22
STANDING COMMITTEE
ON DEFENCE
(2006-07)
FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA
MINISTRY OF DEFENCE
Review of Implementation Status of Group of Ministers (GoMs) Report on
Reforming National Security System in Pursuance to Kargil Review
Committee Report—A Special Reference to Management of Defence
TWENTY-SECOND REPORT
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
July, 2007/Asadha, 1929 (Saka)

TWENTY-SECOND REPORT
STANDING COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE
(2006-07)
(FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA)
MINISTRY OF DEFENCE
Review of Implementation Status of Group of Ministers (GoMs) Report on
Reforming National Security System in Pursuance to Kargil Review
Committee Report—A Special Reference to Management of Defence
Presented to Speaker, Lok Sabha/Chairman, Rajya Sabha on 20.7.2007
Presented to Lok Sabha on …………………
Laid  in  Rajya Sabha on …………………
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
July, 2007/Asadha, 1929 (Saka)

C.O.D. No. 86
Price : Rs. 75.00
© 2007 BY LOK S ABHA S ECRETARIAT
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of
Business in Lok Sabha (Eleventh Edition) and Printed by Jainco Art India,
New Delhi-110 005.

(i)
CONTENTS
PAGES
COMPOSITION OF THE C OMMITTEE  (2006-07) .......................................... (iii)
PREFACE ........................................................................................................ (v)
CHAPTER I INTRODUCTION ......................................................... 1
CHAPTER II MANAGEMENT OF DEFENCE .............................. 5
(i) Actionable Recommendations culled out
by Ministry of Defence and their
implementation status ........................................ 5
(ii) Delegation of Powers to the Service
Headquarters ......................................................... 8
(iii) Synergy among the three Services of Armed
Forces ...................................................................... 11
(iv) Upgradation of the post of Defence
Secretary ................................................................. 15
(v) Restructuring of MoD and Service
Headquarters ......................................................... 17
(vi) Defence Planning and Budgeting .................... 19
(a) Defence Planning .......................................... 21
(b) Defence Budgeting ....................................... 23
(vii) Service-related matters of Defence Personnel.... 27
(a) Optimal Age-Profile .................................... 27
(b) Upgradation of Quality of Personnel
in the Armed Forces .................................. 30
(c) Reduction in Colour Service of Armed
Forces & lateral induction of Armed
Forces personnel into Central Para
Military Forces ............................................. 34

PAGES
(viii) Civil-Military Interface ..................................... 37
(ix) Intelligence Apparatus ........................................ 42
(a) Follow-up Action on the inputs
received—Kargil Experience ...................... 42
(b) Intelligence gathering ................................. 42
(c) Sharing of intelligence inputs between
the Armed Forces and Civil
authorities ...................................................... 46
(x) Withdrawal of Army from internal-security
duties. ..................................................................... 51
C
HAPTER III BORDER MANAGEMENT ........................................ 55
(i) Creation of a separate Department of
Border Management in the Ministry of
Home Affairs ....................................................... 57
(ii) Implementation of ‘One Border One
Force’ ..................................................................... 57
(iii) Distinguishing Border Guarding Forces
(BGF) from other Central Para-Military
Forces (CPMF) ..................................................... 58
(iv) Logistic support to BGF at par with
Army ...................................................................... 60
MINUTES OF THE SITTING ............................................................... 65
(ii)

COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE
ON DEFENCE (2006-07)
  Shri Balasaheb Vikhe Patil —  Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri S. Bangarappa
3. Shri Milind Murli Deora
4. Shri Santosh Kumar Gangwar
5. Shri Ramesh C. Jigajinagi
6. Shri Suresh Kalmadi
7. Shri C. Kuppusami
8. Dr. K.S. Manoj
9. Ms. Ingrid Mcleod
10. Shri Asaduddin Owaisi
11. Shri Adhalrao Shivaji Patil
12. Shri Shriniwas Patil
13. Shri Rajendrasinh Ghanshyamsinh Rana (Raju Rana)
14. Dr. H.T. Sangliana
15. Shri Arjun Charan Sethi
16. Prof. Mahadeorao Shiwankar
17. Shri Manvendra Singh
18. Shri Balashowry Vallabhaneni
19. Shri Rajesh Verma
Rajya Sabha
20. Dr. Farooq Abdullah
21. Shri Jai Prakash Aggarwal
22. Shri Abu Asim Azmi
23. Smt. Shobhana Bharatia
24. Shri R.K. Dhawan
(iii)

25. Smt. N.P . Durga
26. Shri S.P .M. Syed Khan
27. Shri K.B. Shanappa
28. Shri Arun Shourie
29. Smt. Viplove Thakur
SECRETARIAT
1. Shri S.K. Sharma — Additional Secretary
2. Shri P .K. Bhandari — Joint Secretary
3. Shri Gopal Singh — Director
4. Shri D.R. Shekhar — Deputy Secretary-II
5. Smt. Jyochnamayi Sinha — Under Secretary
6. Shri Nilendu Kumar — Sr. Executive Assistant
(iv)

(v)
PREFACE
I, the Chairman, Standing Committee on Defence (2006-07) having
been authorised by the Committee to submit the Report on their behalf,
present this Twenty-Second Report on the subject ‘Review of
Implementation Status of Group of Ministers (GoMs) Report on
Reforming National Security System-in pursuance of the Kargil Review
Committee-A Special Reference to Management of Defence. The subject
was selected for examination by the Standing Committee on Defence
during the year 2006-07.
2. The Committee during their examination of the subject, took
evidence of the representatives of the Ministry of Defence, Ministry of
Home Affairs, National Security Council Secretariat and Dr. Madhav
Godbole and Shri N.N. Vohra, Chairman of the Task Force related to
Border Management and Internal Security respectively, for an in-depth
analysis of the subject.
3. Based on the background note, written replies to the list of
points furnished by the Ministry of Defence, Ministry of Home Affairs
and National Security Council Secretariat on the subject and the feed-
back received during oral evidence of Dr. Godbole and Shri Vohra
and the observations made by the members of the Committee during
the study-visit, the Committee considered and adopted the draft report
at their sitting held on 19th June, 2007.
4. Following the submission of the Kargil Review Committee
Report, the Government set-up a Group of Ministers on 17th April,
2000 to review the National Security System in its entirety and in
particular, to consider the recommendations of the Kargil Review
Committee Report and formulate specific proposals for implementation.
The GoM submitted the Report to the Government in February, 2001.
5. The Recommendations of the GoM are essentially contained in
four chapters  related to Intelligence Apparatus, Internal Security, Border
Management and Management of Defence.
6. National Security is a function of a country’s external
environment and the internal situation, as well as their interplay with
each other. The traditional concept of national security has undergone
fundamental changes over the years. It is no longer synonymous with

sufficient military strength to defend the nation and its interests. Both
the external and internal environment are changing at an incredibly
fast pace, with developments in nuclear weapons and missiles,
increasing cross-border terrorism, the emergence of non-state actors,
the growth of Islamic fundamentalism, the narcotics-arms nexus, illegal
migration and left wing extremism, gravely impacting upon the security
of the country. The rapid technological developments underway at the
same time not only facilitate these events by reducing our reaction
time but add entirely new dimensions of threats and challenges.
7. Amidst these dramatic developments, the traditional structures
and processes for the management of national security are under
considerable stress. Not only are most of them over 50 years old but
their effectiveness has also, over time, been attenuated. These need to
be suitably restructured and strengthened, to cope with the new and
emerging challenges facing us in the areas of Intelligence, Internal
Security, Border and Defence Management, so as to help develop a
more efficient and cost-effective national security system for the 21st
century.
8. In view of the foregoing, this report, in subsequent Chapters,
deals with various issues concerning Management of Defence and
examine the recommendations related thereto under the relevant
Chapter of GoM Report. The Report also touches upon the
recommendations of GoM relating to Border Management and Internal
Security which are related to management of Defence and whose
implementation is largely shared by the Ministry of Defence.
9. The Committee wish to express their thanks to the representatives
of the Ministry of Defence, Ministry of Home Affairs, National Security
Council Secretariat, Dr. Madhav Godbole and Shri N.N. Vohra for
appearing before the Committee for evidence and for furnishing the
material and information in a very short span of time which the
Committee desired in connection with the examination of this subject.
10. For facility of reference and convenience, the observations/
recommendations of the Committee have been printed in thick type in
the body of the Report.
  N
EW D ELHI; BALASAHEB VIKHE PATIL,
17 July, 2007 Chairman,
26 Asadha, 1929 (Saka) Standing Committee on Defence.
(vi)

CHAPTER I
INTRODUCTION
1.1 In the wake of the Kargil conflict, a committee headed by
Shri K. Subramanyam, commonly known as Kargil Review Committee
(KRC), was appointed by the Government in July 1999, to review the
events leading to Pakistan aggression in the Kargil district of Jammu
& Kashmir and to recommend such measures as are considered
necessary to safeguard National Security against such armed intrusions.
The KRC report was submitted on 15 December 1999 and an
unclassified version of the report with security-based deletions was
tabled in both Houses of the Parliament on 28 February 2000.
1.2 The KRC Report brought to light several grave deficiencies in
India’s Security Management System, particularly in the areas of
Intelligence, Border Management and Defence Management. It also
drew attention to the fact that the original framework for Management
of the Country’s security formulated by the Britishers had yet been in
place even after several years of independence. Since then, the country’s
security scenario has witnessed a sea-change and the country has faced
a few wars and several internal and external threats. Despite these
far-reaching developments, the original structure of India’s National
Security System has by and large remained unchanged. It is in this
context that the KRC had urged for a thorough and expeditious review
of the National Security System in its entirety.
1.3 Following the submission of the KRC Report, the Government
set up a Group of Ministers (GoM) on 17 April 2000 to review the
National Security System in its entirety and in particular, to consider
the recommendations of the KRC and formulate specific proposals for
implementation.
1.4 At the outset, the GoM noted that its mandate was substantially
wider than that of the KRC. While the KRC had been required to
review the events leading up to the Pakistani aggression in Kargil
district and to recommend measures necessary to safeguard national
security against such armed intrusions, the GoM was, inter-alia, required
to review the national security system in its entirety and to formulate
specific proposals for implementation. Conscious of the wider scope
and extent of powers, the GoM reviewed all aspects of the national
security system, impinging not only on external threats but also on
internal threats.

2
Setting up of Task Forces
1.5 To facilitate its work, the GoM set up four Task Forces, one
each on Intelligence Apparatus, Internal Security, Border Management
and Management of Defence. In view of its comparatively more limited
scope, the KRC naturally did not address matters concerning internal
security. The GoM, however, considered it necessary to do so in the
light of the problems posed by insurgencies, narco-terrorism, collapse
of law and order machinery in certain states, violence by left- wing
extremists, degradation of the efficacy of the Central Para Military
Forces (CPMFs) and the State police forces etc. Accordingly, the GoM
set up a separate Task Force for issues concerning Internal Security.
1.6 The Task Forces took into account not only the KRC’s
observations and recommendations but also those made by several
other relevant committees. Furthermore, as per the orders setting up
the Task Forces, they also interacted with the concerned administrative
ministries so as to keep in view, their perception of problems and
issues, as well as the feasibility of the various recommendations that
they may make. Each Task Force submitted its report to GoM. The
Task Force Reports were referred to the concerned administrative
ministries for their comments, so that these could be taken into account
by the GoM. In the light of these comments, the recommendations of
the Task Forces were processed in several Inter-Ministerial Group (IMG)
meetings, chaired by the Cabinet Secretary, for the benefit of the GoM.
The GoM also held detailed discussions on the subject with the three
Services Chiefs to ascertain their views on the Task Force reports in
general and issues concerning Defence Management, in particular.
Similarly, the GoM had detailed discussions with the Scientific Advisor
to Raksha Mantri, concerned DRDO officials and Secretary (DP&S) on
issues impinging on Defence Research, relating to the recommendations
of the Task Force on Defence Management.
1.7 The GoM, after considering the reports of the Task Forces,
finalised its report on Reforming the National Security System and
submitted it to the Government in February, 2001.
1.8 The report was classified as Secret. The report was considered
by Cabinet Committee on Security (CCS) which, in May 2001, approved
the GoM report and recommendations except those pertaining to
institution of CDS on which it was decided that Government would
take a view after consulting various political parties.
1.9 The report of GoM has 6 chapters in which first chapter
highlights the approach and methodology adopted by the GoM and

3
the second chapter discusses the challenges to management of National
Security. The recommendations of the GoM are essentially contained
in succeeding four chapters related to Intelligence Apparatus, Internal
Security, Border Management and Management of Defence. It was
decided by the CCS that an implementation of these recommendations
should be coordinated and monitored by the National Security Council
Secretariat (NSCS).
1.10 Since the recommendations of the GoM included a large
number of areas related to different Ministries, it was decided to have
nodal Ministries for submission of Action Taken Reports on
the recommendations contained in different chapters of the report as
follows :-
Name of Chapter Nodal Ministry
Intelligence Apparatus National Security Council Secretariat
(NSCS)
Internal Security Ministry of Home Affairs
Border Management Ministry of Home Affairs
Management of Defence Ministry of Defence
Overall Monitoring NSCS
1.11 National Security is a function of a country’s external
environment and the internal situation, as well as their interplay with
each other. The traditional concept of national security has undergone
fundamental changes over the years. It is no longer synonymous with
sufficient military strength to defend the nation and its interests. Both
the external and internal environment are changing at an incredibly
fast pace, with developments in nuclear weapons and missiles,
increasing cross-border terrorism, the emergence of non-state actors,
the growth of Islamic fundamentalism, the narcotics-arms nexus, illegal
migration and left wing extremism, gravely impacting upon the security
of the country. The rapid technological developments underway at the
same time not only facilitate these events by reducing our reaction
time but add entirely new dimensions of threats and challenges.
1.12 Amidst these dramatic developments, the traditional structures
and processes for the management of national security are under
considerable stress. Not only are most of them over 50 years old but
their effectiveness has also, over time, been attenuated. These need to
be suitably restructured and strengthened, to cope with the new and

4
emerging challenges facing us in the areas of Intelligence, Internal
Security, Border and Defence Management, so as to help develop a
more efficient and cost-effective national security system for the 21st
century.
1.13 In view of the foregoing, this report, in subsequent Chapters,
deals with various issues concerning Management of Defence and
examine the recommendations related thereto under the relevant
Chapter of GoM Report. The Report also touches upon the
recommendations of GoM relating to Border Management and Internal
Security which are related to management of Defence and whose
implementation is largely shared by the Ministry of Defence.
1.14 The Kargil Review Committee had observed that there was
serious lack of synergy amongst the three Services of Armed Forces.
Apart from that, there was also lack of coordination between the Armed
Forces and Civil authorities. The lack of sharing of intelligence inputs
between the three Services and Civil Intelligence agencies had further
aggravated the situation. The Kargil Review Committee also had high
expectations from the Government, Parliament and Public opinion to
determine country security – Intelligence Development Shield to meet
the challenges of 21st century. The Report therefore, also goes into
these issues and propose some action plan to boost the synergy
amongst the three Forces as well as between the Armed Forces and
Civil authorities at various levels.

CHAPTER II
MANAGEMENT OF DEFENCE
Actionable Recommendations culled out by Ministry of Defence and
their implementation status
2.1 The Chapter of GoM Report on Management of Defence
contains 75 recommendations. The Ministry of Defence have completed
action on 59 recommendations. Action on 6 recommendations is
pending and ongoing on 2 recommendations. 8 recommendations of
the chapter relate to institution of Chief of Defence Staff (CDS) which
are pending for decision after consultation with political parties. The
Standing Committee, in the subsequent paras, will take up those issues/
recommendations of GoM, which the Ministry of Defence have selected
as actionable but have not shown sufficient progress. (Please see
Annexure for the current implementation status of various
recommendations of GoM on Management of Defence)
(i) Delegation of Powers  to the Service Headquarters
2.2 In regard to delegation of financial and administrative powers
to the Service Headquarters, the GoM had recommended as under:—
“Though the Service Headquarters have always been associated in
the decision making process, the existing procedures involve
multiplicity of levels/channels, which often lead to delays in
decision-making. Given the size of the country’s defence apparatus
and its substantial budget, there is a need to progressively
decentralize decision-making and delegate powers to the Service
Headquarters, wherever feasible. This process is expected to ensure
greater speed, higher levels of efficiency and accountability. The
delegation of financial and administrative powers to the individual
Service Headquarters and lower formations has been attempted by
the Government in the recent past and more particularly, during
the last 2-3 years. Nonetheless, the process of enhancing the
delegated financial and administrative powers of the Services needs
to be further strengthened. At the same time, for efficacious exercise
of delegated financial and administrative powers, the decision-
making apparatus within the Services needs to be upgraded and
strengthened.
5

6
In this context and with a view to strike the right balance between
the exercise of delegated administrative and financial authority and
accountability, it is proposed that the matter be examined in its
totality by two committees headed respectively by Defence
Secretary, on delegation of administrative powers (refer paragraphs
6.37, 6.44 and 6.70) and the Financial Adviser (Defence Services)
(FA DS) on the delegation of financial powers. While finalizing
their proposals for such delegation of administrative and financial
powers, these committees may also carry out an appraisal of the
processes/procedures currently in use in the services for exercise
of the delegated powers and suggest amendments therein.”
(GoM Report Para 6.15 )
2.3 The Ministry of Defence, during presentation before the
Committee have stated that reclassification of Revenue Expenditure
has been completed by Def/Fin. Orders have been issued for substantial
enhancement of delegated powers to provide more autonomy to the
Service Headquarters. The Ministry have further stated that delegated
Powers have been enhanced. The procedures are also reviewed from
time to time. Defence Procurement Manual and Defence Procurement
Procedure have also been reviewed and streamlined and this is a
continuous process. The Defence procurement manual and Defence
Procurement Procedure have been reviewed in the year 2002, 2004
and the latest one is in the year 2006. The Ministry of Defence is now
following the procurement procedure for both Capital and Revenue as
per the 2006 manual.
2.4 On being asked by the Committee about the major Policy
formulation by the Ministry of Defence in past, where Service
Headquarters were actively involved and delegation of financial and
administrative powers to the Service Headquarters, the Ministry in
their written reply furnished as under:-
“Following Policy initiatives have been taken since the Kargil war:-
(a) Financial powers delegated to the Services were enhanced
in 2002 and again in 2006.
(b) Formulation of the Eleventh (2007-12) Defence Plan. Eleventh
Plan is presently under reference to the Ministry of Finance.
(c) Revision of the Defence Procurement Manual in 2005 and
again in 2006.
(d) Revision of the Defence Procurement Procedure (DPP) in
2005 and again in 2006. DPP-2006 is now under
implementation for all procurements in defence.

7
The HQ IDS have been involved in planning and procurement
process by the Ministry of Defence in the following manner:-
(a) Planning. The process of formulating a Long Term Integrated
Perspective Plan (LTIPP) has been institutionalized. HQ IDS has
been given the responsibility of preparing LTIPP with requisite
inputs from the services. The five step approach for formulation
of LTIPP which was prepared by HQ IDS has been approved by
Defence Acquisition Council (DAC).
(b) Procurement. HQ IDS is responsible for conduct of Services
Capital Acquisition Plan Coordination Committee (SCAPCC) and
Services Capital Acquisition Plan Coordination Higher Committee
(SCAPCHC) where in the aspects of acceptance of necessity,
quantity vetting and categorization for make indigenously or import
of the equipment/system/weapon platform are taken. HQ IDS also
conducts the meeting of the Defence Acquisition Council (DAC)
headed by the Hon’ble RM where decisions for all major capital
acquisitions are taken. The decision taken by DAC are based on
inputs of SCAPCHC.
(a) Financial powers delegated to the Services were enhanced
in 2002 and again in 2006.
(b) Powers to incur expenditure under the Capital head up to
Rs. 10 crores per item have been delegated to the Vice Chiefs
for the first time in 2006.
(c) In order to facilitate exercise of delegated financial powers
by the Services, a Principal Integrated Financial Advisor (an
Additional Secretary level officer) has been positioned in
the Office of the Controller General of Defence Accounts
and dedicated Integrated Financial Advisors have been
posted in all the Service HQrs and Command Headquarters.
Wherever it was not feasible to post a dedicated Integrated
Financial Advisor (mostly in the field), officers of the Indian
Defence Accounts Service have been given additional charge
of providing IFA cover to the CFAs at the lower levels.
(d) A large number of Standard Operating Procedures have been
laid down by the Services to regulate exercise of delegated
financial powers.
The delegated financial powers to Services were enhanced with
effect from 1.4.2002 on the recommendations of the Committee set
up under the Secretary (Defence Finance). Similarly , administrative

8
powers of the Services were enhanced vide MOD/IC/1027/32/
AS(J)/6864/2006 dated 1.9.2006 based on recommendations of a
Committee headed by Additional Secretary in Ministry of Defence.”
Financial Delegation to Defence Minister and Finance Minister
“In accordance with the existing delegated powers, acquisition/
procurement proposals upto Rs. 20 crores are approved at the level
of the Defence Minister and proposals upto Rs. 50 crores are cleared
by the Finance Minister, Proposals beyond this limit are required
to be approved by the Cabinet Committee on security (CCS). These
powers were delegated almost a decade ago. In this meantime,
inflation and the growing sophistication of equipment has
considerably enhanced the cost of refurbishing the Armed Forces.
For expeditious decision making, higher financial powers need to
be delegated to the Defence Minister and the Finance Minister for
proposed that the existing limits be revised to Rs. 50 crores and
Rs. 100 crores for the Defence Minister and the Finance Minister,
respectively. Order in this regard would need to be issued by the
Ministry of Finance (MoF).”
(GoM Report Para 6.17)
2.5 During presentation before the Committee, the representatives
of the Ministry of Defence stated:
“Delegated Powers had been enhanced accordingly. The delegated
powers of Raksha Mantri are now Rs. 100 crores for non-scaled
items and upto Rs. 200 crores with concurrence of Finance Minister.”
Recommendation No. 1
(ii) Delegation of powers to Service Headquarters
2.6 The Committee note that the Group of Ministers (GoM) had
recommended that there was a need to progressively decentralize
decision making and delegate powers to the Service Headquarters,
wherever feasible. This process was expected to ensure greater speed,
higher levels of efficiency and accountability. The Committee are
informed that the Ministry had taken a number of steps to involve
Service Headquarters actively in decision making and had delegated
financial and administrative powers to them. The Committee have
been informed that financial powers delegated to the Services were
enhanced in 2002 and again in 2006. The powers to incur expenditure
under the capital head upto Rs. 10 crores have been delegated to the
Vice-Chiefs for the first time in 2006.

9
2.7 The Committee feel that the amount of financial power
delegated to the Service Headquarters is of a meagre amount and
will hardly serve any meaningful purpose in the context of purchase
of arms and armaments. The Committee feel that delegation of
financial and administrative powers to Service Headquarters should
be suitably enhanced keeping in view their higher cost and present
rate of inflation etc. The Committee also wish to reiterate their earlier
recommendations given in their Sixteenth Report on Demands for
Grants (2007-08) to give appropriate financial delegation of power to
the Defence Secretary to further speed up and facilitate the
acquisition process.
2.8 The Committee also feel that there is no real delegation of
powers at the lower formations. For example, a Brigadier level officer
has been given power upto Rs. 1 lakh which is learnt to be revised
recently upto Rs. 10 lakh. Now, he is required to examine and sign
all cases whether those are for Rs. 1 lakh or Rs. 1 only. This is
because there is no delegation of power down below. The Committee
desire that there should be suitable delegation of powers to the
lower level officers also at the earliest. To ensure accountability, the
Committee recommend that if sanctions to incur expenditure are not
made within the specified time, the proposals for expenditures may
be treated as deemed to be approved by the competent authority.
The Committee strongly feel that this delegation of power to the
lower level officer will reduce the burden of the senior officers and
that will further facilitate them to concentrate on their primary
responsibilities. The Committee recommend that for procurement of
day-to-day civil items, the Ministry of Defence should follow the
procurement methods being followed by other Ministries.
2.9 The Committee, during their visit to Andaman & Nicobar
Island and some of the North Eastern States, had observed that in
case of causalities/death of the soldiers, the body is sent to their
native place by flights but the family members of the soldiers are
not allowed to travel in the same flight because this is not mentioned
in Guidelines. This is a sorry state of affairs. Therefore, the
Committee strongly feel that appropriate financial delegation at the
lower level should be given to incur travelling expenditure of the
family members along with the body of the deceased soldiers.
The Committee during the study visit to Guwahati, had observed
that for specialized medical treatment which is not available in
Armed Force Medical Hospital, if the officer/jawan is referred to
private hospital for treatment, he has to pay cash deposit before

10
getting prescribed treatment. Later on claim is reimbursed to the
servicemen. In the other hand retired person is availing empanelled
private hospital facilities without paying anything, as the Government
is paying the required amount to the hospital directly on behalf of
the retired personnel.
The Committee, therefore, desire that medical facility, as is given
to Ex-Servicemen may also be extended to the Servicemen, who has
been performing more responsibility than the Ex-Servicemen.
Recommendation No. 2
Financial powers to Defence Minister/Finance Minister
2.10 In accordance with the existing delegated powers,
acquisition/procurement proposals upto Rs. 20 crores are approved
at the level of Defence Minister and proposals upto Rs. 50 crorers
are cleared by the Finance Minister. Proposals beyond this limit are
required to be approved by the Cabinet Committee on Security (CCS).
These powers were delegated almost a decade ago. In the meantime,
inflation has grown, sophistication of equipment has considerably
enhanced the cost of equipping the armed forces.  Accordingly, the
Group of Ministers suggested that the existing limits be revised to
Rs. 50 crores and Rs. 100 crores for the Defence Minister and Finance
Minister respectively.
2.11 The Ministry of Defence, in their Action Taken Replies,
intimated that the delegated powers had been enhanced accordingly.
The delegated powers of Raksha Mantri are now Rs. 100 crores for
non-scaled items and upto Rs. 200 crores with concurrence of Finance
Minister.
2.12 The Committee, however, feel that the Defence Minister
should be further delayed financial powers upto Rs. 200 crore in
case of non-scaled items without the concurrence of the Finance
Minister, if the purchase proposal is within the allocated amount of
Ministry of Defence, as the Finance Minister may not have that
knowledge of importance of the purchases to be made as the Defence
Minister is likely to have.
2.13 On the other hand, if the purchases are to be made over
and above the allocations of the Ministry of Defence, the Finance
Minister may have higher power than the Defence Minister. This
will reduce the bureaucratic delays in acquisition of Defence
equipment and will be cost-effective.

11
(iii) Synergy among the three Services of Armed Forces
2.14 The Kargil Review Committee, in their report, have given the
following recommendations related to National Security Management
and apex decision making.
“India is perhaps the only major democracy where the Armed
Forces Headquarters are outside the apex governmental structure.
The Chiefs of Staff have assumed the role of operational
commanders of their respective forces rather than that of Chiefs of
Staffs to the Prime Minister and Defence Minister. They
simultaneously discharge the roles of operational commanders and
national security planners/managers, especially in relation to future
equipment and force postures. Most of their time, is, however,
devoted to the operational role, as is bound to happen. This has
led to a number of negative results. Future-oriented long term
planning suffers. Army Headquarters have developed a command
rather than a staff culture. Higher decisions on equipment, force
levels and strategy are not collegiate but command-oriented. The
Prime Minister and Defence Minister do not have the benefit of
the views and expertise of the Army Commanders and their
equivalents in the Navy and Air Force so that higher level defence
management decision are more consensual and broadbased. The
present obsolete system has perpetuated the continuation of the
culture of the British Imperial theatre system of an Indian
Command whereas what is required is a National Defence
Headquarter. Most opposition to change comes from inadequate
knowledge of the national security decision-making process
elsewhere in the world and a reluctance to change the status quo
and move away from considerations of parochial interest. The status
quo is often mistakenly defended as embodying civilian ascendancy
over the armed forces, which is not a real issue. In fact, locating
the Services’ Headquarters in the Government will further enhance
civilian supremacy.”
(Kargil Review Committee Report Para 14.19)
“Structural reforms could bring about a much closer and more
constructive interaction between the Civil Government and the
Services. The Committee is of the view that the present obsolete
system, bequeathed to India by Lord Ismay, merits re-examination.
An effective and appropriate national security planning and
decision-making structure for India in the nuclear age is overdue,
taking account of the revolution in military affairs and threats of

12
proxy war and terrorism and the imperative of modernizing the
Armed Forces. An objective assessment of the last 52 years will
show that the country is lucky to have scraped through various
national security threats without too much damage, except in 1962.
The country can no longer afford such ad hoc functioning. The
Committee, therefore, recommends that the entire gamut of national
security management and apex decision-making and the structure
and interface between the Ministry of Defence and the Armed
Forces Headquarters be comprehensively studied and reorganized.”
(Kargil Review Committee Report Para 14.20)
2.15 The GoM had observed serious deficiencies in coordination
among the three Services of Armed Forces as under:
‘There is a marked difference in the perception of civil and military
officials regarding their respective roles and functions. There has
also been, on occasions, a visible lack of synchronization among
and between the three departments in the MoD, including the
relevant elements of Defence Finance. The concept of “attached
offices” as applied to Services Headquarters; problems of inter-se
relativities; multiple duplicated and complex procedures governing
the exercise of administrative and financial powers; and the concept
of ‘advice’ to the Minister, have all contributed to problems in the
management of Defence. This situation requires to be ractified, to
promote improved understanding and efficient functioning of the
Ministry.
The functioning of the Chiefs of Staff Committee (COSC) has, to
date, revealed serious weaknesses in its ability to provide single
point military advice to the Government, and resolve substantive
inter-Service doctrinal, planning, policy and operational issues
adequately. This institution needs to be appropriately revamped to
discharge its responsibilities efficiently and effectively, including
the facilitation of “jointness” and synergy among the Defence
Services.”
(GoM Report Paras 6.4 & 6.5)
“The currently envisaged institution of the CDS is likely to be the
first step in a series of structural reforms to be implemented
incrementally. As this institution is absorbed and evolves, further
refinements and changes in concepts and structures will follow.”
(GoM Report Para 6.20)

13
2.16 The Ministry of Defence, during presentation, briefed the
Committee that the decision on institution of CDS will be taken after
consultations with political parties for which process has been initiated.
2.17 The Ministry of Defence, in their Action Taken Replies to the
Eleventh Report on Demands for Grants (2006-2007), had informed
that:
“The process of consultation with political parties has been initiated
by issuing letters to National and State level political parties by
the Raksha Mantri on March 2, 2006, eliciting their views on the
establishment of Chief of Defence Staff. A reminder has been issued
by the Raksha Mantri on June 12, 2006 and again on 11 January
2007. Replies from four political parties only have been received
so far and replies from the majority of the political parties are still
awaited. The decision in the matter will depend on a larger
consensus on the issue.”
2.18 Regarding the views of the Ministry of Defence for handing
over the task of CDS for joint planning, joint training, joint operation,
implementation and joint doctrine to Chief of Staff Committee till the
matter is finally decided, the Ministry of Defence in their written reply
stated :—
“Pending decision on setting up the institution of CDS,
Headquarters, Integrated Defence Staff has been set up under the
Chief of Integrated Defence Staff to the Chairman, Chiefs of Staff
Committee (CISC) in 2001 to support the Chiefs of Staff Committee
and its Chairman in the optimum performance of its roles and
functions, bringing together and coordinating several functions
common to the Services. Planning functions, including the
formulation of Long Term and Five Year Plans have been brought
under the Integrated Defence Staff and Strategic Force Command.
Tri-Service command, the Andaman and Nicobar ‘theatre’
Command has been set up to promote jointness and synergy in
operations. Defence Intelligence agency coordinates intelligence
inputs from the Service intelligence directorates and also provides
interface with the other intelligence agencies like RAW, NTRO, IB
etc. In the field of training several tri-service institutions like
National Defence Academy, Defence Services Staff College and
College of Defence Management (CDM) have been brought under
the Joint Training Committee of HQ IDS. Raksha Mantri has also
recently released the Joint Doctrine for the three Services.”

14
Therefore, it may be stated that pending creation of CDS the COSC
with assistance of CISC and HQ IDS is performing the functions
of CDS to a large extent.
Recommendation No. 3
2.19 The Committee note that it was the lack of synergy among
the three Services which caused difficulties to the Armed Forces
during the Kargil War. The Chief of Staff assumed the role of
operational Commander to the respective forces rather than that of
Chief of Staff to the Prime Minister and Defence Minister. This led
to a number of negative results and protocol problems. The
Committee understand that in pursuance of the observations and
recommendations of Kargil Review Committee as cited above, the
GoM had felt seriously the need for creation of the post of Chief of
Defence Staff in order to boost synergy among the three Services of
Armed Forces and to provide a single point military advice to Prime
Minister and Defence Minister. The Committee also note the
observation of GoM that the functioning of Chief of Staff Committee
has revealed serious weaknesses in its ability to provide single point
military advice to the Government. The Committee, in their earlier
report have recommended for the creation of the post of CDS. In
view of this, the Committee, therefore, reiterate that the Government
should take the GoM’s recommendations as well as this Committee’s
concern in this matter seriously and take the final decision on CDS
at the earliest and till the final decision on CDS taken, the
functioning of COSC should be seriously streamlined and positively
made effective.
2.20 The Committee also desire that the Government should set
up a high level Committee to demarcate clear cut roles and functions
of Civil and Military officials so that duplication of work can be
avoided to check delays and responsibility may also be fixed in
their respective field. As regards the easement of complex procedure
governing the exercise of administrative and financial powers and
concept of ‘advice’ to the Minister are concerned, the Committee are
of the view that post of Defence Secretary should be upgraded to
the level of Cabinet Secretary or equivalent to the Chief of Service
in order to enable him to synergise the functioning of the Ministry
of Defence and Armed Forces and to promote improved
understanding and efficient functioning of the Ministry as a whole.
2.21 The Committee note that the Government have taken a
number of steps to bring synergy amongst the three Services like

15
planning and formulation of Long Term and Five Year Plans, Tri-
Service Commands like the Andaman and Nicrobar theatre command
etc. The Committee, however, during their recent visit to the Islands,
found that the desired level of synergy in such commands is missing.
The Committee understand that the senior officers of the Command
can issue orders to the personnel belonging to their respective forces
only. There is no jointness of Command and Control. The Committee
feel that this is a very serious lacuna and earnest efforts should be
taken to correct it immediately. The Committee further wish to stress
that Coast Guard Services may also be inter-connected with the
jointness of Command and Control of the three Services.
(iv)  Upgradation of the post of Defence Secretary
2.22 The Kargil Review Committee, in their report, had
recommended that:
“The Committee, therefore, recommends that the entire gamut of
national security management and apex decision-making and the
structure and interface between the Ministry of Defence and the
Armed Forces Headquarters be comprehensively studied and
reorganized.”
2.23 The GoM had seriously observed the role and responsibilities
of Defence Secretary as under:
“It is extremely important that there is no dilution in the role of
the Defence Secretary as the “Principal Defence Adviser” to the
Defence Minister. Accordingly, it is felt that:
(a) The Defence Secretary should be officially designated in
standing orders as the “Principal Defence Adviser” and rank
primus inter pares among the secretaries in the MoD. This
measure is intended to reinforce the view that this
individual, irrespective of pay scale or inter-service status,
is a vital element in the higher management of Defence
and should be so recognized unequivocally in civilian and
military hierarchies.
(b) Standing orders need to be promulgated specifying that the
Defence Secretary has the primary responsibility for advising
the Defence Minister on all policy matters and for the
management of the Department, including financial
management. As the Chief Accounting Officer for the
Ministry, he is accountable to the Parliament for the
expenditure of public money as budgeted by Parliament.

16
(c) The Defence Secretary should be responsible to the Defence
Minister for the following :
(i) Policy Advice,
(ii) Supervising the Department of Defence,
(iii) Co-ordinating the functioning of all departments in the
Ministry,
(iv) Co-ordinating the finalisation of the complete MoD Long
Term Defence Perspective Plan (LTDPP), 5 year Plan,
and the annual budget for approval by the Defence
Minister,
(v) Advising the Defence Minister on all matters relating to
Parliament, Central Government and State Governments,
in addition to advice generated by individual
departments, and
(vi) Co-ordinating all matters relating to personnel policies,
terms and conditions of service, foreign postings and
the like, with cadre controlling authorities in the MoD
and with the Department of Personnel and Training
(DoP&T) when required.
The Defence Secretary will function as “Principal Defence Adviser”
to the Defence Minister in a manner similar to the role to be performed
by the CDS as the “Principal Military Adviser” and both will enjoy an
equivalent status in terms of their working relationship as distinct
from the Warrant of Precedence. Similarly, the Defence Secretary must
enjoy an equivalent status vis-a-vis the Chiefs of Staff, in so far as
their functional relationship is concerned. Meetings convened by the
Defence Secretary on issues concerning him shall be attended by the
CDS as necessary and vice versa . The Chiefs of Staff will also attend
the meetings convened by the Defence Secretary, if required and vice
versa. The purpose of this arrangement is to ensure that the aspect of
Warrant of Precedence does not vitiate the working environment of
the Ministry.”
(GoM Report Paras 6.26 & 6.27)
2.24 The Ministry of Defence have noted the observations of GoM
but have not taken any action in the matter so far and nor have they
furnished detailed action plan in this regard.
Recommendation No. 4
2.25 The Committee understand that the decision on the post of
CDS is, at present, pending for political consultations. The Committee

17
note the observation of GoM that the CDS, after its creation, will
enjoy an equivalent status with Defence Secretary in terms of their
working relationship as distinct from the Warrant of Precedence.
The GoM had further observed that the Defence Secretary should
enjoy equivalent status vis-a-vis the Chiefs of Staff in so far as
their functional relationship is concerned. The Committee note that
at present the three Service Chiefs enjoy the status of the Cabinet
Secretary whereas the Defence Secretary is only in the rank of
‘Secretary’ i.e. a step junior. The Committee further note that the
recommendations of GoM i.e. ‘the Defence Secretary will function
as Principle Defence Advisor to the Defence Minister in a manner
similar to the role to be performed by the CDS as the Principle
Military Advisor and both will enjoy an equivalent status in terms
of their working relationship as distinct from the Warrant of
Precedence’ and also that the Chiefs of Staff will also attend the
meetings convened by the Defence Secretary, if required and vice
versa are not being implemented.
2.26 The Committee feel that the unequal status being enjoyed
by the Chiefs of Staff vis-a-vis the Defence Secretary at present has
been causing lack of coordination and synergy in the functional
relationship between the Ministry of Defence and the Service
Headquarters. The Committee, therefore, desire that the Government
should take immediate steps in regard to upgradation in the rank of
Defence Secretary equivalent to the status of Cabinet Secretary or in
the rank of Chief of Service and upgrade the functions of Defence
Secretary as the ‘Principle Defence Advisor’ so that the working
relations amongst the Chiefs and the Defence Secretary are brought
on equal footing. The Committee strongly recommend that the GoM
recommendation with regard to attending the meetings convened by
the Defence Secretary by the ‘Chiefs of Staff’ and vice-versa should
be made operational at the earliest. These functional arrangements
should be done at the earliest to bring about effective synergy
amongst the three Services and the Ministry of Defence and provide
unified advice to the Prime Minister and Defence Minister.
(v) Restructuring of MoD and Service Headquarters
2.27 The GoM had felt the need for restructuring of Ministry of
Defence and Service Headquarters as under:
“Consequent upon the creation of the CDS/VCDS/Defence Staff
and the Procurement Board related structures, the organizational
structure of the Department of Defence (DoD), Service Headquarters

18
and Inter-Service Organisations (ISO) will need to be reviewed.
The Committee headed by the Defence Secretary , looking into the
delegation of administrative powers (refer paragraphs 6.16, 6.37
and 6.70), may also finalise the details of such restructuring. To
fine-tune the details of restructuring of the Service Headquarters,
Defence Secretary may appoint such sub-groups as considered
necessary. All new posts to be created as a result of these structural
changes may be funded through matching savings.
Services Headquarters will also require proper restructuring to take
account of the changes being introduced. These examinations should
be carried out by the respective Chiefs of Staff keeping in view all
relevant aspects of the matter. Service Headquarters
recommendations may thereafter be placed before the Defence
Minister for his approval. All new posts to be created should be
funded through matching savings.”
(GoM Report Paras 6.44 & 6.45)
2.28 The Ministry of Defence, during presentation, stated that all
new structures have been created by matching savings and need based
restructuring within the Ministry and Services Headquarters has been
completed.
2.29 When asked by the Committee in pursuance of the
recommendations of GoM what steps were taken by the Ministry of
Defence to bring about restructuring within the Ministry of Defence
and Service Headquarters, they submitted reply as under:—
“(i) In pursuance to the recommendations of GoM a number of
institutions like Integrated Defence Staff, Tri-Service bodies like
the Defence Intelligence Agency (DIA), the Strategic Forces
Command and the Andaman & Nicobar Theatre Command have
been established.
In addition to the above, Defence Acquisition Council (DAC),
Defence Procurement Board (DPB), Defence Production Board and
Defence Research and Development Board, have also been
established.
(ii) The officers (including civilian officers) and support staff
(including civilian support staff) have been provided by the three
services. The cost of entire HQ IDS have been met by re-
appropriation, matching savings and permanently suppressing the
post in the original entity and transferring to HQ IDS.”

19
Recommendation No. 5
2.30 The Committee note that the Group of Ministers (GoM)
have recommended for restructuring of Ministry of Defence and
Service Headquarters. The Group of Ministers desired that a
Committee headed by the Defence Secretary should look into the
delegation of administrative powers and also finalise the details of
such restructuring.
2.31 The Ministry of Defence, in their reply, have stated that in
pursuance of these recommendations, a number of institutions like
Integrated Defence Staff, Tri-Service bodies like the Defence
Intelligence Agency, the Strategic Forces Command and Andaman &
Nicobar Theatre Command have been established. In addition to the
above, Defence Acquisition Council, Defence Procurement Board,
Defence Production Board and Defence Research and Development
Board have also been established.
2.32 The Committee, feel that there is an urgent need to review
the working of all these organisations set up by the Ministry of
Defence on the basis of recommendations made by GoM. The
Committee desire that a team of experts should examine the actual
working of each and every organisation to ensure their efficient
working and also to have synergy. The Committee may be informed
of the results thereof. The Committee also desire that these
organizations should be given adequate flexibility in order to perform
well or to meet any eventualities as per the changed circumstances.
(vi) Defence Planning and Budgeting
2.33 The Kargil Review Committee, in their report, have observed
the following points pertaining to Security Implications of the present
trends in India’s Defence Expenditure:
“Some questions have been raised about the impact of declining
defence expenditure on the nation’s capacity to counter effectively
the Kargil intrusion and, in particular, the preparedness of the
jawans for high altitude conflicts. The evidence available to the
Committee does not show that a paucity of resources was per se
responsible for any lack of preparedness for the Kargil conflict.
The prioritization of threats among external intelligence agency
and the Army did not provide for Kargil-type intrusions and
consequently their policies in regard to appropriate efforts for space
and aerial surveillance as well as reserves to be maintained were
influenced by it. The harsh mountain terrain of the Kargil sector

20
was considered virtually impregnable in winter. Nonetheless, when
the intrusions were detected, the required clothing, equipment and
other stores were provided from reserves; some shortage of special
clothing was made up by extreme cold clothing and part worn
special (glacial) clothing of troops which had returned from Siachen.
However, there was some shortage of sleeping bags and boots.
Most items needed for the Kargil War were affordable within the
available outlays. Such operational voids as did indeed exist are
attributable primarily to procurement procedures and cycle (which
includes exploration of indigenous options before imports,
finalisation of technical specifications, vendor identification, trials,
etc.), prioritization and the element of surprise in Kargil.
An issue which requires special mention here is the lot of India’s
infantrymen. The brunt of the Kargil War had to be borne by the
foot soldiers. They had to climb high mountains under extreme
cold in pitch darkness. They had to carry heavy loads of weapons,
ammunition, rations and other requirements which made their task
even more arduous. The Committee feels that there is need to
give a high priority to properly equipping infantrymen with
weapons, equipment and clothing, suitable for the threats they are
required to face in the region. Attention needs to be given to
reducing the weight of weapons and stores they have to carry.
It is obvious, however, that over the past years, actual defence
expenditure has been below the amount required by the defence
forces to perform efficiently the tasks allotted to them. A major
victim of the decline in Defence Expenditure has been Defence
Modernisation and replacement of obsolete/obsolescent equipment
and weapons systems. This process was particularly vulnerable to
fluctuations in currency exchange ratios. This has affected the
process of modernisation and also created some unacceptable
operational voids. Given the country’s resource constraints the scope
for enhancing defence outlays is somewhat limited without
tightening up fiscal discipline elsewhere and ensuring a high
growth rate of 6-7% for the economy. It would be pertinent to
mention, however that some part of revenue expenditure also
covers capital items contributing replacement or modernisation. A
significant part of Defence PSUs production and R&D expenditure
which also assist a modernisation is reflected under the revenue
head. With the rising cost of equipment and weapon systems, this
reduction eroded the resources available both for modernisation
and replacement. Hence, the defence Services must seek to extract
the maximum value from each defence rupee. This will call for

21
some drastic measures like restructuring of the defence forces,
improving cost-effectiveness of manpower, retraining and
redeployment, dispensing with avoidable and unnecessary
expenditure, rigorous prioritization, and focusing resources in area
likely to enhance the effectiveness of the defence forces in meeting
the emerging challenges to the country’s security. In other words
a total reform of defence structure, its interface with civil
government, defence production and procurement is called for.”
(a) Defence Planning
2.34 In pursuance of the above observations of Kargil Committee
Report, the GoM had made the following observations in regard to
Defence Planning:
“In the past, the individual Services have prepared their long term
perspective plans. However, with the induction of the CDS and
other related structures, there would be a need to prepare a holistic
and integrated defence perspective plan for 15-20 years through a
rigorous process of Inter-Service prioritization. The Five Year
Defence Plans by the Services should be prepared on the basis of
the LTIPP . These are to be followed up by analysis and preparations
of the Joint Services Plan by the VCDS, which may be finalised
through consultation between the CDS and the Defence Secretary.
The defence planning process incorporating the long term defence
plan, 5 year plan and annual budget should be revised at the
earliest.
The MoD and the CDS may be directed to ensure timely completion
of the LTIPP and five yearly/annual defence plans, apart from
introducing all suggested measures to bring about efficiency in
defence expenditure. The MoF while deciding on annual budgets
must keep in view the requirements of defence plans.
To ensure the effectiveness of the planning exercise, the Defence
Minister’s directive should be issued at least 12 months before the
commencement of the next Five Year Plan. This will form the
conceptual basis for the Defence Plan. The MoF should give a
firm indication of the availability of financial resources, for a period
of 5 years, at least 6 months before the commencement of the
ensuing Five Year Plan.
To obtain the maximum value for money, the formulation of
Services Equipment Policy Statements (SEPS) is required to be co-
ordinated with the perspective planning and Services futuristic
requirements.”
(GoM Report Para 6.46 - 6.49)

22
2.35 The Ministry of Defence, during presentation, stated that the
matter is being coordinated by IDS Headquarters, 11th Plan paper has
also been coordinated by IDS Headquarters and has been prepared
well in time. Formulation of Services Equipment Policy Statements
(SEPS) are also being coordinated by IDS Headquarters as part of the
planning process.
2.36 In response to a specific query of the Committee regarding
status of Eleventh Defence Plan and Long Term Integrated Perspective
Plan (LTIPP) for the three Services, the Ministry replied as under:
“LTIPP for the period 2002-17 is already in place. The same is
being reviewed and revised to cover the period 2007-22.
As regards Eleventh Defence Plan, it was formulated in consultation
with the Services and other Departments and forwarded to the
Finance Minister by the Raksha Mantri in July 2006. Since then
the matter is under consideration between the two Ministries”
Recommendation No. 6
2.37 The Committee note that GoM have recommended for
preparing a holistic and integrated Defence Perspective Plan for 15
to 20 years through a process of inter-service prioritisation. The Five
Year Defence Plans by the Services should be prepared on the basis
of LTIPP . MoD may be directed to ensure timely completion of LTIPP ,
five yearly/annual Defence Plans apart from introducing all suggested
measures to bring about efficiency in defence expenditure.
2.38 The Committee note that Subramanyam Committee, in their
report, had observed that over the past years, actual defence
expenditure had been below the amount required by the Defence
Services to perform efficiently the tasks allotted to them.
2.39 The Ministry of Defence have informed the Committee that
LTIPP for the period 2002-17 is already in place. The same is being
reviewed and revised covering the period 2007-22. The Committee
have been further informed that the 11th Defence Plan has been
formulated in consultation with the Services and forwarded to the
Finance Minister in July, 2006. Since then the matter is under
consideration between the two Ministries. The Committee are deeply
concerned that with the creation of new bodies, there is a need to
clearly lay down the field of responsibility between the Ministry of
Defence and the three Services. While the Ministry of Defence have
to lay down the Defence policies to draw up Long Term Integrated

23
Perspective Plans as well as Five year Plans and lay down different
targets for the three Services and provide funds for the same, on the
other hand, the three services have to prepare Long Term Plan and
Five Year Plan for their respective forces. Actual implementation of
the policies and achievement of targets have to be the part of the
three Services themselves. This should be examined in depth in
consultation with the three Service Headquarters to avoid duplicacy,
etc.
2.40 The Committee note that the 11th Defence Plan is yet to be
cleared by the Ministry of Finance even though it was submitted to
them about a year back. The Committee take a serious view of non
finalisation of 11th Defence Plan inspite of the fact that the
implementation period of the same has begun from April, 2007. The
Committee, therefore, desire that the Plan should be finalised at the
earliest and should be implemented in the right earnest. The
Committee also hope and trust that the annual Plan for the year
2007-08 is based on the targets set by the Ministry of Defence for
the 11th Five Year Plan. The Committee also desire that the LTIPP
should be periodically reviewed in the light of the new developments
and should be kept updated.
(b) Defence Budgeting
2.41 In regard to Defence Budgeting, the GoM had observed as
given in the following paras :
“To begin with, the joint time bound scrutiny of the 10th Defence
Plan (2002-07) and introduction of zero based budgeting approach
for all on-going schemes may be undertaken in a time bound
manner.
Optimal utilization of resources cannot be achieved unless greater
emphasis and attention is given to the process of budget
formulation and implementation, including forecasting, monitoring
and control. In this context, it is felt that capital schemes in Service
Headquarters’ budgets should be included only if reasonable
assurances of contract conclusion and some payment within the
financial year exist. Similarly, only those capital schemes should
be included in the Service Headquarters’ Priority Procurement Plan
and annual budget, where there is adequate evidence that technical
and commercial evaluation, leading to contracting and initial
payment, can be completed in the relevant financial year. There is
also a need for rigorous prioritisation and the order of charge on
the budget being established with reference to the plan objectives.

24
The monitoring of inter-Service and intra-Service prioritisation of
capital schemes by the VCDS/CDS needs to be institutionalized
for ensuring time bound action and the best value for money.
A need has been felt for review of the form and content of the
Defence Service Estimates and the expansion of budgetary
classification to promote programme based budgeting, while
ensuring compliance with security requirements. As such, a Study
Group, headed by a senior official from the Finance Division and
including representatives from Service Headquarters and the
Controller General of Defence Accounts (CGDA), should be
constituted to make recommendations on budgetary reforms.”
(GoM Report Para 6.50 - 6.52)
2.42 The Ministry of Defence have stated that 11th Plan schemes
were reviewed based on actual performance which is in the spirit of
zero based budgeting. The Ministry have further submitted that
monitoring of Inter-Service and Intra-Service prioritisation of capital
schemes is being done by IDS Headquarters under CISC to ensure
best returns for the money spent. Regarding Defence Services Estimates
the Ministry have stated that the same are being prepared as per new
classification.
2.43 Elaborating the concept of Zero-Based Budgeting in regard to
evaluation of various projects, the Ministry have furnished the following
note :-
“1. Zero-based budgeting (ZBB) is a technique of planning and
decision-making. It reverses the working process of
traditional budgeting. In traditional budgeting, departmental
managers need to justify only increases over the previous
year’s budget. This means what has already been spent is
automatically sanctioned. In case of ZBB, no reference is
made to the previous level of expenditure. Every
departmental function is reviewed comprehensively and all
expenditures, rather than only increases, are approved. ZBB
is a technique by which the budget request has to be
justified in complete detail by each division manager starting
from the Zero-base. The Zero-base is indifferent to whether
the total budget is increasing or decreasing.
2. Zero-based budgeting is a concept that lays stress on not
only the need for every new scheme/programme to be
examined and justified before provision for that scheme/

25
programme is made in the budget but also for a similar
exercise to be carried out in respect of every on-going
scheme/programme. For achieving this objective, every
Ministry/Department is expected to develop its own
methodology.
3. A significant proportion of defence expenditure is not
structured around schemes and programmes. Nevertheless,
the broad objectives of the zero-based budgeting have been
achieved by preparing Long-term Integrated Perspective Plan
(2002-17), which is now being reviewed with emphasis on
capability building. These Plans take a holistic view of the
requirement of the defence services and form the basis of
the Defence Five-year and Annual Plans, which, in turn,
provide the basis for working out the annual budgetary
requirement.
4. Based on the objectives set out in the Long-term Integrated
Perspective Plan of the Services (2002-17), an extensive
exercise was carried out while finalising the Eleventh
Defence Plan (2007-12) in 2006. The entire range of defence
expenditure, from pay & allowances to capital outlay, was
subjected to close scrutiny in tune with some of the basic
zero-based budgeting principles.”
2.44 In r egard to the Committee, constituted to make
recommendations on budgetary reforms and the new classification
system proposed by the Committee, the Ministry have stated as
under :-
(i) A Study Group was constituted by the Defence Secretary in
June 2001 under the Chairmanship of the Secretary (Defence
Finance) with the following as the members of the Group:
Member (Finance), OFB Addl Secretary (T)
Addl DG FP AHQ ACNS (P&P) NHQ
ACAS (Fin-P), Air HQ CCR&D (Resources),
DRDO
Addl FA (A) & Joint Secretary Jt CGDA (EDPS), O/o
the CGDA
Director (Fin/Budget) Member Secretary
The terms of reference of the Committee were as follows:
(a) To review the form and contents of Defence Services
Estimates.

26
(b) To examine the expansion of budgetary classification to
promote programme based budgeting, while ensuring
compliance with security requirements.
(c) To review the present classification of expenditure
between Revenue and Capital in respect of Defence
Services/Deptts.
The Committee submitted its Report in 2002.
(ii) The recommendations of the Committee regarding
classification system were as follows:
(a) That the then existing twin-criteria of classifying the
expenditure as ‘Capital’ if (i) the item purchased had a
life of seven years or more and (ii) the cost of item was
more than Rs. 2 crores, may continue subject to the cost
of item being increased to Rs. 10 lakhs for being
considered as ‘Capital’.
(b) That the classification between Revenue and Capital
based on life/cost criteria should apply equally to
supplies to ex-DGOF also. Accordingly, Armoured
Vehicles (Tanks, Armoured Personnel Carriers, etc.), Guns
and Other Equipment etc. meeting the life-cost criteria
should be booked to ‘Capital’.
(c) That the same criteria should be applicable to Stores of
DRDO, which are in the nature of Plant & Machinery
and other equipment meant for setting up facilities,
which could be viewed as Capital assets, as distinct from
other material used in research & development.
(d) That expenditure on refits/upgradation of ships, aircrafts,
other equipments, which has the effect of enhancing the
capability of the relevant item or has the effect of
addition of New Systems/New equipments, etc. should
be treated as ‘Capital’ expenditure depending upon the
life-cost criteria. The component of normal repair/refit/
overhaul in such cases should, however, continue to be
treated as Revenue expenditure.
These recommendations were accepted and
implemented.”
Recommendation No. 7
2.45 The Committee note the recommendations made by Group
of Ministers that Defence Plan should be on zero-based budgeting

27
approach and all on-going schemes may be examined on the same
concept in a time-bound manner. The Group of Ministers also
recommended for constitution of a Study Group by the Ministry of
Defence.
2.46 The Committee note that the Ministry of Defence have
reviewed all the 11th Plan schemes on actual performance which is
in the spirit of zero based budgeting. The Ministry had also
constituted a Study Group to make recommendations on budgetary
reforms. This Study Group has submitted its recommendations, which
have been accepted and implemented by the Government.
2.47 The Committee desire that budgetary allocation to the
Ministry of Defence should be based on various schemes to be taken
up during the period of Five Year Plans. The Ministry should have
the authority to spend that sanctioned amount within that Five Year
Plan period and not in a particular financial year only. The
Committee observe that due to long gestation of procurement
procedure and non-fructification of some contractual liabilities, every
year the Ministry have been surrendering huge amount of their
budgetary allocation. Therefore, the Committee had been
recommending from time-to-time the operation of Non-lapsable Fund
so that whatever money has been sanctioned by the Parliament for
Ministry of Defence, that should remain with them till the
completion of the scheme for which the money had been sanctioned
and the Ministry of Defence should not be asked to surrender the
unutilized funds on year-to-year basis. The Committee strongly feel
that the Ministry of Defence need reforms and procedural changes
to implement the principle of zero based budgeting. Therefore, the
Committee strongly recommend that the Ministry of Defence should
carry out the necessary reforms and make concerted efforts to utilize
the sanctioned amount within the particular financial year itself so
that there is no need to surrender the amount and till the time the
Ministry of Defence must create the non-lapsable fund so that
defence modernisation programme does not face any financial crunch.
(vii) Service-related matters of Defence Personnel
(a) Optimal Age Profile
2.48 In regard to age profile of the Armed Forces, the GoM had
observed as under :
“The GoM has noted that there are problems relating to aspects of
retirement age and command profiles in the armed forces. A group

28
of officers chaired by the VCDS with representatives from Service
Headquarters, DoD, FA(DS) should be established to examine all
aspects of these problems and submit its recommendations before
the COSC. Thereafter, the final recommendations of the COSC
should be placed before the Defence Minister for his consideration.”
(GoM Report Para 6.68)
2.50 The Ministry of Defence have stated that Ajay Vikram Singh
Committee (AVSC) with representatives from Ministry of Defence and
Service Headquarters report is being implemented. Phase I has been
implemented upto the rank of Lt Col/eq. Phase II for Brig/Eq and
above is under scrutiny at the Ministry of Defence.
2.51 On being asked by the Committee about the status of
A.V . Singh Committee’s recommendations and procedure for filling up
vacancies created, the Ministry in their reply stated:
“Subsequent to the submission of the report and based on the
recommendations contained therein regarding restructuring of the
officers’ cadre of the Indian Army, the following recommendations
have been implemented:-
a. Non Select Ranks
(i) Reduction in service for substantive promotion to the rank
of Captain to 2 years and Major to 6 years service.
(ii) Time based promotion to the rank of Lt. Col. At 13 years
of service.
(iii) Introduction of the rank of Col. (Time Scale) at 26 years of
service and upgradation of 750 posts of Lietuent Colonel in
a phased manner.
No vacancies were created due to AVSC-I. However, it is relevant
to state that 750 posts of Lt Col were upgraded to Col on
implementation of AVSC-I within the overall officers’ cadre strength.
No special relaxation has been given to the officers who have
been promoted with implementation of Phase I of AVSC. The
officers who meet the laid down criteria are only being given
time-based substantive ranks.
The reduced reckonable qualifying service period for promotion to
the rank of Capt, and Lt Col is now applicable as per revised
Government instructions, provided officers meet the other selection
criteria.

29
Implementation of the Phase I relating to non-select ranks has
since been completed. For select rank, Phase II of the report is
under examination in consultation with the Ministry of Finance
and the VI Pay Commission.”
2.52 They further stated as under:
“The balancing of organizational requirement and service aspirations
as recommended in the Phase II implementation necessitated inter-
departmental and inter-ministerial consultation, which have been
progressed with the concerned Department and Ministries, but have
not yet been resolved. In the course of consultations with Internal
Finance, aspects of functional justification of posts, cost neutrality
through matching saving and role of the 6th CPC emerged as
areas which needed to be carefully addressed. The matter is
accordingly being pursued for early resolution. To expedite the
matter a D.O. letter has been written to Member Secretary, VI Pay
Commission, at the level of SS(J), on 30.4.2007.”
Recommendation No. 8
2.53 The Committee note that the Ministry had constituted A.V .
Singh Committee with the representatives from Ministry of Defence
and Service Headquarters to look into all aspects of the Service
conditions of Defence personnel and make recommendations for
implementation. The Committee further note that the Ministry have
put efforts for Phase-wise implementation of some recommendations
of the A.V . Singh Committee. The Phase-I is complete and the Phase-
II is under scrutiny at the Ministry of Defence. The Committee desire
that the Ministry should furnish detailed Action Plan at the earliest
for the Phase-II implementation of the recommendations of A.V .
Singh Committee which is under scrutiny of the Ministry of Defence.
The Committee note that as per A.V . Singh Committee’s
recommendation, an officer shall get the rank of Colonel or
equivalent after putting in 26 years of service. After the post of
Colonel, there are four more ranks available for promotion. If an
officer puts in minimum of three years of service in each rank, he
will reach the age of 60 years and it would be difficult to maintain
young profile in the armed forces and shall also result in dearth of
officers to lead the Armed Forces. The Committee, therefore, strongly
recommend that the need of the hour is to examine the whole scheme
of promotions.
2.54 The Committee desire that the practice followed by
neighbouring countries for keeping young profile at the senior levels

30
of the armed forces should be examined to take a decision in the
matter and the Committee should be apprised in this regard.
(b) Upgradation of Quality of Personnel in the Armed Forces
2.55 The GoM had felt the need for upgradation of quality of
personnel as under:
“In view of the increasingly complex requirements of modern-day
warfare, the need to attract quality personnel and nurture
leadership in the Armed Forces is paramount. Therefore, ways and
means of attracting and retaining people with the best talent in
the Armed Forces should be evolved. There is also a need to
upgrade the National Defence Academy (NDA) and at other Service
training institutions. To ensure such quality upgradation, in addition
to all other measures, an Air Force College of Engineering and a
Defence Services Software Institute, should be set up at the earliest
possible time.”
(GoM Report Para 6.71)
2.56 The Ministry of Defence have stated that case for Air Force
College of Engineering (AFCE) is under deliberations with Ministry of
Finance.
2.57 When asked to furnish the latest position of the establishment
of the Air Force College of Engineering and Defence Services Software
Institute, the Ministry have stated as under:
“The proposal to establish Air Force College of Engineering has
not yet been concurred to by the Ministry of Finance.
2. The process of engaging a Consultant for working out the
blueprint of the proposed software Institute including human
resource related issues have been initiated.”
2.58 During examination of Demands for Grants (2007-2008), the
Defence Secretary informed the Committee about the reasons for
declining tend of recruitment to Short Service Commission and National
Defence Academy as under:
“Regarding recruitment to the Short Service Commission, it is true
that it is a difficult entry to manage because we are competing
with whatever are the avenues in the rest of the country. Certainly,
it appears that with the present service conditions that the Defence

31
Services are able to offer, we are not able to attract best of the
youth. It is a problem. We are trying our best in terms of publicity
campaigns and we send teams to colleges. In fact, in one of the
earlier meetings of the Standing Committee, one hon. Member had
mentioned about greater focus on coastal States. That has been
done. We have actually tasked our Command Headquarters to do
that because it is true that from the coastal States, the intake rate
was dropping. That should not be due to the reason of lack of
awareness. That action is also being taken. As far as Cadet careers
are concerned, by and large, the vacancies that we have are fully
subscribed to. We have not had any problem in that end.”
2.59 Defence Secretary further added :—
“Actually, the number of people or interviewees who are coming
through either NDA or UPSC or through other sources are
continuously increasing. Where we find it difficult is that we cannot
lower down the selection criteria. So, the number of people who
are selected is less. There is a continuous sort of attrition also on
those who are in the Services, especially when they have certain
type of skills which are higher in demand. So, the areas where we
have big concerns are, say, pilots where there is a tremendous
demand outside in the open market and we are not able to let the
pilots of the Air Force or the Navy go till they have completed
some minimum service which they are required to do. Similarly,
there is a big draw on the doctors because doctors outside are in
great demand, so we cannot leave them. Now, similar pressures
are also coming in some of the more technical branches because
there is a big demand outside, but that pressure is lesser than
what we are facing in respect of pilots. The strategy is two-pronged.
The arguments that we are placing before the Pay Commission
will include all these because we want to have greater facilities or
greater attractiveness in the Services created and that we are taking
up with the Pay Commission. On the other hand, what can be
done within the Ministry or with the Ministry of Finance, we are
also taking it up. There are about more than a dozen issues which
if we are able to get proper solutions with the Ministry of Finance,
will make some difference in the quality of facilities which are
available. There are some other things where we have problems,
say of the serving soldiers and their families which we are also
trying to sort out in conjunction with the concerned State
Governments. The Defence Minister and I have written to the State
Governments in this regard. At different levels, we are working,
but it is a fact that there is a certain drawal of trained manpower

32
required by the private sector because our economy is growing
and there is a strain on the Defence Forces where, perhaps, we
will have to make things much more attractive than what it is
now.”
2.60 Dr. Vijay L. Kelkar who was the Chairman of the Committee
set up by the Government, “Towards Strengthening Self-Reliance in
Defence Preparedness” appeared before the Committee in Dec. 2006
and had inter-alia in reply to the query of the Committee suggested
following for higher education and study for Services to attain the
best technological knowledge:
“We also made other recommendation regarding giving scholarship
to our Army offices for higher education in technological studies
because tomorrow’s war is technological. Our officers of Army,
Navy and Air Force are just not being technological advanced. We
should send officers to IITs and if necessary send them abroad to
give best knowledge. The reason why Navy is better than the
other two Services is because Navy is more technologically
advanced. So, we should have really 50 per cent scholarship to
the officers of our Services because tomorrow’s war is technological.
Our personnel of Navy are well trained in technology. It does not
cost that much because for giving 50 per cent scholarship, it will
cost a couple of crores of rupees only but the kind of human
capital it will create in our Defence services which will improve
the entire capability of Defence. So, Navy is doing better because
they design themselves and they know what exactly they need
which the other two Services do not know. I would be personally
grateful to you and the Committee if you could endorse this
recommendation of giving our Service officers access to best
possible technological knowledge.”
Recommendation No. 9
2.61 The Committee note that GoM in their report have rightly
pointed out the need to attract qualitative Human Resources and
nurture leadership in the Armed Forces to meet the complex
requirement of modern day’s warfare because tomorrow’s war will
be a technological war. Therefore, ways and means of attracting and
retaining the best talent in the Armed Forces need to be evolved. In
pursuance of the very spirit of this recommendation of GoM, the
Committee strongly desire that the senior officers from the Armed
Forces should be sent to IITs and other such institutions for higher
studies/research activities, etc. to widen their knowledge in the

33
various fields of operation to be undertaken by the Services to
improve the entire capability of Defence.
2.62 The Committee, in their report on Demands for Grants (2007-
08), noted that there had been a declining trend of youth joining
Armed Forces and the service conditions of the Armed Forces are
not such as to attract best talent. As a result thereof, a substantial
number of Pilots, Doctors, Technicians, Scientists in Armed Forces
and from other Defence organizations left the Services as they were
in big demand outside the Services. The Committee feel that this is
one of the reason for shortage of personnel in forces.
2.63 The Committee therefore opined that in order to attract the
talented and best youth to the Armed Forces and to retain the existing
strength, there was an imperative need to approach the Sixth Central
Pay Commission to make the salary structure, facilities and working
Service conditions of the personnel of Armed Force Services more
attractive vis-a-vis private sector which pay them handsomely. The
Committee desire that in case of meritorious service, all the award
winners should be given the attractive one time monitory benefits
in order to further motivate the Armed Forces Personnel. The
Committee had also opined that there was need to introduce pre-
selection training by the Ministry of Defence for the youth which
may include lodging, boarding and transport etc. The aim of the
training should be to attract youth to Defence Services and equip
them for final selection. The Committee reiterate the above
recommendation for expeditious implementation.
2.64 The Committee further desire that to avoid stress, the Jawans
and officers posted in the forward and border areas should be
allowed to avail leave during peace time.
2.65 The Committee note that the GoM had recommended for
setting up of an Air Force College of Engineering (AFCE) and a
Defence Services Software Institute (DSSI) for the Armed Forces.
The Committee are, however, unhappy to see little progress in this
regard. Even though some efforts have been put in regard to the
setting up of AFCE but nothing has yet been done for DSSI. The
Committee, therefore, recommend that the Ministry should take
immediate steps in this matter and apprise the Committee about the
progress from time-to-time. The Committee also reiterate their earlier
recommendation for setting up of Air Force Pilot College at Nasik.

34
(c) Reduction in Colour Service of the Armed Forces
2.66 The Kargil Review Committee, in their report, have given the
following observations/recommendations:
“The Army must be young and fit at all times. Therefore, instead
of the present practice of having 17 years of colour service (as has
been the policy since 1976), it would be advisable to reduce the
colour service to a period of seven to ten years and, thereafter,
release these officers and men for service in the country’s para-
military formations. After an appropriate period of service here,
older cadres might be further streamed into the regular police
forces or absorbed in a Nainital Service Corps (or a National
Conservation Corps), as provided for under Article 51A(d) of the
Constitution, to spearhead a range of land and water conservation
and physical and social infrastructure development on the model
of some eco-development battalions that have been raised with a
fair measure of success. This would reduce the age profile of the
Army and the para-military forces, and also reduce pension costs
and other entitlements such as married quarters and educational
facilities. The Army pension bill has risen exponentially since the
1960s and is becoming an increasing burden on the national
exchequer. Army pensions rose from Rs. 1,568 crore in 1990-91 to
Rs. 6,932 crore (budgeted) in 1999-2000, the equivalent of almost
two-thirds of the current Army salary bill.”
(Kargil Review Committee Report Para No. 14.14)
2.67 About the reduction in Colour Service of the Armed Forces,
the GoM had observed as under:
“In order to ensure that the Armed Forces are at their fighting
best at all times, there is a need to ensure a younger profile of the
Services. However, this is a highly complex matter. While the Army
desires a younger age profile, so do the Central Para-Military Forces
(CPMFs). The GoM recommends that the Cabinet Secretary, COAS,
Defence Secretary, Home Secretary , and Secretary Expenditure may
look into the terms of engagement of soldiers, lateral entry into
other organisations and resettlement policies. The recommendations
in the matter could be submitted for the Government’s
consideration.”
(GoM Report Para No. 6.71)
2.68 The Ministry of Defence have stated that this issue is under
discussion with the Ministry of Home Affairs.

35
2.69 During oral evidence, on being asked by the Committee, the
Defence Secretary expressed constraints in regard to lateral entry of
Armed Forces personnel into Para Military forces as under:
“The basic thing is that the army Jawans retire earlier. They can
go to Central Paramilitary forces like BSF or CRPF. On what rank
they will go? This is the question. At what stage they will go?
That is the question. There are already people who are in the
border security force or CRPF or ITBP at the age of 18-19 years.
At what rank these people will go in the lateral level? Those people
in the services also want younger people. Each service wants to
have a field command of its own personnel.”
2.70 Regarding lateral entry into the Civil Services, he further
informed the Committee as under:
“They also have similar problems. You would understand that there
is very less recruitment in most of the services. In fact, recruitment
is higher in the security services. In none of the civil administration,
you will find that there is very large scale recruitment. So, we
have a physical problem of finding places. One of the major
activities that is happening is to integrate them to be trained in
vocations so that they can find self-employment.”
2.71 On the same issue, Ministry of Defence, in their reply on
implementation status of GoM recommendation in regard to lateral
entry of the soldiers into other organisations, stated as under:—
“The Group of Ministers (GoM), appointed to consider the Kargil
Review Committee Report, had in their report on ‘Reforming the
National Security System’ recommended lateral transfer of Army
personnel to Central Para Military Forces (CPMF) with the primary
aim of keeping a young profile of the Army in peak combat
effective state capable of meeting challenges of future conflict. As
a follow up action to the GOM recommendations, a Working Group
under the Chairmanship of Adjutant General in the Army and
comprising Joint Secretary (Police) in Ministry of Home Affairs
(MHA), representatives of Border Security Force, Central Reserve
Police Force, Central Industrial Security Force and National Security
Council Secretariat as Members was constituted to carry out a
detailed study of various issues involved and work out modalities
for implementing the recommendation.
The report submitted by the Working Group in March, 2002 was
not unanimous. There are concerns on the part of MHA. The matter

36
continues to be under active consideration of the Government and
a series of meetings between the representatives of MHA & Central
Para Military Forces (CPMFs) and Ministry of Defence & Army
have been held at various levels including meetings at the level of
Cabinet Secretary and Home Secretary to evolve and approach
that would address the concerns of both the Ministries.
Subsequently, a meeting was taken by the Home Secretary on
2nd November, 2006. As per the decision taken in the meeting, a
Committee under the Chairmanship of Director General, Border
Security Force has been constituted to work out the modalities.
Home Minister has informed that further action in this matter will
be taken after receiving the report of the Committee.”
Recommendation No. 10
2.72 The Committee endorse the view of Group of Ministers
that the armed forces need to maintain a younger age profile so that
they are at their fighting best at all times.
2.73 The Committee also note that the Ministry of Home Affairs
also desired the younger age profile in the Central Para Military
Forces. Therefore, there is a need to lay down the terms of
engagement of soldiers and their lateral induction into other
organisations.
2.74 The Ministry of Defence have informed the Committee that
there are a number of problems in lateral induction of soldiers into
the Central Para Military Forces like BSF or CRPF.
2.75 The Committee, however, are of the firm view that there is
a need to maintain younger profile with the armed forces. As a
result, a large number of ex-servicemen shall have to be re-settled
in other professions. At present, this responsibility is being catered
to by the Director General of Resettlement. However, there are not
many opportunities for these ex-servicemen available on the civil
side. The Committee feel that it is the responsibility of the
Government to ensure proper re-settlement of these ex-servicemen if
it is decided to maintain younger profile in the armed forces. The
Committee, therefore, desire that these ex-servicemen must be given
lateral entry into various Para Military Border Security Force, Central
Police Forces as well as in State Police Forces and other such forces.
The Committee feel that ex-servicemen are fully trained in handling
arms and ammunitions and they have the first hand experience of
handling infiltrators and insurgents etc. in the border areas. The

37
Committee feel that their expertise can be gainfully utilised in the
Central Police Forces. The Committee also feel that these ex-
servicemen should also be absorbed in State Police Services as they
are disciplined and fully trained personnel having experience in arms
and ammunitions. The Committee suggest that the State Governments
can be asked to absorb at least those ex-servicemen in their State
Police Force which belong to their respective States. The Committee
feel that induction of ex-servicemen into the para-military and other
such forces would lead to huge reduction in pension and other
retirement benefits bill of the Government. The Committee, therefore,
desire that Ministry of Defence and Ministry of Home Affairs should
jointly work out the modalities for lateral entry of ex-servicemen
into Central Para Military Forces and in the State Reserve Police
Forces by making statutory provisions in this regard. To begin with,
the Committee recommend that 10 per cent reservation for ex-
servicemen should be made. The Committee should be kept informed
of the action taken in the matter.
(viii) Civil-Military Interface
2.76 The Kargil Review Committee, in their report, have made the
following recommendations related to Civil Military Liaison.
“The establishment of a civil-military liaison mechanism at various
levels, from the ranking Command HQ to the operational
formations on the ground, Division, Brigade or Battalion, is most
necessary to smoothen relationships during times of emergency
and stress, like war and proxy war, and to ensure that there is no
room for friction and alienation of the local population. Situation
of no-war-no-peace call for norms and procedures that avoid delay
and endless red tape.”
(Kargil Review Committee Report Para 14.28)
2.77 The GoM had felt the need for strong synergy and jointness
between civil authorities and Armed Forces as under :
“The establishment of a civil-military liaison mechanism at various
levels from Command Headquarters to operative formations at the
ground level, is essential to smoothen the relationship during times
of stress and to prevent friction and alienation of the local
population. In this respect, the GoM has decided the following :—
(a) In the States of the North East and Jammu and Kashmir
(J&K) the Unified Headquarters are presently in existence.

38
These mechanisms are geared primarily to deal with
insurgency situations in the relevant States. There is need
to further streamline them [………………………………].
(b) There is need for a mechanism that caters for the entire
spectrum from peace passing through precautionary and
preparatory stages and finally to war. At the State level, a
Core Group of existing civil-military liaison forum may be
set up to identify the problem areas and evolve a system of
smooth mobilisation and thereafter, to meet the logistic needs
of the Army. The group may meet twice a year and the
Home Department may function as the convening
department on behalf of the State Government concerned.
At the district level also, a group may be set up from the
mobilisation stage onwards comprising representatives of the
district administration and the Army, if available.
(c) The above civil-military liaison mechanism may not be
essential for all States, but can be institutionalised in the
States of Gujarat, Rajasthan, Punjab, J&K, Haryana, Delhi,
Uttar Pradesh, Sikkim, West Bengal, Assam and Arunachal
Pradesh. The districts also need to be identified by the State
Governments in consultation with the Army commands
where the suggested mechanism may be put in place. This
Core Group may meet at least twice a year.
(d) Although in some States formal structures already exist,
problems of lack of communication, co-ordination and even
misunderstandings between the civilian and the military
officials on the one hand and the military and the civilian
populace on the other, persist. In this context, inter alia ,
the following measures may be considered for
implementation :—
(i) The earlier tradition of military and civil officials posted
in the field making social calls on the occasion of their
joining the station should be strictly enforced.
(ii) Special care should be taken by DoP&T to post officers
with appropriate background to Ministries like Defence,
Home Affairs and other security agencies.
(iii) Upon their posting, the civilian officials must be put
through a mandatory briefing and orientation of two to
four weeks, in which they should visit certain military
establishments like Siachen, training establishments etc.,
to secure a better understanding of the problems of the
Armed Forces.

39
(iv) The military officials posted at the Headquarters should
also be sensitised to the role and responsibilities of the
civilian officials and the manner in which Government
functions. They should be appropriately sensitised to
procedures followed in staff organisations, as distinct
from command organisations.
(v) A conscious effort must be made by the Services and
MoD to promote active social interaction between the
civilians and the Armed Forces.
(vi) A civilian in the MoD should be provided certain
facilities available to the Armed Forces, like membership
of clubs, medical facilities etc., so that they develop a
sense of belonging to the Defence establishments and
vice versa.
(vii) A composite group of representatives of the Ministries
of Home, Defence, and the Defence Forces may be set
up to undertake an in-depth examination of the civil-
military interaction problems and bring out a manual
on civil-military interface, incorporating practical
measures for implementation, not only at the formal but
also at the informal level. The manual should give the
civilian officers an idea about the ethos and problems of
work among the Armed Forces, and provide to the
military officials information about the obligations and
constraints on the civilian side.”
(GoM Report Para 6.82)
2.78 The Ministry of Defence have furnished the following detailed
note on the institutionalized procedures to smoothen the Civil-Military
liaison at the ground level;
“(i) Civil Military liaison mechanism have been institutionalized at
various levels. Regular conferences are held at the level of
Headquarters Commands, Areas/Sub Areas with appropriate
representation from the Army and State Governments with a view
to foster mutual trust and understanding as also to address specific
issues such as those pertaining to fine tuning response to internal
security deployment, disaster situations, welfare of serving
personnel and their wards, ESM etc. Regular liaison is being
maintained between Field Formations and corresponding officials
from the civil administration.

40
Training
(a) Two types of programmes are being subscribed by Army at
Lal Bahadur Shastri National Academy of Administration
(LBSNAA), Mussoorie. These are :—
(i) Joint Civil Military Training Programme on National
Security.
(ii) Training of Army Officers for Civil Military Interface
during Phase-II IAS Orientation Course.
(b) Training of Army Officers for civil Military Interface during
Phase-II IAS Orientation Course :—Army HQ had approached
LBSNAA for training of Army officers (Maj/Lt. Colonel) alongwith
IAS officers for civil military interface during Phase-II of IAS
Orientation course for one week. The course curriculum would
cater for practical aspects of civil administration at the district
level with activities of high training value to include case studies,
experience sharing of peculiarities of various states and guest
lectures by reputed speakers. The first such participation by two
Army officers is scheduled from 23 July to 27 July 2007.
(c) Moreover, officers from the civil services have over the past
few years, attended a variety of courses in Armed forces institutions
like National Defence College (NDC), New Delhi, Higher Defence
Management Course (HDMC), College of Defence Management
(CDM), Secunderabad and Defence Services Staff College (DSSC),
Wellington. Army Officers have also attended courses like Advance
Professional Programme in Public Administration (APPPA) at Indian
Institute of Public Administration, New Delhi.
Training of Army Officers for civil Military Interface during
Phase-II IAS Orientation Course.
Civil Military Training Programme on National Security :—This
training programme commenced in Feb 03 at LBSNAA and since
then seven such programmes have been conducted (the last one
being conducted from 19 Nov to 01 Dec 2006). In these seven
programmes 21 officers from the Army have been trained.
Consolidated list of attendees of all Services may please be obtained
from HQ IDS. These courses have provided officers to compare
notes about the functioning of respective organizations leading to
greater synergy in an overall context.

41
2.79 For maintaining cordial relationship with the people in Jammu
& Kashmir and North Eastern States, the Army has undertaken a
large number of Civic Action Programmes as part of a strategy for
conflict prevention. In Jammu & Kashmir and North East, these projects
are being implemented under operation SADBHAVNA and in the North
East under OPERATION GOOD SAMARITAN. The Standing
Committee on Defence during their visit to J&K have taken note of
the efforts being made by the Army for spreading harmony and healthy
relation between Army and Civilian. The Committee also noticed the
good work being done by the Army in the field of education and
upbringing the children of terrorists who died during Army operations.
Keeping in view the noble cause of the Civic Action Programme of
Army, the Committee, in their Sixteenth Report on Demands for Grants,
had recommended to allocate more funds to the above mentioned
operation.
Recommendation No. 11
2.80 The Committee note that the GoM had felt the need for a
strong jointness and synergy between the Armed Forces and Civil
authorities at various levels from Command headquarters to operative
formations and therefore suggested several measures for
implementation. The Committee note that some institutionalised
mechanism have been evolved in this regard.
2.81 The Committee note that the GoM had recommended for
setting up a Core Group of existing Civil-Military Liaison Forum to
identify the problem areas and evolve a system of smooth
mobilisation and thereafter to meet the logistic needs of the Army.
The Committee note that no action in this recommendation appears
to have been taken by the Government. The Committee, therefore,
desire that this Core Group should be set up at the earliest and may
be asked to furnish their recommendation in a time-bound manner.
These recommendations should be implemented without any further
loss of time.
2.82 The Committee also feel that various Joint Training
Programmes outlined by the Government for Military and Civil
Officers are meant only for various military and civil officers. There
does not seem to be any proposals for interaction by military
personnel with the public at large. We read in Newspapers frequently
about the military personnel involved in tiffs and brawns with the
civilians in the railways and buses. The Committee feel that there
is an urgent need to bring synergy between the two at the earliest.

42
The Committee had also an experience to know that in cantonment
area run by the cantonment board, civilian dispensaries are not
provided with the same facilities as were available for the military
personnel in their hospitals.
2.83 The Committee, therefore, desire that Armed Forces
personnel, particularly combat forces, be trained by the Ministry in
order to develop rich culture and passion to facilitate the amicable
relation with the Civilians.
2.84 The Committee also noticed the good work being done by
the Army in the field of education and upbringing the children of
terrorists who died during Army operations. Keeping in view the
noble cause of the civic action programme of Army, the Committee
strongly recommend that the Ministry should allocate more funds to
Operation Sadbhavana and Good Samaritan and other similar new
programmes. The Committee also desire that for this purpose, funds
should be collected from different heads of various ministries like
Health, Human Resource Development, Rural Development and Road
Transport, etc. so that money may not be a constraint for this novel
cause and army should continue to be the nodal organisation for
their effective implementation.
2.85 The Committee further desire that the Ministry should
furnish implementation status of every measure suggested by the
GoM to strengthen Civil-Military synergy in times of war and peace.
(ix) Intelligence Apparatus
(a) Inputs received – Kargil Experience
2.86 It has been pointed out in Kargil Review Committee Report
that the Kargil invasion was the first regular war fought by India
since 1971 and it has evoked much controversy and the extent of
intelligence available and the action taken thereon. The Kargil Review
Committee had made a number of observations regarding intelligence
gathering, analysis sharing and taking of follow-up actions in this
regard. Some of these are quoted as under;
(b) Intelligence Gathering
“It is not quietly appreciated in India that the primary responsibility
for collecting external intelligence including that relating to a
potential adversaries, military deployment is vested in R&AW. The
Directorate General of Defence Intelligence (DGMI’s) capability for

43
intelligence collection is limited. It is essentially restricted to the
collection of tactical military intelligence and some amount of signal
intelligence and its main role is to make strategic and tactical
military assessment and disseminate them within the Army. Like
many other countries India does not have a separate Defence
Intelligence Agency with adequate resources and equipment to play
a substantive role in intelligence collection. Unfortunately, the RAW
facility in the Kargil area did not receive adequate attention in
terms of staff or technological capability. The Indian threat
assessment has largely single track process dominated by RAW. In
most advanced countries the Armed Forces have a Defence
Intelligence Agency with a significant intelligence collection
capability. This ensures that there are two stream of intelligence
which enables governments to check one against the other.”
(Kargil Review Committee Report Para 13.31 & 13.40)
2.87 For effective Intelligence gathering, the Kargil Review
Committee had given the following recommendations:
“Kargil highlighted the gross inadequacies in the nation’s
surveillance capability, particularly through satellite imagery . The
Committee notes with satisfaction that steps have been initiated to
acquire this capability. Every effort must be made and adequate
funds provided to ensure that a capability of world standards is
developed indigenously and put in place in the shortest possible
time. It is for consideration whether a two-stream approach-civil
and military-in regard to the downloading and interpretation of
the imagery may not be better alternative than depending on a
single agency. Some countries have created a national surveillance
command. Since the Indian system is still in the initial stages,
decisions taken at this juncture will have long term implications.”
(Kargil Review Committee Report Para 14.5)
“Unmanned Aerial Vehicles (UAVs) also known as remotely Piloted
Vehicles (RPVs), are extremely useful and effective in surveillance,
especially if they have night vision and thermal imaging
capabilities. UAVs have just been inducted and are operating in
the plains under the charge of the Army. Similar efforts should be
made for the acquisition of high altitude UAVs. Institutionalised
arrangements should be made to ensure that the UAV imagery
generated is disseminated to the concerned intelligence agencies
as quickly as possible. UAVs could also prove effective in counter-
insurgency operations. They may replace WASO patrols in the long

44
run. However, in the interim, the possibility of using more stable
WASO platforms than Cheetah helicopters and equipping them
with thermal imaging sensors should be explored.”
(Kargil Review Committee Report Para 14.6)
“The most spectacular intelligence coup of the Kargil operations
was the interception of a series of high level Islamabad-Beijing
telephone conversations. This highlights the capabilities of
communication intelligence which in India is fragmented among a
number of agencies and is not adequately funded. The equipment
needs to be modernised in keeping with the advances made by
Pakistan in inducting advanced communication technologies. There
has also been a gross shortage of direction-finding equipment which
could contribute significantly to counter-insurgency operations.”
(Kargil Review Committee Report Para 14.7)
“The United States has grouped all its communication and
electronic intelligence efforts within a single organisation, the
National Security Agency (NSA). The desirability of setting up a
similar organisation in India with adequate resources for this
extremely important and non-intrusive method of gathering
technological intelligence calls for examination. Adequate attention
has not been paid to developing encryption and decryption skills.
The centralised communication and electronic intelligence agency
should feed all the information it generates to the country’s premier
national intelligence agency which should in turn disseminate this
material to all concerned users. The problems and purposes of
monitoring communications within the country and the effort
devoted to listen in on external communications are different.
Increasingly, organised crime and anti-national elements are using
encrypted communications. While the effort to build up adequate
communication and electronic intelligence capability should be
tailored to suit India’s particular needs, parochial departmental
interests should be effectively countered.”
(Kargil Review Committee Report Para 14.8)
“In many advanced countries, technological intelligence collection
is undertaken by an integrated Defence Intelligence Agency with
adequate resources. In India, the defence intelligence effort is limited
in relation to the role assigned to the external intelligence agency
(R&AW) except for limited tactical and signal intelligence. The
resources made available to the Defence Services for intelligence

45
collection are not commensurate with the responsibility assigned
to them. There are distinct advantages in having two line of
intelligence collection and reporting, with a rational division of
functions, responsibilities and areas of specialisation. The Committee
is of the view that the issue of setting up an integrated defence
intelligence agency needs examination.”
(Kargil Review Committee Report Para 14.9)
“The Committee has drawn attention to deficiencies in the present
system of collection, reporting, collation and assessment of
intelligence. There is no institutionalised mechanism for
coordination or objective-oriented interaction between the agencies
and consumers at different levels. Similarly, there is no mechanism
for tasking the agencies, monitoring their performance and
reviewing the overall functioning of the agencies. These are all
standard features elsewhere in the world. In the absence of such
procedures, the value for money . While taking note of recent steps
to entrust the NSCS with some of these responsibilities the
Committee recommends a thorough examination of the working
of the intelligence system with a view to remedying these
deficiencies.”
(Kargil Review Committee Report Para 14.10)
“All major countries have a mechanism at the national and often
at lower levels to assess the intelligence inputs received from
different agencies and sources. After the 1962 debacle, the then
existing JIC under the Chiefs of Staff Committee was upgraded
and transferred to the Cabinet Secretariat. It was further upgraded
in 1985 with the Chairman being raised to the rank of Secretary
to the Government. The Committee finds that for various reasons
cited in the Report, the JIC was devalued. Its efficacy has increased
since it became part of the National Security Council Secretariat.
However, its role and place in the national intelligence framework
should be evaluated in the context of overall reform of the system.”
(Kargil Review Committee Report Para 14.11)
“Pakistan’s action at Kargil was not rational. Its behaviour patterns
require to be carefully studied in order to gain a better
understanding of the psyche of its leadership. In other countries,
intelligence agencies have developed large “White Wings” of high
quality analysts for in-house analysis. They also contract studies

46
with university departments and think tanks with area
specialisation. This is sadly neglected in India. The development
of such country/region specialisation along with associated
language skills is a time consuming process and should not be
further delayed. A generalist administration culture would appear
to permeate the intelligence field. It is necessary to establish think
tanks, encourage country specialisation in university departments
and to organise regular exchanges of personnel between them and
the intelligence community.”
(Kargil Review Committee Report Para 14.12)
(c) Sharing of Intelligence inputs between the Armed Forces and
Civil Authorities
“The Intelligence Bureau (IB) is mean to collect intelligence within
the country and is the premier agency for counter intelligence.
This agency got certain inputs on activities in the Force Commander
Northern Area (FCNA) region. The Director IB communicated this
information over his signatures on June 2, 1998 to the Prime
Minister, Home Minister, Cabinet Secretary, Home Secretary and
Director General Military Operations. This communication was not
addressed to the three officials most concerned with this
information, namely, Secretary (RAW) who is responsible for
external intelligence, Chairman Joint Intelligence Committee (JIC),
who would have taken such information into account in JIC
assessment and Director General Military Intelligence. Director (IB)
stated that he expected the information to filter down to these
officials through the official hierarchy. However, this did not
happen. The communication of this nature should have been
directly addressed to all the officials concerned. This highlights
the need for closer coordination among the intelligence agencies.
Had RAW and the DGMI spotted the additional battalions in the
FCNA region that were missing from the ORBAT, there might
have been requests for ARC flights in winter and these might
have been undertaken, weather permitting. As it happened, the
last flight was in October 1998, long before the intrusion and the
next in May 1999, after the intrusions had commenced. The
intruders had by then come out in the open. The present structure
and processes in intelligence gathering and reporting lead to an
overload of background and unconfirmed information and
inadequately assessed intelligence which requires to be further
pursued. There is no institutionalised process whereby RAW, IB,
BSF and Army intelligence officials interact periodically at levels

47
below the JIC. This lacuna is perhaps responsible for RAW reporting
the presence of one additional unit in Gultari in September 1998
but not following it up with ARC flights on its own initiative. Nor
did the Army press RAW specifically for more information on this
report. The Army never shared its intelligence with the other
agencies or with the JIC. There was no system of Army authorities
at different levels from the DGMI downwards providing feedback
to the agencies. There are no checks and balances in the Indian
intelligence system to ensure that the consumer gets all the
intelligence that is available and is his due. There is no system of
regular, periodic and comprehensive intelligence briefings at the
political level and to the Committee of Secretaries. In the absence
of an overall, operational national security framework and
objectives, each intelligence agency is diligent in preserving its
own turf and departmental prerogatives. There is no evidence that
the intelligence agencies have reviewed their role after India became
a nuclear weapon state or in the context of the increasing problems
posed by insurgencies and ethno-nationalist turbulences backed
with sophisticated hi-tech equipment and external support. Nor
has the Government felt the need to initiate any such move.”
(Kargil Review Committee Report Para 13.32)
“There were many information about activities within the Force
Commander Northern Area (FCNA) region. The enhanced threat
perception of commander 121 Infantry Brigade, Brig. Surinder Singh
also related to increase infiltration. In its half-yearly assessment
ending September 1998, RAW had assessed the possibility of a
limited swift offensive thrift with possible support of alliance
partners, but no indicators substantiating this assessment. In its
next sixth monthly report ending March 1999 this assessment was
dropped keeping in view the financial constraints that would
inhabit Pakistan from launching on any such adventure.”
(Kargil Review Committee Report Para 13.34)
“In the year 1998 the Indian Army did not share information about
the intensity and its effect of its past firing with other agencies. In
the absence of this information, RAW could not correctly assess
the significance of enemy activities in terms of ammunition storage
or construction of underground bunkers. This provides another
example of lack of inter agency coordination as well as lack of
coordination between the Army and the agencies.”
(Kargil Review Committee Report Para 13.35)

48
“The critical failure in intelligence was related to the absence of
any information on the induction and de-induction of battalions
and the lack of accurate data on the identity of battalions in the
area opposite Kargil during 1998. The prisoners of war and Indian
Army had assessed the presence of 5, 6 and 13 NLI battalions and
24 SIND in the FCNA region from October 1998 onwards. These
units did not figure in the order of battle supplied by RAW to the
DGMI dated April 1998 and June 1, 1999. This shows that there
were in fact a number of changes in the ORBAT of Pakistani forces
in the FCNA region during 1998/early 1999. In the Kargil Review
Committee’s view, a significant gap in information prior to the
detection of Kargil inclusion was the inability of RAW and to a
much lesser extent that of the DGMI and other divisional level
intelligence and Field Surveillance Unit.”
(Kargil Review Committee Report Para 13.36)
“The present structure and processes in intelligence gathering and
reporting lead to an overload of background and unconfirmed
information and inadequately assessed intelligence which requires
to be further pursued. There is no institutionalised process whereby
R&AW, IB, BSF and Army intelligence officials interact periodically
at levels below the JIC. This lacuna is perhaps responsible for
R&AW reporting the presence of one additional unit in Gultari in
September 1998 but not following it up with ARC flights on its
own initiative. Nor did the Army press R&AW specifically for
more information on this report. The Army never shared its
intelligence with the other agencies or with the JIC. There was no
system of Army authorities at different levels from the DGMI
downwards providing feedback to the agencies.”
(Kargil Review Committee Report Para 13.42)
“There are no checks and balances in the Indian intelligence system
to ensure that the consumer gets all the intelligence that is available
and is his due. There is no system of regular, periodic and
comprehensive intelligence briefings at the political level and to
the Committee of Secretaries. In the absence of an overall,
operational national security framework and objectives, each
intelligence agency is diligent in preserving its own turf and
departmental prerogatives. There is no evidence that the intelligence
agencies have reviewed their role after India became a nuclear
weapon state or in the context of the increasing problems posed
by insurgencies and ethno-nationalist turbulences backed with
sophisticated hi-tech equipment and external support. Nor has the
Government felt the need to initiate any such move”
(Kargil Review Committee Report Para 13.44)

49
2.88 In pursuance of the Kargil Review Committee Report, the
Government of India had constituted a Group of Ministers to review
the entire Security scenario. The GoM were assisted by four Task Forces.
The Task Force, constituted to study and suggest improvement in the
Intelligence Apparatus, had given various important recommendations
which were of classified nature and these have since been deleted
from the papers placed before this Committee. The National Security
Council Secretariat is the nodal agency to deal with the monitoring of
the recommendations of whole GoM report including Intelligence
Apparatus. In this regard, the National Security Council Secretariat
(NSCS) must have taken a number of remedial measures to ensure
improvements and to strengthen the entire Intelligence network.
However, what is happening in the country, in our daily life, due to
naxalite activities, Bangladeshi infiltration, growing terrorist activities
of ULFA and other religious groups as well as increase in Narcotic
trade, etc. one is led to conclude that much more remains to be done
in the field of intelligence gathering, analysing and sharing, etc. When
asked about the steps taken by the NSCS and the actual impact of the
GoM recommendations, the representatives of NSCS, during oral
evidence, briefed the Committee as under:
“Intelligence collection agencies, whether it is RAW, IB or State
agencies, they have been given more resources and they have been
given posts as well. In the subsidiary Multi-Agency Centres, inputs
collected by State Intelligence Agencies are evaluated and flagged
for further development, perhaps at the local level. IB has been
designated as the main agency for counter-intelligence and counter-
terrorism. The IB officials remain continuously in touch with State
agencies and they try to see that information obtained is developed.
Then, there is a Unified Command in J&K and some of you are
already aware of it. A Combined Operation Room, at Bhuj develops
intelligence leads and coordinate action. One of the most important
things was that for the first time, formal charters were given to all
the intelligence agencies. Previously, there were no formal charters.
So, the functions and the jurisdiction of all intelligence agencies
have been defined. This also enhances their accountability. There
are also areas which were not under focus like technical intelligence
i.e. the intelligence collected through technical intelligence means.
A new organisation called the ‘National Technical Research
Organisation’ has been created for this purpose. Then, there is
also an emphasis on open sources. Previously this was not receiving
the kind of attention it should have got. The most important thing
is that all source assessment was lacking, and for this, the Joint
Intelligence Committee has been revised. This Committee gets

50
inputs from all the agencies, makes an overall assessment for the
consideration of the Government and CCS. For the first time, an
apex body has been created for performance evaluation of all
Intelligence agencies. The Intelligence coordination group and also
the National Intelligence Board have been created. The responsibility
of the Joint Task Force on Intelligence is to identify the training
requirement of a specialist nature for a particular type of threat in
different States and then they train them. So, that mechanism
functioning. After the Samjhauta blast and the Mumbai blast, a
booklet was prepared. Then, training modules were organised in
order to give training to those who are at sensitive places. So, that
is also taking place. One thing is there. As I said, nobody can say
that there is no room for improvement. There is sufficient room
for improvement. As my colleague has just now pointed out, some
of the successes are not taken into account. Actually, Intelligence
is just like marriage. If everything goes well, nobody notices it.
When something goes wrong, then, everybody comes to know
about it. That is actually happening. But we are making
improvements.
2.89 When asked to brief the Committee about bringing about
accountability in case of Intelligence failure, the representatives of the
National Security Council Secretariat stated:
“ I am saying that there are failures. There is always room for
improvement. That is why, perhaps, this discussion is taking place.
It must take place. I do not hold a brief for the Intelligence
Agencies. I must bring it to your notice that terrorists are working
overtime. They are also finding new methods and new ways to
challenge our security.”
2.90 They further stated:
“In the last three years, because of Intelligence, 486 kgs. of RDX
had been recovered. You can very well imagine that in the Mumbai
blast, 21 or 23 kgs were used. You can imagine how many such
incidents we have saved. So, the impact should be seen in that
respect also. Then, I come to Hawala transactions. Last year,
18 modules were busted on the intelligence provided by various
Intelligence Agencies. Out of these, we have found out that Delhi
is emerging as one of the important centres. The fake Indian
Currency notes are in circulation in Pakistan, Dubai, Kathmandu
etc. Besides the Hawala transactions, even legal channels are being
used. In three cases the Western Union was used. Then, ATM

51
cards were also used. They withdrew small amounts daily. Actually,
it came to a very huge amount. All these things are happening.
We have mechanisms to deal with these threats. FIU is there. They
are taking some action. IB and RAW have been also tasked. Some
improvement is taking place. Of course, some terrorist incidents
are also taking place. You have asked about accountability, that is
a very important point.”
Recommendation No. 12
2.91 The Committee have noted the above mentioned instances
quoted by Subramanyam Committee in their Report, which pertain
to intelligence apparatus. Since not much record has been placed
before the Committee regarding the action being taken by the
Government on these cases, the Committee feel that there is an urgent
need to strengthen the capabilities regarding the intelligence
gathering, the intelligence analysing, intelligence sharing and taking
follow-up action on those recommendations. The Committee note
that in many advanced countries, technological intelligence collection
is undertaken by an integrated Defence Intelligence Agency with
adequate resources. In India, the resources made available to the
Defence Services for intelligence collection are not commensurate
with the responsibility assigned to them. The Committee, therefore,
desire that sufficient funds should be made available to armed forces
for the purpose as recommended by Subramanyam Committee.
2.92 The Subramanyam Committee have noted a number of
instances in the intelligence gathering during Kargil war. The Report
has pointed out that Kargil highlighted the gross inadequacy in the
nation’s surveillance capability, particularly through satellite imaging.
They, therefore, recommended that Unmanned Aerial Vehicles (UA V),
also known as Remotely Piloted Vehicles (RPV), are extremely useful
and effective in surveillance, especially if they have a night vision
and thermal imaging capability. The Committee, therefore, desire
that the Government should take immediate steps to strengthen the
intelligence apparatus on the lines indicated by the Subramanyam
Committee.
(x) Withdrawal of Army from internal-security duties
2.93 The Kargil Review Committee, in their Report, had pointed
out the following important points on the withdrawal of Army from
Internal-Security duties.
“In going on alert to deter any Pakistani escalation and then
focussing on eliminating the intrusion at Kargil, the Army had to

52
withdraw Government Security Deletion battalions deployed in J&K
from their counter-insurgency role. This caused consternation in
the State Government and some worry even to the Para-Military
forces which were largely reliant on the Army in this regard. The
heavy involvement of the Army in counter-insurgency operations
cannot but affect its preparedness for its primary role, which is to
defend the country against external aggression. This point has often
been emphasised by Pakistani analysts. Such a situation has arisen
because successive Governments have not developed a long term
strategy to deal with insurgency. The Army’s prolonged deployment
in a counter-insurgency rule adversely affects its training
programmes leads to fatigue and the development of a mind-set
that detracts from its primary role. However, the Ministry of Home
Affairs, State Governments and para-military forces tend to assume
that the Army will always be there to combat insurgency. This
was vividly demonstrated when the Committee was referred to
the Union Home Ministry’s “Action Plan” for fighting militancy
and the proxy war in J&K prepared in May 1998. This defined the
role of the Army as being to ensure “zero infiltration” across the
LOC.”
(Kargil Review Committee Report Para No. 13.62)
“The Para-Military and Central Police Forces are not trained, raised
and equipped to deal with trans-border terrorism by well-trained
mercenaries armed with sophisticated equipment who are
continuously infiltrating across the border/LOC. Over the years,
the quality of these forces has not been appropriately upgraded
effectively to deal with the challenge of the times and this has led
to the increased dependence on the Army to fight insurgency. The
net result has been to reduce the role of the Indian Army to the
level of a para-military force and the para-military forces, in turn,
to the level of an ordinary police force. Pakistan has ruthlessly
employed terrorism in Punjab, J&K and the North-East to involve
the Indian Army in counter-insurgency operations and neutralise
its conventional superiority. Having partially achieved this objective,
it has also persuaded itself that nuclear blackmail against India
has succeeded on three occasions. A coherent counter-strategy to
deal with Pakistan’s terrorist-nuclear blackmail and the conventional
threat has to be thought through.”
(Kargil Review Committee Report Para No. 13.63)
“The Committee believes that a comprehensive manpower policy
is required to deal with this problem. In the present international

53
security environment, proxy war and terrorism have become
preferred means of hurting a neighbour’s social, political and
economic well-being. Given Pakistan’s unrelenting hostility towards
this country, it is necessary to evolve a long term strategy to reduce
the involvement of the Army in counter-insurgency and devise
more cost-effective means of dealing with the problem.”
(Kargil Review Committee Report Para No. 13.64)
“There has also been criticism that redeployment of military units
from CI duty in the Valley to the Kargil sector resulted in providing
easy passage for a large number of hardened militants who were
infiltrated by Pakistan across the Shamsabari Range into the
Kupwara-Uri area and even south of the Pir Panjal.”
(Kargil Review Committee Report Para No. 13.65)
2.94 In pursuance of the Kargil Review Committee Report, the
Group of Ministers have given the following recommendations for
modernisation of the Central Para Military Force and de-induct army
from the duty of Internal Security and Counter Insurgencies:
“A phased programme of modernisation of the CPMFs and their
enlargement/restructuring is already in hand. This must be
executed in a time bound manner. Decisions with regard to the
extent of enlargement of individual CPMFs should be based on a
clearly spelt-out future role and responsibility of each force. The
ultimate objective should be to entrust Internal Security (IS)/
Counter Insurgency (CI) duties entirely to CPMFs and the Rashtriya
Rifles, thus de-inducting the Army from these duties, wherever
possible.”
2.95 In r esponse to the above recommendation of GoM, the
Government has taken a number of steps for enlargement and
restructuring of Central Para Military Forces. The Government has
assessed and approved the additional requirements of a significant
number of battalions of Central Para Military Forces including IR &
RR over a period of 5 years in a phased manner commencing from
2000-01 in order to entrust Internal Security/Counter Insurgency Duties
entirely to Central Para Military Forces and RR so is to de-inducting
the Army from these duties wherever possible.
Recommendation No. 13
2.96 The Committee note the views expressed by Subramanyam
Committee in their report regarding deployment of army in counter-

54
insurgency operations to tackle terrorist problems in various parts
of the country and other internal security problems. As pointed out
by the Subramanyam Committee, army’s prolonged deployment in
counter-insurgency role adversely affects its training programme
which leads to fatigue and the development of mind-set that detracts
from its primary role. Also, the State Governments and Para Military
Forces tend to assume that army will always be there to combat
insurgency. The net result of all this has been to reduce the role of
the Indian army to the level of Para Military Forces and the Para
Military Forces in turn to the level of an ordinary Police Force. The
view of the Subramanyam Committee is that the involvement of
army in the counter-insurgency operations adversely affects its
preparedness for its primary role, which is to defend the country
against external aggression. The Committee, therefore, feel that army
should be immediately withdrawn from internal security duties and
this should be handled by Central Para Military Forces, Central
Reserve Police Force and the State Police forces. The Committee
desire that a fixed time schedule should be drawn up to withdraw
army from counter-insurgency duties, etc. gradually.
2.97 However, the Committee have also noted the views of the
Subramanyam Committee which state that the Para Military Forces
are not trained and equipped to deal with border terrorism by well
trained mercenaries armed with sophisticated equipment continuously
infiltrating across the border/LoC. The Committee would, therefore,
reiterate their recommendation that the ex-servicemen should be
inducted into the Central Para Military Forces as well as State Police
Forces to tackle all these problems as they are professionally qualified
to handle all sorts of arms and ammunitions and have first hand
experience of these problems at the border during their active service
in the army. This would save the Government a lot of money in
training Central Para Military Forces and Police Forces to handle the
weapons and fire arms etc. The induction of ex-servicemen in Central
Para Military Forces and the State Police Force will also save the
Government’s huge amount in pension and other liabilities. The
Committee, therefore, desire that this suggestion of the Committee
should be implemented in the right earnest at the earliest. The action
taken in the matter should be intimated to the Committee.

CHAPTER III
BORDER MANAGEMENT
3.1 It is stated that pursuant to the recommendations made by the
Kargil Review Committee in December, 1999 the Government appointed
in April, 2000, a Group of Ministers (GoM) comprising the
Home Minister, Raksha Mantri, External Affairs Minister and the
Finance Minister was constituted to review the national security system
in its entirety. The GoM set up four Task Forces on Internal Security,
Border Management, Intelligence Apparatus and Management of
Defence which submitted their reports to the GoM. The GoM after
considering the reports of the Task Forces formulated a series of
recommendations. The GoM report on “Reforming the National Security
System” was submitted to the Government in February, 2001 and these
recommendations were accepted by the Government in May, 2001.
3.2 It would be observed from the above that the reports of the
four Task Forces referred to above were part of the consultation process
the GoM had for formulation of its Report on Reforming the National
Security System. As the reports of four Task Forces formed the basis
for formulation of GoM’s recommendations on reforming the national
security system, no follow up action was required on these reports.
These reports have also not been made public. However, the GoM
recommendations as accepted by the Government in May, 2001 have
been under implementation. Ministry of Home Affairs has been
implementing the GoM recommendations on Internal Security and
Border Management.
3.3 In respect of 130 actionable recommendations made by the
GoM on Border Management, action has been completed with regard
to 94 recommendations and action initiated but is an ongoing process
in respect of 32 recommendations. The balance 4 recommendations are
under implementation.
3.4 Border Management is a subject which comes under the
purview of the Ministry of Home Affairs. However, keeping in view
the fact that Border Management is inter-linked with the Defence
Management and external security of the nation, the Committee took
evidence of the National Security Council Secretariat and Ministry of
Home Affairs and have given some recommendations in the succeeding
paragraphs of this chapter.
55

56
3.5 Pertaining to Border Management, the Kargil Review
Committee Report had given the following recommendations:
“Border management has become immensely more complex over
the years. It is now handled by the Assam Rifles, the Border
Security Force and the Indo-Tibetan Border Police. Border fencing
in Punjab has produced positive results. Elsewhere, vested interests
have come in the way of effective border management. The
smuggling of narcotics, man-portable arms and explosives, illegal
migration and the infiltration of trained mercenaries have all
exacerbated border management. Narcotics is dealt with by the
Finance Ministry while other aspects are handled by the home
Ministry. If the country is to acquire increased capabilities for area
surveillance and electronic fencing, the present structure and
procedures for border patrolling must be reviewed. The Committee
is therefore of the view that the entire issue needs detailed study
in order to evolve force structures and procedures that ensure
improved border management and a reduction, if not the
elimination, in the inflow of narcotics, illegal migrants, terrorist
and arms.”
(Kargil Review Committee Report Para 14.16)
3.6 The Group of Minister in Chapter-V of their Report had
observed that proper management of borders is vitally important for
National Security. Different portions of our extensive borders have a
variety of problems specific to them, which have to be appropriately
addressed. Some of the main problems currently afflicting the
management of our borders may be listed as follows:
(a) Some of our maritime boundaries are still undefined and
much of our land borders is not demarcated on the ground.
The disputed and unsettled nature of our boundaries has
made them a source of tension and made their policing
much more difficult.
(b) Since many of our borders are man-made artificial
boundaries and not based on natural features such as rivers,
watersheds etc, they are extremely porous and easy to cross.
(c ) Multiplicity of forces on the same borders has inevitably
led to the lack of accountability as well as problems of
command and control.
(d) Border Guarding Forces need to be distinguished from
central police organisations. Being more akin to the Army

57
and different from central police organisations which are
called in aid of civil power from time to time, they need to
be appropriately strengthened both in terms of equipment
and manpower.
(e) The repeated withdrawal, in large numbers, of para-military
forces from border guarding duties for internal security and
counter insurgency duties has led to a neglect of the borders.
These forces have also been unable to perform optimally
due to cannibalization of battalions and even companies.
(f) Lack of institutionalized arrangements for sharing and co-
ordination of intelligence at various levels and particularly
at the field level, is a primary weakness in proper
management of borders. The present tendency on the part
of each agency to guard its turf, even at the cost of
compromising national security interests, needs to be
deprecated and put down sternly.
3.7 Keeping in view the aforesaid problems and to improve the
management of India’s land boundaries as well as its coastal and
airspace security, the GoM has made a series of recommendations.
The Committee will examine the following recommendations of the
GoM, since these are inter-connected with Management of Defence.
(i) Creation of a Separate Department for Border Management in
the Ministry of Home Affairs
“In order to pay focused attention to the issues pertaining to border
management, it would be desirable to create a separate Department
of Border Management within the Ministry of Home Affairs (MHA)
under the overall charge of the Home Secretary. The question of
augmenting the strength of officers and staff would be taken up
in the due course.”
3.8 The Ministry of Home Affairs, in a written note submitted to
the Committee, have stated that a separate Department of Border
Management has been created in the Ministry in order to pay focused
attention to these issues relating to Border Management.
(ii) Implementation of ‘one border one force’
At present there are instances of more than one force working on
the same border and questions of conflict in command and control
have been raised frequently. Multiplicity of forces on the same border
has also led to lack of accountability on the part of the forces. To
enforce the accountability, the principle of ‘one border one force’ may
be adopted while considering deployment of forces at the border.
(GoM Para No.5.12)

58
3.9 Dr. Madhav Godbole, Chairman of the Task Force on ‘Border
Management’, during briefing, informed the committee that:
“We also lay down great stress on the accountability of the Border
Guarding Forces. There is a huge big force deployed on the
Bangladesh border and inspite of that so much of illegal migration
has taken place. So what is the criterion for judging whether the
force is effective or not? Therefore, we said, lay down standards,
accountability and one of the pre-conditions which we laid down
was, because when we examined this question we found that on
any given border at times there was more than one force operating.
So, this means throwing responsibilities from one to another rather
than anyone force being held responsible. Therefore, follow the
principle of One Border One Force”.
3.10 The representatives of the Ministry of Home Affairs, during
oral evidence, stated:
“Regarding the issue of ‘one border one force’, action has been
taken in this regard and, in fact, this is linked with the issue of
distinction between border guarding forces and other Central
Paramilitary Forces. Now, this has been implemented. The Indo-
Pakistan border and the Indo-Bangladesh border are being manned
by BSF; the Indo-Myanmar border is being manned by the Assam
Rifles; the Indo-Nepal border is being manned by SSB; and the
Indo-Chinese border is being manned by ITBP . So, this principle
of ‘one border one force’ has been implemented, and each of these
forces has also been designated as the lead intelligence agency for
that particular border for sharing with the other paramilitary forces
and the Army which may be in the hinterland and being able to
coordinate all the operations. As a part of this exercise, it has also
been decided that CRPF will be the major force which would be
dealing with counter insurgency or internal security operations. In
this context, all these paramilitary forces have also been
considerably strengthened”.
(iii) Distinguishing Border Guarding Forces (BGF) from other Central
Para Military Forces (CPMF)
3.11 Border Guarding Forces need to be distinguished from other
CPMF and the Central Police Organisations because of their distinctive
functions. It is imperative that the Border Guarding Forces are not
deployed in the States to deal with internal disturbances, law and
order duties and counter insurgency operations. Withdrawal of Border
Guarding Forces for such duties limits their capabilities to guard the

59
borders effectively. While there may be exceptional circumstances where
it may be necessary to utilise the services of Border Guarding Forces
for performing law and order/counter insurgency duties, as a rule,
these forces should not be withdrawn from the borders.
(GoM Para No. 5.13)
3.12 Dr. Madhav Godbole, in this regard, stated:
“Let me now come to another major problem. What the committee
tried to do was to distinguish between the border guarding force,
which is the first new terminology we coined for the forces which
are on the border, and the forces which are to deal with internal
law and order like the CRPF or like the Rapid Action Force of the
CRPF or like the RPF, etc.
Those which deal with Border, because peace time borders world
over are not manned by the Army but by the paramilitary forces,
therefore, BSF, ITBP , Assam Rifles, all of these are paramilitary
forces. Instead of calling them paramilitary forces let their objectives
be made clear in the name itself and call them Border Guarding
Forces. Once you say that several things follow; how the
recruitment should take place; how the training should take place
and in what manner their accountability must be established. Then,
under no circumstances the Border Guarding Forces should be
called into manage internal security situation in the country. As it
has happened time and again, in Punjab crisis, Jammu and Kashmir
crisis, BSF was withdrawn from the Border and was put on the
internal security duty. ITBP was withdrawn from the Chinese
Border so also Assam Rifles was withdrawn. So, we said, you
must lay down a time limit on the Government itself to say that
it cannot be done overnight. We said, let it be done over a three
or five year period and made a categorical announcement that at
the end of three years or five years no Border Guarding Force will
ever be called by the Government to deal with the internal security
situation in the country. Once you make that policy announcement
then some things will follow. You will have to take a total review
of the availability of forces to manage internal security in the
country. Then you will say how much police force does a State
have; does it require supplementation; what kind of CRPC
supplementation is required and then you will for once and all
separate these two streams altogether”.
3.13 In a written report submitted to the Committee, Ministry of
Home Affairs have stated that “the Government of India has approved

60
additional raising of various Central Para Military Forces. With these
new raisings, it is anticipated that the services of Border Guarding
Forces will be utilised only in exceptional circumstances for performing
law and order/counter insurgency duties.”
(iv) Logistic support to Border Guarding Force at par with Army
3.14 It is desirable to facilitate the integration of the Border
Guarding Forces with the Army whenever the situation so demands.
This would necessitate that the Border Guarding Forces should be
equipped with weapons at par with the infantry or related units of
the Army, when deployed on similar tasks. The MHA should take
further action.
(GoM Report Para No. 5.97)
3.15 The Ministry of Home Affairs have informed the Committee
that modernisation of Central Para Military Force has been approved
by the Cabinet Committee on Security during February 2002.
3.16 Pertaining to training to the CPMF, the GoM in their report
have further recommended:
“Effective vigilance machinery should be set up immediately in
each of the Border Guarding Forces. The set up should be headed
by an IPS officer in the rank of IG to be brought on deputation
and he should report directly to the head of the force.”
(GoM Report Para No. 5.88)
3.17 The Committee are informed by the Ministry of Home Affairs
that suitable officers have been designated in Border Guarding Forces
to have vigilance machinery in their organisations.
“There is a need to recruit more personnel from within the areas
of deployment of the various forces, as they would be able to
withstand weather and difficult living conditions better than the
people from other parts of the country. The percentage of
recruitment in the ITBP and the Assam Rifles from the areas of
deployment should be higher than the present level. At the same
time, increasing the percentage of recruitment beyond a reasonable
limit would affect the national character of the Border Guarding
Forces. The MHA may take a decision on the quantum of increase
in percentage of recruitment of personnel from the areas of
deployment, keeping this in view.”
(GoM Report Para No. 5.91)

61
3.18 In a written note furnished to the Committee, the Ministry of
Home Affairs stated:
“In accordance with the common recruitment scheme of constables
in CPMFs, 10% of the vacancies in ITBP & Assam Rifles are
allocated to States where these forces are deployed. Remaining
90% vacancies are allocated to all the States/UTs on the basis of
their population ratio.”
“The directly recruited officers of the BSF and the ITBP are put
through their basic training in their respective academies. After
initial training, it would be advantageous if they are attached to
the Army units in the field areas for a period of atleast two months
for practical training before they are sent on posting. This will
enable them to acquire additional skills necessary for their day to
day working as well as help in integrating them with the Army
whenever circumstances so require.”
(GoM Report Para No. 5.92)
3.19 The Ministry of Home Affairs, in their written note, informed
the Committee as under:
“Instructions already exist for attachment of directly recruited
officers of CPMFs with Army. The instructions have been reiterated
and MOD has been requested on 6/6/01 to organize training and
attachment of such officers for a period of three months including
two months with Army’s field formations.”
“Proper training of personnel is very important. Special
requirements of each Border Guarding Force based on its role, the
terrain in which it is deployed and such other related factors will
have to be built into the training facilities in each of them.”
(GoM Report Para No. 5.94)
3.20 Pertaining to the Action Taken in pursuance of the above
recommendations of the GoM, the Ministry of Home Affairs stated
that:
“The Ministry of Defence has been requested to allot seats every
year in their training institutions for the training of CPMF
personnel. The demand formulated by CPMFs for number of slots
for their personnel in training institutions has been recommend to
MOD for their consideration and necessary action”.
(GoM Report Para No. 5.94)

62
3.21 It has been observed that Border Security Force lacks
equipment and squardons like Army particularly in Jammu and
Kashmir areas. When asked to consider creating an Air Wing for the
Border Security Force, the representatives of the Ministry of Home
Affairs during oral evidence stated:
“We are seized of this matter and the BSF has been provided with
six helicopters to begin with. We have a larger programme of the
air wing type things which has been mentioned in which there
are small choppers. Our difficulty with the choppers is that they
are all military registered aircraft and we then become dependent
on pilots who would be only from the air force. Air Force may or
may not, at any given point of time, be able to give us that kind
of support. So, we are planning to go in for civil registered aircraft
which can perform the same functions. Our ability to operate them
would be much more. In fact, the day before yesterday, I have
had a detailed discussion with the Chief of Air Staff to see how
at the present moment whatever we have we can utilize it in the
optimum way. We are seized of the matter. Some steps have been
taken and some steps are in the pipeline”.
3.22 For strengthening of Border Security Force, the Group of
Ministers also recommended as under:
“The directly recruited officers of the BSF and the ITBP are put
through their basic training in their respective academies. After
initial training, it would be advantageous if they are attached to
the Army units in the field areas for a period of atleast two months
for practical training before they are sent on posting. This will
enable them to acquire additional skills necessary for their day to
day working as well as help in integrating them with the Army
whenever circumstances so require”.
(GoM Report Para No. 5.92)
3.23 When asked about the quality, training and knowledge of
Border Security Force to fight against terrorists who are using latest
weapons and technology, Dr. Madhav Godbole, during briefing, stated:
“There are a number of recommendations in the Task Force
pertaining to recruitment, pertaining to training, pertaining to
manpower, particularly to deal with the newer threats, and on
the technology upgradation and the kinds of equipment which
need to be provided to them. So, a series of recommendations are
there.”

63
Border Management
Recommendation No. 14
3.24 The Committee note that Group of Ministers, in their report,
had observed that proper management of borders is vital for national
security. But there were instances of more than one force working
on the same border and question of conflicts in command and control
had been raised frequently. Multiplicity of forces on the same border
also led to lack of accountability on the part of the officers. The
Group of Ministers, therefore, suggested the principle of “One Border
One Force”. The Ministry of Home Affairs, during the oral evidence,
informed that the action on the issue of “One border One Force”
has been taken and implemented. Different forces have been named
to man different borders.
3.25 The Committee also note that the Central Para Military
Forces have been assigned different borders and as a result they are
now supposed to deal with different problems at the border which
earlier used to be handled by different departments.
3.26 The Committee, therefore, feel that there is an urgent need
to sensitize these forces with different aspects of the border
management and they need detailed training for the same. The
Committee, therefore, desire a time bound training programme of
the personnel manning these borders should be finalised to give
them detailed training about different aspects of border management
like smuggling of narcotics, illegal migration, etc. At the same time,
they may be manning the border from where people shall be coming
legally also from the neighbouring countries. They, therefore, also
need elaborate training in dealing with legal migration cases where
they must be very polite and courteous to the immigrants and present
an affable face of the country to visitors, etc.
3.27 The Committee also note that the Government have decided
to raise a very large number of additional battalions of Central Para
Military Forces which need to be deployed for internal security duty,
to maintain law and order, to deal with counter insurgency and
terrorist activities, etc.
3.28 The Committee feel that this is the right time when the ex-
servicemen can be given lateral entry into these forces as these units
are being raised at present. This will solve a lot of resettlement
problems of our ex-servicemen and also save money of the
Government in training the new recruits to the battalions. The

64
Committee desire that this aspect should be seriously considered
and the rules should be framed to give some percentage of the
posts to ex-servicemen in these services regularly.
The Committee should be kept informed of the action taken in
this regard.
  N EW D ELHI; BALASAHEB VIKHE PATIL,
19 June, 2007 Chairman,
29 Jyaistha, 1929 (Saka) Standing Committee on Defence.

MINUTES OF THE NINTH SITTING OF THE STANDING
COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE (2006-07)
The Committee sat on Wednesday, the 6th December 2006 from
1500 hrs. to 1600 hrs. in Committee Room No. ‘D’, Parliament House
Annexe, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Shri Balasaheb Vikhe Patil —  Chairman
M
EMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri S. Bangarappa
3. Shri Santosh Kumar Gangwar
4. Shri Suresh Kalmadi
5. Shri C. Kuppusami
6. Dr. K.S. Manoj
7. Shri Asaduddin Owaisi
8. Shri Shriniwas Patil
9. Dr. H.T. Sangliana
10. Shri Mahadeorao Shiwankar
11. Shri Manvendra Singh
Rajya Sabha
12. Shri R.K. Dhawan
13. Smt. N.P . Durga
14. Shri K.B. Shanappa
15. Smt. Viplove Thakur
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri R.C. Kakkar — Deputy Secretary
2. Shri D.R. Shekhar — Under Secretary
65

66
NON-OFFICIAL EXPERT
Shri N.N. Vohra — Former Defence Secretary
2. At the outset, Hon’ble Chairman welcomed the non-official
expert Shri N.N. Vohra, Former Defence Secretary to the sitting of the
Committee. The Chairman then requested him to brief the Committee
on the subject ‘Status of the Task Force Report on Kargil War’ and
drew his attention to Direction 58 of the Directions by the Speaker,
Lok Sabha regarding confidentiality of the deliberations of the sitting.
3. The witness informed the Committee that out of four Task Forces
constituted by the Government of India on Kargil war, he headed one
of those task forces i.e. Task Force on Internal Security.
4. In regard to internal as well as external security environment of
the country, he informed the Committee that in accordance with the
provisions of Constitution of India, these were the responsibility of
the State Governments and Union of India respectively. Therefore, the
constitution itself laid down that police & law and order would be in
the jurisdiction of the States and to protect the country against war,
external aggression and to protect the states against internal disturbance
would also be the duty of Union of India.
5. He apprised the Committee regarding prevailing problems of
naxalism, politisational appointment of DG in the States, State-wise
internal security problems, role of ISI, Mafia in internal disturbances
and role of Public, Government agencies, Police Force, Army to reduce
internal disturbances.
6. In over all, for strengthening of Internal Security, he stated that
Defence and Home Affairs Services should not work in isolated manner
rather they should be coordinated and integrated in working with
each other. Therefore, he impressed that police system must be
improved and enlarged in terms of non-politicised, professionalism at
organisational and intelligence level and it must be integrated and
coordinated with military intelligence and external intelligence from
the point of view of external defence.
7. The Committee also desired to be apprised of his perception
and suggestions relating to Kargil War. He informed the Committee
that it happened due to certain failures like lack of surveillance,
intelligence and coordinated action whether internal or external.

67
8. The Members raised certain queries which were resolved by the
expert one after another.
Witness then withdrew.
9. The record of verbatim proceedings was kept.
The Committee then adjourned.

MINUTES OF THE TENTH SITTING OF THE STANDING
COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE (2006-07)
The Committee sat on Thursday the 07th December, 2006 from
1500 hrs. to 1700 hrs. in Committee Room ‘D’, Parliament House
Annexe, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Shri Balasaheb Vikhe Patil —  Chairman
M
EMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Milind Deora
3. Shri Santosh Kumar Gangwar
4. Dr. K.S. Manoj
5. Ms. Ingrid Mcleod
6. Dr. H.T. Sangliana
7. Shri Mahadeorao Shiwankar
8. Shri Manvendra Singh
Rajya Sabha
9. Shri Jai Parkash Aggarwal
10. Shri K.B. Shanappa
11. Smt. Viplove Thakur
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri S. Bal Shekar — Joint Secretary
2. Shri R.C. Kakkar — Deputy Secretary
3. Shri. D.R. Shekhar — Under Secretary
NAME OF NON-OFFICIAL WITNESS
1. Dr. Madhav Godbole — Former Home Secretary
LIST OF REPRESENTATIVES FROM MINISTRY OF DEFENCE
1. Shri Shekhar Dutt — Defence Secretary
2. Shri K.P . Singh — Secretary (DP)
68

69
3. Shri S. Banerjee — DG (ACQ)
4. Shri V .K. Misra — Secretary (Def. Fin.)
5. Smt. Rekha Bhargava — Addl. Secy. (B)
6. Shri A.K. Jain — Addl. Secy. (J)
7. Shri K.P . Lakshmana Rao — FA (ACQ)
8. Dr. A.S. Pillai — CCR&D (ACE &NS) & DS
9. Shri N. Sitaram — CCR&D (ECS) & DS
10. Shri Bimal Julka — JS (G/Air)
11. Shri Gautam Chatterjee — JS (O/N)
12. Shri Binoy Kumar — JS (E)
13. Shri Jatinderbir Singh — JS(T) & CAO
14. Shri Harcharnjit Singh — JS (ESW)
15. Smt. Kiran Chadha — JS(X)
16. Shri Amit Cowshish — Addl. FA (A)
17. Shri S.N. Misra — Addl. FA (M)
18. Shri Sitanshu Kar — Addl. PIO
Armed Forces Headquarters
1. Lt. Gen. H.S. Lidder — CISC
2. Lt. Gen. S. Pattabhiraman — VCOAS
3. V . Adml. Nirmal Verma — VCNS
4. Air Mshl. B.N. Gokhale — VCAS
5. Surg. V . Adml. V .K. Singh — DGAFMS
6. Lt. Gen. Z.U. Shah — DCOAS (P&S)
7. Maj. Gen. Mukesh Sabharwal — ADG MO (A)
8. Brig. Rahul Kumar — DDG PP
9. Air V . Mshl. D.C. Kumaria — ACAS Ops (Space)
10. Air Cmde. S.S. Roman — VM PD Ops (Space)
11. Cmde. V .S. Batra — PDOA, D (IC)
2. At the outset, Hon’ble Chairman welcomed the non-official
expert Dr. Madhav Godbole, Former Home Secretary to the sitting of
the Committee. The Chairman then requested him to brief the
Committee on the subject ‘Status of the Task Force Reports on Kargil
War’ and drew his attention to the Direction 58 of the Directions by
the Speaker, Lok Sabha regarding maintaining confidentiality of the
deliberations of the sitting.

70
3. Dr. Godbole informed the Committee that out of four Task Forces
constituted by the Government of India on Kargil War, he headed the
task force on Border Management. The Report was submitted to the
Government of India in August 2000. He also informed the Committee
that one of the recommendation of the Committee was to make the
report public for general education and understanding of people. He
further informed the Committee in a record period of five months, the
Group of Ministers had submitted their report, however even after
passing of six years of the submission of report, the same has not
been implemented properly .
4. He apprised the Committee about some serious problem of
management of the border viz. the illegal migration of people into
India, demarcation of borders, issuing of identity cards for credible
identification.
5. He also informed the Committee about the important
recommendations of ‘The Task Force Report on Border Management’
i.e. recruitment, training, manpower, deal with newer threats, technology
upgradation and the equipments which need to be provided to the
forces and for coastal security. He further stated that the task force
made a set of recommendations to establish coastal police and manned
them properly in terms of equipment, stations, wireless equipment
and communications etc.
7. The Members raised certain queries which were resolved by
Dr. Godbole one after another.
Witness then withdrew.
8. The Committee then invited the representatives of the Ministry
of Defence to brief the Committee on the subject ‘Status of the Task
Force Reports on Kargil War’ relating to management Defence and
drew the attention to Direction 58 of the Directions by the Speaker,
Lok Sabha regarding confidentiality of the deliberations of the sitting.
The representatives of the Ministry then requested to give a power
point presentation on the aspects relating to the implementation status
of the recommendations given in the Task Force Report on the
Management of Defence.
9. Thereafter, the Member raised certain queries out of the
presentation which were resolved by the representatives of the Ministry
of Defence. The Chairman also directed the representative of the
Ministry to furnish the replies to the queries on the points raised by
the Members during the sitting for which the replies were not readily
available with them.
Witnesses then withdrew.
10. The record of the verbatim proceeding was kept.
The Committee then adjourned.

MINUTES OF THE NINETEENTH SITTING OF THE STANDING
COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE (2006-07)
The Committee sat on Monday the 05th February 2007 from
1100 hrs. to 1245 hrs. in Committee Room No. ‘D’, Parliament House
Annexe, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Shri Balasaheb Vikhe Patil— Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Santosh Kumar Gangwar
3. Shri Asaduddin Owaisi
4. Shri Shriniwas Patil
5. Shri Raju Rana
6. Dr. H.T. Sangliana
Rajya Sabha
7. Dr. Farooq Abdullah
8. Shri Abu Asim Azmi
9. Shri R.K. Dhawan
10. Shri K.B. Shanappa
11. Shri Arun Shourie
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri P .K. Bhandari — Joint Secretary
2. Shri Gopal Singh — Director
REPRESENTATIVES OF NATIONAL SECURITY COUNCIL
SECRETARIAT (NSCS)
1. Dr. S.D. Pradhan, Chairman, JIC
2. Shri Arvind Gupta, Joint Secretary
3. Shri Rohit Khera, Joint Secretary
4. Shri Ravi Shastri, Director
71

72
5. Shri H.S. Bawa, Director
6. Group Capt. (Retd.) Rejesh Mohan, Senior Defence Specialist.
REPRESENTATIVES OF THE MINISTRY OF HOME AFFAIRS
1. Shri U.N. Panigar, Secretary (BM)
2. Shri L.C. Goyal, Joint Secretary
3. Shri V .N. Gaur, Joint Secretary
4. Shri G.S. Patnaik, Joint Secretary
REPRESENTATIVES OF THE MINISTRY OF DEFENCE
1. Lt. Gen. H.S. Lidder, UYSM, CISC
2. Shri Bimal Julka, Joint Secretary
3. Cmde. V .S. Batra, Member (IC)
4. Lt. Col. D.P .K. Pillay, SC POL (Def.)
2. At the outset, Hon’ble Chairman welcomed the representatives
of the National Security Council Secretariat(NSCS), Ministry of Home
Affairs and Ministry of Defence who appeared before the Committee
to brief on the implementation status of the recommendations contained
in the task force reports and the whole Group of Ministers(GoM) Report
on Kargil War and invited their attention to Direction 58 of the
Directions by the Speaker regarding maintaining confidentiality of the
deliberations of the sitting of the Committee.
3. The representatives of NSCS briefed the Committee about the
status of implementation of the recommendations of the Kargil Review
Committee in the areas of intelligence, border management, defence
management and internal security. The Members putforth certain
queries regarding the recommendations of the Kargil Review Committee
which were replied to by the representatives of NSCS and on certain
points they assured the Committee to furnish written replies later on.
The witnesses then withdrew.
5. A verbatim record of proceedings was kept.
The Committee then adjourned.

MINUTES OF THIRTY-FIRST SITTING OF THE STANDING
COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE (2006-2007)
The Committee sat on Thursday, the 17th May 2007 from 1500 hrs.
to 1630 hrs. in Committee Room ‘E’, Parliament House Annexe,
New Delhi.
PRESENT
Shri Balasaheb Vikhe Patil — Chairman
M
EMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Milind Deora
3. Shri Santosh Kumar Gangwar
4. Shri C. Kuppusami
5. Shri Rajendrasinh Ghanshyamsinh Rana (Raju Rana)
6. Dr. H. T. Sangliana
7. Shri Arjun Charan Sethi
8. Shri Mahadeorao Shiwankar
Rajya Sabha
9. Dr. Farooq Abdullah
10. Smt. N.P . Durga
11. Shri S.P .M. Syed Khan
12. Shri K.B. Shanappa
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri P .K. Bhandari — Joint Secretary
2. Shri Gopal Singh — Director
3. Shri D.R. Shekhar — Deputy Secretary-II
4. Smt. J.M. Sinha — Under Secretary
REPRESENTATIVES OF MINISTRY OF HOME AFFAIRS
1. Shri Madhukar Gupta, Home Secretary, MHA
2. Shri U.N. Panjiar, Secretary(BM), MHA
3. Shri M.L. Kumawat, Special Secretary (IS), MHA
4. Shri A.E. Ahmed, Addl. Secretary (BM), MHA
73

74
5. Shri A.K. Srivastava, Joint Secretary (PM), MHA
6. Shri G.S. Patnaik, Joint Secretary (BM), MHA
7. Shri V .N. Gaur, Joint Secretary (P), MHA
8. Shri K. Skandan, Joint Secretary (CS), MHA
9. Shri Ashim Khurana, Joint Secretary (F), MHA
10. Shri P .K. Mishra, Director (IS-II), MHA
11. Shri Rakesh Nayal, Section Officer, MHA
12. Shri S.K. Chakarabarti, Dy. Director General, O/O RGI
13. Shri V .K. Mall, Director, NSCS
14. Col. C. Mathson, Senior Defence Specialist
2. At the outset, Hon’ble Chairman welcomed the representatives
of the Ministry of Home Affairs to the sitting of the Committee and
requested them to brief the Committee about the status of
implementation of the recommendations contained in the Group of
Ministers (GoM) Report pertaining to Border Management and Internal
Security and also drew their attention to the Direction 58 of the
Directions by the Speaker, Lok Sabha regarding maintaining
confidentiality of the deliberations of the sitting.
3. The representatives of the Ministry then briefed the Committee
about the stages of implementation of the recommendations contained
in the GoM report and apprised the Committee that action on most of
the recommendations has been completed. The representatives further
apprised the Committee about the various issues relating to
institutionalised arrangements for sharing of intelligence inputs at
various levels, the issue of one border one force, distinction between
border guarding forces and other central para-military forces,
strengthening the state Governments for counter  insurgency operations,
police modernisation programme, equipping CISF and BSF to deal
with counter insurgency or internal security requirements etc. The
representatives of the Ministry then shared with the Committee the
implementation status of recommendations concerning demarcation of
land boundaries and maritime borders. The issues of Indo-Bangladesh
Border and India-Bhutan Border were discussed at length.
4. The Members of the Committee then put forth related queries
which were responded to by the representatives of the Ministry. On
certain issues, the representatives of the Ministry assured  the Committee
to furnish information later on.
The witnesses then withdrew
5. The verbatim record of the proceedings was kept.
The Committee then adjourned.

MINUTES OF THIRTY-SECOND SITTING OF THE STANDING
COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE (2006-2007)
The Committee sat on Monday, the 21st May 2007 from 1500 to
1630 hrs. in Committee Room No. 139, Parliament House Annexe,
New Delhi.
PRESENT
Shri Balasaheb Vikhe Patil — Chairman
M
EMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Santosh Kumar Gangwar
3. Shri Shriniwas Patil
4. Shri Rajendrasinh Ghanshyamsinh Rana (Raju Rana)
5. Dr. H. T. Sangliana
6. Shri Manvendra Singh
Rajya Sabha
7. Smt. Shobhana Bhartia
8. Shri R.K. Dhawan
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri P .K. Bhandari — Joint Secretary
2. Shri Gopal Singh — Director
3. Shri D.R. Shekhar — Deputy Secretary-II
REPRESENTATIVES OF NATIONAL SECURITY COUNCIL
SECRETARIAT
1. Smt. Leela K. Ponappa, Dy. NSA
2. Dr. S.D. Pradhan, Chairman, JIC
3. Shri Arvind Gupta, Joint Secretary, NSCS
4. Shri Rohit Khera, Joint Secretary , NSCS
5. Shri Mukesh Mittal, Director, NSCS
75

76
6. Shri Ravi Shastri, Director, NSCS
7. Shri V .K. Mall, Director, NSCS
8. Shri J.S. Bhalla, Director, NSCS
9. Col. C. Mathson, Sr. Defence Specialist
10. Shri Anil Choudhary, IAS (Retd.) Advisor, NTRO
11.D r. M.S. Vijay Raghvan, Advisor, NTRO
2. At the outset, Hon’ble Chairman welcomed the representatives
of the National Security Council Secretariat (NSCS) to the sitting of
the Committee and requested them to brief the Committee about the
overall implementation status of the recommendations contained in
the entire Group of Ministers (GoM) Report on ‘Reforming the National
Security System’ and drew their attention to the Direction 58 of the
Directions by the Speaker, Lok Sabha regarding maintaining
confidentiality of the deliberations of the sitting.
3. The representatives of the NSCS then briefed the Committee
about the stages of implementation of the recommendations contained
in the GoM report pertaining to the various nodal Ministries entrusted
to implement the same. The representatives then apprised the
Committee about the intelligence gathering capabilities of various
intelligence agencies and efforts of NSCS in pooling different agencies
together in the implementation of the decisions taken out of the
intelligence inputs. The Committee were briefed about the role of Joint
Intelligence Committee (JIC) in reconciling the data gathered from
various Intelligence Agencies, the new mechanism in the form of Joint
Intelligence Task Force in identification of training requirements of
specialist nature for a particular type of threat in different states and
training modules devised to give training at sensitive places. The
representatives further briefed the Committee on the effectiveness of
intelligence system during the last few years and the new challenges
viz. cyber security and critical infrastructure, role of communication at
all levels within all organisations as a vital part of the exercise of
national security, the setting up of integrated check posts along the
international borders, etc.
4. The Members of the Committee then put forth related queries
which were responded to by the representatives of the Secretariat. On
certain issues, the representatives of the NSCS assured the Committee
to furnish information later on.
The witnesses then withdrew
5. The verbatim record of the proceedings was kept.
The Committee then adjourned.

MINUTES OF THIRTY-FIFTH SITTING OF THE STANDING
COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE (2006-2007)
The Committee sat on Tuesday, the 19th June 2007 from 1100 hrs.
to 1140 hrs. in Committee Room ‘C’, Parliament House Annexe,
New Delhi.
PRESENT
Shri. Balasaheb Vikhe Patil — Chairman
M
EMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri. Santosh Kumar Gangwar
3. Shri Suresh Kalmadi
4. Dr. K.S. Manoj
5. Shri Shriniwas Patil
6. Shri. Raju Rana
Rajya Sabha
7. Shri Jai Parkash Aggarwal
8. Smt. Shobhana Bharatia
9. Smt. N.P . Durga
10. Shri. K.B. Shanappa
11. Smt. Viplove Thakur
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri P .K. Bhandari — Joint Secretary
2. Shri Gopal Singh — Director
3. Shri D.R. Shekhar — Deputy Secretary-II
4. Smt. J.M. Sinha — Under Secretary
2. At the outset, Hon’ble Chairman welcomed the members to the
sitting of the committee. Then, the Chairman proposed to change title
of the subject ‘Status of the Task Reports on Kargil War’, which was
notified in Lok Sabha Secretariat Bulletin Part-II and suggested the
new title as ‘Review of implementation status of Group of Ministers
77

78
(GoMs) Report on Reforming National Security System in pursuance
of Kargil Review Committee Report – Special Reference to Management
of Defence’. The new title of the Report was unanimously approved
by the Committee.
2. The Committee, thereafter, considered the draft report on the
above subject and adopted the same with some additions/modifications
as suggested by the members.
3. The Committee then authorised the Hon’ble Chairman to finalise
the report and present the same to the Parliament.
The Committee then adjourned.