 
 
 
  
      STANDING COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE 
35
(2008-2009) 
 
(FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
MINISTRY OF DEFENCE 
 
[Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations contained in the 
29th Report of the Committee (Fourteenth Lok Sabha) on the Demands for 
Grants of the Ministry of Defence for the year 2008-2009] 
 
Thirty Fifth Report 
 
 
  
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
 
February, 2009/Phalguna, 1930 (Saka) 

 
THIRTY FIFTH REPORT 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE 
(2008-2009) 
 
(FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
MINISTRY OF DEFENCE 
 
[Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations contained 
in the29th Report of the Committee (Fourteenth Lok Sabha) on the 
Demands for Grants of the Ministry of Defence for the year 2008-2009] 
 
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 24.02.2009 
 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 24.02.2009 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
 
February, 2009/Phalguna, 1930 (Saka) 
 

 
 
C.O.D.  NO.  109 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Price :  Rs. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
© 2009 BY LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 

 
(i) 
 
CONTENTS 
 
           
          P A G E  
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (2008-2009).…………………….  (ii)
   
INTRODUCTION.…………………………………………………….… ………. (iv) 
 
CHAPTER I  Report ……………………………………………….…. 1
   
 
CHAPTER II   Recommendations/Observations which have been  
   accepted by the Government…….……………….…... 28
  
 
CHAPTER III  Recommendation/Observations which the Committee 
   do not desire to pursue in view of Government’s  
   replies…………………………………..…..……….….… 47
  
 
CHAPTER IV  Recommendations/Observations in respect of which 
    replies of Government have not been accepted by 
  the committee………………………..….…………..…… 52 
 
 
CHAPTER V   Recommendations/Observations in respect of which  
 final replies of Government are still awaited. ………… 64
  
 
 
MINUTES OF THE SITTING …………………………………………………….65 
 
APPENDIX    Analysis of Action Taken by the Government on the  
recommendations contained in the 29th  Report of the  
 Standing Committee on Defence(Fourteenth  
 Lok Sabha)……………………………………….………..  68 
  

 
(ii) 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE (2008-09) 
   
  Shri Balasaheb Vikhe Patil   - Chairman  
    
 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri Vijay Bahuguna 
*3. Shri S. Bangarappa 
4. Shri Milind Murli Deora 
5. Shri Santosh Gangwar 
6. Shri Jigajinagi Ramesh Chandappa 
7. Shri Suresh Kalmadi 
8. Shri C. Kuppusami 
9. Dr. K.S. Manoj 
10. Ms. Ingrid Mcleod 
11. Shri Asaduddin Owaisi 
12. Shri Adhalrao Shivaji Patil 
13. Shri Shrinivas Patil 
14. Shri Raju Rana 
**15. Dr. H.T. Sangliana 
16. Shri Arjun Charan Sethi 
17. Prof. Mahadeorao Shiwankar 
18. Shri Manavendra Singh 
19. Shri Balashowry Vallabhaneni 
20. Shri Rajesh Verma 
21. Shri Anil Shukla Warsi 
             RAJYA SABHA 
 
22. Shri A. Elavarasan 
 ***23. Dr. Farooq Abdullah 
24. Shri Jai Parkash Aggarwal 
****25. Shri  Abu Asim Azmi 
26. Smt. Shobhana Bhartia 
27. Shri R.K. Dhawan 
28. Shri K.B. Shanappa 
29. Shri Arun Shourie 
30. Smt. Viplove Thakur 
31. Shri M.V. Mysura Reddy 
32. Shri Munquad Ali 
___________________________________________________________________ 
 
*  Ceased to be a member of this Committee due to his resignation from 
Lok Sabha w.e.f. 12.02.2009 
**    Consequent upon his disqualific ation from Lok Sabha w.e.f. 3.10.2008. 
***   Ceased to be a member of this Committee due to his retirement from 
Rajya Sabha w.e.f. 29.11.2008. 
****   Ceased to be a member of this Committee due to his retirement from 
Rajya Sabha w.e.f. 25.11.2008. 
 

 
 
(iii) 
 
 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
  
1. Shri Devender Singh - Joint Secretary 
3. Shri Rajeev Sharma  - Director 
4. Shri D.R. Shekhar  - Deputy Secretary 
5. Smt. J.M. Sinha  - Under Secretary  
  
 
 
 

 
(iv) 
 
INTRODUCTION  
 
I, the Chairman of the Standing Committee on Defence (2008-09) 
having been authorized by the Committee to present the Report on their 
behalf, present this Thirty-Fifth Report of the Committee on ‘Action Taken by 
the Government on the recommendati ons contained in the Twenty-Ninth 
Report of the Committee (Fourteenth Lok Sabha) on ‘Demands for Grants 
(2008-09) of the Ministry of Defence’. 
 
2.  The Twenty-Ninth Report was presented to Lok Sabha and laid in 
Rajya Sabha on 16.04.2008. It contained 46 recommendations/ observations. 
The Ministry of Defence have furnished their Action Taken Replies on all the 
recommendations/observations on 14.10.2008. The Committee took oral 
evidence of the representatives of t he Ministry of Def ence on 4 February, 
2009 to clarifications on certain issues arising out of the action taken replies. 
 
3.  The Draft Action Taken Repor t was considered and adopted by the 
Committee at their sitting held on 20 February, 2009. 
 
4.  An analysis of action taken by  the Government on recommendations 
contained in the Twenty-Ninth Report of the Standing Committee on Defence 
(Fourteenth Lok Sabha) is given in Appendix. 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI:            BALASAHEB VIKHE PATIL, 
20   February, 2009                                Chairman, 
01   Phalguna, 1930 (Saka)            Standing Committee on Defence. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
1 
 
CHAPTER–I 
 
REPORT 
 
 This Report of the Standing Commi ttee on Defence deals with action 
taken by the Government on the reco mmendations/observations contained in 
their Twenty-Ninth Report (14 th Lok Sabha) on ‘Demands for Grants of the 
Ministry of Defence for the year 2008- 09’ which was presented to Lok Sabha 
and laid in Rajya Sabha on 16.04.2008. 
 
2. The Committee’s Twenty-Ninth Report (Fourteenth Lok Sabha) 
contained observations/recommendations on the following aspects: - 
 
Para No. Subject 
1 Application of criteria for security classification  
2 Outcome Budget 
3 Under utilization of allocation 
4 11th Defence Five Year Plan  
5 Extent of Indigenisation in Defence Acquisition   
6 Provision in DPP relating to transfer of upgraded technology 
7 Creation of Non-Lapsable Defence Modernisation Fund 
8 Curbing of Wasteful Expenditure 
9 Armed Forces Tribunal 
10 Liberalised Leave Policy 
11 Force Level of Coast Guard 
12 Monitoring of disbursement of money for rehabilitation by 
Defence Estate Officer 
 
13 Lateral entry of Service Personnel in Para Military Forces   
14 Registration of retiring servicemen at DGR 
15 Uniformity in Disbursement of Cash Grants to Gallantry 
Award Winners 
 
16 Separate fund under Civil Budget  of MOD for providing 
scholarship to the wards of Armed Forces Personnel 
 
17 Reservation for wards of Ex -servicemen in Educational 
Institutions  
 

 
2 
 
18 Revival and Rejuvenation of Entrepreneurial Schemes 
19 Ex-servicemen Contributory Health Scheme (ECHS) 
20 Revamping the ECHS   
21 Supply of Defective Sleeping Bags 
22 Increase the number of Self-Certification firms 
23 One Sainik School in each State 
24 Critical Review of the working of Sainik Schools 
25 Funding pattern of Sainik Schools 
26 National Cadet Corps (NCC) 
27 Poor Quality of Uniform 
28 Maritime Surveillance of Indian Navy 
29 Construction of Admiral Gorshkov and ADS 
30 Authorized and Existing Force Level of Navy 
31 Stealth Frigate Project (P-17) and Destroyer (P-15A) Project 
32 Shortages of manpower 
33 Upgradation of training curriculum and infrastructure: 
34 Lack of authority and power of the Unified command 
35 Induction of Armed Forces personnel 
36 Depleting Strength of Squadrons in Indian Air Force 
37 Acquisition of Medium Multi- Role Combat Aircraft 
38 Modernisation of Air-Fields 
39 Ordnance Factories 
40 Funding for DRDO 
41 Providing 100% grant to R&D ac tivities in selected private 
sector units 
42 Restructuring of DRDO 
43 Light Combat Aircraft 
44 Arjun Tanks 
45 Light weight Systems for soldiers 
46 Sixth Pay Commission Recommendations 

 
3 
 
3. Action Taken Replies have been received from the Government in 
respect of all the recommendations/ observations contained in the Report. 
These replies have been examined and t he same have been categorized as 
follows: - 
 
(i) Recommendations/observations, which have been accepted by the 
Government (Please see Chapter II): - 
Para Nos. 1, 8, 9, 11, 12, 13, 14, 17, 18, 19, 20, 21, 22, 26, 27, 28, 30, 31, 33, 
37, 38, 40, 43, 44 and 46 
(25 Recommendations) 
(ii) Recommendations/observations, wh ich the Committee do not desire to 
pursue in view of the replies of the Government (Please see Chapter III): - 
Para Nos. 7, 10, 15, 23, 32, 41, 42 
 (07 Recommendations) 
(iii) Recommendations/observations in respect of which replies of the 
Government have not been accepted by  the Committee and which require 
reiteration (Please see Chapter IV): - 
Para Nos.  2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 16, 24, 25, 29, 34, 35, 36, 39 and 45  
      (14 Recommendations) 
 
(iv) Recommendations/observations in re spect of which final replies of the 
Government are still awaited (Please see Chapter V): - 
                    - NiL- 
  
 
4. The Committee desire that th e Ministry’s response to the 
comments made by the Committee in  Chapter-I of this Report be 
furnished to them at the earliest and in any case not later than six  
months of the presentation of this Report.    
   
5. The Committee will now deal with the action taken by the Government 
on some of their recommendations in the succeeding paragraphs.  

 
4 
A Outcome Budget 
Recommendation (Para No. 2) 
6.  In their earlier Report, t he Committee had observed “even the 
Ministries exempted from preparation of Outcome Budget have been required 
to carry out the exercise   for internal use and voluntarily deciding to place it in 
public domain fully or partially”. The Committee had accordingly, expected 
that the same would be pr esented by the Ministry of  Defence to Parliament 
every year in terms of the Ministry of Finance guidelines. 
7. In their action taken reply, the Ministry of Defence have stated as 
under: 
“Ministry of Finance has exempted all the eight Demands for Grant presented 
by the Ministry of Defence to the Parliament from the scope of Outcome 
Budget after careful consideration. Preparation of Outcome Budget 
presupposes quantification and measurability of Outcomes, which may not be 
possible in the case of defence expenditure.  Preparation of Outcome Budget 
in respect of the entire defence expenditure also entails the possibility of 
disclosure of sensitive information through the statements required to be 
prepared as a part of the exercise.  While, therefore, reiterating our view that 
it would not be possible to prepare Outcome Budget to cover the entire 
defence related expenditure, efforts are being made to identify the areas and 
organizations funded from defence budget which could prepare Outcome 
Budget on a limited scale.  This may take some time. As of now, it may also 
not be possible to present the outcome budget, prepared on a limited scale, 
to the Parliament as it would take some time before the proposed system 
stabilizes.” 
 
 
8. The Committee had specifically urged the Ministry of Defence to 
prepare Outcome Budget and expected that the same would be presented 
to Parliament every year in terms of the guidelines of the Ministry of 
Finance issued in December, 2006.  The Committee are however, 
constrained to observe that even after lapse of two years of issuance of 
guidelines, the Ministry of Defence are still in the process of identifying the 
areas and organisations funded from De fence Budget, which could prepare 
Outcome Budget on a limited scale and that it would take some time before 
the system stabilizes. While expressing their serious displeasure over the 
delay in taking concrete action in this regard, the Committee hope that the 
Ministry of Defence will  at least now take efficacious steps to complete the 
process of identifying the areas and organisations for which  the Outcome 
Budget can be prepared  and make earnest efforts to present the same to 
the Parliament at least from the year 2009-10 onwards.        
 

 
5 
 
B Under-utilization of Allocation  
 
Recommendation (Para No. 3) 
 
 9. In their earlier Report, the Committee had observ ed from the data 
furnished by the Ministry of Defence for the years from 2002-03 onwards that 
the overall budgetary allocation to De fence Services had invariably been 
revised downwards every year and the De fence Forces could not fully utilize 
even the reduced allocation.  Without going into the causes for the recurring 
under-utilization, the Committee had point ed out that there was a need to 
make realistic projections of fund requirements by the Defence Forces 
keeping in view all relevant factors. 
10. In their action taken reply, the Ministry of Defence have stated as 
under: 
 
“There had generally been no under ut ilization of funds under the 
Revenue head. Under Capital head, there had been under-utilization 
due to a variety of reasons such as  slippages in achieving milestones 
in the procurement process.” 
 
 
11. Keeping in view the recurring na ture of under-utilisation of funds, 
the Committee had in their earlier Report recommended for making 
realistic projections of fund require ments by the Defence Forces.   The 
Committee are anguished to find that the Ministry in their action taken 
reply have merely stated that th ere has been under utilisation under 
Capital Head due to a “variety of reasons” including slippages in 
achieving milestones in the procur ement process and the reply is 
conspicuously silent on the aspects relating to the steps taken by them 
for making a realistic projection of requirement of funds. The Committee 
are not inclined to accept this evasive reply of the Ministry of Defence 
and they would like to know not  only the “variety of reasons” 
responsible for under utilisation unde r Capital Head but also the 
corrective and precise steps taken by the Ministry to ensure realistic 
projection of funds in future. The Committee would also like the Ministry 
of Defence to review and simplify their existing procurement procedure 
to minimise instances of slippages in procurement schedule. 
 
  

 
6 
 
C. 11 th Defence Five-Year Plan 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 4) 
 
 
12.  The Committee in their earlier Report had noted that even after lapse 
of two years after commencement of 11 th Defence Five Year Plan, the Plan 
proposals had not been finalized yet.  The Committee were given to 
understand that the Ministry of Defence were not sati sfied with the allocation 
indicated by the Ministry of Financ e in March, 2007 and that the matter had 
been taken up by the Raksha Mantri with Prime Minister and Finance Minister 
for reconsideration of the plan propos als. The Committee had expressed the 
hope that the matter would be finalized at the earliest. 
 
 
13. In their action taken reply, the Ministry of Defence have stated as 
under: 
“The 11th Defence Five Year Plan size   is still to be approved by the 
Ministry of Finance and Cabinet Co mmittee on Security. Concerted 
efforts were being made by the Minist ry of Defence towards its early 
finalization.” 
 
14. During oral evidence on this aspec t, the Defence Secretary stated as 
follows: 
“It is still with the Ministry of Financ e.  There are some differences in 
the amounts that we have projected and in the figur es that they have 
arrived at.  So, for the present, the lower figure may be taken as the 
sum that is approved.  We have asked for more.  In any case, it is not 
much of an issue because we function according to our Annual Plan.  
We do have an idea of how much money  we have. We are working on 
that.  There is a gap.  It is around 10 per cent”. 
  
 
 
15. Although the 11 th Defence Five Year Plan has commenced from 
April 2007, the Committee are perturbed to find that the Plan size is yet 
to be approved by the Ministry of Finance and Cabinet Committee on 
Security. Although the Ministry of Defence are stated to have been 
carrying out the Moderni sation Plan according to their Annual Plan, the 
Committee are in no doubt that th e extant Defence planning lacks 
foresightedness in the absence of a defi nite five year plan size. Clearly, 
managing the proposals on defence acqui sitions on a year to year basis 
is adversely effecting the modern isation programmes of the armed 
forces. The Committee therefore, wish to reiterate their earlier 
recommendation and trust that concre te steps would be taken by the 
Ministry of Defence at the highest level to get the 11 th Defence Plan 
finalised at the earliest. 

 
7 
 
D. Extent of Indigenisat ion in Defence Acquisition 
 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 5) 
 
 16. Taking note of the facts that schemes under ‘Make’ category of 
Defence Procurement Procedure 2006 remained to be identified and the 
indigenisation component in Defence Acqui sition was yet to be quantified, the 
Committee desired the Ministry of Defence to undertake an overall 
assessment under ‘Make’ category and Raksha Udyog Ratnas (RURs) and 
apprise the Committee of the same.   
17. In their action taken reply, the Ministry of Defence have stated as 
under: 
“In pursuance of the ai m of Defence Procurement Procedure (Make), 
the three Services have identified projects that could be offloaded to 
Indian industry after conducting feasib ility study.  However, no project 
under `Make’ category, of Defenc e Procurement Procedure had been 
taken up so far. DPP 2006 has been reviewed based on experience 
gained in its implementation. ‘M ake’ procedure of DPP have been 
retained in DPP 2008.  Only a fter some projects under `Make’ 
procedure have been implemented, its review would be undertaken.” 
  
 
18. Considering the fact that the `Make’ category incorporated in the 
Defence Procurement Procedure 2006 has not yielded any tangible 
results, the Committee feel that there is  an urgent need to fine tune and 
rationalise the procurement procedur es under ’Make’ category so as to 
achieve the goal of self-reliance in r eal sense. The Committee therefore, 
desire that an expert committee should be constituted at the earliest to 
review the existing procurement procedures under ‘Make’ category so 
that the capabilities and expertise ava ilable with the defence industries 
in the country can be gainfully utilized. 
 

 
8 
 
E.     Provision in DPP relating to transfer of upgraded technology    
 
Recommendation (Para No. 6) 
 
19. In their earlier Report, the Committee had desired that Defence 
Procurement Procedure should provide for an in-built provision in the 
agreements with suppliers for automat ic transfer of upgraded technology 
without the liability of additional royalt y payments.  The Committee had also 
stressed over the need for similar requirement in the Request for Proposal 
also. 
 20.      In their action taken reply,  the Ministry of De fence have stated as 
under: 
“The upgrades of Defence equipment involve two main aspects - (a) Cost of 
the upgrades and its operational necessity at a later point of time. This cannot 
be assessed during contract negotiation of the equipment, and (b) payment of 
royalty for making additional equipment/platform. The requirement of 
additional numbers, required in future, if any, of equipment/platform cannot be 
foreseen at the time of signing the contract. Upgrades/further modifications, 
which were not known to buyer at the time of contract negotiation and having 
a provision in the contract to provide it  free of cost by vendors, would compel 
vendor to hike its initial proposal. There would be many cases where 
ultimately upgrades may not be of any importance to Services. It would be 
better to procure upgrades/modified equipment or part thereof at a price later, 
which can be justified, rather than being an unknown figure at the time of 
main contract. In view of the above, the recommendation of the Committee 
has not been taken care of in the Defence Procurement Procedure -2008” 
   
21.  Though the Committee had recommended that there should be an in-
built provision in the agreement with suppliers for automatic transfer of 
upgraded technology without liability of additional royalty payments, the 
Ministry have tried to justify non-implementation of the recommendations 
on the grounds that the requirement of additional numbers of 
equipment/platform cannot be foreseen by the Ministry at the time of 
signing the contract and that the upgrades in many cases may not be of 
any importance to Services. The Commi ttee are not inclined to accept this 
reasoning put forth by the Ministry of Defence and they feel convinced on 
the basis of past experience that  the Ministry/Services have on many 
occasions faced problems both during acquisition and transfer of hi-tech 
technology, which ultimately resulted  in undue delay in procurement of 
upgraded equipment at the time of n eed.  Keeping in view the need for 
keeping pace with fast changing defence technology with utmost economy 
in meeting national security challeng es, the Committee wish to reiterate 
their earlier recommendation. 

 
9 
 
 
F. Curbing of Wasteful Expenditure 
 
 
 
 
Recommendation (Para No.  8) 
 
 
 22. Taking note of the fact that t he Headquarter Integrated Defence has 
identified a number of areas  where optimisation of Defence resources could 
be achieved, the Committee had in thei r earlier Report desired that action 
should be taken to curb avoidable duplication of expenditure and quantify the 
savings so made to assess the outcome exercise. The Committee had also 
desired that the action taken in this regard be intimated to them. 
23. In their action taken reply,  the Ministry of Defence have inter-alia stated 
as under: 
 
“(a) At micro level the Servic es had carried out an in house 
examination and confirmed that no wasteful expenditure was being 
incurred on any count. (b) At the macr o level, there we re a number of 
areas involving the Defence Servic es as a whole where wasteful 
expenditure has been avoided. These re lated to capital procurements, 
technology management, R&D, Defence PSUs vis-à-vis private Sector, 
utilisation of assets / facilities of common interest and so on…….   
 However, the quantification of such  savings in real terms is not 
possible without a comprehensive st udy by all agencies involved in 
carrying out cost benefit analysis.” 
 
 
24. During evidence on this aspect, the r epresentatives of the Ministry of 
Defence stated: 
 
“After sending these replies, a Committee has been formed and that 
has been headed by an ex-Secretary (Defence-Finance), and it has 
three other members.  All these three officers are recently retired 
officers from the three Services and it has a Member-Secretary and a 
representative from the Ministry of  Defence as Defence (Finance) so, 
they are looking into all these as pects in great detail and they have 
been tasked to submit a report withi n four months.  So, we are 
expecting that this report would come to us by March 2009”. 
 

 
10 
 
25. The Committee note that in  pursuance of their earlier 
recommendation, the Ministry of De fence have constituted a committee 
headed by an ex-Secretary (Defence- Finance), to look into all these 
aspects in detail within four months. The Committee trust that the 
Committee set up by the Ministry of Defence would submit the report to 
the Government within stipulated period of time. The Committee would 
also like to be apprised of the fi ndings of the committee so constituted 
by the Ministry along with the action taken on its findings.  
 
 
G. Armed Forces Tribunal 
 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 9) 
 
26. In their earlier Report, the Committ ee had expressed the hope that the 
Armed Forces Tribunal would commenc e functioning in July 2008 as 
scheduled and desired to be apprised of the progress made in this regard.  
  
 
27. In their action taken reply, the Ministry of Defence have stated as 
under: 
 
“…establishment of the Tribunal has yet to be notified under Section 4 
of the Act “. 
  
 
28. The Ministry of Defence have also elaborated on the preparatory action 
taken by them to establish and operationalise the Tribunal.  
 
 
29. While taking due note of the preparator y action taken by the 
Ministry to establish and operationalise the Armed Forces 
Tribunal, the Committee are constr ained to observe the delay in 
the establishment of the Tribunal which still remains to be notified 
under Section 4 of the Act. They, therefore, desire that time bound 
action should be taken to expedite the matter. 
 
 

 
11 
 
H. Scholarships to the wards of Army Personnel  
 
Recommendation (Para No. 16) 
 
30. In their earlier report, the Co mmittee had noted that Army Welfare 
Education Society awards scholarships to the wards of Army personnel; PM 
Merit Scholarship Scheme provides scholarships to wards of Ex-servicemen; 
and the Education Grant is provided from Raksha Mantri discretionary fund for 
the wards of Ex-servicemen.  The Committee had accordingly, desired that 
instead of having different sources of funds, the Ministry should consider 
creating a separate fund under Civil Budget of Ministry of Defence for 
providing scholarships to all needy children.
 
  
31. In their Action taken reply, the Ministry of  Defence have stated inter 
alia that “the sources of funds for va rious scholarships can be different 
depending upon the scheme which vary in  their  purpose and content and, 
therefore, a separate or a single fund for the purpose as recommended is not 
considered necessary.”  
  
 
32. Taking note of the fact that a number of schemes having different 
sources of funding are in vogue for aw ard of scholarships to the wards 
of ex-servicemen and serving defence personnel, the Committee had 
recommended that the Ministry of Defence should consider creating a 
separate fund under Civil Budget of Mi nistry of Defence for providing 
such scholarships.   In their action taken reply, the Ministry of Defence 
have, inter alia , stated that the “sources of funds for the various 
scholarships can be different depending upon the schemes which vary 
in the purpose and content and theref ore a separate or a single fund for 
the purpose as recommended is not considered necessary”.  The 
Committee are not inclined to agree with these reasons adduced by the 
Ministry for not creating a separate fund for award of scholarship under 
Civil Budget of the Ministry of Defence and they are rather of considered 
view that inclusion of such welf are schemes in the defence estimates 
leads to distorted and inflated fi gures in the Defence Budget.  They, 
therefore, reiterate their earlie r recommendation and urge upon the 
Ministry to create a sep arate fund under Civil Budget of Ministry of 
Defence for the purpose.  
 

 
12 
 
 
I. Reservation for wards of Ex-servicem en in Educational Institutions 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 17.) 
 
33.  Taking note of the fact the Mini stry of Defence had approached the 
Ministry of Human Resource Devel opment for providing five per cent 
exclusive reservation for wards of ex-servicemen in all educational 
institutions, the Committee had in their earlier Report desired that the Ministry 
of Human Resource Development should consider the matter without loss of 
time to enable wards of Ex-Servicemen to avail of proposed benefits.     
34. In their action taken reply, the Ministry of Defence have stated as 
under: 
 
“Ministry of Human Resource Development has been reminded to 
enhance reservation of seats for getting admission to the 
wards/dependents of defence per sonnel in professional 
colleges/institutions under the Government of India.” 
 
 
35. The Committee are distressed to find that the Ministry of Defence 
have not taken any concrete step in the matter except reminding the 
Ministry of Human Resource Development to enhance the reservation of 
seats for getting admission to wards of ex-servicemen in professional 
colleges/institutions under the Governm ent of India.  In the absence of 
any plausible explanation about the pr ecise action taken by the Ministry 
of Human Resource Development to implement this specific 
recommendation, the Committee are in  no doubt that nothing has so far 
been done in the matter. They, theref ore, strongly reiterate their earlier 
recommendation and stress that this issue be taken up at the highest 
level and follow-up action taken in a time bound manner. 

 
13 
 
J. Ex-Servicemen Contributory Health Scheme 
 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 19) 
 
 
36.  In their earlier Report, the Committee had desired that there should be 
a polyclinic of ECHS with full complement of staff or one recognized by ECHS 
at places where at least 500 Ex-Servi cemen reside.  The Committee had also 
desired that in areas wher e there was no polyclinics or recognized hospitals, 
there should be a provision for covering the area by mobile dispensaries with 
modern facilities. 
 
37. In their action taken reply, the Ministry of Defence have, inter-alia, 
stated as under: 
 
 
“There is no decline in the number of empanelled hospitals. The issue 
of new ECHS rates and empanelment of more hospitals is under 
consideration. ECHS polyclinics in all districts with ESM population of 
1500 and above, ECHS polyclinics in ru ral and remote districts with 
ESM population upto 800 and Mobile pol yclinics in remote locations 
with ESM population between 200 and 800 is also under 
consideration.” 
 
 
38. While appreciating that the issues related to extension of 
adequate facilities under Ex-servicemen Contributory Health Scheme for 
maximum coverage are under consideration of the Government, the 
Committee trust that an early action will be taken to put the intended 
facilities in place expeditiously. They w ould also like to be apprised of 
the latest position in this regard. 

 
 
14 
 
 
K. Revamping the ECHS 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 20) 
   
39. Taking note of the fact that  a high level committee headed by the 
Defence Secretary had been looking into the whole gamut of issues relating to 
ECHS with a view to revamping the scheme, the Committee had in their 
earlier Report expressed the hope that  the high level committee would 
complete its task early with a view to providing expeditious relief to ECHS 
beneficiaries. 
 
40. In their action taken reply, the Ministry of Defence have stated as 
under: 
“Meeting of the High Level Committee is  to take place to review the 
policy issues relating to ECHS.”     
 
 
41. The Committee are surprised to fi nd that the meeting of the high 
level committee on revamping the Ex- servicemen Contributory Health 
Scheme (ECHS) is yet to take place to  review the policy issues relating 
to ECHS despite lapse of a consid erable period of time. The Committee 
are in no doubt that such inact ion sends wrong signals to the 
beneficiaries under ECHS. While deploring the delay in holding the 
meeting of high level committee, th e Committee strongly feel that the 
Government should expeditiously take up this matter with the 
seriousness it deserves. 

 
 
15 
 
L. Increase the number of Self-Certification firms 
 
 
Recommendation (Para No.22) 
 
 
42.  Taking note of the supply of def ective sleeping bags, the Committee 
had in their earlier Report observed that  there was a need to progressively 
increase the award of self-certification status to quality conscious firms which 
have demonstrated consistent product quality. 
43. In their action taken reply, the Ministry of Defence have stated as 
under: 
“Supply of imported sleeping bags, which had been rejected, was not 
made by any self-certified vendor.” 
 
  
 
44. The Committee find it distressing that the Ministry’s reply is 
conspicuously silent on the aspect relating to the need to progressively 
increase the award of self-certification status to quality conscious firms, 
which have demonstrated consiste nt product quality. The Committee, 
therefore, desire that they be appr ised of the precise steps/action taken 
in this regard.   
 
M. Critical Review of the working of Sainik Schools 
 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 24.) 
 
45.  Taking note of the maladies ailing administration of the Sainik Schools, 
the Committee had in their earlier Report desired that the entire gamut of 
these issues should be gone into by a high level committee and remedial 
steps taken in a time bound manner in order to ensure that Sainik Schools 
achieve their intended objectives. 

 
16 
 
46. In their action taken reply,  the Ministry of Defence have inter-alia stated 
as under: 
 
“As per the Sainik Schools Societ y Rules & Regulations, the entire 
capital expenditure on land, build ing, furniture and educational 
equipments required by Sainik Sc hools and a major portion of the 
running expenditure was borne by t he concerned State Government 
who were also responsible for ma intenance of building, roads and 
installations and for major replacement s. They were also required to 
release grants in aid sought for additional requirement of building and 
furniture, transport, laboratory equipmen t, etc.  A majority of Sainik 
Schools are of 40 years plus vint age and the financial support from the 
respective State Governments had not been consistent. As a result the 
physical infrastructure of many schools had been facing a steady 
decline. In order to address this concern, the Raksha Rajya Mantri 
(RRM) had convened the first ever Jo int States’ Representatives and 
Principals’ Conferences in April, 2006 to evolve a joint action plan on 
this issue.  The Sainik Schools had an institutionalized fora at 
various levels to regularly review the functioning of these schools. The 
latest review on all Sainik Schools was carried out by the RRM during 
the Review Committee’s meeting on 24 th March, 2008 and during the 
Principals’ Conference held from 19th to 21st May, 2008.”   
 
 
47. It is observed from the reply of  the Ministry that a review on all 
Sainik Schools was carried out by  the Raksha Rajya Mantri (RRM) 
during the Review Committee’s meet ing on 24 March, 2008 and during 
the Principals’ Conference held from  19 to 21 May, 2008. While awaiting 
the outcome of these meetings, the Committee would also like to know 
about the precise steps taken by the Ministry of Defence in pursuance of 
the specific recommendation made by  the Committee in their earlier 
Report for examination of the issues a iling the administration of Sainik 
Schools by a high level committee for taking remedial steps in a time 
bound manner to achieve their intended objectives. 
 
 

 
 
17 
 
N. Funding pattern of Sainik Schools 
 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 25) 
 
 
48. In their earlier Report, the Commi ttee had observed that the funding of 
Sainik Schools should not be left to the mercy of the State Governments and 
desired that entire funding for all Sainik Schools should be made available by 
the Central Government on the pattern of Kendriya Vidyalayas. 
 
49. In their action taken reply, the Ministry of Defence have stated as 
under: 
 
“Upto the year 2007-08, the budget provision of Rs. 16 crore was made 
for meeting the Central Government’s  liability on account of Defence 
scholarships, subsidies for fee and dietary charges and incentives for 
cadets joining the National De fence Academy (NDA) and other 
expenditure on centralized activities  such as common entrance exam, 
Principals’ conference etc. The ma jor initiative on the part of the 
Central Government for improving the standards of physical and 
academic infrastructure was prov iding additional 44 crore @ 2 crore 
per school towards infrastructure  improvement has  been made for the 
first time during the year 2008-09. The Central assistance in the budget 
towards Sainik Schools is required to be continued in order to achieve 
the desired level of infrastructure standards of these fully residential 
public schools.  There is no proposal to dilute the role and 
responsibility of the State Govern ments in the management of the 
respective Sainik Schools. The St ate Governments role is also 
important since the prim ary objective of Sainik Schools was to remove 
the regional imbalances in the offi cer cadre of the Armed Forces, 
thereby envisaging a permanent stake of  the State Government in the 
development of the schools. These Sa inik Schools are therefore the 
unique assets of the State Governm ents as they prov ide 67 per cent 
reservation for the boys belonging to the particular state. The 
comparison of Sainik Schools with Kendriya Vidyalayas, Navodaya 
Vidyalayas may not be on equal footi ng since Sainik Schools are fully 
residential public schools having an a ll together different role and 
character and specifically cont ribute in removing the regional 
imbalance in the officer cadre of the Armed Forces”. 

 
18 
 
50. During oral evidence on the subj ect matter, the Defence Secretary 
stated as follows: 
 
“Sainik Schools are institutions that should be st rengthened. They 
provide quality education in quite re mote places.  They are sending 
people into the Services.  They ar e ensuring better quality of entrants 
into the Services.   We have found that many sc hools are in poor 
shape because the State Governments have not made any investment.  
This is quite common that when you start something on a sharing basis 
between the Central Government and the State Government, the State 
Governments   tend to fall behind.  We  should take a practical view of 
this and increase the Government f unding almost to 100 per cent and 
then we would have to start running t hese.  We should look for a via 
media and not expect too much from the State Governments”. 
 
51. Keeping in view the inability of State Governments to provide 
required funds to the Sainik School s and consequential decline in 
infrastructural facilities, the Co mmittee had in their earlier report 
recommended that entire funding for all Sainik Schools should be made 
available by the Central Governmen t. During evidence, the Defence 
Secretary conceded that “many schools are in poor shape because the 
State Governments have not made an y investment”. He also deposed 
that a practical view on this aspect was needed to be taken to increase 
Government funding to almost 100 per cent. In the light of the candid 
statement made by the Ministry in their action taken reply that Sainik 
Schools “specifically contribute in removing the regional imbalance in 
the officer cadre of the Armed Forces”, the Committee would like to 
emphasise that there is an imperative need for proactive follow-up 
action in addressing the issues related to financial constraints adversely 
effecting the infrastructural and acad emic standards of these schools. 
They, therefore, reiterate their earlier recommendation for entire funding 
of all Sainik Schools by the Central Government.  

 
19 
 
O. Construction of Admiral Gorshkov and ADS  
 
Recommendation (Para No. 29) 
 
52.  In their earlier Report, the Commi ttee had observed that in view of 
delivery schedule of both Gorshkov and Air Defence Ship being 2012 or after, 
Indian Navy had no alternative but to depend on the ageing INS Viraat for 
surveillance of the vast coastal area of  the country.  In the circumstances, 
keeping in view the future requirements,  the need for going in for third aircraft 
carrier could not be over emphasised. Ta king note of the fa ct that Admiral 
Gorshkov has also run into time and cost over run due to change in scope of 
work, the Committee had desired the Ministry of Defence to complete the task 
of examination of proposed modifications in the deal expeditiously.  The 
Committee had also desired that revis ed agreement in this regard should 
have an inbuilt provision for autom atic transfer of upgraded technology 
without the liability of additional royalty payment.  
53. In their action taken reply, the Ministry of Defence have stated as 
under: 
 
“The matter relating to revision in t he Master Schedule and cost of the 
Ex-Admiral Gorshkov projected by the Russian side has been taken up 
for seeking approval of competent authority to enter into negotiations 
with the Russian side. The matter rela ting to in-built provision for 
automatic transfer of upgraded tec hnology without the liability of 
additional royalty payment can be ta ken up with the Russian side in 
due course, though there was no such provision in the existing 
contract”. 
 
54. In order to ensure maritime security and future requirements, 
the Committee had desired the Ministry of Defence to expedite 
complete examination of the modifi cations in the deal of Admiral 
Gorshkov with Russian Government.  The Committee are however, 
concerned to note that the issue is not being taken up with the 
seriousness and sense of urgency it deserves as is evident from the 
reply that the matter relating to r evision in the master schedule and 
cost of the Ex-Admiral Gorshkov projected by the Russian side has 
been taken up for seeking approval of competent authority just to 
enter into negotiations with the Russian side. The Committee hope 
that the Government will come to a logical conclusion in this regard 
at the earliest and also give due consideration to Committee’s earlier 
recommendation for incorporating a provision in the revised 
agreement for automatic transfer of upgraded technology without the 
liability of additional royalty payment.   

 
20 
 
P. Lack of authority and power of the Unified Command 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 34) 
 
 
55. Taking note of the fact  that the Unified Command is not able to achieve 
its intended objectives due to lack of authority and power, the Committee had 
in their earlier Report recommended t hat the Unified Command should be 
vested with adequate powers to discharge its responsibilities effectively. The 
Committee also recommended that the Ministry of Defence should pay 
attention to the following points:- 
 
(i) Early finalization of revised LTIPP (2007-22). 
(ii) Evolving of a Joint Services doctrine and issue of joint directive 
to the Services.  
(iii) Integrated Modernization Plan for the three services and Coast 
Guard and providing a Joint Budget for the same.  
 
56. In their action taken reply, the Ministry of Defence have stated as 
under: 
“(a) Empowering of Unified Command to achieve its Intended 
Objectives. The present system is working well with all the 
joint aspects being coordinated by HQ ANC where staff' from all 
the Services are posted at eac h branch as per requirement. 
Respective  Component Commander s take instructions from 
the joint staff of HQ ANC and execute the given task as only 
they are competent to carry  out  the Service specific 
operations and it is not advisable to allow outside interference in 
their specialized fields/service.  Issues regarding procurement 
for the ANC, are being examined by a tri-service committee for 
bringing in necessary changes, as envisaged.  
(b) Early Finalization of LTIPP (2007-2022). Currently the 
 LTIPP 2002-17 is in vogue. The Hon’ble RM while approving the 
 current LTIPP had directed that New LTIPP 2012-2027 be 
 formulated.  The progress on the five steps towards formulation 
 of LTIPP (2012-2027) are as follows:- 
(i) Articulation of National Strategy . The draft National 
Strategy was prepared by HQ IDS and rendered to the National 
Security Advisor (NSA) in Jan 2007. Inputs are awaited. 
(ii) Formulation of Defence Planning Guidelines.  
The finalized Defence Planning Guidelines Document has been 
received from Headquarters IDS and is presently under 
consideration in the Ministry of Defence.  
(iii) Formulation of Defence Capability Strategy. The draft 
Defence Capability Strategy has also been formulated in Aug 
2008. The document is under circulation to the respective 
Service HQrs for their comments.    

 
21 
 
(iv) Preparation of Defence Capability Plan and LTIPP 
and approval by DAC. The work on Defence Capability Plan 
and the LTIPP are under way and both these documents are 
likely to be ready by end 2009.      
(c) Evolution of Joint Services Doctrine and Issue of Joint  
  Doctrine to the Services.  
(i) Joint Services Doctrine. This document has been 
issued in Apr 2007.  
(ii) Joint Doctrine. The RM's Operational Directive 
provides the guidelines to the th ree services to formulate their 
operational plans.  
(iii) Integrated Modernisation Pl an for the three Services 
and Provisioning of Joint Budget .  The LTIPP will enshrine 
the Integrated Modernisation Plans  of all three Services and 
provide foundation for Joint Budget”. 
 
57. When asked about the existing mec hanism to resolve disputes among 
the three Services and COSC, a represent ative of the Ministry of Defence 
during oral evidence stated: 
 
“The present situation is that t he plans are discussed by the three 
Chiefs under the Chairman,  COSC, and the plans are 
finalised/exchanged.  Further, each other  priorities and plans of action 
is codified and sent downwards fo r execution.  If there are any 
differences, then they are resolved at the Chairman, COSC meetings.  
This is the mechanism. It is done in operational issues also”. 
* * * * 
“I think that in all such situations there is a final authority, which can be 
at the Services-level or at the politic al-level.  Actually, I would say that 
disagreement within the Services is not a serious issue.  It is because 
by their very nature they are disciplined and conditioned to obedience, 
and when something is laid-down, it is normally carried out.  Therefore, 
I would not say that it is much of an issue. **********I think that there 
has never been any doubt in this country  that it is the decision at the 
political-level that must prevail.  I think that the Services themselves 
have always been the first to acknowledge this.  It has not been 
questioned”. 
 
58. Keeping in mind the Mumbai Terrorist attack, when asked as to how 
the Coast Guard should be a part of join tness, the repres entatives of the 
Ministry of Defence during oral evidence stated: 
 
“Actually, the Coast Guard has to wo rk more closely with the Navy.  It 
also has to have some coordinati on with the State Government and 
particularly in the coastal areas. So, we are trying to put some systems 
in place for this.  At present, t here is coordination between the Coast 
Guard and the Navy.  But there are some issues of command, control, 
sharing of information etc which ar e providing for through directives 
from the Ministry of Defence.  But very broadly, I think that to ensure 
coastal security, we will have to double the assets of the Coast Guard  

 
22 
 
in a short period.  The Coast Guard with its present complement of 
about 70 ships and 45 aircraft is all ri ght for certain roles- humanitarian 
assistance, search and rescue, disaster relief and so on.  But the 
Mumbai attacks have really now highlighted the need for a stronger 
security orientation in the Coast Guard.  So, we are going to the 
Cabinet shortly with proposal.  In fact, maybe it will come up in the next 
week or so to provide for this.  The increase in equipment, increase in 
manpower, setting up of more stati ons, improvement in technology 
through radar stations, improvement  of vessel identification systems 
will have to be done in coordination with the Ministry of Shipping.  So, 
al these are underway.  The Ministry of Home Affairs has also started a 
scheme for coastal police stations  for providing boats to State 
Governments and so on.  So, I think, all these issues are being 
addressed”. 
 
 
59. Expressing their concern over lack of authority and power of 
Unified Command, the Committee ha d recommended that the Unified 
Command be vested with adequate powers to discharge its 
responsibilities effectively. Although the Ministry have elaborated upon 
on the present system put in place to carry out the service specific 
operations and the status of the i ssues regarding procurement for the 
headquarters ANC, their reply is comple tely silent about the steps taken 
to bestow adequate powers on the Unified Command to enable it to 
discharge its responsibilities effectively.  The Committee would, 
therefore, like to be apprised of the precise steps contemplated by the 
Ministry in this regard.   
 
Q. Induction of Armed Forces personnel  
  
Recommendation (Para No. 35) 
 
 
60. In the light of the fact that  the Government had sanctioned 12,676 
additional posts in Air Force for being fill ed up over a period of  five years, the 
Committee had desired to be appr ised of the extent of actual induction of 
personnel in 2007 and the prospects for recr uitment of the projected level of 
personnel in 2008.  The Committee also desired that steps should be taken to 
expand the infrastructure for traini ng to accommodate enhanced number of 
personnel to meet the requirement of Air Force. 

 
23 
 
61. In their action taken reply, the Ministry of Defence have stated as 
under: 
“Induction against sanctioned 12,676 additional posts is planned in a 5 
year period. With regards to training of  pilots, it was initially planned to 
increase the rate of induction so  as to make good the additional 
vacancies within a period of 5 y ears. However, the existing 
infrastructure of the training es tablishments could not accept the 
capacity without major infrastructure  changes and investments.  This 
additional infrastructure if cr eated would have gone waste after 5 
years.  Hence, it was decided to  spread the period of making good the 
additional vacancies to 7 to 8 years from earlier plan of 5 years. As 
regards to PBORs the work servic es for enhancing the infrastructure 
are underway and this is likely to be completed by end of 2009.  As of 
date the infrastructure is being utilized to its peak capacity”. 
 
 
62. The Committee find that instead  of expanding the infrastructure 
for training to accommodate enhanced number of personnel to meet the 
requirement of personnel in Air For ce, the Ministry have decided to 
spread the period of making good the additional vacancies of manpower 
to seven to eight years from the earlier plan of five years ostensibly on 
the ground that the additional training infrastructure if created, would go 
waste after five years. The Committee ar e not inclined to agree with this 
argument adduced by the Ministry  against expansion of training 
infrastructure and they feel conv inced that an expanded training 
infrastructure will be an asset partic ularly when the Air Force plans to 
increase its Squadron strength in coming years. The Committee are in 
no doubt that the Air Force w ill not be able to meet their requirement of 
additional personnel within shortest possible time if appropriate action 
to expand the existing infrastructure of the training establishment is not 
taken at this stage. They, th erefore, reiterate their earlier 
recommendation to expand the infrastructure for training to 
accommodate enhanced number of personnel required to be inducted in 
Air Force to meet the pressing demands of national security. 
 

 
24 
 
 
R. Depleting Strength of S quadrons in Indian Air Force 
 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 36) 
 
 
63. Taking note of the vastly depleti ng strength as against the authorised 
strength of Squadrons in Air Force, the Committee had in their earlier Report 
emphasised over the need to revise the ac quisition target so as to meet the 
authorised strength within the shortest possible time-frame. They also desired 
to be apprised of the action plan formulated in this regard.  
 
 
 
64. In their action taken reply, the Ministry of Defence have stated as 
under: 
“The Force Level Plan had been revi sed and now IAF would have 35 
Sqns by the end of 12th Plan. IAF was planning to add Su-30MKI, Light 
Combat Aircraft (LCA), Medium Mu lti Role Combat Aircraft (MMRCA) 
and Fifth Generation Fighter Aircraft (FGFA) to its fighter fleet to 
replace aircraft phasing out due to completion of calendar life / Total 
Technical Life. To offset the reduced fighter Sqns (presently 34 Sqns), 
induction of various force multiplie rs like Airborne Warning and Control 
Systems (AWACS), Unmanned Aerial Vehicles etc has been done to 
ensure sustenance of combat edge. Induction of trainers like Advanced 
Jet Trainers (AJT) was planned for dual purpose of providing 
comprehensive stage III training to fighter pilots of IAF to ensure 
smooth transition from basic aircraft to advanced fighters and utilization 
of these aircraft for Close Air Support (CAS) role in case of any future 
requirement.” 
 
 
65. Taking note of the depleting strength of Squadrons in Air Force, 
the Committee had emphasised over th e need to revise the acquisition 
target in Air Force so as to meet the authorised strength within the 
shortest possible time frame.  In thei r action taken reply, the Ministry of 
Defence have stated that the force level plan in Air Force has since been 
revised and IAF will now have 35 Squadrons by the end of 12th Plan.  

 
25 
While elaborating the status of induc tion plan of aircraft and its impact 
on force level, the Ministry’s reply is  completely silent about the action 
plan formulated to meet the authori sed strength of squadrons within the 
shortest possible time. The  Committee would like to be apprised of  the 
plan drawn in this regard. 
  
  
S. Ordnance Factories 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 39.) 
   
 66. The Committee were of the view  that in order to make Ordnance 
Factories a vibrant and efficient organization, there was an urgent need to 
convert them into a company so that  they had sufficient autonomy to select 
vendors and undertake joint ventures and to enhance their decision-making 
powers in financial and R&D matters.  In case any delay was envisaged in 
corporatising Ordnance Factories, t he Committee desired that periodical 
technical audits and standard accounting system should atleast be introduced 
forthwith. 
 
 
67. In their action taken reply, the Ministry of Defence have stated as 
under: 
 
“(i) OFB has been maintaining accounts in the form of Income and 
Expenditure Accounts.  However, a decision had been taken to convert 
the existing formats of the accounts of the Ordnance Factories from the 
one based on the Government Depar tment to a new commercially 
oriented format, as per requirement  of GFR-87 of 2005. The same had 
been scrutinized/examined by various department of ministry.   The 
proposal for introduction of Comme rcial Accounting Formats in 
Ordnance Factory was in advance stages for approval of the 
Government and Comptroller & Auditor General.  
(ii) Regarding Corporatisation of Ordnance Factory, several 
meeting were held with representativ es of various federations of 
Ordnance Factories to address the concerns related to 
recommendation of Kelkar Committee.   However, in a meeting under 
the Chairmanship of the then Hon’ble RM with the reps of Federation of 
the Ordnance Factories held on 18
th Sep 2006, wherein it was informed 
that Government has not decided to corporatize Ordnance Factories. 

 
 
 
26 
 
(iii) Greater Autonom y has been given through enhanced financial 
powers.  Full Powers in respect of procurement/import of input 
materials has been accorded to OFB except Single Vendor Situation. 
OFB are not facing any constraints for their financial requirement.  
There has been no provision for technical audit by Independent 
Agency.  However, statutory audi t provision has been in place and 
action is being taken accordingly.  Substantial financial powers have 
been delegated to OFB including full powers for research and 
development activities in Ordnance Factories.” 
 
  
 
68. In order to make Ordnance F actories a vibrant and efficient 
organisation, the Committee had speci fically emphasised over the need 
to convert them into a company to enhance their decision-making 
powers in financial and Research & Development matters. Although the 
Ministry have stated in their action t aken reply that substantial financial 
powers have been delegated to OF B including full powers in Research 
and Developmental activities in Or dnance Factories, the reply is 
completely silent as to the action t aken by the Ministry to convert the 
Ordnance Factories into a company in pursuance of the 
recommendations made by the Commi ttee in their Report presented in 
April, 2008. The Committee would like to  be apprised of the precise 
steps taken by the Ministry in this regard. 
 

 
27 
 
T. Light Weight Systems for soldiers 
  
Recommendation (Para No. 45) 
 
 69. The Committee had observed that a development project to equip 
soldiers with light weight system s ubmitted by Defence Research and 
Development Organization to Army a year ago still remained pending 
clearance.     The Committee had, ther efore, desired that the project should 
be examined without any further delay  and the outcome communicated to 
Defence Research and Development Organization. 
 
 
70. In their action taken reply, the Ministry of Defence have stated as 
under: 
“Pending clearance from Army, DRDO  has already initiated the 
proposal for the development of a fe w long lead and critical technology 
areas.” 
 
71. Although the Committee had sp ecifically desired that the 
development project to equip soldiers  with light weight systems by 
DRDO should be examined without an y further delay, the Committee 
find it rather strange that the proj ect continues to remain pending with 
Army despite lapse of almost two years. While stressing the need for 
early decision on this development project by Army, the Committee 
would like to know the specific reas ons for unduly longer time taken by 
Army in this matter.  

 
28 
 
CHAPTER – II 
 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN 
ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT 
 
Recommendation  (Para No. 1) 
 
  
The Committee had desired Information regarding targets and 
achievement of projects under implementation and of production 
performance, which pertain to Ordnance Factories, etc. in connection with 
examination of their Demands for Grant s.  The desired information was not 
forthcoming and no reasons had been advanced for denial of the information.  
The Committee wonder whether deni al of the information was on 
consideration of national security. The Committee are of the view that 
disclosure of such information may in no way endanger the national security 
and cannot fall under the classified categor y especially when there is a move 
for corporatisation of the Ordnance Factor ies.  The Committee feel that it is 
high time that a thorough re view is undertaken to see whether the criteria for 
security classification have been appli ed properly and with due diligence in all 
matters handled by the Ministry of De fence and the organizations under its 
control.  This is all the more necessa ry in the context of accountability to 
Parliament and in the cont ext of the Right to Information Act.  The Committee 
would like to be apprised of the outcome of the review. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The information on target, achievem ent and R&D projects as desired 
by the Standing Committee on Defence dur ing examination of Demands for 
Grants is as follow:-    
 
(A) Targets and achievement of projects as under :- 
(VALUE IN Rs. CRORE) 
2005-06 2006-07 2007-08 VALUE 
OF 
ISSUE BE 
Projection 
 
Achievement BE 
Projection 
Achievement BE  
Projection 
Achievement
Defence 
Sector 
5915 
 
5632 5714 5017 6403  5780 
Non-
Defence 
Sector 
 
1325 
 
1245 
 
1486 
 
1180 
 
1195 
 
1164 
Total 7240 6877 7200 6197 
 
7598 6944 
 
 
B.  R&D Efforts 
Product successfully developed and trial evaluated 
¾ Independently with indigenous effort for which orders have 
been secured 
• Mine Protected Vehicle (MPV) 
• 30mm Gun on ship with Optronic Pedestal for Navy and Coast  
 Guard. 
• Chaff Launcher CSN 57 ‘Kavach MOD-I’ & MOD-II for Navy 12.7    
 mm Gun (Prahari) 

 
29 
 
• 76/62 SRGM Barrel Assembly 
• 2 KL Water Browser 
• Anti Submarine Rocket RGB-60 with launcher RBU-6000 and         
   fuze YDB-60. 
• 140mm RL for Navy 
• Anti Material Rifle ‘VIDHWANSAK’ 
• 100-120 Kg Air Bomb 
• 155 mm ERFB BB  
• 57 mm Air Craft Rocket (Practice) 
• 40 mm MGL ‘UGRA’ 
• A 7 Ammunition 
• Bullet Proof of Civilian vehicles 
• Driver sight for T-72 Tank & BMP-I (ICV) 
• Commander sight for T-55 Tank 
• Passive Night Vision Device (Long Range) 
• Day cum Night Vision Goggles 
• Passive Night Vision Monocular-1x 
• Reference Telescope for PXE Balasore 
• 0.22” Sporting Rifles 
• 12 Bore Pump Action Gun 
• 0.32” Pistol 
• 0.32” Revolver 
¾ With DRDO 
• MBT Arjun 
• Combat Improved Ajeya (T-72) 
• PINAKA Rocket 
• Armoured Ambulance 
 
New Products and Upgrades Developed & under trial Evaluation 
 
¾ Independently with indigenous effort 
• T-72 Up-gradation 
• 125 mm FSAPDS ammunition 
• 5.56 mm Carbine ‘AMOGH’ 
¾ With DRDO and DPSUs 
• UBGL Weapon 
• 5.56 mm INSAS Rifle (Side Folding Butt) & LMG (Fixed Butt) 
• L-70 up-gradation with BEL 
  Major on–going R&D Projects 
• Armoured Recovery Vehicle 
• Up-gradation of L-70 Gun System 
• Mounting LFG on BMP ICV 
• Mounting LFG on Vehicle platform 
• 155 mm Bofors Gun up-gradation 
• Futuristic AD Gun 35 mm  
• 105 mm ERFB BB Ammunition 
• 155 mm x 52 Calibre Towed gun 
• Future Infantry Soldier System (FISS) 
  
  

 
30 
OFB has supplied in-house developed products worth Rs, 561 crore 
uring 2006-07 and likely to supply worth Rs. 700 crores during 2007-08.   d  
 Some of the major products of OFB for capital investment are detailed 
below:  
¾ Setting up of Bi-modular char ge system production unit at 
 Nalanda.   
¾ Setting up of Carbine Production Unit at Korwa.  The estimated     
           cost of project is Rs. 408 crores. 
 
 This Ministry holds the Committee in highest esteem and the delay in 
furnishing the information was on account  of non-availability of complete 
information at that point of time and not  on account of any consideration of 
national security. 
[MoD OM No. H-11013/12/2008/D(Parl) dated  14.10.2008] 
 
 
Recommendation  (Para No. 8) 
 
A number of areas involv ing the Defence Services as a whole where 
optimization of Defence resources could be achieved has been identified by 
the Headquarter Integrated Defence Sta ff in pursuance of the Committee’s 
earlier recommendation.  These incl ude Tri Service Institutes, Long-term 
deals, Transfer of technology, Life  long support to major systems, 
Maintenance of Reserves and Exploitati on of IT revolution.  The Committee 
feel that there is scope for optimization in expenditure in other areas such as 
land acquisition, trial of equi pments, joint exercises, closure of Military Farms 
as per the study of Ministry of Defence and CAG audit report of March, 2005 
etc.  Now, that the areas for optimiz ation of expenditure have been identified, 
the Committee desire that action s hould be taken to curb avoidable 
duplication of expenditure and quantify t he savings so made to assess the 
outcome of the exercise.  The committee desire that the action taken in this 
regard be intimated to them. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
1. The comments of this Headquarters regarding tackling this important 
subject at two levels are as under:- 
(a) At micro level the Servic es have carried out an in house 
examination and confirmed that no wasteful expenditure is being 
incurred on any count.   
(b) At the macro level, there ar e a number of areas involving the 
Defence Services as a whole w here wasteful expenditure has been 
avoided. These relate to capi tal procurements, technology 
management, R&D, Defence PSUs vis-à- vis private Sector, utilisation 
of assets / facilities of common inte rest and so on.  So me of these are 
elaborated below:- 
 (i) Long Term Deals.   In the present age of exponential 
growth of technology and obsolescence of the same (major 
technologies are roughly doubling every five years), a far more 
focused approach to long term defence planning and weapon 
systems acquisition is being adopted by way of the formulation 
of the combined LTIPP, five y ears plans and periodical reviews 
in light of new developments and keeping the updated.  

 
31 
 
(ii) Life Long Support to Major Systems.  Major modern 
weapon systems / platforms are not only capital intensive for 
initial procurement, there are huge associated costs for 
upgrades, overhaul, refits and so on during the technical life 
span of these systems. Adoption of an effective Life Cycle 
Costing system at the time of contract negotiation is being 
undertaken to curb wasteful expenditure later in the life cycles of 
the major system.  
(iii) Technology Transfer. Technology transfer for 
defence systems comes at a very heavy price. Since the aim of 
such technology transfer is to fa cilitate indigenous development 
of the related technology, large funds thus invested go waste 
when we fail to develop the next generation model in time within 
the country. However, with the greater involvement and co-
ordination between the Services , DRDO, PSUs and the private 
sector this gap is being reduced.  
(iv) Indigenisation of Defence Needs.   The indigenisation level 
of our Defence needs is far from satisfactory as we continue to 
heavily depend on import for most of our major systems.  With bulk 
of our defence needs continuing to be off loaded to the DRDO and 
Defence PSU’s, we have not been able to tap the immense 
potential of our private sector t he way some of the major producer 
countries of defence equipment have done. The current efforts 
being put in by the Services to involve private Sector in meeting 
their needs for the future is yielding in better indigenisation. 
 (v) DRDO. The present trend of endless R&D on major 
weapon systems / platforms without  concrete and time bound 
results leads to huge sunk costs which is highly wasteful. The 
ten year plan of DRDO formulat ed in conjunction with Services 
has resulted in better coordinati on and results in the future R&D 
efforts. 
(vi) Defence PSUs.  Our present policy to somehow keep the 
Defence PSUs afloat against the principles of economic 
prudence needs to be finally c hanged.  These PSUs are being 
made competitive and accountable by  going public to meet their 
financial needs.  
(vii) Communication Network . A centrally coordinated common 
communication network for three Services is not only the 
operational necessity in the present day context of joint warfare, it 
would also result in cost savings. Whilst there is adequate 
compatibility between the individual communication networks of the 
Services, there are plans for installation of a common Defence 
Communication Network (DCN) for the Services which is at an 
advanced stage of procurement. 
(viii) Tri-Service Training Establishments. There are a 
number of common fields where the three Services are running 
their independent training establishments.   Clubbing these has 
resulted in cost effective and qualitative improvement in training 
standards. 
 (ix) Office Automation.  The effective utilization of Computers 
and Networking Systems has enhanced office efficiency.  Office 
automation has  enabled a paperless office with better connectivity, 
thereby resulting in reduction of manpower and stationery.  

 
32 
 
2. The joint approach adopted with t he creation of HQ IDS and the 
formations under it such as ANC have al ready resulted in savings by way of 
sharing of assets, maintenance facilitie s, logistic support etc pooled in from 
the three Services. Further, the integration of policy, war fighting, doctrine and 
procurement would also result in savings.  
 
3. However, the quantification of su ch savings in real terms is not 
possible without a comprehensive study by all agencies involved in carrying 
out cost benefit analysis.  
 
[MoD OM No. H-11013/12/2008/D(Parl) dated  14.10.2008] 
 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 9) 
 
An allocation of Rs. 6.09 crore has been made during 2008-2009 for 
Armed Forces Tribunal, which will reportedl y start functioning in the middle of 
2008-09. The Committee hope that the Tr ibunal will commence functioning in 
July, 2008 as scheduled and render justice to the Service personnel speedily. 
The Committee would like to be appris ed of the progress made by the 
Government in this regard. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 It is stated that the Armed Forces  Tribunal Act 2007 (55 of 2007) has 
come into force w.e.f. 15.06.2008 in te rms of Section 1(2) of the Act. 
However, establishment of the Tribunal is yet to be notified under section (4) 
of the Act. 
 
2. The following preparatory action has been taken to establish and 
operationalise the Tribunal: - 
(i) By way of temporary arrangem ent, it has been decided to set up 
the Principal Bench of the Tribunal at West Block-8, R.K Puram, New 
Delhi. The lay out plan has been fina lized in consultation with CPWD 
and it is expected that the civil wo rks will begin soon. Efforts are on to 
locate a permanent accommodation for t he Principal Bench at Delhi. In 
the interim period, it has been pr oposed to provide accommodation for 
the Chairperson & his personal staff in Sena Bhawan. 
(ii) The Cabinet has approved the proposal for creation of 31 posts 
for Chairperson, Members (Judicial  and Administrative) & Principal 
Registrar in its meeting held on 24.07.2008. 
(iii) Justice A.K.Mathur, Retir ed Judge of the S upreme Court has 
been appointed as Chairperson of the Tribunal on 1st September, 2008.  
(iv) A Selection Committee is bei ng constituted for Selection of 
Members of the Tribunal. Chief Ju stice of India has nominated the 
name of one sitting Judge of Supreme Court of India to act as the 
Chairman of the Selection Committ ee for appointment of Members of 
the Armed Forces Tribunal. The other three Members of the Committee 
will be (i) Chairperson AFT;  (ii) Defence Secretar y & (iii) Secretary, 
Law. 

 
33 
 
(v) A Cabinet proposal has been init iated for seeking approval of 
Cabinet Committee on Accommodati on for residential accommodation 
for the Chairperson, Members, Officers and other employees of 
Principal Bench from out of the General Pool. 
(vi) It has been decided that apart fr om the Principal Bench at New 
Delhi, 08 Regional Benches at Chandi garh, Jaipur, Lucknow, Kolkata, 
Guwahati, Hyderabad, Chennai and Kochi. 
(vii) Service HQrs have been request ed to provide suitable office 
accommodation for Regional Benches. 
(viii) Notification in respect of following rules have been issued on 
21st July, 2008:  
a. ‘Procedure of Appointm ent of Vice-Chairperson and 
Members’  
b. ‘Procedure for investigation of misbehaviour or incapacity 
of Chairman, Vice-chairperson and other Members’ 
(ix) Ministry of Law and Justic e have vetted ‘Rules of Procedure’ 
and are being sent for publication. 
(x) ‘Rules of Practice’ have also been drafted and the same will be 
put up for approval of the Chairperson. 
 
[MoD OM No. H-11013/12/2008/D(Parl) dated  14.10.2008] 
 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 11) 
 
The Committee note that as against the assessed requirement of 154 
ships, 93 boats and 105 aircraft for Coast Guard, the existing strength is just 
43 ships, 45 aircraft/helicopter, 18 boats/crafts and 23 non-commissioned 
boats/crafts in its fleet.  It has also been stated that there is capabilities gap in 
the surface surveillance, shallow wate r operations and Aerial surveillance.  
Against this backdrop, the Committee feel that the budgetary allocation for 
this organization should be enhanced suffi ciently at RE stage to enable the 
Coast Guard to meet its immediate requirements. 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 
 Requirement of funds projected at the Budget Estimates 2008-09 stage 
was in consonance with the XIth Plan pr ojections.  Based on the progress of 
various Capital Acquisition schemes duri ng the current fiscal, the requirement 
of additional funds, if any, will be project ed at the Revised Estimates 2008-09 
stage. 
 
[MoD OM No. H-11013/12/2008/D(Parl) dated  14.10.2008] 
 
 

 
34 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 12) 
 
  The Committee do not agree with the r eply of the Ministry of Defence 
that Defence Estate Officer (DEO) has no role in controlling the flow of funds, 
once these are placed at the disposal  of the collector s of the concerned 
districts.  Comptroller and Auditor General  of India has rightly pointed out that 
failure of the DEO to monitor the di sbursement of compensation to the 
farmers resulted in mis-utilization of Defence Funds by the State Government.  
The Committee strongly recommend that a mechanism should be evolved to 
ensure that the Defence Estate Officer plays an effective and pro-active role 
in monitoring the funds disbursed to the displaced families.  The Committee 
feel that it is the res ponsibility of DEO to obtain ut ilization certificate from 
State Governments with regard to the funds placed at their disposal. 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
  Instructions have been issued to a ll the Principal Directors, Defence 
Estates and the concerned Defence Estate Officers to obtain utilization 
certificates and payees receipts from the Collector concerned.  A copy of 
these instructions is enclosed as Annexure-I & II. 
 
2 Around Rs.2.46 crores have been re funded by the concerned District 
Collectors to the DEO Bikaner.  A st atement reflecting the amount refunded 
by the concerned District Collectors to DEO, Bikaner is given below:- 
 
 
District 
Sriganganagar Bikaner 
Sanctioned amount 
placed with DC (Rs) 
87,74,57,763.24 9,85,78,546 97,60,36,309.24 
Amount disbursed by DC 
(Rs) 
81,31,68,135 8,69,20,536 90,00,88,671 
Undisbursed amount 
lying with DC (Rs) 
6,41,60,630 1,16,58,010 7,58,18,640 
Interest on undisbursed 
amount (Rs) 
1,37,25,137 20,75,575 1,58,00,712 
Undisbursed amount 
refunded (Rs) 
- 96,50,000 96,50,000 
Amount of interest 
refunded (Rs) 
1,35,01,323 15,00,000 1,50,01,323 
 
3 DC, Sriganganagar has informed t hat the balance amount of Rs. 
6,41,60,630 is likely to be disbursed. 
 
[MoD OM No. H-11013/12/2008/D(Parl) dated  14.10.2008] 

 
35 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 13) 
 
 “There are at present over 20 Lakh ex-servicemen and around 4.67 
Lakh widows registered with the Directorate4 General of Resettlement (DGR).  
During the year 2007, the DGR could find placement for over 65,000 ex-
servicemen.  The Committee in this connection note the proposal for lateral 
shift of Defence Forces personnel to t he Central Para Military Organizations.  
It appears that the Ministry of Home Affairs have some reservations on 
implementation of the proposal.  The Co mmittee note that the concerns of the 
Ministry of Home Affairs have been addressed by the Sixth Pay Commission 
in their report submitted recently .  The Committee feel that the 
recommendation made by the Sixth Pa y Commission for lateral entry of 
service personnel in para m ilitary forces merits serious consideration.  The 
committees also feel that there is a need to enhance to 25 per cent the quota 
for Ex-servicemen in all State Police Fo rces.  The Ministry of Home Affairs 
should examine the matter in consultation with State Governments and 
apprise the Committee of the outcome. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 This matter pertains to Ministry of Home Affairs; they were asked for 
the inputs in this regard.  They have informed that the st atus report on the 
issue has been submitted to Lok Sabha Secretariat on 26.05.08 
 
[MoD OM No. H-11013/12/2008/D(Parl) dated  14.10.2008] 
 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 14) 
 
 The Committee note that about 60, 000 personnel retire from Army 
every year and not all of t hem registered with Zila/Dis trict Sainik Boards due 
to some reason or other.  The Commi ttee suggest that a system should be 
evolved to ensure that all retiring serv icemen automatically registered at DGR 
so that all ex-servicemen get the benefit of all schemes formulated for them. 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 The suggestion of the Committee is  noted. The DGR is directed to 
work in collaboration with Regimental C enters 3 Services to  gather the list of 
personnel retiring there at to have a centralized data bank of personnel who 
are to retire in the calendar year to come. 
 
[MoD OM No. H-11013/12/2008/D(Parl) dated  14.10.2008] 

 
36 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 17) 
 
The Committee note from the reply of the Government that the Ministry 
of Defence have approached t he Ministry of Human Resource Development 
for providing 5 per cent exclusive rese rvation for wards of Ex-Servicemen in 
all educational institutions.  The Committ ee desire that the Ministry of Human 
Resource Development should consider this matter without loss of time to 
enable wards of Ex-Servicemen to avail of proposed benefits.   
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 Ministry of Human Resource Development has been reminded to 
enhance of reservation of seats for getting admission to the 
wards/dependents of defence personnel in professional colleges/institutions 
under the Government of India. 
 
[MoD OM No. H-11013/12/2008/D(Parl) dated  14.10.2008] 
 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 18) 
 
 The Committee learn that revival and rejuvenation of entrepreneurial 
schemes i.e. SEMFEX II and SEMFEX III which are promoted by National 
Bank for Agriculture and Rural Development and Khadi and Village Industries 
is being worked out.  The Committee would like to know the specific steps in 
this regard. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 The SEMFEX-II & III schemes which ar e promoted by National Banking 
for Agriculture and Rural Developm ent (NBARD) and Khadi and Village 
Industries (KVI) was reviewed in the mont h of July.  It was observed that the 
schemes demonstrated waning as gai ning acceptance. The changing 
economic scenario and means of pr oduction have discouraged low volume 
productions. As an initial st ep the Ministry has writt en to the Department of 
Banking to assist in increased lending under the scheme. 
[MoD OM No. H-11013/12/2008/D(Parl) dated  14.10.2008] 
 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 19) 
 
 “There are issues about the age lim it of dependent children availing the 
benefits of Ex-Servicemen Contributory Health Scheme (ECHS), decline in 
the number of empanelled hospitals under ECHS due to reduction in rates 
and inability of vast number of ECHS beneficiaries to have access to hospitals 
situated at far of places etc.  T he Committee desire that  there should be a 
polyclinic of ECHS with full complement  of staff or one recognized by ECHS 
at places where at least 500 Ex-Ser vicemen reside.  The Committee also 
desire that in areas wher e there is no polyclinics or recognized hospitals, 
there should be a provision for covering the area by mobile dispensaries with 
modern facilities.” 
 

 
37 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 As per ECHS regulation, the eligibility status for dependent  daughter 
and sons are as under: - 
 Daughter(s): - 
(i) Her/their details must exist in the service record of the 
pensioner; 
(ii) Unmarried and unemployed daughters must be dependent on 
the pensioner 
(iii) Married and or employed daughters are NOT entitled.  
(iv) Widowed daughters who ar e dependent on the pensioner and 
whose income from all source s less than Rs. 1500/- per month 
are entitled 
(v) Daughters with permanent ment al or physical disability, 
irrespective of age/medical condition 
(vi) Divorced daughters are entitled, when solely dependent on the 
pensioner, and whose income from all sources is less than Rs. 
1500/- per month 
(vii) In case where daughter is bor n after the pensioner’s retirement, 
 following documents will be requir ed to enable the child to be 
 declared as a dependent and to become entitled to ECHS 
benefits:  
a. Birth Certificate 
b. Submission of application Form to enroll as a dependants 
sons: 
(i) His/their details must be included in the pensioners 
record of service 
(ii) Unemployed sons upto 25 years 
(iii) Sons suffering from permanent physical or mental 
disability irrespective of age limit or medical condition 
(iv) In case where the son is born after the pensioner’s 
retirement, the following documents will be required 
as proof of dependency :- 
(a) Birth Certificate 
(b) Submission of additional application form to 
enroll as a dependant. 
  
There is no decline in the number of empanelled hospitals. The issue 
of new ECHS rates and empanelment of more hospitals is under 
consideration.   
 
 ECHS polyclinics in all distri cts with ESM population of 1500 and 
above, ECHS polyclinics in rural and re mote districts with ESM population 
upto 800 and Mobile polyclinics in remo te locations with ESM population 
between 200 and 800 is also under consideration.     
  
[MoD OM No. H-11013/12/2008/D(Parl) dated  14.10.2008] 

 
38 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 20) 
 
 “A high level committee headed by the Defence Secretary is reportedly 
looking with the whole gamut of issues  relating to ECHS with a view to 
revamping the scheme.  The Committ ee hope that the high level committee 
will complete its task early with a view to providing expeditious relief to ECHS 
beneficiaries.” 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 
Meeting of the High Level Committee is  to take place to review the 
policy issues relating to ECHS.     
 
[MoD OM No. H-11013/12/2008/D(Parl) dated  14.10.2008] 
 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 21) 
 
 Admittedly, defective items do reac h the Armed Forces, in spite of 
stringent quality checks by the Directora te General of Quality Assurance 
(DGQA).  The case in point is the supply of defective sleeping bags that came 
to surface recently.  Although the Defence Secretary indicated that DGQA 
found that samples were faulty, t he Committee would like to be apprised 
whether any consignment had reached t he Armed Forces before or after 
DGQA completed its checks.  The Committee hardly need to emphasize that 
supply of sub-standard items may affect not only the morale of soldiers but 
may also endanger their lives and security of the nation. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 As per the extant procedure, before an ex-impor t item is used by the 
Indian Army, it is checked for quality by the DGQA either in Pre-dispatch 
Inspection or in Joint Receipt Inspec tion or both.  In the present case, 
complete quantity of 35,580 Nos of the item bag Sleeping with cover received 
against Contract placed on M/s Camp Spa, Italy during Nov 2006 to June 
2007 was rejected by DGQA as thes e did not conform to laid down 
specifications specified in the contrac t.  Since the items having been rejected 
by DGQA, Army has not taken them as assets.  In order to avoid/minimize 
receipt of unacceptable items, Pre-di spatch Inspection (PDI) is now being 
resorted to in all cases of import to  ensure that only t he right items are 
received.  It will also minimize financial loss and arbitration cases. 
 
[MoD OM No. H-11013/12/2008/D(Parl) dated  14.10.2008] 
  

 
39 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 22) 
 
 The Committee in this connection note that in respect of 58 
manufacturers for whom DGQA hav e granted product specific self-
certification, DGQA restricts itself to  process/quality audits.  It is not clear 
whether the supply of defective sleepi ng bags was from any of the self-
certification firms.  The Committee des ire that the matter should be enquired 
into with a view to fixing responsibility.   The Committee feel s that there is a 
need to progressively increas e the award of self-certification status to quality 
conscious firms, which have demonstrated consistent product quality. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Supply of imported sleeping bags, whic h were rejected, was not made 
by any self-certified vendor. 
 
 [MoD OM No. H-11013/12/2008/ D(Parl) dated  14.10.2008] 
 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 26) 
 
 The Committee are distressed to find that there are as many as 3,470 
schools and 1,700 colleges in the waiti ng list to enroll their students in 
National Cadet Corps (NCC) due to limit ed sanctioned strength of 13 lakh 
cadets.  Girl cadets (1.89 lakh) account for just 14.6 percent of the total cadet 
strength.  Considering the significant  role played by NCC in providing the 
youth of the country opportunities for all round development, the Committee 
strongly recommend that the sanc tioned strength of NCC should be 
sufficiently augmented with adequate funding to enable all schools/colleges in 
the waiting list and also those who like to  enroll their students.  It should also 
be ensured that strength of the girl cadets is raised to 33 per cent, as pleaded 
by NCC.  Further, considering the civil nature of NCC's role, the Committee 
feel that it would be appropriate, if the expenditure for NCC is accounted for in 
the Civil budget of the Ministry of Defence rather than in the Defence Budget. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 With the view to reduce the number of  institutions on t he waiting list in 
a phased manner, Ministry of Defenc e has taken following two major 
initiatives:- 
 
(i) Re-structuring of NCC senior division/senior wing curriculum by 
reducing the enrolment period from 3 years at present to 2 years. This 
would provide NCC coverage to additional 90,000 cadets by the end of 
the third year. 
(ii) The Ministry if closely exam ining the proposal to increase the 
authorized strength of NCC from the present 13 lakh to 15 lakh cadets.  
This would also increase the NCC coverage significantly.  The 
important feature of th is proposal is the proposed association of ex-
servicemen in NCC training. 
 

 
40 
 
2. There has been a gradual but steady increase in the strength of girl 
cadets in NCC as percentage of girl cadets in NCC has increased from 16.4% 
in the year 2005 to 21.13% in the year  2007.  Though ther e is no quota of 
reservation for girl cadets in NCC, efforts are being made by the NCC to 
encourage the enrollment of gi rl cadets.  The various steps taken to increase 
the number of girl cadets within the ov erall sanctioned strength of NCC are as 
under:- 
 
(i) Enrollment of girl cadets in boys battalions by way of introducing the 
concept of mixed battalions in NCC units. 
(ii) Publicity through media and conduct of orientation programme in the 
educational institutions. 
(iii) Increase in participation in co mmunity development and social welfare 
activities. 
(iv) Imparting specialized flying and boat ing training to girl NCC cadets to 
make NCC training more attractive. 
 
 Regarding the expenditure for NCC activities recommended to be 
accounted for in the civil budget  of the Ministry of De fence rather than in the 
Defence budget, it is stat ed that the National Cadet Corps is a uniformed 
youth organization with one of its principal objective to motivate the youth to 
join the Armed Forces.  Combat oriented training forms an integral part of 
NCC for which large scale institutional  support is provided by the Armed 
Forces.  Also NCC is staffed by officers and men from the Armed Forces as 
instructors.  The curriculum of NCC is  well balanced.  The activities of NCC 
are multi-faceted and two sides of the same coin.  Whereas one side 
represents the combat aspects, the other side represents the community 
development and societal missions.  The budgetary requirements of NCC 
constitute a very small portion of the Defence Services Estimates.  Adequate 
budgetary allocation is made available by  the Ministry of Defence for NCC 
activities. 
[MoD OM No. H-11013/12/2008/D(Parl) dated  14.10.2008] 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 27) 
 
 Incidentally, the Committee learn that the pre-stitched uniforms 
provided to soldiers are often discar ded due to size misfit.  The Committee 
desire that this issue be examined with a view to taking suitable corrective 
steps and the Committee be apprised of the action taken in this regard. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 It is informed that most of the uni forms have fifteen different sizes to 
take care of different size requirements of soldiers.  No case of discard of 
uniform due to misfit, has been brought to  the notice of Army Headquarters.  
To further improve the system, a case for issue of fabric for uniform and 
stitching under the arrangem ent of the concerned formation, has been taken 
up. 
 
[MoD OM No. H-11013/12/2008/D(Parl) dated  14.10.2008] 
 

 
41 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 28) 
 
 There has been shortage of both s hort range as well as long range 
maritime surveillance aircraft of Navy.   The Committee note that two post Mid 
Life Upgrade aircraft have since arriv ed which would address some of the 
critical shortages in maritime su rveillance and airborne anti-submarine 
warfare.  Consideration by Comme rcial Negotiation Committee (CNC) is 
reportedly in progress for acqui sition of Long Range Maritime 
Reconnaissance aircraft.  Further, deliv ery of ten Fast Attack craft is 
scheduled to commence from 2008 till 2010 for maritime surveillance of Indian 
Navy.  The Committee desire that it should be ensured that the above projects 
do not suffer ant time and cost ov er run and the Long Range Maritime 
Reconnaissance aircraft acquired in  a time-bound programme.  The 
Committee would like to be apprised of t he progress made and details of cost 
and schedule of delivery of above aircraft.   
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 The case for acquisition of Medium Range Maritime Reconnaissance 
aircraft is under progress as per pr ovisions of Defence Procurement 
Procedure-2006 (DPP-06) and they are planned for induction during the 
current Plan period. Similarly, the case of procurement of Long Range 
Maritime Reconnaissance Anti-Submarine Warfare  aircraft is also being 
expeditiously progressed. The Fast Attack Craft project is also being regularly 
monitored as per the provisions of DPP-2006 to avoid time and cost overrun.  
 
[MoD OM No. H-11013/12/2008/D(Parl) dated  14.10.2008] 
 
  
Recommendation (Para No. 30) 
 
 Defence Acquisition Council is stated to have directed Navy to maintain 
140 ships/submarines as early as in March 2003.  The Committee are 
concerned to note that Na vy’s strength as on date is much short of the 
required strength and presently has just 129 ships/submarines. The 
Committee feel that had there been pr oper planning and funding, Navy would 
not have been in a difficult situation as it is today.  The Committee would like 
to know the present acquisition plan of  Navy and information as to how soon 
Navy is expected to attain the required number of fleet.   
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 At present, there are a number of ships including submarines that are 
under construction at various Indian as we ll as foreign shipyards to cater for 
the shortfall and ships planned for de- commissioning. Action has also been 
initiated for undertaking new ship/subm arine building schemes/projects to 
achieve the necessary capabilities.   
 
[MoD OM No. H-11013/12/2008/D(Parl) dated  14.10.2008] 

 
42 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 31) 
   
 There is likely to be a delay of th ree months in the delivery of three 
Stealth Frigates on account of c hange in weapon package and finalization of 
power supply system. There is also likely to be delay in delivery of Destroyer 
due to late receipt of shafting and propeller system and non receipt of Gun 
mounting.  There would, however, be no cost due to the delay as of now.  The 
Committee desire that efforts should be made to ensure that there is no 
further delay in the schedules of these projects and there is no cost 
escalation.   
 
Reply of the Government 
Project-17:  
 There is a likely delay of 09 months in the delivery of first ship.  The 
initial issues concerning weapon package and power system have been 
resolved.  The shipyard is trying to cope with the balance work to avoid any 
further delays.   
Project-15A:  
 Delivery of destroyers is likely to  be delayed on account of shafting and 
propeller system.  The shipyard has been asked to make all out efforts to 
minimize the impact of these delays on the shipbuilding programme.  
 
[MoD OM No. H-11013/12/2008/D(Parl) dated  14.10.2008] 
 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 33) 
 
 The Committee received an impre ssion, having visited the Naval 
Academy- INS Madovi recently, that t here is an imbalance in the curriculum 
with a load of 64 per cent on academies and 17 per cent on service subjects.  
The Committee suggest that there should be a fresh look at curriculum to see 
whether the present scheme is ideal to suit the requirements of Navy. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
1. There is no imbalance in the cu rriculum as the minimum academic 
qualification for an officer to be co mmissioned in the Navy is Graduate in 
Science.  This enables them to handle technology intensive equipment 
onboard ships, submarines and aircraft.  The trainees joining Naval Academy 
under the 10+2 (X) Entry Scheme are mandated to undergo a Degree Course 
(B.Sc.) under the aegis of Goa University, as part of the 3 year training 
curriculum. 
 
2.     The academic syllabus, as stipulated by the Goa University, necessitates 
64% of the laid down curriculum to be earmarked for academic subjects.  The 
balance part of the curriculum is judici ously utilized for training in service 
subjects (17%), outdoor training (16%) and extra curricular activities (3%).  
This structure is ideally suited to meet  the  requi rement of the Navy.  In 
addition, incremental specialized service training courses, post ab-initio stage 
for officers, are also undertaken to meet the continuation training 
requirements of Naval Officers. 
[MoD OM No. H-11013/12/2008/D(Parl) dated  14.10.2008] 

 
43 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 37) 
 
 The Committee have been informed t hat Indian Air Force has planned 
to acquire 126 Medium Multi-Role Co mbat Aircraft (MMRCA) in respect of 
which Request for Proposal (RFP) is to be submitted by vendors by 28 th April, 
2008.  It has been stated that the tec hnical evaluation of MMRCA will be 
made in the second and third quarters  of the year 2008 and the field 
evaluation trials in the first quarter of 2009.  The Committee urge that on 
successful completion of trials, ther e should be no delay in acquisition of 
MMRCA. 
 
Reply of the Government 
  
 The directions of Committee have been noted for compliance.  
 
[MoD OM No. H-11013/12/2008/D(Parl) dated  14.10.2008] 
 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 38) 
 
 The Committee observe that moderni zation of all the 56 airfields is 
being taken up in two phases-30 airfie lds in the first phase and 26 in the 
second phase.  The committee would lik e to be apprised of the time frame 
and cost involved in the two phases of modernization and the number of 
airfields under the management  of State Government s who are not able to 
upkeep them for want of funds.  As Ai r Force requires the airfield from 
strategic point of view, the Committee stress that expeditious steps be taken 
to take over these airfields from t he State Governments and to modernize 
them on priority basis.  The Committee also stress that modernization of 
airfields should be undertaken in a time bound manner and the Committee be 
apprised of the cost estimates of the above-mentioned projects.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
1. Modernization of all 56 airfields of  IAF is being taken up in two phases:- 
 (a) 30 airfields in first phase 
 (b) 26 airfields in second phase 
2. 30 airfields in first phase would be completed in a time frame of 4 years 
from the date of contract signature.  The cost of fi rst phase is estimated at 
Rs.1216.44 Cr. including one Doppler  Very High Frequency Omni 
Range/Distance Measuring Equipment (DVOR/DME) for Indian Navy.  The 
timeframe and cost for the second phase of modernization would be 
estimated only after the contract is finalized for the first phase. 
3. IAF is setting up a separate cell to smoothly implement the first phase 
of MAFI project in a expeditious and time bound manner. 
4. IAF is considering opening of militar y enclaves at some of the Airport 
Authority of India civ il aerodromes on same lines  as those at Palam and 
Guwahati.  Development  and dues of State owned airfields for military 
proposes will be considered as and when required from strategic view point. 
 
[MoD OM No. H-11013/12/2008/D(Parl) dated  14.10.2008] 
 

 
44 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 40) 
 
 
 Adequate funding is a pre-requisite for DRDO to play a significant role in 
progressive enhancement of self-reliance in  critical sphere.   The Committee 
deplore that the Defence R&D has been a llocated just three-fourth of the 
projected demand during 2008-09.  As against the projection of Rs. 8523 
crore for 2008-09, DRDO has  been allocated just Rs. 6487 crore with a 
shortfall of as much as Rs. 2036 cror e (24%).  The Committee find that 
Defence R&D  has a record of healthy utilization of budgetary allocation.   
This is evident from the fact that the enhanced allocation made to Defence 
R&D at RE stage has almost ent irely been utilized during 2005-06 and 2006-
07.  The Committee, therefor e, are of the view that the Ministry of Defence 
should ensure that fund availability is not  a constraint for DRDO to take up all 
its planned R&D activities.   The Commi ttee accordingly recommend that fund 
that might be demanded by Defence R&D at RE stage should be made 
available without fail. 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 
 Availability of funds is not a constraint for DRDO to take up 
planned R&D activities.  Additional f unds requirement for DRDO are always 
being considered and allocated. 
 
[MoD OM No. H-11013/12/2008/D(Parl) dated  14.10.2008] 
 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 43) 
 
 
 The Light Combat Aircraft project is very crucial to our force levels.  
Sadly, there have been delays in achiev ing the initial operation clearance on 
this aircraft which is now expected by 2010 as against the original anticipation 
by 2008.  Whatever be the reasons for delay, it should be ensured that there 
is no further slippage in realizing the initial operation clearance of Light 
Combat Aircraft. 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 
 As per the detailed Plan for LCA, r equisite number of f lights/trials are 
likely to be completed for achieving Init ial Operational Clearance by 2010.  All 
efforts shall be made so that there is no further slippage in achieving initial 
operational clearance of LCA. 
  
[MoD OM No. H-11013/12/2008/D(Parl) dated  14.10.2008] 
 

 
45 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 44) 
 
 The Committee in their earlier reports had recommended that adequate 
number of Main Battle Tank – Arjun should be manufactured for induction into 
Indian Army.  The Committee however are startled to hear now from a 
representative of the Army that Arj un tanks have performed very poorly and a 
lot of improvements have to be made before the Army is satisfied on the Arjun 
tank.  It is not clear why things went wrong with the Arjun tank.  In any case, 
the causes for failure of Arjun tank should be identified without loss of time 
and necessary modifications carried out at the earliest so that the tank 
becomes acceptable to the Army without  loss of time.  The Committee would 
like to be apprised of the schedule of manufacturing of Arjun Tank and its 
induction into the Services. 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 
 Army HQ had placed indent for 124 MBT Arjun on OFB in Mar 2000.  
14 MBT Arjun Tanks, duly modified as required by Army and accepted at Joint 
Receipt Inspection stage have been issued.  Out of 14 tanks, two tanks were 
selected for Accelerated User Cu m Reliability Trials (AUCRT) which 
commenced from 10 th Dec 2007.  The same was conducted in two phases 
and have been recently concluded.  The trial reports are being reviewed. 
 
[MoD OM No. H-11013/12/2008/D(Parl) dated  14.10.2008] 
 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 46) 
 
 
The Committee learn that in res pect of existing PBOR on 01 January 
2006 the fitment have been recommended to be at their existing pay. Due to 
this, the PBOR of same rank of different groups are reportedly getting fixed at 
different stages in the proposed revis ed pay band. Further, the pay-scales of 
Personnel Below Officers Rank (PBOR) as  existing today is stated to have 
been left unchanged by the Sixth Pay Co mmission. On the other hand, the 
pay-scales of Central Para-Military Forces (CPMF) have reportedly been 
upgraded and even after paying Military Se rvice Pay of Rs.1000/-, a new 
recruit PBOR will get just Re. 1 more in  comparison with constable of CPMF. 
The Committee express their serious concern over the issues arising out of 6
th 
Pay Commission recommendations on t he Armed Forces Personnel. The 
Committee understand that Armed Forces personnel are not satisfied with the 
recommendations of 6 th Pay Commission and some of  the officers have 
sought release from the services. K eeping in view, shortage of manpower 
already prevailing in Armed Forces, t he Committee desires that Ministry of 
Finance should take urgent steps to redr ess the grievances of Armed Forces 
Personnel. 
 
 
 
 

 
46 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
      The Personnel Below Officers Rank (PBORs) of Defence Forces 
traditionally enjoy edge in  emoluments over their civilian counterparts 
including the Central Para Military Fo rces (CPMF). However, it has been 
perceived by the Defence Forces that the VI Central Pay Commission (CPC) 
in its recommendations has diluted this edge by giving higher pay to the 
CPMF personnel. 
2.   The representations received from the Chiefs of the Staff Committee were 
examined in the Ministry in detail and it was recommended to the Committee 
of Secretaries (COS) and Ministry of Finance to maintain this edge. It has 
been stated that the terms of conditi ons of engagement of PBOR of Defence 
Forces and CPMF are different and, hence, there can not be parity. In view of 
this, it was recommended, inter-alia, that Military Service Pay (MSP) of PBOR 
may be enhanced. The Services have al so made a presentation before the 
COS clarifying their position. 
3.   The decision of the Government  have been conveyed to the Services by 
way of a Resolution which has been notified in the Gazette. 
 
[MoD OM No. H-11013/12/2008/D(Parl) dated  14.10.2008] 
 

 
47 
 
CHAPTER–III 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT  
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT REPLIES  
 
Recommendation (Para No. 7) 
 
Keeping in view the large scale surrender of Fund allocated for Capital 
Acquisition since 2004-05, and the l ong gestation period for Defence 
Acquisition, the Committee in their ear lier reports on Demands for Grants had 
recommended that a Non-Lapsable Defenc e Modernization Fund should be 
created.  The Committee are disappointed to  note that the Ministry f Defence 
have not done anything in this regard. The Committee desire that the question 
of creation of Defence Modernization Fund should be reconsidered for early 
action. 
Reply of the Government 
 
The matter has been re-examined and it has been decided with the 
approval of Hon’ble Raksha Mantri that as of now there is no need to set up a 
Non-Lapsable Defence Modernization Fund for the reasons explained below: 
(a) Standing Committee on Defence has been recommending setting up of 
the Defence Modernization Fund so t hat the modernization of the Armed 
Forces does not suffer on account of inadequacy of funds in any particular 
year and the Services are able to resort to long-term planning for their 
modernization.   
(b) Availability of funds is not an issue in so far as the modernization effort is 
concerned, as adequate funds are being made available to the Services 
every year. 
(c) The Finance Minister has also repeatedly assured that additional funds 
would be made available, if required. 
(d) Though the Eleventh Defence Plan (2007-12) is yet to be approved, 
modernization programme is proceeding as envisaged in the Plan. 
(e) Utility of such a Fund would be limited as parliamentary approval would be 
required for appropriating any sum from the Fund, as stated by the 
Finance Secretary before the Standing Committee (Recorded in para 1.57 
of its 11th Report). 
(f) As sufficient funds are anyway being made available every year under the 
Capital Head for sustaining modernization effort, the sums available under 
the Defence Modernization Fund may remain unutilized even if suitable 
changes are made in the Rules to obviate the necessity of seeking 
parliamentary approval as suggested by the Standing Committee in Para 
10 of its 3
rd Report. 
(g) Considering that adequate funds are being made available under the 
Capital Head every year, as also the fact that, as of now, the allocated 
funds are not getting fully utilized,  the corpus of the Defence 
Modernization Fund may keep increasing with transfer of unutilized funds 
to the proposed Defence Modernization Fund at the end of each financial 
year. 
[MoD OM No. H-11013/12/2008/D(Parl) dated  14.10.2008] 

 
48 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 10) 
 
 
 The Committee learn that annual leave available to service personnel 
get exhausted in performing the accumula ted family responsibilities and they 
do not have time for recreation for their family.  One of the reasons for stress 
among the Jawans is stated to be i nadequacy of leave.  Therefore, the 
Committee suggest that desirability of providing additional 15 days leave to 
Armed Forces Personnel while av ailing LTC should be examined for 
implementation. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
To ensure that grant of leave is more liberal the following 
guidelines/measures have been undertaken:- 
 
(a) Leave, as such should not be denied to troops except under 
exigencies of service or on operational grounds.   
(b) No local restrictions on gr ant of leave s hall be imposed, 
whatsoever, except with the exp licit permission of the competent 
authority at his HQ.  
(c) Officers are entitled to 20 days casual leave in a calendar year.  At 
present officers can avail casual  leave upto 20 days at a time at 
the discretion of the leave s anctioning authority instead of the 
earlier provision of 10 days normally and extension upto 14 days in 
exceptional cases. 
(d) PBORs are entitled to 30 days cas ual leave in a calendar year.  At 
present PBOR can avail leave upt o 30 days at a time at the 
discretion of the leave sanctioni ng authority instead of the earlier 
provision of 10 days normally and extension upto 20 days in 
exceptional cases.  
(e) At present an officer is entitled to  a total of 80 days leave in a year 
comprising of 60 days Annual leave and 20 days Casual leave.  
On the other hand, a PBO R is entitled to 90 days leave in a year 
comprising of 60 days Annual leave and 30 causal leave.  
(f) Annual leave of 60 days can be ta ken together or in three parts 
instead of the earlier two.   
 
As per the liberalized leave policy,  adequate leave to the extent of 80 
and 90 days is already available to  Officers and PBORs respectively. 
Therefore, additional leave of 15 days to Armed Forces personnel while 
availing LTC is not considered necessary.  
 
[MoD OM No. H-11013/12/2008/D(Parl) dated  14.10.2008] 

 
49 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 15) 
 
 The Committee are dismayed to learn that there has been wide 
disparity in cash grants given by the states to the gallantry award winners, 
which reportedly range fr om Rs.20,000/- to Rs. 20 lakh.  The Committee 
desire that there should be a meas ure of evenness in such grants and 
attempts should be made to evolve a policy in this regard in consultation with 
all State Governments, prescribing a mi nimum threshold limit for such grants.
  
Reply of the Government 
 
 It is the prerogative of the stat e governments to honor the gallantry 
awardees of their respective States by  providing them ca sh grants and other 
benefits at levels as found to be appropriate by them keeping in view their 
financial resources etc.  This being a st ate subject, it is not possible for the 
Central Government to ensure uniformity  across all states.  However, the 
state governments have been requested to enhance these amounts in line 
with the Punjab model and in keeping with prestige and dignity of the 
awardees. The state Governments have been addressed at the level of Hon' 
ble Raksha Rajya Mantri on 30 th April 2008 to take appropriate action (copy 
enclosed).  
 [MoD OM No. H-11013/12/2008/D(Parl) dated  14.10.2008] 
 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 23) 
 
 Though removing regional imbalances in the officers’ cadre of the 
Armed Forces is one of the objectives of establishing Sainik Schools, the 
Committee find that not all States have a Sainik School. At present, there are 
22 Sainik Schools located in 20 Stat es and 3 more have recently been 
sanctioned to cover 3 more States. T he Committee suggest that there should 
be at least one Sainik School in each State and efforts must be directed 
towards achieving this. 
Reply of the Government 
 
 In principle approval has been accor ded by the Ministry of Defence for 
opening of new Sainik Schools in Mi zoram, Sikkim, Chhattisgarh and a 
second school in Haryana. With this, the total number of Sainik Schools would 
go up to 26 and 23 States would be cove red. There are also proposals under 
consideration for opening of a second Sa inik School each in the States of 
Jharkhand and Andhra Pradesh. The basic prerequisite for starting up a new 
Sainik School in any state is the receipt of a specific initia l proposal from the 
State Government concerned, offering suitable land for the school along with 
a commitment for providing funds for the creation / maintenance of physical 
infrastructure and meeting a porti on of the recurring expenditure. The 
prescribed Memorandum of Agreement is also required to be signed by the 
State Government. The three Service HQrs are also required to give a 
commitment for sparing suitable service o fficers for the posts of Principal, 
Headmaster and Registrar. Under the ex isting dispensation, there is no 
provision for the Ministry of Defence to initiate the process of establishment of 
a new Sainik School. 
[MoD OM No. H-11013/12/2008/D(Parl) dated  14.10.2008] 

 
50 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 32) 
 
 
 It is observed from the information fu rnished by the Ministry of Defence 
that there is a shortage of 1,403 officers and 3,829 sailors in Navy.  In the 
context of Navy's plan to induct vari ous technologically intensive weapon 
systems during the 11 th Defence Plan to address capability gap in maritime 
surveillance and anti-submarine warfar e the Committee stress that there 
should be special drive to induct adequate manpower to fill up the vacancies.  
The Committee would like to be apprised of the action taken in this regard.  
As regards the recruitment  of Sailors, the Committee of the view that youth 
belonging to the coastal areas must be im parted pre-selection training, so as 
to exploit their potential and natural ability. 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 
1. Indian Navy presently has a shor tage of 1,495 (16.7%) officers and 
2,791 sailors (5.4%).  The present shor tages in sailors are being maintained 
as a policy to have a 5% planning buffer to cater for contingencies.  Presently, 
no difficulty is being experienced in the recruitment of Sailors. 
2. The above gap in the officer's cadre is on account of various reasons.  
However,  there is a continuous effort in filling up of the vacancies and retrain 
the officers.  In this regard, Indian Navy undertakes a number of measure to 
attract the best youth by creating avenues of the challenging and satisfying 
career through publicity and campaigns et c.  Candidate-friendly recruitment 
procedures have been adopted.  Besides, one additional Services Selection 
Board (SSB) at Diamond  Harbour has  been started and new entry schemes 
for induction of officers have been introduced. 
3. Further the reco mmendation of the 6 th Central Pay Commission have 
been received which have been accepted by the government with certain 
modifications keeping in mind the representations from the Services.  This will 
have a positive impact to attract youth to join Indian Navy. 
4. Regarding pre-selection training, it  is informed that recruitment to 
Indian Navy is carried out on All  India Basis.  Indian Navy is carrying out 
focused publicity drive in various instit utions to attract potential candidates 
and special recruitment drives were conducted in all Coastal States in March 
2007.  Recruitment Cent ers have been activated at places like Dwarka, 
Jamnagar, Karwar, Goa, Kochi, Tu ticorin, Coimbatore, Chennai, 
Visakhapatnam, Chilka, Kolkata and Port Blair.  Also, eight Sainik Schools 
and 36 NCC units operating in the various coastal states educate the students 
on procedures of joining the Armed Forces .  However, it is not found feasible 
to accept the recommendation of imparting any pre-selection training.    
 
[MoD OM No. H-11013/12/2008/D(Parl) dated  14.10.2008] 
 

 
51 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 41) 
 
 The Committee also desire that  there should be an arrangement for 
providing 100 percent grant to R&D activities in selected private sector units. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The “Make” procedure in DPP 2006 provides for sharing of 
development cost with privat e industry.   Where the system configuration is 
complex, lead time for development is  relatively long and technological risks 
are substantial, the De fence Acquisition Council (DAC) may approve sharing 
for development cost with developing agency( ies).  The sharing of cost would 
normally be in the ratio of MoD (80%) and Industry (20%) as per DPP-2006. 
 
[MoD OM No. H-11013/12/2008/D(Parl) dated  14.10.2008] 
 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 42) 
  
 The Committee while examining action taken notes received from the 
Ministry of Defence on recommendations contained in 14 th Report on DRDO, 
had noted that an Independent Review Committee, under the Chairmanship 
of Dr. P. Rama Rao, was studying the issue of restructuring and autonomy for 
DRDO.   The Committee would like to know the findings of the above 
committee. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The Independent Review Committee under the chairmanship of Dr. P. 
Rama Rao has submitted a confidential report to the Government on 5 March 
2008.  The report of the Committee is under study and analysis by the 
Government.  Sub-committees have been formed to study the various 
aspects/implementation of the reco mmendations of the Independent Review 
Committee.   The whole process may ta ke about a year's time from now to 
come to conclusion. 
 
[MoD OM No. H-11013/12/2008/D(Parl) dated  14.10.2008] 
 

 
52 
 
CHAPTER–IV 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH REPLIES OF THE 
GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 2) 
Outcome budget is presented to Parlia ment by each Ministry in terms 
of the guidelines issues by t he Ministry of Finance O.M. dated 12 th December 
2006.  The outcome budget broadly indicates physical dimension of the 
financial budgets indicating the actual performance during the preceding year, 
performance in the first 9 months in  the current year  and the targeted 
performance during the succeeding year .  The Committee note that the 
Ministry of Defence have been exempt ed from presentation of outcome 
budget.  However, even the Ministries ex empted from preparation of outcome 
budget have been required to carry out t he exercise for internal use and 
voluntarily deciding to place it in public  domain fully or partially.  The Defence 
Secretary has gone on record in this regar d stating that the Defence Ministry 
has been trying to do it and develop infrastr ucture ever since the Ministry of 
Finance issued instructions in this regard. He has also promised to do the 
outcome budget for certain areas.  T he Committee would await the outcome 
budget of the Ministry of Defence and expect that the same is presented to 
Parliament every year in terms of the Ministry of Finance guidelines. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Ministry of Finance has exempted all the eight Demands for Grant 
presented by the Ministry of Defence to the Parliament from the scope of 
Outcome Budget after careful consider ation. Preparation of Outcome Budget 
presupposes quantification and measurability of Outcomes, which may not be 
possible in the case of defence expendi ture.  Preparation of Outcome Budget 
in respect of the entire defence expenditure also entails the possibility of 
disclosure of sensitive information th rough the statements required to be 
prepared as a part of the exercise.  While, therefore, reiterating our view that it 
would not be possible to prepare Outcome Budget to cover the entire defence 
related expenditure, efforts are bei ng made to identify the areas and 
organizations funded from defence budget  which could prepare Outcome 
Budget on a limited scale.  This may take some time. As of now, it may also 
not be possible to present the outcome budget, prepared on a limited scale, to 
the Parliament as it would take some time before the proposed system 
stabilizes. 
 
[MoD OM No. H-11013/12/2008/D(Parl) dated  14.10.2008] 
 

 
53 
 
Recommendation (Para No.3) 
 
 
It is observed from the data furnished by the Ministry of Defence for the 
years from 2002-03 onwards that the overall budgetary allocation to Defence 
Services has invariably been revised downwards every year and the Defence 
Forces could not fully utilize even the reduced allocation.  The shortfall in 
utilization by the Defence Services ranges from Rs.234 crore to Rs.1151 crore 
during the period from 2002- 03 to 2006-07.  Without going into the causes for 
the recurring under utilization, the Committee feel that there is a need to make 
realistic projections of fund requirem ents by the Defence Forces keeping in 
view all relevant factors. 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 There has generally been no under ut ilization of funds under the 
Revenue heads.  Under Capital head ther e has been under-utilization due to 
a variety of reasons such as sli ppages in achieving milestones in the 
procurement process. 
 
[MoD OM No. H-11013/12/2008/D(Parl) dated  14.10.2008] 
 
 
Recommendation (Para No.4) 
 
The Committee regret to note that ev en after lapse of two years after 
commencement of 11th Defence Five Year Plan,  the Plan proposals have not 
been finalized yet.  The Committee are gi ven to understand that the Ministry 
of Defence are not satisfied with the a llocation indicated by the Ministry of 
Finance in March, 2007. It has been stat ed that the matter has been taken up 
by the Raksha Mantri with Prime Minister and Finance Minister for 
reconsideration of the plan proposals.   The Committee hope that the matter 
will be finalized at the earliest  to enable the Ministry of Defence to plan their 
finance and acquisition without any further delay 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 
The Ministry of Defence has tak en up the matter with Ministry of 
Finance  as regards fi nalization of the 11 th Defence Five Year Plan at the 
highest level. The Xith Defence Plan size  is still to be approv ed by Ministry of 
Finance and CCS.  Concerted efforts are being made by Ministry of Defence 
towards its early finalization. 
 
[MoD OM No. H-11013/12/2008/D(Parl) dated  14.10.2008] 
 

 
54 
 
Recommendation (Para No.5) 
 
 The Committee are distressed to note that even two years after 
implementation of Def ence Procurement Policy,  2006, the schemes under 
“Make” category of DPP are yet to be fu lly identified and the indigenisation 
components in Defence Acquisition yet to be quantified. The Committee urge 
that the task be completed expeditious ly and the Committee be informed of 
the extent of indigenisation in Defenc e Acquisition after implementation of 
DPP.  It appears from the information fu rnished by the Ministry of Defence 
that no assessment has so far been made to see whether DPP-2006 has 
achieved its intended objectives after its introduction in July,2006. The 
Committee would like the Ministry to  undertake an overall assessment under 
“Make” category and Raksha Udyog Ra tnas and the Committee be apprised 
of the assessment. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 The aim of the Defence Procurement  Procedure (Make) is to optimally 
utilise the potential of I ndian Industry to meet t he requirements of Armed 
Forces in the prescribed time frame. 
 
 In pursuance to the aim of Defence Procurement Procedure (Make) the 
three Services have identified projec ts that could be offloaded to Indian 
Industry after conducting feasibility study . However, no project under ‘Make’ 
category of Defence Procurement Procedure has been taken up so far. 
 
 Defence Procurement Proc edure (DPP)-2006 has been reviewed 
based on experience gained in its implem entation. ‘Make’ procedure of DPP 
has been retained as existing in DPP-2008. Only after some projects under 
‘Make’ procedure have been implemented, its review would be undertaken. 
 
[MoD OM No. H-11013/12/2008/D(Parl) dated  14.10.2008] 
 
 
Recommendation (Para No.6) 
 
 The Committee desire that DPP should provide for an in-built provision 
in the agreement with suppliers for automatic transfer of upgraded technology 
without the liability of additional royalty payments.  There should be similar 
requirement in the Request for Proposals also. 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 The upgrades of Defence equipment involve two main aspects - (a) 
Cost of the upgrades and its operational nec essity at a later point of time.  
This cannot be assessed during contract negotiation of the equipment, and (b) 
payment of royalty for making additional equipment/platform. The requirement 
of additional numbers, required in futu re, if any, of equipment/platform cannot 
be foreseen at the time of signing the contract. 

 
55 
 
In this context, the following points need to be considered:- 
 
i) In any acquisition case vendors assi gn costs to each and every input of 
RFP to arrive at a final cost, which has to be kept valid till 18 months from the 
date of offer.  Moreover, after conc lusion of Contract, vendors are obliged 
under option clause, to provide fres h quantity of equipment at the earlier 
contracted cost, for next one or two years, as the case may be. 
ii) Upgrades/further modifications, whic h are not known to buyer at the 
time of contract negotiation, and having a provision in the contract to provide it 
free of cost by vendors, would compel vendor to hike its initial proposal.  
There would be many cases where ul timately upgrades may not be of any 
importance to Services. 
iii) It would be better to procure upgrades/modified equipment or part 
thereof at a price later which can be justified rather than being an unknown 
figure at the time of main contract. 
 In view of above considerations , automatic transfer of upgraded 
technology without the liability of addi tional royalty payment has not been 
included in the Defence Procurement Procedure-2008. 
 
[MoD OM No. H-11013/12/2008/D(Parl) dated  14.10.2008] 
 
Recommendation (Para No.16) 
 
 The Committee note that Army Welfare Education Society awards 
scholarships to the wards of Army personnel through regimental funds and does 
not receive any funds from the Defenc e Budget.  The Committee also note that 
PM Merit Scholarship Scheme was started in academic year 2006-07 and 4000 
scholarships are available every year for the wards of Ex-servicemen.  The 
Education Grant was also provided by Raksha Mantri Discretionary Fund for the 
wards of Ex-servicemen.  Considering the fact that approximately 60,000 service 
personnel retire every year, the Committee feel that the number of scholarships 
for just 4000 children is obviously inadequate.  The Committee desire that instead 
of having different source of funds, the Ministry should consider creating a 
separate fund under Civil Budget of Mini stry of Defence for providing 
scholarships to all needy children. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 The Prime Minister Scholarship Scheme introduced from the academic 
year 2006-07 is a specific scheme for the wards/dependants of ex-servicemen for 
pursuing professional degree courses in engineering, medicine, MCA etc. 
whereas education grant out of RMDF is  meant for school education which may 
go up to the first degree level course.  Out of 4000 scholarships for the year 
2006-07 under the PM scholarship scheme, 3861 candidates were actually 
granted scholarships.  For the year 2007-08, 4000 candidates have been 
selected.  It is seen that a very high percentage of the applications received have 
been successful in getting a scholarship.  In fact for the year 2007-08 the 
deadline to receive applications was extended upto 31 October, 2007 to attract 
an adequate number of applications.  The number of 4000 scholarships per year 
which would in fact mean around 16000 to 18000 beneficiaries at any time (when 
the scheme matures in the fourth and subsequent years) is found to be adequate.  
The sources of funds for the various scholarships can be different depending 
upon the schemes which vary in their purpose and content and therefore a 
separate or a single fund for the purpose as recommended is not considered 
necessary. 
[MoD OM No. H-11013/12/2008/D(Parl) dated  14.10.2008] 

 
56 
 
Recommendation (Para No.24) 
 
 The Committee are concerned by the rate  of attrition at the officer level 
in the Defence Forces. Sainik Schools have played a unique role as a 
recruiting and training ground of future leaders of the Defence Forces. The 
data presented to the Committee reveal that Sainik Schools have contributed 
only 25 per cent of NDA intake during the last three years. The Committee 
received an impression after hearing some of the Senior officers of the Armed 
Forces that no efforts have been made to improve the administration of Sainik 
Schools which ail from a variety of ma ladies. The problems faced by these 
schools reportedly include poor quality of Principals / teachers, shortcomings 
in curriculum, inadequacies in infrastruc ture, deficiencies in administration, 
mismatch in selection criteria, shor tage of funds, lack of authority of the 
Central Government. All this calls for a cr itical review of the working of Sainik 
Schools. The Committee desire that the entire gamut of t hese issues should 
be gone into by a high level Committee and remedial steps taken in a time 
bound manner in order to ens ure that Sainik Schools achieve their intended 
objectives. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 So far as the academic results of  the Sainik Schools are concerned, 
the Class X Board pass results have cons istently been 100% in recent years. 
The pass percentage in Class XII Board results has also been consistently 
above the 90% mark. The pass perc entage for 2008 Board examinations 
have been 99.87 for Class X and 92.05 for Class XII. The National Defence 
Academy (NDA) intake from Sainik Schools has gone up from 102 in 2003 to 
162 in 2007. This reflects an increase of 60%. In percentage terms, the Sainik 
Schools’ share of the NDA cadets in t he present composition constitutes a 
sizeable 25% as this contribution is ess entially from 18 Sainik Schools, which 
have classes upto class XII. If we take into account the Sainik School boys 
who join the Armed Forces through t he Technical Entry Scheme or after 
graduation through the Indian Military Academy / Officers’ Training Academy / 
Naval Academy / Air Force Academy route, the representat ion of Sainik 
Schools in the Officer Cadre would be much higher.  
 A decision has already been taken to post only Select rank of Colonels 
or equivalents from the Education br anches of the three services as 
Principals. With this measure, a more experienced and professionally 
competent leadership would be provided to these schools. The Principals are 
regularly being deputed for various tr aining programmes and workshops in 
order to help them keep abreast with t he current teaching methodologies and 
best practices. An elaborate programme of  in-service training of all teaching 
and administrative staff of Sainik Sc hools has been institutionalised. Various 
professional bodies like National Univer sity of Educational Planning and 
Administration (NUEPA), National Counc il of Educational Research and 
Training (NCERT) and similar State run bodies are being actively associated 
in this endeavour. Every year, at leas t one Sainik School teacher in Post 
Graduate / Graduate Categories is select ed for the National Award conferred 
by the President on teacher’s day. Last year, two teachers, one each from 
Sainik School, Rewa and Sainik School , Satara have been conferred the 
National Award. 
 

 
57 
 
The Sainik Schools follow the All India CBSE Pattern of curriculum. 
However, for classes XI and XII, only the science stream is offered. In keeping 
with the specific aim of these schools, various specific initiatives have been 
taken to ensure the development of a well-rounded personality to give the 
cadet the necessary competitive edge. These are hobby classes, 
communication skills development progr amme, extensive outdoor games and 
sports exposure, co-curricular activiti es in literary / dr amatics fields and 
extensive IT exposure. Additionally, Serv ices Selection Boar d (SSB) oriented 
training is provided using professional resource personnel. 
 As per the Sainik Schools Societ y Rules & Regulations, the entire 
capital expenditure on land, building,  furniture and educational equipments 
required by Sainik Schools and a major portion of the running expenditure is 
borne by the concerned State Governm ent who are also responsible for 
maintenance of building, roads and inst allations and for major replacements. 
They are also required to releas e grants in aid sought for additional 
requirement of building and furniture, transport, laboratory equipment, etc.  A 
majority of Sainik Schools are of 40 years plus vintage and the financial 
support from the respective State Governments has not been consistent. As a 
result the physical infrastructure of  many schools has been facing a steady 
decline. In order to address this conc ern, the Raksha Rajya Mantri (RRM) 
convened the first ever Joint States ’ Representatives and Principals’ 
Conferences in April, 2006 to evolve a joint action plan on this issue. 
Consequently, a Memorandum of Agreem ent (MoA) clearly defining the 
responsibilities of the major stake holder s of the running of Sainik Schools, 
was circulated to all States. Thr ee State Governments namely Bihar, 
Jharkhand and Karnataka have already signed the MoA and the process is in 
advanced stage with respect to other stat es. The signing of the MoA is an 
essential requirement for sustaining these unique institutions on a long term 
basis. The Sainik Schools have an institut ionalized fora at various levels to 
regularly review the functioning of t hese schools. The latest review on all 
Sainik Schools was carried out by t he RRM during the Review Committee’s 
meeting on 24
th March, 2008 and during the Prin cipals’ Conference held from 
19th to 21st May, 2008. 
 
[MoD OM No. H-11013/12/2008/D(Parl) dated  14.10.2008] 
 
Recommendation (Para No.25) 
 
 The Committee feel that the fundi ng of Sainik Schools should not be 
left to the mercy of the State Governments and desir e that entire funding for 
all Sainik Schools should be made avail able by the Central Government on 
the pattern of Kendriya Vidyalayas. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 Upto the year 2007-08, the budget provision of Rs. 16 crore was made 
for meeting the Central Government ’s liability on account of Defence 
scholarships, subsidies for fee and diet ary charges and incentives for cadets 
joining the National Defence Academ y (NDA) and other expenditure on 
centralized activities such as common entrance exam, Principals’ conference 
etc. In the Union budget for the year  2008-09, an additional provision of Rs. 
44 crore @ Rs. 2 crore for each school towards infrastructure improvement  

 
58 
 
has been made for the first time. This is a major initiative on the part of the 
Central Government for improving the standards of physical and academic 
infrastructure. The Central assistance in  the budget towards Sainik Schools is 
required to be continued in order to achi eve the desired level of infrastructure 
standards of these fully residential public schools. 
 Notwithstanding the above, there is no proposal to dilute the role and 
responsibility of the State Governments in the management of the respective 
Sainik Schools. Since the State Gove rnments are providing the much needed 
scholarships to the cadets belonging to thei r state at varying rates, there is 
also a constant effort to persuade the State Governments to enhance the 
scholarship amount and redefine the various  income slabs in order to benefit 
the maximum number of c adets. The State Governments role is also 
important since the primar y objective of Sainik Schools was to remove the 
regional imbalances in the officer cadre of the Armed Forces, thereby 
envisaging a permanent stake of the State Government in the development of 
the schools. These Sainik Schools are therefore the unique assets of the 
State Governments as they provide 67% reservation for the boys belonging to 
the particular state. The comparis on of Sainik Schools with Kendriya 
Vidyalayas, Navodaya Vidyalayas may not be on equal footing since Sainik 
Schools are fully residential public schools having an all together different role 
and character and specifically contribut e in removing the regional imbalance 
in the officer cadre of the Armed Forces.  
 
[MoD OM No. H-11013/12/2008/D(Parl) dated  14.10.2008] 
 
Recommendation (Para No.29) 
 
 The Standing Committee on Defenc e had observed in one of their 
earlier reports that ther e was a need for minimum th ree aircraft carriers-one 
each for the Eastern and Western C oast and the third one to address the 
maintenance/repair needs of the other two carriers.  The Committee regret to 
note that the only aircraft carrier with the Navy is the ageing INS Viraat, which 
was expected to be decommissioned in  2008.  The Committee have now 
been informed that INS Viraat would be operational till the induction of Ex-
Admiral Gorshkov from Russia whose delivery was initially scheduled for 
2008, which is now expected in 2012.   There is another ship under 
construction viz. Air Defence Ship (ADS ) at Cochin Shipyard limited, delivery 
of which is likely after 2012.  It appears t hat in view of delivery schedule of 
both Gorshkov and Air Defence Ship bei ng 2012 or after, Indian Navy has no 
alternative but to depend on t he ageing INS Viraat for surveillance of the vast 
coastal area of the country.  In the circ umstances, keeping in view the future 
requirements, the need for going in for th ird aircraft carrier cannot be over 
emphasised. 
 Admiral Gorshkov has run into time  and cost over run due to change in 
scope of work.  The initial cost of the Gorshkov is stated to be Rs. 4,882 
Crores.  The deal appears to have becom e fait accompli with little scope for 
effecting economy.  The Committee desire the Ministry of Defence which is 
presently examining the proposed modifica tions in the deal to complete the 
task of examination expeditiously under intimation to the Committee.  The 
Committee desire that revised agreement in this regard should have an inbuilt 
provision for automatic transfer of upgraded technology without the liability of 
additional royalty payment.  

 
59 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 The Navy’s Maritime Capability Perspec tive Plan caters for induction of 
third aircraft carrier during the XIII Plan Period.  Construction of the same can 
commence only after adequate progress has been made in the construction of 
Indigenous Aircraft Carrier being current ly undertaken at Cochin Shipyard 
Limited.  
 The matter relating to revision in the Master Schedule and cost of the 
Ex-Admiral Gorshkov projected by  the Russian side has been taken up for 
seeking approval of competent authorit y to enter into negotiations with the 
Russian side. The matter relating to in-built  provision for automatic transfer of 
upgraded technology without the liability of additional royalty payment can be 
taken up with the Russian side in due course, though there was no such 
provision in the existing contract. 
 
[MoD OM No. H-11013/12/2008/D(Parl) dated  14.10.2008] 
 
 
 
Recommendation (Para No.34) 
 
 
 It appears that due to lack of authority and power, the Unified 
Command is not very effective and is  not able to achieve its intended 
objectives.  All decision making on impor tant issues like acquisition of land, 
accommodation etc. are reportedly ve sted with the respective service 
headquarters.  The Committee, therefor e, recommend that the Unified 
Command be vested with adequate powers to  discharge its responsibilities 
effectively.  The Committee further recommend that the Ministry of Defence 
should pay attention to the following points:- 
 
 (i) Early finalization of revised LTIPP (2007-22). 
  (ii) Evolving of a Joint Services  doctrine and issue of joint directive 
  to the Services.  
 (iii) Integrated Modernization Plan for the three services and Coast 
  Guard and providing a Joint Budget for the same.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
(a) Empowering of Unified Command to achieve its Intended 
 Objectives.  The present system is working well with all the 
 joint aspects being coordinated by HQ  ANC where staff' from all the 
 Services are posted at each branc h as per requirement. Respective 
 Component Commanders take instructi ons from the joint staff of HQ 
 ANC and execute the given task as only they are competent to carry 
 out the Service specific operations  and it is not advisable to allow 
 outside interference in their specializ ed fields/service.  Issues regarding 
 procurement for the ANC, are being examined by a tri-service 
 committee for bringing in necessary changes, as envisaged.  
(b) Early Finalization of LTIPP (2007-2022). Currently the LTIPP 2002-17 
 is in vogue. The Hon’ble RM wh ile approving the current LTIPP had 
 directed that New LTIPP 2012-2027 be formulated. The progress on 
 the five steps towards formula tion of LTIPP (2012-2027) are as 
 follows:- 

 
60 
 
(i) Articulation of National Strategy . The draft National Strategy was 
 prepared by HQ IDS and rendered to the National Security 
 Advisor (NSA) in Jan 2007. Inputs are awaited. 
(ii) Formulation of Defence Planning Guidelines.  The finalized 
 Defence Planning Guidelines Do cument has been received from 
 Headquarters IDS and is presently  under consideration in the 
 Ministry of Defence.  
(iii) Formulation of Defence Capab ility Strategy. The draft Defence 
Capability Strategy has also been formulated in Aug 2008. The 
document is under circulation to the respective Service HQrs for 
their comments.    
(iv) Preparation of Defence C apability Plan and LTIPP and approval 
by DAC. The work on Defenc e Capability Plan and the LTIPP 
are under way and both these docum ents are likely to be ready 
by end 2009.       
(c) Evolution of Joint Services Doct rine and Issue of Joint Doctrine to the 
 Services.  
 (i) Joint Services Doctrine. This document has been issued in 
  Apr 2007.  
(ii) Joint Doctrine.  The RM's Operational Directive provides the 
guidelines to the three services  to formulate their operational 
plans.  
(iii) Integrated Modernisation Pl an for the three Services and 
Provisioning of Joint Budget .  The LTIPP will enshrine the 
Integrated Modernisation Plans of all three Services and provide 
foundation for Joint Budget.  
[MoD OM No. H-11013/12/2008/D(Parl) dated  14.10.2008] 
 
 
Recommendation (Para No.35) 
 
 In October, 2006, the government had sanctioned for Air Force 12,676 
additional posts at different levels agai nst accumulated cadre shortage which 
were to be filled up over a five year per iod.  According to induction plan, 2149 
personnel were to be recruited in the year 2007 and 3250 personnel in 2008.  
The Committee would like to know the ext ent of actual Induction of personnel 
in 2007 and the prospects for recruitment of the projected level of personnel in 
2008.  It should be ensured that there is no let up in sustaining combat force 
level.  The Committee desire that st eps should also be taken to expand the 
infrastructure for training to accommodate enhanced number of personnel to 
meet the requirement of Air Force.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 A Shortage of manpower in IAF was existing even before the sanction 
of 12,676 additional posts in Oct 06.  Hence, these 12,676 personnel would 
be in addition to the shortages that were already in existence, to make good 
the overall deficiency.  Induction against sanctioned 12,676 additional posts is 
planned in a 5 year period. Acco rdingly, 2149 and 3250 personnel were 
planned for induction from these 12,676 posts in 2007 and 2008 respectively.  
Induction is planned to make good the over all deficiency of personnel over a 
period of time.   

 
61 
 
 In 2007, a total of 595 officers  and 8229 PBOR were to be inducted 
against which a total of 485 officers and 8227 PBOR were inducted.  A total 
1800 airmen were inducted as on 31 Ma rch for the year 2008, where the 
annual intake figure is 7200.  Officers  would get commissioned in Jun 08 and 
hence, the induction figure for 2008 would be available only then. 
 With regards to training of pilots, it was initially planned to increase the 
rate of induction so as to make good the additional vacancies within a period 
of 5 years. However, the existing infras tructure of the training establishments 
could not accept the capacity without  major infrastructure changes and 
investments.  This additional infrastr ucture if created would have gone waste 
after 5 years.  Hence, it was deci ded to spread the period of making good the 
additional vacancies to 7 to 8 years from  earlier plan of 5 years. The induction 
figure thus created per y ear has now been absorbed at the flying training 
establishments by increasing the c apacity without major infrastructure 
changes. The first batch of enhanced number of inductees has already joined 
AF Academy in Jan 2008.  T he infrastructure available for training of ground 
duty officers (Tech/Non Tech) is not being utilized fully at Air Force Academy 
and Air Force Technical College in view of  very low turn out.  As of date the 
domestic and technical capacity utilization is only to the extent of 50%.  As 
regards to PBORs the work services  for enhancing the infrastructure are 
underway and this is likely to be comple ted by end of 2009.  As of date the 
infrastructure is being utilized to its peak capacity. 
 
[MoD OM No. H-11013/12/2008/D(Parl) dated  14.10.2008] 
 
 
Recommendation (Para No.36) 
 
 The Committee are seriously conc erned to note the vastly depleted 
strength of squadrons in Air Force. As  against the authorized strength of 39.5 
squadrons, there are at present ju st 32 squadrons. Although two more 
squadrons are reported to have been form ed in the beginning of April, 2008, 
there will also be concurrent phase outs. What irks the Committee most is that 
the strength of the squadrons  is not expected to m eet the authorized level 
even by the end of the 12 th plan, not to speak of the 11 th plan. The target is 
just 35.5 squadrons by  the end of the 11 th plan and 37.5 squadrons by the 
end of the 12th plan. Needless to point out that  depleted Air Force is a serious 
risk to the National security. There is an imperative need to revise the 
acquisition target so as to meet t he authorized strength at the shortest 
possible time frame. The Committee would await an action plan in this regard. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
1.  The Force Level Plan has been re vised and now IAF will have 35 Sqns 
by the end of 12 th Plan. IAF is planning to add Su-30MKI, Light Combat 
Aircraft (LCA), Medium Multi Role  Combat Aircraft (MMRCA) and Fifth 
Generation Fighter Aircraft (FGFA) to its fighter fleet to replace aircraft 
phasing out due to completion of calendar  life / Total Technical Life. The 
status of induction plan to these airc raft and its impact on Force Level is as 
follows:- 
 
 

 
62 
 
(a) IAF has already contracted for Su-30 MKI aircraft. Total of 11 
Sqns of Su-30 MKI will be operational by 2015. 
(b) First Sqn of Light Combat Aircraft (LCA) is expected to be 
inducted in 2010-11 and this will be followed by additional five 
Sqns. However, the serial produc tion of Light Combat Aircraft 
(LCA) will commence only after it meets the requisite 
performance parameters. 
(c) The responses of vendors in t he scheme of Medium Multi Role 
Combat Aircraft (MMRCA) has been received and Technical 
evaluation is in progress. 
(d) An Inter-Governmental Ag reement has been signed with Russia 
for joint development of Fifth Generation Fighter Aircraft (FGFA). 
On completion of development program expected in 2016-17 
production facilities will  be set up and this is likely to facilitate 
timely replacement of fighter aircraft phasing out. 
 
2. To offset the reduced fighter Sqns  (presently 34 Sqns), induction of 
various force multipliers like Airborne Warning and Control Systems 
(AWACS), Unmanned Aerial Vehicles etc has been done to ensure 
sustenance of combat edge. Induction of trainers like Advanced Jet Trainers 
(AJT) was planned for dual purpose of providing comprehensive stage III 
training to fighter pilots of IAF to ens ure smooth transition from basic aircraft 
to advanced fighters and utilization of these aircraft for Close Air Support 
(CAS) role in case of any future requirement. 
 
[MoD OM No. H-11013/12/2008/D(Parl) dated  14.10.2008] 
 
 
 
Recommendation (Para No.39) 
 
 
 The Committee in their Seventh and Twentieth Reports had, inter-alia, 
recommended that there should be gr eater autonomy and flexibility to 
Ordnance Factory Board in their functioning and management.  The 
Committee had also recommended that gradually Ordnance Factories may be 
converted into DPSUs, so that they may have access to finances from market 
etc.  The Committee are distressed to note that even two years after 
presentation of Seventh Report, St andard accounting system and technical 
audit by an independent agency have not  been introduced in Ordnance 
Factories.  The expenditure Secretar y has conveyed that they have no 
objection in making Ordnance Factory a corporate body.  It appears that the 
Ministry of Defence have not initiated any step in this regard.  The Committee 
are of the view that in  order to make Ordnance Factories a vibrant and 
efficient organization, there is an urgent  need to convert them into a company 
so that they have sufficient autonomy to select vendors and undertake joint 
ventures and to enhance their decisi on making powers in financial and R&D 
matters.  In case any delay is envisaged in corporatising Ordnance Factories, 
the Committee desire that periodical technical audits and standard accounting 
system should atleast be introduced forthwith. 

 
63 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Comments 
 (i) OFB is maintaining account s in the form of Income and 
Expenditure Accounts.  However, a decision has been taken to convert 
the existing formats of the accounts of the Ordnance Factories from the 
one based on the Government Depar tment to a new commercially 
oriented format, as per requirement of GFR-87 of 2005.  The same has 
been scrutinized/examined by various  department of ministry.  The 
proposal for introduction of Comme rcial Accounting Formats in 
Ordnance Factory is in advance stages for approval of the Government 
and Comptroller & Auditor General.  
(ii) Regarding Corporatisation of Ordnance Factory, several 
meeting were held with representativ es of various federations of 
Ordnance Factories to address the concerns related to 
recommendation of Kelkar Committee.   However, in a meeting under 
the Chairmanship of the then Hon’ble RM with the reps of Federation of 
the Ordnance Factories held on 18th Sep 2006, wherein it was informed 
that Government has not decided to corporatize Ordnance Factories. 
(iii) Greater Autonomy has been given through enhanced financial 
powers.  Full Powers in respect of procurement/import of input 
materials has been accorded to OFB ex cept Single Vendor Situation.  
OFB are not facing any constraints for their financial requirement.  
There is no provision for technical audit by Independent Agency.  
However, statutory audit provision is in place and action is being taken 
accordingly.  Substantial financial powers have been delegated to OFB 
including full powers for research and development activities in 
Ordnance Factories.   
 
[MoD OM No. H-11013/12/2008/D(Parl) dated  14.10.2008] 
 
 
Recommendation (Para No.45) 
 
 The Committee observe from the info rmation furnished by the Ministry 
of Defence that a developm ent project submitted by Defence Research and 
Development Organization to Army a year ago still remains pending 
clearance.  The project is to equip soldiers  with light weight systems in future.   
The Committee wonder why there is delay  in this regard.   The Committee 
desire that the project should be examined without any further delay and the 
outcome communicated to Defenc e Research  and Development 
Organization. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 Pending clearance from Army, DRDO  has already initiated the 
proposal for the development of a few long lead and critical technology areas. 
 
[MoD OM No. H-11013/12/2008/D(Parl) dated  14.10.2008] 
 

 
64 
 
CHAPTER–V 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL 
REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
- NIL- 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi;           BALASAHEB VIKHE PATIL, 
20  February, 2009                   Chairman, 
01  Phalguna, 1930 (Saka)  Standing Committee on Defence 
 

 
65 
 
MINUTES OF THE EIGHTEENTH SITTING OF THE STANDING 
COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE (2008-09) 
 
 The Committee sat on Wednesday, the 4 th  February 2009 from 1100 
to 1215 hrs. in Committee Room `B’, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
 
Shri Balasaheb Vikhe Patil  -      Chairman 
 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri Santosh Gangwar 
3. Dr. K.S. Manoj 
4. Shri Asaduddin Owaisi 
5. Shri Arjun Charan Sethi 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
6. Shri Jai Parkash Aggarwal 
7. Shri R.K. Dhawan 
8. Shri K. B. Shanappa 
9. Smt. Viplove Thakur 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri Devender Singh - Joint Secretary 
2. Shri Rajeev Sharma           -  Director 
2. Shri D.R. Shekhar              -  Deputy Secretary 
 3. Smt. J.M. Sinha                  -  Under Secretary  
 
REPRESENTATIVES OF THE MINISTRY OF DEFENCE 
 
1. Shri Vijay Singh  - Defence Secretary 
2. Shri M. Natarajan  - SA to RM 
3. Shri S.M. Acharya  - Secretary (ESW) 
4. Smt. H.K. Pannu  - FA(DS) 
5. Smt. Neelam Nath  - Spl. Secretary (N) 
6. Shri S.K. Sharma  - DG (Acquisition) 
7. Shri Shekhar Agarwal - FA (Acquisition) 
8. Shri R.K. Mathur  - Addl. Secy(M) 
9. Shri Bimal Julka  - JS (G/Air) 
10. Shri Sanjeeva Kumar - JS (ESW) 
11. Shri Ajay Tirkey  - JS (E) 
12. Shri S.N. Misra  - JS(Aero) 
13. Shri Amit Cowshish  - Addl. FA(A) 
14. Shri V. Somasundaran - JS (OF) 
15. Shri T Ramachandru - JS(S) 
16. Shri Mukesh Kumar Sinha - Dir. (Fin/Bud). 

 
66 
ARMED FORCES HEADQUATERS 
 
  1. Air Mshl S.C. Mukul   - CISC 
  2. Lt. Gen N. Thamburaj  - VCOAS 
  3. Vice Adml Raman P Suthan - VCNS 
  4. Air Mshl T.S. Randhawa  - DG(I&S) 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the r epresentatives of the 
Ministry of Defence to the sitting of the Committee and drew their attention to 
the Direction 58 of the Directions by the Speaker, Lok Sabha. The Chairman 
then requested the representatives of the Ministry of  Defence to brief the 
Committee on the subjects `Status of implementation of Unified Command for 
Armed Forces’ and Action Taken Replies on the observations/ 
recommendations contained in the 29th Report of the Committee on ‘Demands 
for Grants of the Ministry of Defence for the year 2008-09’.  
 
3. The representatives of the Ministry of Defence then briefed the 
Committee first on various issues pertaining to the subject `Status of 
implementation of Unified Command for Armed Forces’ viz., Mechanism to 
sort out differences among the services , provision of Joint Training at all 
levels in the armed forces, vertical & horizontal aspects of integration as 
identified by the HQ IDS, status of Indian National Defence University (INDU) 
and the linkages between the DRDO and HQ IDS, etc.  
 
4. The Committee then took the oral evidence of the representatives of 
the Ministry of Defence on Action Taken Replies on the observations/ 
recommendations contained in the 29th Report of the Committee on ‘Demands 
for Grants of the Ministry for the y ear 2008-09’. The Ministry of Defence 
briefed the Committee on stat us of trial and supply of Arjun Tanks, findings of 
the Rama Rao Committee on the work ing of DRDO, present status of 
Eleventh Plan, liberalized leave policy, self-certification of firms and issue 
pertaining to the light-weight systems for soldiers, etc.   
 
5. The representatives of the Minist ry then responded to the issues raised 
by the members.  As regards, the poi nts on which the repr esentatives could 
not readily respond, the co mmittee desired them to furnish written information 
at the earliest. 
 
6. The copy of verbatim record of the proceedings has been kept.  
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
 
 
 
 

 
67 
 
MINUTES OF THE NINETEENTH SITTING OF THE STANDING 
COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE (2008- 09) 
 
 The Committee sat on Friday, the 20 th February 2009 from 1000 to     
1025 hrs. in Committee Room `C’, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
 
Shri Balasaheb Vikhe Patil  -      Chairman 
 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri Milind Murli Deora 
3. Shri Santosh Gangwar 
4. Shri Jigajinagi Ramesh Chandappa 
5. Shri Suresh Kalmadi 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
6. Shri Jai Parkash Aggarwal 
7. Shri R.K. Dhawan  
8. Shri A. Elavarasan 
9. Shri M.V. Mysura Reddy 
10. Smt. Viplove Thakur 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1.  Shri Devender Singh - Joint Secretary  
2. Shri Rajeev Sharma  - Director 
3. Shri D.R. Shekhar  - Deputy Secretary 
4. Smt. J.M. Sinha  - Under Secretary 
 
 
2. At the outset, the C hairman welcomed the Members to the sitting of the 
Committee.  The Committee, thereafte r, took up for consideration the 
following draft reports: 
 
(i) Action taken by the Government on the 
recommendations/observations c ontained in the Twenty-Ninth 
Report of the Committee on Demands  for Grants of the Ministry 
of Defence for the year 2008-09; and 
(ii) Status of implementation of Unified Command for Armed Forces. 
 
3. The Committee adopted both the afor esaid draft reports without any 
modification. 
 
4. The Committee then authorized the Chairman to make verbal and 
consequential changes, if any, in the r eports and present the same to the 
Parliament. 
The Committee then adjourned. 

 
68 
 
APPENDIX 
 
ANALYSIS OF THE ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE 
RECOMMENDATIONS / OBSERVATIONS CONTAINED IN THE 29 th 
REPORT OF THE STANDING COMMI TTEE ON ‘DEMANDS FOR GRANTS 
OF THE MINISTRY OF DEFENCE FOR THE YEAR 2008-09’  
  
 
   Percentage 
of Total 
1. Total number of recommendations 
 
46  
2. Recommendations / Observations 
which have been accepted by 
Government 
 
Para No.  1, 8, 9, 11, 12, 13, 14, 17, 18, 19, 
20, 21, 22, 26, 27, 28,  30, 31, 33, 37, 38, 
40, 43, 44 and 46 
 
25  54  
3. Recommendations / Observations which 
the Committee do not des ire to pursue in 
view of Government’s replies 
 
Para No.  7, 10, 15, 23, 32, 41, 42 
 
 
 7   15 
4. Recommendations / Observations in 
respect of which replies of Government 
have not been accepted by the Committee 
 
Para No .  2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 16,24, 25, 29, 34, 
35, 36, 39 and 45 
 
 14 31 
5. Recommendations / Observations in 
respect of which final replies of 
Government are still awaited 
NIL 0 
 
 
 