23
STANDING COMMITTEE
ON DEFENCE
(2006-07)
FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA
MINISTRY OF DEFENCE
[Action Taken by the Government  on the Recommendations contained
in the Twelfth Report of the Committee (Fourteenth Lok Sabha) on
‘Review of Medical Services and Education in the Defence Sector’]
TWENTY-THIRD REPORT
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
July, 2007/Asadha, 1929 (Saka)

TWENTY-THIRD REPORT
STANDING COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE
(2006-07)
(FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA)
MINISTRY OF DEFENCE
[Action Taken by the Government  on the Recommendations contained
in the Twelfth Report of the Committee (Fourteenth Lok Sabha) on
‘Review of Medical Services and Education in the Defence Sector’]
Presented to Hon’ble Speaker Lok Sabha on 3.8.2007
and Hon’ble Dy. Chairman Rajya Sabha on 9.8.2007
Presented to Lok Sabha on …………………
Laid  in  Rajya Sabha on …………………
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
July, 2007/Asadha, 1929 (Saka)


C.O.D. No. 84
Price : Rs. 105.00
© 2007 BY LOK S ABHA S ECRETARIAT
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of
Business in Lok Sabha (Eleventh Edition) and Printed by Jainco Art India,
New Delhi-110 005.

(i)
CONTENTS
PAGES
COMPOSITION OF THE C OMMITTEE  (2006-07) .......................................... (iii)
PREFACE ........................................................................................................ (v)
CHAPTER I Report ............................................................................. 1
CHAPTER II Recommendations/Observations which have
been accepted by the Government ......................... 42
CHAPTER III Recommendations/Observations which the
Committee do not desire to pursue in view
of the Government’s replies ..................................... 60
CHAPTER IV Recommendations/Observations in respect of
which replies of the Government have not been
accepted by the Committee ...................................... 61
CHAPTER V Recommendations/Observations in respect of
which final replies of the Government are still
awaited ........................................................................... 86
MINUTES OF THE S ITTING ............................................................................ 87
APPENDIX Analysis of Action Taken by Government on
the Recommendations contained in the Seventh
Report of the Standing Committee on
Defence (Fourteenth Lok Sabha) on ‘Defence
Ordnance Factories ...................................................... 96

COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE
ON DEFENCE (2006-07)
  Shri Balasaheb Vikhe Patil —  Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri S. Bangarappa
3. Shri Milind Murli Deora
4. Shri Santosh Kumar Gangwar
5. Shri Ramesh C. Jigajinagi
6. Shri Suresh Kalmadi
7. Shri C. Kuppusami
8. Dr. K.S. Manoj
9. Ms. Ingrid Mcleod
10. Shri Asaduddin Owaisi
11. Shri Adhalrao Shivaji Patil
12. Shri Shriniwas Patil
13. Shri Rajendrasinh Ghanshyamsinh Rana (Raju Rana)
14. Dr. H.T. Sangliana
15. Shri Arjun Charan Sethi
16. Prof. Mahadeorao Shiwankar
17. Shri Manvendra Singh
18. Shri Balashowry Vallabhaneni
19. Shri Rajesh Verma
Rajya Sabha
20. Dr. Farooq Abdullah
21. Shri Jai Prakash Aggarwal
22. Shri Abu Asim Azmi
23. Smt. Shobhana Bharatia
24. Shri R.K. Dhawan
(iii)

25. Smt. N.P . Durga
26. Shri S.P .M. Syed Khan
27. Shri K.B. Shanappa
28. Shri Arun Shourie
29. Smt. Viplove Thakur
SECRETARIAT
1. Shri S.K. Sharma — Additional Secretary
2. Shri P .K. Bhandari — Joint Secretary
3. Shri Gopal Singh — Director
4. Shri D.R. Shekhar — Deputy Secretary-II
5. Smt. Jyochnamayi Sinha — Under Secretary
6. Shri Nilendu Kumar — Sr. Executive Assistant
(iv)

(v)
PREFACE
I, the Chairman, Standing Committee on Defence (2006-07) having
been authorized by the Committee to submit the Report on their behalf,
present this Twenty-Third Report on Action Taken by the Government
on the recommendations of the Committee contained in their Twelfth
Report (Fourteenth Lok Sabha) on ‘Review of Medical Services and
Education in the Defence Sector’.
2. The Twelfth Report was presented to/laid in Lok Sabha/Rajya
Sabha on 02 August, 2006. The Government furnished replies indicating
action taken on the recommendations contained in the Report on
‘Review of Medical Services and Education in the Defence Sector’.
The Committee examined the Action Taken Replies and noted that the
Ministry of Defence had not taken any action on most of their
recommendations and the replies to rest of the recommendations were
not complete and exhaustive. The Committee, therefore, had briefing
by the representatives of Ministry of Defence on 12 February, 2007
and asked them to take action and furnish revised Action Taken Replies
within two months. The Committee again found that most of the
revised replies furnished by the Ministry were more or less of the
same nature and character as reflected in the earlier replies. The
Committee, therefore, again took evidence of the representatives of the
Ministry on 04 July, 2007 to have clarifications on various issues arising
out of the action taken replies. In view of the above, the Draft Action
Taken Report was prepared, which was considered and adopted by
the Committee at their sitting held on 18 July, 2007.
3. An analysis of action taken by the Government on
recommendations contained in the Twelfth Report of the Standing
Committee on Defence (Fourteenth Lok Sabha) is given in Appendix.
4. For facility of reference and convenience, the observations/
recommendations of the Committee have been printed in thick type in
the body of the Report.
  N
EW D ELHI; BALASAHEB VIKHE PATIL,
25 July, 2007 Chairman,
3 Sravana, 1929 (Saka) Standing Committee on Defence.

CHAPTER I
REPORT
The Report of the Standing Committee on Defence deals with action
taken by the Government on the recommendations/observations
contained in their Twelfth Report (Fourteenth Lok Sabha) on ‘Review
of Medical Services and Education in the Defence Sector’ which was
presented and laid in both the Houses of Parliament on 02.08.2006.
2. In the Twelfth Report (Fourteenth Lok Sabha), the Committee
had made 61 observations/recommendations on the following subjects:
Sl.No. Para No. Subject
 12 3
 1. 1.4 to 1.7 Introduction
 2. 2.5 to 2.7 Role of Armed Forces Medical Services
 3. 2.13 Coordination amongst Medical Services of
the three Forces
 4. 2.17 to 2.18 AFMS v/s. Civil Medical Services
 5. 2.22 Funds allocation to AFMS
 6. 3.3 to 3.5 Authorised and held Strength
 7. 3.13 to 3.17 Authorised and held Strength of Doctors
 8. 3.20 Authorised and posted Strength of Para-
Medical Staff
 9. 4.12 to 4.17 AFMS Hospitals and their Upgradation
10. 4.20 & 4.22 Field Units
11. 4.27 to 4.28 Doctor-Patient Ratio
12. 5.10 to 5.11 Specialists facilities in Hospitals
13. 5.16 to 5.18 Cardiology Centres
14. 5.23 Orthopaedic facility
15. 5.25 Neurology specialists

2
12 3
16. 5.29 Treatment for Psychological problems of
Armed Forces Personnel
17. 5.31 Treatment facilities for AIDS/HIV
18. 5.34 to 5.35 Traditional Systems of Treatment
19. 6.4 Medical preparedness for contagious
diseases and NBC War
20. 7.11 to 7.13 Medical Education
21. 8.6 to 8.7 Medical Research
22. 9.3 to 9.4 Nursing and Para-Medical Training
23. 9.9 Training to Para-Medical Personnel
24. 10.6 Disaster Management
25. 11.8 Medical Equipment and Drugs
26. 12.5 to 12.6 Medical Services for Ex-Servicemen
3. Action Taken Notes have been received from the Government
in respect of all the recommendations/observations contained in the
Report. These have been categorised as follows:
(i) Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted
by Government (Please see Chapter II):
Para Nos. 1.7, 2.22, 3.16, 3.17, 4.12 to 4.14, 4.16, 4.17, 4.20 to
4.22, 5.16 to 5.18, 5.28, 5.30, 6.4, 8.7, 10.6 and 11.8
(ii) Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do
not desire to pursue in view of Government’s replies (Please
see Chapter III):
Para No. 7.13
(iii) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies
of Government have not been accepted by the Committee
(Please see Chapter IV):
Para Nos. 1.4, 1.5. 1.6.1 to 1.6.6, 2.5 to 2.7, 2.17, 2.18, 3.3 to
3.5, 3.13 to 3.15, 3.20, 4.15, 4.24, 4.27, 4.28, 5.10, 5.11, 5.23,
5.24, 5.33, 5.34, 7.11, 7.12, 8.6, 9.3, 9.4, 9.9, 12.5 and 12.6
(iv) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which final
replies of Government are still awaited:
NIL

3
4. The Committee trust that utmost importance will be given to
the implementation of the recommendations accepted by the
Government. In cases, where it is not possible for any reason to
implement the recommendations in letter and spirit, the matter
should be reported to the Committee with reasons for non-
implementation. The Committee desire that action taken notes on
the recommendations/observations contained in Chapter–I and final
replies to the recommendations contained in Chapter–V of the Report
be furnished to the Committee within six months of the presentation
of the Report.
5. The Committee will now deal with the action taken by the
Government on some of their recommendations contained in
Chapter-I of this report. Chapter-I deals with the recommendations of
the Committee on which replies furnished by the Ministry are not
satisfactory and are not accepted by the Committee or replies to the
recommendations of the Committee have been accepted, but still in
some areas of implementation, the Committee want to further comment
or seek more detailed information. Accordingly in Chapter-I of the
Action Taken Report further comments, recommendations on some of
the replies have been given/made by the Committee for further reply/
seeking action taken statement from the Ministry. The Ministry shall,
after the presentation of this report, furnish statements of action taken
or proposed to be taken by them on the recommendations contained
in the Chapter-I and the final replies to the recommendations contained
in Chapter-V of this report.
UPGRADATION IN THE STATUS OF DGAFMS
(Recommendation Para Nos. 1.4 & 1.5, 2.17 & 2.18)
Recommendation Para Nos. 1.4 and 1.5
6. The Committee noted that AFMS came into existence in 1948
in pursuance of the recommendations of Dr. B. C. Roy Committee set
up to consider the question of integration of three medical services
and medical research in Armed Forces. Dr. B.C. Roy Committee in its
report laid down general principles as to how this integration could
be effected efficiently for providing best medical care to Armed Forces.
7. The Committee, however, on making an in depth examination
of AFMS felt that the BC Roy Committee’s recommendations which
were still relevant in present day scenario had not been fully
implemented in letter and spirit. The Roy Committee had envisaged a
higher status of DGAFMS as Advisor of the Supreme Commander or

4
the Defence Minister. The Committee were constrained to note that
over the years the status of DGAFMS had been slowly downgraded.
This had impinged upon the working of AFMS. The Committee in
this connection had pointed out the manifold increase in the workload
of AFMS over the years with its medical cover having been extended
to families of service personnel, ex-servicemen and their dependents,
para military forces viz., BSF, ITBP , CRPF, Border Road Construction
Units and other supporting organizations posted in field and central/
intelligence agencies operating in disturbed areas and medical aid to
civilians in low intensity conflict areas. It had also a major role to
play in international medical missions and in providing medical relief
in case of natural calamity and disaster. It was ironic that on the one
hand there had been a substantial increase in the role of AFMS which
had been earning accolades for its services to the nation and the world
and on the other status of DG(AFMS) was being slowly downgraded.
Looking at the size, responsibility and nature of AFMS, the Committee
desired that status of DGAFMS should be upgraded to that of Secretary,
Government of India as in the case of Director General of Health
Services (Civil).
8. The Ministry, in their action taken reply, have stated:
“The Government is conscious of the concern expressed by the
Committee about substantial increase in workload of DG, AFMS.
To address this concern, a proposal to augment the AFMS set up
is under consideration of the Government. As regards upgradation
of the post of DG, AFMS, it may be noted that DG, AFMS’s pay
scale is already higher than that of Lieutenant Generals and
equivalent, who are not Army Commanders or equivalent. The
proposal to further upgrade it equivalent to Army Commanders/
Secretaries has overall implications viz-a-viz pay scale of officers in
the services. However, the proposal is under examination of the
Government”.
Recommendation Para Nos.  2.17 and 2.18
9. The Committee noted that the post of DGAFMS was created
in 1948 in the rank of Lt. Gen. with the status of Special Secretary . In
the civil, the post of Director General Health Services (DGHS) was
equivalent to Director. Since 1948 there had been no change in the
status of DGAFMS which was presently equivalent to Additional
Secretary, whereas in the civil DGHS had been upgraded to the status
of Secretary, Govt of India.

5
10. The Committee found that AFMS had expanded manifold since
independence and its role had also considerably increased. Accordingly,
the responsibilities of DGAFMS have also increased substantially . The
Committee, therefore, strongly recommended that the post of DGAFMS
would be upgraded to the status of Secretary, Govt of India. The
Committee felt that upgradation of status of DGAFMS would not only
boost the morale of AFMS but also help DGAFMS in working
effectively.
11. The Ministry have reproduced the same reply as given to the
recommendation Para Nos. 1.4 and 1.5.
12. During the oral evidence, the Defence Secretary has further
apprised the Committee about the latest status of implementation as
under:
“The Committee of the Chiefs have not agreed that there should
be a higher grade. They have given an intermediary grade. We
have informed about it. We have also said that this is the view of
the Standing Committee and we wanted that there should be
difference in grade”.
Comments of the Committee
13. The Committee, after making an in-depth examination of
AFMS and B.C. Roy Committee’s recommendations and also keeping
in view the considerably increased workload and responsibilities of
DGAFMS since inception, had opined that there was an imperative
need for upgradation of status of DGAFMS to the status of Secretary,
Government of India. The Committee, are however, dismayed to note
that the Chief of Staff Committee (COSC) has not approved the
upgradation of DGAFMS. The Committee do not approve the
baseless ground of the Ministry of Defence of referring this important
administrative matter to Sixth Pay Commission. The Committee,
therefore, again strongly recommend that there is an imperative need
to upgrade the rank and status of DGAFMS when his own
counterpart in civil health services  i.e. DGHS has already been
enjoying the status of Secretary, Government of India. The
Committee, therefore, strongly reiterate that the Ministry should take
up this matter in right earnest and show the result to the Committee.
The Committee also desire that pending the decision on upgradation
of the post, DGAFMS should be invested with more financial power
so that there is no need for taking frequent financial sanctions.

6
AUGMENTATION OF MANPOWER IN AFMS
(Recommendation Para Nos. 1.6.1 to 1.6.5, 2.5 to 2.7, 3.13 to 3.15,
3.20, 4.24, 4.27 & 4.28, 5.10 & 5.11, 5.23 & 5.24)
Recommendation Para No. 1.6.1
14. Having examined various other issues pertaining to the subject,
the Committee had inter alia recommend:
Government should increase the strength of AFMS in proportion
to its increased workload and responsibility for smooth and effective
functioning. For this purpose, Government should set up a high
level Committee to review the authorized strength of each cadre
of AFMS.
15. The Ministry in their action taken reply, have stated:
“To cater for increased workload and heightened clientele
expectations and awareness, Army Head Quarters took up a case
for the revision of establishment of various military hospitals for
requirement of additional manpower before the Chiefs of the Staff
Committee (COSC). The COSC recommended accretion of
additional 8714 manpower in three distinct phases. In phase-I
additional manpower to the extent of 1242 was recommended for
Army Hospital (R&R) Delhi Cantonment, Base Hospital Delhi
Cantonment and five Command Hospitals. The Army Standing
Establishment Committee (ASEC), a specialized body set up for
study of manpower and other requirements of Army establishments,
has also accepted and recommended accretion of 1242 manpower
for Phase-I.
Consequent to the recommendations of the Standing Committee, a
committee was set up by DGAFMS on 11 August 2006 under the
chairmanship of a Lieutenant General Rank Officer [Director
General Health Services (Armed Forces)] for review of authorization
of manpower to Armed Forces Medical Services. The Committee
has submitted its report in September 2006, which is under
examination of the Government”.
16. The Ministry have further furnished the latest status of
implementation as under:
“The report of the DGHS(AF) Committee has been examined by
the Ministry of Defence and the matter of augmentation of strength
of AFMS set up has been referred to Finance Division in the
Ministry for examination”.

7
Recommendation Para No. 1.6.2
17. The Committee had recommended that the vacancies of doctors
and paramedical staff in hospitals and field units of AFMS should be
filled up urgently.
18. The Ministry, in their action taken reply, have stated:
“As far as vacancies of doctors are concerned recruitment has
already been carried out thrice in the recent past to limit the gap
between the authorized and the held strength. The manpower
planning cell, in DGAFMS, now carries out an analysis in advance,
pertaining to normal releases of Short Service Commissioned
Officers, superannuation and premature retirement of Permanent
Commissioned Officers. Accordingly, advertisements are issued well
in advance of the anticipated vacancies so that by the time the
selected candidates report for duty , there is no deficiency against
the sanctioned strength. As to further augmentation of the strength
of doctors and paramedical staff, a proposal to augment the AFMS
set up has referred to Finance Division in the Ministry for
examination”.
Recommendation Para No. 1.6.3
19. The Committee had recommended that :
“AFMS should extend super specialist facilities like cardiology and
Neurology in all zonal hospitals and more specialists in peripheral
hospital so that soldiers and officers might be provided with proper
medical care in their vicinity”.
20. The Ministry, in their action taken reply, have stated:
“This issue has been covered in the report of the Committee
constituted by DG, AFMS to review authorization of manpower to
AFMS cadre. The report of the Committee has been examined in
the Ministry of Defence and a proposal to augment the strength of
AFMS set up has been referred to Finance Division in the Ministry
for examination”.
Recommendation Para No . 1.6.4
21. The Committee had recommended that the staffing norms in
AFMS hospitals should be improved to one Medical officer per twenty
one beds according to recommendations given by ASEC Committee in
this regard.

8
22. The Ministry, in their action taken reply, have stated:
“The Committee constituted by DGAFMS in August 2006 has also
made recommendations on the norms for General Duty Medical
Officers, Specialists, Nursing Officers and staff to bed ratio. The
issue is linked with overall manpower authorization to AFMS. As
mentioned earlier, the proposal for augmentation of AFMS set has
been referred to Finance Division of the Ministry for examination”.
Recommendation Para No. 1.6.5
23. The Committee had recommended that:
10% cut in recruitment should not be made applicable on civilian
manpower of AFMS particularly in essential categories and trades like
dietician, physiotherapist etc.
24. The Ministry, in their action taken reply, have stated:
“Department of Personnel and Training (DOP&T) had issued
guidelines vide Office Memorandum No. 2/8/2001-PIC dated
16th May 2001 to restrict Direct Recruitment in civilian post to
1/3 of Direct Recruitment vacancies subject to 1% of total
sanctioned strength of the Department including all Formations/
Directorates with a view to achieve reduction of 10% manpower
in Government Departments during a five year period from
2001-02 to 2005-06. DOP&T has since extended the Scheme of
Optimization of Direct Recruitment to civilian post upto 31st March
2009, subject to a review being undertaken after receipt of the 6th
Pay Commission recommendations.
The issue raised by the Committee about exemption of AFMS from
the purview of 10% cut in recruitment is also valid in case of
other branches of Army, Navy and Air Force and hence a
comprehensive proposal for obtaining Cabinet approval for such
an exemption in respect of civilian employees is being progressed”.
Recommendation Para Nos. 2.5 to 2.7
25. The Committee noted that AFMS was established in 1948 with
authorised strength of 900 medical officers and other supporting staff
to provide comprehensive health care to the serving Armed Forces
personnel. Over the years the role of AFMS had considerably increased
with its services having been extended to families and dependents of
service personnel since Independence. In addition, the AFMS also

9
provides medical cover to ex-servicemen and their dependents, para
military forces viz. BSF, ITBP , CRPF, Border Road units, etc., posted in
field, central/intelligence agencies operating in disturbed areas, and
medical aid to civilians in low intensity conflict areas and in case of
natural calamity and disaster. The AFMS had also been playing a
major role in International/UN Medical & Humanitarian Aid Missions
since 1950. To cope with the increased responsibilities, the AFMS had
also expanded and at present had an authorised strength of 5440
medical officers and other supporting staff.
26. The Committee, however, felt that the expansion of AFMS was
not commensurate with the increase in its responsibilities which had
become manifold over the years as AFMS now not only provides
medical cover to Armed Forces Personnel, their dependents and other
beneficiaries but also plays a vital role in Disaster Management and
International missions, etc.
27. The Committee therefore, strongly recommended that a high
level committee should be appointed to comprehensively review and
re-assess the overall increase in work and responsibilities of AFMS
and suitably recommend ideal strength for each cadre so as to have
smooth and efficient functioning. The proposed committee should also
take into consideration the new medical technologies that have been
introduced in the field requiring training manpower.
28. The Ministry, in their action taken reply, have stated:
“Consequent to the recommendations of the Standing Committee,
a committee under DGHS(AF) was set up by DGAFMS for review
of authorization of manpower to Armed Forces Medical Services.
The Committee has submitted its report. This issue has been
covered in the report of the Committee constituted by DGAFMS.
The report of the Committee has been examined by the Ministry
and a proposal for augmenting the AFMS set up has been referred
to the Finance Division of the Ministry for examination”.
Recommendation Para Nos. 3.13 to 3.15
29. The Committee were constrained to note that whereas the
actual strength of doctors posted in command hospitals was much
more than the authorised strength, there was more than 20% deficiency
of the doctors in field units’ vis-a-vis authorised strength. This showed
that more doctors were being posted in command hospitals at the cost
of field units.

10
30. The Committee were not inclined to accept the reasons given
by DGAFMS that it was a peace time formation and during war time
these medical officers go back to the field units. Even during peace
time there should not be any deficiency of doctors in field units so
that the troops receive adequate medical care and remain fit and healthy
to take on any challenge there. The Committee, therefore, strongly
recommended that the Ministry should look into the matter and take
urgent steps to post doctors at filed units as per the authorised strength.
31. The Committee further noted that the number of doctors posted
in Delhi and Mumbai was double of the authorised strength because
of requirement of specialists and super specialists at hospital in these
cities. The Committee would like the Govt. to look into the lopsided
postings and take corrective measures in this regard. As recommended
in an earlier paragraph, the Committee desire the Govt. to set up a
Committee to review the authorised strength of doctors in various
levels of hospital and field units taking into consideration the necessity
of posting more specialists and super specialists at command and zonal
levels but at the same time ensuring that there was no shortage of
doctors in field units both in peace time and war time. The Committee
desired that adequate reserve doctors/staff should be kept for leave
vacancies so that there was no deficiency on account of doctors and
other staff proceeding on leave/training.
32. The Ministry, in their action taken reply, have stated:
“As a result of advancement in medical technology and requirement
of Armed Forces to keep pace with advances in the technology, a
number of specialists and super specialists have been added to
each hospital. These specialist officers have been culled out from
the existing authorised strength of the doctors in AFMS. By virtue
of their qualification and training acquired these officers are posted
to Command Hospitals and at Delhi and Mumbai to fulfill the
requirements of the clientele. The statement of the DGAFMS was
accordingly based on the factual position on ground. However
during operational requirements the specialists and medical officers
are posted in field units and formations. In Northern Command
and Eastern Command, where there are operational requirements
100% authorised strength has been posted.
Consequent to the recommendations of the Standing Committee, a
Committee was set up by DGAFMS in August 2006 for review of
authorization of manpower/personnel to Armed Forces Medical
Services. This issue has been covered in the report of the Committee.

11
The report of the Committee is under examination of the
Government”.
33. The present status of implementation, as furnished by the
Ministry, is as under:
“This issue is also linked with the overall issue of authorization of
additional manpower in AFMS. The report of the Committee under
DGHS(AF) set up by the DGAFMS to review the authorization of
manpower to AFMS has been examined and proposal for
augmentation of AFMS set up has been referred to Finance Division
of the Ministry for examination”.
Recommendation Para No. 3.20
34. The Committee were constrained to note that large scale
deficiency in posted strength of paramedical staff against the authorised
strength in most of the service commands. The Committee would like
the Ministry of Defence to take urgent steps to fill up the vacancies
and take concrete steps so that such a situation does not arise in
future.
35. The Ministry, in their action taken reply, have stated as under:
“This has resulted due to reduction in ‘tail’ of the Army to improve
the ‘teeth to tail’ ratio based on various Committees reports. The
AFMS is treated as a service and part of tail.
This issue has been covered in the report of the Committee
constituted by DGAFMS for review of authorization of manpower
to Armed Forces Medical Services. The report of the Committee is
under examination of the Government.
Several measures have been taken to reduce the deficiency in
authorised strength of paramedical staff. Some of the measures are
listed below:—
(a) Increasing the number of Diploma seats for General Nursing
and Midwifery at School of Nursing from 30 to 90 per
years.
(b) Detailment of 44 Nursing Assistant/Nursing Technician
on highly specialized courses conducted by Karnataka
Medical Board, Bangalore. This will be a regular and annual
feature.

12
(c) Detailment of selected Nursing Assistant/Nursing Technician
for courses in civil and also sending them abroad for
advanced courses in Liver Transplant and Nuclear Medicine.
(d) Efforts are on to start Paramedics Academy at AMC Centre
& School,  Lucknow with affiliation to Uttar Pradesh Medical
Council for award of Diploma to Nursing Assistant &
Ambulance Assistant.
(e) Detailing a large number of persons from various trades on
foreign assignments so as to enhance prestige and financial
status.
(f) Reducing the minimum service for attestation of Nursing
Assistant from two years to one year so as to make them
earn the salary and benefits of Sepoy earlier”.
Recommendation Para No. 4.24
36. The Committee noted that 10% cut in civilian manpower
particularly in essential categories had adversely affected the patient
care. Also cut in trades like dietician, physiotherapists etc. had adversely
affected the functioning of these departments as only one post was
authorised in these categories in one hospital. The Committee, therefore,
strongly recommended that cut in recruitment should not be made
applicable to the civil manpower connected with the operationalisation
of armed forces medical services as it had direct ramifications on the
health care of our officers in general and troops in particular.
37. The Ministry, in their action taken reply, have stated:
“Department of Personnel and Training (DOP&T) had issued
guidelines vide Office Memorandum No. 2/8/2001-PIC dated
16th May 2001 to restrict Direct Recruitment in civilian post to
1/3 of Direct Recruitment vacancies subject to 1% of total
sanctioned strength of the Department including all Formations/
Directorates with a view to achieve reduction of 10% manpower
in Government Departments during a five year period from 2001-
02 to 2005-06. DOP&T has further extended the Scheme of
Optimization of Direct Recruitment to civilian post upto 31st March
2009, subject to a review being undertaken after receipt of the 6th
Pay Commission recommendations.
The issue of 10% cut in recruitment is also valid in case of other
branches of Army, Navy and Air Force and hence a comprehensive
proposal for obtaining Cabinet approval for exemption of Armed
Forces from such cut is being processed”.

13
Recommendation Para Nos. 4.27 and 4.28
38. The Committee were constrained to note that norms for staffing
pattern were much lower in AFMS hospitals not only a compared to
corporate hospitals but also civil hospitals. The present staffing pattern
of 1 medical officer per 50 beds and 0.8 staff per bed being followed
in AFMC pertains to 1960 vintage. The Committee were unhappy to
note that Lt. Gen. Foley Committee recommendation made in 1993 for
staffing pattern of 1 medical officer for 15 beds and 2 staff per bed
was not implemented by Govt. ASEC (2006) had now recommended
staffing pattern of 1 medical officer per 21 beds and 1.25 staff per bed.
39. The Committee desired the Govt. to take necessary action to
implement the new staffing norms for AFMC as recommended by
ASEC in a time bound manner so that quality services could be made
available to armed forces personnel and their dependents.
40. The Ministry, in their action taken reply, have stated:
“The Committee constituted by DGAFMS in August 2006 has also
made recommendations on the norms for General Duty Medical
Officer, Specialists, Nursing Officers and staff to bed ratio. The
issue is linked with overall manpower authorization to AFMS. The
Committee has submitted its report in September 2006, which has
been examined and a proposal to augment AFMS set up has been
referred to Finance Division in the Ministry for examination”.
Recommendation Para Nos. 5.10 and 5.11
41. The Committee noted with concern that only basic specialist
facilities like, surgery , gynaecology were provided in peripheral
hospitals and specialist facilitates like psychiatry, skin, paediatrics,
orthopedics, ENT etc. were provided only in zonal hospitals. Further
super specializations such as cardiology , neurology, etc. were provided
only in Command and Base hospitals.
42. The Committee were of the view that there was a need to
extend more specialists facilities in peripheral hospitals. ENT, skin,
paediatrics, orthopaedics related diseases and problems were very
common and therefore, peripherals hospital should be equipped
effectively to treat such cases. The Committee further desired that steps
should also be taken to upgrade the zonal hospitals with all specialities
and super specialist facilities as per the demands of agro-climatic

14
conditions so that the Armed Forces Personnel could get these facilities
at nearby place and they did not have rush to Command Hospitals
for treatment. This would ease the congestion in the Command
Hospitals. The Committee were happy to note that specialists facilities
in various categories of hospitals was under review of Govt. The
Committee strongly desired that early decision might be taken in this
regard”.
43. The Ministry, in their action taken reply, have stated:
“This issue is also linked with the overall issue of authorization of
additional manpower in AFMS. As stated in reply to para 1.6.1
the report of the Committee set up by DGAFMS has been examined
and a proposal to augment the AFMS set up has been referred to
Finance Division in the Ministry for examination”.
Recommendation Para No. 5.23
44. The Committee were happy to note that AFMS had world
class orthopaedic centres and had been instrumental in undertaking
world class orthopaedic surgery. The beneficiaries included besides
armed forces personnel, ex-servicemen and civilians. The Committee
were however constrained to note that there are only 30 orthopaedic
specialists in AFMS. The Committee desired that in view of state of
art orthopaedic centres in AFMS, more specialists should be appointed
so that more and more people, both service personnel and civilians,
might avail benefits of world class orthopaedic facilities.
45. The Ministry, in their action taken reply, have stated:
“This issue is also linked with the overall issue of authorization of
additional manpower in AFMS. As stated in reply to para 1.6.1
the report of the Committee appointed by DGAFMS has been
examined and a proposal to augment AFMS set up has been
referred to Finance Division in the Ministry for examination”.
Recommendation Para No. 5.24
45-A. The Committee desire that the two neurosurgical centres as
projected in the proposed Peace Establishment should be set up
urgently.
The Ministry, in their action taken reply, have stated:
“Establishment of Neurological Centre at 5 AF Hospital, Jorhat
and 7 AF Hospital, Kanpur is being processed at the level of Air
Headquarters for implementation.”

15
Comments of the Committee
46. The Committee are concerned to note that the Ministry of
Defence have not given the details of overall manpower authorization
proposed for the AFMS nor have they indicated any clear-cut
requirement of the specialists as stressed upon by the Committee in
their report. The Committee are constrained to note that inspite of
the fact that the proposal of the Ministry of Defence for manpower
authorization has been duly approved by COSC, the same is pending
with another Division of the Ministry of Defence  i.e. Finance
Division which is a clear case of bureaucratic delays. Taking so much
of time in examination of the report by Finance Division also shows
efficiency level of the Ministry of Defence in a very poor light. The
Ministry’s reply shows that no serious action has been taken on the
recommendations of the Committee. The Committee, therefore, desire
that immediate steps should be taken to improve efficiency in the
Ministry of Defence. The Committee are of the considered view that
there are several critical areas in the AFMS where there is immediate
requirement of trained manpower, Doctors and Specialists in the
absence of which the Armed Forces personnel are bound to suffer
a lot. The Committee are totally dissatisfied with the present pace
of implementation and therefore strongly reiterate that the Ministry
should intensify their efforts to augment the existing manpower of
the AFMS and go for phase-wise implementation of the Committee’s
recommendations in a time-bound manner. The Committee also wish
to be apprised of the constraints, if any, being faced by the Ministry
in this regard. The Ministry should also give status of implementation
periodically to this Committee.
AFMC – DEEMED UNIVERSITY
Recommendation Para No. 1.6.6
47. The Committee had recommended that the Armed Forces
Medical College should be converted into deemed university and all
the training courses should be brought under its umbrella. Besides
helping in having uniform standards for various training courses, this
would facilitate in getting necessary recognition for various courses.
48. The Ministry, in their action taken reply, have stated:
“Further to the reply given earlier, it is submitted that the proposal
for converting AFMC, Pune, into a “Deemed University” is under
examination of the Government. As per guidelines for considering
a proposal for declaring an institution as “Deemed University”

16
under section 3 of the UGC Act, one of the requirements is that
“the institution should be registered under the Societies Registration
Act or Public Trust Act and should formulate a Memorandum of
Association and Rules based on the Model prescribed by the UGC”.
The proposal for converting AFMC Pune into a “Deemed
University” in relaxation of above referred guidelines, has since
been forwarded to the Ministry of Human Resources Development.
That Ministry has referred the matter to UGC for their
recommendations/comments”.
49. During presentation, a representative of the Ministry of Defence
stated the latest status of implementation of this recommendation as
under:
“The proposal for AFMC being given the status of deemed
university was not agreed to by UGC. Proposal for seeking
relaxation from forming into a society has been referred to the
Ministry of Human Resource Development. UGC had not agreed
to this saying that they should be converted into a society”.
50. The Defence Secretary endorsed the recommendation of the
Committee as under:
“One thing I would like to humbly point out is that AFMC, Pune
is one of the medical colleges in the country today. So, we do not
want to do something by which it will come down. It is a
professional advice which the Armed Forces Medical Service will
have to take if they want to make it into a society”.
Comments of the Committee
51.  The Committee are totally dissatisfied with the bureaucratic
reply of the Ministry that they are facing several constraints in
according the status of deemed university to AFMC. The Committee
note that the UGC has its own criteria to award such status subject
to fulfillment of certain conditions and, therefore, referring this matter
to the Ministry of HRD for relaxation of certain rules, is
unnecessarily a wastage of time as the same will hardly serve any
purpose in this connection. The Committee further note that for
granting the status of deemed university to AFMC, the institution
has to be converted into a society under Societies Registration Act,
1860. The Committee feel that conversion of AFMC into a society
will not degrade the institution but rather it will empower the
Government to make it a truly professional institution. The
Committee feel that after getting this status, the AFMC will be

17
enjoying immense facilities and will be in a position to offer several
courses of medical science, biotechnology, etc. without any need to
seek permission from the Medical Council of India. It would further
strengthen and boost the academic excellence of the institution. In
this regard, the Committee wish to mention that a number of
organisations have deemed university. The Committee desire that
the Ministry should make study of the pattern of the deemed
university being followed by the other organisations. The Committee
further desire to reiterate that the Ministry should endeavour to
convert the AFMC into a society on priority basis and take concerted
steps to get the status of deemed university by amending rules, etc.,
if need be. The Committee also desire that Raksha Mantri should
be appointed as the Chancellor and DGAFMS as the Vice-Chancellor
of the Deemed University by designation.
The Committee desire that the whole matter be examined with
an open mind and AFMC should be given ‘deemed university’ status
at the earliest.
STRESS MANAGEMENT
(Recommendation Para No. 1.7 and 5.28)
Recommendation Para No. 1.7
52. The Committee had recommended that there was an imperative
need for regular lectures and exercise on yoga techniques in order to
de-stress our Jawans in field units. Immediate steps might be initiated
in this direction.
53. The Ministry in their action taken reply have stated:
“This is already under implementation in various units especially
in Northern and North Eastern Command and the same will be
gradually extended to all the units in the Armed Forces”.
Recommendation Para No. 5.28
54. The Committee had noted with concern that there had been
substantial increase in stress environment leading to psychological
problems for Armed Forces Personnel. There had been increasing
reports in media where soldiers, unable to bear the highly stressed
working atmosphere, had taken extreme step of committing suicide/
attacking their officers. The troops particularly those stationed in border
areas experience loneliness and anxiety and needed proper professional
counselling to de-stress themselves. The Committee, therefore, felt that

18
it was imperative that these troops should not only be regularly given
lectures on peace and mental relaxation through yoga techniques/
mediation but they should also have easy access to counselors in case
of need. The Committee, therefore, recommended the Ministry to
seriously examine the issue and post doctors counsellors specializing
in this area, particularly in the field units. The Committee also desired
that there should be proper study of reasons responsible for creation
of stress and feedback received from it should be given to the doctors
for utilisation thereof in the treatment of such patients”.
55. The Ministry in their action taken reply have stated:
“Some incidents of stress in the personnel of forces mostly caused
due to their personal matters have come to notice. Some of the
measures adopted by the forces in this regard are:
(i) Approval has been accorded for appointment of
88 psychological councellors on contract basis for initial
period of 2 years. DGAFMS has been asked to work out
modalities for engagement of the psychological councellors.
(ii) Augmentation of two Psychiatric centers one each in the
Northern & Eastern sectors in the insurgency affected areas
has been undertaken. Additional Psychiatrists have been
provided. Psychiatrists as per authorization have been posted
to similar high pressure stations.
(iii) Teams of Psychiatrists and Preventive Social Medicine [PSM]
Specialists have conducted seminars and lectures at
Division/Counter Insurgency Forces HQrs levels for Senior/
Staff Officers/Commanding Officers. This was followed by
training seminars for Assistant Directors Medical Service/
Deputy Assistants Director of Health.
(iv) Personnel deployed in sensitive/stressful environment are
being granted regular & frequent spells of leave & are being
turned over/ rotated regularly. All personnel returning to
unit after leave are interviewed & medically examined by
Regimental Medical Officer. Any stress marker is looked for
and motivational talk rendered to all.
(v) Training of Religious teachers/ Education Junior
Commissioned Officers/Non Commissioned Officers, other
Junior Commissioned Officers has begun in two appropriate
hospitals of the Command. Those trained are being termed
as mentors and they will act as peer group leaders in their
respective units.

19
(vi) Seminars for training of officers in stress management are
planned in collaboration with Defence Institute of
Psychological Research (DIPR).
(vii) Yoga Training has been incorporated in Air Force fitness
programmes launched at many Air Force stations. In
collaboration with Defence Institute of Physiology and Allied
Sciences, yoga training is being planned at two training
institutes to the cadets and trainees who will in turn
propagate such training to others when posted out.
(viii) DIPR has recently conducted two studies in relation to
factors leading to psychological problems in Armed Forces
personnel serving in counter insurgency areas in Northern
and Eastern Command. Important recommendations based
on the studies are as follows:
(a) Sensitising the leadership
(b) Enhancing leadership qualities among junior officers and
Junior Commissioned Officers (JCOs)
(c) Rationalizing grant of leave
(d) Rest and recuperation
(e) Improving organizational climate
(f) Control the zero-error syndrome
(g) Improved management of manpower
(h) Education and awareness
(i) Improved training
(j) Improving selection of soldiers
(k) Provision of basic facilities
(l) Training of religious teachers
(m) Psychological indoctrination
(ix) Based on above recommendations action is being taken with
emphasis on the following measures:
(a) Promptly attending to grievances by interaction between
junior leaders and other personnel.
(b) Counselling of persons at higher risk
(c)  Training capsules in relaxation exercises including yoga
(d) Training of doctors and junior leaders by service
psychiatrists

20
(e) Frequent spells of leave and rotation of individuals
(f) 50 psychological counsellors have been trained through
3 courses at Base Hospital, Delhi Cantonment, Command
Hospital (Eastern Command) Kolkata and Command
Hospital (Northern Command), C/o 56 Army Post Office
as a part of combating effects of stress. These counsellors
have been trained to identify ‘high risk’ personnel to
provide timely treatment and thus avoid loss of trained
manpower. Expertise of DIPR has been incorporated in
this venture. The counsellors are being made available
to assist commanders and commanding officers”.
56.  During oral evidence, a representative of the Ministry of
Defence elaborated the issue of suicide cases in the Armed Forces as
under:
“As far as the number of suicides of last year and this year are
concerned, last year we had 126 cases and this year we had
57 cases so far. Last year, at the end of the year, in the month of
November we instituted a study by the Defence Institute of
Psychological Research. The officer who conducted the study,
Dr. Manas Mandal is sitting here. He had recommended certain
steps to be implemented. He had gone across into the Northern
Region and the Eastern Region, interacted with the soldiers and
the officers, and he had given certain recommendations which have
been implemented. One of the major causes which came out in his
Report was concerning the domestic problem of the soldier which
he is not able to at times cope with it. We are continuing that. We
have educated people, we have sensitized the environment, our
commanders and junior leaders to try and identify such men who
are depressed or who are not behaving in their normal pattern.
We have trained 50 junior commissioned officers as psychologists.
They have undergone three months training. They have now spread
out all over the region in the Northern and the Eastern Regions,
and we are training more people. In our courses also, we have
introduced an element of stress training more people. In our courses
also, we have introduced an element of stress management for the
junior leaders to identify. We have set up Committees at all levels,
that is at the Brigade, Division, Corp and Command levels”.
Comments of the Committee
57. The Committee note that the Ministry of Defence have taken
several measures to address the issue of stress management in the

21
Armed Forces. Despite that, the Committee observe that numerous
suicide cases are still taking place in the forces and the killing of
senior officers by their subordinates is equally prevalent. The
Committee take serious view of these incidents which are reported
very frequently in the newspapers. During the last year alone,
126 suicide cases were reported and this year, 57 cases have so far
come to light. The Committee feel that the measures enunciated by
the Ministry to check this alarming trend are absolutely misleading
and are just on the paper. Had these measures been implemented in
true spirit, the stress level of the personnel would have definitely
come down and the figures must have been otherwise. The
Committee also note that the Defence Institute of Psychological
Research (DIPR) has conducted a study to go into the reasons for
suicides. The Committee strongly feel that mere conducting a study
and suggesting a series of measures will not serve any meaningful
purpose unless the Ministry focus on the implementation of the
recommendations of the report. The Committee also desire to have
a copy of the report of DIPR. For long term solution of this problem,
the Committee recommend that Ministry should undertake a research
work on the issue so as to arrest this alarming trend of suicide and
killing. The Committee feel that most of the suicide cases due to
social/criminal/civil cases pending against the Defence personnel. The
Committee are of the view that the existing set-up to address the
stress problems of Jawans and Officers have not been able to yield
desired results. In this connection, the Committee desire that there
should be a judicious set-up in the Armed Forces where personal
complaints of the members of Armed Forces can be handled through
interaction with civil authorities. The personnel should also be
informed of the action taken on their complaints. The Committee
also feel that the administrative set-up should also address the
continuous social changes taking place in the society and the resultant
effects in the Armed Forces. The Committee further desire that the
Ministry should make concerted efforts for completion of married
accommodation project for the Defence personnel so as to contain
their stress level to some extent.
58. The Committee also note that to address the needs of stress
management in the Armed Forces, Yoga Training is being imparted
in various units especially in Northern and North Eastern Command
and the same is proposed to be extended to the other Command
Zones also. The Committee desire the Ministry to furnish the detailed
action plan for the extension of Yoga Training facilities to all the
Commands. The Committee feel that in addition to the yoga training,
spiritual discourses can also be arranged to de-stress the troops. The

22
Committee also desire that there is a need to fix responsibility on
seniors when Army Jawans commit suicide so that suicides committed
on account of misbehaviour of the seniors can be checked.
The Committee also desire that Armed Forces Tribunal Bill, 2005
should also be enacted at the earliest to give fair and quick
mechanism to deal with their problems to give them relief.
UNIFIED TRAINING TO PERSON BELOW OFFICER RANK (PBOR)
Recommendation Para No. 2.13
59. The Committee noted that AFMS was an integrated tri service
organisation which was well coordinated during peace and war time.
All service personnel irrespective of their force could avail medical
care at all hospitals. The Committee had; however, been informed that
professional training of PBORs was carried out by the three services
separately. The Committee concurred with the suggestion of DGAFMS
that the same might be carried out under the aegis of DGAFMS in a
unified manner so that the level of technical knowledge of para
medicals of the three services were standardized. The Committee,
therefore, recommended that all the training institutes for training
various categories of PBORs be placed under DGAFMS where PBORs
from the three services could be imparted training in a unified manner.
This would enable DGAFMS to have proper monitoring of training
standards as per the requirements from time to time and ensure
accountability”.
60. The Ministry of Defence in their action taken reply have stated:
“To impart training to PBORs in a unified manner, the following
measures are being progressed:
(a) A common syllabus for paramedics is being formulated.
(b) Efforts are being made to get the specialized training courses
presently being conducted in the AFMS, recognized/affiliated
with the local Universities/statutory bodies;
(c) Expediting commencement of the Paramedics Academy at
Lucknow, in the vicinity of AMC Centre and School with
affiliation of the University;
(d) After formulating the common training syllabus, instructors
from three medical services will be cross-posted between
the training institutions of Army, Navy and Air Force, in
order to bring in standardization and uniformity in the
methods of instructions/training.

23
The issue of placing the training institutions for training of various
categories of PBOR in AFMS under DGAFMS, is, however, under
examination of the Government”.
61. The Ministry have further furnished the latest status, during
oral evidence, as under:
“While pacing of all training institutions under DGAFMS has not
been found advantageous by the tri-service committee of AFMS,
common syllabus is being formulated and a common pool of
instructors is being created.”
Comments of the Committee
62. The Committee note the measures being taken by the
Ministry to impart unified training to PBORs, which is being taken
up, at present, by the three Services separately. The Committee also
note the view of the Ministry of Defence that placing of all training
institutions under DGAFMS to enable unified training to various
categories of PBORs has not been found advantageous. The
Committee do not subscribe to this finding of the Ministry and,
therefore, strongly reiterate that the Ministry should place the training
institutions under DGAFMS so that the training standards could be
adequately monitored and the Services of all categories of PBORs
could be gainfully utilized at par, thereby creating a separate pool
of trained PBORs. The Committee feel that in view of rapid changes
and development in technology, there is corresponding changes in
the medical science as well. The Committee, therefore, desire that
there is a need to have joint command in the form of DGAFMS to
impart unified training to medical staff of the three Services together.
This will avoid duplicacy of training and works. The Committee
also desire that DGAFMS should also be given authority to have
administrative control over all medical personnel working in the
three Services. The Committee also desire that DGAFMS should open
the centres as per the requirement of the Services.
FILLING UP OF VACANCIES IN AFMS
(Recommendation Para Nos. 3.3 & 3.4 and 3.5)
Recommendation Para Nos. 3.3 and 3.4
63. The Committee were concerned to note the large scale vacancies
in various cadres of AFMS. The Committee had been informed that
vacancies arised due to normal releases of SSC officers, superannuation
and premature retirement of permanent Commission Officers.

24
64. The Committee desired that since most of these vacancies were
anticipated, timely action should be taken to fill up these vacancies. A
career profile in respect of officers should be prepared by the DGAFMS
so that a well planned recruitment programme could be worked out
and there was no deficiency in the sanctioned strength of officers at
any given point of time.
65. The Ministry of Defence in their action taken reply have stated:
“Recruitment has already been carried out thrice in the recent past
to limit the gap between the authorized and the held strength.
The manpower planning cell, in DGAFMS, now carries out an
analysis in advance, pertaining to normal releases of SSC Officers,
superannuation and premature retirement of PC Officers.
Accordingly, advertisements are issued well in advance of the
anticipated vacancies so that by the time the selected candidates
report for duty, there will be no deficiency against the sanctioned
strength”.
Recommendation Para No. 3.5
66. The Committee also desired that Govt. should review tenure
of Short Service Commission officers in AFMS who were released from
service at a young age. The Committee desired that SSC medical officers
and other staff should have minimum tenure of 15 years with 5 years’
extension so that experience and knowledge gained by the doctors,
technical and para medical staff could be gainfully utilised. The
Committee, further, desired that the retirement age of PG teachers be
increased to 65 years and that of nursing and technical para medical
staff be increased to 58 years. Govt. should also consider time bound
promotion policy for AFMS doctors and other staff so as to discourage
premature retirement/resignation of permanent commission officers.
The Committee were of the view that for the purpose, if necessary,
Govt. might amend the existing service rules.
67. The Ministry of Defence in their action taken reply have stated:
“The recommendation of the Standing Committee has been noted
andDGAFMS has been requested to submit a comprehensive
proposal in respectof SSC officers in AFMS.
Regarding time bound promotion policy for AFMS officers, it is
stated that in Phase-I of cadre restructuring proposal of AFMS, as
a consequence of the recommendations of A.V . Singh Committee
as applicable to the Army, Navy and Air Force, additional posts of

25
300 Colonel (& Equivalent) have been sanctioned in the selection
grade to be implemented over a period of 4 years in Army Medical
Corps. Also in Phase-I a time scale rank of Colonel (& Equivalent)
for those, who could not make to the selection grade has been
sanctioned at 24 years of service. In Phase-II additional selection
grade posts in the ranks of Brigadier, Major General & Lieutenant
General (& Equivalent) are under examination of the Government.
As far as, enhancement of retiring age for PG teachers to 65 years
as recommended by Standing Committee is concerned, a proposal
sent by DGAFMS is under consideration of the Government”.
68.  The present status of implementation, as furnished by the
Ministry of Defence, is as under:
“As regards the tenure of SSC officers in AFMS, a proposal for
enhancing the same from present 10 years to 14 years across the
board i.e. for AMC, ADC, MNS and AMC(NT) is being processed
for obtaining approval of the Cabinet.
Phase-II of cadre restructuring proposal of AFMS regarding
additional selection grade posts in the rank of Brigadiers, Major
General & Lieutenant General (& Equivalent) is also being
processed for obtaining Cabinet approval.
As far as, enhancement of retiring age for PG teachers to 65 years
as recommended by Standing Committee is concerned, it may be
stated that in AFMS there is no separate stream for PG teachers.
Enhancing age of retirement for some select few to 65 years may
have overall implications. Since it is a sensitive issue, the matter
is still under examination in consultation with DGAFMS.”
69. During Evidence, a representative of the Ministry of Defence
further stated as under:
“Now, we are having 240 vacancies. Now, interviews are going
on. Normally we select double the number. All of them do not
join. Some of them have already applied for PG and other exams.
Once they find better avenue outside, they do not come. The
compliance is about 60-70 per cent. All of them do not join. That
is why, we do it twice or thrice a year.
Armed Forces is not a very popular career as you all know.
Everyday, you would be reading about it in the papers also. This
is the same thing for the doctors too. Army becomes the second
choice. But still the difference is not critical; it is 10-15 per cent.”

26
Comments of the Committee
70. The Committee note that the Ministry have carried out
recruitment in the AFMS thrice in recent past to limit the gap
between the authorised and held strength. The Committee are,
however, surprised to note that despite all efforts, the Ministry are
unable to attract the young and talented doctors and youth to fill up
the vacancies. The Committee are deeply concerned to learn that the
Ministry themselves have admitted that the Armed Forces is not a
popular career and comes up as the second choice for the young
aspirants. The Committee strongly feel that it is the Ministry which
is accountable for making it an unpopular choice among the youth.
The Committee do not see any reason why comparable and attractive
pay packages may not be offered by the Government to the youth
joining the Defence Services, keeping in view, the market conditions
and remunerative perks and allowances being offered to them by
the private sector enterprises. The Committee, while examining the
Defence PSUs viz. HAL and BEL, also noticed the same trend of
attrition of engineers and scientists for the search of better pay
package. The Committee, therefore, recommend that the Government
should seriously consider the concern of the Committee and devise
attractive pay structure and allowances for the doctors so that they
do not think of pursuing a career outside the AFMS.
71. The Committee note that Short Service Commission (SSC)
doctors and staff are being given early-age retirement despite the
hard fact that the gap between authorised and held strength of AFMS
continues to remain. The Committee also reiterate the
recommendation regarding proposal for enhancing the tenure of SSC
officers of AFMS from 10 years across the board and retirement age
for P .G. Teachers be increased to 65 years and that of nursing and
Technical para medical staff to 58 years, which are under
consideration of the Government. In this connection, the Committee
also desire that till the matter is finalised, P .G. Teachers after
superannuation may be appointed as consultant, without uniform so
that their valuable experience & knowledge could be availed by the
AFMS. It will not only result in immense saving for the Government
but will also check the enormous expenditure on their training.
Moreover, the shortage of manpower will be simultaneously solved
and better and efficient services will be available to the Armed Forces
at all times. In view of the above, the Committee reiterate their
recommendations that Officers in the medical service must be allowed
to continue for more years than at present.

27
The Ministry should adopt a liberal view on the years of service
allowed to the Medical Personnel, particularly Short Service
Commission to meet the shortages.
MODERNISATION OF ARMED FORCES HOSPITALS
Recommendation Para Nos. 4.12 and 4.13
72. The Committee noted that AFMS had a total of 127 hospitals
in the three forces. The Army (R & R) Hospital had the state of art
facilities and had been recently upgraded with new facilities. Similarly,
Naval Hospital, Ashvini was also being modernized with latest facilities.
The Committee desired that DGAFMS should strive to had such state
of the art facilities initially at all the Command Hospitals and then
gradually at Zonal Hospitals so that the service personnel might get
best possible medical treatment at their vicinity. This in turn would
ease pressure on the Referral and Command hospitals.
73. The Committee noted that a modernisation plan of
Rs. 432 crore for upgradation of hospitals had been presented by
DGAFMS to Ministry of Defence and DGAFMS had been advised that
entire plan be made in Annual Acquisition Plans in the next 3-4 years
within the annual budget allocation for each year. The Committee
desired that the Ministry should give priority to the modernisation
and expansion place of AFMS and ensure that the requisite funds for
the plan were made available in the annual budgets and it was
implemented as per the schedule.
74. The Ministry of Defence in their action taken reply have stated:
“The modernisation plan in respect of Armed Forces hospitals,
with a view to have standardized state of the art facilities, initially
at the Command Hospitals/Zonal Hospitals, is already under
phased implementation as part of the Annual Acquisition plans.
Gradually the extension of state of the art facilities will be carried
out at other hospitals in a phased manner.
The Annual Acquisition Plan for 2006-2007 is already in advanced
stage of implementation. Annual Acquisition Plan for 2007-2008
has also been approved by the Government.
Out of the Budget Allocation of Rs. 93.00 Crores (modified
appropriation) under Capital Head during 2006-07, Rs. 109.95 crores
was spent upto 28.3.2007. Under the Revenue Head,
against allocation of Rs. 343.50 crores (modified appropriation),

28
Rs. 361.46 crores was expended upto 28.3.2007. The Budget Estimates
for the year 2007-08 under Capital Head is Rs. 100.00 crores and under
Revenue Head is Rs. 345.50 crores.
Comments of the Committee
75. The Committee had recommended for the modernisation,
upgradation and creation of state-of-the-art facilities in the AFMS
Hospitals at various levels. The Ministry, in their Action Taken Reply,
have given a very vague picture of their modernisation efforts. The
Committee fail to understand as to how much amount of funds is
proposed to be spent and on what specific structures as part of
modernisation. The Committee, therefore, desire that the Ministry
should furnish detailed modernisation plan inclusive of total
expenditure incurred in each year, schedule of expenditure in the
coming years and improvements made over the existing facilities in
the Hospitals.
76. The Committee, during their visit to Jammu, had expressed
deep concern for the need of upgradation of border hospitals. The
Committee feel that in the border areas, the officers and jawans
have to fly to distant places in order to avail adequate medical
services. Therefore, the Committee desire that the Ministry should
pay sufficient attention on the Modernisation and Upgradation of
border hospitals also.
CONSTRUCTION OF NEW HOSPITAL BUILDINGS
Recommendation Para No. 4.15
77. The Committee further noted that some Military Hospitals and
Air Force Command Hospital at Bangalore were housed in old
buildings of the British times. A plan for construction of new buildings
was under consideration of Govt. The Committee desired the Govt. to
expedite the approval of the same and allocate requisite fund to replace
the old buildings with Multi-speciality Hospital complex before any
untoward incident takes place.
78. The Ministry of Defence in their action taken reply have
stated:
“For modernization of the Armed Forces Hospitals, DGAFMS has
been asked to submit a proposal for allocation of dedicated annual
funds for major work plan. A comprehensive proposal for
construction of 54 hospitals at an estimated cost of Rs. 2960.61 crores

29
is already under consideration of the Government. Regarding the
modernisation of Command Hospital (Air Force), Bangalore, it is
stated that cost of the project, based on Standard Schedule of Rates
(SSR) 1996, was Rs. 283.75 crores inclusive of cost of medical
equipment of Rs 62.50 crores. However, the cost estimates are being
revised now based on SSR 2004 by the Service Headquarters. Once
the revised cost estimates are finalized, appropriate approvals will
be obtained”.
Comments of the Committee
79. The Committee note that a comprehensive proposal for
construction of 54 hospitals is under consideration of the
Government. The Committee desire the Ministry to furnish the
location-wise list of these hospitals and schedule of their construction.
80. The Committee are constrained to note that even after the
lapse of almost a year since the report was presented to Parliament,
the revised cost estimates for the modernisation of the Air Force
Command Hospital, Bangalore are still being finalised, which is
reflective of the dilatory attitude and intention of the Ministry. The
Committee are unhappy to note that the said Command Hospital is
still housed in Old Buildings of the British times and the Ministry
are indifferent to it. The Committee, therefore, strongly reiterate that
the Ministry should take immediate steps for the relocation of the
Command Hospital, Bangalore. The Committee desire that while
opening the new hospitals, proper weightage should be given to the
hilly and sensitive border areas.
ESTABLISHMENT OF NEURO SURGICAL CENTRES FOR AIR FORCE
Recommendation Para No. 5.24
81. The Committee desired that the two neurosurgical centres as
projected in the proposed Peace Establishment should be set up
urgently.
82. The Ministry of Defence in their action taken reply have
stated:
“Establishment of Neurological Centre at 5 AF Hospital Jorhat and
7 AF Hospital Kanpur is being processed at the level of Air
Headquarters for implementation”.

30
Comments of the Committee
83. The Committee note that the setting up of two neurological
centres for Air Force Personnel is being processed at the level of Air
Headquarters for implementation. The Committee feel that besides
Air Force Personnel, there are Naval Personnel who have to serve in
the Ships and Submarines for the months together and in the process
their nervous system gets badly affected. In view of this, the
Committee desire that such neurological centres should also be
established for Navy Personnel. The Committee wish to be apprised
of the progress made in this regard. The same facilities for Army
personnel in difficult areas should also be provided.
84. The Committee, during their visit to Guwahati in May - June
2007, had observed that the serving defence personnel have to make
advance cash payment to the hospitals to avail the private hospital
facilities in critical conditions. The Committee feel that the personnel
may be in dire need of emergency treatment but may not be having
the required sum to avail the treatment facility. The Committee take
a very serious view of this and strongly desire that the Ministry
should make provisions for the serving personnel to avail all medical
facilities without any advance payment of expenditure to be incurred
on the treatment and should be given same facilities as are available
to the retired personnel.
INDIAN SYSTEM OF MEDICINE
Recommendation Para Nos. 5.33 and 5.34
85. The Committee were constrained to note that AFMS did not
have any hospitals and education system which were based on Indian
system of medicine and homeopathy which was being used worldwide.
The Indian systems viz. Ayurvedic, Unani, Siddha etc were proven
systems being practiced since ancient times. Though they might not
cater to the wartime requirements, these systems were very effective
in some areas and service personnel had great faith in them.
86. The Committee therefore desired that Government should
examine the feasibility of introducing the Indian system of medicine
and homeopathy in various hospitals alongwith allopathic system for
service personnel.
87. The Ministry of Defence in their action taken reply have stated:
“In reply to OM No. 16/2/COD/2007 dated 2nd Feb., 2007 from
the Standing Committee on this issue, the Standing Committee

31
has already been informed as under:
The Medical Services Advisory Committee (MSAC), the Principal
Personnel Officers Committee (PPOC) and the Chiefs of Staff
Committee (COSC) gave the following reasons for non-acceptance
of Indian System of Medicine in Armed forces hospitals:—
(a) The option of permitting an individual to choose the system
of medicine he desires is not in the interest and ethos of a
disciplined force like the Armed Forces, where sometimes
strict measures have to be enforced not only to keep an
individual fighting fit at all times but also to ensure that a
person is free from any infectious disease which may
jeopardize the health and well being of his fellow
combatants.
(b) The AFMS who are accountable for providing health services
to the Armed Forces personnel are not qualified to practice
the Ayurvedic system and cannot refer any individual or
his dependents for same, without raising Ethical and Legal
issues.
(c) There cannot be any cross-references between these two
systems of medicine that would be detrimental to the health
of troops & families.
(d) The AFMS has in existence a very stringent system of
medical audit and the Ayurvedic system cannot lend itself
to such an audit.
(e) Drug interactions between the Allopathic system of medicine
currently practiced in Armed Forces and Indian Systems of
medicine have not been largely studied.
(f) Wartime medical and surgical requirements are the pivot
on which the structure of AFMS revolve and their scales of
manpower, infrastructure and equipment are based on
catering to this need. The Indian System of Medicine would
not be able to cater to these requirements and neither would
they be able to handle the emergencies in modern medicare
such as Myocardial infarction, arrythmias, cardiac arrest,
intestinal obstruction, head injuries, polytrauma, renal failure
etc which are the primary role of any allopathic physician
or surgical specialist.
Comments of the Committee
88. The Committee note the arguments of the Ministry of
Defence in support of continuing with allopathic system of treatment

32
citing that the traditional Indian system of Medicines i.e. Ayurveda,
Unani, Siddha, etc. is not in the interest and ethos of a disciplined
force like the Armed Forces and also that the same will not meet
the surgical requirements. The Committee are not convinced with
the reasons advanced by the Ministry and feel that any system of
treatment, be it allopathic or any other, has nothing to do with ethos
of an individual. So far as surgical requirements of the forces are
concerned, the Service personnel do not require on daily basis. There
are several diseases which do not involve surgical treatment. In
addition to it, there are family members and kids of the Defence
Personnel who may be benefited by the traditional systems of
Medicine. In view of the above, the Committee desire that the AFMS
should tie up with DGHS (Civil) to develop the necessary
infrastructure at the Command and base Hospitals of the Armed
Forces to create the facilities of traditional Indian System of
Medicines/Homeopathic/Unani so that individual patients have
options to get himself treated under any system of medicines.
INCREASING UG & PG SEATS IN AFMC
(Recommendation Para Nos. 7.11 and 7.12)
Recommendation Para No. 7.11
89. The Committee noted that AFMC imparts undergraduate
training with a total intake of 130 students (105 boys, 25 girls). The
Committee felt that in view of the large campus of AFMC and available
infrastructure, the Govt. should consider augmentation of Under
Graduates seats in AFMC to 200 to meet the big demand for the
course. The Committee, therefore, desired that a proposal in this regard
might be put to MCI for consideration”.
90. The Ministry of Defence in their action taken reply have stated:
“The recommendation of the Committee has been noted. Since
increase of Under Graduate seats in AFMC, Pune to 200 would
involve augmentation of infrastructure, employment of additional
faculty etc, AFMC, Pune has been advised to furnish detailed
proposal including financial implications”.
91. The Ministry have further informed the Committee as under :
“Government has agreed ‘in principle’ to enhance MBBS seats in
AFMC, Pune to 200. DGAFMS has been asked to take up the
matter with MCI for increase of the seats in AFMC, Pune”.

33
Recommendation Para No. 7.12
92. The Committee further desired that Govt. should increase the
Post Graduate and super specialisation seats in various disciplines so
that more medical officers of AFMS may acquire specialisation. Besides
contributing to AFMS they would have better job prospects when
released from defence services.
The Ministry of Defence in their action taken reply have stated :
“Presently following Post Graduate (PG) seats are available in
AFMS Institutions
(i) Medical Council of India (MCI) recognized -   150
(ii) Only University recognized -    30
(iii) Diplomate National Board (DNB)
About 100 PG/Superspeciality seats are available at various AFMS
Institutes. Further, application for reorganization of 50 more seats
has been submitted to the National Board Examination (NBE).
These are sufficient to meet current requirement of AFMS”.
Comments of the Committee
93. The Committee note that the Government has given ‘In-
principle’ approval to enhance MBBS seats in AFMC, Pune to 200.
However, the same is yet to be approved by the Medical Council of
India (MCI) subject to fulfilment of certain conditions. The
Committee also note that at the PG level only 100 seats are available
at various AFMS institutes. The Committee feel that enhancing the
seats at under-graduate and post-graduate level requires augmentation
of infrastructure, employment of additional faculty, etc. and also
financial implications. The Committee, therefore, desire that the
Ministry should take concerted action in this regard so that more
and more number of aspirants go through the MBBS course and
thereafter attain expertise/specialities in various disciplines.
PLACING OF MEDICAL LIFE SCIENCE RESEARCH UNDER DGAFMS
Recommendation Para No. 8.6
94. The Committee appreciated the Medical Research work being
done by the DRDO/DGAFMS and procedure for selection of research

34
projects and number of Indian Research Papers published in
International Journals. The Committee noted that all medical research
in Armed Forces was carried out under the aegis of Defence Research
and Development Organisation. The Medical Research Committee also
included senior scientists of DRDO. The Committee were of the view
that medical and life science research should not be placed under
DRDO as it was entirely different from strategic and Defence Research
work. DRDO should concentrate on Research work pertaining to
Defence Strategic Industry only and medical and life science research
work should be gradually detached from the purview of the DRDO.
This way strength of the DRDO and AFMS would increase in their
specialized and independent field.
95. The Ministry of Defence in their action taken reply have stated:
“The Life Sciences laboratories of DRDO are unique in that they
are the only laboratories in the country operating in their assigned
fields of expertise with the avowed aim of enhancing the
operational efficiency of the armed forces. This encompasses human
factors research related to selection of manpower, weapons
development and manual operations, evaluation of occupational
hazards and safety of weapon systems developed by DRDO etc.
These laboratories are the only laboratories addressing the various
problems being faced by the Indian troops which operate in highly
challenging and hostile environments, like high altitudes, desert
regions, under-water operations, aerospace and toxic and noisy
environments, like engine rooms of ships, aircrafts, tanks etc. No
other agency in the country deals with such issues, which are
paramount for the safety and efficiency of our armed forces. The
research work is targeted to develop technical know-how, impart
necessary training, suggest remedial/preventive measure and to
design and develop useful products to mitigate hazardous effects
of extreme environments. The ergonomics related research ensures
human factor integration in all R&D work of other system
laboratories in DRDO in respect of weapon systems, workstations
and military vehicles. These aspects of research work are beyond
the boundaries as well as capabilities of medical entities and other
agencies.
In the past an experiment has been tried, wherein the biomedical
laboratories were placed under the command and control of the
Director General Armed Forces Medical Services (DGAFMS) (during
1976-1979). However, this experiment failed to yield appreciable
results and the laboratories reverted back to DRDO. Research

35
requires sustained efforts and a continuity to be maintained. The
continuity in the Services is affected due to frequent postings
resulting disruptions in the flow of research work.
Similarly, the agricultural research laboratories were initially under
the purview of the Indian Council of Agriculture Research (ICAR)
in the Ministry of Agriculture for a few years. They had to be
finally transferred to the DRDO as no R&D work could be
undertaken at these remote laboratories at all during this period.
The existing multi-disciplinary laboratories have proven their
importance to the Armed Forces, therefore it would not be desirable
to detach them from DRDO”.
Comments of the Committee
96. The Committee are not satisfied with the arguments advanced
by the Ministry of Defence in support of continuing the Medical
Life Science Research under DRDO. The Committee note that an
experiment of placing the Life Science Research under DGAFMS
had been carried out way back in 1976, which could not be successful
and the same was again reverted to DRDO. The Committee do not
concur with the logic of the Ministry that the DGAFMS is not
capable to undertake Life Science Research in fulfilment of the
extremely tough requirements of the Armed Forces. The Committee,
therefore, reiterate that DRDO should detach itself from the Life
Science Research and hand over the entire responsibility relating
thereto to the DGAFMS. The DRDO should concentrate on research
work pertaining to Defence Strategic Industry only and play the
role of facilitator for AFMS in this regard. The Committee desire to
be apprised of the progress made by the Government in this regard.
M.Sc. NURSING AT AFMC
Recommendation Para Nos. 9.3 and 9.4
97. The Committee noted that there was one college of Nursing at
AFMC Pune and seven schools of Nursing in AFMS. The Indian
Nursing Council (INC) had recommended that all the schools of
nursing might be converted into college of nursing by 2010. The
Committee while appreciating the move desired that diploma courses
conducted by the schools should not be discontinued. The Committee
were given to understand that training being imparted in College of
Nursing and schools was very effective and of a very high professional
caliber. The Committee, however, were constrained to note that at

36
present no post graduate degree in nursing was being awarded by
AFMS and there is no proposal at present for the same.
98. The Committee also desired that Government should make
sincere efforts to introduce a post graduate degree course in the College
of Nursing. The Committee would like to be apprised of the steps
taken in this regard.
99. The Ministry of Defence in their action taken reply have stated:
“As far as continuation of the seven schools of nursing, which
conduct Diploma Courses in Nursing, is concerned the Indian
Nursing Council has informed vide their Letter No.1-5/GB-CIR/
2005-INC dated 2.5.2006 that it has been resolved that upgradation
of School of Nursing (GNM) to College of Nursing to be kept in
abeyance, keeping in view the expansion of health sector and
requirement of large number of nurses in National Rural Health
Mission (NRHM). In view of this, the existing schools of Nursing
in AFMS will continue to function till further order.
Regarding the recommendation to start Post-graduate Degree
Course, it is stated that ‘In-principle’ approval has been granted to
start M.Sc. (Nursing) at College of Nursing AFMC, Pune in the
subject of Medical Surgical Nursing, Obstetrics and Gynaecological
Nursing, Community Health Nursing & Paediatric Nursing and
Service HQrs have been asked to obtain approval/clearance from
concerned agencies required to start M.Sc. (Nursing) course at
AFMC, Pune”.
Comments of the Committee
100. The Committee note that the Ministry of Defence have not
agreed to convert the existing nursing schools into the college of
nursing. The Committee, had recommended for this conversion,
keeping in view the recommendation of the Indian Nursing Council.
The Committee feel that the upgradation of the schools of nursing
to college of nursing is urgent as the same will bring about a
considerable change in its functioning and lead to contribute a very
high professional caliber of the institution. The Committee, therefore,
desire that the Ministry should re-look into the matter and furnish
the status report in this regard.
101. The Committee also note that ‘In-principle’ approval has
been taken by the Ministry to start post-graduate degree course in
Nursing. However, the Service Headquarters are yet to obtain

37
approval/clearance to start the said programme at AFMC, Pune. The
Committee desire that even after the lapse of almost a year since
the report was presented to Parliament, the necessary formalities
have not yet been completed which show the Ministry’s efficiency
in a poor light. The Committee, therefore, strongly reiterate that the
Ministry should take up the matter on priority basis and implement
the same at the earliest in a time-bound manner.
UTILISATION OF THE SERVICES OF SPECIALISTS IN AFMS AFTER
THEIR RETIREMENT
Recommendation Para No. 9.9
102. The Committee noted that at present Armed Forces’ para
medical personnel being imparted training as per requirement of the
three services. Though the curriculum was the same as per the
corresponding civilian medical establishment, these courses had not
been recognised with the result that para medical staff were deprived
of getting benefits of their training post retirement as ex-servicemen.
The Committee, therefore, strongly desired that Govt. should take up
the matter at the highest level including the University Grants
Commission to convert Armed Forces Medical College and the relevant
institutions into a deemed university and bring all training courses
under its umbrella so that the same get recognition. The Committee
also desire that services of specialists and experts in the field of medical
science might be utilised by AFMS, even after their retirement, on
contract basis. For this purpose, if necessary, Govt. might amend the
existing rules framed under the relevant Act”.
103. The Ministry of Defence in their action taken reply have
stated:—
“The proposal of DGAFMS for converting AFMC, Pune, into a
“Deemed University” is under examination of the Government. As
per guidelines for considering a proposal for declaring an institution
as “Deemed University” under section 3 of the UGC Act, one of
the requirements is that “the institution should be registered under
the Societies Registration Act or Public Trust Act and should
formulate a Memorandum of Association and Rules based on the
Model prescribed by the UGC”. The proposal for converting AFMC
Pune into a “Deemed University” in relaxation of above referred
guidelines, has since been forwarded to the Ministry of Human
Resource Development. That Ministry has referred the matter to
UGC for their recommendations/comments.

38
Regarding utilization of services of specialists and experts in the
field of medical science after their retirement, it is submitted that
officers, who are willing and volunteer to serve in the Armed
Forces Medical Services (AFMS) are eligible for re-employment in
the AFMS subject to the following conditions:—
(a) Fulfilling of eligibility criteria in terms of record of service,
medical category and disciplinary status.
(b) Overall deficiency in the AFMS.
(c) Initial re-employment for two years and thereafter extendable
by one year upto the age limit of sixty years.
In addition retired AFMS officers are also eligible for grant of the
status of Honorary Consultant/Advisors to the AFMS subject to
the following conditions:—
(a) Willingness to provide services free of cost.
(b) Recommendations of the concerned hospitals and
intermediary authorities.
(c) A tenure of three years, which is extendable upto the age
limit of 65 years”.
Comments of the Committee
104. The Committee note that the Ministry of Defence have set
out certain eligibility conditions for the utilisation of the Services of
retired specialists. The Committee, however, note that there are a
few such conditions viz. willingness to provide services free of cost,
recommendations of the concerned Hospitals and intermediary
authorities, etc. which are absolutely irrelevant in the context of the
existing market conditions. The trained and experienced people who
have retired from the Medical Services of the Armed Forces have
immense scope in the private sector. So, the Committee do not see
any reason why these people will opt for joining the Armed Forces
on the irrelevant conditions. The Committee, therefore, strongly desire
that the Ministry should prepare attractive remunerations and pay
packages for the retired specialists so as to attract them to work for
Armed Forces. This would make available the Services of most
experienced and trained medical officers to the Armed Forces
personnel on the one hand; whereas on the other, it would generate
huge saving for the Government and also minimize the gap between
authorised and held strength of the AFMS.

39
Regarding the status of ‘deemed university’ to the AFMC, please
refer to the recommendation of the Committee in this report under
title ‘AFMC-Deemed University’.
EX-SERVICEMEN CONTRIBUTORY HEALTH SCHEME (ECHS)
Recommendation Para Nos. 12.5 and 12.6
105. The Committee were constrained to note that the ECHS
scheme was applicable to pensioners/family pensioners only. The
committee desired that coverage of ECHS should be expanded to
include Ex-servicemen with a stipulated minimum period of service
under its purview. Since the ECHS was a contributory scheme, the
Committee failed to understand as to why this scheme was not
extended to the service personnel who were discharged from the
Services for reasons beyond their control by accepting suitable
contribution from such personnel. Also families of the soldiers who
expired during the operations should be brought under the ECHS.
106. The Committee understood that the families/dependents of
the soldiers/officers who die of natural causes, like cardiac arrest, etc.
while on duty were not entitled for additional compensation and
medical facilities as paid during operations. The Committee were of
the view that such deaths should also be treated at par with death
during military operations and desired that rules might be suitably
amended so the families/dependents of deceased got all the facilities,
including ECHS.
107. The Committee also understood that there was a still a vast
number of Ex-servicemen across the country staying in remote and
interior areas and were not in a position to avail these ECHS facilities.
The Committee desired that the Polyclinic facilities should be set in
those areas on priority basis so as to benefit this section of
Ex-servicemen”.
108. The Ministry of Defence in their action taken reply have
stated:—
“The Ex-Servicemen Contributory Health Scheme (ECHS) was
sanctioned by the Government of India for providing
comprehensive medical care to the ex-servicemen, who are in
receipt of pension/family pension/disability pension and their
dependents. It is considered necessary to link eligibility to some
minimum service rendered. To be in receipt of pension is a
reasonable criteria in this regard. The non-pensioners are either

40
those, who left the military service voluntarily for their personal
reasons or those, who were removed as a result of departmental
action on disciplinary grounds. The Government does not favour
extending the scheme to non-pensioners due to above reasons and
because of wide ranging financial implications.
The war widows and the families/dependents of those soldiers,
who died in operations on military duties have already been
covered under ECHS as they are drawing pension. Moreover, the
Government has exempted the War Widows from payment of
contribution for becoming members of the scheme.
Death due to Heart attack/Natural causes both in operational areas
as well as in peace areas are examined with reference to duty
profile, posting profile history of disease etc. and held attributable/
non-attributable by the Medical Board accordingly.
The authorization of family pension and ex-gratia in both cases is
as under :—
Battle Casualty Physical Casualty held Physical Casualty held
attributable to Military non-attributable to
Service Military Service
Family
Pension
Ex-gratia
Liberalized Family
Pension equal to
pay drawn
Rs. 5 lakhs for
death in courses of
performance of
duty attributable to
Military Service,
acts of violence by
terrorists, antisocial
elements or due to
accidents.
Rs. 7.5 lakhs for
death occurring
during action
against militants,
terrorists, extre-
mists and during
border skirmishes.
Special Family Pension equal
to 60% of pay drawn
Rs. 5 lakhs for death
occurring due to accident in
course of performance of
duty
Ordinary Family Pension
equal to 30% of pay drawn
          N i l

41
Persons dying of natural causes are covered under physical casualty
attributable/non-attributable to Military Service depending upon
medical opinion.
At the time of introduction of the scheme, 227 ECHS polyclinics
had been sanctioned to be set up by 31st March, 2008 as per the
concentration of Ex-Servicemen pensioners population across the
length and breadth of the country. As of date, 225 polyclinics are
functional. The balance two are about to be operationalised and
thereafter, necessary need assessment will be carried out to identify
the areas not covered by ECHS facilities.
Thus all the areas are gradually being covered with opening of
polyclinics and empanelling private hospitals.”
Comments of the Committee
109. The Committee note that the Ministry of Defence are facing
constraints in extending the benefits of Ex-Servicemen Contributory
Health Scheme (ECHS) to the non-pensioners. The Committee had
specifically emphasised that there were several Service personnel
who were discharged from the Services for the reasons beyond their
control and, therefore, it was imminent to recognize their invaluable
contribution to the Services by way of extending ECHS facilities to
them and their family members. The Committee feel that the Service
personnel may die or injured due to several reasons like participation
in sports events, which may not be attributable to the duty profile
and posting profile of the Military service and, therefore, the
Government may find difficult to recognize them as Ex-Servicemen.
The Committee, therefore, strongly desire that the Ministry should
appropriately amend their existing rules in regard to definition of
Serviceman and Ex-Servicemen and suitably accommodate the
interests of families of those service personnel who lose their lives
for the reasons beyond their control. The Committee desire that these
Service personnel should be recognized as a special category of
Ex-servicemen.

CHAPTER II
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN
ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT
Recommendation (Para No. 1.7)
There is an imperative need for regular lectures and exercise on
yoga techniques in order to de-stress our Jawans in field units.
Immediate steps may be initiated in this direction.
Reply of the Government
This is already under implementation in various units especially
in Northern and North-Eastern Command and the same will be
gradually extended to all the units in the Armed Forces.
[Ministry of Defence OM No. H-11013/21/2006/D(Parl.)
dated 13.04.2007]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Paras 57 and 58 of Chapter-I)
Recommendation (Para No. 2.22)
The Committee note the substantial improvement in expenditure
of the allocated capital funds by AFMS in the last few years. The
Committee, however, desire that funds allocated under medical head
be used only for that purpose and should not be diverted/
re-appropriated to other heads.
Reply of the Government
In pursuance with the recommendations of the Committee it has
been decided that while approving the annual works plan for AFMS,
commensurate funds will also be earmarked in the Works budget of
the Services who will be advised accordingly for releasing of funds.
For purchase of equipment etc., separate funds are already being
allotted.
[Ministry of Defence OM No. H-11013/21/2006/D(Parl.)
dated 13.04.2007]
42

43
Recommendation (Para No. 3.16)
The Committee are further constrained to note that at present there
is no system of earmarking Govt. Married Accommodation for AFMS
officers. Only in certain stations earmarked accommodation exists for
certain specialist officers belonging to disciplines of surgery, medicine,
anesthesiology, obstetrics and Gynaecology. The Committee further note
the waiting time for accommodation for specialist officers in
metropolitan cities can be more than two years. Keeping in view their
service requirements which involve medical exigencies, the Committee
recommend that there should be separate pool with earmarked
accommodations for AFMS officers near the hospitals.
Reply of the Government
The provision already exists in Para 103(c) of Special Army Order
(SAO) 10/S/86, which is reproduced as under:—
“A General Officer Commanding in Chief (GOC-in-C) may at his
discretion reserve quarters for Officer Commanding Base or Army
Hospitals and for any specialists and consultants in Military or
Army Hospitals, whose services are required for attending to
emergency cases”.
2. Seeing the overall shortage of married accommodation that exists
today no change in present provisions is considered necessary. Also
with Married Accommodation Plan (MAP) Phases I and II which is
likely to be completed in near future, the waiting list in almost all
stations including Metros’ is likely to reduce considerably .
[Ministry of Defence OM No. H-11013/21/2006/D(Parl.)
dated 13.04.2007]
Recommendation (Para No. 3.17)
The Committee understand that investigations/enquiries against
the Medical Officers are often constituted under the purview of AFMS.
The Committee, in this regard, strongly desire that in the case of such
investigations against a lady officer in AFMS or any other Defence
Services, a lady member should be invariably appointed on the Board
of Enquiry to ensure equity and fair justice.
Reply of the Government
 As per the existing policy for all investigations, a court of inquiry,
consisting of a presiding officer and two to three members, is

44
constituted. The presiding officer so detailed is generally of a rank
senior to the person under investigation and the members detailed are
of equal rank/status.
2. DGAFMS has instructed all the units under him to ensure that
depending on availability of a woman officer in appropriate rank, in
any Court of enquiry/Investigation against a lady officer, member of
Military Nursing Service or lady civilian staff, a lady member should
be invariably appointed on the Board of Inquiry to ensure equity and
fair justice.
[Ministry of Defence OM No. H-11013/21/2006/D(Parl.)
dated 13.04.2007]
Recommendation (Para Nos. 4.12 and 4.13)
The Committee note that AFMS has a total of 127 hospitals in the
three forces. The Army (R&R) Hospital has the state-of-art facilities
and has been recently upgraded with new facilities. Similarly, Naval
Hospital, Ashvini is also being modernized with latest facilities. The
Committee desire that DGAFMS should strive to have such state-of-
the art facilities initially at all the Command Hospitals and then
gradually at Zonal Hospitals so that the service personnel may get
best possible medical treatment at their vicinity. This in turn will ease
pressure on the Referral and Command hospitals.
The Committee note that a modernisation plan of Rs 432 crore for
upgradation of hospitals has been presented by DGAFMS to Ministry
of Defence and DGAFMS has been advised that entire plan be made
in Annual Acquisition Plans in the next 3-4 years within the annual
budget allocation for each year. The Committee desire that the Ministry
should give priority to the modernisation and expansion place of AFMS
and ensure that the requisite funds for the plan are made available in
the annual budgets and it is implemented as per the schedule.
Reply of the Government
The modernisation plan in respect of Armed Forces hospitals, with
a view to have standardized state-of-the art facilities, initially at the
Command Hospitals/Zonal Hospitals, is already under phased
implementation as part of the Annual Acquisition plans. Gradually the
extension of state-of-the art facilities will be carried out at other
hospitals in a phased manner.
2. The Annual Acquisition Plan for 2006-07 is already in advanced
stage of implementation. Annual Acquisition Plan for 2007-2008 has
also been approved by the Government.

45
3. Out of the Budget Allocation of Rs. 93.00 crores (modified
appropriation) under Capital Head during 2006-07, Rs. 109.95 crores
was spent upto 28.3.2007. Under the Revenue Head, against allocation
of Rs. 343.50 crores (modified appropriation), Rs. 361.46 crores was
expended upto 28.3.2007. The Budget Estimates for the year 2007-08
under Capital Head is Rs. 100.00 crores and under Revenue Head is
Rs. 345.50 crores.
[Ministry of Defence OM No. H-11013/21/2006/D(Parl.)
dated 13.04.2007]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Paras 75 and 76 of Chapter-I)
Recommendation (Para No. 4.14)
The Committee note that the study on a review of medical
establishment and rationalization of medical cover during operations
has recommended new hospitals in border are Doda, Gopalpur and
Jaisalmer. The Committee desire that an early decision be taken in this
regard so that our forces and supporting organisations at the border
can be given proper medical care.
Reply of the Government
Sanction for establishment of 75 bedded Air Force Hospital at
Jaisalmer has already been granted and Board of Officers for works
services is in progress. Medical equipment as per scale have already
been authorised by the Office of DGAFMS. The manpower has been
arranged from existing resources.
2. The proposal for establishment of 49 bedded Military Hospital
(MH) at Doda by way of relocation of MH Dagshai is under
consideration of the Government. Regarding establishment of MH at
Gopalpur, a proposal has been approved by VCOAS by relocating MH
Avadi. VCOAS has been asked to expedite the matter.
[Ministry of Defence OM No. H-11013/21/2006/D(Parl.)
dated 13.04.2007]
Recommendation (Para No.4.16)
The Committee, further desire that the problems faced by our
Jawans at high altitude should be studied and requisite equipment/
facilities be made available to treat such illnesses on the spot at such

46
places. Also the proposed research centre at Leh to study all high
altitude illnesses to be expedited.
Reply of the Government
 Important research projects carried out for examining problems
faced by jawans at high altitude and actions taken thereon are indicated
below:—
Sl. Title Year Conclusions and Action taken
No. Recommendations
12 3 4 5
1. Medical problems 1991 Problems of High HAPO bags and HAPO
at high altitude Altitude Pulmonary chambers provided at
Oedema (HAPO) and high altitude for first aid
cerebral oedema and treatment of cases
identified
2. The Electrocardio- 1991 ECG changes were seen Tr oops are not kept at
gram in troops stationed for extreme altitudes for
[ECG] at extreme more than 12 weeks at more than 12 weeks
altitude extreme altitudes
(> 5,500 m)
3. Role of modulating 1997 Nitric oxide and oxygen Nitric oxide: oxygen
pulmonary hemod- mixture found to be mixture made available
ynamics in the definitely helpful in for use
treatment of high treatment of HAPO
altitude pulmonary
edema
4. High altitude 1996 Angiotersin Converting Drug included in
induced systemic Enzyme [ACE] inhibitors treatment
arterial hypertension are found to be the
drug of choice
5. Epidemiological 2000 Results suggest higher Maximum precautions
study to establish incidence in re-inductees taken for re-inductees in
whether re-inductees particular
to high altitude are
more prone to
pulmonary edema

47
 12 3 4 5
 6. A study to ascertain 2000 Various factors identified Tr oops being educated to
causative factors follow preventive measures
for cold injuries
in Siachen glacier/
high altitude and
suggest remedial
measures
 7. Assessment of 2001 The requirements of Necessary changes in
nutritional calories and nutrients rations made
requirements of at high altitude
Armed Forces estimated
personnel at
various conditions
of climate and
training
 8. A pilot study on 2001 Preliminary data on Lar ger studies being
molecular mechanisms populations susceptible contemplated
of high altitude to effects analysed
acclimatization by
differential gene
expression analysis
 9. Acclimatization along 2001 Incidence of HAPO high Halts were rescheduled
Manali-Patsio-Pang- in soldiers inducted in which has brought down
Leh Road this route the incidence of HAPO
10. Brain functions at 2002 The effects on sleep Has improved care and
high altitude with understood tr eatment of individuals
special reference with symptoms
to sleep architecture
11. Role of sildenafil 2003 Sildenafil found useful Being used in treatment
in the treatment of in treatment whenever indicated
HAPO
12. Review of 2003 Present acclimatization Acclimatization schedule
acclimatization schedule found to be validated
status at high appropriate
altitude with
special reference
to duration,
age and ethnicity

48
12 3 4 5
13. Field trials of 2004 Indigenous HAPO bag Being introduced for use
One-man found to be suitable
recompression for use
bag
14. Knowledge, attitude 2005 Most of the troops found Efforts are being made
and practices (KAP) to be adequately educated to improve KAP
of troops as regards
medical hazards at
high altitude and
extreme cold climate
15. Study of blood pro- 2005 Ongoing study which Ongoing study
coagulant and will highlight causes
anti-coagulant activity of thrombosis in certain
in high and extreme individuals at high
altitude in apparently altitude
healthy subjects
16. Evaluation of 2005 Ongoing project which Action, when results of
incidence and will show reasons for study are known
pathophysiology increased incidence of
of ocular surface certain eye conditions
disorders at high altitude
17. Introduction of yoga 2005 Ongoing project showing Yoga being inducted
in the Army at encouraging interim gradually for troops at
High Altitude results high altitude
18. Evaluation of Diamox 2005 Diamox found useful in More extensive studies
for the prophylaxis this preliminary study planned for finding
of Acute Mountain appropriate dose for
Sickness in rapid application
inductees to high
altitude
19. A study of 2007 Will enable in early New study
hemoglobin rends detection of cases with
in soldiers risk of thrombosis
exposed to high
altitude conditions
2. Medical equipment installed at high altitude areas include, CT
Scanner, Computerized ECG machine, Cardiac Monitor Defibrillator,
Nebuliser, Blood Storage Cabinet, Electric Insulating Blankets,

49
Hyperbaric Recompression Chamber, Portable X-Ray Machine 100 MA
and Field Sonography. In addition an oxygen generation plant is being
set up at Leh.
[Ministry of Defence OM No. H-11013/21/2006/D(Parl.)
dated 13.04.2007]
Recommendation (Para No. 4.17)
The Committee understand that some private organisations have
donated substantially for the setting up of facilities/modernisation at
the Army Hospitals. The Committee, therefore, recommend that these
organisations should be exempted from the deduction of Income-Tax
for the amount of donation.
Reply of the Government
Though in the past, funds were received through the Army Central
Welfare Fund for construction of part of the Siachen Hospital run by
403 Field Ambulances, the office of DGAFMS does not receive
donations from private organizations for setting up hospitals/facilities
directly. Private organizations are eligible for claiming deduction under
section 80G in respect of donations made to the Army Central Welfare
Fund. Sufficient funds are available for modernization of the Armed
Forces Hospitals.
[Ministry of Defence OM No. H-11013/21/2006/D(Parl.)
dated 13.04.2007]
Recommendation (Para Nos. 4.20 and 4.21)
The Committee note that modernisation of field medical units was
carried out two years ago by DGAFMS wherein the field medical
units were provided with 34 new equipments.
The Committee are of the view that modernisation is an ongoing
process and technologies in medical field are being upgrade very
rapidly. Our soldiers at the borders should have access to the latest
medical care facilities including mobile hospitals by road, air ambulance
services and, therefore, a six monthly review of facilities at local level
and annual review by DGAFMS should be carried out so as to upgrade
the same as per requirement. DGAFMS should also undertake surprise
visit to monitor facilities. The Committee strongly emphasize that there

50
should not be any deficiency in the strength of doctors and equipment
and other manpower in the field units.
Reply of the Government
Director General Armed Forces Medical Services and the Director
Generals Medical Services (Army/Navy/Air Force) make regular visits
to the various hospitals and field medical units to ascertain and monitor
their functioning as well as to address the problem areas.
Administrative and Technical Inspection of all the medical units are
being carried out annually as per laid down instructions for reviewing
the functioning of the different facilities.
2. The modernization of medical units, as pointed out by the
Committee, is an ongoing process and is being undertaken based on
Annual Plans. Steps have been taken to lessen deficiency in the strength
of doctors. Recruitment has already been carried out thrice in the
recent past to limit the gap between the authorized and the held
strength. The manpower planning cell, in DGAFMS, now carries out
an analysis in advance, pertaining to normal releases of SSC Officers,
superannuation and premature retirement of PC Officers. Accordingly,
advertisements are issued well in advance of the anticipated vacancies
so that by the time the selected candidates report for duty, there will
be no deficiency against the sanctioned strength.
3. This issue is also linked with the overall issue of authorization
of additional manpower in AFMS. The report of the Committee under
DGHS(AF) set up by the DGAFMS to review the authorization of
manpower to AFMS has been examined and proposal for augmentation
of AFMS set up has been referred to Finance Division for examination.
If the same is approved, the deficiencies will be taken care of.
[Ministry of Defence OM No. H-11013/21/2006/D(Parl.)
dated 13.04.2007]
Recommendation (Para No. 4.22)
The Committee further note with satisfaction that AFMS is
providing medical cover to civil population residing in low intensity
conflict zones, inaccessible areas. Such service to civil population would
definitely improve confidence of local population with Armed Forces
which is so essential for maintaining cordial relationship. The
Committee desire that such services be extended to all border areas
where adequate medical facilities are not in place.

51
Reply of the Government
The medical services are being provided to civil population in
border areas where the Armed Forces are deployed and where adequate
medical facilities are not in place. Various camps and medical
fraternization programmes are also being carried out from time to
time with a view to extend these services to those where such facilities
from civilian sources are inaccessible.
[Ministry of Defence OM No. H-11013/21/2006/D(Parl.)
dated 13.04.2007]
Recommendation (Para No. 5.16)
The Committee note that there are 10 super specialty centres for
cardiology and 4 cardio vascular centres where cases requiring advance
cardio vascular treatment are referred to by the treating physician.
The Committee further note that since the number of such cases is
large, the existing centres are not adequate to meet the requirement of
all service personnel and their dependents and therefore the Govt. has
approved treatment of such cases by civil private hospitals under Govt.
expense. The Committee desire that Govt. should also empanel private
hospitals for cardio vascular treatment.
Reply of the Government
Presently 23 private hospitals/nursing homes in 9 metropolitan
cities have been empanelled for providing cardio vascular services.
Reputed medical college hospitals such as AIIMS, CMC Vellore & KM
Hospital Mumbai are also empanelled for advanced cardio vascular
treatment for service personnel and their dependents. Service personnel
and their dependents are also entitled to avail specialized treatment in
any Govt. hospital in emergencies. Proposal for empanelment of 7
more private hospitals for cardio vascular treatment has been accorded
‘in-principle’ approval and DGAFMS has been asked to initiate the
process for empanelment of the seven hospitals one each at
Ahmedabad, Allahabad, Jabalpur, Jaipur, Kolkota, Nagpur and Pune.
[Ministry of Defence OM No. H-11013/21/2006/D(Parl.)
dated 13.04.2007]
Recommendation (Para Nos. 5.17 & 5.18)
The Committee note in the proposal for revision of peace
establishments, additional cardiology centres have been suggested in

52
two zonal hospitals. The Committee also note that in pursuance of
their tour report wherein they had desired more cardiology specialist
facility in military hospitals, the AFMS has opened new cardiology
centres in Udhampur, Leh, Guwahati and Jalandhar.
The Committee, however, are not satisfied by opening of new
cardiology centres in some commands. They feel that available number
of cardiology centres are still not sufficient to meet the present day
requirements. In the recent years, due to highly stressed working
environment, number of cardio cases have considerably increased. The
Committee, therefore, desire that Govt. should chalk out a time bound
programme for all zonal hospitals to make available full fledged
cardiology centres with latest equipments so that precious lives could
be saved by providing timely cardio treatment facilities. The Committee
further desire that facilities for Video conferencing and Tele Medicine
should be expanded.
Reply of the Government
Keeping in view various aspects, parameters and functional
requirements the manpower review Committee has already
recommended basic cardiology centres in all the zonal hospitals (300
and above beds). No interventional cardiology facility and cardio
thoracic surgery facilities are envisaged in these centres. All advance
care will be provided by full fledged centres in Command/Army
Hospitals.
2. Facilities for video conferencing and tele medicine are in the
initial phases of implementation. The facilities of tele medicine exist in
Eastern Command, Northern Command and Army Hospital (R&R).
Under the aegis of ISRO, tele medicine has been introduced at
Command Hospital (AF) Bangalore, 5 Air Force Hospital Jorhat and
9 Air Force Hospital Halwara and two Air Force stations at Jaisalmer
and Nalia as pilot phase. These will be expanded in due course of
time as per the requirement and utilisation pattern of the available
facilities. A project management organisation is already in place for
taking up such projects.
[Ministry of Defence OM No. H-11013/21/2006/D(Parl.)
dated 13.04.2007]
Recommendation (Para No. 5.24)
The Committee desire that the two neurosurgical centres as
projected in the proposed Peace Establishment should be set up
urgently.

53
Reply of the Government
Establishment of Neurological Centre at 5 AF Hospital Jorhat and
7 AF Hospital Kanpur is being processed at the level of Air
Headquarters for implementation.
[Ministry of Defence OM No. H-11013/21/2006/D(Parl.)
dated 13.04.2007]
Recommendation (Para No. 5.28)
The Committee note with concern that there has been substantial
increase in stress environment leading to psychological problems for
Armed Forces Personnel. There have been increasing reports in media
where soldiers, unable to bear the highly stressed working atmosphere,
have taken extreme step of committing suicide/attacking their officers.
The troops particularly those stationed in border areas experience
loneliness and anxiety and need proper professional counseling to de-
stress themselves. The Committee, therefore, feel that it is imperative
that these troops should not only be regularly given lectures on peace
and mental relaxation through yoga techniques/mediation but they
should also have easy access to counselors in case of need. The
Committee, therefore, recommend the Ministry to seriously examine
the issue and post doctors counselors specializing in this area,
particularly in the field units. The Committee also desire that there
should be proper study of reasons responsible for creation of stress
and feedback received from it should be given to the doctors for
utilisation thereof in the treatment of such patients.
Reply of the Government
 Some incidents of stress in the personnel of forces mostly caused
due to their personal matters have come to notice. Some of the
measures adopted by the forces in this regard are:—
(i) Approval has been accorded for appointment of
88 psychological councellors on contract basis for initial
period of 2 years. DGAFMS has been asked to work out
modalities for engagement of the psychological councellors.
(ii) Augmentation of two Psychiatric centers one each in the
Northern & Eastern sectors in the insurgency affected areas
has been undertaken. Additional Psychiatrists have been
provided. Psychiatrists as per authorization have been posted
to similar high pressure stations.

54
(iii) Teams of Psychiatrists and Preventive Social Medicine [PSM]
Specialists have conducted seminars and lectures at
Division/Counter Insurgency Forces HQrs levels for Senior/
Staff Officers/Commanding Officers. This was followed by
training seminars for Assistant Directors Medical Service /
Deputy Assistants Director of Health.
(iv) Personnel deployed in sensitive/stressful environment are
being granted regular & frequent spells of leave & are being
turned over/rotated regularly . All personnel returning to
unit after leave are interviewed & medically examined by
Regimental Medical Officer. Any stress marker is looked for
and motivational talk rendered to all.
(v) Training of Religious teachers/Education Junior
Commissioned Officers/Non Commissioned Officers, other
Junior Commissioned Officers has begun in two appropriate
hospitals of the Command. Those trained are being termed
as mentors and they will act as peer group leaders in their
respective units.
(vi) Seminars for training of officers in stress management are
planned in collaboration with Defence Institute of
Psychological Research (DIPR).
(ix) Yoga Training has been incorporated in Air Force fitness
programmes launched at many Air Force stations. In
collaboration with Defence Institute of Physiology and Allied
Sciences, yoga training is being planned at two training
institutes to the cadets and trainees who will in turn
propagate such training to others when posted out.
(x) DIPR has recently conducted two studies in relation to
factors leading to psychological problems in Armed Forces
personnel serving in counterinsurgency areas in Northern
and Eastern Command. Important recommendations based
on the studies are as follows:
(a) Sensitising the leadership
(b) Enhancing leadership qualities among junior officers and
Junior Commissioned Officers (JCOs)
(c) Rationalizing grant of leave
(d) Rest and recuperation
(e) Improving organizational climate
(f) Control the zero-error syndrome

55
(g) Improved management of manpower
(h) Education and awareness
(j) Improved training
(k) Improving selection of soldiers
(l) Provision of basic facilities
(m) Training of religious teachers
(n) Psychological indoctrination
(ix) Based on above recommendations action is being taken with
emphasis on the following measures:
(a) Promptly attending to grievances by interaction between
junior leaders and other personnel.
(b) Counselling of persons at higher risk
(c)  Training capsules in relaxation exercises including yoga
(d) Training of doctors and junior leaders by service
psychiatrists
(e) Frequent spells of leave and rotation of individuals
(f) 50 psychological counsellors have been trained through
3 courses at Base Hospital, Delhi Cantonment, Command
Hospital (Eastern Command) Kolkata and Command
Hospital (Northern Command), C/o 56 Army Post Office
as a part of combating effects of stress. These counsellors
have been trained to identify ‘high risk’ personnel to
provide timely treatment and thus avoid loss of trained
manpower. Expertise of DIPR has been incorporated in
this venture. The counsellors are being made available
to assist commanders and commanding officers.
[Ministry of Defence OM No. H-11013/21/2006/D(Parl.)
dated 13.04.2007]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Paras 57 & 58 of Chapter-I)
Recommendation (Para No.5.30)
The Committee note the facilities available in Armed Forces
hospitals for treatment of AIDS/HIV . In view of the fact that it is
assuming dangerous proportion all over the country, the Committee

56
desire that AFMS should be more vigilant in this regard and conduct
regular awareness programmes to educate the troops about the disease.
AFMS should also undertake more research programmes in this area.
Reply of the Government
This is being implemented. It is stated that AFMS have a vibrant
HIV/AIDS control programme, which includes, health education of
the troops and their families, surveillance of high risk groups, screening
of all ante natal cases and all blood/blood products for HIV ,
encouraging voluntary counselling and testing and spreading awareness
about HIV/AIDS through audio-visual means etc. As already stated
earlier, AFMS is one of the nodal agencies for implementation of the
National AIDS Control Organisation (NACO) guidelines for prevention
and control of HIV/ AIDS.
[Ministry of Defence OM No. H-11013/21/2006/D(Parl.)
dated 13.04.2007]
Recommendation (Para No. 6.4)
The Committee are of the view that due to changing security
environment the threat of non conventional i.e nuclear, biological and
chemical war has increased. The Country therefore should be well
prepared to meet any eventuality incase of such attack. The Committee,
therefore, desire that AFMS should re-look into our special preparedness
and take all the steps as may be necessary so as to able to deal with
such situations more effectively. The Committee stress that proper
equipment and training should be provided to troops and Bio-medicine
developed in this area.
Reply of the Government
The recommendation of the Committee has been noted for
guidance. Nuclear, Biological and Chemical [NBC] warfare training is
being carried out at Army Medical Corps (Centre & School), Lucknow.
In addition, Air Force Institute of NBC Protection located in Delhi,
conducts training programme for all service personnel of Air Force.
 AFMS officers and paramedical staff are being trained on medical
aspects of managing NBC warfare casualties. This includes monitoring
of radio active materials, decontamination of casualties and use of
protective NBC clothings. Quick Reaction Teams (QRT) have been set
up in field ambulances. Hospitals have earmarked crisis management
beds alongwith requisite stores and equipment.
[Ministry of Defence OM No. H-11013/21/2006/D(Parl.)
dated 13.04.2007]

57
Recommendation (Para No. 8.7)
The Committee are of the view that the Govt should encourage
the fundamental and basic research work and for the purpose senior
doctors and research scholars should invariably be sent to attend
international seminars so that their exposure and updated knowledge
can be utilised for providing best services to the AFMS. The Committee,
therefore, recommend that Ministry should prepare a discreet policy
in this regard.
Reply of the Government
 It has been the endeavor of the Government to send as many
doctors as possible for attending International seminars, presenting
papers and research work in international conferences. Research work
in AFMS is being carried out under the aegis of DGAFMS. A proposal
for allocation of funds to the tune of Rs. 1.5 crores for DGAFMS
under the annual foreign travel plan is under consideration. In addition
to the reply given earlier, it is submitted that there is already a policy
on research work in Armed Force Medical Services. The policy lays
down guidelines for research work in AFMS, selection and monitoring
of research projects, deputing doctors and research workers to attend
various seminars and conferences and composition of the Armed Forces
Medical Research Committee, which is headed by DG(AFMS).
[Ministry of Defence OM No. H-11013/21/2006/D(Parl.)
dated 13.04.2007]
Recommendation (Para Nos. 9.3 & 9.4)
The Committee note that there is one college of Nursing at AFMC
Pune and seven schools of Nursing in AFMS. The Indian Nursing
Council (INC) has recommended that all the schools of nursing be
converted into college of nursing by 2010. The Committee while
appreciating the move desire that diploma courses conducted by the
schools should not be discontinued. The Committee are given to
understand that training being imparted in College of Nursing and
schools is very effective and of a very high professional caliber. The
Committee, however, are constrained to note that at present no post
graduate degree in nursing is being awarded by AFMS and there is
no proposal at present for the same.
The Committee also desire that Govt should make sincere efforts
to introduce a post graduate degree course in the College of Nursing.
The Committee would like to be apprised of the steps taken in this
regard.
Reply of the Government
As far as continuation of the seven schools of nursing, which
conduct Diploma Courses in Nursing, is concerned the Indian Nursing

58
Council has informed vide their Letter No.1-5/GB-CIR/2005-INC dated
2.5.2006 that it has been resolved that upgradation of School of Nursing
(GNM) to College of Nursing to be kept in abeyance, keeping in view
the expansion of health sector and requirement of large number of
nurses in National Rural Health Mission (NRHM). In view of this, the
existing schools of Nursing in AFMS will continue to function till
further order.
2. Regarding the recommendation to start Post-graduate Degree
Course, it is stated that ‘In-principle’ approval has been granted to
start M.Sc(Nursing) at College of Nursing AFMC Pune in the subject
of Medical Surgical Nursing, Obstetrics and Gynecological Nursing,
Community Health Nursing & Pediatric Nursing and Service HQrs
have been asked to obtain approval/clearance from concerned agencies
required to start M.Sc(Nursing) course at AFMC, Pune.
[Ministry of Defence OM No. H-11013/21/2006/D(Parl.)
dated 13.04.2007]
Recommendation (Para No. 10.6)
The Committee appreciate that AFMS plays a very major role in
providing medical care during disasters like earthquake, Tsunami, etc.
The Committee are happy to note that a disaster management
committee has been created under DGAFMS and all service medical
units have been equipped to meet disaster situations. The disaster
response time is less than 2 hours. The Committee, however,
understand that precious time is lost due to delay in providing
information and giving necessary orders to DGAFMS in case of
disasters. In order to avoid such delays, the Committee desire that a
mechanism should be evolved whereby such information is provided
to DGAFMS simultaneously so that AFMS machinery could be
mobilized forthwith. The Committee would like to be apprised of the
progress made by the Government in this regard.
Reply of the Government
In so far as the role of the Defence Services in disaster management,
including fall out of Nuclear, Biological and Chemical (NBC) warfare
is concerned, the same is taken care of by the Defence Crisis
Management Group, functioning under the Chief of Integrated Defence
Staff Committee (CISC). The meetings of the Group are held
periodically at Integrated Defence Staff HQs. At the time of a crisis,
the Committee meets frequently on need basis and representatives of
all concerned agencies are invited in such meetings. However, inclusion
of representative of DGAFMS in the Committee is being examined by
the Government in consultation with CISC.

59
A representative of DGAFMS, not below the rank of Major
General(& Equivalent), has been included as part of Defence Crisis
Management Group.
[Ministry of Defence OM No. H-11013/21/2006/D(Parl.)
dated 13.04.2007]
Recommendation (Para No. 11.8)
The Committee note that procurement of Medical equipment and
medicines/drugs is being done under DPP-2005 and Defence
Procurement Manual. The average time taken for procurement ranges
from 4 weeks to 9 months in case of medicines/drugs and 4 weeks to
24 months in case of medical equipments. Further a time period of
15 days to 3 months is required for disbursement of the same to the
hospitals and field units. The Committee feel that in view of the
emergent requirements of the medicines/medical equipments that the
time taken for procurement & disbursement is very much on higher
side. They therefore desire that a quicker system including fast track
for procurement of medicine/drugs and medical equipment be worked
out so that emergency requirements are met in a short time. The
Committee further desires that proposal for revision of delegated
powers of DGAFMS should be approved and implemented urgently.
Reply of the Government
Revised Financial powers have already been delegated to the
DGAFMS and Commandants of the hospitals vide Government of India,
Ministry of Defence Letter No. A/89591/FP-1/1974/2006/D(GS-1) dated
26 July 2006. DGAFMS has now been delegated financial powers upto
Rs. 2 crores each case under Capital Head for procurement of medical
equipment and upto Rs. 5 crores each case for purchases based on
Approved Scales and Authorised by Provision Reviews and for
conclusion of rate Contract for Medical Stores.
2. The Commanding Officers of all hospitals commanded by
Brigadiers and equivalent and two hospitals each of Air force and
Navy commanded by Colonel and equivalent have been de-linked from
the mother depots for drugs and consumables. They have now become
the Direct Demanding Officers and have been vested with adequate
financial powers for such procurements thereby avoiding delays. After
monitoring the effectiveness of this system over a period, this facility
will then also be extended to all other hospitals.
[Ministry of Defence OM No. H-11013/21/2006/D(Parl.)
dated 13.04.2007]

CHAPTER III
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE
COMMITTEE DO NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW
OF GOVERNMENT REPLIES
Recommendation (Para No. 7.13)
The Committee understand that a number of vacancies are provided
for AFMS officers in non military medical institutions for PG courses.
The Committee are constrained to note that the same got subsequently
discontinued in April 1998. The Committee stress that the revival of
this quota for PG seats in various civilian medical colleges and PG
training institutions will go a long way in fulfilling the PG specialist
requirement of the Armed Forces since there is always a shortage of
PG qualified officers. The Committee further desire that Ministry of
Defence should revive this quota and try to get more seats reserved
for PG courses in various institutions for AFMS officers.
Reply of the Government
The matter regarding revival of the quota for PG seats for AFMS
Doctors in various Civil medical Colleges has been considered in
consultation with DGAFMS and though they have stated that the
National Board of Examinations has granted fresh recognition for about
100 seats in basic specialities in various Service Hospitals and as such,
after utilization of these seats, the requirement of the AFMS is most
likely to be met, DGAFMS have been asked to reconsider the proposal.
[Ministry of Defence OM No. H-11013/21/2006/D(Parl.)
dated 13.04.2007]
60

CHAPTER IV
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF
WHICH REPLIES OF GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN
ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE
Recommendation (Para Nos. 1.4 & 1.5)
The Committee note that AFMS came into existence in 1948 in
pursuance of the recommendations of Dr. B. C. Roy Committee set up
to consider the question of integration of three medical services and
medical research in Armed Forces. Dr. B.C. Roy Committee in its report
laid down general principles as to how this integration could be
effected efficiently for providing best medical care to Armed Forces.
The Committee, however, on making an in depth examination of
AFMS feel that the BC Roy Committee’s recommendations which are
still relevant in present day scenario have not been fully implemented
in letter and spirit. The Roy Committee had envisaged a higher status
of DGAFMS as Advisor of the Supreme Commander or the Defence
Minister. The Committee are constrained to note that over the years
the status of DGAFMS has been slowly downgraded. This has impinged
upon the working of AFMS. The Committee in this connection would
like to point out the manifold increase in the workload of AFMS over
the years with its medical cover having been extended to families of
service personnel, ex-servicemen and their dependents, para military
forces viz, BSF, ITBP , CRPF, Border Road Construction Units and other
supporting organizations posted in field and central/intelligence
agencies operating in disturbed areas and medical aid to civilians in
low intensity conflict areas. It has also a major role to play in
international medical missions and in providing medical relief in case
of natural calamity and disaster. It is ironic that on the one hand there
has been a substantial increase in the role of AFMS which has been
earning accolades for its services to the nation and the world and on
the other status of DG(AFMS) is being slowly downgraded. Looking
at the size, responsibility and nature of AFMS, the Committee desire
that status of DGAFMS should be upgraded to that of Secretary,
Government of India as in the case of Director General of Health
Services (Civil).
Reply of the Government
The Government is conscious of the concern expressed by the
Committee about substantial increase in workload of DG,AFMS. To
61

62
address this concern, a proposal to augment the AFMS set up is under
consideration of the Government. As regards upgradation of the post
of DG,AFMS, it may be noted that DG,AFMS’s pay scale is already
higher than that of Lieutenant Generals and equivalent, who are not
Army Commanders or equivalent. The proposal to further upgrade it
equivalent to Army Commanders/Secretaries has overall implications
viz-a-viz pay scale of officers in the services. However, the proposal is
under examination of the Government.
[Ministry of Defence OM No. H-11013/21/2006/D(Parl.)
dated 13.04.2007]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para 13 of Chapter-I)
Recommendation (Para No. 1.6.1)
 Having examined various other issues pertaining to the subject,
the Committee inter alia recommend:
Government should increase the strength of AFMS in proportion
to its increased workload and responsibility for smooth and effective
functioning. For this purpose, Government should set up a high level
Committee to review the authorized strength of each cadre of AFMS.
Reply of the Government
To cater for increased workload and heightened clientele
expectations and awareness, Army Head Quarters took up a case for
the revision of establishment of various military hospitals for
requirement of additional manpower before the Chiefs of the Staff
Committee (COSC). The COSC recommended accretion of additional
8714 manpower in three distinct phases. In phase-I additional
manpower to the extent of 1242 was recommended for Army Hospital
(R&R) Delhi Cantonment, Base Hospital Delhi Cantonment and five
Command Hospitals. The Army Standing Establishment Committee
(ASEC), a specialized body set up for study of manpower and other
requirements of Army establishments, has also accepted and
recommended accretion of 1242 manpower for Phase-I.
2. Consequent to the recommendations of the Standing Committee,
a committee was set up by DGAFMS on 11 August 2006 under the
chairmanship of a Lieutenant General Rank Officer [Director General
Health Services (Armed Forces)] for review of authorization of

63
manpower to Armed Forces Medical Services. The committee has
submitted its report in September 2006, which is under examination of
the Government.
The report of the DGHS(AF) Committee has been examined by
the Ministry of Defence and the matter of augmentation of strength of
AFMS set up has been referred to Finance Division in the Ministry for
examination.
[Ministry of Defence OM No. H-11013/21/2006/D(Parl.)
dated 13.04.2007]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para 46 of Chapter-I)
Recommendation (Para No. 1.6.2)
Vacancies of doctors and paramedical staff in hospitals and field
units of AFMS should be filled up urgently.
Reply of the Government
As far as vacancies of doctors are concerned recruitment has already
been carried out thrice in the recent past to limit the gap between the
authorized and the held strength. The manpower planning cell, in
DGAFMS, now carries out an analysis in advance, pertaining to normal
releases of Short Service Commissioned Officers, superannuation and
premature retirement of Permanent Commissioned Officers. Accordingly,
advertisements are issued well in advance of the anticipated vacancies
so that by the time the selected candidates report for duty, there is no
deficiency against the sanctioned strength. As to further augmentation
of the strength of doctors and paramedical staff, a proposal to augment
the AFMS set up has referred to Finance Division in the Ministry for
examination.
[Ministry of Defence OM No. H-11013/21/2006/D(Parl.)
dated 13.04.2007]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para 46 of Chapter-I)
Recommendation (Para No. 1.6.3)
AFMS should extend super specialist facilities like cardiology and
Neurology in all zonal hospitals and more specialists in peripheral

64
hospital so that soldiers and officers may be provided with proper
medical care in their vicinity.
Reply of the Government
This issue has been covered in the report of the Committee
constituted by DG, AFMS to review authorization of manpower to
AFMS cadre. The report of the Committee has been examined in the
Ministry of Defence and a proposal to augment the strength of AFMS
set up has been referred to Finance Division in the Ministry for
examination
[Ministry of Defence OM No. H-11013/21/2006/D(Parl.)
dated 13.04.2007]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para 46 of Chapter-I)
Recommendation (Para No. 1.6.4)
The staffing norms in AFMS hospitals should be improved to one
Medical officer per twenty one beds according to recommendations
given by ASEC Committee in this regard.
Reply of the Government
 The Committee constituted by DGAFMS in August 2006 has also
made recommendations on the norms for General Duty Medical
Officers, Specialists, Nursing Officers and staff to bed ratio. The issue
is linked with overall manpower authorization to AFMS. As mentioned
earlier, the proposal for augmentation of AFMS set has been referred
to Finance Division of the Ministry for examination.
[Ministry of Defence OM No. H-11013/21/2006/D(Parl.)
dated 13.04.2007]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para 46 of Chapter-I)
Recommendation (Para No. 1.6.5)
10% cut in recruitment should not be made applicable on civilian
manpower of AFMS particularly in essential categories and trades like
dietician, physiotherapist etc.

65
Reply of the Government
Department of Personnel and Training (DOP&T) had issued
guidelines vide Office Memorandum No. 2/8/2001-PIC dated 16th May
2001 to restrict Direct Recruitment in civilian post to 1/3 of Direct
Recruitment vacancies subject to 1% of total sanctioned strength of the
Department including all Formations/Directorates with a view to
achieve reduction of 10% manpower in Government Departments
during a five year period from 2001-02 to 2005-06. DOP&T has since
extended the Scheme of Optimization of Direct Recruitment to civilian
post upto 31st March 2009, subject to a review being undertaken after
receipt of the 6th Pay Commission recommendations.
2. The issue raised by the Committee about exemption of AFMS
from the purview of 10% cut in recruitment is also valid in case of
other branches of Army, Navy and Air Force and hence a
comprehensive proposal for obtaining Cabinet approval for such an
exemption in respect of civilian employees is being progressed.
[Ministry of Defence OM No. H-11013/21/2006/D(Parl.)
dated 13.04.2007]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para 46 of Chapter-I)
Recommendation (Para No. 1.6.6)
The Armed Forces Medical College should be converted into
deemed university and all the training courses should be brought under
its umbrella. Besides helping in having uniform standards for various
training courses, this will facilitate in getting necessary recognition for
various courses.
Reply of the Government
Further to the reply given earlier, it is submitted that the proposal
for converting AFMC, Pune, into a “Deemed University” is under
examination of the Government. As per guidelines for considering a
proposal for declaring an institution as “Deemed University” under
section 3 of the UGC Act, one of the requirements is that “the
institution should be registered under the Societies Registration Act or
Public Trust Act and should formulate a Memorandum of Association
and Rules based on the Model prescribed by the UGC”. The proposal
for converting AFMC Pune into a “Deemed University” in relaxation

66
of above referred guidelines, has since been forwarded to the Ministry
of Human Resources Development. That Ministry has referred the
matter to UGC for their recommendations/comments.
[Ministry of Defence OM No. H-11013/21/2006/D(Parl.)
dated 13.04.2007]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para 46 of Chapter-I)
Recommendation (Para Nos. 2.5, 2.6 & 2.7)
The Committee note that AFMS was established in 1948 with
authorised strength of 900 medical officers and other supporting staff
to provide comprehensive health care to the serving Armed Forces
personnel. Over the years the role of AFMS has considerably increased
with its services having been extended to families and dependents of
service personnel since Independence. In addition, the AFMS also
provides medical cover to ex-servicemen and their dependents, para
military forces viz. BSF, ITBP , CRPF, Border Road units, etc posted in
field, central/intelligence agencies operating in disturbed areas, and
medical aid to civilians in low intensity conflict areas and in case of
natural calamity and disaster. The AFMS has also been playing a major
role in International/UN Medical & Humanitarian Aid Missions since
1950. To cope with the increased responsibilities, the AFMS has also
expanded and at present has an authorised strength of 5440 medical
officers and other supporting staff.
The Committee, however, feels that the expansion of AFMS is not
commensurate with the increase in its responsibilities which have
become manifold over the years as AFMS now not only provides
medical cover to Armed Forces Personnel, their dependents and other
beneficiaries but also plays a vital role in Disaster Management and
International missions, etc.
The Committee therefore, strongly recommends that a high level
committee should be appointed to comprehensively review and re-
assess the overall increase in work and responsibilities of AFMS and
suitably recommend ideal strength for each cadre so as to have smooth
and efficient functioning. The proposed committee should also take
into consideration the new medical technologies that have been
introduced in the field requiring training manpower.

67
Reply of the Government
Consequent to the recommendations of the Standing Committee, a
committee under DGHS(AF) was set up by DGAFMS for review of
authorization of manpower to Armed Forces Medical Services. The
Committee has submitted its report. This issue has been covered in
the report of the Committee constituted by DGAFMS. The report of
the Committee has been examined by the Ministry and a proposal for
augmenting the AFMS set up has been referred to the Finance Division
of the Ministry for examination.
[Ministry of Defence OM No. H-11013/21/2006/D(Parl.)
dated 13.04.2007]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para 46 of Chapter-I)
Recommendation (Para No. 2.13)
The committee note that AFMS is an integrated tri service
organisation which is well coordinated during peace and war time.
All service personnel irrespective of their force can avail medical care
at all hospitals. The Committee have; however, been informed that
professional training of PBORs is carried out by the three services
separately. The Committee concur with the suggestion of DGAFMS
that the same may be carried out under the aegis of DGAFMS in a
unified manner so that the level of technical knowledge of para
medicals of the three services are standardized. The Committee,
therefore, recommend that all the training institutes for training various
categories of PBORs be placed under DGAFMS where PBORs from
the three services could be imparted training in a unified manner.
This will enable DGAFMS to have proper monitoring of training
standards as per the requirements from time to time and ensure
accountability.
Reply of the Government
To impart training to PBORs in a unified manner, the following
measures are being progressed:
(a) A common syllabus for paramedics is being formulated.
(b) Efforts are being made to get the specialized training courses
presently being conducted in the AFMS, recognized/affiliated
with the local Universities/statutory bodies;

68
(c) Expediting commencement of the Paramedics Academy at
Lucknow, in the vicinity of AMC Centre and School with
affiliation of the University;
(d) After formulating the common training syllabus, instructors
from three medical services will be cross-posted between
the training institutions of Army, Navy and Air Force, in
order to bring in standardization and uniformity in the
methods of instructions/training.
2. The issue of placing the training institutions for training of
various categories of PBOR in AFMS under DGAFMS, is, however,
under examination of the Government.
[Ministry of Defence OM No. H-11013/21/2006/D(Parl.)
dated 13.04.2007]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para 62 of Chapter-I)
Recommendation (Para Nos. 2.17 & 2.18)
The Committee note that the post of DGAFMS was created in
1948 in the rank of Lt. Gen. with the status of Special Secretary . In the
civil, the post of Director General Health Services (DGHS) was
equivalent to Director. Since 1948 there has been no change in the
status of DGAFMS which is presently equivalent to Additional
Secretary, whereas in the civil DGHS has been upgraded to the status
of Secretary, Govt of India.
The Committee find that AFMS has expanded manifold since
independence and its role has also considerably increased. Accordingly,
the responsibilities of DGAFMS have also increased substantially . The
Committee, therefore, strongly recommends that the post of DGAFMS
be upgraded to the status of Secretary, Govt of India. The Committee
feel upgradation of status of DGAFMS would not only boost the morale
of AFMS but also help DGAFMS in working effectively.
Reply of the Government
The Government is conscious of the concern expressed by the
Committee about substantial increase in workload of DG,AFMS. To
address this concern, a proposal to augment the AFMS set up is under
consideration of the Government. As regards upgradation of the post
of DG,AFMS, it may be noted that DG,AFMS’s pay scale is already

69
higher than that of Lieutenants General and equivalent who are not
Army Commanders or equivalent. The proposal to further upgrade it
equivalent to Army Commanders /Secretaries has overall implications
vis-a-vis pay scale of officers in the services. However, the proposal is
under examination of the Government.
[Ministry of Defence OM No. H-11013/21/2006/D(Parl.)
dated 13.04.2007]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para 13 of Chapter-I)
Recommendation (Para Nos. 3.3 & 3.4)
The Committee are concerned to note the large scale vacancies in
various cadres of AFMS. The Committee have been informed that
vacancies arise due to normal releases of SSC officers, superannuation
and premature retirement of permanent Commission Officers.
The Committee desire that since most of these vacancies are
anticipated, timely action should be taken to fill up these vacancies. A
career profile in respect of officers should be prepared by the DGAFMS
so that a well planned recruitment programme can be worked out
and there is no deficiency in the sanctioned strength of officers at any
given point of time.
Reply of the Government
Recruitment has already been carried out thrice in the recent past
to limit the gap between the authorized and the held strength. The
manpower planning cell, in DGAFMS, now carries out an analysis in
advance, pertaining to normal releases of SSC Officers, superannuation
and premature retirement of PC Officers. Accordingly, advertisements
are issued well in advance of the anticipated vacancies so that by the
time the selected candidates report for duty, there will be no deficiency
against the sanctioned strength.
[Ministry of Defence OM No. H-11013/21/2006/D(Parl.)
dated 13.04.2007]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para 70 &71 of Chapter-I)

70
Recommendation (Para No. 3.5)
The Committee also desire that Govt. should review tenure of
Short Service Commission officers in AFMS who are released from
service at a young age. The Committee desire that SSC medical officers
and other staff should have minimum tenure of 15 years with 5 years’
extension so that experience and knowledge gained by the doctors,
technical and para medical staff could be gainfully utilised. The
Committee, further, desire that the retirement age of PG teachers be
increased to 65 years and that of nursing and technical para medical
staff be increased to 58 years. Govt. should also consider time bound
promotion policy for AFMS doctors and other staff so as to discourage
premature retirement/resignation of permanent commission officers.
The Committee are of the view that for the purpose, if necessary,
Govt. may amend the existing service rules.
Reply of the Government
The recommendation of the Standing Committee has been noted
and DGAFMS has been requested to submit a comprehensive proposal
in respect of SSC officers in AFMS.
2. Regarding time bound promotion policy for AFMS officers, it is
stated that in Phase-I of cadre restructuring proposal of AFMS, as a
consequence of the recommendations of A V Singh Committee as
applicable to the Army, Navy and Air Force, additional posts of 300
Colonel (& Equivalent) have been sanctioned in the selection grade to
be implemented over a period of 4 years in Army Medical Corps.
Also in Phase-I a time scale rank of Colonel (& Equivalent) for those,
who could not make to the selection grade has been sanctioned at 24
years of service. In Phase-II additional selection grade posts in the
ranks of Brigadier, Major General & Lieutenant General (& Equivalent)
are under examination of the Government.
3. As far as, enhancement of retiring age for PG teachers to 65
years as recommended by Standing Committee is concerned, a proposal
sent by DGAFMS is under consideration of the Government.
4. As regards the tenure of SSC officers in AFMS, a proposal for
enhancing the same from present 10 years to 14 years across the board
i.e. for AMC, ADC, MNS and AMC(NT) is being processed for
obtaining approval of the Cabinet.
5. Phase-II of cadre restructuring proposal of AFMS regarding
additional selection grade posts in the rank of Brigadiers, Major General

71
& Lieutenant General (& Equivalent) is also being processed for
obtaining Cabinet approval.
6. As far as, enhancement of retiring age for PG teachers to 65
years as recommended by Standing Committee is concerned, it may
be stated that in AFMS there is no separate stream for PG teachers.
Enhancing age of retirement for some select few to 65 years may have
overall implications. Since it is a sensitive issue, the matter is still
under examination in consultation with DGAFMS.
[Ministry of Defence OM No. H-11013/21/2006/D(Parl.)
dated 13.04.2007]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para 70 &71 of Chapter-I)
Recommendation (Para Nos. 3.13 to 3.15)
The Committee are constrained to note that whereas the actual
strength of doctors posted in command hospitals is much more than
the authorised strength, there is more than 20% deficiency of the doctors
in field units’ vis-a-vis authorised strength. This shows that more doctors
are being posted in command hospitals at the cost of field units.
The Committee are not inclined to accept the reasons given by
DGAFMS that it is a peace time formation and during war time these
medical officers go back to the field units. Even during peace time
there should not be any deficiency of doctors in field units so that the
troops receive adequate medical care and remain fit and healthy to
take on any challenge there. The Committee, therefore, strongly
recommend that the Ministry should look into the matter and take
urgent steps to post doctors at filed units as per the authorised strength.
The Committee further note that the number of doctors posted in
Delhi and Mumbai is double of the authorised strength because of
requirement of specialists and super specialists at hospital in these
cities. The Committee would like the Govt. to look into the lopsided
postings and take corrective measures in this regard. As recommended
in an earlier paragraph, the Committee desire the Govt. to set up a
Committee to review the authorised strength of doctors in various
levels of hospital and field units taking into consideration the necessity
of posting more specialists and super specialists at command and zonal
levels but at the same time ensuring that there is no shortage of
doctors in field units both in peace time and war time. The Committee

72
desire that adequate reserve doctors/staff should be kept for leave
vacancies so that there is no deficiency on account of doctors and
other staff proceeding on leave/training.
Reply of the Government
As a result of advancement in medical technology and requirement
of Armed Forces to keep pace with advances in the technology, a
number of specialists and super specialists have been added to each
hospital. These specialist officers have been culled out from the existing
authorised strength of the doctors in AFMS. By virtue of their
qualification and training acquired these officers are posted to
Command Hospitals and at Delhi and Mumbai to fulfill the
requirements of the clientele. The statement of the DGAFMS was
accordingly based on the factual position on ground. However during
operational requirements the specialists and medical officers are posted
in field units and formations. In Northern Command and Eastern
Command, where there are operational requirements 100 % authorised
strength has been posted.
2.  Consequent to the recommendations of the Standing Committee,
a committee was set up by DGAFMS in August 2006 for review of
authorization of manpower/personnel to Armed Forces Medical
Services. This issue has been covered in the report of the committee.
The report of the committee is under examination of the Government.
This issue is also linked with the overall issue of authorization of
additional manpower in AFMS. The report of the Committee under
DGHS(AF) set up by the DGAFMS to review the authorization of
manpower to AFMS has been examined and proposal for augmentation
of AFMS set up has been referred to Finance Division of the Ministry
for examination.
[Ministry of Defence, OM No. H-11013/21/2006/D(Parl.)
dated 13.04.2007]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para 46 of Chapter-I)
Recommendation (Para No. 3.20)
The Committee are constrained to note that large scale deficiency
in posted strength of paramedical staff against the authorised strength

73
in most of the service commands. The Committee would like the
Ministry of Defence to take urgent steps to fill up the vacancies and
take concrete steps so that such a situation does not arise in future.
Reply of the Government
 Several measures have been taken to reduce the deficiency in
authorised strength of paramedical staff. Some of the measures are
listed below:—
(a) Increasing the number of Diploma seats for General Nursing
and Midwifery at School of Nursing from 30 to 90 per
years.
(b) Detailment of 44 Nursing Assistant/Nursing Technician on
highly specialized courses conducted by Karnataka Medical
Board, Bangalore. This will be a regular and annual feature.
(c) Detailment of selected Nursing Assistant/Nursing Technician
for courses in civil and also sending them abroad for
advanced courses in Liver Transplant and Nuclear Medicine.
(d) Efforts are on to start Paramedics Academy at AMC Centre
& School Lucknow with affiliation to Uttar Pradesh Medical
Council for award of Diploma to Nursing Assistant &
Ambulance Assistant.
(e) Detailing a large number of persons from various trades on
foreign assignments so as to enhance prestige and financial
status.
(f) Reducing the minimum service for attestation of Nursing
Assistant from two years to one year so as to make them
earn the salary and benefits of Sepoy earlier.
[Ministry of Defence, OM No. H-11013/21/2006/D(Parl.)
dated 13.04.2007]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para 46 of Chapter-I)
Recommendation (Para No.4.15)
The Committee further note that some Military Hospitals and Air
Force Command Hospital at Bangalore are housed in old buildings of

74
the British times. A plan for construction of new buildings is under
consideration of Govt. The Committee desire the Govt. to expedite the
approval of the same and allocate requisite fund to replace the old
buildings with Multi-speciality Hospital complex before any untoward
incident takes place.
Reply of the Government
 For modernization of the Armed Forces Hospitals, DGAFMS has
been asked to submit a proposal for allocation of dedicated annual
funds for major work plan. A comprehensive proposal for construction
of 54 hospitals at an estimated cost of Rs. 2960.61 crores is already
under consideration of the Government. Regarding the modernisation
of Command Hospital (Air Force), Bangalore, it is stated that cost of
the project, based on Standard Schedule of Rates (SSR) 1996, was
Rs. 283.75 crores inclusive of cost of medical equipment of Rs. 62.50 crores.
However, the cost estimates are being revised now based on SSR 2004
by the Service Headquarters. Once the revised cost estimates are
finalized, appropriate approvals will be obtained.
[Ministry of Defence, OM No. H-11013/21/2006/D(Parl.)
dated 13.04.2007]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para 79 & 80 of Chapter-I)
Recommendation (Para No. 4.24)
The Committee note that 10% cut in civilian manpower particularly
in essential categories has adversely affected the patient care. Also cut
in trades like dietician, physiotherapists etc. has adversely affected the
functioning of these departments as only one post is authorised in
these categories in one hospital. The Committee, therefore, strongly
recommend that cut in recruitment should not be made applicable to
the civil manpower connected with the operationalisation of armed
forces medical services as it has direct ramifications on the health care
of our officers in general and troops in particular.
Reply of the Government
Department of Personnel and Training (DOP&T) had issued
guidelines vide Office Memorandum No. 2/8/2001-PIC dated 16th May
2001 to restrict Direct Recruitment in civilian post to 
1/3 of Direct
Recruitment vacancies subject to 1% of total sanctioned strength of the

75
Department including all Formations/Directorates with a view to
achieve reduction of 10% manpower in Government Departments
during a five year period from 2001-02 to 2005-06. DOP&T has further
extended the Scheme of Optimization of Direct Recruitment to civilian
post upto 31st March 2009, subject to a review being undertaken after
receipt of the 6th Pay Commission recommendations.
2. The issue of 10% cut in recruitment is also valid in case of
other branches of Army, Navy and Air Force and hence a
comprehensive proposal for obtaining Cabinet approval for exemption
of Armed Forces from such cut is being processed.
[Ministry of Defence, OM No. H-11013/21/2006/D(Parl.)
dated 13.04.2007]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para 46 of Chapter-I)
Recommendation (Para Nos. 4.27 & 4.28)
The Committee are constrained to note that norms for staffing
pattern are much lower in AFMS hospitals not only compared to
corporate hospitals but also civil hospitals. The present staffing pattern
of 1 medical officer per 50 beds and 0.8 staff per bed being followed
in AFMC pertains to 1960 vintage. The Committee are unhappy to
note that Lt. Gen. Foley Committee recommendation made in 1993 for
staffing pattern of 1 medical officer for 15 beds and 2 staff per bed
was not implemented by Govt ASEC (2006) has now recommended
staffing pattern of 1 medical officer per 21 beds and 1.25 staff per bed.
The Committee desire the Govt. to take necessary action to
implement the new staffing norms for AFMC as recommended by
ASEC in a time bound manner so that quality services can be made
available to armed forces personnel and their dependents.
Reply of the Government
The Committee constituted by DGAFMS in August 2006 has also
made recommendations on the norms for General Duty Medical Officer,
Specialists, Nursing Officers and staff to bed ratio. The issue is linked
with overall manpower authorization to AFMS. The Committee has
submitted its report in September 2006, which has been examined and
a proposal to augment AFMS set up has been referred to Finance
Division in the Ministry for examination.
[Ministry of Defence, OM No. H-11013/21/2006/D(Parl.)
dated 13.04.2007]

76
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para 46 of Chapter-I)
Recommendation (Para Nos. 5.10 & 5.11)
The Committee note with concern that only basic specialist facilities
like medicine, surgery, gynaecology are provided in peripheral hospitals
and specialist facilitates like psychiatry, skin, paediatrics, orthopedics,
ENT etc. are provided only in zonal hospitals. Further super
specializations such as cardiology, neurology, etc are provided only in
Command and Base hospitals.
The Committee are of the view that there is a need to extend
more specialists facilities in peripheral hospitals. ENT, skin, paediatrics,
orthopaedics related diseases and problems are very common and
therefore, peripherals hospital should be equipped effectively to treat
such cases. The Committee further desire that steps should also be
taken to upgrade the zonal hospitals with all specialities and super
specialist facilities as per the demands of agro-climatic conditions so
that the Armed Forces Personnel could get these facilities at nearby
place and they do not have rush to Command Hospitals for treatment.
This will ease the congestion in the Command Hospitals. The
Committee are happy to note that specialists facilities in various
categories of hospitals is under review of Govt. The Committee strongly
desire that early decision may be taken in this regard.
Reply of the Government
This issue is also linked with the overall issue of authorization of
additional manpower in AFMS. As stated in reply to para 1.6.1 the
report of the Committee set up by DGAFMS has been examined and
a proposal to augment the AFMS set up has been referred to Finance
Division in the Ministry for examination.
[Ministry of Defence, OM No. H-11013/21/2006/D(Parl.)
dated 13.04.2007]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para 46 of Chapter-I)
Recommendation (Para No. 5.23)
The Committee are happy to note that AFMS has world class
orthopedic centres and has been instrumental in undertaking world

77
class orthopedic surgery. The beneficiaries include besides armed forces
personnel, ex-servicemen and civilians. The Committee are however
constrained to note that there are only 30 orthopedic specialists in
AFMS. The Committee desire that in view of state of art orthopedic
centres in AFMS, more specialities should be appointed so that more
and more people, both service personnel and civilians, may avail
benefits of world class orthopedic facilities.
Reply of the Government
This issue is also linked with the overall issue of authorization of
additional manpower in AFMS. As stated in reply to para 1.6.1 the
report of the Committee appointed by DGAFMS has been examined
and a proposal to augment AFMS set up has neen referred to Finance
Division in the Ministry for examination.
[Ministry of Defence, OM No. H-11013/21/2006/D(Parl.)
dated 13.04.2007]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para 46 of Chapter-I)
Recommendation (Para No. 5.24)
The Committee desire that the two neurosurgical centres as
projected in the proposed Peace Establishment should be set up
urgently.
Reply of the Government
 Establishment of Neurological Centre at 5 AF Hospital Jorhat and
7 AF Hospital Kanpur is being processed at the level of Air
Headquarters for implementation.
[Ministry of Defence, OM No. H-11013/21/2006/D(Parl.)
dated 13.04.2007]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para 46 of Chapter-I)
Recommendation (Para Nos. 5.33 & 5.34)
The Committee are constrained to note that AFMS does not have
any hospitals and education system which are based on Indian system

78
of medicine and homeopathy which is being used worldwide. The
Indian systems viz. Ayurvedic, Unani, Sidha etc. are proven systems
being practiced since ancient times. Though they may not cater to the
wartime requirements, these systems are very effective in some areas
and service personnel have great faith in them.
The Committee therefore desire that Govt should examine the
feasibility of introducing the Indian system of medicine and
homeopathy in various hospitals alongwith allopathic system for service
personnel.
Reply of the Government
In reply to OM No. 16/2/COD/2007 dated 2nd Feb., 2007 from
the Standing Committee on this issue, the Standing Committee has
already been informed as under:
The Medical Services Advisory Committee (MSAC), the Principal
Personnel Officers Committee (PPOC) and the Chiefs of Staff Committee
(CoSC) gave the following reasons for non-acceptance of Indian System
of Medicine in Armed forces hospitals:—
(a) The option of permitting an individual to choose the system
of medicine he desires is not in the interest and ethos of a
disciplined force like the Armed Forces, where sometimes
strict measures have to be enforced not only to keep an
individual fighting fit at all times but also to ensure that a
person is free from any infectious disease which may
jeopardize the health and well being of his fellow
combatants.
(b) The AFMS who are accountable for providing health services
to the Armed Forces personnel are not qualified to practice
the Ayurvedic system and cannot refer any individual or
his dependants for same, without raising Ethical and Legal
issues.
(c)  There cannot be any cross-references between these two
systems of medicine that would be detrimental to the health
of troops & families.
(d) The AFMS has in existence a very stringent system of
medical audit and the Ayurvedic system cannot lend itself
to such an audit.
(e) Drug interactions between the Allopathic system of medicine
currently practiced in Armed Forces and Indian Systems of
medicine have not been largely studied.

79
(f) Wartime medical and surgical requirements are the pivot
on which the structure of AFMS revolve and their scales of
manpower, infrastructure and equipment are based on
catering to this need. The Indian System of Medicine would
not be able to cater to these requirements and neither would
they be able to handle the emergencies in modern medicare
such as Myocardial infarction, arrythmias, cardiac arrest,
intestinal obstruction, head injuries, polytrauma, renal failure
etc. which are the primary role of any allopathic physician
or surgical specialist.
[Ministry of Defence, OM No. H-11013/21/2006/D(Parl.)
dated 13.04.2007]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para 88 of Chapter-I)
Recommendation (Para No. 7.11)
The Committee note that AFMC imparts undergraduate training
with a total intake of 130 students (105 boys, 25 girls). The Committee
feel that in view of the large campus of AFMC and available
infrastructure, the Govt. should consider augmentation of Under
Graduates seats in AFMC to 200 to meet the big demand for the
course. The Committee, therefore, desire that a proposal in this regard
may be put to MCI for consideration.
Reply of the Government
Government has agreed ‘in principle’ to enhance MBBS seats in
AFMC, Pune to 200. DGAFMS has been asked to take up the matter
with MCI for increase of the seats in AFMC, Pune.
[Ministry of Defence, OM No. H-11013/21/2006/D(Parl.)
dated 13.04.2007]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para 93 of Chapter-I)
Recommendation (Para No. 7.12 )
The Committee further desire that Govt. should increase the Post
Graduate and super specialisation seats in various disciplines so that
more medical officers of AFMS may acquire specialisation. Besides
contributing to AFMS they will have better job prospects when released
from defence services.

80
Reply of the Government
Presently following Post Graduate (PG) seats are available in AFMS
Institutions:—
(i) Medical Council of India [MCI] recognized - 150
(ii) Only University recognized  - 30
(iii) Diplomate National Board [DNB]
 - About 100 PG/Superspeciality seats are available at various
AFMS Institutes. Further, application for reorganization of 50 more
seats has been submitted to the National Board Examination [NBE].
2. These are sufficient to meet current requirement of AFMS.
[Ministry of Defence, OM No. H-11013/21/2006/D(Parl.)
dated 13.04.2007]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para 93 of Chapter-I)
Recommendation (Para No. 8.6)
The Committee appreciate the Medical Research work being done
by the DRDO/DGAFMS and procedure for selection of research projects
and number of Indian Research Papers published in International
Journals. The Committee note that all medical research in Armed Forces
is carried out under the aegis of Defence Research and Development
Organisation. The Medical Research Committee also includes senior
scientists of DRDO. The Committee are of the view that medical and
life science research should not be placed under DRDO as it is entirely
different from strategic and Defence Research work. DRDO should
concentrate on Research work pertaining to Defence Strategic Industry
only and medical and life science research work should be gradually
detached from the purview of the DRDO. This way strength of the
DRDO and AFMS will increase in their specialized and independent
field.
Reply of the Government
The Life Sciences laboratories of DRDO are unique in that they
are the only laboratories in the country operating in their assigned
fields of expertise with the avowed aim of enhancing the operational
efficiency of the armed forces. This encompasses human factors research
related to selection of manpower, weapons development and manual
operations, evaluation of occupational hazards and safety of weapon
systems developed by DRDO etc. These laboratories are the only
laboratories addressing the various problems being faced by the Indian

81
troops which operate in highly challenging and hostile environments,
like high altitudes, desert regions, under-water operations, aerospace
and toxic and noisy environments, like engine rooms of ships, aircrafts,
tanks etc. No other agency in the country deals with such issues,
which are paramount for the safety and efficiency of our armed forces.
The research work is targeted to develop technical know-how, impart
necessary training, suggest remedial/preventive measure and to design
and develop useful products to mitigate hazardous effects of extreme
environments. The ergonomics related research ensures human factor
integration in all R&D work of other system laboratories in DRDO in
respect of weapon systems, workstations and military vehicles. These
aspects of research work are beyond the boundaries as well as
capabilities of medical entities and other agencies.
2. In the past an experiment has been tried, wherein the biomedical
laboratories were placed under the command and control of the
Director General Armed Forces Medical Services (DGAFMS) (during
1976-1979). However, this experiment failed to yield appreciable results
and the laboratories reverted back to DRDO. Research requires
sustained efforts and a continuity to be maintained. The continuity in
the Services is affected due to frequent postings resulting disruptions
in the flow of research work.
3. Similarly, the agricultural research laboratories were initially
under the purview of the Indian Council of Agriculture Research
(ICAR) in the Ministry of Agriculture for a few years. They had to be
finally transferred to the DRDO as no R&D work could be undertaken
at these remote laboratories at all during this period.
4. The existing multi-disciplinary laboratories have proven their
importance to the Armed Forces, therefore it would not be desirable
to detach them from DRDO.
[Ministry of Defence, OM No. H-11013/21/2006/D(Parl.)
dated 13.04.2007]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para 96 of Chapter-I)
Recommendation (Para Nos. 9.3 & 9.4)
The Committee note that there is one college of Nursing at AFMC
Pune and seven schools of Nursing in AFMS. The Indian Nursing
Council (INC) has recommended that all the schools of nursing be
converted into college of nursing by 2010. The Committee while
appreciating the move desire that diploma courses conducted by the
schools should not be discontinued. The Committee are given to
understand that training being imparted in College of Nursing and
schools is very effective and of a very high professional caliber. The

82
Committee, however, are constrained to note that at present no post
graduate degree in nursing is being awarded by AFMS and there is
no proposal at present for the same.
The Committee also desire that Govt. should make sincere efforts
to introduce a post graduate degree course in the College of Nursing.
The Committee would like to be apprised of the steps taken in this
regard.
Reply of the Government
As far as continuation of the seven schools of nursing, which
conduct Diploma Courses in Nursing, is concerned the Indian Nursing
Council has informed vide their Letter No.1-5/GB-CIR/2005-INC dated
2.5.2006 that it has been resolved that upgradation of School of Nursing
(GNM) to College of Nursing to be kept in abeyance, keeping in view
the expansion of health sector and requirement of large number of
nurses in National Rural Health Mission (NRHM). In view of this, the
existing schools of Nursing in AFMS will continue to function till
further order.
2. Regarding the recommendation to start Post-graduate Degree
Course, it is stated that ‘In-principle’ approval has been granted to
start M.Sc(Nursing) at College of Nursing AFMC Pune in the subject
of Medical Surgical Nursing, Obstetrics and Gynecological Nursing,
Community Health Nursing & Pediatric Nursing and Service HQrs
have been asked to obtain approval/clearance from concerned agencies
required to start M.Sc(Nursing) course at AFMC, Pune.
[Ministry of Defence, OM No. H-11013/21/2006/D(Parl.)
dated 13.04.2007]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para 100 & 101 of Chapter-I)
Recommendation (Para No. 9.9)
The Committee note that at present Armed Forces’ para medical
personnel being imparted training as per requirement of the three
services. Though the curriculum is the same as per the corresponding
civilian medical establishment, these courses have not been recognised
with the result that para medical staff are deprived of getting benefits
of their training post retirement as ex-servicemen. The Committee,
therefore, strongly desire that Govt. should take up the matter at the
highest level including the University Grants Commission to convert
Armed Forces Medical College and the relevant institutions into a
deemed university and bring all training courses under its umbrella
so that the same get recognition. The Committee also desire that
services of specialists and experts in the field of medical science may

83
be utilised by AFMS, even after their retirement, on contract basis. For
this purpose, if necessary, Govt. may amend the existing rules framed
under the relevant Act.
Reply of the Government
The proposal of DGAFMS for converting AFMC, Pune, into a
“Deemed University” is under examination of the Government. As
per guidelines for considering a proposal for declaring an institution
as “Deemed University” under section 3 of the UGC Act, one of the
requirements is that “the institution should be registered under the
Societies Registration Act or Public Trust Act and should formulate a
Memorandum of Association and Rules based on the Model prescribed
by the UGC”. The proposal for converting AFMC Pune into a “Deemed
University” in relaxation of above referred guidelines, has since been
forwarded to the Ministry of Human Resources Development. That
Ministry has referred the matter to UGC for their recommendations/
comments.
2. Regarding utilization of services of specialists and experts in the
field of medical science after their retirement, it is submitted that
officers, who are willing and volunteer to serve in the Armed Forces
Medical Services (AFMS) are eligible for re-employment in the AFMS
subject to the following conditions:—
(a) Fulfilling of eligibility criteria in terms of record of service,
medical category and disciplinary status.
(b) Overall deficiency in the AFMS.
(c) Initial re-employment for two years and thereafter extendable
by one year upto the age limit of sixty years.
3. In addition retired AFMS officers are also eligible for grant of
the status of Honorary Consultant/Advisors to the AFMS subject to
the following conditions:-
(a) Willingness to provide services free of cost.
(b) Recommendations of the concerned hospital and
intermediary authorities.
(c) A tenure of three years, which is extendable upto the age
limit of 65 years.
[Ministry of Defence, OM No. H-11013/21/2006/D(Parl.)
dated 13.04.2007]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para 104 of Chapter-I)

84
Recommendation (Para Nos. 12.5 & 12.6)
The Committee are constrained to note that the ECHS scheme is
applicable to pensioners/family pensioners only. The committee desire
that coverage of ECHS should be expanded to include Ex-servicemen
with a stipulated minimum period of service under its purview. Since
the ECHS is a contributory scheme, the Committee fail to understand
as to why this scheme is not extended to the service personnel who
are discharged from the Services for reasons beyond their control by
accepting suitable contribution from such personnel. Also families of
the soldiers who expired during the operations should be brought
under the ECHS.
The Committee understand that the families/dependents of the
soldiers/officers who die of natural causes, like cardiac arrest, etc.
while on duty are not entitled for additional compensation and medical
facilities as paid during operations. The Committee are of the view
that such deaths should also be treated at par with death during
military operations and desire that rules may be suitably amended so
the families/dependents of deceased get all the facilities, including
ECHS.
The Committee also understand that there is a still a vast number
of Ex-servicemen across the country staying in remote and interior
areas and are not in a position to avail these ECHS facilities. The
Committee desire that the Polyclinic facilities should be set in those
areas on priority basis so as to benefit this section of Ex-servicemen.
Reply of the Government
The Ex-Servicemen Contributory Health Scheme (ECHS) was
sanctioned by the Government of India for providing comprehensive
medical care to the ex-servicemen, who are in receipt of pension/
family pension/disability pension and their dependents. It is considered
necessary to link eligibility to some minimum service rendered. To be
in receipt of pension is a reasonable criteria in this regard. The non-
pensioners are either those, who left the military service voluntarily
for their personal reasons or those, who were removed as a result of
departmental action on disciplinary grounds. The Government does
not favour extending the scheme to non-pensioners due to above
reasons and because of wide ranging financial implications.
2. The war widows and the families/dependents of those soldiers,
who died in operations on military duties have already been covered
under ECHS as they are drawing pension. Moreover, the Government
has exempted the War Widows from payment of contribution for
becoming members of the scheme.
3. Death due to Heart attack/Natural causes both in operational
areas as well as in peace areas are examined with reference to duty
profile, posting profile history of disease etc. and held attributable/
non-attributable by the Medical Board accordingly.

85
4. The authorization of family pension and ex-gratia in both cases
is as under :-
Battle Casualty Physical Casualty held Physical Casualty held
attributable to Military non-attributable to
Service Military Service
Family
Pension
Ex-gratia
Liberalized Family
Pension equal to
pay drawn
Rs. 5 Lakhs for
death in courses of
performance of
duty attributable to
Military Service,
acts. of violence by
terrorists antisocial
elements or due to
accidents.
Rs. 7.5 Lakhs for
death occurring
during action
against militants
terrorists, extre-
mists and during
border skirmishes.
Special Family Pension equal
to 60% of pay drawn
Rs. 5 lakhs for death
occurring due to accident in
course of performance of
duty.
Ordinary Family Pension
equal to 30% of pay drawn
Nil.
5. Persons dying of natural causes are covered under physical
casualty attributable/non-attributable to Military Service depending
upon medical opinion.
6. At the time of introduction of the scheme, 227 ECHS polyclinics
had been sanctioned to be set up by 31st March, 2008 as per the
concentration of Ex-Servicemen pensioners population across the length
and breadth of the country. As of date, 225 polyclinics are functional.
The balance two are about to be operationalised and thereafter,
necessary need assessment will be carried out to identify the areas not
covered by ECHS facilities.
7. Thus all the areas are gradually being covered with opening of
polyclinics and empanelling private hospitals.
[Ministry of Defence, OM No. H-11013/21/2006/D(Parl.)
dated 13.04.2007]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para 109 of Chapter-I)

CHAPTER V
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH
FINAL REPLIES OF GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED
—NIL—
  N EW D ELHI; BALASAHEB VIKHE PATIL,
18 July, 2007 Chairman,
27 Asadha, 1929 (Saka) Standing Committee on Defence.
86

MINUTES OF TWENTIETH SITTING OF THE STANDING
COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE (2006-2007)
The Committee sat on Monday, the 12th February 2007 from
1100 to 1430 hrs. in ‘Main’ Committee Room, Parliament House Annexe,
New Delhi.
PRESENT
Shri Balasaheb Vikhe Patil – Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2.  Shri S. Bangarappa
3.  Shri Santosh Kumar Gangwar
4.  Dr. K.S. Manoj
5.  Shri Asaduddin Owaisi
6.  Shri Adhalrao Shivaji Patil
7.  Shri Mahadeorao Shiwankar
8.  Shri Rajesh Verma
Rajya Sabha
9.  Dr. Farooq Abdullah
10.  Shri Abu Asim Azmi
11. Shri R.K. Dhawan
12.  Smt. N.P . Durga
13.  Shri K.B. Shanappa
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri P .K. Bhandari — Joint Secretary
2. Shri Gopal Singh — Director
WITNESSES
Representatives of Ministry of Defence
1. Shri Shekhar Dutt — Defence Secretary
2. Shri K.P . Singh — Secretary (DP)
87

88
3. Dr. M. Natarajan — SA to RM
4. Shri S. Banerjee — DG (ACQ)
5. Shri V .K. Mishra — Secretary (Def. Fin.)
6. Dr. (Mrs.) Rekha Bhargava — Special Secretary (B)
7. Shri P .K. Rastogi — Addl Secy. (B)
8. Dr. W. Selvamurthy — CCR&D (LS&HR)
9. Shri Gautam Chatterjee — JS (O/N)
10. Shri Binoy Kumar — JS (E)
11. Shri Harcharanjit Singh — Secy (BRDB) / JS (ESW)
12. Shri S.N. Mishra — Addl FA(M)
13. Shri Alok Perti — JS (SY)
14. Dr. (Mrs.) Kiran Chadha — JS (X)
15. Shri T. Ramachandru — JS (S)
16. Shri Ranjan Chatterjee — JS (HAL)
17. Shri Mohd. Haleem Khan — Addl FA (H)
18. Smt. Anuradha Mitra — Addl FA (AM)
19. Shri Amit Cowshish — Addl FA (A)
20. Shri S. Ghosh — Chairman/OFB
21. Shri V . Somasuderam — JS (OF)
22. Shri B. Saha — Secy, OFB
23. Shri Sharad Ghodke — OSD (P)
24. Shri Ashok K. Baweja — Chairman, HAL
25. Shri V .R.S. Natarajan — CMD, BEML
26. Shri M. Narayana Rao — CMD, MIDHANI
27. Shri VVR Sastry — CMD (BEL)
28. Rear Adm (Retd.) A.K. Handa — CMD, GSL
29. Rear Adm T.S. Ganeshan — CMD, GRSE
30. Vice Admn S.K.K. Krishnan — CMD, MDL
31. Maj. Gen (Retd.) R. Gossain — CMD, BDL
32. Shri PRK Hara Gopal — Dir (Fin.), BEL
33. Shri SK Mehta — Dir (R&D), BEL
34. Shri Devjit Ghosh — LO. MIDHANI
35. Commdt. Sunil Mane Sinde — CM, GSL
36. Shri Yogesh Sharma — Regional CM, MDL

89
37. Commander Hardev Inder — IN (Retd.), Addl GM
38. Lt. Gen. HS Lidder — CISC
39. Lt. Gen. Deepak Kapoor — VCOAS
40. V . Adml. Nirmal Verma — VCNS
41. Air Mshl AK Nagalia — DCAS
42. Lt. Gen. SS Dhillon — MGO
43. Lt. Gen. Thomas Mathew — AG
44. Air Mshl VR Iyer — AOP
45. Vice Adml Sunil K. Damle — COP
46. Surg Vice Adml VK Singh — DGAFMS
47. Lt. Gen. LP Sadhotra — DGMS (Army)
48. Air Marshal HK Maini — DGMS (Air)
49. Surg Vice Adml Yogendra Singh — DGMS (Navy)
50. Maj. Gen. Suresh Chandra — Addl DGAFMS
51. Maj. Gen. J. Jayram — Addl DGAFMS (MR)
52. Maj. Gen. R.K. Kalra — MD-ECHS
53. Maj. Gen. A.K. Mehra — ADG WE
54. AVM N. Vijaya Kumar — ACAS (FP)
55. R. Adml. R.K. Dhowan — ACNS(P&P)
56. Brig. Kunwar Karni Singh — Dy. DGAFMS (P&T)
57. Brig. Satish Malik — Dy. MD-ECHS
58. Col. A.K. Verma — Dir MS (H)
59. Col. Pawan Kapoor — Dir AFMS (P)
60. Col. G. Ghosh — Dir. ECHS
61. Lt. Col. SI Subhani — CRD Cell
62. Capt. Abhishek Saxena — SO to VCOAS
63. Shri S. Ahuja — INAS, DGONA
2. At the outset, Hon’ble Chairman welcomed the representatives
of the Ministry of Defence to the sitting of the Committee and drew
their attention to Direction 58 of Directions by the Speaker, Lok Sabha.
3. The Committee then took evidence of the representatives of
Ministry of Defence on Action Taken Replies furnished by the Ministry
of Defence on Seventh Report on ‘Defence Ordnance Factories’, Ninth
Report on ‘Defence Public Sector Undertakings’ and Twelfth Report
on ‘Review of Medical Services and Education in the Defence Sector’.

90
4. The Committee expressed their displeasure almost on all the
Action Taken Replies furnished by the Ministry to the recommendations
contained in the above Reports especially on Twelfth Report on ‘Review
of Medical Services and Education in the Defence Sector’.
5. The representatives of the Ministry of Defence submitted that
they would go through the recommendations again in respect of
Twelfth Report and requested the Committee to give two months’
time for submission of Action Taken Replies thereon. The Committee
agreed to the request of the Ministry.
6. The Committee thereafter sought clarifications on the Action
Taken Replies to the observations/recommendations contained in the
Seventh and Ninth Reports on Defence Public Sector Undertakings
and Defence Ordnance Factories respectively to which the
representatives of the Ministry of Defence answered one by one.
The witnesses then withdrew
7. The verbatim record of the proceedings was kept.
8. The Committee, thereafter, considered the two draft reports on
the subjects ‘In-depth Study and Critical Review of Bharat Electronics
Limited (BEL)’ and ‘In-depth Study and Critical Review of Hindustan
Aeronautics Limited (HAL)’ and adopted the same with some
additions/modifications as suggested by the members.
9. The Committee then authorised the Hon’ble Chairman to finalise
the reports and present the same to the Parliament.
The Committee then adjourned.

MINUTES OF THIRTY-SEVENTH SITTING OF THE STANDING
COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE (2006-2007)
The Committee sat on Wednesday , the 04th July 2007 from
1500 hrs to 1755 hrs. in Committee Room ‘D’, Parliament House
Annexe, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Shri Balasaheb Vikhe Patil – Chairman
M
EMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri S. Bangarappa
3. Shri Suresh Kalmadi
4. Dr. K.S. Manoj
5. Shri Asaduddin Owaisi
6. Shri Shriniwas Patil
7. Dr. H. T. Sangliana
8. Shri Arjun Charan Sethi
9. Shri Manvendra Singh
10. Shri Rajesh Verma
Rajya Sabha
11. Shri Jai Parkash Aggarwal
12.  Abu Asim Azmi
13. Smt. Shobhana Bhartia
14. Shri S.P .M. Syed Khan
15. Shri K.B. Shanappa
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri P .K. Bhandari — Joint Secretary
2. Shri Gopal Singh — Director
3. Shri D.R. Shekhar — Deputy Secretary-II
4. Smt. J.M. Sinha — Under Secretary
91

92
Representatives of Ministry of Defence
1. Shri Shekhar Dutt — Defence Secretary
2. Smt. N.K. Narang — FA (DS)
3. Dr. M. Natarajan — SA to RM
4. Smt. Rekha Bhargava — Spl. Secy. (B)
5. Shri A.K. Jain — Spl. Secy (J)
6. Dr. W. Selvamurthy — CCR&D (LS&HR) & DS
7. Shri Binoy Kumar — JS (O/N)
8. Dr. J.P . Singh — Addl. Dir (P&C)
9. Dr. Manas K. Mandal — Director, DIPR
10. Lt. Gen. Thomas Mathew — AG
11. Air Mshl. VR Iyer — AOP
12. V . Adml. D.K. Dewan — CPS
13. Surg. V . Adml. Y. Singh — DGAFMS
14. Lt. Gen. S. Mukherjee — DGMS (Army)
15. Air Mshl. J.K. Gupta — DGMS (Air)
16. Maj. Gen. Suresh Chandra — Addl. DGAFMS
17. Surg. Cdr. B.S. Rathore — PDMS (P&M)
18. Brig. K.K. Singh — DDG (P&T)
19. Col. Pawan Kapoor — Dir. AFMS (P)
List of Non-Official Experts (Retired Senior Officers
of Armed Forces)
1. Lt. Gen. Shri Prakash Mani Tripathi (Retd.), Ex-M.P .
2. Lt. Gen. B.S. Thakkar, PVSM, VSM (Retd.)
3. Lt. Gen. Depinder Singh, PVSM (Retd.)
2. At the outset, Hon’ble Chairman welcomed the representatives
of the Ministry of Defence to the sitting of the Committee and drew
their attention to Direction 58 of the Directions by the Speaker, Lok
Sabha regarding maintaining confidentiality of the deliberations of the
sitting of the Committee.
3. The Ministry of Defence then made a presentation to the
Committee on the updated status of implementation of the
recommendations contained in the Twelfth Report of the Committee
on ‘Review of Medical Services and Education in the Defence Sector’.

93
The Ministry apprised the Committee about the efforts being made for
augmentation of manpower in the AFMS, upgradation of the status of
DGAFMS, modernisation plan for the AFMS, setting up of new military
hospitals in the forward areas, upgradation of the existing hospitals,
increasing number of suicide cases in the Armed Forces and the
measures being taken to check this alarming trend viz. by way of
conducting Yoga, etc. The Ministry also discussed the efforts being
made in regard to getting Deemed University status to AFMC, Pune,
increasing the number of seats in MBBS Courses and PG Courses and
the preparedness of the AFMS to contain the NBC threat. The facilities
being provided to Ex-Servicemen under Ex-Servicemen Contributory
Health Scheme (ECHS) were also discussed. The Committee then raised
a few queries/clarifications in regard to the issues discussed which
were responded to by the representatives of the Ministry.
The witnesses then withdrew
4. The Hon’ble Chairman then invited the non-official experts to
share their experience and expert views on the problems being faced
by the serving personnel as well as Ex-Servicemen and the problems
pertaining to manpower planning in Armed Forces. The Chairman
also apprised the experts about the relevant Direction of Speaker
regarding maintaining confidentiality of the deliberations of the sitting
of the Committee. Thereafter the experts elaborated several issues viz.
representation of Defence Services in the Sixth Pay Commission,
removal of the existing system of calculation of Pension with minimum
33 years of service; one rank—one pension; bleak promotional prospects;
treating Armed Forces Officers not at par with other Central
Government Officers; limited family accommodation in military stations,
etc. The Committee raised a few queries on the issues elaborated by
the experts which were responded to by them.
 5. A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept.
The witnesses then withdrew
The Committee then adjourned.

MINUTES OF THIRTY-NINTH SITTING OF THE STANDING
COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE (2006-2007)
The Committee sat on Wednesday, the 18th July 2007 from
1100 hrs. to 1200 hrs. in Committee Room ‘B’, Parliament House
Annexe, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Shri. Balasaheb Vikhe Patil – Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Milind Deora
3. Shri. Santosh Kumar Gangwar
4. Shri Ramesh C. Jigajinagi
5. Dr. K.S. Manoj
6. Ms. Ingrid Mcleod
7. Shri Shriniwas Patil
8. Shri Rajendrasinh Ghanshyamsinh Rana (Raju Rana)
9. Dr. H.T. Sangliana
10. Shri Arjun Charan Sethi
11. Shri Mahadeorao Shiwankar
12. Shri Manvendra Singh
Rajya Sabha
13. Shri Abu Asim Azmi
14. Shri R.K. Dhawan
15. Smt. N.P . Durga
16. Shri S.P .M.Syed Khan
17. Shri. K.B. Shanappa
18. Smt. Viplove Thakur
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri P .K. Bhandari — Joint Secretary
2. Shri Gopal Singh — Director
3. Shri D.R. Shekhar — Deputy Secretary-II
4. Smt. J.M. Sinha — Under Secretary
94

95
2. At the outset, Hon’ble Chairman welcomed the members to the
sitting of the Committee. The Committee, thereafter, considered the
draft ‘Action Taken Report on the recommendations contained in the
Twelfth Report of the Committee on Review of Medical Services and
Education in the Defence Sector’ and adopted the same with some
additions/modifications as suggested by the members.
3. The Committee then authorised the Hon’ble Chairman to finalise
the report and present the same to the Parliament.
4. The Committee also expressed their concern that the Ministry
of Defence are not giving due importance to the Committee’s
recommendations given in various reports. Therefore, they desired to
have discussion on the reports on the floor of the House in order to
draw pointed attention of the Hon’ble Defence Minister towards the
observations/recommendations and take action thereon.
The Committee then adjourned.

APPENDIX
ANALYSIS OF THE ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON
THE RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE 12TH REPORT
OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE (FOURTEENTH
LOK SABHA) ON ‘REVIEW OF MEDICAL SERVICES AND
EDUCATION IN THE DEFENCE SECTOR’
 Percentage
 of Total
(i) Total number of recommendations: 61
(ii) Recommendations/Observations which 21 34.42
have been accepted by the Government:
(Para Nos. 1.7, 2.22, 3.16, 3.17, 4.12 to
4.14, 4.16, 4.17, 4.20 to 4.22, 5.16 to 5.18,
5.28, 5.30, 6.4, 8.7, 10.6 and 11.8)
(iii) Recommendations/Observations which the 01 1.64
Committee do not desire to pursue in
view of Government replies:
(Para No. 7.13)
(iv) Recommendations/Observations in respect 39  63.94
of which replies of the Government have
not been accepted by the Committee:
(Para Nos. 1.4, 1.5,1.6.1 to 1.6.6, 2.5 to 2.7,
2.13, 2.17, 2.18, 3.3 to 3.5, 3.13 to 3.15,
3.20, 4.15, 4.24, 4.27, 4.28, 5.10, 5.11, 5.23,
5.24, 5.33, 5.34, 7.11, 7.12, 8.6, 9.3, 9.4,
9.9, 12.5 and 12.6)
(v) Recommendations/Observations in respect — —
of which final replies of Government are
still awaited:
NIL
96