14
STANDING COMMITTEE
ON DEFENCE
(2006-07)
FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA
MINISTRY OF DEFENCE
‘DEFENCE RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT
ORGANISATION (DRDO)’
FOURTEENTH REPORT
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
March, 2007/Phalguna, 1928 (Saka)

FOURTEENTH REPORT
STANDING COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE
(2006-07)
(FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA)
MINISTRY OF DEFENCE
‘DEFENCE RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT
ORGANISATION (DRDO)’
Presented to Lok Sabha on 16.3.2007
Laid  in  Rajya Sabha  on 16.3.2007
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
March, 2007/Phalguna, 1928 (Saka)

C.O.D. No. 77
Price : Rs. 149.00
© 2007 BY LOK S ABHA S ECRETARIAT
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of
Business in Lok Sabha (Eleventh Edition) and Printed by Jainco Art India,
New Delhi-110 005.

(i)
CONTENTS
PAGES
COMPOSITION OF THE C OMMITTEE .............................................................. (iii)
PREFACE ........................................................................................................ (v)
REPORT
CHAPTER I Introductory ................................................................... 1
CHAPTER II Organisational Structure of DRDO ......................... 5
CHAPTER III Brain Drain in DRDO ................................................ 11
CHAPTER IV Budget & Expenditure ............................................... 15
CHAPTER V Indigenous Research and Development
Activities ........................................................................ 19
CHAPTER VI Effective Interaction with the users ........................ 33
CHAPTER VII Projects Abandoned by DRDO ................................ 39
CHAPTER VIII Performance of the Projects ...................................... 42
(i) MBT Arjun ............................................................ 44
(ii) Design and Development of Kaveri Engine
for Light Combat Aircraft (LCA) .................... 52
(iii) Integrated Guided Missile Development
Programme (IGMDP) .......................................... 59
(iv) BrahMos Missile................................................... 62
(v) Concurrent Engineering ...................................... 63
C
HAPTER IX Research on Stress Management ............................. 66
CHAPTER X Private Sector Participation in Defence R&D ...... 70
Annexure ........................................................................ 84
APPENDICES
Minutes of the sitting of the Committee held
on 10 October 2005, 1 December 2005, 2 January
2006, 31 January 2006, 23 March 2006, 24 March
2006, 7 June 2006, 17 July 2006, 22 September
2006, 26 December 2006 and 9 January 2007 ...... 111

COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE
ON DEFENCE (2006-07)
  Shri Balasaheb Vikhe Patil —  Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Churchill Alemao
3. Shri S. Bangarappa
4. Shri Milind Murli Deora
5. Shri Santosh Kumar Gangwar
6. Shri Ramesh C. Jigajinagi
7. Shri Suresh Kalmadi
8. Shri C. Kuppusami
9. Dr. K.S. Manoj
10. Ms. Ingrid Mcleod
11. Shri Asaduddin Owaisi
12. Shri Adhalrao Shivaji Patil
13. Shri Shriniwas Patil
14. Shri Rajendrasinh Ghanshyamsinh Rana (Raju Rana)
15. Dr. H.T. Sangliana
16. Shri Arjun Charan Sethi
17. Prof. Mahadeorao Shiwankar
18. Shri Manvendra Singh
19. Shri Balashowry Vallabhaneni
20. Shri Rajesh Verma
(iii)

Rajya Sabha
21. Dr. Farooq Abdullah
22. Shri Jai Prakash Aggarwal
23. Shri Abu Asim Azmi
24. Shri R.K. Dhawan
25. Shri T.T.V . Dhinakaran
26. Smt. N.P . Durga
27. Shri K.B. Shanappa
28. Shri Arun Shourie
29. Smt. Viplove Thakur
*30. Shri Lalit Suri
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri S.K. Sharma — Additional Secretary
2. Shri P .K. Bhandari — Joint Secretary
3. Shri Gopal Singh — Director
4. Shri D.R. Shekhar — Deputy Secretary-II
5. Smt. Jyochnamayi Sinha — Under Secretary
6. Shri Rahul Singh — Sr. Executive Assistant
(iv)
*Demised on 10.10.2006, consequently his seat remained vacant  w.e.f. 10.10.2006.

PREFACE
I, the Chairman, Standing Committee on Defence (2006-07) having
been authorised by the Committee to submit the Report on their behalf,
present this Report on the subject ‘Defence Research and Development
Organization’.
2. The Committee selected the above subject for examination during
the year 2005-06. As the examination of the subject remained
inconclusive, it was re-selected by the Standing Committee on Defence
for examination during the year 2006-07.
3. The Committee, during their examination of the subject, took
briefing and evidence of the representatives of the Ministry of Defence
on 1 December, 2005, 31 January, 7 June and 22 September 2006. The
Committee also heard the views of representatives of Confederation of
Indian Industry (CII) on 10 October, 2005 and 2 January 2006 on the
subject. The Committee also invited the then Hon’ble Minister of
Defence, representatives of Ministry of Defence, representatives from
Confederation of Indian Industry (CII), Federation of Indian Chambers
of Commerce and Industry (FICCI) and Institute of Defence Studies
and Analyses (IDSA) on 17 July 2006 on the subject ‘Public Private
Partnership on Defence R&D and Production’.
4. The Committee also benefited by the expert opinion of Shri
Ajay Vikram Singh, Defence Secretary (Retd.), Gen. V .P . Malik, PVSM,
AVSM (Retd.), Air Chief Marshal S. Krishnaswamy, PVSM, AVSM, VM
& Bar (Retd.), Lt. Gen. S.S. Mehta, PVSM, AVSM, VSM (Retd.), Maj.
Gen. Bikram Singh Kanwar (Retd.), Ex-M.P ., Col. Sudhir Sawant (Retd.),
Ex-M.P ., Vice-Admiral K.K. Nair (Retd.) and Dr. Vijay L. Kelkar, Finance
Secretary (Retd.) at their sittings held on 2 January, 23 and 24 March
and 18 December 2006 on the subject.
5. Based on the background note, written replies to the list of
points furnished by the Ministry of Defence on the subject, approach
paper submitted and briefing/oral evidences tendered by the
representatives of CII and non-official experts and the observations
made by the members of the Committee during the sittings, the
Committee finalised the draft Report at their sitting held on
26 December 2006 and considered/adopted it at their sitting held on
9 January 2007.
(v)

(vi)
6. The Committee wish to epxress their thanks to the then Hon’ble
Minister of Defence, representatives of the Ministry of Defence, non-
official experts, the representatives of the Confederation of Indian
Industry (CII), FICCI for appearing before the Committee for evidence
and for furnishing the material and information in a very short span
of time which the Committee desired in connection with the
examination of the subject.
7. For facility of reference and convenience, the observations/
recommendations of the Committee have been printed in thick type in
the body of the Report.
 N
EW D ELHI; BALASAHEB VIKHE PATIL,
1 February, 2007 Chairman,
12 Magha, 1928 (Saka) Standing Committee on Defence.

CHAPTER I
INTRODUCTORY
1.1 DRDO is one of the premier scientific and technological
organisations in the country formed in 1958 with a mission to design,
develop and lead to production state-of-the-art weapon systems,
platforms and allied equipment and also to provide combat support
for meeting the current requirements of the Armed Forces. The
Organisation is fully dedicated towards progressive enhancement of
self-reliance in defence systems and state-of-the-art technologies and
also to enhance Research & Development infrastructure and capability
of the country. It was established with a vision to promote the corporate
strength and to make the country independent of foreign technologies
in critical sphere.
1.2 DRDO is working in frontier technologies, which are always a
challenge. Considerable advancements have been made and tried in
the field of aeronautics, armaments, missile systems, combat vehicles,
advanced computing & networking, communication, secrecy system,
electronics, electronic warfare systems, radar systems, military
engineering, life sciences, advanced materials, composites, underwater
sensors / weapons and warship technology, etc. and attempts are now
being made to meet emerging challenges in these fields.
1.3 The developed countries with their planning and proper
utilisation of funds human and natural resources clearly took an edge
over developing nations in the fields of science and technology
including the defence systems who were engrossed in multitude of
problems related to provide basic necessities of their population. Then
to show their military and economic superiority no developed country
wanted any developing country to be at par with it. These countries
insisted on only ‘buy’ category of weapons and transfer of complete
technology was always denied to developing nations.
1.4 Despite handicaps, Defence R& D in India managed to mature
well by the mid-1980s and embarked on R&D for major weapon
systems as well as on creating core competence in defence-critical
technologies. It makes interesting observation that its performance was
rated way below the expectations of the user services in low-end
technology areas where foreign suppliers were available. However, in

2
the strategically important areas such as radars, sonar, electronic warfare
equipment, advanced ammunitions and missiles, the users were less
critical of indigenous R&D. In most of these denied technology areas
where user interest and stakes were high, therefore, role of the Defence
R&D in India has become more responsive and sensitive due to the
changing security environment.
1.5 The time period of war has direct bearing on the economy
and resources of the country. The conventional wars always took their
toll on the manpower also, sometimes wiping out almost half of the
adult male population of a country. The consistent improvement in
the weapon system and new ways to fight a war has changed the
requirement from conventional systems to nuclear, biological and
chemical (NBC) weapons of mass destructions where requirement of
manpower changed drastically from numerical strength to technically
qualified professionals who could operate and improve upon the
sophisticated and high precision weapon systems. Therefore, all these
factors led to a need of fundamental research and technological
development in defence sector also.
Charter of DRDO detailing is original functions assigned to it is
enclosed (Annexure ‘A’).
1.6 The Committee after interaction with the Ministry and
information received from the Ministry, are informed that important
projects namely Light Combat Aircraft (LCA), missile programme, Arjun
Tank, Kaveri Engine etc. are far behind the schedule and showing
time and cost overrun. Even after number of years and cost revision
these projects could not be completed by the DRDO as envisaged by
it, which in fact deprived the country of the intended benefits to be
availed by the country after completion of these projects. Besides that
even after 48 years of formation of DRDO, it has not been able to
achieve its targeted mission of self-reliance in weapon system and
other equipment.
1.7 The Committee also find that DRDO is spending only 8-10%
of its budget on fundamental/applied R&D and rest of the Budget is
being spent on DRDO’s programme and schemes. Further, DRDO has
not been able to spend the funds fully allocated for R&D. The
Committee also have noticed some grey areas which are required to
be addressed more adequately in a right direction like one man one
post, effective use of collective wisdom, need to overhaul and
restructure DRDO to perform, effective emphasis on critical scientific

3
research, joint ventures and partnership with the private sector and
within the Government undertaking budget to be reviewed with
performance and to give thrust to complete inordinate delayed projects
indigenously or through collaboration without further loss of precious
time.
1.8 A Self Reliance Review Committee, under the Chairmanship
of Scientific Adviser to Raksha Mantri was constituted in 1992 to
examine all issues related to self-reliance and formulate a long term
plan. Accordingly a “10 Year Plan for Self Reliance in Defence Systems”
was formulated through joint interactions between the various
departments of the Ministry of Defence and the three Services. The
plan envisages a major coordinated thrust for self-reliance in defence
systems to enhance the level of self-reliance progressively from 1995
through 2005. The plan defines self-reliance Index as the ratio of the
indigenous content of defence procurement to the total expenditure on
defence procurement in a given financial year. The 10 year plan
envisages raising the self-reliance Index value from 1992-93 estimation
of 0.3 to possible 0.7 by the year 2005. This implies that the import
content of the defence procurement would be brought down to 30%
or less in the next 10 years.
1.9 As per the ten-year old Vision Plan of the Ministry of Defence,
from 1994 to 2005, self-reliance index would have gone up from 30%
to 70% which is at present hovering around 30-35%.
1.10 Keeping in view all these aspects the Committee on Defence
decided to select DRDO as subject for detailed examination during the
year 2005-06. As the examination of DRDO could not be completed in
2005-06, the Committee again selected this subject for examination
during the year 2006-07. The Committee have held 10 sittings on the
subject and examined this subject thoroughly. Important observations
and recommendations of the Committee are given in the succeeding
paragraphs.
Recommendation No. 1
Need for Reorientation of Defence Research Policy and Private Participation
in IT
1.11 The Committee note that the DRDO was formed in 1958
with an objective to provide Scientific and technological support to
Armed Forces through design and development of new and
sophisticated equipment to meet their operational requirements. The
main objective of DRDO is the establishment of capability for

4
indigenous production of equipment with a view to attain self-
reliance in defence requirements. This mandate of DRDO is
accomplished through 50 Laboratories / Establishments whose
activities are organised through specific projects.
1.12 The Committee are not happy to be informed that during
Xth Plan (2002-2007), against the target fixed to reach 70%
indigenisation only 30-35% target could be achieved. This gives an
impression to the Committee that the country is still largely
dependent on imports of Defence products and the DRDO even
after 48 years of its formation has not been able to achieve its
targeted mission of self-reliance in Defence production. The
Committee feel that there is an urgent need for a thorough review
of its functioning and its organisational/structural set up, in order to
identify the strength and weaknesses and to improve and strengthen
this organisation to increase its efficiency to enable it to achieve
organisational goals.
1.13 The Committee are of the view that in order to achieve the
objective of self-reliance apart from Defence PSUs and Ordnance
Factories, private participation should also be encouraged and re-
oriented in the research and development areas, where they have
expertise and capability in Defence production by funding the
relevant organizations.
1.14 The Committee, keeping in view the future war scenario,
strongly feel that it has become imperative to develop weapon
systems not only on one-to-one basis but also as an integrated system.
The Government should, therefore, take a holistic and flexible view
towards Defence R&D and production agencies by providing them
complete autonomy and accountability and re-orient their work
according to the changes taking place world wide.

CHAPTER II
ORGANISATIONAL STRUCTURE OF DRDO
2.1 Defence Research and Development Organisation (DRDO) was
formed in 1958 with an objective to build up science-based capability
towards making improvements in the existing weapon systems, and
also in other imported equipment. Today DRDO has emerged as one
of the premier scientific and technological organisation in the country
with a mission to design and develop state-of-the-art weapon systems,
platforms, and allied equipment leading to production, and also to
provide combat support for meeting the current requirements of the
Armed Forces. DRDO has a mission-mode structure, headed by the
Director General, Research & Development (DG, R&D), who is also
the Secretary, Department of Defence R&D, and Scientific Adviser to
Raksha Mantri (SA to RM). DG, R&D is assisted by Chief Controllers,
Research and Development. The Organisation has two tier systems,
viz. the Technical and Corporate Hqrs at New Delhi; and laboratories/
establishments located at different stations all over the country from
Jodhpur in west to Tejpur in the east and Leh in north to Kochi in
south.
2.2 In a note furnished to the Committee, the Ministry further
submitted the Organisational Structure of DRDO as under :-
“DRDO Hqrs under the Department of Defence Research &
Development, is organized in two different types of Hqrs
Directorates. Technical Directorates which include Directorates of
Aeronautics, Armaments, Naval Systems, Combat Vehicles and
Engineering, Electronics and Computer Sciences, Missiles, Naval
Research and Development, Life Sciences, Civil Works and Estates
and Technical Examination Cell. These Directorates act as ‘single
window’ to facilitate laboratories and establishments, functioning
in particular areas, in obtaining approvals of new projects from
the Government, facilitate in monitoring and review of ongoing
projects and also to co-ordinate with other laboratories and
directorates. Corporate Directorates, like, Directorates of Personnel;
Human Resource Development; Materials Management; Planning
& Coordination; Management Services; Rajbhasha and Organisation
& Methods; Budget, Finance & Accounts; Security & Vigilance;
International Cooperation, and Extramural Research & Intellectual
Property Rights assist laboratories in improvement of their
5

6
infrastructure, creation of new facilities, induction of manpower,
etc. and also in getting Government approvals for taking up projects
in their respective areas. Recruitment & Assessment Centre
undertakes fresh recruitments, and organizes assessment on periodic
basis for the promotions of scientists for all laboratories & Hqrs.
of DRDO under Defence Research Development Service (DRDS).
Personnel Assessment Centre conducts assessment of performance
for promotions for personnel of DRTC Cadres.”
2.3 With regard to various Laboratories/Establishments in DRDO,
the Ministry stated as under :—
“Various programmes/projects are being executed through a
network of fifty laboratories/establishments, Field Stations, Regional
Centres of Military Airworthiness (RCsMA), etc. located all over
the country. They are engaged in R&D activities in the field of
aeronautics, armaments, missiles, combat vehicles, advanced
computing & networking, electronics, opto-electronics, military
engineering systems, life sciences, advanced materials, composites
and underwater sensors/weapons and warship technology. DRDO
has two societies, namely Aeronautical Development Agency (ADA),
and Society for Integrated Technology Applications & Research
(SITAR). ADA was set up in 1983 at Bangalore and has mission to
undertake design & development of advanced technology aircraft.
SITAR designs digital components and devices required for various
projects including high performance computing. Defence Institute
of Advanced Technology (DIAT), earlier an establishment of DRDO,
attained the status of Deemed University in 2005. DIAT organizes
courses on wide spectrum of technologies including regular long,
and short term courses, Induction Programmes for newly recruited
scientists and Post Graduate Programmes to meet defence
requirements in general and weapon systems in particular. These
are also administered and funded by the DRDO. Gallium Arsenide
Enabling Technology Centre (GAETEC) at Hyderabad is a foundry,
set up for design, development and fabrication of critical microwave
components for various programmes undertaken by DRDO and
Department of Space. Hierarchical organisational structure of DRDO
is given at Annexure “A” whereas list of DRDO laboratories/
establishments is enclosed at Annexure-B.”
2.4 On being asked about the proposal for restructuring DRDO,
the Ministry in its reply submitted as under :—
“The structure of DRDO has been undergoing various changes
depending upon the environment and the services expected of the

7
DRDO. For example, recently in order to improve our interface
with the Defence Services, a new office of Chief Controller R&D
(Services Interaction) has been set up which participates with the
CIDS and the Defence Services on the Defence Acquisition Council
Categorisation Committee and ‘Make’ or ‘Buy’ decisions. Further,
interface issues with the Services will also be dealt with by this
wing of DRDO.”
2.5 On the issue of inclusion of independent professional experts
to suggest restructuring of DRDO in order to improve its efficiency
and professionalism, the Ministry replied as under :—
“A suggestion has already been made by Kelkar Committee to
this effect. We are eliciting views of other scientific departments
with respect to similar review of their organizations and its efficacy.
We are looking at various possibilities and issues that need to be
focused for the review. We may suggest a suitable committee for
the purpose largely with external experts having familiarity with
the working of scientific and industrial departments, experts in
the areas of science, industry, finance and academic institutions so
that the review is purposeful.”
2.6 On being asked about the positions at present being held by
SA to RM, the Ministry replied as under :—
“(i) Secretary , R&D
(ii) Dir ector General Defence Research and Development
Organisation
(iii) Director General Aeronautical Development Agency”
2.7 On the issue of splitting DRDO into separate independent
organization for undertaking R & D in their respective fields, the
Ministry replied as under :—
“DRDO undertakes research projects to develop weapons and
platforms for strategic requirements of our Armed Forces. Since
majority of DRDO projects are interdisciplinary, systems and science
laboratories are working in close coordination in a symbiotic
manner to complete the ongoing projects. Splitting into various
separate independent organisations will adversely affect the
functioning and proper coordination among them, which, at present,
is working very well. DRDO works on user driven mission mode
projects or science and technology projects. Though it appears that
Life Sciences related issues need not be addressed by DRDO, but

8
the subject has been repeatedly debated and discussed in
conjunction with the user whether they are ready to take on the
research in those areas either by themselves or through academic
universities or other scientific departments. However, such attempts
have not succeeded primarily because users are very keen to avail
the services of Life Sciences laboratories as it meets their operational
needs directly. Users also feel that the Life Sciences laboratories
understand their requirement better. In spite of this, we are making
conscious attempts to identify sources whether certain operations
of such tasks can be outsourced.”
2.8 The Committee wanted the views of the Ministry as to
whether three separate research wings for Army, Navy and Air Force
could be beneficial, the Ministry replied as under :-
“The science and technology is not specific to Army, Air Force
and Navy. However, the products and systems are to be designed
and developed to meet the specific requirements of the individual
Services. This is being done in close coordination with individual
Service. However, pure science and technology in R&D areas is
not linked to any Service and the output of this R&D will be
available to the products that will be development for the three
Services”.
2.9 As regards the autonomy to DRDO, the Ministry submitted
as under :-
“DRDO is a dynamic organisation having flexibility to adopt to
changes necessary for its role and functions. So, it is autonomous
in functions and can not become static organisation. We intend
examining the possibility of a structure similar to Space
Commission/Atomic Energy Commission, Council of Scientific and
Industrial Research (CSIR) to bring about greater autonomy in our
functioning; particularly for teaming with industries. This may take
some time to evolve conceptually, before we could seek Government
approval for the same”.
2.10 The Ministry was asked whether DRDO needs to have
autonomy for taking financial decisions and establishing partnership
with public-private sector. The Ministry replied as under :-
”Currently adequate autonomy exists for taking financial decisions
and establishing partnership with public-private sector.”

9
2.11 In another reply to restructure DRDO on the lines of Space
Commission/Atomic Energy Commission, the Ministry stated as
under :-
“DRDO internally keeps reviewing its structure for enhancing its
effectiveness. Even under current dispensation, the Organisation is
performing well and there is no such proposal to restructure on
lines of the Space Commission/Atomic Energy Commission under
consideration of the Government.”
2.12 On being asked whether more autonomy will help DRDO to
achieve its goal in a realistic and time-bound manner, the Ministry
replied as under :-
“Science and Technology Departments need greater functional
autonomy and flexibility and yet be accountable. In order to achieve
organizational goal in realistic and time bound manner. It is
pertinent to execute high-end cutting edge technologies in frontier
areas of technology projects and programmes with greater flexibility
in operation. Enhancement of autonomy in lines with Space
Research and Atomic Energy Departments will help in overcoming
procedural delays and effective & efficient management of time
and resources. This will enhance efficiency in execution of Science
and Technology Projects and Programmes”.
2.13 The Ministry was asked as to whether DRDO is an
autonomous body, the representative of the Ministry during oral
evidence stated:-
“We are largely autonomous I would not say fully autonomous
please appreciate that already the Government has initiated certain
changes in the Defence procurement policy which will have an
effect on us in the sense of future developments”.
Recommendation No. 2
Organisational Structure of DRDO
2.14 The Committee express their displeasure to note that
Scientific Advisor to Raksha Mantri has been assigned multifarious
responsibilities. Besides this he is holding, the posts of Director-
General of Defence Research and Development Organisation and
Secretary (R&D). He is also the Director-General of Aeronautical
Development Agency. The Committee strongly feel that any Officer
who holds various posts simultaneously cannot be expected to devote

10
adequate time and energy to visit R&D laboratories under him and
to contact other scientific labs for motivational leadership purpose.
This, in turn, dilutes the benefits of collective wisdom, different
sets of mind sets give efficiency, accountability, proper planning and
also efficacy of the organization. The Committee feel that one person
should not be entrusted with a number of responsibilities by making
him hold a number of posts simultaneously. The Committee also
desire that the Government should fill all the vacancies urgently, so
that the organisation will be more purposeful and productive. The
Committee would like to be apprised of the progress made by the
Government in this regard.
2.15 The Committee note with serious concern that DRDO in
addition to fundamental research and development for developing
weapons and platforms for strategic requirement of Armed Forces is
also undertaking R&D on medical sciences, life sciences and other
allied sciences. The Committee strongly feel that R&D work on
medical, life and other allied sciences should be entrusted directly
to the concerned organization relating to these subjects as it would
give more and more opportunity to DRDO to concentrate on the
fundamental and crucial Defence Research work. This would make
the country self reliant in the field of weapon systems and force
multipliers. For R&D on Medical and allied sciences, Government
should create a separate R&D organization in their respective
organisation, life science and medical science can merge as respective
institutions.
2.16 The Committee are of the view that DRDO should
concentrate on research work, primarily on Defence and Strategically
important matters only and research activities in the field of Life
Sciences i.e. food, agriculture, medicine, psychology, physical and
allied sciences, be left to the manufacturers or the users or private
organizations as the case may be. The Committee also desire that
projects for applied research activities should be funded by the
respective Services/Organizations.
2.17 The Committee have been informed that the Space
Commission/Atomic Energy Commission enjoys greater autonomy in
its functioning particularly for teaming up with the industry. The
Committee, keeping in view the disappointing performance of DRDO
strongly recommend to the Government the complete review of the
structure and functioning of DRDO including providing greater
autonomy by appointing an independent Committee of Experts/
professionals, on the lines of Atomic Energy Commission and Indian
Space Research Organization (ISRO) so that it could achieve its
targeted mission of self-reliance in Defence sector.

CHAPTER III
BRAIN DRAIN IN DRDO
3.1 As regard the adequacy of laboratories and strength of
scientists, the Ministry in a written note furnished to the Committee
stated:—
“50 DRDO laboratories/establishments, field stations regional
centres are sufficient to meet the requirement of DRDO.
The total authorized strength of DRDO is 33,442 distributed in the
various categories viz. Defence Research & Development Services
(DRDS)/Defence Research & Technical Cadre (DRTC) Admin. &
Allied categories which is the upper limit of the number of
employees up to Xth Plan period i.e. 2007. It is pertinent to mention
that this is not the authorized strength in the conventional sense
of the word, meaning thereby that Organisation must have the
post filled up. DRDO is the project-driven scientific organisation
and the manpower inducted in phases as per the requirement in
Projects. Such requirements are analysed by the Organisation and
number decided from time to time. There is no concept of deficient
manpower merely because not all the manpower positions have
been filled in the Organisation and the upper ceiling touched. The
projects have not suffered on account of non-availability of
manpower”.
3.2 The Committee desired to know about the salary structure
and also number of scientists left DRDO in the last 10 years, the
Ministry replied as under:-
“The scientists in DRDO apart from the Pay Scales as per the Vth
Central Pay Commission (CPC), are also granted two additional
increments to all the scientists (recruitees and promotees) in the
pay scale of Rs. 10000-15200/-, Rs. 12000-16500/-. Rs. 14300-18300/-
and 16400-20000/-, with effect from 01.01.1996 after their normal
pay fixation. Special Pay of Rs. 2000/- per month to the scientists
in the Pay Scales of Rs. 18400-22400/-. In lieu of separate higher
Scale after Peer Review. Professional Update Allowance of Rs. 5000/-
per annum to all scientists. A proposal for giving incentives for
scientists is being processed for approval of the Government.
11

12
A total 1404 scientists have left the DRDO during the last ten
years. The DRDO is taking all due care of tangible and intangible
viz. accommodation to the scientists within campus & postings in
the on-going projects to attract and retain talent in the
Organization”.
3.3 The Committee further asked the Ministry to give specific
reasons of brain drain and efforts to retain the scientists. The Ministry
explained as under:-
“During the last 10 years, most of the scientists have left DRDO
on their personal/domestic grounds.
DRDO employs highly qualified scientists in various disciplines.
Some of the disciplines are in very high demand in open market,
especially large number of electronics and computer science
graduates are in great demand by the booming IT Industry for
which India is developing as a big base. A number of MNCs are
establishing R&D centers in India, many in the cities where DRDO
has a cluster of laboratories and establishments. Preferential
acceptance of various options of job offer available are exercised
by talented candidates. DRDO also exercises option on these
meritorious candidates for recruitment. Some of the scientists
selected in DRDO through proper selection process, after training
and R&D experience in the Organisation are offered much higher
lucrative salary by MNCs and Private Companies. DRDO is striving
to meet the rising expectations of scientists and technical personnel
and attract and retain talent in the Organisation. A scheme of
incentives proposed to the Government is pending with the Govt.
since July 2001. In view of Parliamentary Assurance given in the
196th (2002) Session, a fresh proposal for giving the following
incentives for scientists is being processed for approval and sanction
of the Government:-
• Enhancement of professional update allowance.
• Authorization of additional increments to Scientists ‘B’ at
the time of joining.
• Internet facility to all the scientists at home.
• Enhancement of Study Leaves for acquiring higher
qualification viz PhD, M Tech, etc.
• Individual Consultancy & Collaborative opportunities.
• Fast track promotion policies.

13
• Grant of Sabbatical Leave for interaction with academia and
R&D departments.
• Detailing scientists for Short Term/Long Term training
courses in frontier areas within the country and abroad.
• Entitling all scientists for Air Travels on Official/Temporary
Duty.
• Reimbursement of residential telephone and Internet
expenses for young scientists also.
•A ward Scheme to be augmented.
• Adjunct appointment.
• Sharing of monetary benefits of commercialization of
products/processes developed by inventors.
• Augmentation of residential facilities, recreational, medical
and educational facilities.
• Better social life in the DRDO living campus.
The above Incentives Schemes will help to ameliorate the problem
of attrition and to attract and retain the best scientists for the
Organisation.
The working  environment is congenial and amenities are adequate
in DRDO. The DRDO is taking all due care of tangible and
intangible benefits viz. accommodation to the scientists within
campus & postings in the ongoing projects to attract and retain
talent in the organization”.
Recommendation No. 3
Brain Drain in DRDO
3.4 The Committee are constrained to note that DRDO has been
facing problem of shortage of scientists to the extent of 1404 scientists,
as they have left DRDO in view of the lucrative job opportunities
available to them in the private sector and other organisations. The
Committee take note of the fact that the organisation has been facing
this serious challenge to retain its trained manpower.
3.5 The Committee note with serious concern that the proposal
to provide incentives for scientists of DRDO has been pending for
consideration with the Government since 2001 and despite all the
Parliamentary assurances, the Ministry has not taken any action to

14
implement the proposed incentives. The Committee therefore, desire
that immediate steps be taken by the Ministry to clear the said
incentive proposal and also think of providing other perks and
facilities in order to attract best, talented employable technical
manpower and to contain the existing brain drain to further
strengthen the organization so that the research work should not
suffer.
3.6 The Committee hold a view that scientists are the intellectual
property of the country and their contribution to the nation is
peerless which cannot be equated by providing only monetary
benefits to them. The Committee, therefore, strongly recommend the
Government to take suitable and firm measures for encouragement
to scientists by providing adequate freedom to do research work.
The Government should create an atmosphere of trust and have
close interaction with them to address their problems/grievances so
that they can concentrate on their research work.
3.7 The Committee, therefore, desire that a comprehensive
national policy should be formulated to recruit and retain talented
and experienced scientists who would make the pursuit of science a
viable academic and commercial proposition.

(Basic
Research
+ Grant-
in-aid)
8-10%
of
DRDO
Budget.
CHAPTER IV
BUDGET & EXPENDITURE
4.1 When asked to furnish the break up of the funds allocated
and utilized by DRDO on R&D and fundamental research activities
during the last five years, the Ministry stated as under :—
“R&D budget to the total Defence budget, expenditure incurred
on R&D activities, fundamental research for the last five years are
as follows:
Year(s) Allocations Expen- Defence R&D       Expenditure incurred
Defence diture Budget Budget
R&D as % of R&D Fundamental
Defence Project, Research
Budget Programme,
Scheme
2000-01 3359 3341 54461 6.17 2503.34
2001-02 3173 3119 57000 5.57 2236.95
2002-03 3079 3006 56000 5.50 2043.02
2003-04 3458 3441 65300 5.30 2361.88
2004-05 3747 3712 77000 4.87 2480.80
2005-06 5356 - 83000 6.5 - -
Budget allocations made to Defence R&D are quite adequate to
progress the on-going projects, programmes and schemes and also
for the new programmes sanctioned during the year.
4.2 The Committee desired to know about the details of Defence
R&D budget in respect of neighbouring and developed countries during
the last five years, the Ministry in a note furnished to the Committee
submitted the following :-
Years
Countries Budget 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004
12 3 4 5 6 7
India Defence 11956 12513 12294 14336 16904
R&D 737 (6.17) 697 (5.57) 676 (5.50) 760 (5.30) 823 (4.87)
15

16
12 3 4 5 6 7
USA Defence 322309 324908 364819 414400 455304
R&D 43415 (13.47) 44934 (13.83) N. A. 52753 (12.73) 64653 (14.04)
UK Defence 40725 41777 44068 51082 47401
R&D 4861 (11.88) 5105 (12.22) N. A. N. A. N. A.
Pakistan Defence 2920 3125 3358 3602 3685
R&D N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A.
China Defence 22200 26100 30700 33100 35400
R&D China’s R&D Budget is around 15% of Defence Budget according to
some rough estimates.
Note: Figures in parenthesis are percentage of Defence Budget. Defence Budget of all
the countries except India are in accordance with details available in DIPRI year
book.
Allocation made to the Defence R&D are utilized for approved/
sanctioned projects, programmes and schemes. Annual allocations
made to Defence R&D are normally utilized in full for the approved
projects. Minor portion of allocations at times remains un-utilised
due slippages in delivery commitments by foreign suppliers and
other reasons beyond control”.
4.3 During oral evidence, on funding pattern on R&D, a
non-official expert expressed his views as under: —
“It is necessary to identify portions of the Budget where there is
a joint control with the three Services so that the basic and urgent
requirement of the Services is met. Of course, the bulk of the
Budget would be left to the DRDO to do green field and new
projects to keep India in the development path in strategic areas.
In the division of the cake of the DRDO’s budget, there must be
a portion earmarked for the three Services, which is controlled
jointly. The balance of the Budget will, of course, go to the DRDO
for new and basic research areas. These are areas in which there
is not yet adequate development and we cannot trust other
countries to do it for us”.
4.4 During oral evidence, on the issue of decline in allocation of
budget for R&D, the representative of the Ministry apprised the
Committee :—
“About the budget, it is correct that in the initial years of this
decade, in 2001-02, it was 5.8 per cent of the total budget of the

17
Defence Ministry. In 2002-03, there was a drop from 5.8 per cent
to 5.4 per cent. In 2003-04, although in physical terms, the budget
increased, in percentage terms, it was lower than what it was in
2001-02. It means, from 5.8 percent, it came down to 5.7 per cent.
In 2004-05, it was at 4.9 per cent, though the total budget of the
DRDO increased by about 300 crore over the previous year. In
2005-06, that is, in the current year, this has become 6.5 per cent.
From Rs. 3,700 crore, straightaway there is a jump to
Rs. 5,300 crore. We plan to keep the budget of the DRDO at over
Rs. 5,000 crore”.
Recommendation No. 4
Budget & Expenditure
4.5 The Committee find that there is a steady decline in the
percentage of R&D budget for DRDO out of the total Defence Budget
which has come down from 6.17 per cent in 2002 to 4.87 per cent in
2004. The Committee also note that the amount allocated for R&D
activities were not fully utilized during the years 2004-05 and
2005-06 because of non-materialisation of certain commitments against
some projects/schemes. The Committee further find that the
percentage spending on R&D activities to the Defence Budget is
very low as compared to the advanced and neighbouring countries.
The Committee are not satisfied with the reasons advanced by the
Government for non-utilization of the allocated amount for R&D
activities which is very meagre in comparison to the total Defence
Budget and also very less in comparison to the budgets in other
developed countries.
4.6 The Committee have also been informed that 8 to 10 per
cent of the total DRDO budget is being spent on fundamental
research. The Committee are not happy with the existing state of
affairs of the utilization of fund for existing R&D activities in DRDO.
The Committee feel that besides utilization of the budget allocated
for R&D activities in DRDO, there is an urgent need for an increase
in the total budget for R&D activities so that new and basic research
work in DRDO could adequately be funded and the country’s
dependency on other countries in critical and high technology is
minimized, thus enabling the country to become self-reliant in
Defence production. The Committee, as recommended in their earlier
Ninth Report (14th Lok Sabha), again emphasise that Defence Public
Sector Undertakings and ordnance factories should have their in-
house R&D centers so that the need to approach DRDO for small
upgradation could be avoided. The Committee also desire DRDO to

18
facilitate DPSUs and ordnance factories to set up necessary
infrastructure and technical know-how to establish and strengthen
their R&D Centres in advisory capacity.
The Committee further desire that R&D budget should be at
least 14 to 15% of the total defence budget of the country as more
and more research and product development opportunities are likely
to come India’s way due to changed international scenario.

CHAPTER V
INDIGENOUS RESEARCH & DEVELOPMENT
(R&D) ACTIVITIES
5.1 The Ministry of Defence promoting indigenous R&D in a
written note submitted as under :—
“During last decade, advanced countries have instituted and
progressively strengthened restrictive technology denial regimes.
The idea behind these regimes and its successor Wassenaar
Arrangement, is prolonging their technological superiority over
developing countries. We are denied the newer technology till we
develop it ourselves. It is imperative that we not only develop
these systems and technologies indigenously , as per the
requirements of our Armed Forces, but also effectively counter the
attempts of the foreign arms vendors and their agents to disrupt
indigenous R&D efforts.”
5.2 The Ministry was asked to give a list of projects which
were developed on the request of user but after development, user
refused to take the product. The Ministry supplied the following
information :—
“Most of the major designed and developed systems by DRDO at
the instance of users have been inducted into Services either
through Limited Series Production (LSP) or direct order placement
on PSUs to whom ToT was given by DRDO. Although in some
cases the quantity ordered by the Services are not as per expected
requirements. However, following are the projects, which were
taken up but later refused by the user:-
Emergency Floatation System for MI-8 Helicopters:—
Project was sanctioned in 1994, at a cost of Rs. 75 lakh for MI-8
helicopters. IAF was negotiating with M/s FPT, UK for meeting
its immediate requirement. Subsequently, as some airworthiness
requirements were not being met by M/s FPT UK, IAF decided to
import the system from M/s Kazan System, Russia. The
development project was short-closed in the year 1998 at cost of
Rs. 48 lakh. Presently, IAF does not have any requirement. The
expertise and technology acquired out of the effort is being
gainfully employed in development of Emergency Floatation System
for the Advanced Light Helicopter (ALH).
19

20
Relocatable Balloon Barrage System:—
A mobile version of Balloon Barrage system for IAF was sanctioned
in 1993 and was developed in March 1998 at a cost of
Rs. 45.99 lakh. In June 1999, IAF informed that system was based
on operational philosophy of 1980s. In 2002, IAF conveyed that
the system would prove ineffective against attacking aircraft and
due to changes in its operational philosophy/strategy, purchase of
both the fixed as well as the re-locatable versions would have to
be deferred/discontinued”.
5.3 The list of projects which developed on the specifications given
by the user and later on user changed the specifications, resulting in
delay and cost overrun in developing the defence items is as under:—
“Development of 30 mm Fair Weather Towed AD Gun System.
The project was sanctioned in Sept. 2000 at a cost of Rs. 17.70 cr.
VCOAS in January 2001 said that the existing fleet of AD guns  i.e.
40mm L/70 and 23mm ZU guns in the service are in good
condition with a residual life of 10-15 years, further during 9th &
10th Plan these guns are proposed to be upgraded and after
upgradation the characteristics of these guns will be superior than
that specified in GSQR No.767. It was, therefore, decided that the
QR for future AD gun should be reviewed as de-induction of the
existing guns will start in 2015. Accordingly in May, 01 new draft
GSQR was issued, which was entirely different from that issued
earlier. In view of the change in GSQR, the project was short
closed after spending Rs. 14.50 lakh.
Development of 30 mm Light Towed AD Gun System
The project was sanctioned in Aug. 1997 at a cost of Rs 9.85 cr.
Since the scope of development work was entirely different as
compared to what was planned for, if necessitated additional funds
and extension of PDC to design/develop the system to meet the
new QR in view of the change in QR decision was taken to close
this project and Rs. 51.18 lakh was spent till the closure of the
project”.
5.4 The Committee desired to know the reason behind several
projects which were abandoned during the last 20 years after incurring
substantial amount on them, the Ministry gave the reason as under :—
“DRDO analyses the reasons from time to time. Certain unforeseen
circumstances like, technology denial, technological obsolescence,

21
change in operational requirements of the user, procurement of
items by the user from other sources are some of the reasons for
such events. However, we analyse the new project through Peer
Review and Decision Aid for Technology Evaluation (DATE)
Analysis before sanctioning of any project. Rich learning, facility
creation, and skill upgradation happens even if for some reason
the projects get delayed”.
5.5 On the Long Term R&D Planning and on Eleventh Five Year
Plan, the Ministry has stated as under:—
“DRDO Plan i.e., 11th Five Year Plan and Perspective Plan up to
2022 are under preparation. The first draft will be ready by Sep.
2006 and then interaction meetings will take place between CIDS,
representatives from industries, officials from MoD and financial
authorities. The final draft is expected by December 2006. The
following parameters have been taken into account for DRDO Plan:
(i) User requirements.
(ii) Core competence of DRDO laboratories/establishments.
(iii) Capability of participating industry .
(iv) Interface with universities and academic institutions”.
5.6 DRDO is working through bipartite or tripartite Memorandum
of Understandings. The current budget of DRDO for current year is
sufficient to progress work on current projects and new projects being
undertaken by DRDO. We have adequate expertise to carry out project
activities. As regards progress on preparation of Perspective Plan of
DRDO is concerned, we wish to state that initial inputs from Services
have been received and all Chief Controllers are in the progress of
finalizing discipline-wise plans in their respective areas. It may take
about one year time to finalise the report. Budget will not be a
constraint in our development.
5.7 In reply to a question whether it is necessary to set up
R & D Centres in each Defence Public Sector Undertaking and Defence
Ordnance Factory, the Ministry has stated as under :—
“It may be advisable for DPSUs/Defence Ordnance Factory to have
their own Research and Development centres because of the
following reasons :
• Interaction with DRDO may become easier when Transfer
of Technology (ToT) is to be given to DPSUs/OFs.

22
• It may help in undertaking joint development by DRDO &
DPSUs/OFs.
• It may help in “load sharing” for large volume of system
support required by the Services in terms of minor
upgradation & field support.
• It may also help DPSUs/OFs when they obtain ToT from
Original Equipment Manufacturers (OEMs) of “Buy”
Systems”.
5.8 On the question of what type of technical assistance is
provided by DRDO, the Ministry stated as under :—
“DRDO provides technical assistance to DPSUs/OFs. They are
having their own R&D centres. At present, DPSUs/OFs are
concerned with producing 20-30% of their items indigenously
developed by DRDO. BEL is having 30% of their turnover from
DRDO items and spending 5% on R&D. Other DPSUs are also
having their R&D units. They need to enhance this level”.
5.9 On the question how much time is taken for starting the
production and constraints faced in terms of availability of funds after
the completion of research, the Ministry stated as under :—
“The time for starting production of indigenously developed system
depends upon the investment cost, user requirement and MoD
policy for production by OFs/DPSUs and industries, so the time
varies from case to case. In certain cases like Prithvi Missile system,
it was a concurrent development and production. Presently DRDO
is following policy of fabrication of Designed & Engineered (D&E)
model jointly with PSUs. This reduces considerable amount of time
required for production activities by Public Sector Undertakings”.
5.10 The Ministry was asked whether the DRDO is facing problem
of co-ordination of various units involved in R&D work and the
achievements of each unit/lab, the Ministry replied as under :—
“DRDO laboratories are having good co-ordination with other R&D
establishments in the country. Research scientists share their
knowledge, outputs and expertise through conferences, seminars,
workshops and publications of research papers. As far as co-
ordination within the DRDO is concerned, mechanism for
knowledge management and knowledge sharing for various work
centres has been started by implementing DRDO wide area Intranet
“DRDO Rapid Online Network Access” (DRONA) with sufficient
application software thereon. Moreover, the groups at various
laboratories that deal with identical technologies have also been
formed”.

23
5.11 On reply to a question pertaining to engineers in the Army
who constitute approximately 15 percent of its strength and whether
DRDO provides R&D support to develop the research capabilities,
especially in base workshops and how these workshops can be
developed as research centres for specific use of the respective forces,
the Ministry replied as under :—
“Base workshops have been designed to provide maintenance
services, which include repairing the defective equipment and
machinery and install practices for preventive maintenance. These
workshops are not equipped to undertake research work. One of
the incidence of adding some innovative operational features is
what at best can come from the Base workshop. Therefore, the
workshop and laboratory should remain the separate entities”.
5.12 During oral evidence, a non-official expert expressed his views
on use of base workshop as under : —
“……It is perhaps not very well known outside the services that
the Army itself, in the composition of its manpower, has over a
lakh or one and half a lakh of Engineers in the Engineering corps,
in the Electronic and Mechanical Engineering Corps; and in the
Signal corps. This is true of other Services also. I want to make
two points. First is a suggestion that it is necessary for the Services
to do some Research and Development to explore the talent i.e.
available with them. When you ask the Research and Development
establishment to do some tasks, I think, you have to do a definition
of quantity and quality. Instead of giving them 500 jobs to be
done, many of which could well be done by the Services
themselves, it would be appropriate if they concentrate on
quality………….. If a piece of equipment has already been inducted
into the service, then its modernisation and upgrade must become
the responsibility of the Service. With this the usable level of the
force would be very high and a large number of things will be
done to extend the in service life of the equipment”.
5.13 During oral evidence, on the question why there is non-
availability of platforms and trial teams, the representative of the
Ministry stated as under : —
“This must be understood in the right perspective. It is a problem
that we face. For example, I am testing a Sonar on a particular
ship platform. If certain modifications are asked for, I need time
to do that. But, by that time that ship might have gone out on
some exercise. So, I may have to transplant it on to another ship.
Then, naturally you need some more time to handle that. It should
be taken in that spirit. It is not an accusation”.

24
5.14 During oral evidence, non-official expert expressed his views
regarding interaction of DRDO with other agencies as under : —
“After I came to the Parliament, I met Dr. Kasturirangan who is
in Rajya Sabha now. Our ISRO is specialist in camera technology.
However, he informed me that Armed Forces or the Ministry of
Defence never approached them (ISRO) for any assistance in this
field. I think when you are talking of intelligence required, then
not only DRDO but they must cooperate with ISRO, BARC,
etc………. About intelligence photography , ISRO is putting up
satellites, and they are photographing it. But I do not think that
this benefit is coming to the Armed Forces. I do not think that it
is happening for them”.
5.15 During oral evidence, on the question of R&D by PSUs, the
representative of the Ministry (BEL) stated as under : —
“……In all our public sectors we spend a lot of money on our
own research and development. For example, in Bharat Electronics,
we spend every year 5 per cent of our annual revenue in our
internal R&D. Out of our total revenues, if you see, in the last 5-
6 years, 40 per cent of the revenue comes from products
manufactured based on design and development done within
Bharat Electronics. This year, i.e. 2005-06, 30 per cent of our revenue
is coming from products manufactured based on design and
development done in DRDO and the balance 30 per cent is coming
from products manufactured based on Technology Transfers. We
are increasing the manufacturing based on indigenous design and
development”.
5.16 During oral evidence, on the question of R&D by DRDO for
services, the representative of the Ministry (Navy) stated as under : —
“With the help of DRDO….. we have made a considerable progress
on the electronic warfare systems. In Sonar systems from the last
5/10 years, we have stopped buying Sonar from abroad. Even in
the ships we made in Russia, all those ships have been retrofitted
with the Indian Sonar systems……….. In all our aircraft which we
have brought from outside, we have started putting Indian
electronic warfare systems. In the Gorshkov Carrier, called
Vikramaditya, which we are buying from Russia, we are sending
many Indian systems there and we are retrofitting the Indian
systems even on that ship”.

25
5.17 During oral evidence, on the question of R&D by PSUs , the
representative of the Ministry (GRSE) stated as under : —
“In Garden Reach, we have started production of first anti-
submarine warfare corbets. The steel has been developed by DRDO.
We are now the first major users of this indigenous steel produced
by SAIL. The entire electronics, weapons and sensors in that ship
are going to be hundred per cent indigenous. The ship should be
able to roll out in another 4 years’ time”.
5.18 During oral evidence, non-official expert expressed his views
on ten-year old vision plan of DRDO on critical technology as
under :—
“In 1992, the DRDO had worked out a 10 year old Vision Plan,
which was ‘to transform the department into a leader of
international class with mission to capture and retain commanding
heights in critical technological area’. That 10 Year Vision Plan
envisaged that in 2005, our self-reliance index will go up from 30
per cent to 70 per cent. We were importing 70 per cent so by
2005, the imports were to come down to 30 per cent. I do not
know the amount that was sanctioned for this purpose. Those
details would be available. Sir, after 10 years, the import and
indigenous ratio has not changed”.
He also informed the Committee the adverse effects of import as
under :—
“I want to give you a picture for tomorrow. We are spending 2.5
per cent of our GDP on defence today. Out of that, 18 billion
dollars worth equipment is being imported. In 2050, if we continue
to progress as we are doing now, 2.5 per cent of our GDP would
mean 80 billion dollars expenditure on defence. It will mean 35-
40 billion dollars of imported equipment. So, unless we take these
steps on self-reliance, we shall be spending huge amounts on
imports, with all other complications involved. If our country is to
become a reasonably powerful state in terms of economy,
technology and security, then we have to take steps right now to
improve our self-reliance”.
5.19 During oral evidence, non-official expert expressed his views
on the expected changing role of industry, as under :—
“The next is that currently we are organized like old Communist
countries where R&D drives production. The DRDO designs and

26
give it to the industry to produce whereas it should be the other
way – industry should be on the lead. Normally, in any other
mature organisation, the contact is given to the industry to design
and produce. They in turn call for certain research to be done and
they ask the research organisation we will give you the funds to
research and develop the industry since they have to deliver the
research and develop for the industry since they have to deliver
the users. Thus the user drives the industry and the industry drives
the R&D designs an aeroplane and then the industry says, I know
nothing much about it. The Industry today tells R& D to deliver
the total proven design to them, when ready if the user has a
complaint, the Industry expects R& D to fix it. Today, DRDO has
already transferred LCA to the industry, regrettably HAL does not
know much about the design of LCA. If there is any problem
with the LCA, we, the Air Force ask the industry but they throw
their hands up. The DRDO has washed its hands off by transferring
the design to the industry and saying, ‘here is the paper, you
make it as per this’. So, it is only a half-mature aeroplane. Now,
industry, very rightly , does not want to touch it because it is
problem laden with the answers”.
5.20 On the production of Protective Clothing and Allied
Technologies for High Altitudes, the Ministry stated as under :—
“DMSRDE, Kanpur based DRDO Laboratory developed textile items
for Services like jackets, bags, trousers, rescue carrying bags;
clothing systems and equipment for extreme cold/glacier region,
like gloves sleeping bags; modernized tents/shelter for different
uses and other heavy textile items, like shelter cook house, tent
stations for missiles, mat and frame structure; and chiral materials.”
Monitoring of R&D
5.21 About the existing mechanism available in the DRDO to
monitor R&D Projects and assessment of work, the Ministry stated as
follows :—
“DRDO has instituted several review mechanisms to monitor
programmes and projects regularly right from their inception, with
active participation of the Services, production agencies, academic/
research institutions, etc. There is an in-house apex level body
called DRDO Research Council (DRC), chaired by the SA to RM
to periodically review the progress of ongoing projects in all the
labs / establishment Staff projects for Army are reviewed by the
Vice Chief of Army Staff, twice a year. For all major programmes/

27
/ projects, there are multi-tier programme management boards,
having representation from the Services, DRDO laboratories and
in some cases from academic institutions and other national
research laboratories.
Three-tier management and monitoring mechanism has been
adopted for all the projects costing more than Rs. 100 cr. (CCS
projects). In the case of mega programmes, inter-ministerial apex
board has been constituted to manage and monitor it. We have
apex management board, executive board, project monitoring &
review committee and project review committee to monitor and
review ongoing projects. These Boards and Committees are
represented by the developers, users, production agencies,
inspection agencies, financial authorities, senior scientists from
similar organizations, etc. and they review and monitor projects
periodically”.
5.22 The Committee wanted to know whether any scientific audit
of the projects has been carried out in DRDO, the Ministry in a note
stated :—
“There is no scientific audit of DRDO projects as such, however,
we have the following mechanism in place.”
Feasibility Study
The feasibility report precedes the sanction of Mission Mode (MM),
Technology Development (TD) and Science & Technology (S&T) projects
costing Rs. 2 crore and above. The report is prepared in a manner that
it helps to identify and enable selection of suitable projects which can
be successfully accomplished within the estimated cost and time and
to promote self-reliance in critical defence technology.
Decision Aid for Technology Evaluation (DATE)
DATE is a decision support tool for technology evaluation of R&D
projects. The methodology incorporated into DATE specifically
addresses the system development projects of DRDO. It facilitates
systematic analysis of a project for its technology content and evaluation
of feasibility in the context of technological expertise and facilities
available in the country.
Project Peer Review
All DRDO projects costing more than Rs. 2 crore have to be peer
reviewed by an expert committee for their viability. The purpose of

28
the peer review is to tap the relevant expertise available out side the
laboratory proposing the project within DRDO and else where in the
country. As far as possible, views of the perceived and beneficiary or
the main stakeholder, in the outcome of the project are being
incorporated prior to final formulation of the project. The Peer Review
Committee (PRC) examines the necessity of the project and adequacy
of the core competence of the laboratory proposing the project,
proposed time, cost, other resources, approach, methodology, etc.
Post-Project Review
Most of the DRDO projects are a response to a user need, and a
key stage in concluding a project is to confirm that the project has, in
fact, met the expectations of the user or all the requirements of TD/
S&T. This step requires a mixture of process and communication,
addressing the following questions :—
• Have all agreed outputs/deliverables been received by the
client?
•W ere they do the agreed quality?
•A re there any resulting obligations on the provider, such as
warrantees ?
•A re processes for handling intellectual property established
and agreed, including for any future revenue ?
• Is there a clear communication channel for follow-up contact
between the user and the lab/estt. This is particularly
important if a dedicated project team had been established
to run the project ?
Seeking this feedback as part of a broader structured assessment
of user satisfaction”.
5.23  During oral evidence, non-official expert expressed his views
on autonomy and R&D of Ordnance Factories as under :—
”……….. Ordnance Factories do not have their own R&D and
they cannot decide on their vendors. Hence, they are not efficient.
They should have more autonomy . Give them more powers and
make them autonomous. Like any modern organization, let them
choose their own supplier and technology. Even with Rs. 10,000
crore of annual output they do not have R&D. Even small Indian
firms have their own R&D. There is a genuine demand of ordnance
factories to have more powers. Once you corporatise them, I think,

29
you should give them adequate powers. The total strength of the
ordnance factories is two lakhs. A private sector is producing ten
times more than what they are producing today. This is the kind
of possible gains we can get in that case. They are not allowed to
produce for civilian market and they do not know their strength.
Unless you give them more powers, more autonomy, I think,
situation will not be improving. I think, in ordnance factories there
is very great technological power in India which is not exploited
fully….”
Recommendation No. 5
Indigenous Research & Development (R&D) Activities
5.24 The Committee understand that designing and developing
defence weapons is perhaps the toughest task for DRDO. There are
shortage of designers and engineers in DRDO. The Committee,
therefore, recommend that DRDO should search for the technology
and product within the country before conducting research on a new
product, as it would not only save precious time and energy of
DRDO scientists but also save lots of money to the Government,
besides ensuring quick availability of product to the Armed Forces.
5.25 The Committee are given to understand among the three
Services, only the Navy has design capability and it has due to this
reason, the Navy is far ahead of the Army and Air Force in R&D
and outsourcing, but they should have separate R&D of their own
also. The Committee are confident after establishing their own R&D
centers outsourcing will definitely increase. The Committee find it
difficult to understand/analyse that DRDO or the Ministry of Defence
could not initiate action to establish a separate in house R&D for
each Army and Air Force. The Committee are of the view that Army
and Air Force should also try hard to achieve the capability in design.
The Committee note there is untapped source of large availability
of technical manpower in the Army and its Base workshops, which
are designed to provide maintenance services, including repairing
the defective equipment and machinery and undertaking preventive
maintenance. The Committee, therefore are of the view that the
Ministry should explore the possibility of developing the base
workshops as small research centres where talent of Engineers and
technical staff could be utilized to modify the existing equipments
and develop import-substitute products so that the precious time
can be saved and this could lead to indigenization/outsourcing.

30
They should help in laying down users requirements as they are
very well versed with the equipments/machines. They are concerned
with the functional operation of the equipment.
5.26 The Committee note the problems faced by DRDO in the
matter of non-availability of platform for trials of warheads for the
Navy, as the ships go on exercises. The Committee feel that a better
coordination between DRDO and Navy could easily solve this
bottleneck and also cut short the time frame in development and
testing of weapon system. The Committee, therefore, feel that
Ministry should make concerted efforts in this direction so that
testing and trial platforms may not be a problem any more.
5.27 The Committee note that surveillance equipments are being
imported from Israel and other foreign countries. It shows
dependency on other countries. Therefore, the Committee keeping
in view the changed geo political scenario suggest that the Ministry/
BEL must have an MoU with the private companies who have
expertise in the area, or transfer of technology to produce these
equipments in the country by Public Private Partnership in order to
have self-reliance in this field. The Committee appreciate the
measures taken by BEL in in-house R&D of its products resulting
in large scale indigenisation of manufactured items. The Committee
advice that other DPSUs will also follow the same model in the
field of internal R&D product indigenization. It would be worthwhile
for DRDO to tie up with other premier research organisations of the
country like ISRO which have good expertise in camera technology.
5.28 The Committee also feel that, the country is heavily
dependent on imported weapons systems for its armed forces which
are some times disproportionately procured from a single country/
vendor, which affects the budget. With changing geo-political
scenario, the Committee feel that it will be prudent to take
strategically firm steps towards ensuring greater production of
weapons systems indigenously developed by DRDO/Defence
Production Agencies and Indian private sector. The Committee are
of the opinion that the Ministry of Defence should work out a firm
and well planned scheme for providing viable economic incentives
for manufacturing of indigenously developed products by the
Defence PSUs, Ordnance Factories and Private Sector. For the success
the Committee also desire that DRDO should closely co-operate with
the universities and IITs in order to have skilled technical manpower
and available infrastructure in furtherance of in house R & D for
Defence products. The Ministry of Defence should directly fund as

31
per the requirement of the users to strengthen R&D in the private
sector. The reason is that the fundamental research in sensitive areas
is highly capital intensive.
5.29 The Committee feel that India should adopt model of R&D
of developed countries like Russia, England, France, Germany and
U.S., where any planned weapon system is developed concurrently
by at least two private corporations and the U.S. Government pays
them appropriate development cost. The products developed by these
companies compete against each other and a production contract is
signed with the successful company. The Committee desire that the
Ministry should take steps for successful implementation of such a
model, which not only provides private sector initiation participation
in Defence R&D but also gives the country the latest and modern
war gadgets.
5.30 The Committee understand that the country is spending
huge amount of money to buy clothing for the use of Jawans in
high altitude areas from foreign countries. Therefore, they recommend
that DRDO should give more emphasis on design and production
of clothing for our troops in high altitude areas, besides developing
other weaponry. The Committee also feel that our military forces
must be backed by an efficient industry, either from foreign suppliers
or from the indigenous industry. The Committee feel that there is a
lot of scope for private sector participation in this area. The research
done by DMSRDE Kanpur should be passed on to the industry
which in turn can do mass production for the services as well as
civil and export markets. Mass production would in turn reduce cost
also.
5.31 The Committee are given to understand that the ordnance
factories do not have a system to prepare balance sheet in order to
have an appraisal of their cost of products and materials etc. The
Committee therefore, desire that Ordnance Factories should also
prepare their Balance sheet on the line of Corporate. Total accounting
system of DPSUs should go as per standard accounting system of
Indian Council of Chartered Accountant . The Committee are also of
the view that in order to make ordnance factories, more progressive,
productive, competitive and financially viable, there is an urgent
need to turn them into a Corporation and allow them to select
vendors and to take decision in financial and R&D matters
independently because in the competitive age they must have full
autonomy in order to have level playing field.

32
5.32 The Committee are also given to understand that due to
faulty production/certification of ammunition and incidents of fire,
a large number of soldiers have died or been injured. The Committee,
therefore, urge upon the Government to appoint a fact finding
Committee to ensure to avoid recurrence of such incidents.
5.33 The Committee further note that DRDO has instituted
several review mechanisms to monitor programmes and projects :
like : DRDO Research Council, multilevel programme management
boards, inter-ministerial apex board and project peer review etc.
However, the Committee find that inspite of so many review
mechanisms, a large number of projects get delayed leading to time
and cost overruns. The Committee, therefore, feel that there is an
urgent need to review the working of various scientific review
mechanism themselves as they themselves may be the cause of delays
in some cases. The Committee feel that review mechanism should
have technical personnel which can really guide the research projects
on technical matters. There can be staffed by senior scientists from
different research educational organisations who have experience in
the relevant fields. Even the retired scientists from ISRO and Atomic
Energy Commission etc. can also be associated with the review
committees. The Committee feel that there is an urgent need to
appoint R&D Council of DRDO from CSIR etc.

CHAPTER VI
EFFECTIVE INTERACTION WITH THE USERS
6.1 DRDO has created infrastructure and management structure
to develop, manage and integrate high cost and high technology
programmes and projects by pooling national resources and expertise
available in academic institutions, R&D centres, public and private
industries. DRDO has a strong partnership with about 40 academic
institutions, 15 national S&T agencies, 50 PSUs, 39 Ordnance Factories
(OFs) and 250 private sector industries. This has enabled the
Organisation to minimize the effect of the sanctions and technology
denials, which were imposed by the advanced countries from time to
time.
6.2 On the question at what level the users interact with the
research agencies at DRDO, the Ministry stated as follows :-
“Users interact with DRDO laboratories/establishments through the
following mechanisms :
• Finalisation of GSQR.
• Joint funding of major programmes i.e. EW Programmes,
Divyadrishti, Samvahak, etc.
• Multi-tier reviews at the top, middle and working levels.
•T rial of equipment/testing of systems, like flying of LCA
by IAF pilots.
• Any change in GSQR or scope by users in consultation
with DRDO.
Accordingly reasons for loss of time can not be fixed on one agency
as such changes are dictated by threat perception”.
6.3 On providing the details on the involvement of the users, the
Ministry stated as follows :-
“Various Boards/Committees have been constituted in major
projects/programmes, which involve the users also. Like, DCAS is
the member of Aero Engine Development Board; and VCOAS,
VCNS and DCAS are the members of Guided Missile Board. LCA
development programme is being closely reviewed by the
33

34
Governing Body and the General Body of Aeronautical
Development Agency (ADA), CAS, CNS and CIDS are the members
of General Body of ADA whereas CAS, VCNS, DCNS and DCAS
are the members of Governing Body of ADA, DCOAS (P&S),
DGQA, DGMF and ADGCV are the members of Steering
Committee of MBT Arjun”.
6.4 On being asked about the difficulties being faced by DRDO
while interacting with the users i.e. changing of GSQR midstream,
long and extended trials etc., the Ministry in its reply mentioned as
under:-
“After successful development and technical trials, the issuance of
user trial directives, carrying out trials and final placement of
indents/orders by users takes a long time.
• Often ASR/GSQRs are supersets of various latest
technologies available in different foreign products combined
together and, therefore, unrealistic for providing a complete
or ultimate solution through development.
• Operational requirements drafted by user are in fluid state
or open ended, therefore capable of multiple interpretations
of specification. The same requires resolution through user
participation.
• Indigenously developed product is subjected to prolonged
exhaustive trial and evaluation, whereas imported products
are not subjected to same evaluation but readily accepted,
whereas performance of indigenously developed product
may be as good. This can be corrected by intensive user
participation in development and testing to enhance
confidence in indigenous products.
• Change in user representatives during the development
cycle, which sometimes result in changes in user perception.
• Changes in carrier vehicle platforms strategy and matching
availability.
• Amendments to QR required by users during development
stage”.
6.5 The Ministry also suggested the following measures to
overcome the difficulties:
•“ A select group of user rep may be nominated and
associated with the project till induction of the equipment.

35
• Compulsory financial participation of users in projects will
increase user involvement and end-use commitment.
• Amendments other than QR may be incorporated through
improvement program on subsequent versions.
• Users should give indicative production number of the
products being developed.
• There is need to identify a technical team of service people
who could continuously interact and organize meetings at
different regimental level with DRDO scientists.
• DRDO scientists should also be invited to participate in the
technical seminars held at regimental level. This will help
them appreciate the needs of the Services.
•P roper base lines and acceptance criteria including time
frame to be decided between DRDO and Users at the stage
initiation of project activities. Wherever the system is meeting
the original GSQR, it should be accepted by the user and
any further changes in GSQR/improvement in performance
may be incorporated in next version of the system. Any
substantial amendments to GSQR should be taken as Mark-
II (and onwards) since it may amount to introducing new
features in the product”.
6.6 During oral evidence, non-official expert expressed his views
on users participation as under :-
“All Ordnance factories and defence PSUs must be given total
freedom to upgrade their equipment, R & D etc. Secondly, DRDO
needs to interact much more with the Services; more than what
they are doing today. Ultimately, the Services only can tell them
what is their requirement or acceptability of any equipment”.
6.7 On the question whether users should be involved in R & D,
he informed the Committee :-
“Yes, certainly. Today, their interaction with the Services is very
limited. It is not enough. A number of complaints I got from our
officers were that they were being used by DRDO as administrative
officers and not for development. Also, all GSQR for weapons
systems should be done jointly by the Armed Forces and the DRDO
together”.
6.8 During oral evidence, non-official expert expressed his views
on users participation as under : -
“So, we have our own evolution process. We believe that we must
come up with indigenous design of the next AJT. It is a matter of

36
perception. It is now possibly going through bureaucracy and the
finance officials. Both are not experts. India is the only country in
the World today where uniformed people are not in the Ministry,
nowhere in the world you have a country where the uniformed
people are not involved in decision-making chain of Ministry of
Defence. Recently, the IDS has come in. But it is not a part of the
Ministry. Minister leads the Ministry and you have the bureaucrats
and the finance officials in the decision making chain of the
Government. We, (Service HQ) are like a department working in
a building elsewhere. Anything that we project they say, ‘app chitti
lik ke bejo’. This chitti gets into a file and it just remains there; it
does not permeate further because that babu is busy with other
files”.
6.9 During oral evidence, on interaction with the user, the
representative of the Ministry stated as under : -
“The problem is like this. It is there with almost every system.
People get promoted, they get changed, and then the new persons
come. This kind of problem is there in a live situation. Military
officers who are involved in a trial team may get posted out or
promoted. For DRDO, this kind of continuity is very much
necessary because the person would understand the equipment
better. With micro changes in pressure an aircraft would start
behaving differently. It is only the pilot who has flown it earlier
that would be able to notice whether there is any improvement.
That is a kind of a problem. We have to live with it”.
6.10 During oral evidence, also on the importance of interaction
with the users, representative of the Ministry stated :-
“When DRDO came into existence, it was a must. Today the time
has come that they need a re-look because end result of DRDO
has been in spurts. Somewhere they have performed very well
and somewhere they have performed well but the user satisfaction
has not been that good, for which the user is also responsible. I
say this because as on today we have 200 officers from the Army
deployed and working with DRDO, but I am so sad about the
performance of these 200 officers. The moment they go to DRDO,
they forget the O.G. uniform and their performance is not
satisfactory. Now in the Army Headquarters, we are wanting to
change the system. We are wanting that all projects which are
given by the user should be user-driven. A user must be the force
which drives them. We will now nominate officers who will report

37
back to the user. They will work with DRDO, but they will
continue to report back to user every quarter. Any modification,
any injunction, any thought-process change in the equipment being
developed or project being developed would be taken every three
months to six months. Now, we are giving them a GSQR, and
allowing them to produce equipment in which army officers are
posted there on permanent basis for three years or four years. But
their contribution has not been satisfactory. Therefore, the wrong
end comes like the Arjun Tank. The wrong things are happening
even after the user being there, and they have not contributed
enough to ensure that they are pro-active. They do not take action
before it happens. They also wait to let it go back, let it go to
ranges and then come and tell us that: “Sir, we were thinking that
it would go bad”. We are also not happy with our own
contributions to the DRDO. You are very right in saying that there
is a need for DRDO to have a re-look at this, and re-look at the
participation by the users”.
Recommendation No. 6
Effective Interaction with the Users
6.11 The Committee note the difficulties being faced by the
DRDO while interacting with the user. Some of these difficulties
are changing of GSQR midstream, long and extended trials which
results in final placement of orders after very long time. The
Committee also note that an indigenously developed product is
subject to prolonged exhaustive trials and evaluation, whereas
imported products are not subjected to the same evaluation but are
readily accepted, whereas performance of indigenously developed
product are equally good as the imported one. The Committee,
therefore, recommend that users should promote the indigenously
developed defence items in preference to the imported ones and
there should not be major changes in GSQRs. DRDO should also
follow concurrent engineering for development of the products on a
case-to-case basis according to the circumstances or even they can
have outsourcing to avoid the embarrassment and delay in production
at all level. From day one users and manufacturers should be
involved from top policy making decision to all other level.
6.12 The Committee note that the involvement of the users with
DRDO/Private industry is very limited. Due to this, the final products
lack the facilities and qualities as per technical and the requirement
of the user. The Committee as recommended in their Ninth and

38
Eleventh Reports of the Committee (14th Lok Sabha) further
recommend that representative selected by the user, for a specific
project should have adequate knowledge of the product to be
produced and he must be involved at the conceptualization stage of
the project on a permanent basis so that defects, if any may be
rectified during production stage itself and delivery of the product
to the user may not get delayed for a long time. In case, the user
does not suggest corrective measures/improvement wherever necessary
and the product is not developed as per GSQR, then the
accountability may also be fixed on them in this regard. The
Committee also desire that there should be compulsory financial
participation of the users in the projects so as to increase user
involvement.
6.13 For this purpose, the Committee recommend that the user
should give its specification alongwith adequate project fund to
DRDO for a system/product and the final or cut off date of
development should be fixed by them. Manufactures should also be
taken into confidence from the beginning for the success of the
product. DRDO should create an environment more friendly with
Indian Companies of loading their responsibilities. Usual research
should be given to manufacturers – Government or private as the
case may be. DRDO must off load a number of their responsibilities.
DRDO should not think that private industry are not capable worthy
of maintaining secrecy, lacking in integrity. They should shed their
doubts. It should have certain supervisory responsibilities to monitor
all major product developments as part of the service under their
care and accountability. The Committee also feel that, as in other
developed nations, a project management organisation or coordination
Committee with representations from DRDO, user and production
agency should be there and the funds should be provided in different
stages after ascertaining the performance according to the parameters
set up and agreed upon. The Committee, therefore, strongly
recommend that it is essential to make fundamental changes in the
organization, structure, monitoring method and in the funding pattern
of DRDO with accountability to the user and to do work in time.
The Committee feel that once it has been decided to hand over
a project to DRDO for development and production, care should be
taken to avoid last minute major changes in its design etc and should
invariable be inducted in the user service. While going in for any
imports, it should be weighed as to what shall be the options
available with the country in case of technology denial regime and
in case of a war. Preference should always be given to indigenous
development of technology.

CHAPTER VII
PROJECTS ABANDENED BY DRDO
7.1 The Ministry was asked to give the details of major projects
which were undertaken by DRDO and later abandoned during the
last 20 years. The Ministry replied as under :-
“Airborne Surveillance Platform Project. It was sanctioned in May
1997 at a cost of Rs. 10 crore with a PDC of 30 months as a
concept demonstrator. Following the fatal accident of the AVRO
aircraft on 11 Jan 1999 at Arrakkonam, the project was short closed
in November 1999. The cost incurred at closure of the project was
Rs. 2.145 crore.
Cargo Ammunition. The project was sanctioned in January 1998
at a cost of Rs. 16.35 cr. During the initial stages of development,
it was felt that bomblet developed for Prithvi missile with certain
modification can be adopted for Cargo system. However, this was
not possible and design of bomblet and its fuze required total
redesign and posted certain technological constraints. All the
technological constraints were overcome and the design of 130
mm Cargo Shell, bomblet, bomblet fuze with SD element, packing
system and ejection system were worked out. The project was
short closed at the stage since PDC extension was not approved
and expenditure of Rs. 2.78 crore was made.
Technology Demonstration Programme for developing & GPS
based system as on alternative to Fire Direction Radar.  The project
was sanctioned in Aug 1999 at a cost of Rs. 12.20 cr. Two parallel
methods, AGAPS and GPS, were worked out for Pinaka system,
out of which AGAPS was found more suitable. Hence the project
of developing GPS based system was short closed and Rs. 46.70
lakh was spent till that date.
Development of 30mm Fair Weather Towed AD Gun System.
The project was sanctioned in Sept 2000 at a cost of Rs. 17.70 cr.
VCOAS in Jan 2001 said that the existing fleet of AD guns i.e.
40mm L/70 and 23mm ZU guns in the service are in good
condition with a residual life of 10-15 years, further during 9th &
10th Plan these guns are proposed to be upgraded and after
upgradation the characteristics of these guns will be superior than
39

40
that specified in GSQR No. 767. It was, therefore, decided that the
QR for future AD gun should be reviewed as deinduction of the
existing guns will start in 2015. Accordingly in May 01 new draft
GSQR was issued, which was entirely different from that issued
earlier. In view of the change in GSQR, the project was short
closed after spending Rs. 14.50 lakh.
Development of 30 mm Light Towed AD Gun System. The project
was sanctioned in Aug 1997 at a cost of Rs. 9.85 cr. Since the
scope of development work was entirely different as compared to
what was planned for, if necessitated additional funds and
extension of PDC to design/develop the system to meet the new
QR in view of the change in QR decision was taken to close this
project and Rs. 51.18 lakh was spent till the closure of the project.
7.2 The Ministry was asked to give details of projects in hand of
DRDO, their status till date, and the projects running behind the
schedule, the Ministry supplied the information as per Annexure – ‘B’.
The Ministry supplied the information on time taken for obtaining
sanction in case of important CCS projects as per Annexure – ‘C’ and
steps for sanction of CCS projects as per Annexure – ‘D’.
Recommendation No. 7
Projects Abandoned by DRDO
7.3 The Committee note with concern that DRDO closed the
major projects namely Airborne Surveillance Platform Project, Cargo
Ammunition, Technology Demonstration Programme, Development
of 30mm Fair Weather Towed AD Gun System and Light towed AD
Gun System, after getting these sanctioned and incurring huge
expenditure thereon. The Committee are not fully convinced with
the reply of the Ministry that due to technological constraints, change
in design and development and GSQR, the Projects sanctioned were
abandoned, particularly in the case of Cargo Ammunition where the
project was closed when all the technological constraints were
overcome and the design of 130 mm cargo shell, bomblet, bomblet
fuze with SD element, packing system and ejection system were
worked out.
7.4 The Committee are of the view that before sanctioning of
the project, at the formulation level itself, the Ministry with their
users should have foreseen all the constraints scrupulously well in
advance and all the techno, qualitative, design and development
requirements of the project could have been completed. The

41
Committee are of the view that had the Ministry followed the
concurrent engineering and development approach, the number of
closed projects might have come down and infructuous efforts and
expenditure made thereon could have been avoided. The project
which has been overtaken by technical development elsewhere and
not worth the extra efforts should not be undertaken by DRDO.
The Committee, therefore, desire that there should be scientific,
technical and concurrent audit of the ongoing project from an outside
agency so that the kinds of situation that have come to the notice
of the Committee do not recur. The Committee also desire that the
Ministry should study the reasons, have a second look and take the
advice of experts before closing down of any project in future so
that the country may not be deprived of the intended benefits of
the project envisaged.

CHAPTER VIII
PERFORMANCE OF PROJECTS
8.1 The Ministry was asked to furnish details of the major projects
which have been plagued by long delays and are showing time and
cost overruns. The Ministry furnished the following statement :-
“Major projects (with time & cost overruns) completed during the
last ten years :
Project Date of PDC PDC Cost Cost Date of
Sanction (Orig) (Rev) (Orig) (Rev) Closure
(in cr) (In cr)
1. LCA (ADA) (Ph-I) Aug. 83 Aug. 93 Mar. 04 560 2188 Jul. 05
2. Lakshya (ADE) Sep. 80 Sep. 87 Jun. 94 17 30 Jul. 98
3. Nishant (ADE) Oct. 91 Apr. 95 Mar 03 34 60.83 Oct. 05
4. Pinaka Dec. 86 Dec. 92 Dec. 00 26.47 55.33 Feb. 05
5. MBT Arjun May 74 May 84 May 95 15.50 305.6 Sep. 00
6. Panchendriya Nov. 87 Nov . 93 Dec. 98 31.22 31.23 Feb. 00
7. Sagardhwani Oct. 87 Jun. 91 Mar. 99 44.90 80.01 Dec. 00
8. AET Sep. 87 Aug. 92 Oct. 99 12.51 24.43 May 02
9. Sarvatra Dec. 92 Dec. 99 Dec. 00 17.58 22.80 Dec. 01
Ongoing major projects (with time & cost overruns)‘
Sl. Project Date of PDC PDC Cost Cost
No. Sanction (Orig.) (Rev.) (Orig.) (Rev.)
(in Cr.) (in Cr.)
1. LCA (Ph-II) Nov. 01 Dec. 08 3301.78
2. Samvahak May 99 Nov . 03 Sep. 06 108.90
3. Samyukta May 94 Nov . 99 Nov. 07 1200.22 1336.00
4. Sangraha Jun. 95 Jun. 02 Dec. 06  491.97
5. IGMDP Jul. 83 Jul. 95 Dec. 06  388.83 1771.43
6. Kaveri Mar. 89 Dec. 96 Dec. 09 383.00 2839.00
42

43
8.2 During oral evidence, when Committee desired to know what
kind of mechanism should be there to make DRDO accountable, non-
official expert expressed his views as under :-
“Sir, the Navy has best example. So why don’t we follow that? All
major developments take place as part of the Service, under their
care and accountability”.
8.3 During oral evidence, on accountability , the non-official expert
informed the Committee :-
“The DRDO has a budget of about Rs. 3,000 crore. A decade ago,
the budget to DRDO was allotted from the three services based
on their projects with DRDO. Each service funded this project of
DRDO. Through that process, they had a certain supervisory
responsibility. The Chief could ask, ‘I gave the funds what about
the product? Whereas for more than a last couple of years this has
changed. DRDO draws their budget directly from the Government.
So, they are answerable to nobody”.
8.4 During oral evidence, on the same issue of accountability of
DRDO, representative of the Ministry expressed his views as under :-
“Whether it is MBT Arjun, whether it is going to be Akash missile
or whether is LCA, for everyone of these projects, I am prepared
to take the blame organizationally for the delay due to certain
inability to assess in entirety all the technological complexities
involved. But I also wish to assure this Committee that at the
point of introduction it has a useful life appropriate to the product
of this kind and the Services have appreciated this”.
8.5 During oral evidence, on various products, the non-official
expert stated :-
“………. In a private sector, if your Indica car is not working
properly then it will go off the market. He has to make it good.
That is why, I do believe that the private sector, essentially because
their work culture is a little different, has to be given some role
in the Defence industry which, I believe, is happening today . It is
a matter of survival for us. In the Government organisation, we
have been trying for a long time.
8.6 The Committee enquired about the monitoring mechanism
available with DRDO to check on projects delayed, the Ministry stated
as under :-
“In early 80s, DRDO used to take projects which also involved ab-
initio development of technologies and systems. The industry did

44
not have adequate infrastructure to support our programmes at
that time. Such projects were getting delayed and since 1995, we
have separated S&T projects from development of systems. Now
the projects sanctioned after 1995 are not experiencing that kind of
delay, which we experienced in case of high technology and high
cost and complex systems. Our time estimates have also become
more realistic now. We have regular review and monitoring
mechanisms for periodically monitoring of our ongoing projects
leading to checks in delay and cost over-runs. In this regard, many
DRDO laboratories have also got ISO-9001-2000 certification for
their quality systems. The slippages are due to technical problems
and not because of negligence”.
(i) Main Battle Tank (MBT) Arjun
8.7 On MBT Arjun, the Ministry supplied the following
information :—
“In March 1974, the Government of India accorded clearance for
the development of an indigenous Main Battle Tank (MBT) in order
to put India on the world map along with other countries capable
of mastering the technology of designing and developing their
own MBTs. DRDO was nominated to execute the mission.
The Chronology of Development is as under :-
Development of first prototype — November 1983
Development and production of next — November 1983 to 1992
Series prototypes (12 Numbers)
Development and production of Pre- — 1992 to 1995
Production Series (PPS tanks)
(12 numbers)
Production of another three PPS tanks — 1995-1996
Rolling out of five Limited Series — 07 August 2004
Production (LSP) tanks
Five LSP tanks handed over to 43 — February 2005”
Armoured Regiment
8.8 The Ministry was asked to give comparative table of
production cost, features and capability of Arjun Tank with original
and upgraded T-90 and T-72 Tank. The Ministry replied as under :—
“MBT Arjun is a 60 tonne class battle tank with state of the art
optro-electronic power-packed control system, weapon management

45
system and high performance suspension. It is a product unique
in its class specifically configured for Indian Army requirement.
Unlike T-90 tank which was primarily built for Russian Armed
Forces, adapted by Indian Army for certain specific roles, this T-
90 is a 50 tonne class vehicle which does not have some of the
advanced features of MBT Arjun. But it is an improved system
over T-72 tank. A price comparison between the two tanks,
therefore, will not be in order. However, it is important to know
that MBT Arjun had a cost of Rs 17.20 crore per system from the
production line and is Rs 6-8 crore cheaper than its contemporary
system in the west. It is understood that T-90 tank is costing
approximately Rs. 12 crore and is yet to be indigenised. Some of
the salient features of the three tanks are given below :
MBT Arjun :
• Four men operated crew.
• 120 mm gun.
• 60 tons weight.
• Powered by1400-1500 hp engine.
T-90 and T-72 Tanks:
• Three men operated crew.
• 125 mm gun.
• 50 tons weight.
• Powered by 780-1000 hp engine.
MBT Arjun firing accuracy is far superior to other two tanks. It
has a second generation thermal imager and can engage targets at
2500 meters. Its 1400 hp engine ensures excellent mobility
performance. It has capability to fire Laser Homing Anti Tank
(LAHAT) missile from the barrel of the gun. Only T-90 tank has
such capability. .MBT Arjun has good export potential in African
countries due to its superior features vis-a-vis contemporary MBTs.”
8.9 The Committee desired to know the reason behind the cost
escalation as the original cost of MBT project was Rs. 15.50 crore in
1974 which escalated to Rs. 306 crore in 2005. The Ministry submitted
the following reason :—
“The original scope & requirement of 15 pre-Prod tanks was
enhanced. 15 Pre-Production Series (PPS) tanks involving production
cost of Rs. 110 cr. is included in the development cost. Accuracy
of fire has been enhanced”.

46
8.10 The Ministry was asked to provide the latest status and import
content in MBT Arjun. The Ministry supplied the information as
under :—
“Main Battle Tank Arjun is currently under production at Heavy
Vehicles Factory, Avadi under the aegis of Ordnance Factory Board,
Users have placed an indent for 124 tanks, out of which the
production for the year 2005-06 is expected to be 15 Nos. The
entire quantity of 124 Nos. is planned to be produced by March
2008. Power pack, Gunner’s Main Sight and Track are imported
items, which work out to 58% of the cost per tank. The import
content can be progressively reduced with increased production
orders”.
8.11 The Ministry was again asked when the import content of
the tank is 58%, how increased indigenous production can reduce
import contents. The Ministry was also asked to give price comparison
of Arjun Tank with T – 90 Tank.
The Ministry replied as under :—
“Indigenous Gunner’s Main Sight (IGMS) is an integrated gyro-
stabilized sight consisting of thermal imager, laser range finder,
and day sight with inbuilt fire control computer for ballistic
computation. This system enables the crew of the tank to engage
targets under static and dynamic conditions by day and night
with enhanced hit probability.
Suitable indigenous power Packs are not available for application
in MBT. Indigenous production of power pack through license
production is feasible with enhanced production order for MBT
Arjun considering the economy of scale. A project for development
of indigenous power pack is planned in XI Five Year Plan. There
are few vendors in the world who can manufacture gunner’s main
sight. DRDO is developing indigenous gunner’s main sight. It is
likely to mature and be available beyond 124 tanks. Indigenous
track is in advanced stage of development. It will be available for
Arjun production tanks beyond 124 Nos. Licensed production of
the above items may be feasible with enhanced order quality for
Arjun tanks and may result in reduction in import contents. T-90
is a forty-ton class tank. It cannot be compared with MBT Arjun
in terms of lethality power and protection. The present cost of
MBT Arjun is 16.80 crore. The production cost of T-90 is being
ascertained from Ordnance Factory Board”.

47
8.12 During oral evidence, on the quality of Arjun Tank, the non-
official expert informed the Committee :—
“……… I am afraid our quality control is very poor I have heard
that fives tanks were presented before the media, however, when
the media and other people went away, the tanks were put back
in the factory because still some quality checks had to be made.
The biggest problem in India in respect of defence production is
quality control. If China can do it, why can we not do it ?”
8.13 During oral evidence, on the certification of MBT Arjun, the
representative of the Ministry informed the Committee :—
“…….. Arjun is certified by DGQA. The responsibility of Arjun
certification is not with DGQA and still it is with DRDO
themselves”.
“These 124 tanks which have been ordered for production by the
Army, are produced in the Ordnance Factory. We have given
clearance for the Ordnance Factory to do internal QC. This is only
quality control. Then, the overall AHSP , that is, Authorised Holder
of the Sealed Particulars continues to be with DRDO till certain
maturity level is reached in production. Now, DGQA is
participating throughout in the inspection. They are not AHSP .
They will become AHSP only after DRDO gives the documents to
them. Then, the become the ultimate authority for the sealed
particulars. Today, sealed particulars are held by DRDO. DGQA is
fully involved in inspection”.
8.14 During oral evidence, on the production of MBT Arjun, the
representative of the Ministry informed the Committee :—
“After we took over the production from the DRDO first year we
decided to deliver five tanks. These tanks were delivered last year.
This year we are delivering 15 tanks more. Now 14 tanks which
we had promised are ready. But while the tanks were handed
over to the Army, they went for an extensive user trial. Now in
the user trial some minor defects were noticed and these defects
are being rectified one-by-one. Now the corrective actions which
are required are expected to be completed by January this year.
After this corrective action, further trials will take place. Now these
are very small defects”.

48
8.15 Regarding the snag, he further stated :—
“Sir, we have driven them and for over 60,000 kms and fired
more than 8,000 rounds. There was no problem. What happens is
that in the gun control system, there are power amplifiers which
are used in the fire control system. Some temperature settings were
not properly done by the parent company. These were tucked
inside. As you know, now-a-days, the deck is packaged so densely
even to get access to that you have to take out the whole module.
So, when this type of settings get disturbed, the rule says that one
has to go through the whole qualification process again. There is
no change in the design. It is a temperature re-setting which was
got done. That has been rectified. Now the tanks would be there
by the middle of January”.
8.16 During oral evidence, on the problems faced by MBT Arjun
during trials, the representative of the Ministry apprised the
Committee :-
“In the Arjun, we got into a little bit of a problem because certain
temperature-setting switches were not tuned properly. They had to
be returned. Yes, this was a problem of the Defence Research
Scientists who have not seen that 60 degree setting was not kept
at 60, but at 55 which is a normal standard of that company
which supplied those parts follow. But we had in the prototype
modified that for the 60. so, this had to be done. Once this got
done, now we are ready. So some of these productions hiccup if
they do take place in the initial phase, they should not dispirit us
because whenever we do new products like that, we may face
these kinds of problems”.
8.17 During oral evidence, on the status of MBT Arjun, the
representative of the Ministry informed the Committee :-
“………….The MBT Arjun started off with a 110 mm gun but at
the point of delivery it is already featuring 120 mm gun the state-
of-art. We started off a rifled gun for which there was no missile
which could be pushed through that. But we have now identified
that missile which can be fired through that. Similarly, we have
built in certain electronic package as part of our processing,
computing power within the tank which will allow us to network
into the future”.
8.18 During oral evidence, on the production of MBT Arjun, the
representative of the Ministry informed the Committee :-
“………….I want to tell you the roadmap of MBT Arjun as an
hon/ Member had asked about this issue. I want to assure you

49
that after these 15 tanks are tried by the Army, the DRDO will be
involved only for 15 more tanks. As soon as the Ordnance Factory
produces these 30 tanks, the DGQA will take over the responsibility
for giving technical clearance – which DRDO is doing today – and
the links will be broken. Thereafter, it will be entirely the Ordnance
Factory production, and the DGQA will be responsible for its
certification. Hopefully, this situation will remain till DRDO does
some more research and makes a Mark II of Arjun Tank. If they
decide to do that, then, again, the Government will start, but that
will be only after producing 124 Tanks and not before that. We
will produce 124 Tanks, as the Army has accepted and told us to
produce these Tanks”.
8.19 The Ministry further stated :-
“As of now all the 124 MBT Arjun production tanks is planned
with M/s MTU engine integrated with M/s Renk Transmission of
Germany as a power pack. The cost of MTU power pack (Engine
& Transmission) was Rs. 5.2 crore, as per the last ordered price
during mid-nineties. The features of MTU engine are as follows :-
• Built on modular concept.
• 1400 hp with V 90, 10 cylinder.
•T urbocharged and water cooled.
• Made of light weight aluminum alloy with built in safety
features.
• State of art cooling system and Air cleaning system to
withstand hot and desert environmental condition.
T-90 Tank is fitted with 1000 hp Engine. The cost of T-90 (engine
and transmission) is Rs. 2.15 crore as ascertained from Ordnance
Factory Board (OFB).
It is proposed to take up a project on “Development of 1500 hp
Engine” in the XI Five Year Plan. Preliminary design work has
already commenced.”
8.20 On the requirement of Tanks by the Army and the present
position of orders received from the Army for Arjun Tank and also
time schedule to deliver the same, the Ministry replied as under :-
“Total requirements of Army is about 3500 tanks. Army has placed an
indent for manufacture of 124 MBT Arjun. Heavy Vehicle Factory (HVF)

50
Avadi, a constituent unit of Ordnance Factory Board (OFB), has
set up exclusively for Main Battle Tank (MBT), Arjun an assembly
bay that has just started functioning. Once the activity picks up
speed in this facility, HVF is confident to produce 50 Arjun tanks
per year from the year 2009 onwards subject to continuous
requirement by the user. T-90 tank is also being produced in the
same factory under a separate production line.”
Recommendation No. 8
Performance of Projects
8.21 The Committee note that scores of projects with DRDO were
plagued by time and cost overruns and several projects were short
closed due to change in the GSQR by the user or due to technological
obsolescence. Some of the projects are showing significant time and
cost overrun. The Committee are of the view that the delays in
development of weapon systems, MBT Arjun, LCA II, Samvahak,
Samyukta, Sangraha, Integrated Guide Missile Development
Programme i.e. Prithvi, Akash, Trishul, Nag and Agni, Kaveri Engine
for LCA etc not only has caused significant loss of revenue but also
delayed the timely procurement of weapon systems from foreign
sources that were needed to keep the forces fighting fit and
modernised. The delays cause suspicion on the capability of DRDO
in the eyes of the users, the common man and intelligentsia. The
Committee do understand that not every equipment can be developed
by DRDO. The Committee, however, desire that prior to taking a
decision on the development of a weapon system, DRDO should
sharpen its foresight, whether it could develop it within a fixed
time frame and with available financial and technical resources or
not.
8.22 The Committee feel that DRDO should lay more stress on
the Project Management as in the Western industrialized countries,
where the R&D agencies only design and develop armaments
technologies and the military, as the user agency, has the highest
stakes in such weapon development projects, because it contributes
directly to their operational capabilities.
8.23 The Committee are of the opinion that DRDO being the
prime development agency for almost all type of research, cannot
absolve itself from the responsibility for inordinate delay in the
important project like LCA and Kaveri Engine and also of creating
credible deterrence capabilities for Indian Armed Forces by
developing technologically superior weapon systems. The Committee

51
keeping in view of the fact that weapon system face obsolescence
very fast, desire that DRDO must concentrate and focus on
augmenting basic science and technological out put to be at par
with the other developed countries. The Committee also desire that
DRDO should enter into joint venture/collaboration with Indian
Private Industry or the foreign partner where it does not have
capability to design and develop. The Committee also desire that
Ministry must ensure to minimize the gap between the project
initiated and sanctioned.
Recommendation No. 9
Main Battle Tank (MBT) Arjun
8.23 The Committee are perturbed to note that the Government
of India accorded clearance for the development of an indigenous
Main Battle Tank (MBT) Arjun in May 1974. Even after the lapse of
more than 32 years, the nominated agency of DRDO could not
execute the mission so far. Inordinate delay has escalated the original
cost of MBT project from Rs.15.50 crore in 1974 to Rs. 306 crore in
2005. The Committee are surprised to note that neither the execution
agency of DRDO or the certifying agency Director General Quality
Assurance (DGQA) are taking responsibility for the inordinate delay
and quantity in production of MBT Arjun. Out of 124 ordered for
tanks by the users, only 15 tanks have been produced by the Heavy
Vehicle Factory, Avadi.
8.24 Total requirement of Army is about 3500 Tanks. Army has
placed an indent the manufacture 124 MBT Arjun and Arjun
assembly has just started functioning. The Factory will produce
50 Arjun Tanks per year from the year 2009 onwards subject to
continuous requirement of the user. Users should be empowered to
certify the products produced by the ordnance factories. The
Committee also like to be apprised how they will comply the demand
of the user.
8.25 From the foregoing the Committee are very much concerned
and strongly feel that over the last 40 years, DRDO has put efforts
on R&D and also in manufacturing but still it has not been capable
of mastering the technology to fulfil the goal of self reliance
designing and developing their own MBT Arjun. It has not been
able to deliver the goals of self-reliance as promised by it to the
nation. It seems that DRDO can deliver successful results only when
it enters into joint venture/collaboration with a reliable partner.

52
8.26 The Ministry of Defence should think seriously as to how
to comply Arjun’s requirement in a time bound manner with the
help of private Industry – joint ventureship or otherwise.
8.27 The Committee, therefore, stress that DRDO must
concentrate on augmenting in technological output to be ahead with
the other developed countries and in order to put India on the world
map capable of mastering the technology.
(ii) Design and Development of Kaveri Engine for Light Combat
Aircraft (LCA)
8.28 Light Combat Aircraft (LCA) is a multi-role fighter aircraft
being indigenously designed and developed to meet the requirements
of the Indian Air Force. It is being designed as a light weight aircraft
incorporating advanced technologies such as unstable aerodynamics to
provide higher agility. All the state-of-art technologies such as digital
fly-by-wire flight control system, advanced avionics, multimode Radar,
composite materials for primary structures including wing and high
performance engine are incorporated to meet the long term operational
requirements specified by the IAF. The Programme is managed by the
Aeronautical Development Agency (ADA).
8.29 The Ministry was asked to give details about the likely date
of induction of LCA in the Forces and whether the delay in induction
of LCA has adversely affected modernisation process of the IAF, the
Ministry replied as under :—
“LCA Phase I of Full Scale Engineering Development was
completed in March 2004 whereas, LCA Phase  II of Full Scale
Engineering Development is progressing and would be completed
by Dec. 2008. It has about 25-30% import content. The LCA features
very advanced concepts of combat warfare systems and avionics.
LCA is expected to be inducted into Service in the Initial
Operational Configuration (IOC) by 2008 and the Final Operational
Configuration (FOC) is likely to be achieved by 2010. Delay in the
LCA development programme is being closely reviewed by various
review committees, like Governing Body of Aeronautical
Development Agency (ADA) and the General Body of ADA. The
General Body of ADA is presided over by the Hon’ble RM and
has various Secretaries, Chiefs of IAF, Indian Navy, etc. as members.
The last meeting of General Body of ADA was held in Dec. 2005.
IAF only can state the possible impact of delay on modernization
exclusively due to LCA”.

53
8.30 Not satisfied with the reply of the Ministry, the Committee
enquired further and desired to know precisely the reasons for delay
and whether any responsibility fixed for this, the Ministry stated as
follows :—
“The original PDC of LCA (Phase I) was not 1983. Sanction was
accorded in August 1983. The original cost estimates of Rs. 560
crores was prepared with a clear understanding that cost would
be revised after Project Definition Phase (PDP). PDP was completed
in 1988. Full Scale Engineering Development (FSED) Phase-I was
sanctioned in 1993 with a PDC of 1998. The scope of FSED Phase-
I was revised in 1998 with 2 additional aircrafts with a PDC of
2000. FSED Phase-I was completed in 2004 with no cost overrun.
The reasons for delay involve a complex interaction between
various factors that are listed below:—
• Revision of development strategy by increasing indigenous
content in aircraft and ground facilities due to lack of FE.
• US sanctions imposed in 1998.
• Re-designing of composite wings to cater for weapon
definition changes specified by Indian Air Force (IAF) during
January 2004.
• Extensive on-ground evaluation, simulation and testing of
indigenous equipment, systems, software and aircraft.
• Extensive Independent Verification & Validation (IV&V) of
complex air borne software to ensure flight safety.
• Coordination and integration effort by many work centres
to type certify indigenous equipment/system”.
8.31 The Ministry further stated:—
“FSED Phase-II of Tejas Programme is progressing satisfactorily.
The following activities are being pursued:
• Manufacture of three Prototype Vehicles (PVs) (including
Trainer Variant)
• Development activity leading to Initial Operational Clearance
(IOC) and Final Operational Clearance (FOC).
•T ransfer of Technology (TOT) to production agencies.
• Manufacture of 08 Limited Series Production (LSP) standard
aircraft.

54
•C reation of 08 aircraft per annum LSP facilities at production
agency i.e. HAL.
As on 24th May 2006, 530 flight tests (289 hrs: 05 minutes) have
been completed utilizing 02 Technology Demonstrators (TDs) and
02 Prototype Vehicles (PVs). As of date, Initial Operational
Clearance (IOC) is expected in 2008 and Final Operational Clearance
(FOC) in 2010.
On 31st March 2006, ‘Go-ahead’ for initiating Production Phase of
LCA Programme (concurrently with FSED Phase) has been
accorded, with the signing of a Contract (between IAF and HAL)
for initial induction of 20 Tejas (IOC) aircraft into operational
service. The lead-time for production of first induction standard
Tejas (IOC) aircraft is 37 months from ‘Go ahead’ and production
of 20 Tejas (IOC) aircraft will be completed within 69 months of
‘Go ahead’. Further orders for additional LCAs will be processed
after completion of IOC”.
8.32 During oral evidence, on LCA, the non-official expert informed
the Committee :—
“DRDO, as an organisation, is fine, but the main problem is project
management. For example, you have very rightly pointed out about
the user’s problems. Users are complaining. Why is the user
complaining? It is because the user does not participate in the
project. Now, LCA project is run by a committee system and the
head of the committee is the Minister of Defence. When does the
Minister have time to get into the technical aspects. The Technical
Committee is headed by SA to RM. He is the boss of that
programme and he himself is the chairman of the technical
committee and he takes all the decisions himself. In other countries,
for example, America they have 200 years of experience in running
projects. A project management organisation must be formed by
the users. For example, for LCA or for Arjun Tank for the Army,
they should be user-driven where the user get the funds and he
passes the money and say: ‘within so much time you must perform
and here is the money’. Then, the money flows in stages on proving
at each stage: The cash flow stops if it fails at any stage. There
should be review as to where they had gone wrong or whether
they have expanded beyond the capability or whether the design
is wrong. Therefore, the review should be done by the users who
funds the project. Thus, the user should be a part of the programme
the user is a part of the programme then how could they complain
to the Government?”

55
8.33 During oral evidence, on LCA, the representative of the
Ministry informed the Committee :—
“In the case of LCA, we brought a newer management concept.
So, each one of these major programmes had slightly varying
concept of management. It is a three tier management. One at the
apex level, depending upon the value, it is headed by the Secretary
or myself or sometimes by the Minister. In the case of ADA as an
agency for the LCA, we have the Minister chairing the bigger
Committee. Then, there is a middle level committee with the Vice
Chief of the Service, then we have the working level committee
with the Programme Director. Inherently , there is nothing wrong.
These Committees are pretty sound. As I said, there is some amount
of handing over because of the long gestation period. But I am
sure, we have to necessarily go through these graduation for the
first off systems. For example, the SP BHIM project of the self-
propelled gun on Arjun, the whole project got executed in a matter
of about 30 months. When you are in a position to execute a
project in less than three years, there is absolutely no problem
because people from all the three constituent units remain together
because they are there as a part of development. It is only when
change occurs, perceptions could differ. But, I am sure, all of us
have matured over the years. We have understood the complexities
involved and you will find this synergy taking shape better not
only within the Ministry but even with our partners or vendors
outside. Sometimes, they are impatient that they have developed
some part and it is yet to be accepted”.
8.34 The Ministry supplied the following information on Kaveri
Engine :—
“The project on ‘Design and Development of Kaveri Engine’ was
originally sanctioned in April 1989 to Gas Turbine Research
Establishment (GTRE), Bangalore at a cost of Rs. 382.81 crores with
a PDC of 93 months. Government had approved revision of cost
to Rs. 1386 crores and extension of PDC as Dec. 2004, which was
further revised to Rs. 2839 crores with PDC Dec. 2009. While
revising the cost, it was decided to execute the project in two
phases, first phase for interim flight trials and to demonstrate
reliability of the engine and second phase to demonstrate full
performance of the engine.
The scope of the project is to design, develop, test and type certify
the Kaveri engine to meet the specific needs of the LCA. Kaveri
engine is an advanced technology, 80k thrust class, twin pool, low
bypass (ratio) augmented turbofan engine.

56
The engine incorporates flat rated concept in order to compensate
for thrust drop due to high ambient and high forward speed
conditions. The engine will have Full Authority Digital Electronic
Control Unit and a dedicated engine accessory gear box. Design
of the engine, sub systems, and components have been completed
and sixteen Kaveri engines have been fabricated with equivalent
sets.
The basic light-up characteristics, aero-mechanical integrity, vibration
signature of the engine have been established. The flat rating
concept and wind milling starts have been demonstrated. Kabini
(Kaveri Core Engine) has also been tested on the high altitude test
bed in Russia where it was established that the thrust and fuel
consumption performance were close to the design intent. As on
date a total of about 1425 hour of testing has been carried out on
these prototype engines. Jet Fuel Starter (JFS) systems for starting
Kaveri engine has been indigenously developed with assistance
from GTRE, Bangalore by HAL and is being integrated with Kaveri
engine at GTRE, Bangalore.
Two version of engines are envisaged namely, K-9 standard engines
for integration of first flight with LCA and K10 standard engines
for final production and integration on LCA”.
8.35 The Ministry was asked how much amount was spent on the
Kaveri Engine till date and the reasons for cost escalation, the Ministry
replied as under:—
“The project has incurred an expenditure of Rs. 1459.79 Crore till
date against the sanctioned cost of Rs. 2839 Crore. The reasons for
cost escalation are changes in specification as a result of pre-review
conducted by three reputed engine houses in the world, change in
scope of work, redesign of component system, sanctions imposed
by the United States, cost estimates was carried out in 1985 which
is obviously non-realistic in today’s scenario, denial of testing time
and slot by agencies abroad as per the requirement, lack of
infrastructure for manufacturing and testing of engine in the
country.”
8.36 When asked about the reasons for delay in development and
integration of Kaveri engine and carrying out the mid-term review
regarding development of Kaveri engine, the Ministry replied as under:—
• “Challenges of ab-initio engine development,
• Incorporation of cutting edge technologies,

57
•E ffect of post 1998 US Sanctions coupled with delays in
delivery of critical engine components,
• Design review of all critical systems by leading engine house
in the world,
• Emergence of enhanced number of Hours of engine testing
before first flight on aircraft, etc.”
Regular Monthly, Quarterly & Six monthly reviews are being done
by Project Management Board, Programme Management Board and
the Apex Board (AEDB) chaired by SA to RM. In addition special
monthly review by SA to RM & CC R&D (AMS) and review by
Dr. Kota Committee on integration on LCA are being carried out.
8.37 The following challenges were faced in the development of
the Kaveri engine:—
• Decision of the overall thermo dynamic cycle of the engine
to match required performances over the complete flight
envelop.
• Decision on the overall lay out on various engine modules.
• Aerodynamic, aero-mechanical, combustion, structural
integrity and related design procedures in each of the engine
sub-systems.
• Conversion of the design intent into appropriate
manufacturing processes and technologies and related quality
control aspects.
All these aspects interact with each other in very complex ways to
determine the success of the programme. The project was also
delayed by sanctions and export control of critical components at
various phases of the programme. However, DRDO in the past
sought to utilize expertise from well-known engine houses through
consultancy and testing agreements. As a consequence of
improvements in indigenous design, materials and manufacturing
capability and input from various consultancies, GTRE has
demonstrated the operation of an engine which has performed at
100% of the design engine RPM and at about 80% of intended
design thrust. The engine has also undergone simulated altitude
testing and various aspects of its performances at altitude up to
15 km have been tested and demonstrated”.

58
8.38 When asked about the opinion of the users on credibility
design and present performance of Kaveri Engine, the Ministry
replied :—
“With the level of understanding thus developed for the design
and manufacturing technology of the aero engine, it has been
decided that a joint venture with reputed engine house could be
attempted to hasten the pace of development of the engine to the
full operating performance and safety requirements of the LCA.
As a consequence, the engine has been evaluated by reputed engine
houses in response to DRDO’s request for proposal and 3 reputed
engine houses have submitted proposals for joint development
based upon the existing Kaveri engine. These proposals are being
technically evaluated”.
8.39 The Ministry was further asked to clarify how a joint venture
with reputed engine house could hasten the pace of development of
the Kaveri engine. The Ministry clarified as under :—
“The proposal in respect of consultancy on Kaveri engine has gone
through technical evaluation. Consequent to technical evaluation,
a reiteration of issues arising, has been raised to the companies.
The clarifications are expected in one month’s time after which
the projects negotiation committee can be conducted.”
Recommendation No. 10
Design and Development of Kaveri Engine for Light Combat Aircraft (LCA)
8.40 The Committee also express their displeasure in the delay
in development of LCA (rechristened as T ejas) which started in 1983,
which is still showing time and cost overruns. The Committee note
that even after 530 flight tests the LCA is years away from induction
into IAF. The Committee also note that contract between IAF and
HAL has been signed for initial induction of 20 Tejas aircraft into
operational service. However, it could not be turned into reality so
far due to delay in development of indigenous Kaveri Engine.
8.41 The Committee note the inordinate delay in the development
of indigenous Kaveri engine to meet the LCA requirement. The
project on design and development of Kaveri Engine was originally
sanctioned way back in 1989 to Gas T urbine Research Estt. (GTRE)
at a cost of Rs. 382.81 crore with PDC in December 1996. However,
after spending 15 years, it has revised the PDC to Dec. 09 with an
approximate budget of Rs. 2839 crore. The Committee also note that

59
now DRDO is adopting concurrent engineering and joint venture
approach in order to develop the Kaveri Engine. The Committee
deprecate the delayed approach of DRDO to enter into joint venture
with other company or Defence Public Sector Undertakings for
development of this engine. Had it taken this decision earlier, till
now the LCA would have become a reality with Kaveri engine and
the inordinate delay and huge escalation in the revised cost could
have been minimized. The Committee, therefore, recommend that
the Ministry should take immediate steps to avoid further delay in
the development of Kaveri Engine and time bound schedule for
completion of this project may be fixed.
8.42 The Committee note that non-development of the engine
and the long list of slip-ups in domestic production programmes
has strengthened the need for a thorough assessment of the
functioning of both the Defence Research & Development
Organisation and the production agencies. The Committee also desire
that Ministry of Defence and DRDO should address these problems
seriously and take firm steps for development of Kaveri Engine for
LCA by giving full autonomy to Aeronautical Development Agency
(ADA) or by entering into collaboration/joint venture with the public
private limited company which is favourable to avoid future loss
with foreign partner without further loss of time.
8.43 Finally, the Committee are of the view that HAL and ADA
may be allowed to develop their own leadership and separate
organisation/institution/company independent of DRDO.
(iii) Integrated Guided Missile Development Programme (IGMDP)
8.44 During the Study Visit to Hyderabad when asked about the
status of missiles being developed by DRDO, the Bharat Dynamics
Limited replied as under :—
“Integrated Guided Missile Development Programme to design,
development leading to limited series production of Prithvi, Akash,
Trishul, Nag and a technology demonstrator Agni was undertaken
in July 1983. Nag, Akash and Dhanush, naval version of Prithvi
missile system are part of the Integrated Guided Missile
Development Programme. The total investment under Integrated
Guided Missile Development Programme is of the order of
Rs. 1341.2 crores. Agni-I & II and Prithvi 150 Km range, 250 km
range and naval version Dhanush have already been inducted into
the Indian Armed Forces.

60
The missiles being developed under Integrated Guided Missile
Development Programme are as accurate as contemporary missiles
available in the world armoury. The flight testing during the
development phase is a continuous process depending on the
mission objective set for the particular flight test. Quantifying the
success rate during the development phase may not be possible
even when the mission objectives are met 100%.
The enormous data generated during the flight trials is used for
the further improvements and flight tests. BrahMos missile system
has established 100% accuracy to hit and destroy the target ships
with high kill energy, during the trials”.
(a) Akash
8.45 Akash is medium range surface-to-air missile having range of
25 km. It has a multiple target handling capacity with digitally coded
command guidance system. 35 flight trials have been conducted
including guided flight against Electronic/Parabarrel/Nishant/Lakshya
unmanned air vehicles as target. During last 7 flight trials, Command
Guidance has been proved for the full duration. Multi-target
engagement capabilities of Akash have been demonstrated in recently
conducted flight trials. Akash missile system in Group Mode and
Combat Configuration has been demonstrated and proved.
8.46 On being asked by the Committee, the major reasons for
delay with respect to Akash, the Ministry supplied the following
information :—
• ”Akash Missile System uses state-of-art command guidance
system using a multi-function phased array radar and
against multiple targets. This, being developed for the first
time, took much longer than anticipated.
• Realization of rocket ramjet propulsion system.
• User trials of Akash to be conducted only on T-72 based
radar system from production agency.
• Non-availability of critical components, devices and sub-
systems from import due to embargos”.
(b) Nag
8.47 Nag is a third generation anti-tank missile having ‘top-attack’
and ‘fire and forget’ capability. So far, 56 developmental flight trials
have been carried out including 11 guided flights with Imaging Infra

61
Red (IIR) seeker in ‘top-attack’ and ‘fire and forget’ mode. Flight trials
with day and night Imaging Infra Red (IIR) Seeker in top attack mode
have been undertaken in Feb. 2003 and June 2004 successfully. All the
mission objectives were met. These flights have established ‘top attack’
and ‘fire and forget’ capability of NAG missile system. Desert trials
have been completed. Army has issued Acceptance of Necessity (AON).
User trials phase – II are planned in December 2006/Jan 2007 and
user trials for helicopter version (ALH) are planned in June 2007 to
December 2007.
8.48 When the Committee asked the major reasons for delay with
respect to Nag, the Ministry supplied the following information :—
• “Unforeseen technological problems encountered in
development of IIR Seeker as homing seeker technology with
real time image processing was realized for the first time.
• Realization of IIR seeker in adequate numbers as per the
NAG development schedule.
• Major modifications in NAMICA configuration based on
User feedback (after field trials).
• Non-availability of critical components, devices and sub
systems from import due to embargo”.
8.49 The Ministry was also asked to elaborate realization of rocket
propulsion system and the effect of import embargos on the availability
of critical components etc. of Akash and Nag Missiles, the Ministry
replied :—
“The propulsion system of Akash missile is based on solid fuel
rocket ramjet, which has both booster and sustainer integrated.
Only Russia and France are two other countries which have
mastered such an efficient propulsion system and flown successfully .
This engine has been perfected and successfully flown more than
30 times at all attitudes and manoeuvering conditions. The system
is 100% indigenous with all raw materials, fabrication and
integration processes being developed within DRDO and know
how transferred to industries for serial production.
The missile system has performed excellently and all events starting
from surveillance through detection of air targets, tracking them,
assigning to launchers, evaluating the threat, identifying optimum
launch automatic checkout of missile and auto launch. Multiple
missiles have been guided to multiple targets simultaneously and

62
successful guidance followed by target destruction demonstrated a
number of times. The development work on Akash missile system
has been completed, the problems regarding realization of Rocket
propulsion system have been overcome. System is ready for serial
production and induction by Army and Air Force.
Nag missile system is the 3rd generation fire and forget anti-tank
guided missile system which has hit targets accurately at various
ranges both during day and night. System is ready for serial
production at BDL and induction by Army”.
8.50 During oral evidence, on missiles, the non-official expert
informed the Committee:—
“Look at our missile programme. There is not a single Air Defence
missile as yet entered the Service other than the Prithvi”.
8.51 During oral evidence, when Committee desired to know what
kind of mechanism should be there to make DRDO accountable,
representative of the Ministry expressed his views as under:—
”There has been a delay but even with that delay, our Akash, our
Nag, our Trishul have done pretty well in the recent trials. Yes,
we have a problem. We have a problem because testing this missile
is not easy. You need a kind of target and organizing for the
target. So, repeatability and consistency is what Services want to
be demonstrated. I am sure we will be in a position to do that.
We will do a couple of more trials and demonstrate this
consistently. They have not questioned basic performance and they
want to be reassured that it is capable of being repeated. Once we
do this, I am sure they will accept the Akash and Nag Missiles
and we will get going. In fact, Nag has already been accepted”.
(iv) Brahmos Missile
8.52 The Parliamentary Standing Committee on Defence visited
BrahMos Aerospace Complex and reviewed the concept and progress
of Joint Ventrue BrahMos. JV is responsible for design, development,
production and marketing of a most advanced Supersonic Cruise
Missile. This Joint Venture between India and Russia signed in 1998,
has resulted a technology collaboration between two leading research
organization, DRDO from India and NPO Mashinostroyenia from Russia
with 50.5% and 49.5% respectively as equity share and with sharing of

63
technology. The flexibility provided to the JV to perform and take
decisions fast as a private company with same management culture,
helped to put the scientific minds together to realize this system in a
very short time. The BRAHMOS missile thus realized is the fastest
operational cruise missile existing in the world today and can be
launched from any type of platform—land, sea, sub-sea and air and
precisely reach the targets either on land or at sea with high lethal
effect. The missile has undergone twelve successive successful flight
trials and has been inducted by the Indian Navy. Production is in
progress for multiple ships of Indian Navy and in mobile launchers
for the Army. The Air Force version has just been taken up for
development.
8.53 Integration of multiple scientific institutions, industries, user
services and inspection agencies of India and Russia from beginning
of the project enabled the product to come to the global market as a
BRAND item, well ahead of other countries. Superior product
performance, cost effectiveness and availability in quantity attracted
many countries to demand this product. Aggressive marketing is
essential to take advantage of the competitiveness of the product.
(v) Concurrent Engineering
8.54 The Ministry was asked to state the projects where DRDO
has resorted to concurrent approach in development and efforts being
made by DRDO to encourage concurrent engineering. The Ministry
replied as under:—
“Concurrent engineering leads to simultaneous progress of activities
required in getting new products out to the users as quickly as
possible. It has been identified as simultaneous engineering, parallel
engineering, multi-disciplinary team approach and integrated
product and process development. At present, DRDO involves
industry during product development. For many complex products,
DRDO follows concurrent engineering approach where industry is
a major partner from the early stage of R&D and product
development. DRDO has well-established procedure for Limited
Series Production (LSP) where Indian companies are fully associated
in various stages of product development. These companies are
selected for the potential for absorption of technology, for the
capability to carry out design and modification in design to suit
the specific requirement, if necessary. During this process vendors
get qualified through the process of evaluation and testing.”

64
Recommendation No. 11
Integrated Guided Missile Development Programme (IGMDP)
8.55 The Committee note that Integrated Guided Missile
Development Programme (IGMDP) was sanctioned in 1983 to develop
four missile systems, namely, Prithvi, Akash, Trishul and Nag in
addition to the technology demonstrator—Agni. The Committee are
constrained to note that the original cost of the project was
Rs. 388.83 crore which has been now revised substantially and their
probable date of completion which was 1995 has also been revised
to 2007. The reasons furnished to the Committee for delay were—
non-realization of state-of-art technology and non-availability of
components and sub-systems. However, the Committee hope that
DRDO will make all out efforts to overcome all the obstacles coming
in the way of developing and completing these projects. The
Committee again stress that DRDO must concentrate on fundamental
R&D work and retain and augment its scientific knowledge based
industry and simultaneously enter into joint venture with a capable
company and also follow concurrent engineering approach where
industry is a major partner from the early stage of R&D and product
development. The Committee also note that DRDO has well-
established procedure for Limited Series Production (LSP) where
Indian companies are fully associated in various stages of product
development. The Committee feel that the Ministry should give more
emphasis on concurrent engineering in the R&D and product
development, as the DRDO has adopted concurrent engineering
approach only during the development of the project. The Committee
hope that in future most of R&D projects would not get delayed
and the country would get the benefits of the projects in time.
8.56 The Committee note that there is no scientific audit at any
point of time of DRDO and its projects as such. However, the DRDO
has the mechanism of feasibility study, design and technology
evaluation, project peer review, post project review. The Committee
observe that inspite of that, a large number of projects are showing
inordinate delay and escalation of huge cost. The Committee,
therefore, recommend that in addition to existing audit system,
DRDO’s projects must also be audited by external and independent
audit group of experts duly approved by the Government of India.
The Committee are of the view that this will facilitate the
Government to understand the scientific environment, fundamentals
in delays and to check the real growing cost and their over runs of
the projects and contains the accountability of the DRDO and
Ministry of Defence.

65
8.57The Committee appreciate the Joint Venture model of BrahMos
signed between India and Russia in 1998 which has resulted a
technology collaboration between two leading research organisations
of Russia, DRDO from India and NPO Mashinostroyenia. The
Committee feel that this remarkable achievement in technology
collaboration between two countries putting together their core
competencies has given the message that DRDO can develop and
lead to production of defence equipment in time satisfying the
requirements of the Armed Forces, with less cost, if they resort to
collaborative efforts in the form of Joint Ventures. BrahMos is a
model joint venture, which needs to be followed by the Ministry of
Defence to achieve competitiveness in the world arms market.

CHAPTER IX
RESEARCH ON STRESS MANAGEMENT
9.1 The Committee enquired about the facilities available for stress
management and treatment of psychological problems of soldiers and
officers. The Committee was informed:—
“All Command and Zonal military service hospitals have psychiatric
treatment, both OPD/indoor. Further, Psychiatric Centres are located
in the hospitals in the area of CI Operations like:
92 Base Hospital in Srinagar
155 Base Hospital in Tejpur
151 Base Hospital in Guwahati
Primary prevention is done by:
(a) Stress management lectures given by Regiment Medical
Officers (RMO) in the units in the field.
(b) Officers, Non-commissioned Officers (NCO) and Religious
teachers are trained as resource persons in separate batches
at the psychiatric centres on short capsule course of one
week to train them in identifying & managing stress in
field.
(c) Psychiatrists in the above hospitals conduct lectures on Stress
Management on induction of troops for the first time in
Counter insurgency operations.
(d) Once the personnel are identified to be suffering from stress
related psychological disorders they are removed from the
work place and admitted in psychiatric centres for
observations and management.
Secondary Level
(a) After proper evaluation & diagnosis, psychiatrists attend to
these patients with
— Modern drug therapies
— Psychological forms of therapy like psychotherapy sessions/
Relaxation Techniques/Behavioural therapy/Religious
therapies
66

67
— Sick leave to facilitate recovery
(b) Re-evaluation and return to unit under sheltered employment.
(c) Only those patients who do not recover after sufficient
length of observation in sheltered employment are
discharged from service.
(d) More serious psychiatric illnesses like insanity are offered
the best available treatment with modern drugs in the
psychiatric centres and put under sheltered employment.
They are retained in service as long as possible but
discharged from service only when sheltered employment
cannot be provided or the relapses are so frequent that they
become a liability to service.”
9.2 On further query on the soldiers released/retrenched due to
psychological disorders, the Ministry furnished the following data:—
Year No. of admissions in No. of Pers. Percentage
Psychiatric Centres of invalided out
Military Hospitals of
services
2000 2709 457 16.87
2001 2763 345 12.49
2002 4514 522 11.56
2003 4432 538 12.14
2004 4982 443 08.89
9.3 On use of yoga/ayurveda/mediation and other Indian systems
of medicines like the Kerala therapy in case of such problems, the
Ministry stated:—
“Stress management techniques such as breathing exercises,
mediation and yoga are actively being studied in the prevention
of heart disease alongwith diet control and life-style modifications.
The personnel who appear to be at high risk of heart diseases
who are detected during annual medical exam are advised life
style modifications to prevent the occurrence of such diseases. The
modifications known to have positive effect are weight reduction
for obese personnel, stopping of tobacco use, dietary changes,
encouragement of exercises and stress management techniques
described above. However, the role of yoga/ayurveda/mediation
and other Indian systems of medicines including Kerala Therapy
in curing heart disease has not been fully established.”

68
9.4 During oral evidence, on the issue of treatment of personnel
in border areas, representative of the Ministry informed the Committee:—
“Sir, I must humbly submit that the DRDO and our laboratories
are too small an entity to look after the entire Armed Forces
requirements. We are basically focused on such technologies or
science which can be help to meet their need. Scaling up is the
responsibility of the concerned Department”.
9.5 During oral evidence, on DRDO’s involvement in medical
research and life sciences, the representative of DRDO informed the
Committee:—
“In DRDO there are two aspects. One is the weapon system
development and the other is to look into the needs of the men
behind the weapon. So, the DRDO is mandated with these two
charters. Our soldiers have to operate in extreme conditions, like
high altitude, cold, desert, underwater, aerospace, low intensity
conflict environments, NBC environments, etc. The DRDO is also
mandated to see how to take care of the health of the normal
soldiers, whereas the DGAFMS looks into the diseases and health
care delivery. So, there is a clear demarcation. The hon. Chairman
asked about the system in other countries. In the US, for example,
they have Walter Reid Army Research Institute. Similarly, they have
an Institute of Chemical Defence. Then, U.K. earlier had Defence
Evaluation Research Agency, the DERA. In the weapon system the
human factors have to be built into. Human factors, right from
anthropometry, ergonomics, noise, vibration, toxic fumes, the safety
of the soldiers are built into. So, it is not only for the medical. We
are not doing pure medical research. It is a human factor research
applied to the weapon system development. For example, if you
want to design MBT Arjun we need to look at the coupola, what
should be the dimension of the coupola, what should be the seat
design, etc. Similarly if the soldiers have to operate in high altitude
conditions, we have to develop ethnic population standards and
how will they get acclamatised.
He further stated that the next point is about high altitude. Take
for example, in US they have altitude up to Pikes Peak, Alpine.
So, we have signed an MOU with the US Army Research Institute
of Environmental Medicine NATIC. The other Institute is in
Kirghizstan. They have high altitude. So, we have already
undertaken a study there to see the Hans Chinese population which
is the Kirghiz. How do they match with our soldiers when they

69
are inducted to high altitudes ? So, we have taken both the groups
after studying physiological, biochemical, psychological and clinical
profile. Then we take them to high altitude.”
9.6 The Ministry was asked whether collaboration with foreign
countries also being done in the above field, the Ministry supplied the
following information :—
“India-UK Workshop on Stress Management during Military
Operations was held in March 2000 in India and based on the
deliberations, two areas were identified for collaborative research
but they have not yet been implemented. The UK side has been
requested to re-examine the areas and to explore the possibility of
initiation of collaborative research. The proposals identified for
research are as follows :
• Optimization of human work performance during military
operations using ergogenic aids such as creatine, Composite
Indian Herbal Preparation, dichloroacetate and glumatic acid.
• Evaluation of physiological effects due to sleep deprivation
during military operations and amelioration of these effects
through pharmacological and non-pharmacological
intervention measures.”
Recommendation No. 12
Research on Stress Management
9.7 The Committee are concerned to learn about the growing
incidents of violence, suicide and killings by the overstressed Jawans
particularly in J&K and North East. The Committee understand that
human resource is not the job of DRDO, therefore, to manage the
highly stressed environment, the Committee, desire that the Ministry
of Defence should assigned this job to specialised association/bodies/
organizations who have expertise in this area, and these organisations
may be allowed to use the facilities created by DRDO. The
Committee also urge the Government to implement at the earliest
the recommendation of this Committee on Armed Forces T ribunal
Bill, 2005 which in the opinion of the Committee would definitely
help to reduce the stress among the Jawans and Officers of the
Armed Forces.

CHAPTER X
PRIVATE SECTOR PARTICIPATION IN DEFENCE R&D
10.1 It is mandatory that in a long term our country gets its
defence needs, as much as possible, from within the country. The
country should progressively graduate towards maximum
Indigenisation and aim for total self-reliance with regards to the defence
production. This will only be possible if we manufacture at least 70%
of major defence requirements within the country. And, this will not
be possible unless we develop our own manufacturing base and create
our own technology bank.
10.2 Technology is to Industry what tonic is to the body. Without
technology Industry cannot grow and cannot become self-reliant. No
foreign business organisation would like to part with a critical
technology because there is money in it and no country would like to
part with a strategic technology because it has power in it. Even if
they do part with it, there is a heavy cost attached. Further, there are
embargoes and technology denials, which many nations impose and
many nations face. We have been part of latter group many a times
and the examples are not being put down here. Coupled with this is
the whole issue of Technology management to include technology
development, technology procurement, keeping a record of technologies
available within the country, segregating technologies under heads like
strategic/critical/general, segregating them under various industry
groups, co-ordination, financing and similar other actions.
10.3 The fact is that the Technology particularly in defence industry
is a national resource. It needs to be controlled, developed, coordinated
and funded by a national body. Another fact is that no meaningful
Indigenisation in defence can take place without a coordinated R&D
effort in this direction. The country needs homegrown technologies for
development.
Confederation of Indian Industry (CII) was asked how private
sector participation can help DRDO achieving self-reliance in Defence
production, they submitted the following information/suggestion:—
1. The private sector must be involved at the stage of
conceptualization of the equipment itself by the Armed
Forces and Ministry of Defence. This would enable the
70

71
Private Sector to put across the capabilities, which already
exist in the industry or could be acquired by them through
national or international Joint Ventures and Technology Tie-
ups and consortium with DPSUs/OFs. The DRDO, therefore,
can avoid reinventing the wheel. Once, the item has been
decided to be developed in the country, DRDO as policy
must associate select private sector companies at the initial
stage itself as its R&D partners. This would eliminate the
current difficulties faced by DRDO, while transferring the
technology for bulk production. What is imperative here is
identification of industry as ‘System Integrators’ by the
Ministry of Defence based on their capabilities. These system
integrators could be private sector, DPSUs or OFB or
consortiums between them. Once these industries have been
recognized and officially accepted as Systems Integrators
(Champions) by the MoD, the DRDO must be given the
freedom to select its R&D partners who have the
competency to take on the project with DRDO.
2. The current practice of nominating a production agency such
as a DPSU or OFB only by the Ministry of Defence must
be dispensed with immediate effect. There were several cases
wherein a private sector company developed equipment in
partnership with DRDO but after successful development
of the project, the Ministry of Defence nominated a DPSU
or OFB as its production agency for bulk production of the
equipment. This has resulted into discouraging involvement
of private sector in Defence production in general and R&D
in particular. As a policy, after successful development of
the project by Private Sector with DRDO, the Ministry of
Defence must treat the System Integrator as the production
agency and orders must be placed on them.
3. The user involvement in the development of R&D projects
is a necessity. While development of several large systems
has taken place, over a period of time, the User’s
involvement has not been to the extent required. There is
an urgent need to put in place a system, which could be
based on the idea of ‘Integrated Project Team’ where all
stake holders are brought on board.
4. In order to ensure continued commitment. Each stakeholder
should contribute to the funding in the ratio of 75:15:10
among DRDO, Industry and User respectively. In case of
development of products based on spin offs, the Industry

72
will be willing to partner with DRDO by contributing to
the funding in the ratio of 50:50 between DRDO and
Industry.
5. In case of Transfer of Technology for bulk production, DRDO
as the nodal agency for development could have the IPR
on the technology and charge royalty from Industry as per
the existing Government procedures. Alternatively, DRDO
and the company can form a new Joint Venture company
wherein DRDO could have an equity participation to the
extent of 26%. The objective is to convert DRDO Labs as
profit centres.
6. With 30% direct offset of imports above Rs. 300 crores,
announced in the offset policy by the Ministry of Defence
recently, several technologies for defence production are
expected to pass on to Indian Industry by the foreign
suppliers, DRDO and System Integrators from the Private
Industry should also be involved in any technology transfer
which results out of the offset policy so as to ensure that
relevant technologies are acquired, co-ordinated and
managed for future development/upgradation of the
equipment.
7. DRDO and the Systems Integrators (including private sector)
should be involved in consultation while categorizing ‘Buy’,
‘Buy and Make’ and ‘Make’.
8. The DRDO must have the freedom to associate with the
Industry in developing technologies/products, which have
great export potential. This must be enabled through a
proper framework/guidelines. This would facilitate the
optimum usage of the existing infrastructure held by the
DRDO for development of various defence equipment, which
could take India into the global defence market.
9. The Small and Medium Scale companies are the second
and third tier, who provide raw materials and components
to Systems Integrators. At present around 45% of the
production work is outsourced to SMEs. The SMEs, because
of their size do not have the funds to invest in the R&D.
DRDO should take upon itself to provide the R&D backing
to these SMEs. This could be done firstly by providing funds
for development of the components for the project and
thereafter ensure commitments of orders during bulk
production stage. Secondly DRDO should acting as a

73
technology bank for SMEs in supporting their R&D
requirements.
10. The DRDO at present interacts with more than 400
companies, however there is no formally published
framework/guideline for partnership between the private
sector and DRDO. CII recommends that DRDO must
stipulate/publicise guidelines for industry participation in
Defence R&D project to attract more Indian companies.
10.4 The Ministry was asked to explain the role of private sector
and foreign company in Defence R&D Sector, the Ministry replied as
under:—
“The role of private sector in the activities of DRDO has increased
tremendously over the last 15 years. From being simple fabricator,
nearly 300 private industries in the country are now able to carry
out independently design, development and testing of sub-systems,
modules and products. Within next few years, some of the
industries will become even capable of integrating systems and
delivering to users directly. We do not have policy of FDI in R&D
but we can have joint ventures”.
10.5 The Ministry was asked how DRDO is coordinating/
synergizing the R & D efforts of public and private sector, the Ministry
replied as under:—
“Under the Integrated Guided Missile Development Programme,
wherever possible, public and private sector have been involved
in the development. The integrated team is working for design
and development of the various missile systems being developed
by DRDO under the command of Project Director and Project
Managers working at various work centres”.
10.6 The Ministry was asked further how private industry can
help DRDO in speedy completion of projects and how DRDO can
reciprocate in development of private industry as a whole in Defence
Sector to make it larger player in the world arms market. The Ministry
replied as under:—
“Development of defence systems is a multi-disciplinary activity.
It involves active interaction among teams having expertise in
specific technological domains. Besides coordinating and
orchestrating the activities of various teams, one needs to have the
wherewithal to physically realize the designs evolved. Here the
infrastructure available with industry and their manufacturing

74
expertise would be of immense advantage. Involvement of industry
at the development stage itself would speed up the subsequent
up-scaling for production. Some of the other activities like job
farm out are being assigned to private industry by the DRDO and
assembly/fabrication of components are also being done by the
private industry. This point has also been addressed by the Kelkar
Committee which has been accepted by the Government.
Many industries, today have graduated into design and
development houses. DRDO intends to outsource modules and
subsystems to such certified (by DRDO) industries so that DRDO
laboratories will develop only those, which cannot be done by
industries. Such private firms become so versatile and professional
that they can compete in global market and get international orders.
Astra Microware Products Ltd. and MTAR technologies are
examples to quote”.
10.7 During the deliberations before the Committee, representatives
of CII stated that they want to tie up with DRDO directly. In this
connection, the Ministry replied as under:—
“Industries which would like to tie-up directly with DRDO for
taking up R&D and product development activities including
systems integration and check out, can register with DRDO as
certified venders, discipline wise. Some of them may be allowed
to fund R&D so that eventually they get assured orders.
DRDO is already involving Private Sector by way of fabrication
and development of contracts. Tie-up with CII will improve the
availability of information on Private Sector to DRDO”.
10.8 The Ministry was also asked whether DRDO has made efforts
to invite the private sector abroad for research work or for requisite
technology transfer, it replied as under:—
“Many industries abroad have been associated with DRDO for
product development, system integration, limited supplies and
know-how transfer. For examples, NPOM of Russia for BrahMos
missile system, AGAT of Russia for RF seekers, ELTA of Israel for
radars, Sagem of France for Inertial Measurement units, etc. We
have invited IMI, Israel for Trajectory Correction System (TCS) for
Pinaka”.
10.9 During the oral evidence, on outsourcing, the representative
of the Ministry informed the Committee as under:—
“As I mentioned to you, almost 60 per cent of our work is
outsourced. It is not given as a direct grant. When it comes to

75
giving a direct grant, we are going through the Universities and
all that, which roughly accounts for two to three per cent of our
budget”.
10.10 On shareholding pattern, he stated:—
“All shareholders must invest in R&D. This is primary in areas
where commercial technologies are not available. We have
recommended later on that DRDO should really confine itself to
those cutting edge technologies which are not commercially
available already. In such projects, when they are undertaken,
whereas we have proposed a model, where DRDO contributes
75 per cent, the industry contributes 15 per cent and the user also
must have a stake and we have just given a recommendation that
he should also contribute about 10 per cent so that there is a joint
stake in success of these projects and a joint monitoring.
The other point we want to make is the DRDO labs which are
really phenomenal in their width of technology available, they
should operate on a commercial basis with the industry where the
industry can get the advantage of laboratories and pay for the
services”.
10.11 On export promotion he stated:—
“We propose the DRDO should have total freedom to select
industry partners for exports. Here I am talking about a different
topic altogether. That is for defence exports. We believe that when
even very small countries, insignificant-sized countries like Israel
can become major defence export powerhouses, we can do many
times that much. But DRDO should, therefore, have a freedom to
select the partners and this can be a selection out of the Ministry
recognized system integrators and there need to be guidelines or
a framework established for selection of such partners”.
“We need to have a global outlook which will provide sufficient
scope for the public and private sectors. Often this fear has been
expressed that if private sector comes in what will happen to the
established capacities. We plead with you that look at the total
scenario. As you mentioned, more than 50 per cent of imports are
starting to be in place. Let us look at that as a major opportunity
to give this country a very much bigger involvement in the defence
sector – both private and public”.

76
10.12 During the oral evidence in involvement of private in
fabrication, design and integration of system, the representative of the
Ministry informed the Committee as under:—
“The general points have been brought out very clearly in the
presentation made. He has presented a road map with which we
agree. But I would like to highlight certain points before this august
Committee. Today , our industries have grown in the defence sector.
In 1980s, there were no defence industries from the private sector.
The participation of the private sector started because of certain
programmes launched by the DRDO. We not only started involving
them for fabrication including design, but we also treated them as
system integrators in certain areas like for engineering products,
etc. All the bridges, combat vehicle products, super components of
electronic warfare, many of the launchers, some parts of the Sonar
Array, etc. are coming from the private sector industries.
We are involving nearly 400 industries from India for the DRDO
programmes. But the main problem is we do not know the exact
numbers to be produced after development. Nobody knows about
it, and this is the crux of the problem. The private sector that
participates with us in the development process is given a
development contract, and they do not know the exact numbers
that they have to produce once the contract is over. This is a big
question before them. On the other hand, in other countries they
generally specify the likely production at the time of formulating
the project itself. It means that all the planning is done concurrently ,
so that the industry absorbs the technology along with
development. This gives them the flexibility to produce as and
when the demand is made to them. This sort of a situation has
not been created in many of our programme. Therefore, this is
one of the problems that we have to face today…………….we have
opened up eight laboratories to the CII, we have told them that
these eight laboratories belong to them”.
10.13 During the oral evidence, on involvement of private sector
at conceptualization stage, the representative of the Ministry stated as
under:—
“There are certain issues. It is very difficult to involve the industry
or even the PSUs at the stage of conceptualization. When we come
to the feasibility stage, definitely, we look at the capability of the
industry to undertake development. It is the second stage where
the industry comes in and not at the conceptualization stage”.

77
“The point was about the current practice of nominating production
agencies such as DPSU or OFB only with the Ministry of Defence,
must be dispensed with immediate effect. The policy in this regard
is, whenever there are capabilities and facilities, that should be
used. It is not a reality whether it is the Defence Public Sector
Undertakings or the ordnance Factories, the capabilities which have
been developed must be used keeping in mind the Government
investments that have been in this direction. If the capability exists
in the private sector, that would be used. There is nothing that the
orders will not be given to the private sector if the capability
exists there”.
10.14 During the oral evidence, on involvement of private sector
in production, the non-official expert stated as under:—
“Besides ISRO and BARC, IITs can be called. They have got
tremendous technological inputs which we are using.
How do you think PPP can be helpful for indigenisation of defence
procurement? The big think is quality in the private sector.
Normally, the quality of goods manufactured by private sector is
better than that of Government as private sector has to sale its
good in the market”.
10.15 During the oral evidence on financial involvement of private
sector, the representative of the Ministry stated as under:—
“………. Now that there are a hosts of industries who have been
groomed to a certain level of capability, the question is whether
there is a possibility of a future development. We can look at the
model where the DRDO invests 70 per cent, 20 per cent can be
invested by the lead industry, whether a PSU or an ordnance
factory and ten per cent from the services. It is not that we need
money, but that brings in a focused attention of participation.
Therefore, there is a greater sense of commitment in all the three
to sit together and see through the success of the programme”.
10.16 During the oral evidence on the involvement of private sector
in Defence R&D and Production, the representative of CII stated as
under:—
“The first point is about the level playing field with respect to
foreign suppliers. Today, there are three points, namely, payment
terms, duties, taxes and tariff and no cost and no commitment.
On payment terms, for foreign contracts, these are against line of

78
credit. Normally, payment is made against the bill of lading of
FOB. In case of Indian vendors, payments are made on production
of an inspection note and the confirmation that the customer has
received the goods. This not only delays the payment by four to
six weeks but also brings an additional agency into the picture.
There are a number of instances when payments have either been
delayed or denied for various procedural gaps.
Coming to duties and taxes, Indian vendors are loaded with excise,
sales tax, octroi, as applicable whereas the foreign vendor is
generally exempted from all the duties. Customs duty is exempted
in all cases for defence imports, including for Indians. Further, no
cost, no commitment favours the foreign vendors as they have
ready-made products available. So, our recommendation is that to
offer a level playing field, it is essential that either the Indian
vendor’s price should be taken without the duties during the
tendering stage or foreign vendor should be loaded to the extent
of the excise, sales tax and octroi as applicable. Further, as we
discussed this morning, no cost, no commitment should be replaced
by shared development cost.
My second point is that we have been requesting this. The Defence
Department has a lot of training institutes. It is also the time for
some integration between the industry and the armed forces. If
our people or our officers could also be trained and if they can
learn the experiences of the National Defence College or something
like that through one-year course, it would be very helpful in
understanding each other.”
10.17 He further stated:—
“The other point is that if there is a company with a licence
available for a particular equipment, it should be allowed to import
items for R&D. Currently , after an RFP is given, it may be allowed
to import those items. But in case of R&D, you need to do the
R&D much earlier than the RSP comes out. So, if this point could
be taken that once a licence has been given for an equipment,
then for R&D’s sake, sub-assembly should be allowed to be
imported.”
“We have had discussions in the past that on the Categorization
Committee where decisions on buy, buy and make and make or
made are taken, we wanted representation from the industry
associations. The DPSUs and DRDO already represented on that
Committee. But we were told that industry associations would not

79
be on that highest level Committee. The reason that we wanted to
be on it was that to establish that if there was a decision to buy,
we feel that the understanding of the knowledge of what private
sector is capable of, is not there. There could be instances when a
buy decision could be converted into a buy and make decision.
Therefore, our recommendation is that if we cannot be on that
committee, then at least let us have an option of hearing after a
decision is taken so that there is still a possibility of private sector
saying that they have the capability to do that.”
10.18 During the oral evidence on the involvement of private sector
in Defence R&D and Production, the representative of BEML stated as
under:—
“Sir, basically we are in three businesses. One is defence equipment
making. We are in Metro and Rail including wagons and military
rail. We are in the earth-moving and construction equipment. Today
almost 60 per cent of our parts and aggregates are bought out
through vendors, sub-contractors and sub-players. The critical
components that we are really seized of, we are finding it difficult
even to import where the private sector can work with us on a
long-term basis because there are huge orders of about Rs. 4,000
crore on our kitty. We supply wheel sets for both Metro and Rail
wagons and rail coachers. It is a great demand. We have ended
up paying almost double the rate of what the Indian Railways
could make. So, it is a great opportunity. Somebody can look at it.
We are going to partner with them.
10.19 During the oral evidence on the involvement of private sector
in Defence R&D and Production, the representative of Institute for
Defence Studies and Analyses (IDSA) expressed his views as under:—
“I was emphasizing the point of having a perspective plan or at
least long-term assured commitments. These are equally important
or public sector and private sector without which they cannot
amortise or recover their R&D costs. I would add that if this is
not possible, then, of course, there is no choice to sharing the risk
and cost of R&D expenditure because nobody can be expected,
either public sector or private sector, to operate only on basis of
national sentiment or charity.
10.20 During the oral evidence on the involvement of private sector
in Defence R&D and Production, the representative of the Ministry of
Defence expressed his views as under:—
“Currently roughly 55 or 50 per cent is the indigenous manufacture,
that which is made by Ordnance Factories, Defence PSUs who in

80
turn outsource quite a lot to the private sector; and a little less
than 50 per cent is what is imported to meet the requirements of
the Services. ……..It is a very highly interdependent world today .
In fact the word self-reliance as used in the 1960s is no longer
applicable today. It has undergone a paradigm shift. When we say
a mechanical system is entirely built in India, it will still have
somewhere between 16 to 30 per cent import content depending
upon the degree of sophistication. I think we should not grudge
that because that is the best way to get going. Initially it could be
even lower at the prototype stage but at the production time it
comes to 15 to 25 per cent or something of that kind. This way
we can put systems quickly and efficiently into production.”
Recommendation No. 13
Private Sector Participation in Defence R&D
10.21 The Committee note that DRDO develops weapons and
equipment in response to the Qualitative Requirements (QRs)
projected by Services based on their threat perceptions. However, at
times, the QRs are formulated by incorporating/selecting the ‘best
features’ of various systems available in the world, at that point of
time. Many times, it is not possible to include these ‘best features’
in a single system, which are sometimes conflicting due to
technology-compatibility problems. The reasons for this vary. These
are : changes in threat perception, consequent strategy and tactics,
advancing technology and introduction of new weapon systems, force
the Services to make changes in the QRs, mid way in the project
work etc. This necessitates redesign and redevelopment of some of
the key sub-systems, causing time and cost overruns. Another related
factor is the unexpectedly long time taken in extensive and extended
user trials, which consequently increases the development time.
10.22 Though an endeavour is made by the Government to
harness nation’s best available expertise and infrastructure, this effort
has proved to be inadequate in many cases. Moreover, indigenous
industrial capacity does not exist for critical micro/nano electronic
components and super components and advanced materials essential
for development of a world-class weapon system, whereas, these
inputs are available off-the-shelf in most of the advanced countries.
Non-availability of critical components, delay in supply or additional
time taken in indigenous development of such inputs, is another
cause of “time-over-runs” in many state-of-the-art systems.”

81
10.23 The Committee, therefore, feel that it is high time to create
an environment where both public and private sector grow together
and the R&D effort should be synergized and coordinated in a big
way to obtain and absorb capital investment or high technology
from international partner outside. The Committee also desire that
Ministry of Defence should provide level playing field to Indian
private industry and allow Private industry to tie up with original
manufacturers abroad to develop certain basic science and
technologies based on requirements of the users as delay in
production of indigenous defence items, extend benefits only to the
foreign suppliers.
10.24 The Committee, therefore, recommend that DPSUs,
Ordnance factories and private industry must work closely as a
partner of each other and for the success of this DRDO should
facilitate them. Even unexploited resources of IIT and his tech
scientific universities knowledge based should be utilized to build-
up defence capabilities. DRDO should allow these organisations to
function independently if they so desire in collaboration with the
user. For this purpose the Ministry, DPSUs and DRDO should sign
bipartite and tripartite Memorandum of Understanding and enter
into joint venture with Indian and International Partners in R&D
and also in manufacturing to make use of already established
industries in the world or basic components for designing and
realization of hardware. The Committee also desire that DRDO
should take initiative to provide greater role for IITs and Universities
in the field of Defence R&D.
10.25 The Committee are also of the opinion that over the years
the private sector has also graduated in capabilities and reach.
Therefore, there is a need to emphasize on building an effective
and fruitful public-private partnership in defence R&D and
production on sharing basis. In order to ensure continued
commitment, each stockholder should contribute to the funding in
the ratio of 70:20:10 among DRDO, Industry and user respectively.
In the case of development of products based on spin offs, the
industry will be partner with DRDO by contributing funds in the
ratio of 50:50 between DRDO and the Industry. The Committee,
therefore, recommend that the Ministry of Defence should try to
make provisions for direct funding of R&D activity in the industry,
both public and private, apart from the provisions made for DRDO.
10.26 The Committee also endorse their views with the CII that
inspite of the fact that DRDO interacts with more than 400

82
companies, there is no formally published framework/guidelines for
partnership between the private sector and DRDO. The Committee,
therefore, recommend that Ministry of Defence must stipulate/
publicise guidelines for industry participation in Defence R&D in
order to attract more Indian Private Companies. These guidelines
should be flexible and change progressively as per the need of the
hour.
10.27 The Committee note that the extent of investment made by
the private industry as well as public sector in the R&D activity is
very low and this has been a major factor restricting the country
from acquiring sophisticated technology. Since R&D activities in
defence requires heavy investments and the private sector does not
have the capacity to invest, there must be a substantial government
support for making the industry technologically more capable. It is
disheartening to note that while most advanced countries are
spending at least two per cent of the GDP on basic science and
technology in universities and research institutions and the industries
both in public and private sector across the globe are investing
between 4 and 15 per cent of their turnover towards R&D. The
private industry in India today has developed very high capabilities
in engineering and has a reasonable capability in design; but its
contribution to R&D activities is very low. Therefore, the Committee
recommend that the Government must take initiative to encourage
private sector to spend more on Defence R&D activities.
10.28 The Committee are of the view that to engage private
industry, it would also be necessary to adopt the principle of
acquiring minimum order quantity for technically and economically
feasible viable proposals and it is also the responsibility of private
sector to ensure quality as required by our defence forces. For the
purpose the Committee are of the view that there is a need to get
the demands of user services vetted through the Defence Acquisition
Committee (DAC) so that users are committed to place purchase
orders after the product has been developed.
10.29 The Committee are of the considered view that long and
continued dependence on imported weapon systems can lead to the
country supporting all legal and illegal actions of the importing
country as crucial supply of spares and ammunition could be in
jeopardy in future. Therefore, the Committee strongly recommend
that there should be greater professionalism in integrated defence
capability planning, management of Research and Development and
more emphasis should be given to self-reliance, thereby nurturing
the nation’s industrial capability in defence sector.

83
10.30 The Ministry of Defence should take into confidence all
highly performing scientific institutions in the country including
DRDO, the future projections and requirement of the armed forces.
It will help the Research Organisations and industry to plan their
investment in research and infrastructure. Looking to the new and
the changing warfare systems, some scientific organisations can work
out how to reduce manpower and the marketing can take place. Till
now we are working in conventional warfare. There is a need to
make big shift in policy from conventional to strategic weapon
system, from manufacturing to marketing and all nuclear and
biological protecting environment. This will only happen after the
strengthening of research organisations through appropriate
investment, full autonomy and research should be decentralized. So,
specialised laboratories should be established in the public private
partnership. The Committee are fully aware of the budgetary
constraints. With the limited sources how the capability of man and
machinery can be efficiently used by developing basic science,
fundamental technology or by analyzing the fundamentals.
 N
EW D ELHI; BALASAHEB VIKHE PATIL,
09 January, 2007 Chairman,
19 Pausa, 1928 (Saka) Standing Committee on Defence.

ANNEXURE-A
CHARTER OF DRDO
• Apprising, assessing and advising Raksha Mantri on the
influence on National Security of emerging developments
in Science and Technology.
• Rendering advice to Raksha Mantri and to the three Services
and inter services organizations on all scientific aspects of
weapons; weapon-platforms; military operations; surveillance;
support and logistics in all likely threats of conflict.
•T o function, with the concurrence of the Ministry of External
Affairs, as the nodal coordinating agency of the Ministry of
Defence on all matters relating to Instruments of Accord
with foreign Governments relating to the acquisition of
technologies whose export to India is the subject of national
security related controls of foreign Governments.
• Formulation and execution of programmes of scientific
research and design, development, test and evaluation, in
fields of relevance to national security.
• Direction and administration of agencies, laboratories,
establishments, ranges, facilities, programmes and projects
of the Department.
84

ANNEXURE ‘D’
STEPS FOR OBTAINING SANCTION OF CCS PROJECTS
Project proposal initiated by the laboratory
|
|
↓
Proposal examined and refined at DRDO HQrs.
|
|
↓
Proposal seen by the Integrated Finance Branch
|
|
↓
Secretary , Defence R & D
|
|
↓
Raksha Mantri
|
|
↓
Finance Minister
|
|
↓
Cabinet Committee on Security (CCS)
110

APPENDIX
MINUTES OF THE FIFTH SITTING OF THE STANDING
COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE (2005-06)
The Committee sat on Monday, the 10 October, 2005 from
1500 hrs. to 1700 hrs. in Committee Room No. ‘C’, Parliament House
Annexe, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Shri Balasaheb Vikhe Patil — Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Churchill Alemao
3. Shri A.V . Bellarmin
4. Shri Suresh Chandel
5. Shri Milind Deoa
6. Shri Ramesh Jigajinagi
7. Shri Suresh Kalmadi
8. Dr. K.S. Manoj
9. Shri Raghuraj Singh Shakya
10. Shri Manvendra Singh
11. Shri Balashowry Vallabhaneni
Rajya Sabha
12. Shri R.K. Anand
13. Smt. N.P . Durga
14. Shri Janardan Dwivedi
15. Shri Anand Sharma
16. Shri Lalit Suri
SECRETARIAT
1. Shri R.C. Ahuja — Joint Secretary
2. Smt. Anita Jain — Deputy Secretary
3. Shri D.R. Shekhar — Under Secretary
111

112
Representatives of Ministry of Defence
1. Shri Shekhar Dutt, Defence Secretary
2. Shri Dhanendra Kumar, Secretary (DP)
3. Shri Ranjit Issar, Addl. Secy. (I)
4. Smt. Sheela Bhide, FA (DS)
5. Shri Anup Mukerji, AS (DP)
6. Shri S. Banerjee, Additional Secretary (Acquisition)
7. Shri A. Sivathanu Pillai, CCR&D (MNS) Offg. Secy. (R&D)
8. Shri S.C. Narang, CCR&D (R&M)
9. Shri Alok Perti, JS (S)
10. Shri Ranjan Chatterjee, JS (HAL)
11. Smt. Rita Menon, JS (SY)
12. Shri Raj Kishore Mukhi Bhattacharya, JS (Coord.)
13. Shri R.K. Chauhan, Dir. (P&C)
14. Shri D.C. Bajaj, Adviser (COST)
Representatives from CII
1. Mr. Atul Kirloskar, Chairman, CII National Committee on
Defence
2. Mr. Abhay Firodia, Member, CII National Committee on
Defence and Chairman and Managing Director, Force Motors
Limited
3. Brig. K.A. Hai (Retd.), Member, CII National Committee on
Defence
4. Mr. Joseph Alexander, Vice President, Tata Services Limited
5. Mr. Rahul Chaudhry, Member, CII National Committee on
Defence and Chief Executive Officer, Strategic Electronics
Division, The Tata Power Company Limited
6. Mr. M.V. Kotwal, Member, CII National Committee on Defence
and Senior Vice President, Larsen & Toubro Limited
7. Mr. S. Sen, Deputy Director General, CII
8. Mr. Vikram Badshah, Senior Consultant, CII
9. Mr. Suhith Haridas, Director CII
10. Mr. Rakesh Verma, Consultant, CII
11.M r. N.B. Mathur, Director, CII

113
At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the members to the sitting
of the Committee and informed them that the representatives of the
Ministry of Defence and CII were present to tender oral evidence on
the subject ‘Public Private Partnership in Defence Production & its
relationship with DRDO.’
2. The Chairman then welcomed the Defence Secretary, Chairman,
CII National Committee on Defence and their colleagues to the sitting
of the Committee and invited their attention to Directions 55 and 58
of the Directions by the Speaker, Lok Sabha regarding maintaining
confidentiality of the deliberations of the sitting.
3. The representatives of CII gave a presentation before the
Committee on the subject ‘Public Private Partnership in Defence
Production & its relationship with DRDO’. The representatives of CII
stressed on the optimum utilisation of huge national resources and a
consolidated approach in the matter rather than viewing industry as
a public or private or a defence oriented industry. They also stressed
upon the need to achieve synergy between recognised strength of
DRDO in scientific research and development and the acknowledged
strengths of private sector in successful bulk production keeping in
view cost, time and quality in line with global practices.
4. Members of the Committee then sought clarifications on some
of the points from the representatives of CII and Ministry of Defence
such as steps to be taken to provide level playing field to private
production houses, assimilation and development of technologies,
involvement of private sector at the stage of conceptualisation of the
equipment by the armed forces and the Ministry of Defence, etc. The
representatives of the Ministry answered the queries one by one
including the ten points raised by the representatives of CII in their
presentation.
5. The Committee then sought to know from the Ministry officials
what was their opinion on allowing the Private Sector to participate
in taking advantage of the offset clause for manufacturing defence
product and it should not be used for trade account. The Ministry
officials expressed their willingness in providing the Private Sector all
necessary cooperation in this regard.
6. The Committee desired that the Ministry should take advantage
of CII in development and production of low level radar systems.
7. A verbatim record of proceedings was kept.
The Committee then adjourned.

MINUTES OF THE TWELFTH SITTING OF THE STANDING
COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE (2005-06)
The Committee sat on Thursday, the 1 December 2005 from
1800 hrs. to 1940 hrs. in Committee Room No. ‘D’, Parliament House
Annexe, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Shri Balasaheb Vikhe Patil — Chairman
M
EMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri A.V . Bellarmin
3. Shri Thupstan Chhewang
4. Dr. C. Krishnan
5. Shri S.D. Mandlik
6. Shri Manvendra Singh
Rajya Sabha
7. Smt. N.P . Durga
8. Shri Janardan Dwivedi
9. Shri Anand Sharma
10. Shri Lalit Suri
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri S.K. Sharma — Additional Secretary
2. Shri R.C. Ahuja — Joint Secretary
2. Smt. Anita Jain — Deputy Secretary
4. Shri D.R. Shekhar — Under Secretary
List of Witnesses of Ministry of Defence
1. Shri Shekhar Dutt, Defence Secretary
2. Shri M. Natrajan, SA to RM
3. Shri K.P . Singh, Secretary (DP)
114

115
4. Shri V .K. Misra, FA (DS)
5. Shri S. Banerjee, DG (Acquisition)
6. Dr. V .K. Saraswat, CCR&D (M&SS) & DS
7. Dr. D. Banerjee, CCR&D (AMS) & DS
8. Shri Prahlada, CCR&D (SI) & DS
9. Shri K.U. Limaye, CCR&D (ECS) & DS
10. Dr. W. Selvamurthy , CCR&D (LS&HR)
11. Shri S.C. Narang, CCR&D (R)
12. Shri P .K. Jena, Addl. FA (J) & JS
13. Shri B. Rajendran, OSD to SA to RM
14. Shri Gopal Bhushan, SO to SA to RM
15. Shri Pushkar Raj, Addl. Dir. P&C
16. Ms. Nabnita R. Krishnan, Sc ‘F’
17. Dr. J.P . Singh, Jt. Dir. P&C
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the representatives of
Ministry of Defence to the sitting of the Committee and invited them
to brief the Committee on the subject ‘Defence Research and
Development Organisation’ (DRDO).
3. The representatives of the Ministry of Defence briefed the
Committee on various aspects of ‘DRDO’ through slide presentation
on matters like Budget allocation and pattern of expenditure,
development of Light Combat Aircraft, Missile programme, Electronic
warfare programme, Armoured System, indigenous development of
cutting edge technology, Joint Venture with foreign partner for  major
weapon system, etc.
4. A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept.
The Committee then adjourned.

MINUTES OF THE SIXTEENTH SITTING OF THE STANDING
COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE (2005-06)
The Committee sat on Friday, the 2 January, 2006 from 1100 hrs.
to 1600 hrs. in ‘Main’ Committee Room, Parliament House Annexe,
New Delhi.
PRESENT
Shri Balasaheb Vikhe Patil — Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri A.V . Bellarmin
3. Dr. K.S. Manoj
4. Shri Raghuraj Singh Shakya
5. Shri Mahadeorao Shiwankar
6. Shri Ganesh Prasad Singh
Rajya Sabha
7. Smt. N.P . Durga
8. Shri Janardan Dwivedi
9. Shri Pramod Mahajan
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri S.K. Sharma — Additional Secretary
2. Smt. Anita Jain — Deputy Secretary
3. Shri D.R. Shekhar — Under Secretary
Non Official Witnesses
1. Lt. Gen. S.S. Mehta, PVSM, AVSM, VSM (Retd.)
2. Air Chief Marshal S. Krishnaswamy, PVSM, AVSM, VM & Bar
(Retd.)
116

117
List of Representatives from Confederation of
Indian Industry (CII)
1. Shri Rahul Chaudhry
2. Shri S. Sen
3. Brig K.A. Hai (Retd.)
4. Shri V .S. Noronha
5. Shri Rajesh Kakkar
6. Shri Vikram Badshah
7. Shri Rakesh Kumar Verma
8. Shri N.B. Mathur
9. Shri Sujith Haridas
10. Shri Prashant A.N.
2. The Chairman welcomed Lt. Gen. S.S. Mehta (Retd.) and
requested him to present his views on DRDO and Threat Perception
and Associated Procurements. As regards DRDO, Gen. Mehta stressed
that investment in R&D must begin to be seen with a spin off benefits
to the country. There are dual used technologies for both military and
civil sector in which private sector would also be interested. He
expressed the need for institutionalised academia industry interface.
Gen. Mehta expressed core problem was human resource development
of India which was not keeping pace with the demand for employment
and employability. As regards the DRDOs budget he stated that there
must be a portion earmarked for three services. For all new and basic
research work DRDO should be given sufficient fund so that country
might not depend on other countries. He also expressed his views on
concept of R&D offset direct and indirect clause, public and private
participation in R&D, threat perception, etc.
3. The Chairman then welcomed Air Chief Marshal
S. Krishnaswamy (Retd.) and requested him to present his views on
DRDO and Threat Perception and Associated Procurements. Air Marshal
Krishnaswamy gave his views on the threat perception. He emphasised
that the reasons for increase in the external threats are unsettled
borders, poverty in certain countries and their prevailing
underdeveloped socio-economic conditions. On the issue of DRDO, he
stressed that there is week capability of the country to design and
develop a jet engine, for improvement in DRDO working it was
essential to make fundamental changes in organsiation and structure
of the DRDO with accountability to user and to do work in time. He
also suggested more participation by the users through a project team
of the user services in development of projects.

118
4. Hon’ble Chairman, then invited representatives of CII to present
their views on capability of private sector to undertake and develop
complex Defence projects and to undertake R&D works on sharing
basis with the DPSUs & OFB. The representatives of CII then placed
before the Committee three main suggestions (i) clear mechanism of
funding the projects whereby the DRDO puts in about 75 percent, the
industry puts in 15 percent and the user puts in 10 percent and the
user should be directly invited in the decision making at the project
stage. (ii) The involvement of the industry both private and public
sector, should be ensured at the conceptualisation stage itself and not
at final stage. At the time of development of the products, there should
be clear commitment on procurement. (iii) There should be some
process whereby private industry can directly participate using their
capabilities, technology and some of the resources. They also informed
the Committee about the project of Cockpit display for Su-30 in which
the private sector was producing both software and hardware under
the PSU/DRDO programme.
5. The representatives of CII also answered the queries of members
on how private sector looks at the Threat Perception before the country.
The representatives of CII were asked to send a note on their capability
and views on DRDO, structure and Threat Perception.
6. Hon’ble Chairman then welcomed the representatives of Ministry
of Defence. The representatives of Ministry of Defence briefed the
Committee on the various aspects of products being developed by
DRDO. On the question of delay in completion of projects i.e. Akash,
MBT, LCA by DRDO, the representatives of DRDO informed the
Committee that there were delays because of certain complexities
involved. There were delays at developmental stage because testing of
missiles was not easy.
7. Members of the Committee also raised certain questions on some
other issues relating to DRDO to which the representatives replied,
they also assured the Committee that within four years the country
would have the first Kavery qualified.
8. A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept.
The Committee then adjourned.

MINUTES OF THE TWENTY FIRST SITTING OF THE STANDING
COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE (2005-06)
The Committee sat on Tuesday, the 31 January, 2006 from 1500
hrs. to 1630 hrs. in Committee Room No. ‘D’, Parliament House
Annexe, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Shri Balasaheb Vikhe Patil — Chairman
M
EMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Iliyas Azmi
3. Shri A.V . Bellarmin
4. Shri Thupstan Chhewang
5. Smt. Sangeeta Kumari Singh Deo
6. Shri Suresh Kalmadi
7. Dr. C. Krishnan
8. Dr. K.S. Manoj
9. Ms. Ingrid Mcleod
Rajya Sabha
10. Shri Pramod Mahajan
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri S.K. Sharma — Additional Secretary
2. Shri R.C. Ahuja — Joint Secretary
3. Smt. Anita Jain — Deputy Secretary
4. Shri D.R. Shekhar — Under Secretary
List of Representatives from Ministry of Defence
1. Shri Shekhar Dutt, Defence Secretary
2. Dr. M. Natarajan, SA to RM
3. Shri K.P . Singh, Secretary (DP)
119

120
4. Shri V .K. Misra, FA(DS)
5. Shri S. Banerjee, DG (Acq.)
6. Shri AS Pillai, CCR&D (ACE&NS) & DS
7. Dr. V .K. Saraswat, CCR&D (M&SS) & DS
8. Dr. D. Banerjee, CCR&D(SI) & DS
9. Shri Prahlada, CCR&D (LS&HR)
10. Shri K.U.  Limaye, CCR&D (ECS) & DS
11.D r. W. Selvamurth, CCR&D (LS&HR)
12. Shri S.C. Narang, CCR&D (R)
13. Shri P .K. Jena, Addl. FA (J) & JS
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the representatives of
the Ministry of Defence to the sitting of the Committee to render oral
evidence on the subject ‘Defence Research and Development
Organization (DRDO)’ and invited their attention to Directions 55 and
58 by the Hon’ble Speaker, Lok Sabha regarding maintaining
confidentiality of the deliberations of the sitting. The Committee then
raised the matter regarding developments in radar systems, problems
in INSAS rifle and roadmap for achieving self-reliance in Defence
Production and asked the Ministry to clarify the issues.
3. The representatives of the Ministry of Defence briefed the
Committee on development of radars. They informed the Committee
that Radar Development Establishment works in close cooperation with
BEL, TATA Power and L&T. They have developed Indira PC Radar of
90 km. range. DRDO was also working with HAL on multimode radar
for LCA, which was undergoing test in Hawk aircraft.
4. The representatives of the Ministry stressed upon the need to
upgrade and reinforce the design talent in the country both in public
and private sectors, who can handle design & development tasks of a
wide variety.
5. The representatives of the Ministry also briefed the members on
the progress made by DRDO in the development of Multi Mode Radar
(MMR), PV-5, a two seater trainer aircraft and Naval variant of LCA.
6. The members of the Committee put forth questions ranging
from users participation, production of surveillance system in the
country and problems faced by the users of INSAS rifle to which the
representatives of the Ministry replied and also promised to send a
written note thereon.

121
7. The Committee expressed concern over the reduction of R&D
budget, IAF’s refusal to fly new Jaguars, MiG crash near Jamnagar,
C&AG’s complaints about the T-72 tanks, non-availability of platforms
for testing and the 20 year roadmap. The representatives of the Ministry
replied to the queries of the Members of the Committee.
8. A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept.
The Committee then adjourned.

MINUTES OF THE THIRTY FIRST SITTING OF THE STANDING
COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE (2005-06)
The Committee sat on Thursday, the 23rd March, 2006 from
1500 hrs. to 1630 hrs. in Committee Room No. ‘074’, Parliament Library
Building, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Shri Balasaheb Vikhe Patil — Chairman
M
EMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Churchill Alemao
3. Shri Iliyas Azmi
4. Shri Thupstan Chhewang
5. Shri Ramesh Jigajinagi
6. Shri Raghuraj Singh Shakya
7. Shri Mahadeorao Shiwankar
8. Shri Ganesh Prasad Singh
9. Shri Manvendra Singh
10. Ms. Ingrid Mcleod
Rajya Sabha
11. Smt. N.P . Durga
12. Shri Jai Prakash Aggarwal
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri S.K. Sharma — Additional Secretary
2. Smt. Anita Jain — Deputy Secretary
3. Shri D.R. Shekhar — Under Secretary
List of Non-Official Witnesses
1. Shri Ajay Vikram Singh — Former Defence Secretary
2. Major General Bikram — Ex-MP
Singh Kanwar (Retd.)
122

123
3. Col. Sudhir Sawant (Retd.)  — Ex-MP
4. Vice-Admiral Retired K.K. Nair (Retd.)
2. At the outset, Hon’ble Chairman welcomed Shri Ajay Vikram Singh,
Defence Secretary (Retd.) and requested him to putforth his view points
on (i) * (ii) * (iii) * (iv) Role of DRDO in Self-Reliance and (v)*.
As regards DRDO, he stated that keeping in view the large size
of procurement from outside, our main concern should be to make
the R&D efforts of the country more effective by involving and working
together closely with private sector, ordnance factories and Defence
PSUs.
The witness then withdrew.
Then Hon’ble Chairman welcomed Maj. Gen. Vikram Singh
Kanwar, (Retd.) Ex-MP to express his opinion on (i) * (ii) * (iii) * (iv)
Role of DRDO in Self-Reliance and (v) *.
The witness then withdrew.
Then Hon’ble Chairman welcomed Col. Sudhir Sawant (Retd.), Ex-
MP and requested him to putforth his suggestions on (i) * (ii) * (iii)
* (iv) Role of DRDO in Self-Reliance and (v)*.
* * *
Hon’ble Chairman then welcomed Vice-Admiral (Retired) K.K. Nair
and requested him to put forth his view point on the subject. He was
of the view that problems in the armed forces could be resolved if
there was a board consisting of three service Chiefs and the Minister.
The witnesses then withdrew.
A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept.
The Committee then adjourned.
******** not related to the subject.

MINUTES OF THE THIRTY SECOND SITTING OF THE
STANDING COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE (2005-06)
The Committee sat on Friday, the 24th March, 2006 from 1100 hrs.
to 1430 hrs. in Committee Room No. ‘G-074’, Parliament Library
Building, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Shri Balasaheb Vikhe Patil — Chairman
M
EMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Iliyas Azmi
3. Shri Thupstan Chhewang
4. Shri Ramesh Jigajinagi
5. Shri Mahadeorao Shiwankar
6. Shri Ganesh Prasad Singh
7. Shri Balashowry Vallabhaneni
Rajya Sabha
8. Shri Jai Prakash Aggarwal
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri S.K. Sharma — Additional Secretary
2. Shri R.C. Ahuja — Joint Secretary
3. Smt. Anita Jain — Deputy Secretary
4. Shri D.R. Shekhar — Under Secretary
Non-Official Witnesses
Gen. V .P . Malik (Retd.)
2. At the outset, the Hon’ble Chairman welcomed Gen. V .P . Malik
(Retd.) to share his viewpoints on (i) *******; (ii) ********; (iii) ******;
(iv) Role of DRDO in self-reliance and (v) **********.
3. *** *** ***
124

125
4. *** *** ***
5. On DRDO he suggested the following points:
- Every year the budget allocation is increasing, without
accountability. Our country is spending 2.5% of GDP on
defence and out of that 18 billion dollars worth equipment
are being imported.
- There is a need to upgrade our DRDO. There is a need for
capital investment and import of technology and
involvement of private sector engaged in defence production.
- The DRDO should do some in-house introspection as to
what happened in those 10 years, where they have gone
wrong, why they have not been able to stick to that plan.
They themselves ought to do this introspection.
- They should work now as a consortium with the private
sector within the country.
- Users should be closely associated with DRDO and
manufacturers.
- All the Ordinance Factories and all defence PSUs must be
given total freedom to upgrade their R&D.
- GSQR should always be done by the Armed Forces and
DRDO together and it should be under the General staff.
- DGQA has been wrongly placed and has failed in the
services on very important equipment. Instead of expanding
the capability, the Ministry is expanding the manpower. That
is a wrong step. People who are manufacturing are cleaning
their equipment.
There should be a Non-lapsable Fund.
6.*** *** ***
The witness then withdrew.
7. A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept.
The Committee then adjourned.
***not related to the subject.

MINUTES OF THE FORTY FOURTH SITTING OF THE
STANDING COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE (2005-06)
The Committee sat on Wednesday, the 7th June, 2006 from
1100 hrs. to 1330 hrs. in Committee Room No. ‘C’, Parliament House
Annexe, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Shri Balasaheb Vikhe Patil — Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Iliyas Azmi
3. Shri Thupstan Chhewang
4. Smt. Sangeeta Kumari Singh Deo
5. Dr. K.S. Manoj
6. Shri Raghuraj Singh Shakya
7. Shri Mahadeorao Shiwankar
8. Shri Ganesh Prasad Singh
9. Shri Balashowry Vallabhaneni
Rajya Sabha
10. Smt. N.P . Durga
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri R.C. Ahuja — Joint Secretary
2. Shri D.R. Shekhar — Under Secretary
List of Representatives from Ministry of Defence
1. Shri K.P . Singh — Secretary (DP)
2. Dr. M. Natrajan — SA to RM
3. Smt. Rekha Bhargava — AS(B)
4. Dr. A.S. Pillai — CCR&D (ACE&NS), DS
5. Shri D. Banerjee — CCR&D (AMS)
126

127
6. Shri Prahlada — CCR&D (SI), DS
7. Shri K.U. Limaye — CCR&D (ECS), DS
8. Shri W. Selvamurthy — CCR&D (LS&HR)
9. Shri S.C. Narang — CCR&D (R)
10. Dr. Thomas Mathew — JS&AM (MS)
11. Shri P .K. Jena — Addl. FA (J)
12. Lt. Gen. G.D. Singh — DCOAS (P&S)
13. Air Marshal B.U. Chengappa — AOM
14. Rear Admiral R.K. Dhowan — ACNS (P&P)
15. Air Vice-Marshal N.V . Tyagi — ACAS (Plans)
16. Shri Rajwant B. Singh — Director (P&C)
17. Brigadier H.C. Sethi — Officiating ADG (WE)
18. Shri B. Lalmohan — SA to CNS
2. At the outset, Hon’ble Chairman welcomed the representatives
of Ministry of Defence to the sitting of the Committee to render oral
evidence on the subject ‘Defence Research and Development
Organisation’ and drew their attention to the Direction 58 of the
Directions by the Speaker, Lok Sabha regarding maintaining
confidentiality of the deliberations of the sitting.
3. The Committee then took oral evidence of the representatives of
the Ministry of Defence on the above subject. Members of the
Committee sought clarifications on certain important issues viz. creating
a separate research organisation on Medical and Allied Sciences outside
DRDO so that DRDO can concentrate more on development of crucial
technology i.e. to make the country self-reliant in the field of weapon
system and force multipliers.
4. On the question of future self-reliance, the representatives
apprised the Committee that in the last 10-15 years they have focused
on platforms within their capability. They are focusing on indigenization
of systems required in tanks etc. with local industry. In the area of
sensors they are trying to tie up with certain countries depending on
to what extent these countries can share the technology.
5. On the question of technical difficulties in MBT Arjun, the
representatives informed the Committee that there was problem in
Arjun Tank because of defect in setting switches.

128
6. Indigenization percentage they informed the Committee that in
Xth Plan they were supposed to reach 70% indigenization by 2005 but
it did not happen. Today they have reached 30-35% because of the
orders from three services. They expect that by the end of XIth Plan
they would reach about 65%.
7. The Committee desired that Brahmos model should be followed
in other projects also. The Committee also desired that private sector
should be given more opportunities in Defence production and user
participation should be encouraged from R&D stage.
8. Verbatim record of the proceedings was kept.
The Committee then adjourned.

MINUTES OF THE FORTY EIGHTH SITTING OF THE STANDING
COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE (2005-06)
The Committee sat on Monday, the 17 July, 2006 from 1030 hrs to
1530 hrs in Main Committee Room, Parliament House Annexe,
New Delhi.
PRESENT
Shri Balasaheb Vikhe Patil — Chairman
M
EMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Thupstan Chhewang
3. Shrimati Sangeeta Kumari Singh Deo
4. Shri Ramesh Jigajinagi
5. Dr. C. Krishnan
6. Shri Raghuraj Singh Shakya
7. Shri Ganesh Prasad Singh
8. Shri Manvendra Singh
9. Shri Balashowry Vallabhaneni
Rajya Sabha
10. Shrimati N.P . Durga
11. Shri R.K. Dhawan
12. Shri K.B. Shanappa
13. Shri Jai Prakash Aggarwal
14. Shri Lalit Suri
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri R.C. Ahuja — Joint Secretary
2. Shrimati Anita Jain — Deputy Secretary
3. Shri D.R. Shekhar — Under Secretary
129

130
SPECIAL INVITEE
Shri Pranab Mukherjee — Hon’ble Minister of Defence
LIST OF REPRESENTATIVES FROM MINISTRY OF DEFENCE
1. Shri K.P . Singh — Secretary (DP)
2. Shri S. Banerjee — DG (ACQ)
3. Dr. M. Natrajan — SA to RM
4. Shri V .K. Misra — Secretary (Def. Fin.)
5. Shrimati Rekha Bhargava — AS (B)
6. Shri A.K Jain — AS (J)
7. Shri P .K. Rastogi — Addl. Secy. (DP)
8. Shri K.P . Lakshamana Rao — FA (ACQ)
9. Shri Prahlada — CCR & D (SI) & DS
10. Shri S.C. Narang — CCR & D (R)
LIST OF REPRESENTATIVES FROM CONFEDERATION OF
INDIAN INDUSTRY (CII)
1. Shri R. Seshasayee — Pr esident, CII and MD,
Ashok Leyland Limited
2. Lt. Gen. S.S. Mehta — Director General, CII
(Retd.), PVSM, AVSM
3. Shri Atul Kirloskar — Chairman, CII National
Committee on Defence and
CMD, Kirloskar Oil Engines
Limited
4. Shri Abhay Firodia — Member, CII National
Committee on Defence and
Chairman and Managing
Director, Force Motors Ltd.
5. Brig K.A. Hai (Retd.) — Member, CII National
Committee on Defence and
Chief Executive, Mahindra
Defence Systems
6. Shri N. Nigam — V ice President, Larsen and
Toubro Limited
7. Shri Ashok Kanodia — Member, CII National
Committee on Defence and
Managing Director, Precision
Electronics Ltd.

131
8. Shri S. Niyogi — Deputy Director General, CII
9. Shri S. Sen — Coordinator (Projects)
LIST OF REPRESENTATIVE FROM FEDERATION OF INDIAN
CHAMBERS OF COMMERCE AND INDUSTRY (FICCI)
1. Shri Vivek Pandit — Joint Director, FICCI
LIST OF REPRESENTATIVE FROM INDUSTRY
1. Shri Rahul Chaudhary — CEO, Strategic Electronics
Division, Tata Power
LIST OF REPRESENTATIVE FROM INSTITUTE OF
DEFENCE STUDIES AND ANALYSES (IDSA)
1. Dr. Narendra Sisodia — Director, IDSA
1. At the outset, Hon’ble Chairman welcomed the representatives
of Ministry of Defence, Confederation of Indian Industry (CII),
Federation of Indian Chambers of Commerce and Industry (FICCI),
IDSA and Industry to the sitting of the Committee on Public-Private
partnership of Defence R&D and Production and apprised them of the
Direction 58 of the Directions by the Speaker, Lok Sabha regarding
maintaining confidentiality of the deliberations of the sitting.
3. The Committee then asked the view point of the representatives
of the Ministry of Defence on Public-Private partnership on Defence
R&D and Production and desired to know the reason for low
investment by the Public Sector and Private Industry in the R&D
activity. The representative of the Ministry apprised the Committee
about the action being taken by them on the issue of expenditure on
Defence (R&D). They stated that for the past two years they have
been extensively modernising their procurement policies and the issue
is being addressed by a group comprising of three Voice Chiefs,
Members from DRDO, Defence Production, Finance, etc. This group
categorised the requirement into Make, Buy and Make and Buy. The
main idea behind that is to procure more and more Defence material
from sources within India.
4. On off set policy, the representatives of the Ministry informed
the Committee that the acquisitions which are of a size of more than
Rs. 300 crore would be accompanied with an off set.
5. The representatives of CII apprised the Committee that private
industry and private technology development all over the world has

132
been fountainhead of some breakthrough concepts coming which have
revolutionised market forces. Apart from meeting the needs of Defence,
the private industry will have to play a role to be supported by the
Government policy to attain breakthrough technology which will have
tremendous spin-off effect in revolutionising the industrial landscape
in this country. They further informed that modern Army not only
requires modern equipment, but it also needs to be backed up by
modern processes.
Then the Committee had slide presentation from the representatives
of CII on the subject.
6. The representatives of CII apprised the Committee that during
the discussion in Kelkar Committee they had discussed the sharing of
development cost in the ratio of 75% by Government, 15% by Industry
and 10% by the user in terms of developing the technology. They
needed an assurance on returns. They assured the Committee that the
industry would take the initiative to invest in R&D and they are ready
to get technology from abroad whenever it is needed, which could
also attract FDI.
7. The representative of the Industry apprised the Committee that
the country is among the largest importers of defence equipments and
it does not befit the stature of country’s economy and engineering
capabilities for which this country is recognised world over. He
suggested that capability in the Defence Industry should be funded by
the Government.
8. On the question of basic requirement of Armed Forces, the
representative of the Air Force apprised the Committee that to get
high quality equipment on time over the years, they earlier had a
problem because the import contents have been high and acquisition
procedures were slow. On involvement of private sector he further
apprised the Committee that like in all other countries private industry
in the arms manufacturing is the most lucrative and high-tech industry
which has a lot of spin off. He assured the Committee that if private
sector join hands with DRDO and DPSU, the country can get high-
tech equipment.
9. The representative of Navy apprised the Committee that DPSUs
are manufacturing state of the art equipment in the field of water
electronics and radars developed by DRDO. If the procedures could
be simplified private industry would be a great help.

133
10. The representative of IDSA apprised the Committee of over all
situation between Department of Defence Production, DPSU and private
sector. He suggested that Department of Defence Production should
be renamed as the Department of Defence Industrial Development
whose mandate should be to develop Defence Industry in the country.
This Department should focus not only on public sector units but also
facilitate the process of Defence Industrial Development in the country.
He was of the view that because there is no perspective plan of the
Ministry, therefore, it is not possible to give assured orders to public
or private industry. Therefore, this is one of the reasons that industry
is not spending enough money on R&D because R&D costs are very
high.
Hon’ble Minister of Defence also briefed the Committee on the
subject. He stated that introduction of the policy initiative in 2001
would facilitate the participation of the private sector in Defence
Industries. He also apprised the Committee that roughly about
40 recommendations in Part I of the Report of the Kelkar Committee
have been accepted either in toto or partly modified form and quite a
large number of them are being actually implemented. In respect of
Part II, recommendations are still under the consideration of the
Government and the final view is to be taken thereon. He also assured
the Committee that the Ministry will look into the recommendations
of the Committee and implement them.
He further apprised the Committee that it would be easier to have
latest updated technology through the private sector participation
because the technologies which are being developed abroad could be
comfortably transferred to their counterparts in India. He also informed
the Committee that Eleventh Plan for the Ministry of Defence is being
prepared and the Ministry is in the process of going through various
sectors and service requirements to make it a realistic plan. On the
allocation of budget for the Ministry of Defence, he further informed
the Committee that it should remain well below three percent of the
GDP and it would be extremely difficult to go beyond that limit. The
average expenditure normally is 16 to 17 percent of the total
expenditure budget which goes to the finance.
On non-lapsable fund, he informed the Committee that the
characteristics of having a separate fund which is non-lapsable would
not help. He felt that there is a need for a separate Budget Head. On
the acquisition process, he informed the Committee that the Ministry
normally makes acquisition through two or three routes. One is the
direct purchase, another one is buy and make—partially buy and

134
partially make and the third one is the made procedures and the
Ministry has systematized both for revenue and capital acquisition in
the Defence procurement procedure.
12. The representative of Ministry of Defence from DRDO informed
the Committee that BrahMos Aerospace is a private company so it
follows the private company rules as per the Act. But at the same
time when it gives the development work to the DRDO, the
Government procedures are followed.
13. On the issue of duties and taxes, representative of CII apprised
the Committee that Indian vendors are loaded with excise, sales tax,
octroi as applicable whereas the foreign vendors are generally exempted
from all duties, therefore, they desired there should be a level playing
field so either the Indian vendors price should be taken without the
duties or foreign vendor should be loaded with the taxes.
14. He further desired that officers from CII/Private Industries
should be trained at National Defence College or similar institutions
to have experience on the issue. He also desired that if a Company
has a licence for a particular equipment it should be allowed to import
items/sub-assemblies for R&D.
15. He was also of the view that if the representatives of the
private sector cannot be on the Categorization Committee where
decisions on buy, buy and make and make or made are taken, at least
they should have an option of hearing after a decision is taken so that
there is still a possibility of private sector saying that they have the
capability to do that.
16. Representative of BEML apprised the Committee that there is
a huge possibility of private sector participation in manufacturing of
wheel sets for both metro and rail wagons, electrical systems for trucks
etc.
17. Representative of HAL also apprised the Committee that they
have involved private sector in a big way in supplying various items
in manufacturing of aircraft.
18. A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept.
The Committee then adjourned.

MINUTES OF THE THIRD SITTING OF THE STANDING
COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE (2006-07)
The Committee sat on Friday, the 22 September, 2006 from
1100 hrs to 1300 hrs in Committee Room No. ‘D’, Parliament House
Annexe, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Shri Balasaheb Vikhe Patil — Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Santosh Kumar Gangwar
3. Shri Suresh Kalmadi
4. Dr. K.S. Manoj
5. Shri Shriniwas Patil
6. Shri Raju Rana
7. Dr. H.T. Sangliana
8. Shri Balashowry Vallabhaneni
9. Shri Rajesh Verma
Rajya Sabha
10. Dr. Farooq Abdullah
11. Shri Abu Asim Azmi
12. Shri R.K. Dhawan
13. Shrimati N.P . Durga
14. Shri K.B. Shanappa
15. Shri Arun Shourie
16. Shri Lalit Suri
17. Shrimati Viplove Thakur
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri S.K. Sharma — Additional Secretary
2. Shri S. Bal Shekar — Joint Secretary
3. Shrimati Anita Jain — Deputy Secretary
4. Shri D.R. Shekhar — Under Secretary
135

136
LIST OF REPRESENTATIVES FROM MINISTRY OF DEFENCE
1. DR. M. Natarajan — SA to RM
2. Shri K.P . Singh — Secretary (DP)
3. Shri S. Banerjee — DG (ACQ)
4. Shri A.K. Jain — AS (J)
5. Shri K.P . Lakshamana Rao — FA (ACQ)
6. Dr. V .K. Saraswat — CCR&D (M&SS) & DS
7. Dr. Prahlada — CCR & D (SI) & DS
8. Dr. W. Selvamurthy — CCR & D (LS & HR)
9. Shri N. Sitaram — CCR & D (ECS)
10. Shri S.C. Narang — CCR & D (R&M)
11. Shri P .K. Jena — Addl. FA (J) & JS
12. Lt. Gen. H.S. Lidder — CISC
13. Lt. Gen. S. Pattabiraman — VCOAS
14. Air Mshl. A.K. Nagalia — DCAS
15. Shri Ranjan Chatterjee — JS (HAL)
16. Shri V . Somasundaran — JS (OF)
2. At the outset, Hon’ble Chairman welcomed the Members and
representatives of Ministry of Defence to the sitting of the Committee.
The Chairperson then requested the Representatives of the Ministry to
brief the Committee on the subject ‘Defence Research and Development
Organisation’ and drew their attention to the Direction 58 of the
Directions by the Speaker, Lok Sabha regarding maintaining
confidentiality of the deliberations of the sitting.
3. The representatives of the Ministry of Defence briefed the
Committee on the functioning of DRDO through slide presentation.
4. On the question of production of Arjun Tank, the representatives
of the Ministry apprised the Committee that the MBT Arjun had
received the users acceptance and it was under production. They further
stated that trial of 5 tanks were done and they have asked for
15 tanks more to do a further trial before they give clearance for final
production of them. The representative from Army informed the
Committee that in the recent trials with the five Arjun tanks, they
were satisfied with the performance. He also stated that in mobility,
driving and in quality, the tank was very good. The representatives of
the Ministry informed the Committee that night fighting capability in

137
an integrated mode was the best with Arjun and in terms of ability
it might be compared very well with the best state-of-art western
tank-Leopard II or Challenger-II.
5. With regard to a query on the abandonment of projects, the
Committee have been informed that the Industry was heavily
dependent on the kind of technology base that was available in the
country, the science base available in the country and the projects
thereof by the other entities who would be cooperating with the
industry during the phase of development. It was further informed
that industry was constrained to manufacture because they were highly
specialised items for which the technology did not exist with the
industry so they were developing that technology as such they were
constrained to do that work.
6. On the issue of technical difficulties and delay in production of
LCA, the representatives informed the Committee that though it was
DRDO’s first design, yet it featured the most advanced technology
relating to 40% composite structure and digital fly by wire.
7. On the issue of funding pattern of future projects, the
representatives informed that DRDO should fund 70 per cent, the
Services 10 per cent and the industry 20 per cent.
8. Members of the Committee also sought clarifications on other
important issues viz. Eleventh Plan, interaction with the Universities
etc. The representatives of the Ministry responded to the queries of
the Members one by one.
9. Verbatim record of the proceedings was kept.
The Committee then adjourned.

MINUTES OF THE FOURTEENTH SITTING OF THE STANDING
COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE (2006-07)
The Committee sat on Tuesday the 26th December, 2006 from
1630 hrs. to 1700 hrs. in Committee Room ‘D’, Parliament House
Annexe, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Shri Balasaheb Vikhe Patil — Chairman
M
EMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Santosh Gangwar
3. Shri C. Kuppusami
4. Shri Shriniwas Patil
5. Shri H.T. Sangliana
6. Shri Mahadeorao Shiwankar
7. Shri Manvendra Singh
8. Shri Rajesh Verma
Rajya Sabha
9. Shri R.K. Dhawan
10. Shri N.P . Durga
11. Shri K.B. Shanappa
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri R.C. Kakkar — Deputy Secretary
2. Shri D.R. Shekhar — Under Secretary
LIST OF REPRESENTATIVES FROM MINISTRY OF DEFENCE
1. Shri K.P . Singh — Secretary (DP)
2. Dr. M. Natarajan — SA to RM
3. Shri V .K. Misra — Secretary (Def. Fin.)
4. Shri Prahlada — CCR & D (SI) & DS
138

139
2. At the outset, Hon’ble Chairman welcome the Members to the
sitting of the Committee to consider the Draft Report on the subject
Defence Research and Development Organisation (DRDO). The
Committee then took up the Draft Report for consideration and
adoption. After deliberation, on the Draft Report the Committee decided
to have some further clarifications on the information supplied by the
Ministry of Defence on DRDO. Then the Committee decided to
postpone the consideration of the Draft Report for the next sitting of
the Committee.
3. Hon’ble Chairman then welcomed the representatives of the
Ministry of Defence to this sitting of the Committee to give clarifications
on some important points relating to DRDO. Thereafter, Hon’ble
Chairman drew their attention to the Direction 58 of the Directions by
the Speaker, Lok Sabha regarding maintaining confidentiality of the
deliberations of the sitting. The members putforth the following
queries:—
(i) Review of DRDO by an independent authority.
(ii) Number of projects which were initiated by DRDO and
approved and abandoned by the Ministry and DRDO and
expenditure incurred for the last 20 years.
(iii) The time taken by DRDO/Ministry and other relevant
organization in approving, disapproving or abandoning the
projects and the expenditure incurred at each stage.
(iv) The method of appointment of the Head of the Defence
Research and Development in USA, UK and Israel.
4. The representative of Ministry of Defence answered the queries
of the Members one-by-one.
The witnesses then withdrew.
The Committee then adjourned.

MINUTES OF THE FIFTEENTH SITTING OF THE STANDING
COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE (2006-07)
The Committee sat on Tuesday the 09th January, 2007 from
1100 hrs. to 1315 hrs. in Committee Room ‘D’, Parliament House
Annexe, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Shri Balasaheb Vikhe Patil — Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Milind Deora
3. Shri Santosh Gangwar
4. Dr. K.S. Manoj
5. Shri Adhalrao Shivaji Patil
6. Shri Raju Rana
7. Shri H.T. Sangliana
8. Shri Mahadeorao Shiwankar
9. Shri Balashowry Vallabhaneni
10. Shri Rajesh Verma
Rajya Sabha
11.D r. Farooq Abdullah
12. Shrimati N.P . Durga
13. Shri K.B. Shanappa
14. Shrimati Viplove Thakur
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri P .K. Bhandari — Joint Secretary
2. Shri D.R. Shekhar — Under Secretary
2. At the outset, Hon’ble Chairman welcomed the Members to the
sitting of the Committee to consider the Draft Report on the subject
‘Defence Research and Development Organisation (DRDO)’. The
Committee then took up the Draft Report for consideration and
adoption. Hon’ble Chairman moved some amendments on the report
which were adopted by the Committee. The Committee then considered
the whole report and adopted the same.
3. The Committee then authorised the Chairman to finalise the
Report in light of consecutive changes and present it to both the Houses
of Parliament.
The Committee then adjourned.
140