25
STANDING COMMITTEE
ON DEFENCE
(2007-2008)
FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA
MINISTRY OF DEFENCE
[Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations/observations contained in
the 14th Report of the Standing Committee on Defence (Fourteenth Lok Sabha) on
‘Defence Research & Development Organisation (DRDO)’]
TWENTY-FIFTH REPORT
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
March, 2008/Phalguna, 1929 (Saka)

TWENTY-FIFTH REPORT
STANDING COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE
(2007-2008)
(FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA)
MINISTRY OF DEFENCE
[Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations/observations
contained in the 14th Report of the Standing Committee on
Defence (Fourteenth Lok Sabha) on ‘Defence Research &
Development Organisation (DRDO)’]
Presented to Lok Sabha on 19.3.2008
Laid  in  Rajya Sabha on 19.3.2008
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
March, 2008/Phalguna 1929 (Saka)


C.O.D. No. 91
Price : Rs. 62.00
© 2008 BY L OK SABHA  SECRETARIAT
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of
Business in Lok Sabha (Twelfth Edition) and printed by Jainco Art India,
New Delhi-110 005.

(i)
CONTENTS
PAGES
COMPOSITION OF THE  C OMMITTEE (2007-08)............................................ (ii)
PREFACE........................................................................................................(iv)
CHAPTER I Report............................................................................. 1
CHAPTER II Recommendations/Observations which have
been accepted by the Government......................... 13
CHAPTER III Recommendations/Observations which the
Committee do not desire to pursue in view
of the Government’s replies..................................... 39
CHAPTER IV Recommendations/Observations in respect of
which replies of the Government have not been
accepted by the Committee...................................... 42
CHAPTER V Recommendations/Observations in respect of
which final replies of the Government are still
awaited........................................................................... 44
APPENDICES
APPENDIX I Minutes of the Sitting................................................ 51
APPENDIX II Analysis of Action Taken by the Government
on the Recommendations contained in the
14th Report of the Standing Committee on
Defence (Fourteenth Lok Sabha)............................. 56

COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE
ON DEFENCE (2007-08)
  Shri Balasaheb Vikhe Patil —  Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Vijay Bahuguna
3. Shri S. Bangarappa
4. Shri Milind Murli Deora
5. Shri Santosh Gangwar
6. Shri Jigajinagi Ramesh Chandappa
7. Shri Suresh Kalmadi
8. Shri C. Kuppusami
9. Dr. K.S. Manoj
10. Ms. Ingrid Mcleod
11. Shri Asaduddin Owaisi
12. Shri Adhalrao Shivaji Patil
13. Shri Shriniwas Patil
14. Shri Raju Rana
15. Dr. H.T. Sangliana
16. Shri Arjun Charan Sethi
17. Prof. Mahadeorao Shiwankar
18. Shri Manavendra Singh
19. Shri Balashowry Vallabhaneni
20. Shri Rajesh Verma
21. Shri Anil Shukla Warsi
Rajya Sabha
22. Dr. Farooq Abdullah
23. Shri Jai Prakash Aggarwal
24. Shri Abu Asim Azmi
25. Smt. Shobhana Bharatia
(ii)

26. Shri R.K. Dhawan
27. Smt. N.P. Durga
28. Shri S.P.M. Syed Khan
29. Shri K.B. Shanappa
30. Shri Arun Shourie
31. Smt. Viplove Thakur
SECRETARIAT
1. Shri S.K. Sharma — Additional Secretary
2. Shri A. Louis Martin — Joint Secretary
3. Shri Gopal Singh — Director
4. Shri D.R. Shekhar — Deputy Secretary-II
5. Smt. Jyochnamayi Sinha — Under Secretary
6. Shri Rahul Singh — Committee Officer
(iii)

(iv)
PREFACE
I, the Chairman, Standing Committee on Defence (2007-08) having
been authorized by the Committee to present the Report on their behalf,
present this Twenty-Fifth Report of the Committee on Action Taken by
the Government on the recommendations contained in the Fourteenth
Report of the Committee (Fourteenth Lok Sabha) on ‘Defence Research
and Development Organisation (DRDO)’.
2. The Fourteenth Report was presented to Lok Sabha and laid in
Rajya Sabha on 16.3.2007 and it contained 55 recommendations/
observations. The Ministry of Defence have furnished their Action Taken
Replies on all the recommendations/observations on 3.7.2007. The
Committee took oral evidence of the representatives of the Ministry of
Defence to have clarifications on certain issues arising out of the action
taken replies on 11.12.2007.
3. The Draft Action Taken Report was considered and adopted by
the Committee at their sitting held on 10.3.2008.
4. An analysis of action taken by the Government on
recommendations contained in the Fourteenth Report of the
Standing Committee on Defence (Fourteenth Lok Sabha) is given in
Appendix-II.
  N EW D ELHI; BALASAHEB VIKHE PATIL,
17 March, 2008 Chairman,
27 Phalguna, 1929 (Saka) Standing Committee on Defence.

CHAPTER I
REPORT
The Report of the Standing Committee on defence deals with action
taken by the Government on the recommendations/observations
contained in their Fourteenth Report (Fourteenth Lok Sabha) on
‘Defence Research & Development Organisation’ which was presented
to Lok Sabha and laid in Rajya Sabha on 16.3.2007.
2. The Fourteenth Report (Fourteenth Lok Sabha) contained
55 observations/recommendations on the following aspects:
Sl.No.   Para No. Subject
 1. 1.11 to 1.14 Review of the functions of DRDO
 2. 2.14 to 2.17 Organisational Structure of DRDO
 3. 3.4 to 3.7 Brain Drain in DRDO
 4. 4.5 to 4.6 Budget and Expenditure
 5. 5.24 to 5.33 Indigenous Research and Development
(R&D)  activities
 6. 6.11 to 6.13 Effective interaction with the users
 7. 7.3 to 7.4 Projects abandoned by DRDO
 8. 8.21 to 8.22a Performance of Projects
 9. 8.23 to 8.27 Main Battle Tank (MBT) Arjun
10. 8.40 to 8.43 Design and Development of Kaveri
Engine for Light Combat Aircraft (LCA)
11. 8.55 to 8.57 Integrated Guided Missile Development
Programme (IGMDP)
12. 9.7 Research on Stress Management
13. 10.21 to 10.30 Private Sector Participation in Defence
R&D

2
3. Action Taken Replies have been received from the Government
in respect of all the recommendations/observations contained in the
Report. They are broadly categorized as follows:
(i) Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted
by the Government:
Para Nos. 1.11, 1.12, 1.13, 2.17, 3.4, 3.7, 4.5, 4.6, 5.24, 5.25,
5.26, 5.27, 5.28, 5.29, 5.30, 5.31, 6.11, 6.12, 6.13, 7.4, 8.21,
8.22, 8.22a, 8.23, 8.25, 8.26, 8.27, 8.40 to 8.43, 8.55, 8.57, 9.7,
10.21 to 10.25, 10.27 to 10.29 (42 Recommendations)
(ii) Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do
not desire to pursue in view of the Government’s replies:
Para Nos. : 2.15, 2.16, 5.32, 7.3, 8.24 (5 Recommendations)
(iii) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies
of the Government have not been accepted by the
Committee:
Para Nos. 2.14, 3.5, 3.6 (3 Recommendations)
(iv) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which final
replies of the Government are still awaited.
Para Nos. 1.14, 5.33, 8.56, 10.26, 10.30 (5 Recommendations)
4. The Committee trust that utmost importance will be given to
implementation of all the recommendations made by the Committee
except those the Committee do not desire to pursue in view of
Government’s replies. In cases, where it is not possible for any reason
to implement the recommendations in letter and spirit, the matter
should be reported to the Committee with reasons for non-
implementation. The Committee observe that the Ministry of Defence
have failed to give specific responses to a  number of
recommendations taking shelter under the plea that an independent
Review Committee has been constituted to review the organizational
status of DRDO. Since this Review Committee was expected to
submit its report in February, 2008, the Committee desire that action
taken notes on the recommendations/observations contained in
Chapter-I and final replies to the recommendations contained in
Chapter-V of the Report be furnished to the Committee within one
month of the presentation of the Report.
5. The Committee will now deal with the action taken by the
Government on some of their recommendations contained in the
Fourteenth report.

3
Review of the functioning of DRDO
Recommendation (Para No. 1.12)
6. The Committee were not happy that during X Plan (2002-2007),
against the target fixed to reach 70% indigenisation only 30-35% target
could be achieved. This gave an impression to the Committee that the
country was still largely dependent on imports of Defence products
and the DRDO even after 48 years of its formation had not been able
to achieve its targeted mission of self-reliance in Defence production.
The Committee felt that there was an urgent need for a thorough
review of its functioning and its organizational/structural set up, in
order to identify the strength and weaknesses and to improve and
strengthen this organisation to increase its efficiency to enable it to
achieve organisational goals.
7. The Ministry of Defence in their action taken reply, have stated:
“DRDO is developing only for defence-critical/denied technologies
and strategic systems. Acceptance of DRDO developed systems
and their subsequent production and induction depends on Users
and identified production agencies (DPSUs and OFs). Achieving
self-reliance is a responsibility that has to be met through national
effort by MOD, DPSUs, OFs, private industries and DRDO jointly.
Independent Review Committee, under the chairmanship of
Dr. P. Rama Rao, is studying the issues concerning making DRDO
more effective in a changing industrial and economic scenario.”
8. In a subsequent reply, the Ministry of Defence informed that
the Committee headed by Dr. P. Rama Rao is required to review the
present organizational status and recommend required Institutional,
Management, Administration and financial arrangements, to meet
specified objectives. The time frame of the Committee, which was
constituted on 8th February 2007 is upto 7th February 2008.
9. The Committee appreciate that as recommended by the
Committee, an Independent Review Committee has been constituted
to review the organizational status of DRDO. The Review Committee
is headed by Dr. P. Rama Rao, former Secretary to Department of
Science and Technology and is expected to submit its report in
February 2008. The Committee would like to be apprised of the
Review Committee’s recommendations and the time frame for
implementation of those recommendations.

4
Secretary, DDRD heading other Organisations
Recommendation (Para No. 2.14)
10. The Committee had expressed their displeasure to note that
Scientific Advisor to Raksha Mantri had been assigned multifarious
responsibilities. Besides this he was holding, the posts of Director-
General of Defence Research and Development Organisation and
Secretary (R&D). He was also the Director-General of Aeronautical
Development Agency. The Committee strongly felt that any Officer
who holds various posts simultaneously cannot be expected to devote
adequate time and energy to visit R&D laboratories under him and to
contact other scientific labs for motivational leadership purpose. This,
in turn, dilutes the benefits of collective wisdom, different sets of mind
sets give efficiency, accountability, proper planning and also efficacy of
the organization. The Committee felt that one person should not be
entrusted with a number of responsibilities by making him hold a
number of posts simultaneously. The Committee had also desired that
the Government should fill all the vacancies urgently, so that the
organization would be more purposeful and productive. The Committee
desired to be apprised of the progress made by Government in this
regard.
11. The Ministry in their action taken reply, have stated:
“DRDO is administered through a  collegiate management council
headed by Secretary, Defence Research and Development with all
the Chief Controllers and Financial Advisor as members of the
council. Each Chief Controller has functional autonomy with regard
to the activities of the Laboratories in this cluster. This approach
is necessitated both for specialization as well as management and
the above said practice is working well over the past 15 years.
The Aeronautical Development Agency (ADA) is a society wholly
funded by DRDO and has a Programme Director for LCA also
functioning as Director, ADA, with the clear delineation of financial
and technical jurisdiction, akin to the Director of a DRDO
Laboratory.
Nevertheless, the whole issue of management of DRDO and its
associate setup is being looked into by Dr. P. Rama Rao
Committee.”

5
12. In the context of the Secretary, Department of Defence
Research and Development (DDRD) holding three other positions
viz. Scientific Advisor to Raksha Mantri, Director General of DRDO,
and Director General of Aeronautical Development Agency, the
Committee felt that one person should not be entrusted with a
number of responsibilities as it could adversely affect the efficient
functioning of the concerned organisations. The Ministry of Defence
have, inter-alia , stated in their response that the whole issue of
management of DRDO and its associate set up is being looked into
by Dr. P. Rama Rao Committee. The Committee wish to point out in
this regard that the terms of reference of Rama Rao Committee,
however, does not disclose this aspect. In order to remove any doubt
in  this regard the Committee desire that this issue should be
explicitly referred to the Rama Rao Committee for its consideration.
Irrespective of the recommendation that might be made by the
Independent Review Committee on this issue, the Committee
reiterated their earlier recommendations that one-man one-post
principle should be strictly adhered to and the posts already created
for Director General of DRDO, Scientific Advisor to RM and DG,
Aeronautical Development Agency (ADA) should be filled up by
different officers without any further delay.
Brain Drain in DRDO
Recommendation (Para Nos. 3.4, 3.5 and 3.6)
13. The Committee had noted with serious concern that the
proposal to provide incentives for scientists of DRDO had been pending
for consideration with the Government since 2001 and despite all the
Parliamentary assurances, the Ministry had not taken any action to
implement the proposed incentives. The Committee therefore, desired
that immediate steps be taken by the Ministry to clear the said incentive
proposal and also think of providing other perks and facilities in order
to attract best, talented employable technical manpower and to contain
the existing brain drain to further strengthen the organization so that
the research work should not suffer.
14. The Committee held a view that scientists have been the
Intellectual property of the country and their contribution to the nation
was peerless which could not be equated by providing only monetary
benefits to them. The Committee had, therefore, strongly recommended
the Government to take suitable and firm measures for encouragement
to scientists by providing adequate freedom to do research work. The
Government should create an atmosphere of trust and have close
interaction with them to address their problems/grievances so that
they could concentrate on their research work.

6
15. The Ministry in their action taken reply, have stated as under:
“A comprehensive proposal has already been submitted by the
DRDO and is under active consideration by the Government.
Comprehensive proposal has also been submitted to Sixth Central
Pay Commission.
DRDO has been provided with some level of flexibility in
functioning within the Government system. A conducive ambience
is being provided in work place as well as in Residential Quarters/
Campus.
The approach to tackle the serious problem of attrition is multi-
pronged. A comprehensive proposal has been submitted to the
Sixth Central pay Commission and also being taken up separately
with the Cabinet Committee for providing incentives  to the
scientists.”
16. A proposal for grant of incentives to the Scientists of DRDO
was reportedly submitted in July 2001 and a revised proposal submitted
to Raksha Mantri on 26 December 2006. As directed by the Raksha
Mantri, an in-depth study was assigned to the Administrative Staff
College of  India (ASCI) and on the basis of the ASCI recommendation,
an incentive  package to DRDO Scientists has been proposed to the
Raksha Mantri. ASCI’s proposal has also reportedly been submitted to
the Sixth Pay Commission. Some of the incentives proposed are as
follows:
(i) Special Intellectual Capital Pay @30 per  cent of basic pay
under FR 9(25) to all Scientists.
(ii) Three increments at the time of initial recruitment to
Scientists at all levels.
(iii) Enhancement of professional update allowance from
Rs. 5000 to Rs. 25,000 p. a.
(iv) VRS for Scientists who have completed 20 years of service
to facilitate migration to industries and to generate
committed defence production.
(v) Enhancement of retirement age by 2 years i.e. upto 62 years
for all Scientists and 65 years for selective few.
(Please see Annexure-A and B regarding full proposals).

7
17. During the discussion held with the representatives of the
Ministry of Defence regarding action taken by the Government, a
representative submitted the following before the Committee:
“As far as the incentives to the scientists are concerned, they were
not earth shaking incentives. They are basically incentives to keep
the young scientists attracted. Now the Government is in the
process of accepting that. It has gone through the financial
implications of that”.
“IT Companies are currently running attrition, especially in
Bangalore and Hyderabad between 18 to as high as 30 per cent.
We peaked around 24 per cent or so and we have come down
now between 19-20 per cent.”
18. The Committee are not satisfied with the reply of the Ministry
of Defence. The Committee wonder why the incentive package for
DRDO Scientists proposed as early as in June 2001, could not be
decided by the Government during the last six years. It has now
been stated that the proposal for incentive package has been
submitted to the Sixth Pay Commission. It is a well known fact that
grant of incentives is an administrative matter and should have been
decided by the Government without referring the matter to the Sixth
Pay Commission. The Committee further emphasise that incentives
to Scientists and Engineers should not be one time affair but should
be linked to their achievement in R&D from time to time. The
Committee hope that the Government will take expeditious decision
on the proposed incentive package to DRDO Scientists. The
Committee have however, reservations about one of the incentives
proposed in the package which relates to Voluntary Retirement
Scheme (VRS) for Scientists, who have completed 20 years of service.
The Committee feel that since incentives are aimed at attracting and
retaining talented scientists in DRDO, agreeing to the proposed VRS
may defeat this very objective.
Since a number of scientists have already left DRDO as indicated
in the original report, the Committee stress that responsibility should
be fixed on officers who have caused delay in grant of incentive
package by referring the matter to the Sixth Pay Commission.
National Policy for defence Recruitment
Recommendation (Para No. 3.7)
19. The Committee had, desired that a Comprehensive National
Policy should be formulated to recruit and retain talented and

8
experienced scientists who would make the pursuit of science a viable
academic and commercial proposition.
20. The Ministry of Defence have stated in their reply that the
Government is in full agreement with the recommendations of the
Standing Committee on Defence.
21. The reply of the Ministry of Defence is silent as to when
action will be taken to formulate Comprehensive National Policy to
recruit and retain talented scientists. The Committee hope that urgent
action will be taken in this regard under intimation to the Committee.
Augmenting R&D Budget
Recommendation (Para Nos. 4.5 & 4.6)
22. The Committee found that there  was a steady decline in the
percentage of R&D budget for DRDO out of the total Defence Budget
which has come down from 6.17 per cent in 2002 to  4.87 per cent in
2004. The Committee also noted that the amount allocated for R&D
activities were not fully utilized during the years 2004-05 and 2005-06
because of non-materialisation of certain commitments against some
projects/schemes. The Committee had further found that the percentage
spending on R&D activities to the Defence Budget was very low as
compared to the advanced and neighbouring countries. The Committee
were not satisfied with the reasons advanced by the Government for
non-utilization of the allocated amount for R&D activities which was
very meagre in comparison to the total Defence Budget and also very
less in comparison to the budgets in other developed countries.
23. The Committee had also been informed that 8 to 10 per cent
of the total DRDO budget was being spent on fundamental research.
The Committee were not happy with the existing state of affairs of
the utilization of fund for existing R&D activities in DRDO. The
Committee had felt that beside utilization of the budget allocated for
R&D activities in DRDO, there was an urgent need for an increase in
the total budget for R&D activities so that new and basic research
work in DRDO could adequately be funded and the country’s
dependency on other countries in critical and high technology was
minimized, thus enabling the country to  become self-reliant in Defence
production. The Committee, as recommended in their earlier Ninth
Report (14th Lok Sabha), emphasised that Defence Public Sector
Undertakings and Ordinance Factories should have their in-house R&D
centres so that the need to approach DRDO for small upgradation
could be avoided. The Committee had also desired DRDO to facilitate

9
DPSUs and ordnance factories to set up necessary infrastructure and
technical know-how to establish and strengthen their R&D Centres in
advisory capacity.
24. The Committee had further desired that R&D  budget should
be at least 14 to 15% of the total defence budget of the country as
more and more research and product development opportunities are
likely to come India’s way due to changed international scenario.
25. The Ministry in their action taken reply, have stated:
“Currently DRDO is spending about 6% of the Defence Budget.
There have been discussions regarding increasing this allocation
for conduct of more and more R&D activities for the three Services.
As per Defence Procurement Procedure (DPP)-2006, the indigenous
development under “Make” category can now be directly allocated
to industry either with the help of DRDO or independent of DRDO
with direct funding from MOD. There are also discussions  wherein
R&D allocations at Ordnance Factories and DPSUs need also to be
increased. DRDO would mainly concentrate on highly complex or
strategically sensitive or on futuristic technological development
or on creating state-of-the-art test and evaluation facilities.
The requirement to increase budget provision for DRDO will be
taken up progressively based on these considerations.
Non-utilisation of the allotted grants in full, during 2004-05 and
2005-06 was largely due to the reduced requirements against certain
CCS approved programmes and special schemes. Subsequently
allotted funds were fully utilized in 2006-07.
Defence PSUs, like Bharat Dynamics Limited (BDL) has in-house
Design and Engineering Division which carries out limited R&D
activities. Hindustan Aeronautics Limited (HAL) has nine R&D
centres for design, development and upgradation of military
aircrafts, helicopters, small engines, etc. Mishra Dhatu Nigam
(MIDHANI) Limited and HAL have collaboration in R&D activities
with   DRDO laboratories. Bharat Earth Movers Limited (BEML)
has established R&D centre and also liaised with DRDO for
research and development work. Bharat Electronics Limited has
two established R&D centres and is also closely working with
several DRDO Laboratories.”

10
26. In reply to a question on increasing/revision of the R&D
budget, the Ministry stated as under:—
“DRDO has been consistently requesting MoD to evolve a policy
to have a budget provision within the Defence Budget for
procurement of DRDO developed Systems (Rupees 1,50,000 cr. for
next 15 years i.e. 10,000 cr./year). Achieving this target would
require national effort by the MoD, Production Agencies, DPSUs
and Ordinance Factories and involving Private Sector in a big way.
National Policy on self-reliance is essential. Only then more R&D
will be undertaken by DRDO/Industries. The following are some
significant points for increasing the R&D budget:
— Assurance of accepting indigenously developed items.
— Assurance of Minimum Order Quantity (MOQ).
— Assurance of accepting MK-I and continuous development.
— Freedom to DRDO to choose development partners from
industries, both in public and private.
— Enhanced spending in academic research and privately
recognized R&D Institutions.”
27. In view of the need for promoting indigenous production
and self reliance in Defence requirements, the Committee had
recommended that atleast 14 to 15% of the total Defence budget be
spent on Defence R&D. The Committee, however, are constrained to
note that nothing has been mentioned in the Government’s reply
about the action proposed in this regard. The Committee urge the
Ministry of Defence to evolve a policy as proposed by DRDO  to
have budget provisions within the Defence budget for procurement
of DRDO developed systems and take immediate steps for increasing
the R&D Budget.
Instrumentation and Trial Ship
Recommendation (Para No. 5.26)
28. The Committee had noted the problems faced by  DRDO in
the matter of non-availability of platform for trials of warheads for the
Navy, as the ships go on exercises. The Committee felt that a better
coordination between DRDO and Navy could easily solve this
bottleneck and also cut short the time frame in development and testing
of weapon system. The Committee, therefore, felt that Ministry should

11
make concerted efforts in this direction so that testing and trials
platforms may not be a problem any more.
29. The Ministry in their action taken reply, have stated:—
“DRDO and Indian Navy have developed very-close working
relationship over the years and the situation has improved very
much.
DRDO has also undertaken building a test and evaluation ship to
further reduce the time for development and testing.“
30. In reply to a question about non-availability of platform and
building of test and evaluation ship, the Ministry submitted the
following information:—
“Availability of ships/platforms is subject to operational
commitments of the Navy. Navy provides platforms, to the extent
feasible, after meeting its operational commitments.
Further the availability of ships for trials gets restricted to fair
weather periods only, since trials cannot be undertaken in rough
sea/weather conditions.
A project to build an “Instrumentation & Trials  Ship’ for DRDO
is under consideration. Specifications and details of equipment fit
for such a ship are under preparation. The estimated cost of basic
ship, including the cost of Navy specific equipment, is Rs. 400 cr.
Scientific/trials equipment would be provided by the respective
user laboratories.”
31. The Committee had recommended in the context of non-
availability of platform for DRDO to conduct trial of warheads that
concerted efforts be made to remove this bottleneck. The Committee
note with satisfaction that a project at an estimated cost of Rs. 400
crore has since been proposed to build an ‘Instrumentation & Trails
Ship‘ for DRDO trials of warheads. The Committee desire that
decision on implementation of the project be taken early and the
Committee be informed of schedule of completion of the project.
Corporatisation of Ordnance Factories
Recommendation (Para No. 5.31)
32. The Committee were given to understand that the ordnance
factories do not have a system to prepare balance sheet in order to

12
have an appraisal of their cost of products and materials etc. The
Committee had therefore, desired that Ordnance Factories should also
prepare their balance sheet on the line of Corporate. Total accounting
system of DPSUs should go as per standard accounting system of
Indian Council of Chartered Accountant. The Committee were also of
the view that in order to make ordnance factories, more progressive,
productive, competitive and financially viable, there was an urgent
need to turn them into a Corporation and allow them to select vendors
and to take decision in financial and R&D matters independently
because in the competitive age they must have full autonomy in order
to have level playing field.
33. The Ministry in their action taken reply, have stated:—
“It has been decided to introduce Commercial Accounting Format
in Ordnance Factories. The finalized formats have been forwarded
for  concurrent of Comptroller and Auditor General. The Kelkar
Committee (Part II) has recommended that the Ordnance Factories
should be corporatized. This recommendation was examined and
the Government has decided not to corporatize Ordnance Factories.
It has also been decided that the present position would continue
for some time.
In order to make Ordnance Factories more progressive, productive,
competitive and financially viable, substantial financial powers have
been delegated by the Government to Ordnance Factories, including
full power for R&D.”
34. The Committee are glad to note that in pursuance of the
Committee’s recommendation, it has been decided to introduce
Commercial Accounting Format in Ordnance Factories. The
Committee hope that it would be possible to Introduce the changes
from the ensuing financial year (2008-09) after having the concurrence
of C&AG. As regards the Government’s decision not to corporatise
the Ordnance Factories for the present, no reasons have been
advanced as to what prompted such a decision. The Committee would
like to be apprised of the same.

CHAPTER II
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN
ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT
Recommendation No. 1 (Para No. 1.11)
The Committee note that the DRDO was formed in 1958 with an
objective to provide Scientific and technological support to Armed
Forces through design and development of new and sophisticated
equipment to meet their operational requirements. The main objective
of DRDO is the establishment of capability for indigenous production
of equipment with a view to attain self-reliance in defence requirements.
This mandate of DRDO is accomplished through 50 Laboratories/
Establishments whose activities are organised through specific projects.
Reply of the Government
DRDO is primarily responsible for design and development up to
Transfer of Technology (ToT) stage. Subsequent production and life
cycle support is provided by production agency. DRDO provides back-
to-back support to production agency on as required basis.
Recommendation No. 1 (Para No. 1.12)
The Committee are not happy that during 10th Plan (2002-2007),
against the target fixed to reach 70% indigenisation only 30-35% target
could be achieved. This gives an impression to the Committee that the
country is still largely dependent on imports of Defence products and
the DRDO even after 48 years of its formation has not been able to
achieve its targeted mission of self-reliance in Defence production. The
Committee feel that there is an urgent need for a thorough review of
its functioning and its organizational/structural set up, in order to
identify the strength and weaknesses and to improve and strengthen
this organisation to increase its efficiency to enable it to achieve
organisational goals.
Reply of the Government
DRDO is developing only for defence-critical/denied technologies
and strategic systems. Acceptance of DRDO developed systems and
their subsequent production and induction depends on Users and
13

14
identified production agencies (DPSUs and OFs). Achieving self-reliance
is a responsibility that has to be met through national effort by MoD,
DPSUs, OFs, private industries and DRDO jointly.
Independent Review Committee, under the chairmanship of
Dr. P. Rama Rao, is studying the issues concerning making DRDO
more effective in a changing industrial and economic scenario.
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para 9 of Chapter-I)
Recommendation No. 1 (Para No. 1.13)
The Committee are of the view that in order to achieve the objective
of self-reliance apart from Defence PSUs and Ordnance Factories,
private participation should also be encouraged and re-oriented in the
research and development areas, where  they have expertise and
capability in Defence production by funding the relevant organizations.
Reply of the Government
Partnership with industry is encouraged in a big way and all the
major current projects of DRDO are using services of Indian industry
proactively for development of components and sub-systems. DPSUs
have also been outsourcing the production services from numerous
industries. As per Defence Procurement Procedure (DPP)-2006, under
“Make” category, R&D tasks for systems can be directly given to DPSUs
and private industries. DRDO has already more than 400 Industrial
Partners in its various projects.
Defence PSU, like Hindustan Aeronautics Limited (HAL) is
encouraging private industries in R&D areas wherever these have
expertise and capabilities.
Recommendation No. 2 (Para No. 2.17)
The Committee have been informed that the Space Commission/
Atomic Energy Commission enjoys greater autonomy in its functioning
particularly for teaming up with the industry. The Committee, keeping
in view the disappointing performance of DRDO strongly recommend
to the Government the complete review of the structure and
functioning of DRDO including providing greater autonomy by
appointing an independent Committee of Experts/professionals, on the
lines of Atomic Energy Commission and Indian Space Research

15
Organisation (ISRO) so that it could achieve its targeted mission of
self-reliance in Defence sector.
Reply of the Government
Independent Review Committee, under the chairmanship of
Dr. P. Rama Rao, is studying the issue of autonomy for DRDO.
Recommendation No. 3 (Para No. 3.4)
The Committee are constrained to note that DRDO has been facing
problem of shortage of scientists to the extent of 1404 scientists, as
they have left DRDO in view of the lucrative job  opportunities
available to them in the private sector and other organizations. The
Committee take note of the fact that the organisation has been facing
this serious challenge to retain its trained manpower.
Reply of the Government
DRDO has presented its case effectively to the 6th Pay Commission
to take cognizance of the attrition and provide for reasonable pay
structure to keep talents attracted to DRDO.
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para 18 of Chapter-I)
Recommendation No. 3 (Para No. 3.7)
The Committee, therefore, desire that a comprehensive national
policy should be formulated to recruit and retain talented and
experienced scientists who would make the pursuit of science a viable
academic and commercial proposition.
Reply of the Government
Government is in agreement with the recommendations of the
Standing Committee on Defence.
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para 21 of Chapter-I)
Recommendation No. 4 (Para No. 4.5)
The Committee find that there is a steady decline in the percentage
of R&D budget for DRDO out of the total Defence Budget which has

16
come down from 6.17 per cent in 2002 to  4.87 per cent in 2004. The
Committee also note that the amount allocated for R&D activities were
not fully utilized during the years 2004-05 and 2005-06 because of
non-materialisation of certain commitments against some projects/
schemes. The Committee further find that the percentage spending on
R&D activities to the Defence Budget is very low as compared to the
advanced and neighbouring countries. The Committee are not satisfied
with the reasons advanced by the Government for non-utilization of
the allocated amount for R&D activities which is very meagre in
comparison to the total Defence Budget and also very less in
comparison to the budgets in other developed countries.
Reply of the Government
Currently DRDO is spending about 6% of the Defence Budget.
There have been discussions regarding increasing this allocation for
conduct of more and more R&D activities for the three Services. As
per Defence Procurement Procedure (DPP)—2006, the indigenous
development under “Make” category can now be directly allocated to
industry either with the help of DRDO or independent of DRDO with
direct funding from MoD. There are also discussions  wherein R&D
allocations at Ordnance Factories and DPSUs need also to be increased.
DRDO would increasingly concentrate on highly complex or
strategically sensitive or on futuristic technological development or on
creating state-of-the-art test and evaluation facilities.
The requirement to increase budget provision for DRDO will be
taken up progressively based on these considerations.
Non-utilisation of the allotted grants in full, during 2004-05 and
2005-06 was largely due to the reduced requirements against certain
CCS approved programmes and special schemes. Subsequently allotted
funds were fully utilized in 2006-07.
Comments of the Committee
Please see para 27 of Chapter-I)
Recommendation No. 4 (Para No. 4.6)
The Committee have also been informed that 8 to 10 per cent of
the total DRDO budget is being spent on fundamental research. The
Committee are not happy with the existing state of affairs of the
utilization of fund for existing R&D activities in DRDO. The Committee
feel that besides utilization of the budget allocated for R&D activities

17
in DRDO, there is an urgent need for an increase in the total budget
for R&D activities so that new and basic research work in DRDO
could adequately be funded and the country’s dependency on other
countries in critical and high technology is minimized, thus enabling
the country to  become self-reliant in Defence production. The
Committee, as recommended in their earlier Ninth Report (14th Lok
Sabha), again emphasised that Defence Public Sector Undertakings and
Ordnance Factories should have their in-house R&D centres so that
the need to approach DRDO for small upgradation could be avoided.
The Committee also desire DRDO to facilitate DPSUs and ordnance
factories to set up necessary infrastructure and technical know-how to
establish and strengthen their R&D Centres in advisory capacity.
 The Committee further desire that R&D  budget should be at
least 14 to 15% of the total defence budget of the country as more and
more research and product development opportunities are likely to
come India’s way due to changed international scenario.
Reply of the Government
Currently DRDO is spending about 6% of the Defence Budget.
There have been discussions regarding increasing this allocation for
conduct of more and more R&D activities for the three Services. As
per Defence Procurement Procedure (DPP)—2006, the indigenous
development under “Make” category can now be directly allocated to
industry either with the help of DRDO or independent of DRDO with
direct funding from MoD. There are also discussions  wherein R&D
allocations at Ordnance Factories and DPSUs need also to be increased.
DRDO would mainly concentrate on highly complex or strategically
sensitive or on futuristic technological development or on creating state-
of-the-art test and evaluation facilities.
The requirement to increase budget provision for DRDO will be
taken up progressively based on these considerations.
Non-utilisation of the allotted grants in full, during 2004-05 and
2005-06 was largely due to the reduced requirements against certain
CCS approved programmes and special schemes. Subsequently allotted
funds were fully utilized in 2006-07.
Defence PSUs, like Bharat Dynamics Limited (BDL) has in-house
Design and Engineering Division which carries out limited R&D
activities. Hindustan Aeronautics Limited (HAL) has nine R&D centres
for design, development and upgradation of military aircrafts,
helicopters, small engines, etc. Mishra Dhatu Nigam (MIDHANI)

18
Limited and HAL have collaboration in R&D activities with   DRDO
laboratories. Bharat Earth Movers Limited (BEML) has established R&D
centre and also liaised with DRDO for research and development work.
Bharat Electronics Limited has two established R&D centres and is
also closely working with several DRDO Laboratories.
Comments of the Committee
(Please see  para 27 of Chapter-I)
Recommendation No. 5 (Para No. 5.24)
The Committee understand that designing and developing defence
weapons is perhaps the  toughest task for DRDO. There are shortage
of designers and engineers in DRDO. The Committee, therefore,
recommend that DRDO should search for the technology and product
within the country before conducting research on a new product, as it
would not only save precious time and energy of DRDO scientists but
also save lots of money to the Government, besides ensuring quick
availability of product to the Armed Forces.
Reply of the Government
Government is in agreement with the recommendations of the
Standing Committee on Defence. DRDO undertakes development of
only such technologies/products/applications, which are not available
in the country.
Recommendation No. 5 (Para No. 5.25)
The Committee are given to understand among the three Services,
only the Navy has design capability and it has due to this reason, the
Navy is far ahead of the Army and Air Force in R&D and outsourcing,
but they should have separate R&D of their own also. The Committee
are confident after establishing their own R&D centres outsourcing
will definitely increase. The Committee find it  difficult to understand/
analyse that DRDO or the Ministry of Defence could not initiate section
to establish a separate in-house R&D for each Army and Air Force.
The Committee are of the view that Army and Air Force should also
try hard to achieve the capability in design. The Committee note there
is untapped source of large availability of technical manpower in the
Army and its Base Workshops, which are designed to provide
maintenance services, including repairing the defective equipment and
machinery and undertaking preventive maintenance. The Committee,

19
therefore are of the view that the Ministry should explore the possibility
of developing the base workshops as small research centres where
talent of Engineers and technical staff could be utilized to modify the
existing equipments and develop import-substitute products so that
the precious time can be saved and this could lead to indigenization/
outsourcing.
They should help in laying down users requirements as they are
very well versed with the equipments/machines. They are concerned
with the functional operation of the equipment.
Reply of the Government
Navy has design capability only in the areas of  ship-building and
for other requirements they approach DRDO or industry.
The core competency of Army Base Workshops is to carry out
mid-life overhaul of vehicles and equipment as a part of the Equipment
Management Policy. While carrying out overhaul, manufacture of
selected components, modification of existing assemblies/sub-assemblies
as per requirement, reclamation and outsourcing are undertaken. It
also involves limited R&D work. The responsibility of indigenisation
of spare parts/stores for all imported equipment not manufactured by
PSUs/OFBs have been transferred to EME from DGQA from 1 April
2007. This will also involve the technical staff of the Army Base
Workshops in limited R&D.
The Indian Air Force is considering setting up of an indigenisation
Base Repair Depot (BRD) with the aim of achieving self-reliance in
indigenisation of spares.
Naval Headquarters have also been transferred the responsibility
of indigenisation of spare parts/stores for all imported equipments
since September 2005.
Recommendation No. 5 (Para No. 5.26)
The Committee note the problems faced by  DRDO in the matter
of non-availability of platform for trials of warheads for the navy, as
the ships go on exercises. The Committee feel that a better coordination
between DRDO and navy could easily solve this bottleneck and also
cut short the time frame in development and testing of weapon system.
The Committee, therefore, feel that Ministry should make concerted
efforts in this direction so that testing and trials platforms may not be
a problem any more.

20
Reply of the Government
DRDO and Indian Navy have developed very-close working
relationship over the years and the situation has improved very much.
DRDO has also undertaken building a test and evaluation ship to
further reduce the time for development and testing.
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para 31 of Chapter-I)
Recommendation No. 5 (Para No. 5.27)
The Committee note that surveillance equipments are being
imported from Israel and other foreign countries. It shows dependency
on other countries. Therefore, the Committee keeping in view the
changed geo-political scenario suggest that the Ministry/BEL must have
an MoU with the private companies who have expertise in the area,
or transfer of technology to produce these equipments in the country
by Public Private Partnership in order to have self-reliance in this
field. The Committee appreciate the measures taken by BEL in
in-house R&D of its products resulting in large scale indigenisation of
manufactured items. The Committee advice that other DPSUs will also
follow the same model in the field of internal R&D product
indigenization. It would be worthwhile for DRDO to tie up with other
premier research organizations of the country like ISRO which have
good expertise in camera technology.
Reply of the Government
Historically, DRDO and ISRO have collaborated in many areas
with positive outcome and will continue the  same.
Many Defence PSUs have already entered Memorandum of
Understandings (MoUs) under public-private partnership to achieve
self-reliance in defence sector. Some other DPSUs have started efforts
in the field of product indigenisation. DPSUs, like Mishra Dhatu Nigam
(MIDHANI) Limited, Hindustan Aeronautics Limited (HAL) already
have their R&D centres.
Recommendation No. 5 (Para No. 5.28)
The Committee also feel that the country is heavily dependent on
imported weapon systems for its armed forces which are some times

21
disproportionately procured from a single country/vendor, which affects
the budget. With changing geo-political scenario, the Committee feel
that it will be prudent to take strategically firm steps towards ensuring
greater production of weapons systems indigenously developed by
DRDO/Defence Production Agencies and Indian private sector. The
Committee are of the opinion that the Ministry of Defence should
work out a firm and well planned scheme for providing viable
economic incentives for manufacturing of indigenously developed
products by the Defence PSUs, Ordnance Factories and Private Sector.
For the success the Committee also desire that DRDO should closely
co-operate with the universities and IITs in order to have skilled
technical manpower and available infrastructure in furtherance of in-
house R&D for Defence products. The Ministry of Defence should
directly fund as per the requirement of the users to strengthen R&D
in the private sector. The reason is that the fundamental research in
sensitive areas in highly capital intensive.
Reply of the Government
The Government in principle is in agreement with recommendations
of the Committee. However, this requires closer examination in
consultation with concerned departments/agencies.
DRDO has developed close ties with most of the universities and
institutions across the country. DRDO has developed Centers of
Excellence to encourage research in cutting edge technologies. Also,
DRDO is working towards increasing its spending on  Extramural
Research from 1.5% of its annual budget to about 5%.
Defence Procurement Procedure (DPP)-2006 provides for MOD’s
directly funding R&D in private sector.
Recommendation No. 5 (Para No. 5.29)
The Committee feel that India should adopt model of R&D of
developed countries like  Russia, England, France, Germany and U.S.,
where any planned weapon system is developed concurrently by at
least two private corporations and the U.S. Government pays them
appropriate development cost. The products developed by those
companies compete against each other and a production contract is
signed with the successful company. The Committee desire that the
Ministry should take steps for successful implementation of such a
model, which not only provides private sector initiation  participation
in Defence R&D but also gives the country the latest and modern war
gadgets.

22
Reply of the Government
The ‘MAKE’ procedure promulgated in Defence Procurement
Procedure (DPP)-2006 provides for concurrent development by two
competing vendors from the Indian private sector.
Recommendation No. 5 (Para No. 5.30)
The Committee understand that the country is spending huge
amount of money to buy clothing for the use of Jawans in high altitude
areas from foreign countries. Therefore, they recommend that DRDO
should give more emphasis on design and production of clothing for
our troops in high altitude areas, besides developing other weaponry.
The Committee also feel that our military forces must be backed by
an efficient industry either from foreign suppliers or from the
indigenous industry. The Committee feel that there is a lot of scope
for private sector participation in this area. The research done by
DMRSDE Kanpur should be passed on to the industry which in turn
can do mass production for the services as well as civil and export
markets. Mass production would in turn reduce cost also.
Reply of the Government
Defence Material Science Research and Development Establishment
(DMSRDE), a laboratory of DRDO at Kanpur, has been active laboratory
in developing clothing items for use of Jawans in high altitude areas.
With good expertise in design of clothing, it has current emphasis on
development of new fibres and fabrics to impart improved performance
quality to textile stores. The clothing technologies developed by
DMSRDE, for several items accepted by the Users, have already been
transferred to the industry. As such, the DMSRDE, has in focus to
take up R&D of only such stores, which are generally not available in
global market or are high-tech items.
Recommendation No. 5 (Para No. 5.31)
The Committee are given to understand that the ordnance factories
do not have a system to prepare balance sheet in order to have an
appraisal of their cost of products and materials etc. The Committee
therefore, desired that Ordnance Factories should also prepare their
balance sheet on the line of Corporate. Total accounting system of
DPSUs should go as per standard accounting system of Indian Council
of Chartered Accountant. The Committee are also of the view that in
order to make ordnance factories, more progressive, productive,

23
competitive and financially viable, there is an urgent need to turn
them into a Corporation and allow them to select vendors and to take
decision in financial and R&D matters independently because in the
competitive age they must have full autonomy in order to have level
playing field.
Reply of the Government
It has been decided to introduce Commercial Accounting Format
in Ordnance Factories. The finalized formats have been forwarded for
concurrence of Comptroller and Auditor General. The Kelkar Committee
(Part II) has recommended that the Ordnance Factories should be
corporatized. This recommendation was examined and the Government
has decided not to corporatize Ordinance Factories. It has also been
decided that the present position would continue for some time.
In order to make Ordnance Factories more progressive, productive,
competitive and financially viable, substantial financial power have
been delegated by the Government to Ordnance Factories, including
full power for R&D.
Comments of the Committee
(Please see para 34 of Chapter-I)
Recommendation No. 6 (Para No. 6.11)
The Committee note the difficulties being faced by the DRDO while
interacting with the user. Some of these difficulties are changing of
GSQR midstream, long and extended trials which results in final
placement of orders after very long time. The Committee also note
that an indigenously developed product is subject to prolonged
exhaustive trials and evaluation, whereas imported products are not
subjected to the same evaluation but are readily accepted, whereas
performance of indigenously developed product are equally good as
the imported one. The Committee, therefore, recommend that users
should promote the indigenously developed defence items in preference
to the imported ones and there should not be major changes in GSQRs.
DRDO should also follow concurrent engineering for development of
the products on a case-to-case basis according to the circumstances or
even they can have outsourcing to avoid the embarrassment and delay
in production at all level. From day one users and manufacturers
should be involved from top policy making decision to all other level.

24
Reply of the Government
The Government in principle agrees with the observations of the
Standing Committee. However, it is submitted that in addition to
DRDO’s own effort of keeping abreast with latest technologies, only
such mutually agreed changes in GSQR be made which do not
necessitate initiating a new cycle of development, or are substantial
enough to put back the developmental effort by unduly long periods.
In all situations, products based on DRDO developed technologies
will have a reasonable useful User life. DRDO has adopted concurrent
engineering for all the development projects. Representatives of User
and production agencies are always members of Project Management
Board.
Recommendation No. 6 (Para No. 6.12)
The Committee note that the involvement of the users with DRDO/
Private industry is very limited. Due to this, the final products lack
the facilities and qualities as per technical and the requirement of the
user. The Committee as recommended in their Ninth and Eleventh
Reports of the Committee (14th Lok Sabha) further recommend that
representative selected by the user, for a specific project should have
adequate knowledge of the product to be produced and he must be
involved at the conceptualization stage of the project on a permanent
basis so that defects, if any may be rectified during production stage
itself and delivery of the product to the user may not get delayed for
a long time. In case, the user does not suggest corrective measures/
improvement whereas necessary and the product is not developed as
per GSQR, then the accountability may also be fixed on them in this
regard. The Committee also desire that there should be compulsory
financial participation of the users in the projects so as to increase
user involvement.
Reply of the Government
DRDO has taken up a case of financial stake holding of DRDO:
Industry: User in the ratio 70:20:10 which is under consideration of
the Government.
Recommendation No. 6 (Para No. 6.13)
For this purpose, the Committee recommend that the user should
give its specification along with adequate project fund to DRDO for a
system/product and the final or cut off date of development should
be fixed by them. Manufacturers should also be taken into confidence

25
from the beginning for the success of the product. DRDO should create
an environment more friendly with Indian Companies off loading their
responsibilities. Usuall research should be given to manufacturers-
Government or private as the case may be. DRDO must off load a
number of their responsibilities. DRDO should not think that private
industry are not capable worthy of maintaining secrecy, lacking in
integrity. They should shed their doubts. It should have certain
supervisory responsibilities to monitor all major product developments
as part of the service under their care and accountability. The
Committee also feel that, as in other developed nations, a project
management organisation or coordination Committee with
representations from DRDO, user and production agency should be
there and the funds should be provided in different stages after
ascertaining the performance according to the parameters set up and
agreed upon. The Committee, therefore, strongly recommend that it is
essential to make  fundamental changes in the organization, structure,
monitoring method and in the funding pattern of DRDO with
accountability to the user and to do work in time.
The Committee feel that once it has been decided to hand over a
project to DRDO for development and production, care should be taken
to avoid last minute major changes in its design etc. and should
invariable be inducted in the user service. While going in for any
imports, it should be weighed as to what shall be the options available
with the country in case of technology denial regime and in case of
a war. Preference should always be given to indigenous development
of technology.
Reply of the Government
DRDO has been regularly involving private sector for development
of sub-systems and components. The response of private sector is quite
encouraging and many private companies have successfully developed
and produced the products in limited numbers to meet the
requirements of conducting tests and trials. Wherever, infrastructure
and expertise are available in private sector, they are approached for
developmental work right in the beginning of the project. DRDO
focuses on those systems, which are of critical nature or strategic
importance. Each project is considered by the Acquisition Wing of the
MoD to decide as per Defence Procurement Procedure (DPP)-2006,
whether it should be done by the DRDO or by the private sector.
Independent Review Committee, under the Chairmanship of
Dr. P. Rama Rao, is studying the issue of restructuring of DRDO and
project monitoring and review process.

26
Recommendation No. 7 (Para No. 7.4)
The Committee are of the view that before sanctioning of the
project, at the formulation level itself, the Ministry with their users
should have foreseen all the constraints scrupulously well in advance
and all the techno, qualitative, design and development requirements
of the project could have been completed. The Committee are of the
view that had the Ministry followed the concurrent engineering and
development approach, the number of closed projects might have come
down and infructuous efforts and expenditure made thereon could
have been avoided. The project which has been overtaken by technical
development elsewhere and not worth the extra efforts should be
undertaken by DRDO. The Committee, therefore, desire that there
should be scientific, technical and concurrent audit of the ongoing
project from an outside agency so that the kinds of situation that have
come to the notice of the Committee do not recur. The Committee
also desire that the Ministry should study the reasons, have a second
look and take the advice of an expert before closing down of any
project in future so that the country may not be deprived of the
intended benefits of the project envisaged.
Reply of the Government
A Peer Review, with the members drawn from various industries,
universities, academia, finance, users other R&D institutions and DRDO
is conducted before getting Government approval. Concurrent
engineering practice is being followed in every project. Quality
Assurance and Production Agency are now being identified right from
the beginning of the project. The suggestions by the Standing
Committee on Defence regarding closure of the project will be
implemented.
Recommendation No. 8 (Para No. 8.21)
The Committee note that scores of projects with DRDO were
plagued by time and cost overruns and several projects were short
closed due to change in the GSQR by the user or due to technological
obsolescence. Some of the projects are showing significant time and
cost overrun. The Committee are of the view that the delays in
development of weapon systems, MBT Arjun, LCA II, Samvahak,
Samyukta, Sangraha, Integrated Guide Missile Development Programme
i.e. Prithvi, Akash, Trishul, Nag and Agni, Kaveri Engine for LCA etc.
not only has caused significant loss of revenue but also delayed the
timely procurement of weapon systems from foreign sources that were

27
needed to keep the forces fighting fit and modernised. The delays
cause suspicion on the capability of DRDO in the eyes of the users,
the common man and intelligentsia. The Committee do understand
that not every equipment can be developed by DRDO. The Committee,
however, desire that prior to taking a decision on the development of
a weapon system, DRDO should sharpen its foresight, whether it could
develop it within a fixed time frame and with available financial and
technical resources or not.
Reply of the Government
Main Battle Tank (MBT) Arjun, Light Combat Aircraft (LCA) Tejas,
Integrated Guided Missile Development Programme (IGMDP), etc. are
major systems developments, attempted for the very first time not
only in DRDO, but also in the country. When projects, like MBT were
taken up in early 80s, Indian Industry was just not ready to embark
on these types of products and DRDO decided to initiate development
including major components/sub-systems in-house. Subsequently,
Missile Technology Control Regime (MTCR) and technology denial by
Western block delayed these developments still further.
Industry is now in a much better position for taking up
development, production and integration. Situation has also changed
drastically with liberalization and globalization in late 90s and early
2000. There is no shortcut to the learning in developing ones own
products, but the pains undergone in the development, should instill
the confidence in future capabilities and strengths for newer
developments as every agency would have learnt its lessons and also
gained in maturity in technology leadership and decision taking, in a
realistic manner. It is equally important that both public-private sectors
pay adequate attention to investment in research and development in
an increasingly competitive environment.
Hopefully, these measures would make development time and cost
more manageable.
Recommendation No. 8 (Para No. 8.22)
The Committee feel that DRDO should lay more stress on the
Project Management as in the Western industrialized countries, where
the R&D agencies only design and develop armaments technologies
and the military, as the user agency, has the highest stakes in such
weapon development projects, because it contributes directly to their
operational capabilities.

28
Reply of the Government
Modern project management practices have been used for all the
projects undertaken after 1980. DRDO only undertakes the design and
development of the systems till Transfer of Technology (ToT) stage
and thereafter the production agencies take over. DRDO has also
suggested management contributions from all its stake holders, namely
Users and production agency.
Recommendation No. 8 (Para No. 8.22a)
The Committee are of the opinion that DRDO being the prime
development agency for almost all type of research, cannot absolve
itself from the responsibility for inordinate delay in the important
project like LCA and Kaveri Engine and also of creating credible
deterrence capabilities for Indian Armed Forces by developing
technologically superior weapon systems. The Committee keeping in
view of the fact that weapon system face obsolescence very fast, desire
that DRDO must concentrate and focus on augmenting basic science
and technological output to be at par with the other developed
countries. The Committee also desire that DRDO should enter into
joint venture/collaboration with Indian Private Industry or the foreign
partner where it does not have capability to design and develop. The
Committee also desire that Ministry must ensure to minimize the gap
between the project initiated and sanctioned.
Reply of the Government
DRDO Team continues to upgrade the inducted systems to take
care of technological obsolescence.
DRDO has started entering into joint venture/collaborations with
foreign partners for joint development projects after the liberalization
and globalization. Such collaborative development has become possible
now when many countries have recognized strength of DRDO in
development and testing. Such collaborative projects will have shorter
development time (for example, Brahmos).
Recommendation No. 9 (Para No. 8.23)
The Committee are perturbed to note that the Government of India
accorded clearance for the development of an indigenous Main Battle
Tank (MBT) Arjun in May 1974. Even after the lapse of more than
32 years, the nominated agency of DRDO could not execute the mission
so far. Inordinate delay has escalated the original cost of MBT project

29
from Rs. 15.50 crore in 1974 to Rs. 306 crore in 2005. The Committee
are surprised to note that neither the execution agency of DRDO or
the certifying agency Director General Quality Assurance (DGQA) are
taking responsibility for the inordinate delay and quantity in production
of MBT Arjun. Out of 124 ordered for tanks by the users, only
15 tanks have been produced by the Heavy Vehicle Factory, Avadi.
Reply of the Government
The development of Main Battle Tank was started in Aug. 1972 as
per GSQR 326 at a cost of Rs. 15.50 crore. The GSQR was revised a
number of times and the final GSQR 467 for MBT Arjun was issued
in Nov. 1985 incorporating a number of technological and operational
changes. The total cost of the project was revised to Rs. 280.00 crore
and the project finally was closed in March 1995 with a total
expenditure of Rs. 305.60 crore with delivery of 12 nos. of prototypes
and 15 nos. of Pre-Production Series of Arjun tanks. These tanks
underwent extensive field evaluation with the Army wherein
approximately 70,000 km. of mobility trials and 7000 rounds of main
armament were fired. The equipment was approved by Army and an
indent of 124 nos. of MBT Arjun was placed on Heavy Vehicle Factory/
Ordnance Factory Board (OFB) in March 2000. DRDO, in association
with DGQA and OFB, is fully involved in streamlining the bulk
production and early delivery of tanks to Army. All quality assurance
issues have been duly addressed and production is taking place as
per the production schedule finalized during the meeting of 5th Steering
Committee on Production of MBT Arjun.
Recommendation No. 9 (Para No. 8.25)
From the foregoing the Committee are very much concerned and
strongly feel that over the last 40 years, DRDO has put efforts on
R&D and also in manufacturing but still it has not been capable of
mastering the technology to fulfil the goal of self-reliance designing
and developing their own MBT Arjun. It has not been able to deliver
the goals of self-reliance as promised by it to the nation. It seems that
DRDO can deliver successful results only when it enters into joint
venture/collaboration with a reliable partner.
Reply of the Government
Over the last 40 years, DRDO has developed and delivered many
technologically complex products like Prithvi, Agni, Lakshya, EW
Systems, Radars, Sonars, Torpedo, NBC Systems, etc.

30
It has taken longer time than initially predicted for complex
systems, which were taken up in early 80s due to limitations of
industry, constraints from foreign suppliers and technology problems
being attempted for the first type by DRDO.
The present trend of entering into collaborative R&D wherever,
feasible will cut down development time and risks.
Recommendation No. 9 (Para No. 8.26)
The Ministry of Defence should think seriously as to how to comply
Arjun’s requirement in a time bound manner with the help of private
Industry—joint venture ship or otherwise.
Reply of the Government
Steering Committee chaired by Secretary (Defence Production) is
reviewing the progress on production of Arjun tanks. The present order
for 124 MBT Arjun will be completed by HVF by 2009 and a large
number of private industries are supplying sub-systems for integration
by HVF.
This Committee is empowered to recommend alternate production
agencies or joint ventures if users requirements (including beyond 124)
in terms of delivery schedules are not likely to be met by HVF.
Recommendation No. 9 (Para No. 8.27)
The Committee, therefore, stress that DRDO must concentrate on
augmenting in technological output to be ahead with the other
developed countries and in order to put India on the world map
capable of mastering the technology.
Reply of the Government
Government agrees with the recommendation of the Standing
Committee on Defence. DRDO’s efforts are directed towards this broad
goal. But it will be difficult for DRDO to develop the entire spectrum
of products required by the Services. Indian industries and PSUs must
take equal responsibility in meeting with the challenges. Defence
Procurement Procedure (DPP)—2006 has some enabling provisions in
this regard.
Recommendation No. 10 (Para No. 8.40)
The Committee also express their displeasure in the delay in
development of LCA (rechristened as Tejas) which started in 1983,

31
which is still showing time and cost overruns. The Committee note
that even after 530 flight tests the LCA is years away from induction
into IAF. The Committee also note that contract between IAF and
HAL has been signed for initial induction of 20 Tejas aircraft into
operational service. However, it could not be turned into reality so far
due to delay in development of indigenous Kaveri Engine.
Reply of the Government
For first 20 Tejas production aircraft will be fitted with imported
GE engines. Production is in progress at HAL. The issue of Kaveri
Engine has been delinked from Tejas production and will surface again
only after the Kaveri Engine undergoes all mandatory development
tests. Thus initial lots of Tejas production aircraft will feature
G.E. Engine.
Recommendation No. 10 (Para No. 8.41)
The Committee note the inordinate delay in the development of
indigenous Kaveri engine to meet the LCA requirement. The project
on design and development of Kaveri Engine was originally sanctioned
way back in 1989 to Gas Turbine Research Estt. (GTRE) at a cost of
Rs. 382.81 crore with PDC in December, 1996. However, after spending
15 years, it has revised the PDC to Dec. 09 with an approximate
budget of Rs. 2839 crore. The Committee also note that now DRDO is
adopting concurrent engineering and joint venture approach in order
to develop the Kaveri Engine. The Committee deprecate the delayed
approach of DRDO to enter into joint venture with other company or
Defence Public Sector Undertakings for development of this engine.
Had it taken this decision earlier, till now the LCA would have become
a reality with Kaveri engine and the inordinate delay and huge
escalation in the revised cost could have been minimized. The
Committee, therefore, recommend that the Ministry should take
immediate steps to avoid further delay in the development of Kaveri
Engine and time bound schedule for completion of this project may
be fixed.
Reply of the Government
Gas Turbine Engine development for fighter aircraft is an extremely
complex and involved exercise. Very few nations have this capability.
Even for recent projects abroad, e.g. Euro Fighter, now engine
development is not being attempted. In spite of complexities and
challenges, DRDO has initiated this development, ab initio, from scratch
and established necessary skills and infrastructure to establish
indigenous engine development capability.

32
To accelerate the Kaveri Engine progress, DRDO has initiated action
to select a reputed engine house as a partner in development and
production. Request for Proposal (RFP) has already been sent to engine
houses. The contract is likely to be finalized before the end of 2007,
if techno-commercial terms are found acceptable. It is estimated that
the production  release of such engine can be expected by the end of
2011.
Recommendation No. 10 (Para No. 8.42)
The Committee note that non-development of the engine and the
long list of slip-ups in domestic production programmes has
strengthened the need for a thorough assessment of the functioning of
both the Defence Research & Development Organisation and the
production agencies. The Committee also desire that Ministry of
Defence and DRDO should address these problems seriously and take
firm steps for development of Kaveri Engine for LCA by giving full
autonomy to Aeronautic Development Agency (ADA) or by entering
into collaboration/joint venture with the public private limited company
which is favourable to avoid further loss with foreign partner without
further loss of time.
Reply of the Government
Gas Turbine Engine development for fighter aircraft is an extremely
complex and involved exercise. Very few nations have this capability.
Even for recent projects abroad, e.g. Euro Fighter, new engine
development is not being attempted. In spite of complexities and
challenges, DRDO has initiated this development, ab-initio, from scratch
and established necessary skills and infrastructure to establish
indigenous engine development capability.
To accelerate the Kaveri Engine progress, DRDO has initiated
process to select a reputed engine house as a partner in development
and production. Request for proposal (RFP) has already been sent to
engine houses. The contract is likely to be finalized before the end of
2007, if techno-commercial terms are found acceptable. It is estimated
that the production release of such engine can be expected by the end
of 2011.
Aeronautical Developmental Agency (ADA) is an independent
society with Programme Director as its Chief Executive and HAL is
also independent DPSU totally independent from DRDO.

33
Recommendation No. 10 (Para No. 8.43)
Finally, the Committee are of the view that HAL and ADA may
be allowed to develop their own leadership and separate organisation/
institution/company independent of DRDO.
Reply of the Government
HAL is a Defence PSU totally independent from DRDO. ADA is
a society under Department of Defence R&D. Since substantial work
for LCA is being carried out at DRDO laboratories, common leadership
of Director General, DRDO functioning as DG, ADA will synergise
the development efforts of ADA with DRDO. This arrangement has
been discussed several times in the past and is found to be the most
pragmatic way of managing the requisite technical and techno-
managerial issues/tasks.
Recommendation No. 11 (Para No. 8.55)
The Committee note that integrated guided missile development
programme (IGMDP) was sanctioned in 1983 to develop four missile
systems, namely, Prithvi, Akash, Trishul and Nag in addition to the
technology demonstrator—Agni. The Committee are constrained to note
that the original cost of the project was Rs. 388.83 crore which has
been now revised substantially and their probable date of completion
which was 1995 has also been revised to 2007. The reasons furnished
to the Committee for delay were—non-realization of  state-of-art
technology and non-availability of components and sub-systems.
However, the Committee hope that DRDO will make all out efforts to
overcome all the obstacles coming in the way of developing and
completing these projects. The Committee again stress that DRDO must
concentrate on fundamental R&D work and retain and augment its
scientific knowledge based industry and simultaneously enter into joint
venture with a capable company and also follow concurrent engineering
approach where industry is a major partner from the early stage of
R&D and product development. The Committee also note DRDO has
well-established procedure for Limited Series Production (LSP) where
Indian companies are fully associated in various stages of product
development. The Committee feel that the Ministry should give more
emphasis on concurrent engineering in the R&D and product
development, as the DRDO has adopted concurrent engineering
approach only during the development of the project. The Committee
hope that in future most of R&D projects would not get delayed and
the country would get the benefits of the projects in time.

34
Reply of the Government
Missile Complex laboratories, are in general, following the
recommendations as suggested by Standing Committee. The concurrent
engineering model has been adopted and followed in IGMDP and
also other missile systems under development.
Recommendation No. 11 (Para No. 8.57)
The Committee appreciate the Joint Venture model of Brahmos
signed between India and Russia in 1998 which has resulted a
technology collaboration between two leading research organizations
of Russia, DRDO from India and NPO Mashinostroyenia. The
Committee feel that this remarkable achievement in technology
collaboration between two countries putting together their core
competencies has given the message that DRDO can develop and lead
to production of defence equipment in time satisfying the requirements
of the Armed Forces, with less  cost, if they resort to collaborative
efforts in the form of Joint Ventures. Brahmos is a model joint venture,
which needs to be followed by the Ministry of Defence to achieve
competitiveness in the world arms market.
Reply of the Government
DRDO will enter in Joint Venture, wherever needed and feasible.
Recommendation No. 12 (Para No. 9.7)
The Committee are concerned to learn about the growing incidents
of violence, suicide and killings by the overstressed Jawans particularly
in J&K and North East. The Committee understand that human
resource is not the job of DRDO, therefore, to manage the highly
stressed environment, the Committee, desire that the Ministry of
Defence should assigned this job to specialised association/bodies/
organizations who have expertise in this area, and these organisations
may be allowed to use the facilities created by DRDO. The Committee
also urge the Government to implement at the earliest the
recommendation of this Committee on Armed Forces Tribunal Bill,
2005 which in the opinion of the Committee would definitely help to
reduce the stress among the Jawans and Officers of the Armed Forces.
Reply of the Government
Defence Institute of Psychological Research (DIPR), a life sciences
laboratory of DRDO, is the only laboratory in the country working on
military psychology. This Laboratory has more than 50 years of
experience in the area of stress management of the Armed Forces.
Over the years, this Institute has developed competency and created

35
facilities, like stress management modules & manuals customized to
the Armed Forces requirements. Though  DIPR is not in a position to
work towards all the aspects of human resources issues in Armed
Forces in entirely due to limited scientific manpower, the expertise
available is being used to coordinate such activities through other
external agencies, involving Ministry of Defence.
Recommendation No. 13 (Para No. 10.21)
The Committee note that DRDO develops weapons and equipment
in response to the Qualitative Requirements (QRs) projected by Services
based on their threat perceptions. However, at times, the QRs are
formulated by incorporating/selecting the ‘best features’ of various
systems available in the world, at that point of time. Many times, it
is not possible to include these ‘best features’ in a single system, which
are sometimes conflicting due to technology-compatibility problems.
The reasons for this vary. These are changes in threat perception,
consequent strategy and tactics, advancing technology and introduction
of new weapon systems, force the Services to make changes in the
QRs, mid way in the project work etc. This necessitates redesign and
redevelopment of some of the key sub-systems, causing time and cost
overruns. Another related factor is the unexpectedly long time taken
in extensive and extended user trials, which consequently increases
the development time.
Reply of the Government
While the Government in principle is in agreement with the
recommendations of the Committee, it may be clarified that QRs are
provided by Users based on operational requirements of Users.
Sometimes these are changed due to changed technical scenario when
better technologies or items reportedly become available during long
gestation period involved in development process. All efforts are made
to complete these trials in shortest possible period. However, in
development stage a series of repeated trials become necessary when
defects are noticed and items after removal of defects are again
subjected to trials.
Recommendation No. 13 (Para No. 10.22)
Though an endeavour is made by the Government to harness
nation’s best available expertise and infrastructure, this effort has
proved to be inadequate in many cases. Moreover, indigenous industrial
capacity does not exist for critical micro/nano electronic components
and super components and advanced materials essential for

36
development of a world-class weapon system, whereas, these inputs
are available off-the-shelf in most of the advanced countries. Non-
availability of critical components, delay in supply or additional time
taken in indigenous development of such inputs, is another cause of
“time-over-runs” in many state-of-the-art systems.
Reply of the Government
Though Government is in agreement with this observation of the
Committee, it may be mentioned that in respect certain critical
components and sub-systems, special indigenous development effort
has been made successfully.
Recommendation No. 13 (Para No. 10.23)
The Committee, therefore, feel that it is high time to create an
environment where both public and private sector grow together and
the R&D effort should be synergized and coordinated in a big way to
obtain and absorb capital investment or high technology from
international partner outside. The Committee also desire that Ministry
of Defence should provide level playing field to Indian private industry
and allow private industry to tie up with original manufacturers abroad
to develop certain basic science and technologies based on requirements
of the users as delay in production of indigenous defence items, extend
benefits only to the foreign suppliers.
Reply of the Government
As per Defence Procurement Procedure (DPP)-2006, level playing
field has been provided for private industry also to participate in
R&D and subsequent productions.
Recommendation No. 13 (Para No. 10.24)
The Committee, therefore, recommend that DPSUs, Ordnance
factories and private industry must work closely  as a partner of each
other and for the success of this DRDO should facilitate them. Even
unexploited resources of IIT and its tech scientific universities
knowledge based should be utilized to build-up defence capabilities.
DRDO should allow these organisations to function independently if
they so desire in collaboration with the user. For this purpose the
Ministry, DPSUs and DRDO should sign bipartite and tripartite
Memorandum of Understanding and enter into joint venture with
Indian and International Partners in R&D and also in manufacturing
to make use of already established industries in the world or basic
components for designing and realization of hardware. The Committee
also desire that DRDO should take initiative to provide greater role
for IITs and Universities in the field of Defence R&D.

37
Reply of the Government
DRDO has entered into Memorandum of Understanding (MOU)
with many universities including IITs and is funding many fundamental
and applied research projects. There is network of DPSUs, OFs and
private industries for all major defence systems both during prototype
development and serial production.
Recommendation No. 13 (Para No. 10.25)
The Committee are also of the opinion that over the years the
private sector has also graduated in capabilities and reach. Therefore,
there is a need to emphasize on building an effective and fruitful
public-private partnership in defence R&D and production on sharing
basis. In order to ensure continued commitment, each stockholder
should contribute to the funding in the ratio of 70:20:10 among DRDO,
Industry and user respectively. In the case of development of products
based on spin offs, the industry will be partner with DRDO by
contributing funds in the ratio of 50:50 between DRDO and the
Industry. The Committee, therefore, recommend that the Ministry of
Defence should try to make provisions for direct funding of R&D
activity in the industry, both public and private, apart from the
provisions made for DRDO.
Reply of the Government
DRDO has already proposed joint stake holding model with shared
funding in the ratio of 70:20:10 between DRDO: Industry Users.
Provision exists in Defence Procurement Procedure (DPP)-2006 for
direct funding of R&D activity in industry, both public and private.
Recommendation No. 13 (Para No. 10.27)
The Committee note that the extent of investment made by the
private industry as well as public sector in the R&D activity is very
low and this has been a major factor restricting the country from
acquiring sophisticated technology. Since R&D activities in defence
requires heavy investments and the private sector does not have the
capacity to invest, there must be a substantial Government support
for making the industry technologically more capable. It is disheartening
to note that while most advanced countries are spending at least two
per cent of the GDP on basic science and technology in universities
and research institutions and the industries both in public and private
sector across the globe are investing between 4 and 15 per cent of
their turnover towards R&D. The private industry in India today has
developed very high capabilities in engineering and has a reasonable
capability in design; but its contribution to R&D activities is very low.

38
Therefore, the Committee recommend that the Government must take
initiative to encourage private sector to spend more on Defence R&D
activities.
Reply of the Government
Government is in agreement with observation of the Committee.
Provision exists in DPP-2006 to give incentive to R&D in both private
and public sector.
Recommendation No. 13 (Para No. 10.28)
The Committee are of the view that to engage private industry, it
would also be necessary to adopt the principle of acquiring minimum
order quantity for technically and economically feasible viable proposals
and it is also the responsibility of private sector to ensure quality as
required by our defence.
Reply of the Government
The concept of ensuring a minimum order quantity has been
incorporated in the ‘MAKE’ procedure for indigenous research, design,
development and production of systems in DPP-2006.
Recommendation No. 13 (Para No. 10.29)
The Committee are of the considered views that long and continued
dependence on imported weapon systems an lead to the country
supporting all legal and illegal actions of the importing country as
crucial supply of spares and ammunition could be in jeopardy in future.
Therefore, the Committee strongly recommend that there should be
greater professionalism in integrated defence capability planning,
management of Research and Development and more emphasis should
be given to self reliance, thereby nurturing the nation’s industrial
capability in defence sector.
Reply of the Government
Government is in agreement with the observations of the
Committee. All efforts are made to promote self reliance in defence
sector. The DPP-2006 has provisions to encourage indigenous R&D
and products. The Offset policy is another margin step to achieve this
objective.

CHAPTER III
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE
COMMITTEE DO NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE IN
VIEW OF GOVERNMENT REPLIES
Recommendation No. 2 (Para No. 2.15)
The Committee note with serious concern that DRDO in addition
to fundamental research and development for developing weapons and
platforms for strategic requirement of Armed Forces is also undertaking
R&D on medical sciences, life sciences and other allied sciences. The
Committee strongly feel that R&D work on medical, life and other
allied sciences should be entrusted directly to the concerned
organization relating to these subjects as it would give more and more
opportunity to DRDO to concentrate on the fundamental and crucial
Defence Research work. This would make the country self reliant in
the field of weapon systems and force multipliers. For R&D on Medical
and allied sciences, Government should create a separate R&D
organization in their respective organisation, life science and medical
science can merge as respective institutions.
Reply of the Government
Life sciences laboratories are not engaged in fundamental research
in the medical sciences but only carry out directed research in defence-
critical products and technologies like, NBC, Bio-terrorism, problems
related to high altitude stress, and augmentation of fresh/nutrition
food for sustaining troops in field areas as required by the Indian
defence forces. The limited activities in the life science areas are of
direct use to the services and is highly appreciated by them.
Recommendation No. 2 (Para No. 2.16)
The Committee are of the view that DRDO should concentrate on
research work, primarily on Defence and Strategically important matters
only and research activities in the field of Life Sciences  i.e. food,
agriculture, medicine, psychology, physical and allied sciences, be left
to the manufacturers or the users or private organizations as the case
may be. The Committee also desire that projects for applied research
activities should be funded by the respective Services/Organizations.
39

40
Reply of the Government
Main thrust of DRDO programmes are indigenous development of
critical technologies/systems and strategic systems required for Indian
defence. Applied research projects in areas, other than mentioned above,
can be directly funded and controlled by respective Services. Provision
for this has already been made in Defence Procurement Procedure
(DPP)-2006. PSUs have been advised to have their own Research &
Development centers for continued product improvements and new
initiatives.
Recommendation No. 5 (Para No. 5.32)
The Committee are also given to understand that due to faulty
production/certification of ammunition and incidents of fire, a large
number of soldiers have died or been injured. The Committee, therefore,
urge upon the Government to appoint a fact finding Committee to
ensure to avoid recurrence of such incidents.
Reply of the Government
No data due to faulty ammunition/fire incident is held with AG’s
Branch. However, number of soldiers who have died or injured due to
ammunition/splinter injuries/barrel blast/RL blast/grenade blast/range
accidents peace time are as under:
       Y ear Killed Wounded
2005 07 28
2006 07 38
Recommendation No. 7 (Para No. 7.3)
The Committee note with concern that DRDO closed the major
projects namely Airborne Surveillance Platform Project, Cargo
Ammunition, Technology Demonstration Programme, Development of
30 mm Fair Weather Towed AD Gun System and Light Towed AD
Gun System, after getting these sanctioned and incurring huge
expenditure thereon. The Committee are not fully convinced with the
reply of the Ministry that due to technological constraints, change in
design and development and GSQR, the Projects sanctioned were
abandoned, particularly in the case of Cargo Ammunition where the
project was closed when all the technological constraints were overcome
and the design of 130 mm cargo shell, bomblet, fuze with SD element,
packing system and ejection system were worked out.

41
Reply of the Government
In case of Cargo Ammunition, these were developed for 130 mm
Cargo Ammunition as per the priorities laid down by the users.
However, later on, user changed the priorities and wanted Cargo
Ammunition for 120 mm Long Range Mortar as first priority. This
required fresh  development efforts. Due to this reason, the project
was technically short closed. However, knowledge and expertise were
used in development of new systems.
Recommendation No. 9 (Para No. 8.24)
Total requirement of Army is about 3500 Tanks. Army has placed
an indent the manufacture 124 MBT Arjun and Arjun assembly has
just started functioning. The Factory will produce 50 Arjun Tanks per
year from the year 2009 onwards subject to continuous requirement of
the user. Users should be empowered to certify the products by the
ordinance factories. The Committee also like to be apprised how they
will comply the demand of the user.
Reply of the Government
Present practice followed is that Authority Holding Seal Particulars
(AHSP) remains with design agency till production stabilizes
(about 5-10 lots). Thereafter, this responsibility is transferred to
inspection agency (DGQA). Users do not carry out inspection/
acceptance of produce directly nor they have trained manpower and
infrastructure at their disposal to carry out out this task.
DGQA has taken over the responsibility of QA and inspection of
Arjun tanks from 1 April 2007. Products are always certified by
manufacturers. Users have the right of inspections as customers either
by themselves or through accredited agencies.

CHAPTER IV
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF
WHICH REPLIES OF GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN
ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE
Recommendation No. 2 (Para No. 2.14)
 The Committee express their displeasure to note that Scientific
Advisor to Raksha Mantri has been assigned multifarious
responsibilities. Besides this he was holding, the posts of Director-
General of Defence Research and Development Organisation and
Secretary (R&D). He is also the Director-General of Aeronautical
Development Agency. The Committee strongly felt that any Officer
who holds various posts simultaneously cannot be expected to devote
adequate time and energy to visit R&D laboratories under him and to
contact other scientific labs for motivational leadership purpose. This,
in turn, dilutes the benefits of collective wisdom, different sets of mind
sets give efficiency, accountability, proper planning and also efficacy of
the organization. The Committee feel that one person should not be
entrusted with a number of responsibilities by making him hold a
number of posts simultaneously. The Committee also desire that the
Government should fill all the vacancies urgently, so that the
organization will be more purposeful and productive. The Committee
would like to be apprised of the progress made by Government in
this regard.
Reply of the Government
DRDO is administered through a  collegiate management council
headed by Secretary  Defence Research and Development with all the
Chief Controllers and Financial Advisor as members of the council.
Each Chief Controller has functional autonomy with regard to the
activities of the Laboratories in this cluster. This approach is necessitated
both for specialization as well as management and the above said
practice is working well over the past 15 years.
The Aeronautical Development Agency (ADA) is a society wholly
funded by DRDO and has a Programme Director for LCA also
functioning as Director ADA, with the clear delineation of financial
and technical jurisdiction, akin to the Director of a DRDO Laboratory.
Nevertheless, the whole issue of management of DRDO and its
associate setup is being looked into by Dr. P. Rama Rao Committee.
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para 12 of Chapter-I)
42

43
Recommendation No. 3 (Para No. 3.5)
The Committee note with serious concern that the proposal to
provide incentives for scientists of DRDO has been pending for
consideration with the Government since 2001 and despite all the
Parliamentary assurances, the Ministry has not taken any action to
implement the proposed incentives. The Committee therefore, desire
that immediate steps be taken by the Ministry to clear the said incentive
proposal and also think of providing other perks and facilities in order
to attract best, talented employable technical manpower and to contain
the existing brain drain to further strengthen the organization so that
the research work should not suffer.
Reply of the Government
A comprehensive proposal has already been submitted by the
DRDO and is under active consideration by the Government.
Comprehensive proposal has also been submitted to Sixth Central Pay
Commission.
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para 18 of Chaper-I)
Recommendation No. 3 (Para No. 3.6)
The Committee hold a view that scientists are the Intellectual
property of the country and their contribution to the nation was
peerless which could not be equated by providing only monetary
benefits to them. The Committee, therefore, strongly recommended the
Government to take suitable and firm measures for encouragement to
scientists by providing adequate freedom to do research work. The
Government should create an atmosphere of trust and have close
interaction with them to address their problems/grievances so that
they could concentrate on their research work.
Reply of the Government
DRDO has been provided with some level of flexibility in
functioning within the Government system. A conducive ambience is
being provided in work place as well as in Residential Quarters/
Campus.
The approach to tackle the serious problem of attrition is multi-
pronged. A comprehensive proposal has been submitted to the Sixth
Central Pay Commission and also being taken up separately with the
Cabinet Committee for providing incentives  to the scientists.
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para 18 of Chapter-I)

CHAPTER V
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH
FINAL REPLIES OF GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED
Recommendation No. 1 (Para No. 1.14)
The Committee, keeping in view the future war scenario, strongly
feel that it has become imperative to develop weapon systems not
only on one-to-one basis but also as an integrated system. The
Government should, therefore, take a holistic and flexible view towards
Defence R&D and production agencies by providing them complete
autonomy and accountability and re-orient their work according to the
changes taking place world wide.
Reply of the Government
Independent Review Committee under the Chairmanship of
Dr. P. Rama Rao is looking into the issue of accountability of DRDO
vis-a-vis autonomy in decision taking.
Recommendation No. 5 (Para No. 5.33)
The Committee further note that DRDO has instituted several
review mechanisms to monitor programmes and projects: like: DRDO
Research Council, multilevel programme management boards, inter-
ministerial apex board and project peer review etc. However, the
Committee find that inspite of so many review mechanisms, a large
number of projects get delayed leading to time and cost overruns. The
Committee, therefore, feel that there is an urgent need to review the
working of various scientific review mechanism themselves as they
themselves may be the cause of delays in some cases. The Committee
feel that review mechanism should have technical personnel which
can really guide the research projects on technical matters. There can
be staffed by senior scientists from different research educational
organisations who have experience in the relevant fields. Even the
retired scientists from ISRO and Atomic Energy Commission etc. can
also be associated with the review Committees. The Committee feel
that there is an urgent need to appoint R&D Council of DRDO from
CSIR etc.
44

45
Reply of the Government
Independent Review Committee, under the Chairmanship of
Dr. P. Rama Rao, is looking into reasons and remedies for time and
cost overrun of projects. Experts from different institutions/
organizations and universities and even retired scientists participate in
various reviews of DRDO projects.
Defence R&D Board has been reconstituted including members from
ISRO and CSIR.
Recommendation No. 11 (Para No. 8.56)
The Committee note that there is no scientific audit at any point
of time of DRDO and its projects as such. However, the DRDO has
the mechanism of feasibility study, design and technology evaluation,
project peer review, post project review. The Committee observe that
inspite of that, a large number of projects are showing inordinate delay
and escalation of huge cost. The Committee, therefore, recommend
that in addition to existing audit system, DRDO’s projects must also
be audited by external and independent audit group of experts duly
approved by the Government of India. The Committee are of the view
that this will facilitate the Government to understand the scientific
environment, fundamentals in delays and to check the real growing
cost and their over runs of the projects and contains the accountability
of the DRDO and Ministry of Defence.
Reply of the Government
Independent Review Committee is considering this aspect also and
is likely to give suitable recommendations.
Recommendation No. 13 (Para No. 10.26)
The Committee also endorse their views with the CII that inspite
of the fact that DRDO interacts with more than 400 companies, there
is no formally published framework/guidelines for partnership between
the private sector and DRDO The Committee, therefore, recommend
that Ministry of Defence must stipulate/publicise guidelines for
industry participation in Defence R&D in order to attract more Indian
Private Companies. These guidelines should be flexible and change
progressively as per the need of the hour.
Reply of the Government
DRDO has constituted a Committee to stipulate guidelines for
industry participation. After obtaining Government approval, the same
will be published/implemented.

46
Recommendation No. 13 (Para No. 10.30)
The Ministry of Defence should take into confidence all highly
performing scientific institutions in the country including DRDO, the
future projections and requirement of the armed forces. It will help
the Research Organisations and industry to plan their investment in
research and infrastructure. Looking to the new and the changing
warfare systems, some scientific organisations can work out how to
reduce manpower and the marketing can take place. Till now we are
working in conventional warfare. There is a need to make big shift in
policy from conventional to strategic weapon system, from
manufacturing to marketing and all nuclear and biological protecting
environment. This will only happen after the strengthening of research
organisations through appropriate investment, full autonomy and
research should be decentralized. So, specialized laboratories should
be established in the public private partnership. The Committee are
fully aware of the budgetary constraints. With the limited sources how
the capability of man and machinery can be efficiently used by
developing basic science, fundamental technology or by analyzing the
fundamentals.
Reply of the Government
Independent Review Committee is looking at DRDO’s
organizational structure and efficient use of manpower and machinery.
  N EW D ELHI; BALASAHEB VIKHE PATIL,
10 March, 2008 Chairman,
20 Phalguna, 1929 (Saka) Standing Committee on Defence.

ANNEXURE ‘A’
(Please see Para 16)
REVISED PROPOSAL OF INCENTIVES PACKAGE
(AFTER STUDY OF ASCI) SUBMITTED TO RM
• Special Intellectual capital pay @ 30% of basic pay under
FR 9(25) to all Scientists.
• Three increments at the time of initial recruitment to Scientists
at all levels.
• Enhancement of the present incentive of two increments given
to Sc ’C’ to ‘F’ to three increments which is to be treated as
part of pay for all purposes including pension.
• T reating Special Pay of Rs. 2000 p.m. give to Scientists in the
pay scale of Rs. 18400-22400 as part of pay for all purposes.
• Internet access and telephone reimbursement at the rate of
Rs. 1000 to non-entitled Scientists.
• Enhancement of professional update allowance from Rs. 5000 to
Rs. 25000 p.a.
• Higher qualification allowance of Rs. 1000 per month to all
Scientists having post graduate qualification in Engg./Ph.D. in
Science subjects.
• One time grant of Rs. 40,000 for purchase of lap top.
• Special Compensatory allowance for additional higher
responsibility under FR 9(25) @ Rs. 5000 p.m. to Programme
Directors/Directors of the Labs & Estts./Corporate Directors,
@ Rs. 10,000 per month of Distinguished/Outstanding Scientists,
Chief Controllers and @ Rs. 20,000 per month to SA to RM.
• Sanction to Air Travel for all the Scientists on temporary duty
and for trials irrespective of basic pay including initial reporting
to recruited post.
• Field trial allowance of Rs. 500 per day in addition to DA
admissible at the stations.
• Hard Station posting allowance @ Rs. 3000 p.m. or ration and
facilities as applicable to Armed Forces Officers posted at these
stations.
• P romotion from Sc ‘B’ to ‘C’ after two years on completion of
probation without assessment.

48
• Performance linked advance increments.
• Special leave to Scientists in the first two years of service for
compassionate reasons, for appearing in examinations etc.
• Risk coverage and additional allowance @10% of basic pay for
performing hazardous/arduous operations and special insurance
cover for such activities.
• Comprehensive health cover for Scientists and their families.
• Sanction for sharing of royalty, monies/fees earned due to
commercialization of intellectual property, patents, copyrights,
designs etc. as per CSIR pattern.
• Sanction for introducing a reward scheme for Scientists for
systems inducted in services @1% value of production order to
be shared by the Scientists and associates of the labs.
• One time reward of Rs. 10,000 for papers published in journals
of repute having an impact value of three and for patents
approved with the ceiling of rupees one lakh per year at par
with CHS Doctors.
• Permitting Scientists to attend international conferences once in
two years with financial assistance of rupees one lakh per case.
• Enhancement of period of study leave to 36 months and a total
absence of 48 months in combination with other admissible leave
due.
• Grant of sabbatical leave for a maximum period of 24  months
in two spells at an interval of 10 years.
• Permission to hold adjunct appointment for a period not
exceeding a total time of one month in a year.
• Permission to take up individual consultancy for Scientists who
have rendered 20 years service, not exceeding one month in a
year and accept honorarium/fee thereof.
• Enhancement of retirement age by two years i.e. upto 62 years
for all Scientists and 65 years for selective few.
• VRS for Scientists who have completed 20 years of service to
facilitate migration to industries and to generate committed
defence production.
• Contract appointment for experts for a period of 2 to 5 years
with emoluments worked out as cost to company as in private
sector.

ANNEXURE ‘B’
(Please see Para 16)
RECOMMENDATION SUBMITTED TO 6TH CENTRAL
PAY COMMISSION ON 11 JANUARY 2007
1. Proposed pay scales as per Govt. norms with 3 increments
(instead of 2) at every stage to be treated as part of pay for
all purposes including pension.
2. Intellectual capital pay @30% of basic pay.
3. Two increments presently given to Scientists in the grade of
Sc. ‘C’ to Sc. ‘F’ and Rs. 2000 special pay given to Scientists
‘G’ in the pay scale of Rs. 18400-22400 in lieu of separate
higher scale to be immediately declared as part of pay for
DA and Pension made applicable all serving and retired
Scientists.
4. Three increments uniformly to all Scientists from Scientist
‘C’ to Scientist ‘H’.
5. Internet Access to all Scientists and reimbursement of
Telephone/Internet expenses of the rate of Rs. 1000 p.m. to
Scientist who are presently not covered.
6. Enhancement of professional update allowance from
Rs. 5000 p.a. to Rs. 25000 p.a.
7. Higher qualification allowance of Rs. 1000 p.m. to Scientist
having higher qualification M. Tech./Ph.D. at entry level.
8. Laptop grant of Rs. 40,000 to all Scientists.
9. Hazard allowance @15% of basic pay under FR 9 (25) to
Scientists posted in such duties.
10. Special compensatory allowance for additional higher
responsibility under FR 25@ Rs. 5000 p.m. to Directors,
Rs. 10,000 p.m. to Chief Controllers/Outstanding/
Distinguished Scientists and Rs. 20,000 p.m. to SA to RM
and Secretary Defence (R&D).
11. Air move on all duties to Scientists.
12. Field trial allowance of Rs. 500 per day during the trials
conducted at remote places on Ships/Helicopter/Submarine
etc. in addition to normal DA.
49

50
13. Remote area allowance of Rs. 3000 p.m. or free rations and
facilities as applicable to service officers posted there.
14. Sharing of royalty of commercialized products on the lines
of CSIR.
15. Reward for systems introduced in the services 11% of
production value.
16. As an incentive to promote innovation, one time reward of
Rs. 10,000 for patents approved and paper published in
Referred Journals.
17. Financial assistance of Rs. 1 lakh for attending International
Conference once in 2 years.
18. Sabbatical leave of two years in two spells for Scientists
who have completed 10 years of service.
19. Enhancement of Study Leave from 24 months to 36 months
and extension by 12 months more with combination of other
kind of leave.
20. Living allowance of Rs. 3000 when detailed for course of
study beyond 180 days.
21. Permission to hold adjunct appointment for scientists having
completed 20 years service not exceeding one month in a
year and accept honorarium/fee thereof.
22. Medical insurance in addition to CGHS. Life insurance for
Scientist/Staff during hazardous trials.
23. Enhancement of age of superannuation to 62 years and
selectively to 65 years for experts.
24. VRS (with golden Handshake) for scientists who have
completed 20 years service to facilitate migration to
industries and to generate committed Defence production.
25. Contractual appointment for experts proposed for Technical,
Administration & Allied Categories.

APPENDIX I
MINUTES OF THE TENTH SITTING OF THE STANDING
COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE (2007-2008)
The Committee sat on Tuesday, the 11th December 2007 from
1100 to 1240 hrs. in Committee Room ‘C’, Parliament House Annexe,
New Delhi.
PRESENT
Shri Balasaheb Vikhe Patil— Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Vijay Bahuguna
3. Shri Santosh Gangwar
4. Dr. K.S. Manoj
5. Shri Manavendra Singh
6. Shri Rajesh Verma
7. Shri Anil Shukla Warsi
Rajya Sabha
8. Shri Jai Parkash Aggarwal
9. Shri S.P.M. Syed Khan
SECRETARIAT
1. Shri Gopal Singh — Director
2. Shri D.R. Shekhar — Deputy Secretary-II
WITNESSES
Ministry of Defence
1. Shri Vijay Singh — Defence Secretary
2. Shri P.K. Rastogi — Addl. Secy. (R)
3. Shri Ajoya Acharya — Addl. Secy. (DP)
4. Smt. Neelkamal Narang — FA (DS)
5. Shri S.N. Misra — JS (HAL)
6. Shri V. Somasundaran — JS (OF)
51

52
DRDO
7. Shri M. Natarajan — SA to RM
8. Dr. D. Banerjee — CCR&D (AMS) & DS
9. Dr. Prahlada — CCR&D (SI)
10. Dr. W. Selvamuthy — CCR&DD (LS&HR)
11. Shri N. Sita Ram — CCR&D (ECS)
12. Shri G. Elangovan — CCR&D (R&M)
13. Shri R.B. Singh — Director, (P&C)
14. Shri J.P. Singh — Addl. Dir. (P&C)
Armed Forces HQ
15. Air Mshl. B.N. Gokhale — VCAS
16. V. Adml. Nirmal Verma — VCNS
17. V. Admi. B.S. Randhawa — COM
18. Air Mshl. A.V. Vaidya — DCIDS (PP&FD)
19. Air Mshl. NAK Browne — DCAS
20. AVM KJ Mathews — ACAS (Ops.)
21. R. Adml. Anil Chopra — ACNS (P&P)
2. At the outset, the Chairman drew the attention of the
representatives of the Ministry of Defence to the Direction 58 of the
Directions by the Speaker, Lok Sabha regarding maintaining
confidentiality of the deliberations of the sitting. The Chairman
expressed his displeasure on the Action Taken Replies furnished by
the Ministry as in most of the recommendations, the Ministry instead
of giving proper reply, has referred to constitution of a Independent
Review Committee under the Chairmanship of Dr. P. Rama Rao to
examine the issue and report thereon. Hence, replies furnished by the
Ministry were inadequate and incomprehensive. The Committee,
therefore, desired the Ministry to brief on Action Taken replies furnished
by the Ministry of Defence on recommendations/observations of the
Committee contained in their 14th Report on Defence Research and
Development Organisation (DRDO).
3. The Committee sought clarifications on several issues viz.
achieving self-reliance through national effort by Ministry of Defence,
Defence Public Sector Undertakings, ordnance Factories, Private
Industries and DRDO, contributions of DRDO in achieving self-reliance,
comprehensive proposal to provide incentives to the scientists of DRDO,

53
and its latest position, specific steps taken by the Ministry/DRDO to
form a comprehensive national Policy to recruit and retain talented
and experienced scientists, highlights of DPP-2006 in R and D field,
with special emphasis on ‘MAKE’ procedure, performance and outcome
of Public Private Partnership under ‘Make’ category, etc.
4. During the interaction with the Ministry, the Committee also
expressed their concern over the slow progress in production of Arjun
Tank and development of Kaveri Engine and Light Combat Aircraft
(LCA).
5. The Committee also desired to have a copy of the rpeort where
more autonomous functioning of DRDO’s laboratories was studied by
DIPR, break up of the 6 percent budget being spent by the DRDO on
R and D and possibility to make HAL, an independent body to develop
LCA, etc.
6. The representatives of the Ministry clarified the issues raised by
the Members one by one. On some of the issues the Committee desired
to have written replies from the Ministry.
7. The Committee also desired to have a separate discussion on
Tanks and Aircraft available and proposed to be procured for the
Armed Forces.
8. The copy of verbatim record of the proceedings has been kept.
The Committee then adjourned.

MINUTES OF THE TWENTIETH SITTING OF THE STANDING
COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE (2007-2008)
The Committee sat on Monday, the 10th March, 2008 from
1500 hrs. to 1545 hrs. in Committee Room ‘C’, Parliament House
Annexe, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Shri Balasaheb Vikhe Patil — Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Vijay Bahuguna
3. Shri Milind Murli Deora
4. Shri Jigajinagi Ramesh Chandappa
5. Shri C. Kuppusami
6. Dr. K.S. Manoj
7. Shri Asaduddin Owaisi
8. Shri Shrinivas Patil
9. Shri Arjun Charan Sethi
10. Shri Anil Shukla Warsi
Rajya Sabha
11. Smt. N.P. Durga
12. Shri K.B. Shanappa
13. Smt. Viplove Thakur
SECRETARIAT
1. Shri A. Louis Martin — Joint Secretary
2. Shri Gopal Singh — Director
3. Shri D.R. Shekhar — Deputy Secretary-II
4. Smt. J.M. Sinha — Under Secretary
54

55
2. The Committee considered the following Action Taken Reports
and adopted the same with some additions/modifications, as suggested
by the members:
(i) Draft Action Taken Report on the recommendations/
observations contained in the Fourteenth Report on ‘Defence
Research and Development Organisation (DRDO)’; and
(ii) ** ** ** **
3. The Committee then authorized the Chairman to finalize the
above mentioned reports and present the same to the Parliament.
The Committee then adjourned.
*Not related to the subject.

APPENDIX II
ANALYSIS OF THE ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON
THE RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS CONTAINED IN THE
14TH REPORT OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE
(FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA) ON ‘DEFENCE RESEARCH AND
DEVELOPMENT ORGANISATION (DRDO)’
Percentage
of Total
(i) Total number of recommendations 55
(ii) Recommendations/observations, which 42 76%
have been accepted by the Government:
(Para Nos. 1.11, 1.12, 1.13, 2.17, 3.4, 3.7,
4.5, 4.6, 5.24, 5.25, 5.26, 5.27, 5.28, 5.29,
5.30, 5.31, 6.11, 6.12, 6.13, 7.4, 8.21, 8.22,
822a, 8.23, 8.25, 8.26, 8.27, 8.40 to 8.43,
8.55, 8.57, 9.7, 10.21 to 10.25, 10.27 to
10.29)
(iii) Recommendations/observations which the 5 9%
Committee do not desire to pursue in view
of the Government’s replies:
(Para Nos. 2.15, 2.16, 5.32, 7.3, 8.24)
(iv) Recommendations/observations in respect 3 6%
of which replies of the Government have
not been accepted by the Committee:
(Para Nos. 2.14, 3.5, 3.6)
(v) Recommendations/observations in respect 5 9%
of which final replies of the Government
are still awaited
(Para Nos. 1.14, 5.33, 8.56, 10.26, 10.30)
56