21
STANDING COMMITTEE
ON DEFENCE
(2006-07)
FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA
MINISTRY OF DEFENCE
[Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations contained in
the Ninth Report of the Committee (Fourteenth Lok Sabha) on
Defence Public Sector Undertakings]
TWENTY-FIRST REPORT
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
July, 2007/Asadha, 1929 (Saka)

TWENTY-FIRST REPORT
STANDING COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE
(2006-07)
(FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA)
MINISTRY OF DEFENCE
[Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations contained in
the Ninth Report of the Committee (Fourteenth Lok Sabha) on
Defence Public Sector Undertakings]
Presented to Speaker, Lok Sabha/Chairman, Rajya Sabha on 20.7.2007
Presented to Lok Sabha on …………………
Laid  in  Rajya Sabha on …………………
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
July, 2007/Asadha, 1929 (Saka)

C.O.D. No. 85
Price : Rs. 95.00
© 2007 BY LOK S ABHA S ECRETARIAT
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of
Business in Lok Sabha (Eleventh Edition) and Printed by Jainco Art India,
New Delhi-110 005.

(i)
CONTENTS
PAGES
COMPOSITION OF THE C OMMITTEE  (2006-07) .......................................... (iii)
PREFACE ........................................................................................................ (v)
CHAPTER I Report ............................................................................. 1
CHAPTER II Recommendations/Observations which have
been accepted by the Government ......................... 36
CHAPTER III Recommendations/Observations which the
Committee do not desire to pursue in view
of Government’s replies ............................................. 65
CHAPTER IV Recommendations/Observations in respect of
which replies of Government have not been
accepted by Committee.............................................. 67
CHAPTER V Recommendations/Observations in respect of
which final replies of Government are still
awaited ........................................................................... 77
M
INUTES OF THE S ITTING ............................................................................ 78
APPENDIX Analysis of Action Taken by Government on the
Recommendations contained in the 9th Report
of the Standing Committee on Defence
(Thirteenth Lok Sabha) .............................................. 86

COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE
ON DEFENCE (2006-07)
  Shri Balasaheb Vikhe Patil— Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri S. Bangarappa
3. Shri Milind Murli Deora
4. Shri Santosh Kumar Gangwar
5. Shri Ramesh C. Jigajinagi
6. Shri Suresh Kalmadi
7. Shri C. Kuppusami
8. Dr. K.S. Manoj
9. Ms. Ingrid Mcleod
10. Shri Asaduddin Owaisi
11. Shri Adhalrao Shivaji Patil
12. Shri Shriniwas Patil
13. Shri Rajendrasinh Ghanshyamsinh Rana (Raju Rana)
14. Dr. H.T. Sangliana
15. Shri Arjun Charan Sethi
16. Prof. Mahadeorao Shiwankar
17. Shri Manvendra Singh
18. Shri Balashowry Vallabhaneni
19. Shri Rajesh Verma
Rajya Sabha
20. Dr. Farooq Abdullah
21. Shri Jai Prakash Aggarwal
22. Shri Abu Asim Azmi
23. Smt. Sobhana Bharatia
24. Shri R.K. Dhawan
(iii)

25. Smt. N.P . Durga
26. Shri S.P .M. Syed Khan
27. Shri K.B. Shanappa
28. Shri Arun Shourie
29. Smt. Viplove Thakur
SECRETARIAT
1. Shri S.K. Sharma — Additional Secretary
2. Shri P .K. Bhandari — Joint Secretary
3. Shri Gopal Singh — Director
4. Shri D.R. Shekhar — Deputy Secretary-II
5. Smt. Jyochnamayi Sinha — Under Secretary
6. Shri Rahul Singh — Committee Officer
(iv)

(v)
PREFACE
I, the Chairman, Standing Committee on Defence (2006-07) having
been authorized by the Committee to submit the Report on their behalf,
present this Twenty-First Report on ‘Action Taken by the Government
on the recommendations contained in the Ninth Report of the
Committee (Fourteenth Lok Sabha) on ‘Defence Public Sector
Undertakings (DPSUs)’.
2. The Ninth Report was presented to/laid in Lok Sabha/
Rajya Sabha on 20 March, 2006.  The Government furnished replies
indicating action taken on the recommendations contained in the
Report.  The Committee took oral evidence of the representatives of
Ministry of Defence on 12 February, 2007 to have clarifications on
certain issues arising out of the action taken replies.  The Committee
also took evidence of the representatives of various Trade/Employees
Unions of Defence Public Sector Undertakings (DPSUs) and Ordnance
Factories on 6 June, 2007.  The Draft Action Taken Report was
considered and adopted by the Committee at their sitting held on
11 July, 2007.
3. An analysis of action taken by the Government on
recommendations contained in the Ninth Report of the Standing
Committee on Defence (Fourteenth Lok Sabha) is given in Appendix.
4. For facility of reference and convenience, the observations/
recommendations of the Committee have been printed in thick type in
the body of the Report.
  N
EW D ELHI; BALASAHEB VIKHE PATIL,
12 July, 2007 Chairman,
21 Asadha, 1929 (Saka) Standing Committee on Defence.

CHAPTER I
REPORT
The Report of the Standing Committee on Defence deals with action
taken by the Government on the recommendations/observations
contained in their Ninth Report (Fourteenth Lok Sabha) on the Defence
Public Sector Undertakings which was presented to Lok Sabha/laid
on the Table of Rajya Sabha on 20th March, 2006.
2. In the Ninth Report (Fourteenth Lok Sabha), the Committee had
made 45 observations/recommendations on the following subjects:—
Sl.No. Para No. Subject
 1. 1.5  to 1.13 Introduction
 2. 2.19 to 2.27 Hindustan Aeronautics Limited
 3. 3.19 to 3.21 Bharat Electronics Limited
 4. 4.12 to 4.16 Bharat Earth Movers Limited
 5. 5.8 to 5.12 Bharat Dynamics Limited
 6. 6.13 & 6.14 Mishra Dhatu Nigam Limited
 7. 7.21 to 7.24 Goa Shipyard Limited
 8. 8.12 Garden Reach Shipbuilders and
Engineers Limited
 9. 9.24 to 9.28 Mazagon Dock Limited
10. 10.7 & 10.8 Private Sector Participation in
Defence Productions
3. Action Taken Notes have been received from the Government
in respect of all the recommendations/observations contained in the
Report.  These have been categorised as follows:—
(i) Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted
by Government (Please see Chapter II):
Sl. Nos. 1.7 to 1.13, 2.19, 2.21 to 2.27, 3.19 to 3.21, 4.12 to
4.15, 5.8, 5.12, 6.14, 7.23 & 7.24, 8.12, 9.24 to 9.28, 10.7 &
10.8

2
(ii) Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do
not desire to pursue in view of Government’s replies (Please
see Chapter III):
Sl. Nos. 4.16, 5.9 & 5.10
(iii) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies
of Government have not been accepted by the Committee
(Please see Chapter IV):
Sl. Nos. 1.5, 1.6, 2.20, 6.13, 7.21 & 7.22
(iv) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which final
replies of Government are still awaited (Please see
Chapter – V):
Sl. No. 5.11
4. The Committee trust that utmost importance will be given to
the implementation of the recommendations accepted by the
Government.  In cases, where it is not possible for any reason to
implement the recommendations in letter and spirit, the matter
should be reported to the Committee with reasons for non-
implementation. The Committee desire that action taken notes on
the recommendations/observations contained in Chapter–I and final
replies to the recommendations contained in Chapter–V of the Report
be furnished to the Committee within six months of the presentation
of the Report.
5. The Committee will now deal with the action taken by the
Government on some of their recommendations contained in
Chapter-I of this report.  Chapter-I deals with the recommendations of
the Committee on which replies furnished by the Ministry are not
satisfactory and are not accepted by the Committee or replies to the
recommendations of the Committee have been accepted, but still in
some areas of implementation, the Committee want to further comment
or seek more detailed information. Accordingly in Chapter-I of the
Action Taken Report further comments, recommendations on some of
the replies have been given/made by the Committee for further reply/
seeking action taken statement from the Ministry.  The Ministry shall
as early as possible, after the presentation of this report, furnish
statements of action taken or proposed to be taken by them on the
recommendations contained in the Chapter-I and the final replies to
the recommendations contained in Chapter-V of this report.

3
INTRODUCTION
Need to confer more autonomy to DPSUs
Recommendation (Para Nos. 1.5 & 1.6)
6. The Committee had noted that the Ministry of Defence had
eight Public Sector Undertakings (DPSUs) which catered to the basic
strategic requirements of Defence Forces. The Committee had also noted
that defence production was a highly sophisticated sector, which
required state-of-the-art technology. A major challenge before these
DPSUs was therefore to constantly upgrade their technology and
products so that their products might be of world standards and may
successfully compete in the international market.
7. To achieve the above objectives, DPSUs needed sufficient
resources/funds to undertake modernization of their plants and make
investment in R&D, manpower training etc. Therefore, the Committee
were of the view that DPSUs should be given more financial autonomy
and allowed to raise resources through market-borrowing by way of
equity/bonds/loan from public. The Committee had recommended that
the Government should permit DPSUs to utilize a certain percentage
of the money received from market borrowing for modernization
purposes. It would ensure accountability and also increase the resource
bases of the organizations. It would also make them self-sufficient and
reduce their dependency on government funds. The DPSUs should
also be given more autonomy in decision making and in matters like
entering into joint venture/co-development and co-production
agreements with foreign countries. The Committee therefore had desired
that DPSUs should appoint a Committee of experts including some
outside experts also which might, from time to time, give well
considered advice to improve their products and bring efficiency in
the work.
8. The Ministry in their, action taken reply, have stated:—
“The Defence Public Sector Undertakings (DPSUs) have taken up
several steps to upgrade their technology and products.  Out of
the eight DPSUs, three are Defence Shipyards.
(ii) It includes Hindustan Aeronautics Limited (HAL)’s upgrading
Design and Production facilities with systems and machineries
required for a modern aerospace industry.  Besides, HAL have
commissioned computer aided design packages (Catia, Unigraphics),
CNC profilers, CNC machining centres, Coordinate Measuring

4
Mahines, Laser marking and cutting machines, Water Jet cutting
machines, Electron Beam Welding Machines and other sophisticated
machines. Apart from this, HAL has developed the Advanced Light
Helicopter (Dhruv) and under development is intermediate Jet
Trainer.
(iii) Another DPSU, Bharat Electronics Limited (BEL) takes up
development of new products proactively. Some of its recently
upgraded products are Flycatcher Radar, Frequently Hopping VHF
equipment, VHF Portable Set (VPS) Mk III etc.
(iv) Shipbuilding is a complex activity comprising Naval
Architecture, Mechanical, Electrical and Weapon disciplines.  The
shipyards focus is towards construction of a desired platform
capable of operating in a specified environmental condition and
capacity to house the state-of-art machinery/equipment/weapons.
Upgradation of Production Technology and Design features are
the issues of concern in shipbuilding.
(v) One of the Defence Shipyards, Goa Shipyard Limited (GSL)
has taken the following action for upgrading its technology:—
• Implemented ERP covering the entire gamut of its operation.
• Upgraded TRIBON software for design of ships and laying
out compartments.
• Integrated ERP system, Primavera Project Management Tool,
TRIBON software.
• Upgraded production technology by introducing ceramic
back up strip welding, Gullco automatic welding attachment,
bevelling machine, established modern electronic workshop,
updated Pipe shop etc.
• Appointed M/s. Royal Haskoning, UK as consultants for
modernization.
(vi) Another Defence Shipyard, Garden Reach Shipbuilders &
Engineers Limited (GRSE) has undertaken:—
(a) Number of licenced software (Tribon) for Computer Aided
Design;
(b) ERP System (SAP R/4) for better integration/coordination
among Production, Planning, Design and Material;
(c) Project Planning & Control of Shipbuilding activities using
PRIMA VERA software;

5
(d) Modular Concept in Ship Production to increase the
Outfitting activities to 60-80% at prelaunch aids with
(i) Modern CNC Plasms cutting machines.
(ii) CNC Pipe Bending machines.
(iii) CNC Oxy Acetylene plate cutting machine.
(iv) Boring machine with sighting facility.
(v) Extensive use of TIG/MIG welding.
(vi) Having taken strides towards updating the Production
Technology, GRSE now proposes to venture into
exporting a few of its products in the international
market.
(vii) With the Financial support received from the Strategic
Customers and also with injection of the internal
resources generated by Mishra Dhatu Nigam Limited
(MIDHANI) the Company has been able to commence
the Modernization plan. The modernization plan is
expected to be completed within two years.  The
modernization of the Company’s equipment and facilities
would enable improved productivity and yield while at
the same time ensure supply of quality materials to its
customers with faster deliveries.
(viii) The DPSU Bharat Earth Movers Limited (BEML) is
upgrading its products based on feedback from its
marketing network by incorporating additional features
that are on the competitor equipments. New equipments
are designed and produced to meet specific customer
requirements.  Apart from this, tie ups are made with
international companies for new products and these are
indigenised progressively by obtaining necessary technical
inputs from collaborators.”
9. The Ministry in their, action taken reply on Para No. 1.6, have
stated:
“Two Mini Ratna DPSUs, Hindustan Aeronautics Limited (HAL)
and Bharat Electronics Limited (BEL) have sufficient funds available
to undertake their activities and modernization of their plants and
products.
(ii) Another DPSU, Mishra Dhatu Nigam Limited (MIDHANI) has
been able to wipe out its cumulative losses and to register
improvements in its Reserves and Surplus.  These funds are being
ploughed back into business for procurement of capital equipment
as a part of its Modernization plan to replace its outdated and

6
obsolete equipment as a part of its Modernization plan to replace
its outdated and obsolete equipment.  However, due to its weak
financial health and its inability to service debts, MIDHANI’s
strategic customers have extended financial assistance both in the
form of Grant and interest free loan/advances.  MIDHANI could
consider borrowing from markets/public in the form of equity/
loan/bonds once its financial health improves and for next phase
of modernization plan.
(iii) One more DPSU Bharat Earth Movers Limited (BEML) has
sought assistance for funds for setting up an independent R&D
centre of excellence at Bangalore for Metro Rail coaches and such
high tech rail products and for upgrading metro manufacturing
facility at its Bangalore unit.  These two proposals are with the
Department of Heavy Industry.  BEML propose to invest around
Rs. 167 crore for modernization/upgradation of its manufacturing
facilities from its own resources.  Also, BEML is engaging
Consultants/Professionals in areas where in-house talent/expertise
is found wanting.
(iv) One of the Defence shipyards, Goa Shipyard Limited (GSL)
has initiated to raise sources from capital market.  The GSL propose
to appoint SBI Capital Market to render advisory services and also
to undertake the Capital restructuring exercise to enable issue of
shares held by MoD by way of offer to the public and also by
GSL itself.
(v) A comprehensive plan for modernization of GSL is in hand
which when completed in a phased manner by mid 2010 would
give the yard a quantum jumps in building and repairing medium
sized sophisticated vessels at competitive price with reduced build
period.
(vi) M/s. Royal Haskoning, UK, have been appointed as consultant
for GSL modernisation. The Preliminary Project Report submitted
by the Consultant has been duly approved by Board of Directors.
The Detailed Project Reports is under preparation.
(vii) Modernisation programme envisaged by GSL involves an
outlay of app. Rs. 525 crore. GSL is making efforts to garner Indian
Navy’s support to fund part of the project to construct MCMVs to
the extent of Rs. 237 crore.  GSL have also approached Indian
Coast Guard with a proposal to part fund the modernization for
long term repair/maintenance of Coast Guard ships to the extent
of Rs. 80 crore.  It is planned to mobilize the remaining

7
Rs. 208 crore through external commercial borrowings or by issue
of additional shares to the public.
(viii) Regarding joint ventures, GSL has signed following MoU/
collaboration agreements
• M/s. Wartsila LIPS Defence, France:
MoU signed with M/s. Wartsila LIPS Defence for
collaborating as their partner in India on project-to-project
basis and to pool resources for the purpose of securing
orders and manufacturing full stern gear in India.
• M/s. Alstom Power Conversion, France:
MoU signed with M/s. Alstom Power Conversion, France
for collaborating as their partner in India for providing after
sales service support to the Propulsion Control and
Monitoring System supplied by ALSTOM to Indian Navy
and Coast Guard.
• M/s. Iv-Nevesbu, Netherlands:
MoU signed with M/s. Iv-Nevesbu, Netherlands for
collaborating as their partner in India on project-to-project
basis and to pool resources for the purpose of securing
orders for System Integration of P28 ASW Corvette.
• M/s. Rolls-Royce Power Engineering Plc, U.K:
MoU signed with M/s. Rolls-Royce Power Engineering Plc,
U.K. for manufacturing/procurement of certain components,
sub-assemblies and final assembly and test of motion control
equipment for use in Naval and Coast Guard vessels
manufactured in India.
• M/s. VT Helmatic, U.K:
MoU signed with M/s. VT Helmatic, UK for design,
manufacture, test, trials and after sales support service for
GRP boats being built for Indian market.
• M/s. THORNYCROFT MARITIME & ASSOCIATES (AUST)
PTY LTD Fremantle, Western Australia, Australia:
MoU signed with M/s. Thornycroft Maritime & Associates
(AUST) Pty Ltd. Fremantle, Western Australia, Australia for
collaborating as partner on project to project basis to pool
resources in regards to shipbuilding projects for Indian
market as well as for export.

8
(ix) Similarly, another Defence Shipyard Garden Reach Shipbuilders
& Engineers Limited (GRSE) has embarked on modernization plan
at a value of more that Rs. 300 crore and also in the process of
setting up ship repairing facility at Haldia Port through joint
ventures/co-development and co-production agreement with foreign
countries if required. GRSE has appointed UK based consultant
M/s Giord for drawing up a modernization plan and the SBI Cap
for Haldia Project.
(x) A Committee to give well-considered advice to improve
products regularly undertake benchmarking meetings between the
defence shipyards to introduce the best practices prevailing in each
shipyard.  In addition to that, external consultants have been
appointed, on need basis in areas of energy saving, improving
safety etc.
(xi) MIDHANI in its quest to increase its turnover has been taking
up supply of value added item like Rings, Plates, Kanchan Armour,
large machined items etc., to its Strategic Customers like Space,
Defence and Atomic Energy. In this direction MIDHANI has been
making use of the facilities, that do not exist in MIDHANI, but
that are available at different PSUs (RSP , Rourkela) and Government
Organizations (Nuclear Fuel Complex, Hyderabad) and other
private sector/small and medium sectors (in and around
Hyderabad) and adequate delegation of powers exists to the Chief
Executives in this regard.  Though, these are not in the nature of
Joint Ventures, it facilities co-development and co-production with
efficient utilization of the resources available within the country.
(xiii) MIDHANI has sought the induction of experts in the field of
metallurgy management, finance, marketing etc., as independent
directions on the Board of MIDHANI. With the induction of these
Independent directors MIDHANI would be benefited with their
independent advise, foresight and expertise for the improvement
of the company.”
10. The Ministry was again specifically asked about the outcome
of the Committee’s recommendation to appoint a Committee for
improvements in the working and various products of DPSUs.  In
their reply the Ministry stated as under:
“The Ministry has not constituted a separate committee of experts
for improvement in the working and various products of DPSUs.
However, as regards the autonomy of DPSUs the status in each
case is as given below:—

9
Hindustan Aeronautics Limited (HAL)
Autonomy has been granted to HAL in decision making and
entering into joint ventures and co-development arrangement with
foreign vendors and private sector.  HAL is a Mini Ratna-Category
1 Company with autonomy and powers delegated accordingly.
The Apex Committee on conferment of Navratna status to select
Central Public Sector Enterprises in its meeting chaired by Cabinet
Secretary on 13.2.2007 has recommended conferment of Navratna
status to Hindustan Aeronautics Limited.  Department of Public
Enterprises is taking further action to issue notification in this
regard.  With the notification, HAL will have enhanced autonomy
and delegation of powers.
The Board of Directors of HAL is fully empowered to take all
decisions pertaining to investments, personnel and other business
related issues. Ministry’s approval is required only in case of new
programmes, where the commitment from the Defence Services/
Government is necessary.
The Board of Directors of HAL includes independent directors from
industry and finance in addition to the Government directors and
internal directors.  Independent directors contribute significantly
in the working procedures and systems by their advices in their
specialized areas.  In addition HAL, has been taking the services
of specialist consultants on need basis, in areas such as lean
management, Human Resource Development, Project feasibility
studies, etc.
Bharat Electronics Limited (BEL)
BEL is a Mini Ratna Category-1 and enjoys the autonomy conferred
on it in accordance with the status. The Apex Committee on
Conferment of Navratna Status chaired by Cabinet Secretary has
recommended conferment of Navratna status of BEL.  Notification
is awaited.
Bharat Earth Movers Limited (BEML), Bharat Dynamics
Limited(BDL), Goa Shipyards Limited (GSL), Garden Reach
Shipbuilders & Engg. Limited (GRSE) and Mazagon Dock Limited
(MDL).
All these five DPSUs have been conferred Mini Ratna Category-I
status as on date.”

10
Comments of the Committee
11. From the reply of the Ministry, the Committee observe that
the Ministry of Defence are not inclined to change their mind set to
improve upon the existing infrastructure and working of DPSUs in
order to make them self-reliant in the field of finance & decision
making.  The Committee note that only HAL & BEL have been
given autonomy in their functioning and they are financially strong
and viable, whereas rest of the DPSUs are financially not strong
enough and unable to sustain themselves without the outside help,
therefore, these DPSUs should restructure themselves in such a way
that they may come out of their losses and register improvement in
other sources and surplus.  The Committee are also concerned to
note that the Ministry have not constituted a separate Committee of
experts for improvement in the working of DPSUs, as recommended
by the Committee.  The Committee, therefore, while reiterating their
earlier recommendation, wish to further recommend that in order to
make DPSUs self reliant, progressive and independent in taking
financial and commercial decisions, they must be given financial
autonomy to raise resources through market borrowings from public
to enable them to invest money in modernisation of their units and
applied R&D.
12. The Committee are unhappy to note  the casual approach of
the  Ministry while replying to the recommendations made by the
Committee.  They have not furnished any detail on the follow up
action taken on signing of Memorandum of Understandings (MoUs)
and Joint Ventures, which were entered into by various DPSUs.  The
Committee desire that all the  information including date of signing
of MoU/Joint Venture and their implementation status should be
furnished by the Ministry as mentioned in Para No. 1.6 above at the
earliest.  The Committee further desire that steps must be taken to
make all DPSUs profitable so that they should not be a burden on
the exchequer, rather they should support and fund modernisation
programme of Armed Forces so that budgetary support given to them
by the Ministry of Defence could be minimised.
Need to spend a minimum percentage of profit on R&D
Recommendation (Para No. 1.7)
13. The Committee felt that in R&D matters DPSUs should not
depend only on DRDO/foreign technology . They were of the view
that in the fast changing technology regime, there was an imperative
need for in-house R&D centres in each of DPSUs so that they might

11
also themselves undertake technology upgradation. For this purpose,
a minimum percentage of the profit earned by the DPSUs should be
allowed to be utilized by them for their R&D centres. This will also
enable the DPSUs to avail benefit of the inbuilt provision in the income
tax law whereby they could seek admissible exemption in the income
tax for investments made in R&D. In this way DPSUs would be able
to spend more money on R&D, thereby taking the country further on
the path of self reliance in defence technology . The Committee also
felt that DPSUs should maintain effective coordination among
themselves in the R&D field to have optimum results therefrom. The
Committee had desired that in all & DRDO projects, users and DPSUs
should always be involved at the time of conceptualisation of the
project.
14. The Ministry in their, action taken reply, have stated:
(i) “DRDO can take up development of the basic technologies which
are commercially not viable but are of strategic importance.  All
the application oriented technologies are to be developed by the
DPSUs/industry on a commercial basis.
(ii) Hindustan Aeronautics Limited (HAL) has a policy of spending
2% of its sales or 20% of its profits, whichever is higher, towards
R&D. Similarly, Bharat Electronics Ltd. (BEL) could achieve high
level of turnover from indigenously developed products due to in-
house R&D efforts.  Revenue accrued due to indigenous R&D
during 2005-06 is 73%.  Out of this, 37% is from BEL in-house
developed products and 36% from DRDO developed products.  BEL
spends 4-5% of its turnover on R&D.  BEL has entered into an
MoU with HAL and OFB with an arrangement for mutual
cooperation and work share in the respective core areas of business.
BEL is also closely working with the Shipyards for providing
electronic systems required for their various shipbuilding
programmes.  BEL has evolved with DRDO a methodology to
participate in development projects from the time of
conceptualisation of the projects in the areas of Radars, Sonars,
Electronic Warfare Systems, Network Centric Systems, Tank
Programmes etc.
(iii) Four different variants of Offshore Patrol vessels namely;
90 mtrs, 102 mtrs and  105 mtrs Naval version and 105 mtrs Coast
Guard version to suit the customer requirements have been
developed by Goa Shipyard Limited (GSL).  It incurs substantial
expenditure in proving these designs by conducting model tests.

12
‘Society of Defence Technologies’ award in the gold category for
development of Technology & Innovation was awarded to GSL in
2004-05 in recognition of its effort in R&D.
(iv) Garden Reach Shipbuilders & Engineers Limited (GRSE) is
manufacturing Defence Warships/Patrol Vessels based on orders
from the Indian Navy/Coast Guard.  The build specification and
the equipment outfit are specified.  GRSE has limited R&D role.
GRSE’s R&D activities are limited to ship design & limited product
development of engineering/deck machinery items like Halo
Traversing System and Bailey Bridges.  GRSE will work in liaison
with DRDO for R&D projects.
(v) MIDHANI has so far developed more than 150 alloys through
in-house R&D efforts that constitute major part of the present sales
turnover. The in-house R&D has played an important role not
only in providing well defined technological parameters and
procedures for their commercial scale production and over the years
but it has also played an important role by developing several
grades and standardizing process parameters for better quality and
yield.
(vi) MIDHANI undertakes certain R&D activities that entail huge
investments in collaboration with DRDO so as to ensure that
synergies that exists between a Developmental Laboratory and a
Production unit are fully exploited. Currently, MIDHANI has been
sanctioned an amount of Rs. 1455 Lakh by DRDO for Development
of Supercast 247A (GTM-SU-DS-247 LC MH) for Turbine Blade/
Vane Applications (Project No. TD-P1-2004/DMR-217) jointly with
Defence Metallurgical Research Laboratory (DMRL), Hyderabad.
(vii) Bharat Earth Movers Limited (BEML) is proposing to spend
2% of its sales turnover on R&D. BEML has a well established
and equipped R&D centre set up with UNDP assistance and in-
house R&D.  It has developed a number of products and many
more are on the anvil.”
15. The Ministry was asked again to give break up of amount
spent by each DPSU on  R&D, they supplied the following information:
“(i) Hindustan Aeronautics Limited (HAL)
HAL has nine R&D centres established for design & development
of combat aircraft, helicopters, aero engines, gas turbines, engine
test beds, aircraft communication and navigation systems and

13
mechanical system accessories.  The R&D centres are equipped
with modern facilities, backed by competent engineers and
designers having requisite experience in various disciplines of
aeronautics.
Data for HAL is as follows:
2003-04 2004-05 2005-06
R&D Expenditure 313.81 306.63 433.58
(Rs. in crore)
% of R&D Expenditure 8.25 6.76 8.12
to sales
(ii) Bharat Earth Movers Limited (BEML)
BEML has a well established and equipped R&D centre set up
with UNDP assistance. The in-house R&D has developed a number
of products and many are on the anvil.
Data for BEML is as follows:
2003-04 2004-05 2005-06
Amount (Rs. crore) 14.98 16.88 19.85
% of sales 0.85% 0.90% 0.90%
(iii) Bharat Dynamics Limited (BDL)
(a) BDL has got in-house R&D.
(b) BDL has proposed to earmark a minimum of 1.5% of Turnover
from existing 0.9% tow ards R&D expenditure.
(c) Data for BDL is as follows:—
2003-04 2004-05 2005-06
Amount (Rs. in crore) 4.08 3.89 4.57
% of turnover 0.78 0.86 0.86
(iv) Mishra Dhatu Nigam Limited (MIDHANI)
MIDHANI has so far developed more than 150 alloys through in-
house R&D efforts that constitute major part of the present sales
turnover.

14
The in-house R&D has played an important role not only in
providing well defined technological parameters and procedures
for their commercial scale production and over the years but it
has also played an important role by developing several grades
and standardizing process parameters for better quality and yield.
The expenditure incurred in the last five years and percentage
R&D expenditure to sale is as under:
2003-04 2004-05 2005-06
R&D Expenditure (Rs. in crore) 1.05 1.75 1.69
% of R&D expenditure to sales 0.83 1.33 1.11
It can be seen from the above table the R&D expenditure has been
consistently increasing as a percentage of sales.
Further, certain R&D activities that entail huge investments are
undertaken in collaboration with DRDO so as to ensure that
synergy that exists between a Developmental Laboratory and a
Production unit is fully exploited.  MIDHANI has now been
sanctioned an amount of Rs. 14.55 crore by DRDO for Development
of Supercast 247A (GTM-SU-DS-247 LC MH) for Turbine Blade/
Vane Applications (Projects No. TD-P1-2004/DMR-217) jointly with
Defence Metallurgical Research Laboratory (DMRL), Hyderabad.
The Project is progressing on the expected lines.
(v) Bharat Electronics Ltd. (BEL)
BEL has evolved a three-layer set up to effectively address the
technology and product needs of the customers.
• All the 9 manufacturing units have their own unit
Development and Engineering (D&E) groups developing
new products in their respective areas.
• Central D&E group at Bangalore is working to develop
specialized technology modules for the unit D&E groups.
•T wo Central Research Laboratories (CRLs) at Bangalore and
Ghaziabad are set up for undertaking research in futuristic
areas with a view to identify and realize enabling
technologies relevant to the company’s products.
BEL has been introducing continuously new products to
sustain growth through its proactive development initiatives.

15
BEL could achieve high level of turnover from indigenously
developed products due to its concentrated efforts on R&D.
Revenue accrued due to indigenous R&D during 2005-06 is
73%. Out of this, 37% is from BEL in-house developed
products and 36% from DRDO developed products.  The
company is availing income tax benefits for investments
made in R&D. Estimated tax benefits for the year 2005-06
are Rs. 22 crore.
The Company spends on an average 4-5% of its turnover on R&D.
The entire funding for R&D is totally through its internal accruals.
The total expenditure on R&D during the last five years is Rs. 586
crore.  Data for BEL is as follows:
2003-04 2004-05 2005-06
R&D Expenditure (Rs. in crore) 130.61 127.14 130.13
% of turnover 4.66 3.96 3.68
(vi) DEFENCE SHIPYARDS – Goa Shipyards Limited (GSL),
Mazagon Dock Limited (MDL) and Garden Reach Shipbuilders
& Engg. Ltd. (GRSE)
R&D in Shipyards is primarily driven by professional Directorates
of Navy.  Navy provides concept design and the shipyards prepare
detailed construction design.  The shipyards are in the process of
exploring opportunities to set up companies in partnership with
global design majors.”
Comments of the Committee
16. The Committee note that Hindustan Aeronautics Limited,
Bharat Electronics Limited, Bharat Earth Movers Limited, Bharat
Dynamics Limited, Mishra Dhatu Nigam Limited are spending 8.12%,
3.68%, .90%, .086% and 1.11% of its turnover/sales on R&D,
respectively.  The Committee find that HAL is spending a good
amount on R&D.  Whereas BEL has spent 3.68% during the year
2005-2006 and 4.66% & 3.96% during the year 2003-2004 & 2004-2005
respectively, which shows declining trend of expenditure on R&D.
For Goa Shipyards Limited, Garden Reach Shipbuilders and
Engineers Limited and Mazagaon Dock Limited  there is no clear
cut allocation on R&D as it solely depend on the professional
directorates of Navy.  From the reply of the Ministry, the Committee
observe that Ministry of Defence is not implementing the

16
recommendation of the Committee to spend a minimum percentage
of the profit on R&D in letter and spirit. The Committee, therefore,
further stress that DPSUs, instead of depending on DRDO, must
strengthen their in-house applied R&D by spending at least 5% of
their total budget thereon.  The Committee also desire that DRDO
should facilitate the DPSUs in setting up in-house applied R&D by
way of giving technological support to them.
Restructuring of three Ship-building DPSUs
Recommendation (Para No. 1.13)
17. The Committee had noted that there were three DPSUs namely
Mazagaon Dock Limited (MDL), Goa Shipyard Limited (GSL) and
Garden Reach Shipbuilders and Engineers Limited (GRSE) engaged in
shipbuilding. The Committee had desired that those DPSUs which
were producing the same or similar kind of products or supplementary
to each other should be restructured/integrated in order to synergise
their resources. Such an integration/restructuring would enormously
help in modernisation of the existing facilities, besides resulting in
optimum utilisation of Human Resource and production capacity. The
Committee also desired that during the process of restructuring of
DPSUs, the interests of the labourers and workmen must be taken in
account by the Government.
18. The Ministry in their, action taken reply, have stated:
“There is no DPSU except HAL which produces aeronautical
products and its integration with other DPSU would not be feasible.
The defence shipyards have their own capabilities based on their
infrastructure. Depending upon work load, shipyards have in the
past offloaded work one to another. GSL has supplied stern gear
to Project 17 ships being constructed by MDL and to FACs being
manufactured by GRSE.  Issues like sharing of resources, know
how etc. are discussed with CMDs of other DPSUs.
MIDHANI manufactures critical materials required for the strategic
sectors including Defence.”
Comments of the Committee
19. The Committee are not satisfied with the reply of the
Ministry that the defence shipyards have their own capabilities based
on their infrastructure. Depending upon work load, shipyards have

17
in the past offloaded work to one  another. GSL has supplied stern
gear to Project 17 ships being constructed by MDL and to FACs
being manufactured by GRSE.  Issues like sharing of resources, know
how etc. are discussed by CMDs amongst themselves.  However,
they desire that these shipyards should build specialised ships
according to their expertise in the field and as per the market
demand.  The Committee desire that in order to strengthen, synergy
and optimum use of manpower and advance technology, the
management of these shipyards must sit together and have frequent
meetings to discuss and exchange their knowledge,  resources and
expertise available with them to make the country self reliant in
ship building.
The Committee are not satisfied with the reply of the Ministry
on restructuring/integration of DPSUs with same kind of products.
The Committee note that the Ministry on the one side considered
the proposal of merging of MIDHANI with the larger DPSU i.e.
HAL and, on the other side, when the Committee later on
recommended for the restructuring/integration of DPSUs, the Ministry
have replied that it would not be feasible. The Committee, therefore,
reiterate their earlier recommendation that those DPSUs which were
producing the same or similar kind of products or supplementary to
each other should be restructured/integrated in order to synergise
their resources.
HINDUSTAN AERONAUTICS LIMITED (HAL)
Need to formulate a strategy to give a better export orientation
Recommendation (Para Nos.  2.19 & 2.20)
20. The Committee were happy to note that Hindustan Aeronautics
Limited (HAL) had evolved itself into a large Aeronautics complex
and in many areas, it had built up indigenous comprehensive skills in
design, manufacturing and overhaul of fighters, trainers, helicopters,
transport aircraft, engines, avionics and system equipment. The
Committee, however, observe that there were still some areas which
needed to be addressed in right perspective in order to have optimum
utilisation and better exploitation of capability and potentiality of the
HAL such as increase in self reliance or indigenisation of product and
technology through more emphasis on R&D and exploitation of global
market through export.
21. The Committee had noted that HAL’s exports, in comparison
to its total sales, were very small. During the year 2003-04, the

18
company’s total sales were Rs. 3799.78 crores and the exports were
only Rs. 215.34 crores which was less than 6% of the total sales. The
Committee had viewed that HAL by virtue of its vast capability and
expertise should play a vital role in global market which can be
achieved by increased thrust on exports of their products. The
Committee therefore, had desired the HAL to formulate a well planned
strategy in consultation with experts so as to give export orientation
to their products and market them effectively in the global market.
For giving wide publicity to their products, Defence attaché posted in
various countries should be actively involved to play a positive role
in this regard. The Committee would like that a clear cut export policy
be laid down to tap the vast export potential not only for the HAL
but also for all Defence PSUs products.
22. The Ministry in their, action taken reply to Para No. 2.19, have
stated:
“HAL has identified Research & Development and Exports as thrust
areas to position itself as a global player as per its Mission. HAL
has drawn up a Design Perspective Plan identifying the products
and technologies to be developed in the coming years.  The plan
envisages Company financed R&D expenditure of Rs. 1000 Cr. for
development of new products and technologies upto the period
2012.  In addition to in-house plans, co-development with major
international companies are being planned in the areas of
helicopters, simulators, display technologies, etc.
To promote exports, HAL has drawn up an action plan and some
of the actions are listed below:
• Setting up a Joint V enture Marketing company for promotion
of ALH with Israel Aircraft Industries.
• Setting up export oriented shops for manufacture of engine
components and composites.
• Developing vendors in India to participate in the export
programmes with HAL as the nodal agency.
• Obtaining AS-9100 and NADCAP certifications.
(To increase the exports, mutual recognition of civil aviation
certifications is required. DGCA through M/o Civil Aviation is
being requested to get.)”

19
23. The Ministry in their, action taken reply to Para No. 2.20, have
stated:
“HAL’s exports have grown progressively over the years.  Export
has been considered as thrust area for HAL.  HAL’s perspective
plan envisages significant growth in exports for which strategies
have been formulated.  Export shops for manufacture of engine
components and composites are being planned to be set up at
HAL. HAL is making its best efforts for aggressive marketing of
its products and services for which target markets have been
identified and strategies for penetration in the target market have
been formulated. On a continuous basis, HAL apprises the Indian
Missions abroad regarding the progress made in its efforts in
promotion products and services and seek their help in taking
HAL’s proposals forward.”
Comments of the Committee
24. The Committee appreciate the measures taken by HAL to
identify the Research and Development and export as thrust area to
position itself as a global player as per its mission.  However, they
desire that HAL not only should do fundamental research in the
aviation areas but also expedite the matter with the civil aviation
authorities to obtain AS-9100 and NAD CAP certification to increase
the exports.  The Committee would also like to be apprised about
the concrete steps taken by the HAL to turn its proposed action
plan into ground reality in the areas like Joint Venture Marketing
Company, for promotion of Advance Light Helicopter (ALH), with
Israel Aircraft Industries and also setting up export oriented shops
for manufacture of engine components and composites etc.
Therefore, the Committee, reiterate their earlier recommendation
that there should be a clear cut export policy to encourage export of
defence items where the country has expertise and can provide
quality products on competitive prices.
Intermediate Jet Engine
Recommendation (Para Nos. 2.25, 2.26 & 2.27)
25. The Committee noted that HAL had taken up the development
of Intermediate Jet Engine called HJT-36. This project was sanctioned
in 1999 and as of now, two prototypes had been developed and trials
were going on with different engines. The Committee had desired that
for development of IJT a time frame be fixed and should be strictly
adhered to so that cost escalation etc. could be checked.

20
26. The Committee had noted that the engine for Intermediate Jet
Trainer IJT or HJT 36 aircraft was being imported by HAL in order to
minimise developmental risks. The Committee had desired, that HAL
should strive for an indigenous engine for this aircraft to make the
country self reliant in production of Intermediate Jet Trainer. The
Committee had also desired that regular supply of engines from
M/s Snecma, France and LPO Sateern, Russia should be ensured to
avoid future developmental and production difficulties.
27. The Committee strongly felt that HAL should strive to develop
Advanced Jet Trainer indigenously. In this connection, the Committee
had desired that concerted efforts of DRDO/HAL and other related
agencies be made to translate it into reality.
28. The Ministry in their, action taken reply to Para No. 2.25, have
stated:
“The Initial Operation Clearance (IOC) for IJT aircraft is planned
to be achieved by March 2008 and the Final Operation Clearance
(FOC) by March 2009.”
29. The Ministry in their, action taken reply to Para No. 2.26, have
stated:
“AL-55 I engine selected to power the Intermediate Jet Trainer
(IJT) in the production phase will be manufactured at the Engine
Division of HAL in Koraput.  Inter-Government Agreement for
the Transfer of Technology (ToT) for the manufacture and Repair/
Overhaul of this engine has been signed in Aug. 05 between the
Russian and Indian Governments. AL-55 I engine is under
development and is a major milestone as per the contract for
development.
HAL is co-ordinating with the Russian side for timely completion
of the engine development and also for the supply of engines and
setting up of manufacturing facilities at HAL.
HAL has acquired capabilities in design and development of small
gas turbine engines and test beds.  HAL developed PTAE-7 gas
turbine engine is being used on the Lakshya (Pilotless Target
Aircraft).  Development of engines of the class used on IJT and
other similar aircraft will require a timeframe of 8 to 10 years.
Initiating development work now will not match with the
requirements of the IJT programme.

21
Gas Turbine Research Establishment under the DRDO is developing
the Kaveri engine for the Light Combat Aircraft (LCA).  On
successful completion of productionisation of this engine, a scaled
down version of the Kaveri engine could be developed for
powering smaller aircraft in future.”
30. The Ministry in their, action taken reply to Para No. 2.27, have
stated:
“HAL has proposed to develop an indigenous AJT as a follow up
project of IJT.  A decision on a new version of AJT would be
taken in 2008-09, when the Air Force requirement is firmed up.”
Comments of the Committee
31. The Committee are unhappy to note that the development
flight tests of IJT are still being undertaken on engines from Snecma,
France and the production series is planned to be fitted with higher
powered AL-55 I engine from Russia.  The Committee are of the
view that trials should be carried out on AL – 55 I engines only as
for the production series, this engine was selected.  The Committee
feel that despite the passage of a long period since the project was
sanctioned, HAL has not successfully developed the engine of the
Aircraft and unfortunately it has taken HAL more than 7 years to
complete the outer airframe of IJT.  The Committee further note that
the Initial Operation Clearance (IOC) for IJT aircraft is planned to
be achieved by Mar 2008 and the Final Operation Clearance (FOC)
by March 2009.  The Committee again stress that HAL should make
all out efforts, to develop indigenous Intermediate Jet Engine in a
time bound manner, instead of depending on any foreign company.
The Committee would like to be apprised of the progress of trials
being undertaken by the HAL.  The Committee also desire that the
Ministry should take adequate measures so that this project should
not be delayed like Kaveri Engine or MBT Arjun.
BHARAT EARTH MOVERS LIMITED (BEML)
Need to redress the bottlenecks in the production quantities of metro
coaches
Recommendation (Para No. 4.13)
32. The Committee had noted that BEML also produced Metro
Coaches which were at par with imported coaches in terms of quality
and performance and had full order book position. The Committee,

22
however, noted that a major bottleneck was being faced by BEML in
achieving the production quantities as per delivery schedule i.e. delay
in receipt of “free supply items” such as steel, wheel sets, etc. from
Indian Railways. The Committee, had therefore, stressed that in order
to supply full order of coaches to Metro, it was essential that the
matter might be taken up with the Ministry of Railways to redress the
bottleneck coming in the way of achieving the production quantities
as per delivery schedule.
33. The Ministry in their, action taken reply, have stated:
“The Ministry had taken up the matter with the Ministry of
Railways to expedite free supply materials and wheel sets for
manufacture of rail coaches.  However, for Metro coaches, the
necessary inputs will be organized by BEML by interacting with
the overseas suppliers M/s Rotem, South Korea. “
34. In reply to a question on the problems faced by BEML from
Ministry of Railways/Ms Rotem of South Korea in free supply
materials, the ministry stated as under:
“Railway Board supplies raw material such as steel and wheel
sets as free issue items against all the orders placed on BEML.
However, there is always time lag between manufacturing of
coaches and its aggregates by BEML and receipt of free supply
items.  The delay in receipt of free supply items delay production
schedule of the coaches and semi-finished goods also occupy
limited track at the site.
For the current orders for rail coaches, Railway Board has directed
BEML to make own arrangements for procurement of wheel sets.
This has compelled BEML to find an alternate source, which would
be done through imports. The imports of wheel sets would also
require approval of RDSO and arrangements would have to be
made by BEML for inspection of wheel sets by the team of RITES,
RDSO etc.  This would further cause a delay in production and
supply of the coaches by BEML.  If the Railway Board is in a
position to continuously supply the wheel sets, this would hasten
production and delivery .
For Metro coaches, the necessary inputs are organized by BEML
by interacting with the overseas supplier M/s Rotem, South Korea.
The “Free supply” of wheel sets is only for the rail coaches and
wagons and not for metro coaches.”

23
Comments of the Committee
35. The Committee note that Railway Board supplies raw material
such as steel and wheel sets as free issue items against all the orders
placed on BEML.  However, there is always time lag between
manufacturing of coaches and its aggregates by BEML and receipt
of free supply items.  Due to delay in receipt of free supply items,
production schedule of the coaches and semi-finished goods are also
delayed.  However, for the current orders for rail coaches, Railway
Board has directed BEML to make own arrangements for procurement
of wheel sets.  This has compelled BEML to find  an alternate source,
which would be done through imports  and may cause problem to
BEML.
The Committee, therefore, desire that the Ministry of Defence
should take up this matter with Ministry of Railways to help BEML
to procure these wheel sets as early as possible so that production
schedule as well as long term strategy of BEML does not suffer.
MISHRA DHATU NIGAM LIMITED (MIDHANI)
Upgradation and Modernisation of MIDHANI
Recommendation (Para No. 6.13)
36. The Committee had noted that MIDHANI was supplying
special steels, super alloys and titanium alloys for strategic sectors,
which formed the core material not only for defence needs but also
for space and atomic energy programmes, and these alloys were very
crucial in timely completion of various projects of strategic importance.
The Committee were constrained to note that despite the critical
importance, the plant, machinery and facilities of MIDHANI had not
been upgraded and modernized for the last two decades. The
Committee also noted that a Committee set up by the Ministry to
review the working of MIDHANI had recommended for the
upgradation and modernization of the outdated and obsolete facilities
of it with adequate investment. For this  purpose, the Ministry had
moved a Cabinet note for providing a budgetary grant of Rs. 66.63
crore to MIDHANI for its modernization plan. The Committee, had
therefore, recommended that MIDHANI should be allocated adequate
budgetary grants expeditiously so that plant, machinery and facilities
of MIDHANI could be upgraded and modernised to save strategic
products from being jeopardised.

24
37. The Ministry in their, action taken reply, have stated:
“On the Cabinet note moved by the Department of Defence
Production for seeking budgetary grant of Rs. 66.63 crore, the
Ministry of Finance suggested that MIDHANI should consider the
option of merger with a larger DPSU such as HAL as long-term
solution.
However, with proactive initiative of the Ministry  a meeting of
the strategic customers of MIDHANI was called for to seek their
financial assistance for the Modernization plans of MIDHANI. In
the meeting held in February 2006, the strategic customers of
MIDHANI such as HAL, DRDO and Ordnance Factory Board
agreed to provide necessary financial assistance in the regard.
As a matter of mutual benefit, the above customers agreed to
fund the modernization of MIDHANI with Company passing on
a certain portion of the benefit of improved productivity and yield
due to modernization to these customers in the form of price
reduction and Customers being assured of supply of consistent
quality material and with faster deliveries from MIDHANI.  HAL
have agreed to consider extending interest free loan of Rs. 25 crore,
DRDO has agreed to consider providing equipment worth Rs. 15
crore, as part of Modernization to MIDHANI to facilitate production
of materials required for their programmes and Ordnance Factory
Board has agreed to consider placing their equipment worth
Rs. 15 crore at MIDHANI as part  of MIDHANI Modernization to
ensure quality materials supply for ordnance factories current and
future programmes. The balance funds required for modernization
would be met from the Internal resources of the MIDHANI.
The modernization plan of MIDHANI has already commenced and
orders for the major equipment being funded by the Department
of Space have been placed and others are being ordered.  It is
expected that the entire modernization plan would be completed
in two years.”
Comments of the Committee
38. The Committee had expressed their concern over not
upgrading, modernizing plant and machineries and other facilities
of MIDHANI for the last two decades. The Committee note that for
the purpose, a cabinet note was moved by the Department of Defence
Production for seeking budgetary grant of Rs. 66.63 crore.  However,
the Ministry of Finance suggested that MIDHANI should consider

25
the option of merger with larger defence Public Sector Undertaking
(PSU) such as Hindustan Aeronautics Limited (HAL) as a long term
solution.  The Committee further note that the strategic customers
of MIDHANI such as HAL, Defence Research and Development
Organisation (DRDO) and Ordnance Factory Board have agreed to
provide necessary financial assistance for modernization and
upgradation of MIDHANI.  The Ministry have informed that
modernization plan of MIDHANI has already commenced and  it is
expected that the entire modernization plan would be completed in
two years.  The Committee are dismayed to note that despite the
critical and strategic importance of MIDHANI plant, machineries and
other facilities have not been upgraded and modernized for the last
two decades and for this purpose, MIDHANI is financially dependent
on the mercy of HAL, DRDO and Ordnance Factory Board.  It is
expected that entire modernization plan would be completed in two
years.
39. The Committee, keeping in view the forgoing position
strongly recommend that Ministry of Defence should provide full
financial support to  MIDHANI for modernization and upgradation
of its plant on priority basis in a time-bound manner.  The
Committee are also of the view that MIDHANI should make a
adequate and prudent planning to generate its own financial
resources in order to become self reliant and to modernize its own
plant within its own resources so that situation may not arise to
consider the option to merge it  with the other larger defence PSU.
The Committee hope and trust that MIDHANI would follow the
recommendation of the Committee in letter and spirit.
GOA SHIPYARD LIMITED (GSL)
Need to improve capacity utilisation of GSL
Recommendation (Para No. 7.21 & 7.22 )
40. The Committee had noted that the order book position of Goa
Shipyard Limited was not healthy and there was constant shrinking of
capacity utilisation, which has gone down from 91.01% in 2001-02 to
30.31% in 2003-04. To improve capacity utilisation, the Committee
desired that the order for construction of small and medium vessels
required by Navy and Coast Guard as reflected in 10th and 11th
Acquisition Plan of Navy and Coast Guard, may be given to GSL. The
Committee further desired that the Ministry should make it obligatory
for each DPSU shipyard to constitute a Committee which besides
examining the need for creating resources for healthy order book

26
position, should also suggest ways and means for full and effective
utilisation of the installed capacity and submit its report to the
Government.
41. The Committee were constrained to note that GSL had not
made any export during the last five years despite the keen interest
shown by some countries on their products. As stated by the GSL, the
main reason, therefore, was the non-availability of financial assistance
to these countries for procurement of GSL ships. The Committee noted
that if soft finance was provided to these countries, the interest shown
by the countries can materialise in orders. The Committee also note
that two of our nationalised banks namely PNB and SBI are ready to
provide soft loans. In view of long term advantage to Indian shipping
industry in general and GSL in particular in terms of export of vessels,
the Committee recommended that the Government should give
necessary approval to the DPSUs to avail bank facility to extend soft
loan to the importing countries. The Committee further desired that
GSL should chalk out a clear cut plan to increase its export to fully
book its production capacity.
42. The Ministry in their, action taken reply, have stated:
“The Committee’s comments are noted. The Ministry is constantly
monitoring the capacity of the yards.  As recently as on 22.05.2006,
Secretary (DP) chaired a meeting with CWP&A, in which the CMD
of GSL gave a presentation on capacity of the yard with reference
to the Maritime Capability Perspective Plan of the Navy. Interaction
between the Navy/Coast Guard and GSL is constant.
The Committee’s recommendations are noted.  The Govt. has set
up the Indian Development and Economic Assistance Scheme
(IDEAS) as a window for the buyer country to avail lines of credit
through agencies like EXIM Bank.”
43. On a specific question about effective steps taken by Goa
Shipyard Limited to improve its order book position, the Ministry
replied as under:
“(i) The order book position in respect of GSL has improved.
The following are details of orders in hand and those
expected.
(ii) Goa Shipyard Limited has bagged this year an order for
building 3-nos of 90m Offshore Patrol V essels for Indian
Coast Guard.  It was won in an open tender wherein private

27
shipyards also participated.  Production of 1st vessel has
commenced in Nov., 06.  Discussions are underway to get
order for one more of the same class of vessel.
(iii) An order has also been received for constructing 3-nos of
Naval Offshore Patrol Vessels from Indian Navy.  Production
of the 1st commenced in Dec., 06.  Discussions are in
progress for obtaining order for one more of the same class
of vessel.
(iv) Based on the performance of our earlier vessel, Indian Navy
has nominated GSL for building one more Sail Training
Ship. Price negotiation will commence in mid Mar., 07.
(v) Negotiation is in progress between GSL and Indian Coast
Guard for placing order for 4-nos of Fast Patrol Vessels
(FPVs).  This is a follow-up of 5 FPVs which we built
recently and delivered 5-6 months ahead of schedule.
(vi) Indian Coast Guard has requirement for 16 nos of Inshore
Patrol Vessels (IPVs). They have selected GSL and GRSE
for construction of these vessels and asked the companies
to quote.
(vii) GSL have also been nominated for construction of Mine
Counter Measure Vessels (MCMVs) for Indian Navy.
Dedicated infrastructure facilities will be made available after
fructification of our modernization plan.”
44. On the progress and outcome of setting up the Indian
Development and Economic Assistance Scheme (IDEAS), the Ministry
stated as under:
“As on date, GSL does not have any export order.”
Comments of the Committee
45. The Committee are not satisfied with the reply furnished by
the Ministry of Defence on efforts being made to increase capacity
utilisation of Goa Shipyard. The Committee are concerned to note
that Ministry of Defence have not constituted a Committee to
examine the need for creating resources for healthy order book
position of the Shipyard and to suggest ways and means for full
and effective utilisation of the installed capacity of the Goa Shipyard
Limited as recommended by the Committee.  The Committee further
note from the reply that instead of implementing the recommendation
of the Committee with due seriousness, the Ministry seem to be

28
contended to submit that ‘Committee’s comments are noted’ and
monitoring the capacity of the yard is being done. The Ministry in
their reply nowhere have mentioned about the existing capacity of
the yard, capacity utilised, capacity to be utilised and the effective
& concrete steps taken to get the orders from the services, in order
to fully utilise the installed capacity.  More galling fact is that as on
date GSL does not have any export order.
46. Keeping in view the foregoing situation, the Committee
strongly reiterate that Ministry of Defence should set up a Committee
which besides examining the need for creating resources for healthy
order book position, should also suggest ways and means for full
and effective utilisation of the installed capacity and submit its report
to the Government.
The Committee also recommend that long term export policy
should be chalked out by the Ministry to attract and enhance the
export ships of GSL, which will not only result in higher foreign
exchange but also keep the order book position good and healthy.
Need for creating a strong R&D base of GSL
Recommendation (Para No. 7.23)
47. The Committee were surprised to note that GSL had not
incurred any expenditure on the important and vital area of R&D,
which showed that it had not taken up any R&D initiative of its own
and was relying on the designs supplied by vendors or depending on
the obsolete designs. As R&D was the base of technology upgradation
and modernisation of equipment and plant, the Committee had strongly
recommended that GSL must allocate substantial amount on R&D and
should undertake selected R&D project in close coordination with
DRDO and other Defence shipyards so as to upgrade and modernize
their products. The Committee had therefore desired that there must
be a Research and Development centre in every defence shipyard
especially in GSL with modern CAD/CAM facilities for constant
improvement in present level of designing so that they can compete
with the best in the world.
48. The Ministry in their, action taken reply, have stated:
“Committee/s recommendations are noted. The company will take
suitable decisions on R&D based on their resources and prospects
and these decisions will have to be taken by the Board.”

29
49. The Committee desired to know that steps are being taken by
GSL to give more thrust on R&D.  The Ministry replied as under:
“GSL is one of the few shipyards in the country which carries out
design of their own ships. Till date, it has designed Fast Patrol
Vessels, 90m Offshore Patrol Vessels, 102m Advanced Offshore
Patrol Vessels, 105m Advanced Offshore Patrol Vessels and 105m
Naval Offshore Patrol Vessels. Design of all the vessel that are
undergoing construction are borne out of our R&D efforts.  GSL
has also bagged the coveted Society of Defence Technologists
(SODET) award in the gold category for Technology Development
and Innovation.”
Comments of the Committee
50. The Committee note that GSL is one of the few shipyards in
the country which carries out design of their own ships and till
date, it has designed Fast Patrol Vessels, 90m Offshore Patrol Vessels,
102m Advanced Offshore Patrol Vessels, 105m Advanced Offshore
Patrol Vessels and 105m Naval Offshore Patrol Vessels. Design of
all the vessels that are undergoing construction are borne out of its
R&D efforts.  However, in reply to other query on amount spent by
DPSUs on R&D, the Committee note that the R&D in Shipyards is
primarily driven by professional Directorates of Navy.  Navy also
provides concept design and the shipyards prepare detailed
construction design.  The shipyards are in the process of exploring
opportunities to set up companies in partnership with global design
majors.
51. The Committee observe that reply furnished by the GSL on
investment in R&D and carry out design of their own Ship is not
clear.  The Committee note that on the one hand as per the Ministry
GSL has not incurred any specific expenditure on R&D and
improvement of design are effected through vendors and on the
other hand it has been stated that GSL is one of the few Shipyards
in the country which carry out design of their own. The Committee,
therefore, like to be apprised of the actual status of GSL for its own
R&D and carry out design of their own or totally dependent on
vendors in this regard.  The Committee also recommend that a fixed
percentage of turnover should be earmarked for R&D activities in
each defence shipyard to make them state of the art and globally
competitive.

30
MAZAGON DOCK LIMITED (MDL)
Modernisation/Upgradation of MDL
Recommendation (Para No. 9.24)
52. The Committee had noted that MDL had not been able to
qualify as the main bidder in shipbuilding tenders due to non-
availability of adequate infrastructure as compared to the private/
foreign shipyards. The Committee further noted that other shipyards
were blessed with low labour input cost and overheads and cut in
octroi duties and various subsidies. The Committee, therefore,
recommended that Ministry should chalk out a plan for development
and strengthening of infrastructure of Defence shipyard, not only for
effective participation in shipbuilding tenders but also to qualify as
the main bidder. The Committee had also recommended that a study
group should be constituted to examine the possibility of extending
exemptions to defence shipyards in the matter of subsidies, tax benefits
and excise duties etc. in order to make it cost effective and competitive
with foreign/private shipyards.
53. The Ministry in their, action taken reply, have stated:
“Development and Strengthening of Infrastructure at MDL:
Government has approved 10-year modernization and capital
investment plan of the company to maximize productivity of
existing capital assets by providing balancing equipments and
judicial essential replacements.
The infrastructure under development are as follows:
(i) Modular workshop with EOT cranes
(ii) Additional wet basin with Level Luffing cranes
(iii) Cradle assembly shop & stores for submarines
(iv) Upgradation of Design Software
(v) Upgradation of welding stations in submarine yard
Constitution of study group to examine possibilities of extending
financial benefits to defence shipyard:
The recommendations of the committee would enhance
competitiveness of the shipyards in a big way.
Formation of Study Group -  The Finance Ministry is considering
reduction of tax exemptions and to make Indian Industry

31
competitive at the global level.  However, the Ministry of Shipping
has already constituted a committee to examine the present Ship
Subsidy scheme.  At present the Shipbuilding Subsidy Scheme
envisages 30% subsidy for domestic orders for ships of length
more than 80 metres obtained through global tender process for
construction of seagoing vessels as defined in Section 3(41) of the
Merchant Shipping Act 1958.  The present scheme expires in Aug.
2007 and is under revision by the Shipping Ministry.  Seen in this
perspective, constituting a study group to examine possibility of
extending exemptions to Defence Shipyards alone in the matter of
subsidies, tax benefits and excise duties may be unfounded.
Primarily Naval Shipbuilding is a specialized activity and at present
customs duty concessions have been extended on certain material
& components. In this connection Ministry of Finance has written
to this Ministry to consider withdrawing tax concession presently
extended.”
54. On the present tax concessions given to Naval Ship Building
industry, the Ministry informed as under:
“In Shipyards, the following tax concessions are granted for
construction of ships for the Indian Navy & Coast Guard:—
(a) Sale of “Cost Plus” ships are exempted from West Bengal
VAT.
(b) Procurement of materials, equipment for fitment onboard
are exempted from:—
(i) Custom Duty
(ii) Excise Duty against certificate from competent authority.
(iii) Octroi
Municipal Corporation of Greater Mumbai has exempted the
material brought for naval ships from octroi duty based on the
certificates given by Navy.”
Comments of the Committee
55. The Committee keeping in view of the fact that Mazgaon
Dock Limited (MDL) as compared to other shipyards is not blessed
with low labour input cost, less overheads, cut in octroi duties and
various other subsidies, had recommended the Ministry to constitute
a study group to examine the possibility of extending exemptions to
defence shipyards in the matter of subsidies, tax benefits and excise

32
duties etc.  The Committee, however, are surprised to note that
instead of extending tax exemption to Defence Shipyards, as
recommended by the Committee, the Ministry of Finance are
considering reduction of tax exemptions and also have written to
the Ministry of Defence to consider withdrawing tax concession
presently extended.  The Committee take a serious note of the fact
and callous attitude of the Ministry of Finance towards the considered
recommendation of the Committee for giving tax exemption to the
MDL.
The Committee, therefore, strongly reiterate their recommendation
that the tax concessions already available to Naval Shipbuilding
Industry should not only be retained but the additional tax benefits
as suggested by the Committee should also be extended to Defence
Shipyards especially Mazgaon Dock Limited in order to make this
industry cost effective and competitive at the global level.
PRIVATE SECTOR PARTICIPATION  IN DEFENCE PRODUCTION
Recommendation (Para No. 10.7)
56. The Committee had noted that over the years the private sector
has grown in size and reach to form an important part of country’s
industrial base. The Committee were of the view that their capabilities
and resources should be made use of in strengthening the country’s
defence production. The Committee felt that with their expertise and
capability, the public/private sector/DRDO can contribute in building
self reliance and home grown technologies in major defence systems.
The Committee had also felt that there was a need to create an
environment where both public and private sector/DRDO can grow
together and be partner with each other. Further R&D efforts of both
the public and private sector should be synergised and, coordinated
by the DRDO. The Committee, had therefore, recommended the
Government to chalk  out a National Defence Production policy to
synergise the capabilities of public and private sector and DRDO in
defence production with greater emphasis on indigenous content. The
Committee had also recommended the Government to explore the
possibility of promoting defence R&D by involving private sector in
selective R&D projects.
57. The Ministry in their, action taken reply, have stated:
“The recommendations made by the Committee to synergise the
capabilities of public and private sector and DRDO in defence
production with greater emphasis on indigenous content and to

33
explore the possibility of promoting defence R&D by involving
private sector in selective R&D projects are agreed to in principle
by DRDO.  Modalities for their implementation need to be worked
out.”
Recommendation (Para No. 10.8)
58. The Committee had noted that at present 45% of the production
work was outsourced to private sector. The Committee had desired
the Government to explore the possibility of outsourcing more and
more work to the private sector particularly in areas where they have
sufficient infrastructure and technology to supply the required products.
59. The Ministry in their, action taken reply, have stated:
“The recommendation has been noted.  Greater emphasis is being
laid on outsourcing the production work to the private sector and
to progressively increase the same.”
60. During the oral evidence before the Committee, the
representatives of Trade Unions Forum on implementation of Kelkar
Committee Report and encouragement of private sector in Defence
Production, R&D, they submitted the following for consideration:—
“The composition of Kelkar Committee itself is questionable as it
did not include the major stake holder i.e. the employees. The
report is totally flawed in its approach when instead of reducing
import through strengthening the existing public sector defence
industry, it has embarked upon a policy of giving maximum space
to private sector in Defence.  It has given undue stress on export
of arm which is not a sphere where country like India would try
to project itself like USA or Israel.
** ** ** **
It deprives DPSUs and OFB of a level playing field with private
industries. OFB and DPSUs are captive industries of defence
services.  Unless they reach optimal capacity utilisation,
technological upgradation and necessary autonomy, the question
of so called competition with private sector does not arise.”
61. On being asked by the Committee regarding capacity utilisation
and Order Book position and outsourcing of work to private sector by
the Ordnance Factories, the representative of Trade Unions/Forum
stated as under:
“It is that in spite of the fact that the PSUs or the Ordnance
Factories have the capabilities, they are not being utilized as in

34
the case of Hindustan Aeronautics Limited.  I am not quoting
from my figures.  It is a figure from the C&AG.  Where the
capacity is there, even that capacity is being outsourced and
tomorrow the RURs will be placed position.
We have no quarrel about quality and time.  These are the factors
for any unit to develop.  Lastly, we would sum up with the request
that please see that the existing orders and existing capacity is
totally utilized before passing it to anyone else.  Please put pressure
on the Government on this issue.”
62. He further stated :
“Our point is for increasing self-reliance.  The first and foremost
requirement is that we must increase the capacity utilization, we
must increase the technological upgradation and we must improve
our own in house to see that whatever can be produced in our
public sector units, which have been functioning for the last 45 to
50 years, is utilized optimally before you go in for some other
source.
I would like this hon. Committee to go through the C&AG Report
on Defence Units wherein it has been specifically mentioned that
in the case of Hindustan Aeronautics Ltd., the capacity utilization
is not being made, and without seeing the capacity inside they are
going in for outsourcing and private parties.
The same reference is there in respect of the Bharat Earth Movers
Ltd.  This is the recent C&AG Report which has come during this
month. Our submission is that there must be an assessment of the
internal production capabilities and upgradation and also giving
autonomy to these institutions. Only after that, any further access
to private sector should be given.”
Comments of the Committee
63. The Committee had desired the Government to explore the
possibility of outsourcing more and more work to the private sector
particularly in areas where they have sufficient infrastructure and
Technology to supply the required products. The Committee, however
briefed by the representatives of Trade Unions that the government
are outsourcing the work to private sector inspite of the fact that
DPSUs have in house capacity to manufacture these products and
due to this outsourcing their manpower is sitting idle and optimal
capacity is being under-utilised, which has caused some anxiety in
the mind of the workers/trade unions.

35
64. The Committee, therefore, desire that DPSUs at the first
instance must ensure to produce self certified quality products on
competitive rates to meet the requirement of armed forces and ensure
optimum utilisation of their existing capacity and thereafter explore
the possibility of outsourcing work to the Private Sector where they
have sufficient capability as well as consider Joint Ventures with
them.  The Committee also feel that outsourcing should be done
only in those areas where capability of the private sector is proved
and after the optimal capacity of the DPSUs utilised.  The Committee,
again reiterate that DPSUs during the process of outsourcing, must
ensure strict adherence to the stringent quality standards of the
outsourced work.  The Committee would like to be apprised about
the action taken by the government in this regard.

CHAPTER II
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN
ACCEPTED BY GOVERNMENT
Recommendation (Sl. No. 1, Para No. 1.7)
The Committee feel that in R&D matters DPSUs should not depend
only on DRDO/foreign technology. They are of the view that in the
fast changing technology regime, there is an imperative need for in-
house R&D centres in each of DPSUs so that they may also themselves
undertake technology upgradation. For this purpose, a minimum
percentage of the profit earned by the DPSUs should be allowed to be
utilized by them for their R&D centres. This will also enable the DPSUs
to avail benefit of the inbuilt provision in the income tax law whereby
they can seek admissible exemption in the income tax for investments
made in R&D. In this way DPSUs will be able to spend more money
on R&D, thereby taking the country further on the path of self reliance
in defence technology. The Committee also feel that DPSUs should
maintain effective coordination among themselves in the R&D field to
have optimum results therefrom. The Committee desire that in all
DRDO projects, users and DPSUs should always be involved at the
time of conceptualisation of the project.
Reply of the Government
DRDO can take up development of the basic technologies which
are commercially not viable but are of strategic importance.  All the
application oriented technologies are to be developed by the DPSUs/
industry on a commercial basis.
2. Hindustan Aeronautics Limited (HAL) has a policy of spending
2 percent of its sales or 20 percent of its profits, whichever is higher,
towards R&D. Similarly, Bharat Electronics Ltd. (BEL) could achieve
high level of turnover from indigenously developed products due to
in-house R&D efforts.  Revenue accrued due to indigenous R&D during
2005-06 is 73 percent.  Out of this, 37 pecent is from BEL in-house
developed products and 36 percent from DRDO developed products.
BEL spends 4-5 percent of its turnover on R&D.  BEL has entered into
an MoU with HAL and OFB with an arrangement for mutual
cooperation and work share in the respective core areas of business.
BEL is also closely working with the Shipyards for providing electronic
36

37
systems required for their various shipbuilding programmes.  BEL has
evolved with DRDO a methodology to participate in development
projects from the time of conceptualisation of the projects in the areas
of Radars, Sonars, Electronic Warfare Systems, Network Centric Systems,
Tank Programmes etc.
3. Four different variants of Offshore Patrol vessels namely; 90
mtrs, 102 mtrs and  105 mtrs Naval version and 105 mtrs Coast Guard
version to suit the customer requirements have been developed by
Goa Shipyard Limited (GSL). It incurs substantial expenditure in
proving these designs by conducting model tests.  ‘Society of Defence
Technologies’ award in the gold category for development of
Technology & Innovation was awarded to GSL in 2004-05 in recognition
of its effort in R&D.
4. Garden Reach Shipbuilders & Engineers Limited (GRSE) is
manufacturing Defence Warships/Patrol Vessels based on orders from
the Indian Navy/Coast Guard. The build specification and the
equipment outfit are specified. GRSE has limited R&D role. GRSE’s
R&D activities are limited to ship design & limited product
development of engineering/deck machinery items like Halo Traversing
System and Bailey Bridges. GRSE will work in liaison with DRDO for
R&D projects.
5. MIDHANI has so far developed more than 150 alloys through
in-house R&D efforts that constitute major part of the present sales
turnover. The in-house R&D has played an important role not only in
providing well defined technological parameters and procedures for
their commercial scale production and over the years but it has also
played an important role by developing several grades and
standardizing process parameters for better quality and yield.
6. MIDHANI undertakes certain R&D activities that entail huge
investments in collaboration with DRDO so as to ensure that synergies
that exists between a Developmental Laboratory and a Production unit
are fully exploited. Currently, MIDHANI has been sanctioned an
amount of Rs. 1455 Lakh by DRDO for Development of Supercast
247A (GTM-SU-DS-247 LC MH) for Turbine Blade/Vane Applications
(Project No. TD-P1-2004/DMR-217) jointly with Defence Metallurgical
Research Laboratory (DMRL), Hyderabad.
7. Bharat Earth Movers Limited (BEML) is proposing to spend 2%
of its sales turnover on R&D. BEML has a well established and
equipped R&D centre set up with UNDP assistance and in-house R&D.
It has developed a number of products and many more are on the
anvil.
[Ministry of Defence OM No. H-11013/6/2006/D(Parl.)
dated 30.8.2006]

38
The Ministry was asked to give break up of R&D spending, they
supplied the following information:
“(i) Hindustan Aeronautics Limited (HAL)
HAL has nine R&D centres established for design & development
of combat aircraft, helicopters, aero engines, gas turbines, engine
test beds, aircraft communication and navigation systems and
mechanical system accessories. The R&D centres are equipped with
modern facilities, backed by competent engineers and designers
having requisite experience in various disciplines of aeronautics.
Data for HAL is as follows:
2003-04 2004-05 2005-06
R&D Expenditure 313.81 306.63 433.58
(Rs. in crore)
% of R&D Expenditure to sales 8.25 6.76 8.12
(ii) Bharat Earth Movers Limited (BEML)
BEML has a well established and equipped R&D centre set up
with UNDP assistance. The in-house R&D has developed a number
of products and many are on the anvil.
Data for BEML is as follows:
2003-04 2004-05 2005-06
Amount (Rs. in crore) 14.98 16.88 19.85
% of sales 0.85% 0.90% 0.90%
(iii) Bharat Dynamics Limited (BDL)
(i) BDL has got in-house R&D.
(ii) BDL has proposed to earmark a minimum of 1.5% of
Turnover from existing 0.9% towards R&D expenditure.
(iii) Data for BDL is as follows:-
2003-04 2004-05 2005-06
Amount (Rs. in crore) 4.08 3.89 4.57
% of turnover 0.78 0.86 0.86

39
(iv) Mishra Dhatu Nigam Limited (MIDHANI)
MIDHANI has so far developed more than 150 alloys through in-
house R&D efforts that constitute major part of the present sales
turnover.
The in house R&D has played an important role not only in
providing well defined technological parameters and procedures
for their commercial scale production and over the years but it
has also played an important role by developing several grades
and standardizing process parameters for better quality and yield.
The expenditure incurred in the last five years and percentage
R&D expenditure to sale is as under:
2003-04 2004-05 2005-06
R&D Expenditure (Rs. in crore) 1.05 1.75 1.69
% of R&D expenditure to sales 0.83 1.33 1.11
It can be seen from the above table the R&D expenditure has been
consistently increasing as a percentage of Sales.
Further, certain R&D activities that entail huge investments are
undertaken in collaboration with DRDO so as to ensure that synergy
that exists between a Developmental Laboratory and a Production unit
is fully exploited. MIDHANI has now been sanctioned an amount of
Rs. 14.55 crore by DRDO for Development of Supercast 247A (GTM-
SU-DS-247 LC MH) for Turbine Blade/Vane Applications (Projects No.
TD-P1-2004/DMR-217) jointly with Defence Metallurgical Research
Laboratory (DMRL), Hyderabad. The Project is progressing on the
expected lines.
(v) Bharat Electronics Ltd. (BEL)
BEL has evolved a three-layer set up to effectively address the
technology and product needs of the customers.
• All the 9 manufacturing units have their own unit
Development and Engineering (D&E) groups developing
new products in their respective areas.
• Central D&E group at Bangalore is working to develop
specialized technology modules for the unit D&E groups.
•T wo Central Research Laboratories (CRLs) at Bangalore and
Ghaziabad are set up for undertaking research in futuristic
areas with a view to identify and realize enabling
technologies relevant to the company’s products.

40
BEL has been introducing continuously new products to sustain
growth through its proactive development initiatives. BEL could achieve
high level of turnover from indigenously developed products due to
its concentrated efforts on R&D. Revenue accrued due to indigenous
R&D during 2005-06 is 73%. Out of this, 37% is from BEL in-house
developed products and 36% from DRDO developed products. The
company is availing income tax benefits for investments made in R&D.
Estimated tax benefits for the year 2005-06 are Rs. 22 crore.
The Company spends on an average 4-5% of its turnover on R&D.
The entire funding for R&D is totally through its internal accruals.
The total expenditure on R&D during the last five years is Rs. 586
crore. Data for BEL is as follows:
2003-04 2004-05 2005-06
R&D Expenditure (Rs. in crore) 130.61 127.14 130.13
% of turnover 4.66 3.96 3.68
(vi) Defence Shipyards
Goa Shipyards Limited (GSL), Mazagaon Dock Limited (MDL) and
Garden Reach Shipbuilders & Engg. Ltd. (GRSE).
R&D in Shipyards is primarily driven by professional Directorates
of Navy. Navy provides concept design and the shipyards prepare
detailed construction design. The shipyards are in the process of
exploring opportunities to set up companies in partnership with global
design majors.
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para 16 of Chapter- I)
Recommendation (Sl. No. 1, Para No. 1.8)
The Committee recommend that Government should formulate a
well planned export policy for defence products in consultation with
DPSUs and outside experts in the field. A strategy should be evolved
to give export orientation to the defence products and market them
effectively in the international market. In this connection, the Committee
also desire that, like in many countries, matters relating to defence
exports should be actively taken up with foreign countries at
Government level. The Committee also desire that Government should
appoint authorized agents to promote defence exports in international
market.

41
Reply of the Government
There are some DPSUs engaged in exports. Hindustan Aeronautics
Limited (HAL) takes the assistance of Indian Missions abroad for
promoting HAL’s business interests and appoints suitable selling agents
abroad for pursuing its products and services to potential customers.
The agent is appointed by HAL after confirming the credentials of the
agent from the Indian Mission of the concerned country.
2. Bharat Electronics Limited (BEL) interacts inter-alia with the
Ministry of External Affairs (MEA) and Indian Embassies to identify
the export opportunities. BEL has appointed local representatives/agents
in few countries like Sri Lanka, Indonesia, Nepal etc.
3. Garden Reach Shipbuilders & Engineers Limited (GRSE) has
been making efforts for export to Seychelles, Indonesia, Myanmar,
Bangladesh. The three defence shipyards – MDL, GRSE & GSL – also
engaged M/s RITES as Export Agent to promote defence export in the
international markets.
4. The only promising avenue for exports as far as Mishra Dhatu
Nigam Limited (MIDHANI) is concerned is Maraging Steel MDN 250.
However, Maraging Steel is in the restricted list of items for export as
per Government policy.
5. Bharat Earth Movers Limited (BEML) has been exporting a
number of Mining and Construction equipments to more than 30
countries around the world. The export made so far is around Rs. 750
crs. Efforts are also on to export, defence and railway products to
increase its exports turnover.
[Ministry of Defence OM No. H-11013/6/2006/D(Parl.)
dated 30.8.2006]
Recommendation (Sl. No. 1, Para No. 1.9)
The Committee note that an offset clause has been introduced in
new Defence Procurement Policy—2005. Government should give
necessary freedom to the defence establishments so that they may
utilise this clause in the best possible and effective manner to ensure
maximum benefit for the country. Besides, for more effective utilization
of the offset clause, defence PSUs should be given autonomy to enter
into MOUs with other DPSUs, ordnance factories, private sector and
foreign countries.

42
Reply of the Government
This is an area, which will help DPSUs to increase their business
volumes. Any policy decision to involve DPSUs to reap the benefits of
offset clause is most desirable. As regards entering of MoU with various
agencies, no restrictions have been imposed.
2. In view of the large volume of offsets envisaged through major
Defence procurements, HAL is formulating the strategies for liquidation
of such offsets. HAL has initiated discussion with potential companies
from domestic and private companies for strategic alliances to address
the future requirements. Similarly, BEL is interacting with international
suppliers like M/s EADS, France, M/s Boeing IDS, USA and M/s
Raytheon, USA etc. to take advantage of offset opportunities. GRSE
will utilize the off-set clause which has been introduced in the defence
procurement policy 2005 when entering into MoUs with Private Sector
and foreign countries.
The Ministry of Civil Aviation has commenced the process of
acquisition of civilian aircraft for Indian Airlines, MIDHANI has as
such requested help from the State Trading Corporation of India Ltd.
(STC).
STC being the nodal agency for Counter Trade/Offset in respect
of Ministry of Civil Aviation has requested Ministry of Commerce to
include MIDHANI to undertake offset arrangements. BEML has
concluded MoUs with DPSUs, private sector companies and foreign
companies wherever it is found beneficial for the growth of the
organization.
[Ministry of Defence OM No. H-11013/6/2006/D(Parl.)
dated 30.8.2006]
Recommendation (Sl. No. 1, Para No. 1.10)
The Committee emphasize that defence products manufactured by
DPSUs should be of top quality, at par with the international standards.
The Committee also desire that Government should formulate a policy
for all defence units including DPSUs to allow them to move towards
self certification of all their defence products. It will increase the
accountability/responsibility of DPSUs/Ordnance Factories/Private
Sector in maintaining the quality of the products and will go a long
way in establishing their creditability and quality assurance with the
defence services.

43
Reply of the Government
In HAL self certifications in non-critical areas/products is already
in vogue as a part of Approved Firm Inspection Organisation (AFIO)
concept covering majority of the work areas. A bare minimum
inspection and Quality Assurance coverage is provided by DGAQA to
flight safety areas including flight clearance. This is about 10% of the
total Quality Control (QC) activities based on risk analysis. At this
stage, it would be pre-mature to grant full self-certification to HAL.
BEL has been practicing Total Quality Management (TQM) under the
acronym Total Organisational Quality Enhancement (TORQUE), for
more than two decades. All the manufacturing units of the company
have been certified to the new ISO 9000-2000.
BEL has been working in the direction of Self-Certification and
obtained Self-Certification status for few of its products. The company
is in the process of getting ‘Self-Certification’ status for some more
products.
The company has adopted Business Excellence Model as laid down
by the CII-EXIM Bank Excellence Award criteria. Over the past few
years, five of the Units/SBUs have got recognition for their strong
commitment towards Total Quality Management principles. By adopting
the above strategies, it will help BEL in achieving global level standards.
GSL’s Quality Management System (QMS) is certified in accordance
with the international standard ISO 9001-2000. Quality Assurance Plans
(QAP) of suppliers of equipments are approved by GSL before
manufacture. These QAPs are continuously reviewed and updated for
improving the processes.
GRSE is strengthening its QA Department towards self-certification
of their products. The activity regarding Quality Assurance is under
General Manager level. GRSE has acquired ISO 9001:2000 Certificates
for Bailey Bridge, Deck Machinery & Diesel Engine Products.
MIDHANI has already obtained self-certification status from
Director General of Quality Assurance (DGQA).
Most of Mining and Construction equipments manufactured by
BEML are self-certified. With regard to defence, products, the equipments
manufactured by BEML are quality tested by DGQA agencies.
[Ministry of Defence OM No. H-11013/6/2006/D(Parl.)
dated 30.8.2006]

44
Recommendation (Sl. No. 1, Para No. 1.11)
The Committee note that DPSUs, in addition to defence equipment,
are also making hi tech equipment for non-defence sector, and thereby
diluting their status and character as DPSUs. The Committee, therefore,
desire that DPSUs should slowly get rid of the non-defence sector
items and focus only on defence requirements. The Committee further
stress that only after meeting their prime responsibility towards defence
sector, the DPSUs may use their spare capacity if any, for other sectors
for generating additional revenue.
Reply of the Government
In its bid to become a global player in the aerospace field, HAL
have identified diversification into civil aviation as one of the strategies
for growth. Participation in civil aviation will not dilute the
technological capability of the company as the requirements of civil
aviation in the present scenario are as stringent as for the defence
sector.
HAL has been providing support to the Indian Defence Services
by way of design & development, manufacture, repair/overhaul and
spares supply for both indigenous and licence manufactured products.
Upgrade programs, supply of spares and indigenization of spares and
rotables are taken up for non-HAL manufactured aircraft/helicopters
also.
GRSE is engaged for defence work and making Naval and Coast
Guard Ships, Deck Machinery items for onboard ships as their main
products. GRSE uses their spare machining capacity for outside
industries for generating additional revenue.
GSL has been catering mainly to the requirements of Indian Coast
Guard and Indian Navy.
MIDHANI is committed to meet the requirements of Defence, Space
and Atomic Energy Sector. On an average, about 80 to 85% of the
sales turnover constitute sales to these strategic sectors. However, in
respect of materials such as Molybdenum etc., company has been
making use of the capacities that are available after meeting the
requirements of the strategic sectors to meet the needs of non-strategic
sectors also.
In order to achieve higher sales, BEML intends to expand, diversify
and tap all the markets instead of depending on defence sector for
orders.
[Ministry of Defence OM No. H-11013/6/2006/D(Parl.)
dated 30.8.2006]

45
Recommendation (Sl. No. 1, Para No. 1.12)
The Committee desire that the Government while granting the
status of Mini Ratna, should not follow the criteria of Independent
Directors of the Company Board, in the case of defence establishment.
The Committee are of the strong view that for this strategic industry,
Government should evolve different criteria for granting the status of
Mini Ratna.
Reply of the Government
In Compliance with DPE guidelines, action has been taken to
appoint independent Directors on the Boards of HAL, MIDHANI, MDL,
GSL & BDL. Independent Directors are in position in GRSE, BEML &
BEL.
[Ministry of Defence OM No. H-11013/6/2006/D(Parl.)
dated 30.8.2006]
Recommendation (Sl. No. 1, Para No. 1.13)
The Committee note that there are three DPSUs namely Mazagaon
Dock Limited (MDL), Goa Shipyard Limited (GSL) and Garden Reach
Shipbuilders and Engineers Limited (GRSE) engaged in shipbuilding.
The Committee desire that those DPSUs which are producing the same
or similar kind of products or supplementary to each other should be
restructured/integrated in order to synergise their resources. Such an
integration/restructuring will enormously help in modernisation of the
existing facilities, besides resulting in optimum utilisation of Human
Resource and production capacity. The Committee also desire that
during the process of restructuring of DPSUs, the interests of the
labourers and workmen must be taken in account by the Government.
Reply of the Government
There is no DPSU except HAL which produces aeronautical
products and its integration with other DPSU would not be feasible.
The defence shipyards have their own capabilities based on their
infrastructure. Depending upon work load, shipyards have in the past
offloaded work one to another. GSL has supplied stern gear to Project
17 ships being constructed by MDL and to FACs being manufactured
by GRSE. Issues like sharing of resources, know how etc. are discussed
with CMDs of other DPSUs.

46
MIDHANI manufactures critical materials required for the strategic
sectors including Defence.
[Ministry of Defence OM No. H-11013/6/2006/D(Parl.)
dated 30.8.2006]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para 19 of Chapter-I)
Recommendation (Sl. No. 2, Para No. 2.19)
The Committee are happy to note that Hindustan Aeronautics
Limited (HAL) has evolved itself into a large Aeronautics complex
and in many areas, it has built up indigenous comprehensive skills in
design, manufacturing and overhaul of fighters, trainers, helicopters,
transport aircraft, engines, avionics and system equipment. The
Committee, however, observe that there are still some areas which
need to be addressed in right perspective in order to have optimum
utilisation and better exploitation of capability and potentiality of the
HAL such as increase in self reliance or indigenisation of product and
technology through more emphasis on R&D and exploitation of global
market through export.
Reply of the Government
HAL has identified Research & Development and Exports as thrust
areas to position itself as a global player as per its Mission. HAL has
drawn up a Design Perspective Plan identifying the products and
technologies to be developed in the coming years. The plan envisages
Company financed R&D expenditure of Rs. 1000 Cr. for development
of new products and technologies upto the period 2012. In addition to
in-house plans, co-development with major international companies
are being planned in the areas of helicopters, simulators, display
technologies, etc.
To promote exports, HAL has drawn up an action plan and some
of the actions are listed below:
• Setting up a Joint V enture Marketing company for promotion
of ALH with Israel Aircraft Industries.
• Setting up export oriented shops for manufacture of engine
components and composites.
• Developing vendors in India to participate in the export
programmes with HAL as the nodal agency.
• Obtaining AS-9100 and NADCAP certifications.

47
To increase the exports, mutual recognition of civil aviation
certifications is required. DGCA through M/o Civil Aviation is being
requested to get.
[Ministry of Defence OM No. H-11013/6/2006/D(Parl.)
dated 30.8.2006]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para 24 of Chapter-I)
Recommendation (Sl. No. 2, Para No. 2.21)
The Committee are also given to understand that proposal for
incorporation of direct offset clause while finalising the purchase
agreement for military/civil aviation products is pending for clearance
with the Government. Keeping in view the fact that this offset clause
would result in increased revenue technology upgradation and creation
of new business opportunities, the Committee strongly recommend
that Government should accord its approval therefore expeditiously.
Reply of the Government
Offset clauses in all high value purchases of military and civil
aviation products is required for the growth and upgradation of
aviation industries in India. Defence Procurement Procedure 2005 (DPP-
2005) gives guidelines for offsets in Defence procurements.
[Ministry of Defence OM No. H-11013/6/2006/D(Parl.)
dated 30.8.2006]
Recommendation (Sl. No. 2, Para No. 2.22)
Further the Committee, in view of the technological expertise
gained by the HAL, desire that it should invariably be involved at the
negotiations/discussions stage in order to obtain maximum advantages
during procurement of military/civil aviation products. The Committee
further recommend that technical expertise of not only HAL but also
of other Defence PSUs should be gainfully utilised by associating them
at negotiations/discussions stage while finalising agreements for
purchase of high tech equipments in their field.
Reply of the Government
All possible efforts are taken to obtain maximum advantage of the
Defence Public Sector Undertakings (DPSUs) while acquiring high tech
military products.
[Ministry of Defence OM No. H-11013/6/2006/D(Parl.)
dated 30.8.2006]

48
Recommendation (Sl. No. 2, Para No. 2.23)
The Committee also note that in most of the cases, indigenisation
is between 70 to 85%. The Committee feel that the remaining 15 to
20% are the critical components for which the country is totally
dependent on imports which can at any time be denied by foreign
countries. Thus, there is a need to spend more money on R&D efforts
so that country’s dependence on foreign sources can be minimised.
Reply of the Government
Indigenisation is an on-going activity at HAL. HAL has drawn up
a Design Perspective Plan identifying the products and technologies to
be developed in the coming years. Development of Accessories and
Avionics like flight control actuators, pumps, radars, flight date
recorders, etc have been planned. The plan envisages Company
financed R&D expenditure of Rs. 1000 crore for development of new
products and technologies upto the period 2012.
Development of some of the critical technologies involve long
periods of R&D work with associated large investments. HAL takes
up the development work based on the market potential and financial
feasibility. HAL is developing many of the technologies/products for
use on its platforms in partnership with DRDO laboratories private
industries and academic institutions.
[Ministry of Defence OM No. H-11013/6/2006/D(Parl.)
dated 30.8.2006]
Recommendation (Sl. No. 2, Para No. 2.24)
The Committee is happy to learn that HAL has developed ALH
Dhruv, which is a well equipped advanced Helicopter with capability
to operate in extremities of temperatures suitable to Indian conditions.
However the Committee note that production target of ALH Dhruv in
2004-05 could not be achieved due to delay in supply of 470 mm
diameter collector gear bearing by SNFA, France. The Committee,
therefore, recommend that HAL should try to develop such items
indigenously through Transfer of Technology or inhouse R&D to avoid
such delays. The Committee desire that besides DRDO, private sector
should also be involved in R&D/supply of the critical components so
that their expertise/capacity could be beneficially utilised. Keeping in
view the highly advanced technology and multipurpose role of ALH
(Dhruv) to meet the requirements of modern era, the Committee desire
that HAL should vigorously pursue for export of ALH. The Committee

49
also desire that HAL should enter into strategic alliances/business
cooperation for enhancing their export in international market.
Reply of the Government
Aerospace bearing technology is a highly specialized area which
has been mastered by only a few players worldwide. Developing the
bearing technology involves large investments towards facilities for
testing and manufacturing. Low volume requirements of bearings by
the Indian aircraft industry make it difficult for any industry to take
up the development and manufacture. However, HAL has been
pioneering in the filed of indigenisation wherever the scale of economy
is favourable to the industry.
HAL’s major thrust is on marketing of Dhruv. The helicopter has
got good export potential because of its multi-mission, multi-role
capabilities and HAL is fully geared up for export of Dhruv to various
countries.
HAL has identified target customers for promotion of Dhruv in
both civil and military applications. HAL is pursuing with these
customers aiming to meet their total requirement in terms of training
of pilots and maintenance personnel, Ground Handling and Support
Equipment (GHE/GSE), logistic support etc.
HAL has signed an MoU with Israel Aircraft Industries (IAI) for
joint marketing of Dhruv in international market. Accordingly, supply
of Dhruv to various identified countries is being pursued jointly with
IAI.
HAL is participating in various international Air Shows and
showcasing its capabilities to the international aviation community. Live
demo of Dhruv was made in two consecutive Air Shows in Paris
during 2003 and 2005 and in Singapore Air Show 2004, Air Show in
Dubai and in Chile which have drawn major attention and created
keen interest among various civil and military operators. This is being
further followed up by submitting proposals, presentations to the
customers etc.
[Ministry of Defence OM No. H-11013/6/2006/D(Parl.)
dated 30.8.2006]
Recommendation (Sl. No. 2, Para No. 2.25)
The Committee further note that HAL has taken up the
development of Intermediate Jet Engine called HJT-36. This project

50
was sanctioned in 1999 and as of now, two prototypes have been
developed and trials are going on with different engines. The
Committee desire that for development of IJT a time frame be fixed
and should be strictly adhered to so that cost escalation etc. could be
checked.
Reply of the Government
The Initial Operation Clearance (IOC) for IJT aircraft is planned to
be achieved by Mar. 2008 and the Final Operation Clearance (FOC) by
Mar. 2009.
[Ministry of Defence OM No. H-11013/6/2006/D(Parl.)
dated 30.8.2006]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para 31 of Chapter-I)
Recommendation (Sl. No. 2, Para No. 2.26)
The Committee note that the engine for Intermediate Jet Trainer
IJT or HJT 36 aircraft is being imported by HAL in order to minimise
developmental risks. The Committee however desire, that HAL should
strive for an indigenous engine for this aircraft to make the country
self reliant in production of Intermediate Jet Trainer. The Committee
also desire that regular supply of engines from MIS Snecma, France
and LPO Sateern, Russia should be ensured to avoid future
developmental and production difficulties.
Reply of the Government
AL-55 I engine selected to power the Intermediate Jet Trainer (IJT)
in the production phase will be manufactured at the Engine Division
of HAL in Koraput. Inter-Government Agreement for the Transfer of
Technology (ToT) for the manufacture and Repair/Overhaul of this
engine has been signed in Aug 05 between the Russian and Indian
Governments. AL-55 I engine is under development and major
milestones as per the Contract for development.
HAL is co-ordinating with the Russian side for timely completion
of the engine development and also for the supply of engnes and
setting up of manufacturing facilities at HAL.
HAL has acquired capabilities in design and development of small
gas turbine engines and test beds. HAL developed PTAE-7 gas turbine

51
engine is being used on the Lakshya (Pilotless Target Aircraft).
Development of engines of the class used on IJT and other similar
aircraft will require a timeframe of 8 to 10 years. Initiating development
work now will not match with the requirements of the IJT programme.
Gas Turbine Research Establishment under the DRDO is developing
the Kaveri engine for the Light Combat Aircraft (LCA). On successful
completion of productionisation of this engine, a scaled down version
of the Kaveri engine could be developed for powering smaller aircraft
in future.
[Ministry of Defence OM No. H-11013/6/2006/D(Parl.)
dated 30.8.2006]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para 31 of Chapter-I)
Recommendation (Sl. No. 2, Para No. 2.27)
The Committee strongly feel that HAL should now strive to
develop Advanced Jet Trainer indigenously. In this connection, the
Committee desire that concerted efforts of DRDO/HAL and other
related agencies be made to translate it into reality.
Reply of the Government
HAL has proposed to develop an indigenous AJT as a follow up
project of IJT. A decision on a new version of AJT would be taken in
2008-09, when the Air Force requirement is firmed up.
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para 31 of Chapter-I)
Recommendation (Sl. No. 3, Para No. 3.19)
The Committee note that 80% of BEL production in 2004-05 was
meant for defence forces. The Committee further note that BEL has
taken a number of steps to meet the demands of civilian electronics
sector also. The Committee feel, that while meeting the demand of
civilian sector, priority should always be given to the defence sector.
Recommendation (Sl. No. 3, Para No. 3.20)
The Committee are happy to note that BEL has established strong
relationship with DRDO and its labs in R&D activities and is also

52
doing concurrent product developments. The Committee, feel that BEL,
in partnership with DRDO, should intensify their R&D programme so
that more and more electronic systems used in defence equipments
can be indigenously manufactured. The Committee note that BEL has
put up proposal for Rs. 1000 crore grant to Planning Commission for
undertaking research in some strategic areas for which the Commission
has not given its decision even after a lapse of six months. The
Committee are of the view that such a project which undertakes
research to develop technology in strategic area, involving very high
expenditure, should be funded at Government level with close and
effective monitoring. They, therefore, desire the Planning Commission
to urgently take a decision on BEL proposal and make available
requisite funds so that work on the project can start at an early date.
The Committee further desire that BEL should also invest in R&D
from the profit earned by the company. In this regard, BEL can also
take advantage of inbuilt provision in income tax laws wherein they
can seek suitable exemption in the income tax for the investments
made in R&D. The Committee feel that BEL, besides DRDO, should
also coordinate with other defence public sector undertakings in R&D
field. It should invest money only on those areas which have not been
covered by any of the PSUs so as to avoid duplication of efforts. The
Committee also desire the Ministry to explore the possibility of
involving private sector in various selective R&D projects and
manufacturing of various products.
Recommendation (Sl. No. 3, Para No. 3.21)
The Committee also feel that quality upgradation and
costeffectiveness of defence products are imperative to keep the Defence
PSUs, including BEL, vigilant, agile and responsive to the needs and
concern of Defence forces. The Committee therefore desire that BEL
should continuously introduce new or upgraded products every year
based on in-house/indigenous technology in its efforts to be in the
forefront of Technology. The Committee feel that to achieve the goals
of modernisation, concerted efforts need to be made with a clear
mandate. Production of items should be undertaken side by side with
quality upgradation and cost effectiveness so as to attract global market
also.
Reply of the Government (Para Nos. 3.19 to 3.21)
BEL continues to give priority to the Defence Sector. Planning
Commission has since regretted their ability to fund investment in
strategic areas. BEL invests about 4-5% of its’ turnover on R&D. The

53
Committee’s recommendations regarding avoiding duplication of
investment is noted.
[Ministry of Defence OM No. H-11013/6/2006/D(Parl.)
dated 30.8.2006]
Recommendation (Sl. No. 4, Para No. 4.12)
The Committee note that BEML Bangalore was established basically
as a manufacturing unit for rail coaches and related rail products. The
Committee, however, observe that since 1998-99, the installed capacity
of BEML for 400 coaches has not been fully exploited due to lack of
orders from Indian Railways. The Committee feel that Ministry of
Defence should take up the matter with the Ministry of Railways at
the highest level so that sufficient orders are placed on BEML and its
capacity could be utilised fully. The Committee would like to have
details of efforts made by the Ministry in this regard.
Reply of the Government
On persistent follow up and timely intervention by MoD, BEML
has been getting orders for around 300 rail coaches from Indian
Railways from the last 2 years. However, company has the capacity to
easily produce another 100 more rail coaches which may be looked
into by IR.
[Ministry of Defence OM No. H-11013/6/2006/D(Parl.)
dated 30.8.2006]
Recommendation (Sl. No. 4, Para No. 4.13)
The Committee note that BEML also produces Metro Coaches which
are at par with imported coaches in terms of quality and performance
and has full order book position. The Committee, however, note that
a major bottleneck is being faced by BEML in achieving the production
quantities as per delivery schedule  i.e. delay in receipt of “free supply
items” such as steel, wheel sets, etc. from Indian Railways. The
Committee, therefore, stress that in order to supply full order of coaches
to Metro, it is essential that the matter may be taken up with the
Ministry of Railways to redress the bottleneck coming in the way of
achieving the production quantities as per delivery schedule.
Reply of the Government
The Ministry had taken up the matter with the Ministry of Railways
to expedite free supply materials and wheel sets for manufacture of

54
rail coaches. However, for Metro coaches, the necessary inputs will be
organized by BEML by interacting with the overseas suppliers M/s.
Rotem, South Korea.
[Ministry of Defence OM No. H-11013/6/2006/D(Parl.)
dated 30.8.2006]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para 35 of Chapter-I)
Recommendation (Sl. No. 4, Para No. 4.14)
The Committee note that BEML which is supplying critical and
essential ground support equipment to the Defence services, is facing
problem of placement of continuous orders from them. The Committee,
therefore, desire that the Ministry should ensure that sufficient orders
are made available to BEML in consonance with the perspective plan
of Defence services.
Reply of the Government
There has been drastic improvement in placement of orders by
MoD on BEML in the year 2005-06 and the trend is likely to continue
in the coming year.
[Ministry of Defence OM No. H-11013/6/2006/D(Parl.)
dated 30.8.2006]
Recommendation (Sl. No. 4, Para No. 4.15)
The Committee are concerned to note that there has been a
continuous rise in import content due to increase in the sales turnover
of the company. The Committee are of the view that there is an
imperative need to prepare a long term perspective plan to reduce
import content in a planned and phased manner and to make the
company self-reliant.
Reply of the Government
Phased indigenisation programme for all the products being
supplied to defence viz., Tatra vehicles, Armoured recovery vehicles,
etc., has been drawn up to achieve self reliance and required technical
inputs/support is being received from our collaborators. Manufacturing
shops are being geared up for this purpose.
[Ministry of Defence OM No. H-11013/6/2006/D(Parl.)
dated 30.8.2006]

55
Recommendation (Sl. No. 5, Para No. 5.8)
The Committee note with concern that capacity utilisation of the
Bharat Dynamics Limited (BDL) in terms of both manpower and
machine has been decreasing since 2002-03 and the order book position
has also gone down from Rs. 2479.46 on 1 April 2004 to Rs. 1957.00
on 1 April 2005. To maximise the utilisation of the capacity of BDL,
the Committee recommend that all missiles and torpedoes that are
indigenously developed or planned for procurement from abroad under
ToT, should be given for production to BDL.
Reply of the Government
As observed by the Committee, the reduction in capacity utilization
of BDL is due to the reason that the major on going projects viz.
Milan 2 and Konkurs ATGMs have been tapering off keeping in tune
the operational requirements of the Services. However, new projects
like Konkurs-M and INVAR have been awarded to BDL, which in
turn help the company to improve its capacity utilization. It may please
be noted that these projects are being taken up in a phased manner
of technology transfer wherein initially utilization will be low but
progressively when these projects enter the component level indigenous
production, a substantial rise in capacity utilization would occur. In
procurement of missiles systems with ToT leading to licensed
production in the country. BDL would be the proposed production
agency, though the decision will be made on a case-to-case basic as
provided for in the Defence Procurement Procedure 2005.
[Ministry of Defence OM No. H-11013/6/2006/D(Parl.)
dated 30.8.2006]
Recommendation (Sl. No. 5, Para No. 5.12)
The Committee note that the Government has not granted status
of Mini Ratna to BDL as it does not fulfil the prescribed criteria of
independent Directors on the Company Board. The Committee have
also been informed of the advantage of Mini Ratna status to PSUs i.e.
it provides them more functional autonomy and enables them to form
joint ventures. The Committee are of the strong view that for strategic
industry like BDL, different criteria for granting Mini Ratna status
should be prescribed. Because of its very nature, defence industry
cannot have independent Directors on Company Board. The Committee,
therefore, recommend the Government to review the criteria for
granting status of Mini Ratna particularly to the defence industries
including BDL so as to enable it to avail the benefit of Mini Ratna.

56
Reply of the Government
Action for restructure for Board of Directors is being done as per
the guidelines of the Department of Public Enterprises (DPE).
[Ministry of Defence OM No. H-11013/6/2006/D(Parl.)
dated 30.8.2006]
Recommendation (Sl. No. 6, Para No. 6.14)
The Committee note that the Indian Army and other Para Military
Forces are using heavier jackets weighing more than 9 kgs which are
being manufactured by MIDHANI. The Committee are given to
understand that light weighted imported bullet proof jackets are being
demanded by the Indian Army and other Para Military Forces and
MIDHANI has not been able to produce that quality of LWBPJ.
Therefore, the Committee desire that MIDHANI should collaborate with
the foreign manufacturer for making light weight BPJs, so that our
forces could increase their work efficiency by getting lighter BPJs and
country can become self-reliant in this field also.
Reply of the Government
MIDHANI is in the business of 100% indigenous manufacture and
supply of Body Armour Jackets and Bullet Proof Patka (Head Gear)
for several years. The company has so far manufactured and supplied
over 70,000 of them to Armed Forces and Para Military Forces in the
country. These Jackets are manufactured with heavy Armour steel and
weigh about 9 to 9.5 Kgs.
Indian Army and other Para Military Forces have been seeking
Light Weight Bullet Proof Jackets (LWBPJ) which weigh about 3.5 to
4.5 Kgs. These LWBPJs are manufactured with Soft Armour Panel (SAP).
SAP are made of hybrid materials like aramid and unidirectional
polyethylene and are in the nature of composites and not materials.
MIDHANI’s core business is Development and Manufacture of
Super Alloys, Titanium and Titanium Alloys, Molybdenum and other
special steels. The technology required for Composites are different
and are not compatible with MIDHANI’s current core business.
Ordnance Factory Board is currently assigned with the responsibility
of meeting the requirement of LWBPJ’s of the Indian Armed Forces.
[Ministry of Defence OM No. H-11013/6/2006/D(Parl.)
dated 30.8.2006]

57
Recommendation (Sl. No. 7, Para No. 7.23)
The Committee are surprised to note that GSL has not incurred
any expenditure on the important and vital area of R&D, which shows
that it has not taken up any R&D initiative of its own and is relying
on the designs supplied by vendors or depending on the obsolete
designs. As R&D is the base of technology upgradation and
modernisation of equipment and plant, the Committee strongly
recommend that GSL must allocate substantial amount on R&D and
should undertake selected R&D project in close coordination with
DRDO and other Defence shipyards so as to upgrade and modernize
their products. The Committee further desire that there must be a
Research and Development centre in every Defence shipyard, especially
in GSL with modern CAD/CAM facilities for constant improvement
in present level of designing so that they can compete with the best
in the world.
Reply of the Government
Committee’s recommendations are noted. The company will take
suitable decisions on R&D based on their resources and prospects and
these decisions will have to be taken by the Board.
[Ministry of Defence OM No. H-11013/6/2006/D(Parl.)
dated 30.8.2006]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Paras 50 & 51 of Chapter-I)
Recommendation (Sl. No. 7, Para No. 7.24)
The Committee note that GSL is taking various steps to modernise
its facilities with an investment of Rs. 241 crore, which is to be arranged
internally during the 10th and 12th Five Year Plan period for high
technology ships. The Committee hope that concerted and timely action
will be taken by the GSL to implement its modernisation and
upgradation plan in order to generate its internal resources for the
purpose. The Committee are of the opinion that besides special
modernisation plan there is a need to put concerted efforts by GSL to
make modernisation activities as a part of the annual budgetary exercise
of the company.
Reply of the Government
Noted. The company will take a suitable decision based on
resources and constraints and these decisions will have to be ratified

58
by the Board of Directors. The modernization plan of GSL is expected
to be ready soon.
[Ministry of Defence OM No. H-11013/6/2006/D(Parl.)
dated 30.8.2006]
Recommendation (Sl. No. 8, Para No. 8.12)
The Committee note that there has been underutilisation of capacity
of Garden Reach Shipbuilders and Engineers Limited (GRSE) since
2001-2002 due to shortage of workload. The Committee are given to
understand that the Navy did not acquire any ships in GRSE’s range
of production during this period. The Committee further note that
there has been a negligible R&D expenditure by GRSE during the last
five years. As regards the modernisation and upgradation of the GRSE,
the Committee note that phase I of the modernisation of project has
already been completed, phase II was expected to be completed by
July 2005 and about phase III, the detailed project report has since
been submitted by the consultant from UK with certain added features
and the same is to be approved by the Board before its finalisation.
The Committee are informed that on completion of modernisation plan,
GRSE will be able to drastically bring down the total production time
of warships, which in turn will help to obtian optimum capacity
utilisation of existing infrastructure and available manpower. The
Committee, therefore, strongly recommend that Ministry should make
all concerted efforts to finalise and implement the modernisation plan
in a time bound manner without further showing time and cost overrun
so that intended benefits could be availed by the company. The
Committee also desire that the Indian Navy and Coast Guard should
prepare and give their actual shipbuilding requirements to the GRSE,
so that it may also prepare its perspective plan accordingly and
available capacity and manpower may not go underutilised. As regards
the constraints being faced by GRSE, the Committee desire the Ministry
to take initiative for signing and finalisation of MoU between the
GRSE and Kolkata Port Trust (KPT) so that its refit constraints due to
non-availability of dry dock facilities, could be resolved.
Reply of the Government
Modernisation Phase I & II has been completed. Phase-III proposal
is under preparation by Consultant, Gifford, UK. The modernisation
plan is expected to be completed by 2010 which will help GRSE
drastically to bring down the total production time of warships. GRSE
has received orders for 4 ASW Corvette and 10 Waterjet FAC in
addition to the existing 3 LSTL under production. The available capacity

59
will be utilised to the fullest extent and in addition possession of
Rajabagan Dockyard is in the advanced stage.
[Ministry of Defence OM No. H-11013/6/2006/D(Parl.)
dated 30.8.2006]
Recommendation (Sl. No. 9, Para No. 9.24)
The Committee note that MDL has not been able to qualify as the
main bidder in shipbuilding tenders due to non-availability of adequate
infrastructure as compared to the private/foreign shipyards. The
Committee further note that other shipyards are blessed with low
labour input cost and overheads and cut in octroi duties and various
subsidies. The Committee, therefore, recommend that Ministry should
chalk out a plan for development and strengthening of infrastructure
of Defence shipyard, not only for effective participation in shipbuilding
tenders but also to qualify as the main bidder. The Committee also
recommend that a study group should be constituted to examine the
possibility of extending exemptions to defence shipyards in the matter
of subsidies, tax benefits and excise duties etc. in order to make it cost
effective and competitive with foreign/private shipyards.
Reply of the Government
Development and Strengthening of Infrastructure at MDL:
Government has approved 10-years modernization and capital
investment plan of the company to maximize productivity of existing
capital assets by providing balancing equipments and judicial essential
replacements.
The infrastructure under development are as follows:
(VI) Modular workshop with EOT cranes
(VII) Additional wet basin with Level Luffing cranes
(VIII) Cradle assembly shop & stores for submarines
(IX) Upgradation of Design Software
(X) Upgradation of welding stat ions in submarine yard
Constitution of study group to examine possibilities of extending
financial benefits to defence shipyard:
The recommendations of the Committee would enhance
competitiveness of the shipyards in a big way.

60
Formation of Study Group— The Finance Ministry is considering
reduction of tax exemptions and to make Indian Industry competitive
at the global level. However, the Ministry of Shipping has already
constituted a committee to examine the present Ship Subsidy Scheme.
At present the Shipbuilding Subsidy Scheme envisages 30% subsidy
for domestic orders for ships of length more than 80 metres obtained
through global tender process for construction of seagoing vessels as
defined in Section 3(41) of the Merchant Shipping Act 1958. The present
scheme expires in Aug. 2007 and is under revision by the Shipping
Ministry. Seen in this perspective, constituting a study group to examine
possibility of extending exemptions to Defence Shipyards alone in the
matter of subsidies, tax benefits and excise duties may be unfounded.
Primarily Naval Shipbuilding is a specialized activity and at present
customs duty concessions have been extended on certain material &
components. In this connection Ministry of Finance has written to this
Ministry to consider withdrawing tax concession presently extended.
[Ministry of Defence OM No. H-11013/6/2006/D(Parl.)
dated 30.8.2006]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para 55 of Chapter-I)
Recommendation (Sl. No. 9, Para No. 9.25)
The Committee also note that there has not been any export by
the company during the last five years. The Committee hope that
after substantial investment for modernisation of shipyard MDL, it
would be possible to initiate and enhance the export at the optimum
level. For this purpose, the Committee desire that Government should
explore the possibility of subsidising shipyards heavily and to extend
soft loan credit facility to the buyers as is being done by some other
countries.
Reply of the Government
At present there is no provision for extension of soft loan credit
facility to the buyers at the Govt. to Govt. level. The Govt. has set up
the Indian Development and Economic Assistance Scheme (IDEAS) as
a window for the buyer country to avail lines of credit through agencies
like EXIM Bank of India for buying products of Indian manufacturers.
[Ministry of Defence OM No. H-11013/6/2006/D(Parl.)
dated 30.8.2006]

61
Recommendation (Sl. No. 9, Para No. 9.26)
The Committee note that perspective plan of MDL is based on the
Navy’s acquisition plans for the Tenth and Eleventh plan period. The
Committee desire that not only proposed Navy acquisition plan should
be implemented effectively but also Committee should be apprised
about effective steps taken by the Ministry in this regard.
Reply of the Government
Apprising of the committee on effective implementation of proposed
Naval Acquisition Plan:
(i) Construction of three frigates of P17 class and three destroyers
of P15A class is progressing at MDL as follows:
(i)
Sl. Class of Yard No. Keel laid on Launched on Delivery
No. Ship Target
1. P 17 12617 11/07/2001 18/04/2003 Sep.-08
2. 12627 31/10/2002 04/06/2004 May-09
3. 12637 30/09/2003 27/05/2005 Dec.-09
4. P15A 12701 26/09/2003 30/03/2006 May-10
5. 12702 25/10/2006 May-11
6. 12703 May-12
(ii) Further discussions are in progress with Indian Navy for
construction of P17A and P15B class of ships.
(iii) Preparatory activities of construction of 6 Nos. Scorpene
submarines are in progress and construction of the first boat will
commence 15th December 2006.
The Secretary (Defence Production) has conducted a meeting on
22.05.2006 of all CMDs of Shipyards to assess their capacity in the
light of maritime capability perspective plan of the Indian Navy
recently. It is also proposed to hold a separate meeting under the
chairmanship for Chief of Naval Staff to make firm projections in the
light of present capacity of shipyards, orders under execution and
projection of Navy’s requirements in the maritime capability Perspective
Plan.
[Ministry of Defence OM No. H-11013/6/2006/D(Parl.)
dated 30.8.2006]

62
Recommendation (Sl. No. 9, Para No. 9.27)
The Committee note the difficulties posed by the CMD, MDL
regarding expansion of the shipyard since at present the draught of
the shipyard is only 4.5 metres and there is no scope of further increase
in draught as well as in length and breadth as it is surrounded by
Mumbai Port Trust and ship-breaking yard of Darukhana. The
Committee also note that MDL is looking for Green Field site for
deeper draught to hit the global market and to make bigger ships.
The Committee, therefore, recommend that the Government should
explore the possibility of arranging a site at the Gujarat Coast or East
Coast, so that the trained manpower and resources of MDL could be
utilised for shipbuilding of more than 1000 tonnes for exports, thereby
enabling the MDL to hit the global market.
Reply of the Government
(a) ONGC has written to MDL to return 18.3 hectares of land at
Nhava which ONGC had informally leased to MDL in 1980. ONGC
has plans for modernizing and upgrading Nhava Supply base in view
of increased activities in offshore areas. MDL has made considerable
investment by building a Jetty, temporary slipway and necessary
workshops in the area. These were used for offshore work relating to
ONGC. Nhava provides an ideal water-front for shipbuilding and ship
repair activities. Since the area is located just across the channels from
MDL. Ministry has taken up with ONGC on 14.07.2006 for allowing
MDL to continue to utilize the facilities.
(b) The investment in Pipavav Shipyard Ltd. has been received in
this Deptt. after observations of the Finance Ministry. In the light of
the observations of the Ministry of Finance, the proposal is under
consideration of the Board of MDL.
[Ministry of Defence OM No. H-11013/6/2006/D(Parl.)
dated 30.8.2006]
Recommendation (Sl. No. 9, Para No. 9.28)
The Committee note that submarine building facility in MDL has
been lying idle for more than eleven years as no order was given to
them. The Committee have been informed that a decision has now
been taken to manufacture Scorpene class submarine with French
technology and French parts in MDL. Since the acquisition of submarine
has been long delayed, the Committee desire the Ministry to take
urgent steps to upgrade the facilities at submarine building of MDL in

63
a time-bound manner with adequate allocation of funds and induction
of technical manpower so that any further delay in manufacturing of
submarine may be avoided.
Reply of the Government
MDL has placed order for upgradation of welding stations at
submarine yard and also trained concerned welding officers on the
latest technology employed for construction of Scorpene submarines
in France. Construction of Cradle assembly shop and stores for
submarines is under tendering stage. As far as induction of technical
manpower is concerned the same has been split into stages and first
stage recruitment of 40 officers has been completed. Proceedings in
respect of posts in the AGM level awaiting Board’s approval. This is
expected to be over soon and induction will begin in August.
[Ministry of Defence OM No. H-11013/6/2006/D(Parl.)
dated 30.8.2006]
Recommendation (Sl. No. 10, Para No. 10.7)
The Committee note that over the years the private sector has
grown in size and reach to form an important part of country’s
industrial base. The Committee are of the view that their capabilities
and resources should be made use of in strengthening the country’s
defence production. The Committee feel that with their expertise and
capability, the public/private sector/DRDO can contribute inbuilding
self reliance and home grown technologies in major defence systems.
The Committee also feel that now there is a need to create an
environment where both public and private sector/DRDO can grow
together and be partner with each other. Further R&D efforts of both
the public and private sector should be synergised and, coordinated
by the DRDO. The Committee, therefore, recommend the Government
to chalk out a National Defence Production policy to synergise the
capabilities of public and private sector and DRDO in defence
production with greater emphasis on indigenous content. The
Committee also recommend the Government to explore the possibility
of promoting defence R&D by involving private sector in selective
R&D projects.
Reply of the Government
The recommendations made by the Committee to synergise the
capabilities of public and private sector and DRDO in defence
production with greater emphasis on indigenous content and to explore

64
the possibility of promoting defence R&D by involving private sector
in selective R&D projects are agreed to in principle by DRDO.
Modalities for their implementation need to be worked out.
[Ministry of Defence OM No. H-11013/6/2006/D(Parl.)
dated 30.8.2006]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para 63 & 64 of Chapter-I)
Recommendation (Sl. No. 10, Para No. 10.8)
The Committee note that at present 45% of the production work
is outsourced to private sector. The Committee desire the Government
to explore the possibility of outsourcing more and more work to the
private sector particularly in areas where they have sufficient
infrastructure and technology to supply the required products.
Reply of the Government
The recommendations has been noted. Greater emphasis is being
laid on outsourcing the production work to the private sector and to
progressively increase the same.
[Ministry of Defence OM No. H-11013/6/2006/D(Parl.)
dated 30.8.2006]

CHAPTER III
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE
COMMITTEE DO NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE IN
VIEW OF GOVERNMENT’S REPLIES
Recommendation (Sl. No. 4, Para No. 4.16)
The Committee also note that the profitability of BEML depends
on purchase preference policy of government and the same has not
been renewed beyond 31 March 2005. Since BEML is supplying critical
ground support equipment to defence services, Government should
renew purchase preference policy in favour of the company. The
Committee also desire that BEML should also strive to consolidate its
strength to face competition so that it may not have to depend on
Government purchase preference policy in future. The Committee are
of the view the BEML should also strive to be closely and exclusively
associated with defence industry and supply critical and essential
ground support to the defence services. In this connection, the
Committee desire that Government should examine this issue and try
to separate non defence production of the BEML. The Committee also
desire that there should be a separate organization for production of
non-defence products like rail coaches and other rail products.
Reply of the Government
Purchase preference policy has been extended beyond 31st March
2006.
Two business segments of BEML viz. defence and non-defence,
work at arm length to each other and a few production facilities are
similar to meet the production requirement of these two segments. For
purpose of sustenance, most companies involved in manufacturing
defence products diversify and produce products, which has a sustained
market on the civil sector. Dependence only on Defence supplies would
not be advisable.
[Ministry of Defence OM No. H-11013/6/2006/D(Parl.)
dated 30.8.2006]
Recommendation (Sl. No. 5, Para No. 5.9)
The Committee note that BDL manufactures products like Milan
and Konkurs ATGMs under licence from French and Russian

66
Companies and before these products can be exported, BDL requires
clearance from the Original Equipment Manufacture (OEM) and
Ministry of Defence. The Committee, therefore, desire that BDL should
scrupulously examine and identify the products, which have the export
potential, on case to case basis and get the approval of OEM and
Ministry of Defence, in order to augment its revenue resources. The
Committee, further desire that Ministry while making procurement
under Buy and Make category, should examine the feasibility of
inserting suitable clause to avoid clearance from the Original Equipment
Manufacturer for exporting these products.
Reply of the Government
The earlier agreements for license production of Milan and Konkurs
envisage production of these missiles only for internal consumption.
Hence, any export of these systems needed clearance from the OEMs
in addition to approval by Government of India. The OFF-SET
condition included in the recently promulgated DDP 2005 would help
in binding the OEMs to source products from India. This would
certainly augment the export revenues of the Indian industry.
[Ministry of Defence OM No. H-11013/6/2006/D(Parl.)
dated 30.8.2006]
Recommendation (Sl. No. 5, Para No. 5.10)
The Committee feel that in view of increasing threat perception of
missiles from enemy, ballistic missile defences are essential in order to
defend the country. The Committee, therefore, recommend that a time
bound programme must be chalked out urgently to develop the Missile
Defence System, so that our defence forces can counter any possible
attack from any hostile country.
Reply of the Government
Regarding the observation made in Point 5.10 it is stated that this
aspect is always considered by the Indian Forces and as per their
requirement action is taken.
[Ministry of Defence OM No. H-11013/6/2006/D(Parl.)
dated 30.8.2006]

CHAPTER IV
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF
WHICH REPLIES OF GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN
ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE
Recommendation (Sl. No. 1, Para No. 1.5)
The Committee note that the Ministry of Defence has eight Public
Sector Undertakings (DPSUs) which cater to the basic strategic
requirements of Defence Forces. The Committee also note that defence
production is a highly sophisticated sector, which requires state-of-the-
art technology. A major challenge before these DPSUs is therefore to
constantly upgrade their technology and products so that their products
may be of world standards and may successfully compete in the
international market.
Reply of the Government
The Defence Public Sector Undertakings (DPSUs) have taken up
several steps to upgrade their technology and products. Out of the
eight DPSUs, three are Defence Shipyards.
2. It includes Hindustan Aeronautics Limited (HAL)’s upgrading
Design and Production facilities with systems and machineries required
for a modern aerospace industry. Besides, HAL have commissioned
computer aided design packages (Catia, Unigraphics), CNC profilers,
CNC machining centers, Coordinate Measuring Mahines, Laser marking
and cutting machines, Water Jet cutting machines, Electron Beam
Welding machines and other sophisticated machines. Apart from this,
HAL has developed the Advanced Light Helicopter (Dhruv) and under
development is intermediate Jet Trainer.
3. Another DPSU, Bharat Electronics Limited (BEL) takes up
development of new products proactively. Some of its recently
upgraded products are Flycatcher Radar, Frequently Hopping VHF
equipment, VHF Portable Set (VPS) Mk III etc.
4. Shipbuilding is a complex activity comprising Naval Architecture,
Mechanical, Electrical and Weapon disciplines. The shipyards focus is
towards construction of a desired platform capable of operating in a
specified environmental condition and capacity to house the state of
67

68
art machinery/equipment/weapons. Upgradation of Production
Technology and Design features are the issues of concern in
shipbuilding.
5. One of the Defence Shipyards, Goa Shipyard Limited (GSL) has
taken the following action for upgrading its technology:—
• Implemented ERP covering the entire gamut of its operation.
• Upgraded TRIBON software for design of ships and laying
out compartments.
• Integrated ERP system, Primavera Project Management Tool,
TRIBON software.
• Upgraded production technology by introducing ceramic
back up strip welding, Gullco automatic welding attachment,
bevelling machine, established modern electronic workshop,
updated Pipe shop etc.
• Appointed M/s Royal Haskoning, UK as consultants for
modernization.
6. Another Defence Shipyard, Garden Reach Shipbuilders &
Engineers Limited (GRSE) has undertaken:—
(f) Number of licenced software (Tribon) for Computer Aided
Design;
(g) ERP System (SAP R/4) for better integration/coordination
among Production, Planning, Design and Material;
(h) Project Planning & Control of Shipbuilding activities using
PRIMA VERA software;
(i) Modular Concept in Ship Production to increase the
Outfitting activities to 60-80% at prelaunch aids with
(i) Modern CNC Plasms cutting machines.
(ii) CNC Pipe Bending machines.
(iii) CNC Oxy Acetylene plate cutting machine.
(iv) Boring machine with sighting facility.
(j) Extensive use of TIG/MIG welding.
Having taken strides towards updating the Production Technology,
GRSE now proposes to venture into exporting a few of its products in
the international market.

69
7. With the Financial support received from the Strategic Customers
and also with injection of the internal resources generated by Mishra
Dhatu Nigam Limited (MIDHANI) the Company has been able to
commence the Modernization plan. The modernization plan is expected
to be completed within two years. The modernization of the Company’s
equipment and facilities would enable improved productivity and yield
while at the same time ensure supply of quality materials to its
customers with faster deliveries.
8. The DPSU Bharat Earth Movers Limited (BEML) is upgrading
its products based on feedback from its marketing network by
incorporating additional features that are on the competitor equipments.
New equipments are designed and produced to meet specific customer
requirements. Apart from this, tie ups are made with international
companies for new products and these are indigenised progressively
by obtaining necessary technical inputs from collaborators.
[Ministry of Defence OM No. H-11013/6/2006/D(Parl.)
dated 30.8.2006]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para 11 & 12 of Chapter-I)
Recommendation (Sl. No. 1, Para No. 1.6)
To achieve the above objectives, DPSUs need sufficient resources/
funds to undertake modernization of their plants and make investment
in R&D, manpower training etc. Therefore, the Committee are of the
view that DPSUs should be given more financial autonomy and allowed
to raise resources through market-borrowing by way of equity/bonds/
loan from public. The Committee recommend that the Government
should permit DPSUs to utilize a certain percentage of the money
received from market borrowing for modernization purposes. It will
ensure accountability and also increase the resource bases of the
organizations. It will also make them self-sufficient and reduce their
dependency on government funds. The DPSUs should also be given
more autonomy in decision making and in matters like entering into
joint venture/co-development and coproduction agreements with
foreign countries. The Committee further desire that DPSUs should
appoint a Committee of experts including some outside experts also
which may, from time to time, give well considered advice to improve
their products and bring efficiency in the work.

70
Reply of the Government
Two Mini Ratna DPSUs, Hindustan Aeronautics Limited (HAL)
and Bharat Electronics Limited (BEL) have sufficient funds available to
undertake their activities and modernization of their plants and
products.
2. Another DPSU, Mishra Dhatu Nigam Limited (MIDHANI) has
been able to wipe out its cumulative losses and to register
improvements in its Reserves and Surplus. These funds are being
ploughed back into business for procurement of capital equipment as
a part of its Modernization plan to replace its outdated and obsolete
equipment as a part of its Modernization plan to replace its outdated
and obsolete equipment. However, due to its weak financial health
and its inability to service debts, MIDHANI’s strategic customers have
extended financial assistance both in the form of Grant and interest
free loan/advances. MIDHANI could consider borrowing from
markets/public in the form of equity/loan/bonds once its financial
health improves and for next phase of modernization plan.
3. One more DPSU Bharat Earth Movers Limited (BEML) has
sought assistance for funds for setting up an independent R&D center
of excellence at Bangalore for Metro Rail coaches and such high tech
rail products and for upgrading metro manufacturing facility at its
Bangalore unit. These two proposals are with the Department of Heavy
Industry. BEML propose to invest around Rs. 167 crore for
modernization/upgradation of its manufacturing facilities from its own
resources. Also, BEML is engaging Consultants/Professionals in areas
where in-house talent/expertise is found wanting.
4. One of the Defence shipyards, Goa Shipyard Limited (GSL) has
initiated to raise sources from capital market. The GSL propose to
appoint SBI Capital Market to render advisory services and also to
undertake the Capital restructuring exercise to enable issue of shares
held by MOD by way of offer to the public and also by GSL itself.
5. A comprehensive plan for modernization of GSL is in hand
which when completed in a phased manner by mid 2010 would give
the yard a quantum jumps in building and repairing medium sized
sophisticated vessels at competitive price with reduced build period.
6. M/s Royal Haskoning, UK, have been appointed as consultant
for GSL modernisation. The Preliminary Project Report submitted by
the Consultant has been duly approved by Board of Directors. The
Detailed Project Reports is under preparation.

71
7. Modernisation programme envisaged by GSL involves an outlay
of app. Rs. 525 crore. GSL is making efforts to garner Indian Navy’s
support to fund part of the project to construct MCMVs to the extent
of Rs. 237 crore. GSL have also approached Indian Coast Guard with
a proposal to part fund the modernization for long term repair/
maintenance of Coast Guard ships to the extent of Rs. 80 crore. It is
planned to mobilize the remaining Rs. 208 crore through external
commercial borrowings or by issue of additional shares to the public.
8. Regarding joint ventures, GSL has signed following MOU/
collaboration agreements
• M/s. Wartsila LIPS Defence, France:
MoU signed with M/s. Wartsila LIPS Defence for
collaborating as their partner in India on project-to-project
basis and to pool resources for the purpose of securing
orders and manufacturing full stern gear in India.
• M/s. Alstom Power Conversion, France:
MoU signed with M/s. Alstom Power Conversion, France
for collaborating as their partner in India for providing after
sales service support to the Propulsion Control and
Monitoring System supplied by ALSTOM to Indian Navy
and Coast Guard.
• M/s. Lv-Nevesbu, Netherlands:
MoU signed with M/s. Lv-Nevesbu, Netherlands for
collaborating as their partner in India on project-to-project
basis and to pool resources for the purpose of securing
orders for System Integration of P28 ASW Corvette.
• M/s. Rolls-Royce Power Engineering Plc, U.K:
MoU signed with M/s. Rolls-Royce Power Engineering Plc,
U.K. for manufacturing/procurement of certain components,
sub-assemblies and final assembly and test of motion control
equipment for use in Naval and Coast Guard vessels
manufactured in India.
• M/s. VT Helmatic, U.K:
MoU signed with M/s. VT Helmatic, UK for design,
manufacture, test, trials and after sales support service for
GRP boats being built for Indian market.

72
• M/s THORNYCROFT MARITIME & ASSOCIATES (AUST)
PTY LTD Fremantle, Western Australia, Australia:
MOU signed with M/s Thornycroft Maritime & Associates
(AUST) Pty Ltd. Fremantle, Western Australia, Australia for
collaborating as partner on project to project basis to pool
resources in regards to shipbuilding projects for Indian
market as well as for export.
9. Similarly, another Defence Shipyard Garden Reach Shipbuilders
& Engineers Limited (GRSE) has embarked on modernization plan at
a value of more that Rs. 300 crore and also in the process of setting
up ship repairing facility at Haldia Port through joint ventures/co-
development and co-production agreement with foreign countries if
required. GRSE has appointed UK based consultant M/s Giord for
drawing up a modernization plan and the SBI Cap for Haldia Project.
10. A Committee to give well-considered advice to improve
products regularly undertake benchmarking meetings between the
defence shipyards to introduce the best practices prevailing in each
shipyard. In addition to that, external consultants have been appointed,
on need basis in areas of energy saving, improving safety etc.
11. MIDHANI in its quest to increase its turnover has been taking
up supply of value added item like Rings, Plates, Kanchan Armour,
large machined items etc., to its Strategic Customers like Space, Defence
and Atomic Energy. In this direction MIDHANI has been making use
of the facilities, that do not exist in MIDHANI, but that are available
at different PSUs (RSP , Rourkela) and Government Organizations
(Nuclear Fuel Complex, Hyderabad) and other private sector/small
and medium sectors (in and around Hyderabad) and adequate
delegation of powers exists to the Chief Executives in this regard.
Though, these are not in the nature of Joint Ventures, it facilities co-
development and co-production with efficient utilization of the
resources available within the country.
12. MIDHANI has sought the induction of experts in the field of
metallurgy management, finance, marketing etc., as independent
directions on the Board of MIDHANI. With the induction of these
Independent directors MIDHANI would be benefited with their
independent advise, foresight and expertise for the improvement of
the company.
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para 11 & 12 of Chapter-I)
[Ministry of Defence OM No. H-11013/6/2006/D(Parl.)
dated 30.8.2006]

73
Recommendation (Sl. No. 2, Para No. 2.20)
The Committee further note that HAL’s exports, in comparison to
its total sales, are very small. During the year 2003-04, the company’s
total sales were Rs. 3799.78 crores and the exports were only Rs. 215.34
crores which is less than 6% of the total sales. The Committee hold
the view that HAL by virtue of its vast capability and expertise should
play a vital role in global market which can be achieved by increased
thrust on exports of their products. The Committee therefore, desire
the HAL to formulate a well planned strategy in consultation with
experts so as to give export orientation to their products and market
them effectively in the global market. For giving wide publicity to
their products, Defence attaché posted in various countries should be
actively involved to play a positive role in this regard. The Committee
would like that a clear cut export policy be laid down to tap the vast
export potential note only for the HAL but also for all Defence PSUs
products.
Reply of the Government
HAL’s exports have grown progressively over the years. Export
has been considered as thrust area for HAL. HAL’s perspective plan
envisages significant growth in exports for which strategies have been
formulated. Export shops for manufacture of engine components and
composites are beings planned to be set up at HAL. HAL is making
its best efforts for aggressive marketing of its products and services
for which target markets have been identified and strategies for
penetration in the target market have been formulated. On a continuous
basis, HAL apprises the Indian Missions abroad regarding the progress
made in its efforts in promotion products and services and seek their
help in taking HAL’s proposals forward.
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para 24 of Chapter-I)
[Ministry of Defence OM No. H-11013/6/2006/D(Parl.)
dated 30.8.2006]
Recommendation (Sl. No. 6, Para No. 6.13)
The Committee note that MIDHANI is supplying special steels,
super alloys and titanium alloys for strategic sectors, which forms the
core material not only for defence needs but also for space and atomic
energy programmes, and these alloys are very crucial in timely

74
completion of various projects of strategic importance. The Committee
are constrained to note that despite the critical importance, the plant,
machinery and facilities of MIDHANI have not been up-graded and
modernized for the last two decades. The Committee also note that a
Committee set up by the Ministry to review the working of MIDHANI
has recommended for the upgradation and modernization of the
outdated and obsolete facilities of it with adequate investment. For
this purpose, the Ministry has moved a Cabinet note for providing a
budgetary grant of Rs. 66.63 crore to MIDHANI for its modernization
plan. The Committee, therefore, recommend that MIDHANI should be
allocated adequate budgetary grants expeditiously so that plant,
machinery and facilities of MIDHANI could be upgraded and
modernised to save strategic products from being jeopardised.
Reply of the Government
On the Cabinet note moved by the Department of Defence
Production for seeking budgetary grant of Rs. 66.63 crore, the Ministry
of Finance suggested that MIDHANI should consider the option of
merger with a larger DPSU such as HAL as long-term solution.
However, with proactive initiative of the Ministry a meeting of the
strategic customers of MIDHANI was called for to seek their financial
assistance for the Modernization pans of MIDHANI. In the meeting
held in February 2006, the strategic customers of MIDHANI such as
HAL, DRDO and Ordnance Factory Board agreed to provide necessary
financial assistance in this regard.
As a matter of mutual benefit, the above customers agreed to
fund the modernization of MIDHANI with Company passing on a
certain portion of the benefit of improved productivity and yield due
to modernization to these customers in the form of price reduction
and Customers being assured of supply of consistent quality material
and with faster deliveries from MIDHANI. HAL have agreed to
consider extending interest free loan of Rs. 25 crore, DRDO has agreed
to consider providing equipment worth Rs. 15 crore, as part of
Modernization to MIDHANI to facilitate production of materials
required for their programmes and Ordnance Factory Board has agreed
to consider placing their equipment worth Rs. 15 crore at MIDHANI
as part of MIDHANI Modernization to ensure quality materials supply
for ordnance factories current and future programmes. The balance
funds required for modernization would be met from the Internal
resources of the MIDHANI.

75
The modernization plan of MIDHANI has already commenced and
orders for the major equipment being funded by the Department of
Space have been placed and others are being ordered. It is expected
that the entire modernization plan would be completed in two years.
[Ministry of Defence OM No. H-11013/6/2006/D(Parl.)
dated 30.8.2006]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para 38 & 39 of Chapter-I)
Recommendation (Sl. No. 7, Para No. 7.21)
The Committee note that the order book position of Goa Shipyard
Limited is not healthy and there is constant shrinking of capacity
utilisation, which has gone down from 91.01% in 2001-02 to 30.31% in
2003-04. To improve capacity utilisation, the Committee desire that the
order for construction of small and medium vessels required by Navy
and Coast Guard as reflected in 10th and 11th Acquisition Plan of
Navy and Coast Guard, may be given to GSL. The Committee further
desire that the Ministry should make it obligatory for each DPSU
shipyard to constitute a Committee which besides examining the need
for creating resources for healthy order book position, should also
suggest ways and means for full and effective utilisation of the installed
capacity and submit its report to the Government.
Reply of the Government
The Committee’s comments are noted. The Ministry is constantly
monitoring the capacity of the yards. As recently as on 22.05.2006,
Secretary (DP) chaired a meeting with CWP&A, in which the CMD of
GSL gave a presentation on capacity of the yard with reference to the
Maritime Capability Perspective Plan of the Navy. Interaction between
the Navy/Coast Guard and GSL is constant.
[Ministry of Defence OM No. H-11013/6/2006/D(Parl.)
dated 30.8.2006]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para 45 & 46 of Chapter-I)
Recommendation (Sl. No. 7, Para No. 7.22)
The Committee are constrained to note that GSL has not made
any export during the last five years despite the keen interest shown

76
by some countries on their products. As stated by the GSL, the main
reason, therefore, was the non-availability of financial assistance to
these countries for procurement of GSL ships. The Committee note
that if soft finance is provided to these countries, the interest shown
by the countries can materialise in orders. The Committee also note
that two of our nationalised banks namely PNB and SBI are ready to
provide soft loans. In view of long term advantage to Indian shipping
industry in general and GSL in particular in terms of export of vessels,
the Committee recommend that the Government should give necessary
approval to the DPSUs to avail bank facility to extend soft loan to the
importing countries. The Committee further desire that GSL should
chalk out a clear cut plan to increase its export to fully book its
production capacity .
Reply of the Government
The Committee’s recommendations are noted. The Govt. has set
up the Indian Development and Economic Assistance Scheme (IDEAS)
as a window for the buyer country to avail lines of credit through
agencies like EXIM Bank.
[Ministry of Defence OM No. H-11013/6/2006/D(Parl.)
dated 30.8.2006]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para 45 & 46 of Chapter-I)

CHAPTER V
RECOMMENDATION/OBSERVATION IN RESPECT OF WHICH
FINAL REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED
Recommendation (Sl. No. 5, Para No. 5.11)
The Committee note, that the number of new projects undertaken
by the BDL are in different stages of progress and none of the project
has been completed in toto. The Committee, therefore, would like that
all out efforts should be made by the Ministry/BDL to complete these
projects and in a time bound manner. The Committee would also like
to have details of commissioning stage of the projects, targets fixed for
completion, reasons for delay in completion and corrective measures
taken in this regard.
Reply of the Government
The details of new projects are mentioned in Point 5.3. On these
projects it is stated that the proposals are under consideration at
different levels and once the proposals are finalized/contracted the
targets etc. will be fixed and progress will be monitored as per the
targets.
[Ministry of Defence OM No. H-11013/6/2006/D(Parl.)
dated 30.8.2006]
  N
EW D ELHI; BALASAHEB VIKHE PATIL,
12 July, 2007 Chairman,
21 Asadha, 1929 (Saka) Standing Committee on Defence.
77

MINUTES OF TWENTIETH SITTING OF THE STANDING
COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE (2006-2007)
The Committee sat on Monday, the 12th February 2007 from 1100
to 1430 hrs. in ‘Main’ Committee Room, Parliament House Annexe,
New Delhi.
PRESENT
Shri Balasaheb Vikhe Patil – Chairman
M
EMBERS
Lok Sabha
2.  Shri S. Bangarappa
3.  Shri Santosh Kumar Gangwar
4.  Dr. K.S. Manoj
5.  Shri Asaduddin Owaisi
6.  Shri Adhalrao Shivaji Patil
7.  Shri Mahadeorao Shiwankar
8.  Shri Rajesh Verma
Rajya Sabha
9.  Dr. Farooq Abdullah
10.  Shri Abu Asim Azmi
11. Shri R.K. Dhawan
12.  Smt. N.P . Durga
13.  Shri K.B. Shanappa
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri P .K. Bhandari — Joint Secretary
2. Shri Gopal Singh — Director
WITNESSES
REPRESENTATIVES OF MINISTRY OF DEFENCE
1. Shri Shekhar Dutt — Defence Secretary
2. Shri K.P . Singh — Secretary (DP)
78

79
3. Dr. M. Natarajan — SA to RM
4. Shri S. Banerjee — DG (ACQ)
5. Shri V .K. Mishra — Secretary (Def. Fin.)
6. Dr. (Mrs.) Rekha Bhargava — Special Secretary (B)
7. Shri P .K. Rastogi — Addl Secy. (B)
8. Dr. W. Selvamurthy — CCR&D (LS&HR)
9. Shri Gautam Chatterjee — JS (O/N)
10. Shri Binoy Kumar — JS (E)
11. Shri Harcharanjit Singh — Secy (BRDB) / JS (ESW)
12. Shri S.N. Mishra — Addl FA(M)
13. Shri Alok Perti — JS (SY)
14. Dr. (Mrs.) Kiran Chadha — JS (X)
15. Shri T. Ramachandru — JS (S)
16. Shri Ranjan Chatterjee — JS (HAL)
17. Shri Mohd. Haleem Khan — Addl FA (H)
18. Smt. Anuradha Mitra — Addl FA (AM)
19. Shri Amit Cowshish — Addl FA (A)
20. Shri S. Ghosh — Chairman/OFB
21. Shri V . Somasuderam — JS (OF)
22. Shri B. Saha — Secy, OFB
23. Shri Sharad Ghodke — OSD (P)
24. Shri Ashok K. Baweja — Chairman, HAL
25. Shri V .R.S. Natarajan — CMD, BEML
26. Shri M. Narayana Rao — CMD, MIDHANI
27. Shri VVR Sastry — CMD (BEL)
28. Rear Adm (Retd.) A.K. — CMD, GSL
Handa
29. Rear Adm T.S. Ganeshan — CMD, GRSE
30. Vice Admn S.K.K. Krishnan — CMD, MDL
31. Maj. Gen (Retd.) R. Gossain — CMD, BDL
32. Shri PRK Hara Gopal — Dir (Fin.), BEL
33. Shri SK Mehta — Dir (R&D), BEL
34. Shri Devjit Ghosh — LO. MIDHANI
35. Commdt. Sunil Mane Sinde — CM, GSL
36. Shri Yogesh Sharma — Regional CM, MDL

80
37. Commander Hardev Inder — IN (Retd.), Addl GM
38. Lt. Gen. HS Lidder — CISC
39. Lt. Gen. Deepak Kapoor — VCOAS
40. V . Adml. Nirmal Verma — VCNS
41. Air Mshl AK Nagalia — DCAS
42. Lt. Gen. SS Dhillon — MGO
43. Lt. Gen. Thomas Mathew — AG
44. Air Mshl VR Iyer — AOP
45. Vice Adml Sunil K. Damle — COP
46. Surg Vice Adml VK Singh — DGAFMS
47. Lt. Gen. LP Sadhotra — DGMS (Army)
48. Air Marshal HK Maini — DGMS (Air)
49. Surg Vice Adml Yogendra Singh — DGMS (Navy)
50. Maj. Gen. Suresh Chandra — Addl DGAFMS
51. Maj. Gen. J. Jayram — Addl DGAFMS (MR)
52. Maj. Gen. R.K. Kalra — MD-ECHS
53. Maj. Gen. A.K. Mehra — ADG WE
54. AVM N. Vijaya Kumar — ACAS (FP)
55. R. Adml. R.K. Dhowan — ACNS(P&P)
56. Brig. Kunwar Karni Singh — Dy. DGAFMS (P&T)
57. Brig. Satish Malik — Dy. MD-ECHS
58. Col. A.K. Verma — Dir MS (H)
59. Col. Pawan Kapoor — Dir AFMS (P)
60. Col. G. Ghosh — Dir. ECHS
61. Lt. Col. SI Subhani — CRD Cell
62. Capt. Abhishek Saxena — SO to VCOAS
63. Shri S. Ahuja — INAS, DGONA
2.At the outset, Hon’ble Chairman welcomed the representatives
of the Ministry of Defence to the sitting of the Committee and drew
their attention to Direction 58 of Directions by the Speaker, Lok Sabha.
3.The Committee then took evidence of the representatives of
Ministry of Defence on Action Taken Replies furnished by the Ministry
of Defence on Ninth Report on ‘Defence Public Sector Undertakings’
****.

81
4. ****
5. ****
6. The Committee thereafter sought clarifications on the Action
Taken Replies to the observations/recommendations contained in the
Ninth Report on Defence Public Sector Undertakings and **** to which
the representatives of the Ministry of Defence answered one by one.
The witnesses then withdrew.
7. The verbatim record of the proceedings was kept.
8. ****
9. ****
The Committee then adjourned.
****Not related with the subject.

MINUTES OF THIRTY-THIRD SITTING OF THE STANDING
COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE (2006-2007)
The Committee sat on Wednesday, the 06th June 2007 from
1100 to 1215 hrs. in Committee Room ‘C’, Parliament House Annexe,
New Delhi.
PRESENT
Shri Balasaheb Vikhe Patil — Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Santosh Kumar Gangwar
3. Shri C. Kuppusami
4. Dr. K.S. Manoj
5. Dr. H.T. Sangliana
6. Shri Rajesh Verma
Rajya Sabha
7. Shri Abu Asim Azmi
8. Shri R.K. Dhawan
9. Shri K.B. Shanappa
10. Smt. Viplove Thakur
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri P .K. Bhandari — Joint Secretary
2. Shri Gopal Singh — Director
3. Shri D.R. Shekhar — Deputy Secretary-II
4. Smt. J.M. Sinha — Under Secretary
WITNESSES
NON-OFFICIAL WITNESSES
1. Shri Dipankar Mukherjee, Ex-M.P ., Convenor, Trade Union
Forum for Self-reliance in Defence, New Delhi
82

83
2. Shri A.D. Nagpal, Secretary, HMS, New Delhi
3. Shri S.N. Pathak, President, AIDEF, New Delhi
4. Shri C. Srikumar, General Secretary, AIDEF, New Delhi
5. Shri Saila Bhattacharya, General Secretary, AIDEF, New Delhi
6. Shri D. Ananthapadmnabha, Coordinator, JAF, Bangalore
7. Shri S. Prasanna Kumar, Convenor, JAF, Bangalore
8. Shri Sukumaran Pillai, General Secretary, BEL Worker’s Union
9. Shri Laxman Gauda, Working President, BEWUF
10. Shri S.R. Viswanath, President, HAEA, Bangalore
11. Shri Jagdish, President, BEML Employees Association, Mysore
12. Shri R. Sadanandan, General Secretary , BEL Head Office Staff
Association, Bangalore
13. Shri V . Prabhakar, President, Bharat Electronics Employees
Union, Hyderabad
14. Shri Rudresh, General Secretary, BEML Staff Association,
Bangalore
15. Shri J. Ramesh, Joint Secretary, BEMEA, KGF
16. Shri M. Shrinivasa Reddy, Treasurer, BEMEA, Bangalore
17. Shri C. Narayan Swamy, Organising Secretary, HAEA, Bangalore
18. Shri C.V . Krishnappa, Joint Secretary, BEWUF, Bangalore
19. Shri Gurudayal Singh, Vice President, INDWF (INTUC),
Dehradun
2. At the outset, Hon’ble Chairman welcomed the representatives
of various Trade Unions/Employees Unions of Defence Public Sector
Undertakings to the sitting of the Committee to render oral evidence/
suggestions on the subjects ordnance factories and Defence Public Sector
undertakings and drew their attention to Direction 58 of Directions by
the Speaker, Lok Sabha regarding maintaining confidentiality of the
deliberations of the sitting of the Committee.
3. The representatives of Trade Union Forum for self-reliance in
Defence mentioned the following points before the Committee:—
(i) The moto of the Trade Union is to ensure self-reliance.
(ii) In the name of creating Raksha Utpadana Ratna, the
Government should not outsource to Private Sector.
(iii) Under -utilisation of the capacity in Ordnance Factories/
Defence Public Sector Undertakings.

84
(iv) There must be full capacity utilisation, technological
upgradation and improvement in-house production before
going for outsourcing the work to private sector. They did
not express reservation on entering into joint venture with
the private sector/foreign company for upgradation of
technology etc.
(v) There must be an assessment of internal production
capabilities and upgradation and also give autonomy to
these institutions.
(vi) They sighted many cases where low technology orders were
given to private firms but they had failed to produce the
quality items as per the requirement.
The witnesses then withdrew.
4. The verbatim record of the proceedings was kept.
The Committee then adjourned.

MINUTES OF THIRTY-EIGHTH SITTING OF THE STANDING
COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE (2006-2007)
The Committee sat on Wednesday, the 11th July 2007 from 1500
hrs. to 1530 hrs. in Committee Room ‘E’, Parliament House Annexe,
New Delhi.
PRESENT
Shri. Balasaheb Vikhe Patil — Chairman
M
EMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri. Santosh Kumar Gangwar
3. Shri Suresh Kalmadi
4. Dr. K.S. Manoj
5. Ms. Ingrid Mcleod
6. Shri Asaduddin Owaisi
7. Shri Adhalrao Shivaji Patil
8. Shri Shriniwas Patil
9. Shri Mahadeorao Shiwankar
10. Shri Rajesh Verma
Rajya Sabha
11. Shri Jai Parkash Aggarwal
12. Smt. N.P . Durga
13. Shri S.P .M. Syed Khan
14. Shri. K.B. Shanappa
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri P .K. Bhandari — Joint Secretary
2. Shri Gopal Singh — Director
3. Shri D.R. Shekhar — Deputy Secretary-II
4. Smt. J.M. Sinha — Under Secretary
2. At the outset, Hon’ble Chairman welcomed the members to the
sitting of the committee. The Committee, thereafter, considered the
draft ‘Action Taken Report on the recommendations contained in the
Ninth Report of the Committee on Defence Public Sector Undertakings’
and adopted the same with some additions/modifications as suggested
by the members.
3. The Committee then authorised the Hon’ble Chairman to finalise
the report and present the same to the Parliament.
The Committee then adjourned.
85

APPENDIX
ANALYSIS OF THE ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT
ON THE RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE
9th REPORT OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON
DEFENCE (FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA) ON
‘DEFENCE PUBLIC SECTOR UNDERTAKINGS’
 Percentage
 of Total
(i) Total number of recommendations 45
(ii) Recommendations/Observations which have 35 78
been accepted by the Government:;
(Para Nos. 1.7 to 1.13, 2.19, 2.21 to 2.27,
3.19 to 3.21, 4.12 to 4.15, 5.8, 5.12, 6.14,
7.23 & 7.24, 8.12, 9.24 to 9.28, 10.7 & 10.8)
(iii) Recommendations/Observations which the 3 07
Committee do not desire to pursue in
view of Government replies
(Para Nos. 4.16, 5.9 & 5.10)
(iv) Recommendations/Observations in respect  6 13
of which replies of the Government have
not been accepted by the Committee:
(Para Nos. 1.5, 1.6, 2.20, 6.13, 7.21 & 7.22)
(v) Recommendations/Observations in respect 1 02
of which final replies of Government are
still awaited:
(Para No. 5.11)
86