19
STANDING COMMITTEE
ON DEFENCE
(2006-07)
FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA
MINISTRY OF DEFENCE
[Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations contained in
the Sixth Report of the Committee (Fourteenth Lok Sabha) on
‘Procurement Policy and Procedure’]
NINETEENTH REPORT
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
July, 2007/Asadha, 1929 (Saka)

NINETEENTH REPORT 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE 
(2006-2007) 
 
(FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
MINISTRY OF DEFENCE 
[Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations contained in  
the Sixth Report of the Committee (Fourteenth Lok Sabha) on  
‘Procurement Policy and Procedure’] 
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 16.08.2007.  
 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 16.08.2007. 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
 
NEW DELHI 
 
July 2007, Asadha, 1929 (Saka) 
 

C.O.D. No. 83
Price : Rs. 103.00
© 2007 BY LOK S ABHA S ECRETARIAT
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of
Business in Lok Sabha (Eleventh Edition) and Printed by Jainco Art India,
New Delhi-110 005.

(i)
CONTENTS
PAGES
COMPOSITION OF THE C OMMITTEE  (2006-07) .......................................... (iii)
PREFACE ........................................................................................................ (v)
REPORT
CHAPTER I Report .............................................................................
CHAPTER II Recommendations/Observations which have
been accepted by the Government .........................
CHAPTER III Recommendations/Observations which the
Committee do not desire to pursue in view
of the Government’s replies .....................................
CHAPTER IV Recommendations/Observations in respect of
which replies of the Government have not been
accepted by the Committee ......................................
C
HAPTER V Recommendations/Observations in respect of
which final replies of the Government are still
awaited ...........................................................................
M
INUTES OF THE S ITTING ............................................................................
APPENDIX Analysis of Action Taken by Government on the
Recommendations contained in the Sixth Report
of the Standing Committee on Defence
(Fourteenth Lok Sabha) on ‘Procurement Policy
and Procedure ..............................................................

COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE
ON DEFENCE (2006-07)
  Shri Balasaheb Vikhe Patil —  Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri S. Bangarappa
3. Shri Milind Murli Deora
4. Shri Santosh Kumar Gangwar
5. Shri Ramesh C. Jigajinagi
6. Shri Suresh Kalmadi
7. Shri C. Kuppusami
8. Dr. K.S. Manoj
9. Ms. Ingrid Mcleod
10. Shri Asaduddin Owaisi
11. Shri Adhalrao Shivaji Patil
12. Shri Shriniwas Patil
13. Shri Rajendrasinh Ghanshyamsinh Rana (Raju Rana)
14. Dr. H.T. Sangliana
15. Shri Arjun Charan Sethi
16. Prof. Mahadeorao Shiwankar
17. Shri Manvendra Singh
18. Shri Balashowry Vallabhaneni
19. Shri Rajesh Verma
Rajya Sabha
20. Dr. Farooq Abdullah
21. Shri Jai Prakash Aggarwal
22. Shri Abu Asim Azmi
23. Smt. Shobhana Bhartia
24. Shri R.K. Dhawan
(iii)

25. Smt. N.P . Durga
26. Shri S.P .M. Syed Khan
27. Shri K.B. Shanappa
28. Shri Arun Shourie
29. Smt. Viplove Thakur
SECRETARIAT
1. Shri S.K. Sharma — Additional Secretary
2. Shri P .K. Bhandari — Joint Secretary
3. Shri Gopal Singh — Director
4. Shri D.R. Shekhar — Deputy Secretary-II
5. Smt. Jyochnamayi Sinha — Under Secretary
(iv)

(v)
PREFACE
I, the Chairman, Standing Committee on Defence (2006-07) having
been authorized by the Committee to submit the Report on their behalf,
present this Nineteenth Report on Action Taken by the Government
on the recommendations contained in the Sixth Report of the
Committee (Fourteenth Lok Sabha) on ‘Procurement Policy and
Procedure’.
2. The Sixth Report was presented to/laid in Lok Sabha/Rajya
Sabha on 12 December 2005. The Government furnished replies
indicating action taken on the recommendations contained in the Report
on ‘Procurement Policy and Procedure’. The Committee took oral
evidence of the representatives of Ministry of Defence on 16th January
and 19th February, 2007 to have clarifications on certain issues arising
out of the action taken replies. The Draft Action Taken Report was
considered and adopted by the Committee at their sitting held on 27
June, 2007.
3. An analysis of action taken by the Government on
recommendations contained in the Nineteenth Report of the Standing
Committee on Defence (Fourteenth Lok Sabha) is given in Appendix.
4. For facility of reference and convenience, the observations/
recommendations of the Committee have been printed in thick type in
the body of the Report.
  N
EW D ELHI; BALASAHEB VIKHE PATIL,
12 July, 2007 Chairman,
21 Asadha, 1929 (Saka) Standing Committee on Defence.

CHAPTER I
REPORT
The Report of the Standing Committee on Defence deals with action
taken by the Government on the recommendations/observations
contained in their Sixth Report (Fourteenth Lok Sabha) on ‘Procurement
Policy and Procedure’ which was presented and laid in both the Houses
of Parliament on 12.12.2005.
2. In the Sixth Report (Fourteenth Lok Sabha), the Committee had
made 28 observations/recommendations on the following aspects:
Sl. No. Para No. Subject
12 3
1. 1.4 & 1.5 Reduction in stages of Procurement and
Curtailment of Lead Time
2. 1.15 Need to build a strong R&D base for
Defence Sector
3. 1.16 Upgradation of Technology/Weapon
System without Payment of Royalty
4. 1.17 Sharing of Transfer of Technology (ToT)
and design among DRDO /OFs/
DPSUs/Private Sectors
5. 1.18 Need for pr eparing an appropriate
Defence Production and Procurement
Strategy
6. 1.19 Sharing of Joint Venture with private
sector
7. 2.17, 2.19 & 2.20 To make improvement over DPP &
DPM-2006
8. 2.18 Formulation of make procedure
9. 2.24 Need for maintaining required force
level of Ships
10. 2.25 Upgradation of shipbuilding facilities at
MDL

2
11. 3.5, 3.6 & 3.7 Finalisation of Long Term Perspective
Plan and Five Years Defence Plan
12. 4.8 & 4.9 Broad basing SQR
13. 4.10 & 4.11 Involvement of Experts during
finalisation of SQR
14. 4.12 Inviting Pre-bid meetings of
manufactures to avoid single-vendor
situation
15. 5.7 Offset Clause.
16. 6.9 Effective use of the Services of Defence
Attaches
17. 6.10 Need to give preference to private
sector over foreign suppliers
18. 7.6 & 7.7 To avoid single vendor situation
19. 8.2 Standard contract clause
20. 9.5 Need for prescribing time-frame for the
Ministries/Department other than the
Ministry of Defence to clear the defence
acquisition proposal
21. 9.6, 12.4 & 12.5 Prolonged field trail-cause of delay
22. 10.7 Integrity Pact
23. 11.4 Need to make the guidelines for
appointment of authorised Indian
agents less cumbersome
24. 11.5 Need to evolve a clear-cut policy for
identifying and accepting a person as
a representatives of the company
25. 13.8, 13.9, Fast Track Procedure
13.10 & 13.12
26. 13.11 To update the data bank
27. 14.2 Post contract monitoring
28. 15.4 to 15.7 Revenue Procurement
12 3

3
3. Action Taken Replies have been received from the Government
in respect of all the recommendations/observations contained in the
Report. The Committee have examined the Action Taken Replies
received from the Ministry and the same have been categorized as
follows:
(i) Recommendations/observations which have been accepted
by the Government:
Para Nos. (1.4 & 1.5), 1.17, 1.19, (2.17, 2.19 & 2.20), 2.18,
2.25, (4.8 & 4.9), (5.6 & 5.7), 6.10, (7.6 & 7.7), 8.2, 9.5, (9.6
& 12.4 & 12.5), 10.7, 11.5, 13.11 (15.4, 15.5, 15.6 & 15.7)
(ii) Recommendations/observations which the Committee do not
desire to pursue in view of the Government replies.
Para Nos. 14.2
(iii) Recommendations/observations in respect of which replies
of the Government have not been accepted by the
Committee:
Para Nos. 1.15, 1.16, 1.18, 2.24, (3.5, 3.6 & 3.7), (4.10 & 4.11),
4.12, 6.9 11.4 and (13.8, 13.9, 13.10 & 13.12),
(iv) Recommendations/observations in respect of which final
replies of the Government are still awaited.
Para Nos. Nil
4. The Committee trust that utmost importance will be given to
the implementation of the recommendations accepted by the
Government. In cases, where it is not possible for any reason to
implement the recommendations in letter and spirit, the matter
should be reported to the Committee with reasons for non-
implementation. The Committee desire that action taken notes on
the recommendations/observations contained in Chapter –I and final
replies to the recommendations contained in Chapter – V of the
Report be furnished to the Committee within six months of the
presentation of the Report.
5. The Committee will now deal with the action taken by the
Government on some of their recommendations as contained in Chapter
– I of this Report.
Reduction in Stages of Procurement and Curtailment of Lead time
Recommendation (Para No.1.4 & 1.5)
6. The Committee were happy to note that the Government had
promulgated a new Defence Procurement Procedure-2005 for Capital

4
procurements; and also, for the first time, Defence Procurement Manual
2005, for Revenue Procurements. The Committee felt that it would
bring about greater transparency in defence purchases and make
procurements speedier thereby ensuring timely utilisation of funds.
This way it could be ensured that our soldiers got timely and quality
supply of defence items.
The Committee had desired the Government to examine whether
the stages for procurement could be reduced to curtail the time
involved. With a view to avoiding delays the Committee also desired
that once allocation had been made in the budget for a particular
procurement, the same should not be sent again and again for approval
to Ministry of Finance.
7. The Ministry, in their Action Taken Reply, have stated that
“DPP-2006 and DPM-2006 are under implementation with effect
from 1.09.06. All efforts are being made to ensure that the Armed
Forces are supplied with all necessary items to ensure that the
security interests of the nation are adequately protected.
Following steps have been taken to reduce the time frame of
Defence Acquisition:
(i) Time frame for procurement activities has been stated at
Appendix -C of DPP-06 and major deviation would be
monitored at the highest level. The time frames as prescribed
in DPP-06 would lead to cutting down of internal lead time
for procurements as it brings in checks and balances to
avoid multi-layered examination on file and following a path
of collegiate functioning at all levels. All major decisions as
per the procedures in vogue are being taken at the initiation
of the case at the highest level in a time bound manner,
which is aimed to reduce the overall lead time for
procurement. These include:-
(a) Acceptance of Necessity
(b) Quantities to be procured
(c) Categorisation i.e. or ‘BUY’, ‘MAKE’ or ‘BUY & Make’.
(d) Single vendor Clearance (if applicable)
(e) Offset percentages (if applicable)
(f) Detailed scope of trials
(g) Nomination of production agency in cases involving
Transfer of Technology (ToT).

5
(ii) In order to reduce time taken at commercial negotiations
and in line with the recommendations of CVC, there would
no negotiations with L1 bidder in multi vendor cases.
(iii) The financial powers of RM & FM have been enhanced
along with delegation of financial powers to SHQRs (upto
10 crores) which would speed up the acquisition process.
The time frame given in the DPP-06 is indicative and not
prescriptive.
(iv) No comments can be offered on the issue of forwarding of
proposals time and again to the Ministry of Finance.”
8. In response to the query of the Committee pertaining to
reduction of time frame in DPP 2006, the representatives of the Ministry
of Defence, during oral evidence, stated :
“We have not changed the time frame indicated in DPP , 2005. The
time frame for capital acquisition indicated in DPP , 2005 is between
2 to 3 years depending on trials to be conducted. Wherever there
was requirement of conducting trails, it would take three years;
otherwise is would be two years. But as we have submitted to the
Committee in our comments that this time frame is indicated. We
had arrived at this time frame in consultation with the Services
Headquarters. Now that was in 2005, we have not made any
change in that time frame in 2006 although we make several
improvements on DPP , 2005. Most decisions are now taken in a
collegiate manner, a front in the Defence Acquisition Council. These
include acceptance of necessity, quantity waiting, inclusion in
Annual Action Plan, the extent of the offset provision that has to
be there and categorization etc. Several process that used to be
processed on file previously is now being dealt with in a collegiate
manner. We expect that this will have an positive impact on the
time taken.
Secondly, we have also stipulated on the advice of the CVC, that
in a multiple vendor situation, we will not have any negotiation
with L-1. Previously what use to happen even upto 2005, even in
multiple vendor situation negotiations would be conducted with
L-1. Now we will state this upfront in our Request For Proposal
(RFP) that there would be no negotiation with L-1 once identified
in a multiple vendor situation. We expect that the time frame
would be reduced substantially.
One of the very important things which has been done is that the
Government has increased the delegation of financial authority to

6
the RM and the FM. For projects up to Rs. 100 crore, now the
competent financial authority is the Raksha Mantri. For projects
up to Rs. 200 crore, it is in consultation with the Finance Minister.
Only cases over Rs. 200 crore would have to go to the CCS for
approval. This also would be another step for cutting down the
time frame that is required.
One more important thing, is that for the first time in capital
acquisition cases we have made a delegation to the Services
Headquarters up to Rs. 10 crores. There were certain delegations
which used to be available in the revenue side In fact, all cases up
to Rs. 10 crore are now dealt with in the Services Headquarters.
I expect that it would certainly have an impact on the time. This
kind of power is given to them for the first time to cut on the
number of cases which required reference to the Ministry of
Defence and acquisition through the Acquisition Wing of the
Ministry of Defence. In quantitative terms, a very large number of
cases fall in this category of Rs. 10 crore or lower. These would all
get done by the Services themselves.
This has been the experience and these are subject to review every
two years. I am talking about the powers on the revenue
expenditure side. The last revision was in 2002. Last year, we have
very substantially enhanced it and the bulk of the revenue spending
is now within their control.”
9. When asked to state about the adequacy of delegated powers to
the Service Headquarters, the Defence Secretary, during oral evidence,
submitted :
“I would like to point out that there was nothing like this earlier.
We want more to be delegated. This delegation of Rs. 10 crore has
been done in great consultation with the Finance Department. We
will definitely delegate it if there is a large possibility.”
10. On being asked whether there is a need to review continuously
with regard to the delegation of powers instead of waiting for two
years, the representatives of the Ministry of Defence, during oral
evidence, stated:
“There is no problem in reviewing any specifically-felt need of the
three services. If they bring it up, then the Ministry would be
quite open to review it and mandate whatever needs to be done.
But there is a whole range of issues involved in it. There are
certain efficiencies, which have to be brought about at the level of

7
the command. Delegations are not static in the sense that if we
see that there is a good merit, then this two-year ban does not
come in the way.”
11. Replying to a query of the Committee pertaining to getting
approval of the Ministry of Defence and Ministry of Finance on the
proposals which fall within the delegated power of the Service
Headquarters, the Ministry of Defence, during oral evidence, stated:
“This is the first time that powers in respect of capital acquisition
have been given to the Services. In quantitative terms almost one-
third of the cases would not have to come to the Ministry and
they are free to do the price negotiation and technical evaluation,
conclude the contract, etc. All those stages are saved. It relieves
the Ministry of a lot of burden in physical terms because each
process, whether the value is Rs. 5 crore or Rs. 500 crore, has to
undergo the same kind of rigorous examination. Work to the extent
of one-third has been entrusted to them. There is a lot of reduction
in the number of cases and more quality time can be devoted by
the functionaries in the Ministry in the Acquisition Wing to this
focused acquisition.
All cases require Acceptance of Necessity (AON), and AON is
given by the Defence Acquisition Council. The rest of the process
will be started only after AON is accorded. The necessity has to
be established.
I think this concern is extremely valid. There is a tremendous
merit in delegation. The hon. Member was questioning as to why
the acceptance of necessity approval should be required once the
power is delegated. I fully agree with the concern. We are going
to examine this. If it is not required, we are going to delegated
that also.“
Ministry of Defence OM No.H-11013/28/2005/D(Parl) dt. 6.2.2007
Comments of the Committee
12. The Committee note that the Ministry of Defence have made
improvement in Defence Procurement Policy (DPP), 2005 and the
revised DPP , 2006 and Defence Procurement Manual (DPM), 2006
are being implemented w.e.f. 01.09.2006. After examining the DPP ,
2006, the Committee feel that there is a need for further improvement
in the present Defence Procurement Procedure. The Committee are
concerned to note that the present limit of financial delegation to

8
the Service Headquarters is meager and inadequate as the cost of
the equipment for the three Services is continuously going up. The
Committee, therefore, strongly recommend that the present financial
delegation to the Service Headquarters needs to be suitably increased.
The Committee desire that Defence Secretary also be delegated
appropriate financial powers at par with the Service Headquarters
to speed up and facilitate the acquisition process. In this context,
the Committee further recommend that the financial power of
Defence Minister should be increased upto Rs. 200 crores, if that
falls within the Budgetary provision of the Ministry of Defence and
there should be no need for concurrence of the Minister of Finance.
However, if the demand is over and above the budget of the Ministry
of Defence, then the approval of the Minister of Finance be sought
at the higher level expeditiously.
The Committee observe that proposals falling within the
delegated power of the Service Headquarters and Defence Secretary
required acceptance of the necessity by the Defence Acquisition
Council. During oral evidence, the representatives of the Ministry of
Defence also agreed with the concern of the Committee that once
power has been delegated, that should not be subjected to approval
of acceptance of necessity by the Acquisition Council or approval
from the Ministry of Defence and the matter may be examined with
an open mind. Therefore, the Committee strongly recommend that
there should not be any need to refer the cases to the Acquisition
Council or Ministry of Defence upto Rs. 10 crore or more where the
powers have been delegated to the Service Headquarters. This will
further minimize delay and ensure accountability.
The Committee note that the Ministry of Defence review the
Defence Procurement Procedure in every two years. During oral
evidence, the Ministry of Defence admitted that delegation of powers
is not static and if they find merit in the proposals of the armed
forces, they may review it. Therefore, the Committee recommend
that the Ministry of Defence should bring improvements as and
when the situation requires instead of waiting for two years to
modify the Procurement Procedure.
In regard to the procurement of day-to-day (civil) revenue items,
the Committee desire that the Ministry of Defence should follow
the procedure being followed by other Ministries in procurement of
revenue items.

9
Need to build a strong R&D base for Defence Sector
Recommendation (Para No.1.15)
13. The Committee had noted that 53.9% of procurements made
in 2004-05 were through imports and only 46.1% of procurements were
from indigenous sources. In the case of Navy , procurements through
imports had increased from 36% to 57.81% during the last 5 years. It
showed that even after more than 60 years of Independence, cutting
edge technologies had not been developed in the country. This had
resulted in the large scale dependence on foreign suppliers for defence
procurements which were subjected to various constraints like
technology denials, sanctions, higher costs, etc. by the exporting
countries. The Committee felt that these constraints could be adequately
addressed through sufficient investments in R & D Sector as also
through transfer of design, data and technology agreements. The
Committee, therefore, were of the strong view that Government should
lay stress on building a strong R & D base with accountability so that
development of defence equipment within the country was encouraged
and dependence on foreign suppliers was minimised.
14. The Ministry, in their Action Taken Reply, have stated that:
“The Navy has been able to increase the indigenous procurement
from 40% in 2004-05 to 60% in 2005-06 as a result of the major
thrust given to indigenization. The increase in the content of
indigenization from 2000-01 to 2005-06 is given in the table below:-
(Rs. in Crore)
Year Total Imported (%) Indigenous (%)
2000-01 3752.52 1706.90 (36) 2045.62 (64)
2001-02 4829 2363 (48.93) 2466 (51.07)
2002-03 3810 1919 (50.36) 1891 (49.64)
2003-04 5175 2985 (57.68) 2190 (42.32)
2004-05 7882.76 4557.11 (57.81) 3324.89 (42.19)
2005-06 8574 3400 (39.65) 5174 (60.35)
A strong R&D base is important for achieving self sufficiency in
the Defence area. It may, however, be mentioned that R&D
laboratories undertake limited production of equipment developed

10
by them which leads to problems in providing adequate product
support, supply of spares, maintenance of equipment and training,
as the R&D laboratories are not geared to undertake such
production related activities.
The Navy’s force level accretion plan is mostly based on indigenous
construction capability of the PSUs and the Private Sector. To
further this cause, Navy has established the Directorate of
Indigenisation to provide impetus and direction to the process of
indigenisation.”
[Ministry of Defence OM No.H-11013/28/2005/D(Parl)
dt. 6.2.2007]
15. When asked to furnish Service-wise information on percentage
of indigenous procurement and import since 2000-01, the Ministry of
Defence, in their written replies, stated :-
Expenditure on Capital Acquisition Indigenous
vis-à-vis Foreign payments
Year Indigenous Foreign Payments Total Cap. Acq.
2000-01 4680.68 5821.23 10501.91
2001-02 7216.99 7212.60 144429.59
2002-03 4961.32 7977.32 12938.64
2003-04 6370.28 8213.48 14583.76
2004-05 11656.86 155551.71 27208.57
16. It has been observed that the Government are spending major
chunk of Defence budget for importing Defence equipment and in
return getting obsolete equipment. In this context, when asked whether
the Ministry of Defence have given any thought to share critical
technologies and systems with the private sectors engaged with Defence
Projection in order to attain high end technology in different Defence
R&D fields, the Ministry of Defence in their written replies furnished
to the Committee stated:
“The following provisions have been made in DPP 2006 to
encourage joint venture or collaborations of private manufactures
with adequate capabilities with OFs/DPSUs relating to Transfer of
Technology (ToT):
(a) Cases where ToT is being sought from appropriate
production agency (PA) would be approved by the DAC.

11
The PA would be selected from any of the public/private
firms based on inputs from DDP . In case where the response
to the RFP is received from a joint venture company, then
assessment of absorption of key technologies as required
under the ToT would be carried out by a Committee
constituted by DDP (Para 19 DPP-2006)
(b) The provision of ToT to an Indian Public/Private firm, for
providing Maintenance Infrastructure for ‘Buy’ category
cases, where equipment is being brought from foreign
vendors has been provided in Para 28 of DPP 2006.”
17. On being asked about the efforts made to establish a Directorate
of indigenization for Army and Air Force in order to make these
Services advance like Navy, the Ministry of Defence informed the
Committee that :
“The Directorate of indigenization has been operational in the
Indian Air Force  since 1994. EME Directorate is concerned with
indigenization within Army Head Quarters.”
Comments of the Committee
18. The Committee are distressed to note that even after 60 years
of independence, expenditure on capital acquisition from foreign
sources is 2/3 of the total expenditure on capital acquisition. This
clearly shows that cutting edge technologies have not been developed
in the country and our production agencies are not capable enough
to deliver the equipment/weapon systems as per the requirements of
the Armed Forces.
The Committee are constrained to note that despite the realization
of the fact that a strong R&D base is important for achieving self-
sufficiency in the Defence, Government initiative does not seems to
be adequate. The Ministry of Defence have admitted that R&D
laboratories undertake limited production of equipment developed
by them which leads to problems in providing adequate product
support, supply of spares, maintenance of equipment and training,
as R&D laboratories are not geared to undertake such production
related activities. The Committee, in their 14th Report on DRDO,
had observed that there was a steady decline in the percentage of
R&D budget for DRDO out of the total defence budget. It had gone
down from 6.17 per cent in 2002 to 4.87 per cent in 2004. The
Committee further found that the percentage spending in R&D
activities to the Defence Budget was very low as compared to the

12
advanced and neighbouring countries. Therefore, the Committee wish
to reiterate their earlier recommendation ‘to build a strong R&D
base with accountability’ by putting sufficient investment in R&D
sector and by providing adequate world-class infrastructure facilities
and congenial working atmosphere to the scientist community. The
Committee desire that all out efforts should be made by the Ministry
to encourage Joint Ventures or collaborations of private manufactures
with DPSUs in cases of Transfer of Technology etc. where equipment
is brought from foreign vendors. Similarly, where DRDO laboratories
have undertaken limited production of equipment, the private sector
firms can be encouraged to undertake the mass production. The
Committee also stress for strengthening of R&D base of DPSU,
Ordnance Factories and Public Private Partnership in this regard.
The Committee feel that this will help to bring self-sufficiency in
defence production and minimize dependence on foreign suppliers.
The Committee also strongly feel that the Government should ensure
efficacious implementation of defence acquisition and product policy
in order to considerably reduce capital acquisition from foreign
sources in a gradual and time-bound manners.
The main objective of DRDO is the establishment of capability
for indigenous production of equipment with a view to attain self-
reliance in defence requirements. This mandate of DRDO is
accomplished through 50 laboratories/establishments whose activities
are organized through specific projects. The Committee in their 14th
Report had expressed displeasure to note that one of the reasons for
not delivering the desired result as per the mandate of DRDO to
achieve self-reliance in defence production was that multifarious
responsibilities were being assigned to one authority i.e. the SA to
RM who was also the D.G. of Defence Research and Development
Organization. In this context, the Committee would like to stress
again that one person should not be entrusted with number of
responsibilities by making him hold a number of post
simultaneously. The Committee therefore strongly recommend that
Government should fill all the vacancies urgently so as to make the
organization more purposeful and productive.
The Committee note that Navy has got strong R&D base and
the indigenisation level is quite high in comparison to Army and
Air Force. In this regard, the Committee wish to recommend that
the Ministry of Defence must ensure that the Army and Air Force
should follow Navy’s model for modernisation and indigenisation.

13
Upgradation of Technology of Weapon System without Payment of
Royalty
Recommendation (Para No.1.16)
19. Whenever imports were made, transfer of design, data and
technology should also be ensured. During the life of the agreement
or a reasonable period to be specified therein, if the weapon system
was upgraded, the foreign manufacturer should also transfer the
upgraded technology without payment of royalty.
20. The Ministry, in their Action Taken Reply, have stated that:
“It would not be financially prudent to take ToT for all equipment
procured from abroad. ToT is taken only in those cases where the
requirement of equipment is large. Categorization of the equipment
into ‘Buy & Make’ is decided by DAC/DPB.
Provisions have been incorporated at Para 11 of RFP (DPP-06),
wherein vendors are supposed to intimate about all upgrades and
modifications carried out in the equipment during its lifecycle.”
Ministry of Defence OM No.H-11013/28/2005/D(Parl) dt. 6.2.2007
Comments of the Committee
21. The Committee strongly feel that it should be made
compulsory for the vendors to intimate about all upgrades and
modifications carried out in the equipment during its life cycle.
Therefore, the Committee wish to reiterate their earlier
recommendation that relevant para of RFP should ensure to make it
compulsory on the part of the vendors to upgrade and modify the
equipment during its lifecycle without payment of royalty otherwise
there should be penalty clause for seeking compensation from the
company for not performing committed responsibility / liability as
the per contract.
Need for preparing an appropriate Defence Production and
Procurement Strategy
Recommendation (Para No.1.18)
22. The Committee further desired that the private sector, which
had grown in its capabilities and resources over the years, should be
actively involved in the development/ production/ supply of defence
equipment. Instead of large scale dependence on foreign suppliers,

14
who worked under constraints imposed by their respective
Governments, the Committee were of strong view that home-grown
technologies should be developed with coordinated and concerted
efforts of DRDO, DPSUs, Ordnance Factories and Private Sector. The
Committee, therefore, had desired that an appropriate defence
production and procurement strategy be chalked out with emphasis
on developing indigenous technologies. The Committee further desired
that sufficient incentives with financial support be given to promote
R&D in both public and private sectors engaged in developing cutting
edge technologies. Similarly, in the case of Transfer of Technology
(T.O.T.) agreements, private sector should also be allowed to participate
in/ take benefit of developing new technologies.
23. The Ministry, in their Action Taken Reply, have stated that:
“Design and development of High Technology Complex systems
by RURS/ Indian Industry/DPSUs/OFB/Consortia is being
undertaken as per `Make’ procedure of DPP-2006. [Para 3(c)
Chapter-II of DPP 2006]”
Ministry of Defence OM No.H-11013/28/2005/D(Parl) dt. 6.2.2007
Comments of the Committee
24. The Committee note that design and development of High
Technology Complex Systems by Rakshya Udyog Ratnas/Indian
Industry/DPSUs/Ordnance Factory Board/Consortia is being
undertaken as per ‘Make Procedure of Defence Procurement Policy
(DPP) – 2006. The Committee further note that the R&D laboratories
are not geared to provide adequate product support, supply of spares
and maintenance’. Therefore, the R&D laboratories undertake limited
production of equipment developed by them. The Committee are
further concerned to observe that the R&D budget for DRDO out of
the total defence budget has been declining since 2002. Further, the
percentage spending in R&D activities to the total defence budget is
very low as compared to the advanced and neighbouring countries.
Therefore, the Committee strongly feel that the “make Procedure”,
as enunciated in DPP – 2006, should be supplemented with adequate
budgetary support to promote R&D in both public and private sectors
engaged in developing cutting edge technologies, thereby promoting
indigenisation and self reliance in Defence Sector. The Committee
would like to know the details of the cases where design and
development of high technology complex systems have been
undertaken during the last one year.

15
Need for maintaining required force level of Ships
Recommendation (Para No.2.24)
25. The Committee noted with concern that with the scheduled
de-commissioning of the ships, the force level would fall to 132 at the
end of Eleventh Plan against DAC’s directive to maintain the force
level of 140 ships. The Committee, therefore, strongly recommended
the government to take urgent steps to expedite acquisition of ships
by placing sufficient orders with Defence Shipyards so that the required
number of ships might be maintained. The Committee also desired
that sufficient funds might be allocated to Defence Shipyards to enable
them to undertake upgradation/modernization of their exiting
infrastructure and produce ships of latest technology, thereby facilitating
the Navy to induct them and to maintain their force level as per
perspective plan.
26. The Ministry, in their Action Taken Reply, have stated that:
“Concerted efforts are made to ensure that Navy’s force level of
140 ships as directed by DAC is maintained. There are 38 warships
and submarines presently being built at Indian shipyards, which
are at various stages of construction. Details have been furnished
in Annexure.
Cases for acquisition of ten new ships i.e. one Fleet Tanker, one
Sail Training Ship (STS) and eight Mine Counter Measure Vessels
(MCMVs) are under process.”
Ministry of Defence OM No.H-11013/28/2005/D(Parl) dt. 6.2.2007
Comments of the Committee
27. Keeping in mind the important role the Indian Navy has to
play to safeguard the nation on both economic and strategic fronts,
the Committee wish to reiterate their earlier recommendation to
expedite the matter and also desire that matching allocation should
be provided to DPSUs to upgrade/modernize their infrastructural
facilities for production of ships to ensure that the required fleet
strength is maintained. The Committee also strongly desire that the
process of acquisition of ten new ships should also be expedited
and in a time-bound manner and the Committee may be apprised
about the action taken in this regard.

16
Finalisation of Long Term Perspective Plan and Five Years Defence
Plan
Recommendation (Para No.3.5, 3.6 and 3.7)
28. The Committee noted that acquisition of capital assets flowed
out from the defence procurement planning process which covers 15
year long Perspective Plan, 5-year Service Capital Acquisition Plan
and Annual Acquisition Plan. It was, therefore, imperative that the
above plans were formulated in time and timely approval was given
by Government with firm indication of available funds so that
procurement process could progress smoothly.
The Committee were constrained to note that there had been
abnormal delay in formulation and approval of LTIPP covering the
period 2002-2017 and since 3 years of the plan had elapsed, the Ministry
had now revised the period of LTIPP to 2007-2022. Even the 10th
Defence Five Year Plan (2002-2007), which was in the fourth year, had
not yet been approved with firm indication of funds till now and was
now an academic exercise only. It showed the casual approach of the
Government in formulation of such an important plan as also adhocism
in decision making, adversely affected the modernization plan of the
services. The Committee need not emphasize that in the long term
procurements, lead time was required for creating futuristic forces,
making it necessary to have long term defence planning. The
Committee, therefore, recommended that the Government should
urgently finalize the long term Perspective Plan and also initiate steps
for finalization of the 11th defence plan so that there was a clear
direction of procurements to be made. The Committee desired that the
exercise be completed in a time-bound manner preferably within a
year. The Committee further desired that the 11th Plan Approach Paper
might be made available to the Committee at the time of examination
of Demand for Grants 2006-07.
The early finalization of the LTIPP would also help in projecting
the financial requirements to Ministry of finance (MOF) well in advance,
so as to enable them to plan for the required funds accordingly. This
planning would also help the Ministry of Defence (MOD) in identifying
the requirements of the Services and initiating the procurement process,
well in time, thereby reducing the time lag. This would also help in
determining the broad based qualitative requirements by the services
and ensuring that the GSQRs were not frequently changed and single
vendor situations were avoided. The Ordnance Factories and public
and private sectors could also plan their investments accordingly.

17
29. The Ministry, in their Action Taken Reply, have stated that:
“Broad approval to LTIPP 2002-17 was given by DAC in its meeting
held on 19th June, 2006. Annual Acquisition Plan (AAP) of the
three Services and Coast Guard pertaining to Financial Year 2006-
07 has been approved by DPB on 11-4-2006 in respect of three
Services and on 5-10-2006 in respect of Coast Guard.”
Ministry of Defence OM No.H-11013/28/2005/D(Parl) dt. 6.2.2007
30. On being asked whether the Long Term Integrated Plan and
Five Year Defence Plan is being shared with the production agencies,
the representatives of the Ministry of Defence, during oral evidence,
stated:
“There has been some consultation with the production agencies,
but it is not so formally structured. First of all, we formulate a
plan and then get into the manner in which it has to be acquired.
We fully agree that this is the need of the hour. Firstly, all the
annual acquisition plans come out of the five-year plan, and the
five-year plan is a part of long-term integrated plan. Now, when
an item is to be procured, the CISC organizes the meeting. In this
meeting it is decided whether that item is to be bought. If it is to
be bought, then they discuss whether it should be bought from
Indian firms or from abroad. So, ‘buy and make’ and ‘make’
decisions are first taken, and then we go for procurement.”
Comments of the Committee
31. The Committee note that broad approval to Long Term
Integrated Prospective Plan (LTIPP ) 2002-2017 has been given by
Defence Acquisition Council in June 2006. During the examination
of Demands for Grants (2007-08) the Committee had observed that
the period of LTIPP 2002-17 has now been revised to 2007-22 keeping
in view the likely availability of funds during the 11th Plan. The
Committee note that this revised LTIPP will be approved by the
Defence Acquisition Council by 31st October 2009 and the 11th Plan
is yet to be finally cleared by the Ministry of Finance. The Committee
are deeply concerned to note that continued delay in preparing LTIPP
and Five Years Defence Plan hamper defence modernisation and
upgradation programme. Therefore, the Committee strongly
recommend that Ministry of Defence should take up this matter at
the highest level to get its 11th Plan cleared by the Ministry of
Finance. The Ministry should finalise LTIPP at the earliest in order
to make a correct assessment of the procurement based on threat

18
perception, changing security scenario and rapid scientific and
technological innovation to meet the requirements of the forces. The
Committee hope and trust that annual plan of the Ministry of
Defence for the year 2007-08 are based on the projections/targets
fixed for the Eleventh Plan and will be synchronized timely with it.
The Committee further recommend that the Armed Forces/
Ministry of Defence should make available their Long Term
Perspective Plan to the Production agencies and involve the users
directly throughout the process to prepare a realistic and growth-
oriented perspective plan of the production agencies. This will further
facilitate the production agencies to produce the latest equipment as
per the technological changes so as to meet the requirements of the
Armed Forces and encourage them for more investment and ensure
hundred percent capacity utilisation.
Involvement of Experts during finalisation of Service Qualitative
Requirements
Recommendation Para No. 4.10 & 4.11
32. The Committee, however, desired that SQRs should be laid
down after careful evaluation of the equipment, if already in use,
during the trials and exercises. The Committee felt that for laying
down SQRs, experts from OFB / DRDO and outside must be consulted
so that deficiencies in the equipment were identified and technical
parameters, after rectifying the known deficiencies, were correctly laid
down for the procurement of that equipment in future.
Similarly, if the equipment to be procured was not in use, the
service requirements should be clearly identified first by the user and
thereafter SQR might be laid down after consulting experts from DRDO,
OFB and reputed private Organisations having relevant expertise. This
would help in avoiding changes in SQR again and again.
Reply of the Government
Formulation of SQRs have been addressed in DPP 2006 (Para 13
to 16).
33. SQRs are formulated by the User Directorate at SHQ and
circulated to all concerned for obtaining their views/comments
including other possible user directorates, maintenance directorate, HQ

19
IDS, DRDO, Department of Defence Production (DDP), Director General
of Quality Assurance (DGQA)/Director General of Aeronautical Quality
Assurance (DGAQA), Directorate of Standardisation, Technical Managers
and any other department, as deemed necessary. (Para 13 to 16 of
DPP 2006).
Reputed private organizations having relevant experience are being
consulted before finalizing the SQR.
Ministry of Defence OM No.H-11013/28/2005/D(Parl) dt. 6.2.2007
Formulation of SQR has been addressed in DPP-2006.
34. On being asked whether the reputed private organisations
having relevant expertise are being appointed as a consultant, the
representatives of the Ministry of Defence, during oral evidence, stated:
“As far as trials are concerned, they are conducted only on vendors
who are short listed. No private sector would be involved in that.
The service headquarters are the users. They decide what is the
requirement. They are the best judges to see whether a particular
equipment meets the requirement or not. These equipments are
tried out in various climatic conditions. In the conduct of the trials,
if, for particular equipment, they feel that they need to consult
somebody, they are free to do that. If the service headquarters feel
that they need a particular consultant, they could certainly write
to us and we will permit that.”
Comments of the Committee
35. The Committee are concerned to note that during the trial of
a particular equipment, the private sector, having relevant expertise,
are not being consulted regularly to identify deficiencies in the
equipment and other technical parameters before finalizing Service
Qualitative Requirement (SQR). However, the Ministry of Defence
permit the Service Headquarters, if they desire, to appoint any proven
and experienced private consultant. The Committee feel that for
careful and correct evaluation of the equipment and other technical
parameters, the Ministry of Defence should insert a provision in the
Defence Procurement Policy (DPP) so that the Service Headquarters
or the production agencies if need be can avail the services of private
consultants/experts, wherever they have relevant expertise, before
finalizing SQR.

20
Inviting pre-bid meetings of manufactures to avoid single-vendor
situation
Recommendation Para No. 4.12
36. The Committee had suggested that, in order to avoid single
vendor situations a new methodology could be adopted which should
comprise inviting pre-bid meetings of the various manufacturers to
discuss technical specifications of the desired product after floating
global enquiries. Then the respective service headquarters could prepare
their own technical specifications from the above discussion by
involving the technical experts from the user service, DRDO, OFB,
DGQA and reputed private organisations having relevant expertise,
before inviting the manufacturers to submit the technical and financial
bids according to the specifications. This would be helpful in avoiding
manipulation and single vendor situations as many manufacturers
would participate in final bidding and accountability would be there.
The Committee would like to emphasize that the system should be
foolproof so that there was no room for accusation of corruption and
illegal transaction.
37. The Ministry, in their action taken reply, have stated:
“Formulation of SQRs has been addressed in para 13 to 16 of DPP
2006. The QRs shall be prescribed in clear-cut terms and they
should not vague or ambiguous. Prior to according approval to
the SQRs, the Staff Equipment Policy Committee (SEPC) should
assess that it would result in a multi vendor situation. If a single
vendor situation is likely, then the reasons for formulation of such
SQRs are to be recorded. Such cases would be debated in the
SCAPCHC meeting while seeking AoN and approved by DAC.
SHQ may issue `Request For Information (RFIs)’, where they are
not certain of the specification of a system, in order to formulate
realistic SQRs (Para 14 of DPP 2006).
The issue of pre-bid meeting of all the vendors has been addressed
in DPP-2006. (Para 31)
SQRs are based on operational requirements. Meeting with vendors
to discuss the technical specifications prior to formulation of SQRs
is not warranted as it may lead to dilution of operational
requirements or SQRs being vendor specific which is not warranted.
However, it is made sure that SQRs are broad based to lead to
multi-vendor situation in all cases. This has been addressed at
Para 13-16 of DPP 2006.

21
Reputed private organizations having relevant experience are being
consulted before finalizing the SQR wherever required.”
Ministry of Defence OM No.H-11013/28/2005/D(Parl) dt. 6.2.2007
Comments of the Committee
38. The Committee are not satisfied with the vague replies. The
provision of Defence Procurement Policy 2006 i.e. “prior to according
approval to the SQRs, the Staff Equipment Policy Committee (SEPC)
should assess that it would result in a multi- vendor situation” does
not spell out clear cut measures to avoid single-vendor situation.
Therefore, the Committee desire to reiterate their earlier
recommendation that the Ministry of Defence must take concerted
efforts to amend the provision of DPP-2006 and specifically mention
the methodology for inviting pre-bid meetings of various
manufacturers to discuss technical specification of the desired product
after floating global enquiries. Then the respective service
headquarters can prepare their own technical specifications from the
above discussion by involving the technical experts from the user
service, DRDO, OFB, DGQA and reputed private organisations
having relevant expertise, before inviting the manufacturers to submit
the technical and financial bids according to the specifications. This
will bring uniformity and minimize delay in finalisation of tender.
Off-set Clause
Recommendation (Para Nos. 5.6 & 5.7)
39. The Committee had noted that the provision of offset clause
which had been introduced in the new procedure and was being
followed in many countries. The Committee had been informed about
the benefits of offset clause which had helped build up indigenous
defence industries in some countries. Since the Indian import of defence
equipment was very large, the Committee felt that the provision should
be utilized to ensure the development of indigenous defence industry.
There should be a national policy for utilisation of offset clause for
defence procurement. The Committee desired that efforts should be
made to ensure participation of private sector defence industries and
some of the benefits of this clause should be passed on to them also.
The Committee, therefore, strongly recommended that the modalities
for implementation of offset contracts should be carefully worked out
so that foreign technology could be adequately imbibed by the Indian
industrial sector. A Committee of experts from industry and other
relevant fields be constituted which should examine each offset and

22
suggest as to how maximum advantage could be derived there from
and also to monitor implementation of the offset clause. The Committee
would again like to stress that no royalty should be given for
subsequent upgradation / modifications of the technology by the
foreign supplier during the contract period.
The Committee also expressed their apprehension that this clause
would be utilized for trade accounts only. The Committee felt that
maximum benefit should be extracted from this clause. Private sector
along with the OFs/DPSUs should be permitted to participate in the
scheme envisaged under offset clause and allowed to enter into joint
ventures with foreign manufacturers for defence production under
technology transfer. The Committee also desired that there should be
a joint public and private sector venture to implement the benefits of
offset clause. This would be helpful in achieving self-reliance. A specific
time frame should be determined by the Government so that the offset
clause could make India self-sufficient in defence production.
40. The Ministry, in their action taken reply, have stated:
“The recommendations of the committee has been included wherein
defence off-set guidelines have been incorporated in Para 22 of
DPP 2006”.
41. Pertaining to the present status of offset clause, the
representative of Ministry of Defence, during oral evidence stated :
“It is submitted that the provision for offset was indicated in the
DPP 2005. We started indicating and asking in our RFP , and we
said that offset would be required. The offset proposals are
evaluated concurrently with our main proposals that are received
in response to the RFP . All these things are being implemented,
but it takes a little time to actually sign the offset contract. It is
all in the process, and they are in the pipeline. First few offset
cases are almost reaching finalization, and we expect that shortly
they should come up. It is being implemented from DPP 2005.
Subsequently, we have included detailed guidelines for offset, in
DPP 2006. This is an improvement that we made from DPP 2005.
These are all being implemented, and everything is in the pipeline.”
Ministry of Defence OM No.H-11013/28/2005/D(Parl) dt 6.2.2007
Comments of the Committee
42. The Committee note that the Ministry of Defence has
incorporated detailed offset guidelines in DPP – 2006. In regard to

23
the implementation status of off-set provision, the Committee observe
that off-set provisions have been indicated while issuing Request
for Proposals. The Government is examining the proposals received
under RFP along with the offset provisions. The Government is going
to finalise these provisions. In this perspective, the Committee desire
that the Ministry should make earnest efforts to finalise at the earliest
and ensure to utilise the off-set proposals for development of defence
R&D at the first instances and in case of non-utilisation, the same
may be utilized for industrial infrastructure for services, co-
development, joint venture and co-production of Defence production
instead of diversifying it for some other purposes.
Effective use of the Services of Defence Attaches
Recommendation Para No. 6.9
43. The Committee had been informed that the Ministry maintain
data bank of prospective vendors who were suppliers of defence
equipment. Defence Attaches posted in various countries were also
involved in the identification of vendors. The Committee were of the
view that Defence Attaches should be given a meaningful role in
identifying technology and defence equipment available with foreign
suppliers and they should regularly and adequately apprised the
Ministry of the various advancements made and agencies involved in
the development of defence equipment in the country of their posting.
They should also provide data and evaluation of such equipment and
its tentative cost, etc. The Ministry of Defence should have sufficient
data bank with them based on such information.
44. The Ministry, in their action taken reply, have stated:
“Provision has been made in DPP 2006 to generate maximum
vendor response through vendor’s registration through internet,
case specific advertisement on the internet, expression of interest
and advertisement through newspaper (Para 24).”
Ministry of Defence OM No.H-11013/28/2005/D(Parl) dt 6.2.2007
Comments of the Committee
45. The Committee observe that a provision has been made in
Defence Procurement Policy (DPP) 2006 to generate maximum vendor
response through vendor’s registration through internet, case specific
advertisement on the internet, expression of interest and
advertisement through newspaper. However, the Committee are

24
deeply concerned to note that their recommendation to fully utilize
the services of the Defence Attaches posted in various countries in
the identification of vendors have not been duly reflected in the
DPP-2006. Therefore, the Committee wish to reiterate their earlier
recommendation to fully utilise the services of Defence Attaches in
the identification of vendors, technology and defence equipment
available with the foreign suppliers, etc. and desire that specific
provision in this regard may be suitably incorporated in the DPP-
2006.
Prolonged Field Trail- Cause of delay
Recommendation (Para No. 9.6, 12.4 & 12.5)
46. The Committee noted that another reason for delay in
procurement of a major equipment which was to be introduced for
the first time, was that it had to be tried out during winter, summer,
at high altitude, in desert, forest and plains and, therefore it did take
time. The Committee desired that efforts should be made to reduce
the time taken in the trials of the equipment in all the different
situations.
The Committee, also stressed that all required trials should be
done in a time bound manner in conformity with the planned schedule.
47. The Committee noted that field evaluation/computer simulation
of a new weapon system was normally done in all conditions where
the equipment was required to be deployed. The Committee were,
however, of the view that though field evaluation/computer simulation
of new equipment was very essential, this should be completed in a
time-bound manner so that the procurement process was completed in
the prescribed period.
48. The Committee further desire that in the field evaluation of
new equipment, the user and technical experts of Ordnance Factories,
DRDO and reputed private organization having relevant expertise,
should invariably be involved so that they may help in proper
evaluation of the equipment particularly in case involving integration
of different systems and sensitive equipment.
The Committee also desire that a floor level Committee should be
constituted for evaluating the field trials. The Committee should
comprise of the field level service officers, technical experts from DRDO,
OFs/DPSUs and reputed private organization having relevant expertise
and also the manufacturer. This will help in assessing the quality of
equipment more objectively.

25
49. The Ministry of Defence in their Action Taken Reply, submitted
as under:-
“Due to the complexities involved in the procurement of defence
equipments, it has invariably been seen that maximum time is
devoted in conduclt of field trials by the user in various terrains
and its subsequent evaluation at SHQ. The equipment offered by
the foreign vendors are not specifically developed for Indian
conditions and there are number of short falls. The equipment is
to be trial evaluated as per our GSQR parameters. Prolonged trials
take place till the time all the parameters are validated.”
“The trials are carried out by the user who is going to operate the
equipment/weapon system in field conditions. The trials are also
witnessed by representatives of higher formations; service HQs
and even Technical Managers. The trials report is processed through
the chain of command where the commanders in chain give their
comments. While conducting trials, representatives of DRDO,
DPSUs and other agencies are also involved on case to case basis.”
Ministry of Defence OM No.H-11013/28/2005/D(Parl) dt 6.2.2007
Comments of the Committee
50. The Committee do understand that complexities are involved
in the procurement of defence equipments and the maximum time
is devoted in conduct of field trials by the user in various terrains
as the equipment offered by the foreign vendors are not specifically
developed for Indian conditions. The Committee, however, are
concerned to observe that long field trial of equipment is major
cause for delay in procurement of equipments. The Committee
understand that computer simulation and other new methods are
available world wide to try the new equipment in all conditions.
The Committee hope that these methods should be meticulously
used to avoid delays in field trials and complete the procurement in
the prescribed period of time. The Committee, therefore, recommend
that each stage of field trial should scrupulously & scientifically be
studied by the expert Committee, in order to assess and report, how
the long process of field trial can be minimized, in order to reduce
significant delay in capital procurement. The Committee may be
informed about the steps taken by the Government in this regard.
The Committee note that same amount of time is taken by Armed
Forces in making evaluation trails even in case of equipments
produced indigenously. The Committee desire in such cases trials

26
should be completed in a time-bound manner. The Ministry of
Defence should monitor and try to improve the situation.
Need to make the guidelines for appointment of authorised Indian
agents less cumbersome
Recommendation (Para No. 11.4)
51. The Committee noted with concern that despite the guidelines
issued by the Ministry for appointment of authorized Indian
representative/agents of foreign suppliers, nobody had registered
himself as an authorized Agent. The Committee were of the view that
representatives of the suppliers in the country could play a useful role
in After Sale Service and in sorting out problems during the warrantee
period etc. The committee, therefore, strongly recommended that the
Ministry mighty analyse the reason for non-registration of authorized
representatives with the Ministry and take remedial steps to make the
procedures less cumbersome and simple so as to encourage the
authorized representatives to come forward and register themselves.
The Committee also felt that registration of agents should be
encouraged so that the allegation of kickbacks might be minimized
and these agents might also facilitate better coordination between the
MoD and the supplier during trials, etc. This would also help in
reducing the time and cost overruns.
52. The Ministry of Defence in their reply stated as under:
“On the basis of Ministry of Finance’s instructions issued on 31st
January, 1989 relating to Indian Agents of foreign suppliers for all
the Ministries/Departments under the Government of India,
supplementary instructions were issued by the Ministry of Defence
in April, 1989 and in November, 2001 to regulate authorized Indian
representatives/agents of foreign suppliers. The instructions provide
for the regulation of representational arrangements through a
system of registration, categorical and open declaration by the
foreign suppliers of the services to be rendered by their authorized
representative/agents and the remuneration payable to them by
way of fees, commission or any other method. So far no authorized
Indian Representative/Agent has been registered by the Ministry
of Defence in terms of these instructions.”
Comments of the Committee
53. The Committee are concerned to note that inspite of
instructions issued by the Ministry of Finance on 31st January 1989

27
relating to Indian Agents of foreign suppliers for all the Ministries/
Departments under the Government of India and supplementary
instructions issued by the Ministry of Defence in April 1989 and
Nov 2001 to regulate authorized Indian representatives/agents of
foreign suppliers, no authorized Indian representative/agent has been
registered by the Ministry of Defence in terms of these instructions.
The Committee take a serious note of the fact that no registration of
any Indian Agents/Representative since 1989 has not been done so
far. Moreover the Ministry of Defence has not given any reason
thereon. The Committee feel that there must be some regulations
which are deterring the authorised Indian representatives to get
themselves registered with the Ministry. The Committee strongly
recommend that there is an urgent need to review the guidelines/
procedure relating to registration and authorized Indian
representatives by the Ministry of Defence and to take necessary
remedial steps urgently to make the procedure less cumbersome and
simple in this regard.
Fast Track Procedure
Recommendation (Para Nos. 13.8, 13.9, 13.10 & 13.12)
54. The Committee noted that the fast tract procedure promulgated
in December, 2002 to facilitate speedier acquisition of defence equipment
in an emergent situation had completely failed to meet its objectives.
A study of the cases taken up under FTP revealed that it took more
than 12 months to sign the contracts defeating the very purpose for
which it was established i.e. to meet certain unforeseen eventualities.
Actual delivery of the equipment would have taken some more time.
The Committee were informed that there was mix up in the
implementation of the Fast Track Procedure, and the government was
in the process of reviewing it. As an efficient Fast Tract Procedure
could play a vital role in emergent situations, the Committee
recommended that the Ministry should carefully analyse the
shortcomings of FTP and establish a procedure for emergent purchases
which was truly fast tract and quick.
55. The Committee felt that the conditionality of starting
procurement process after the approval of RM only, in itself was time
consuming in an emergent situation where time was of great essence.
The Committee desired that the requirements of emergent nature after
having been certified at the level of GOC-in-C in Army and equivalent
level in other forces and routed through Chief of Staff should be
considered emergent to start the process. Approval of RM could be
taken when the proposal was put up to him for financial sanction.

28
56. However, to check that every other case was not put under
FTP , the Ministry should lay down norms / guidelines which a
procurement case would have to meet to qualify for Fast Track
Procurement. A certificate to this effect could be furnished by GoC-in-
C approving the case.
57. The Committee also felt that 12 months time taken under FTP
to sign a contract would negate the very purpose of the procedure
particularly when something was ‘imminent’ or there was an
operational emergency. The Committee felt that there might be a need
for separate procedure under FTP for SOS supplies. The Committee
desired that the Government should examine this aspect also and check
how far present FTP could handle such a situation. The Committee
might be informed of the analysis made.
58. The Ministry in their action taken replies have stated:
“A revamped Fast Track Procedure 2006 has been included in
Chapter –IV of DPP 2006.
Ministry of Defence OM No.H-11013/28/2005/D(Parl) dt 6.2.2007
Comments of the Committee
59. The Committee noted that the aim and objective of this
procedure was to ensure expeditious procurement of urgent
operational requirements foreseen as imminent or for a situation in
which a crisis emerges without prior warning. However, the
Committee are distressed to note that the period prescribed under
the Fast Track Procedure i.e. twelve months to sign the contracts
defeat the very purpose for which it was established. From an in-
depth study of the Fast Track Procedure, the Committee observe that
the Ministry have not made any provision to purchase equipment in
an urgent operational requirements. Therefore, the Committee wish
to reiterate their earlier recommendation and desire that suitable
provision may be inserted in the DPP-2006 to enable the Service
Headquarters to purchase the desired equipment within a month’s
time with the approval of Raksha Mantri. In this way the Fast Track
Procedure will serve meaningful purpose to meet the emergent
operational requirements.
The Committee further note that in the Fast Track Procedure -
2006, the Ministry of Defence have prescribed twelve months time
frame to complete the acquisition procedure. This prescribed time
frame will be followed in case of “procurement of equipment already

29
inducted into the Services” as well as “procurement of new
equipment”. The Committee strongly feel that the Ministry of
Defence should not take the same time for procurement of equipment
already inducted into the Services, because they are already well
versed with the supplying agencies, price and quality of the
equipment and trial etc. Therefore, the Committee, desire that the
Ministry of Defence must modify the Fast Track Procedure – 2006
and make clear cut distinction in regard to time period and
procedures followed for procurement of equipment which are already
inducted into services and procurement of new equipment. The
committee also desire that improvements made in Fast Track
Procedure from time to time may be intimated to the Committee.

CHAPTER II
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN
ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT
Recommendation (Sl. No. 1.4 & 1.5)
The Committee are happy to note that the Government has
promulgated a new Defence Procurement Procedure-2005 for Capital
procurements; and also, for the first time, Defence Procurement Manual
2005, for Revenue Procurements. The Committee feel that it will bring
about greater transparency in defence purchases and make
procurements speedier thereby ensuring timely utilisation of funds.
This way it can be ensured that our soldiers get timely and quality
supply of defence items.
The Committee desire the Government to examine whether the
stages for procurement can be reduced to curtail the time involved.
With a view to avoiding delays the Committee also desire that once
allocation has been made in the budget for a particular procurement,
the same should not be sent again and again for approval to Ministry
of Finance.
Reply of the Government
DPP-2006 and DPM-2006 are under implementation with effect from
1.09.06. All efforts are being made to ensure that the Armed Forces
are supplied with all necessary items to ensure that the security
interests of the nation are adequately protected.
Following steps have been taken to reduce the time frame of
Defence Acquisition:
(i) Time frame for procurement activities has been stated at
Appendix -C of DPP-06 and major deviation would be
monitored at the highest level. The time frames as prescribed
in DPP-06 would lead to cutting down of internal lead time
for procurements as it brings in checks and balances to
avoid multi-layered examination on file and following a path
of collegiate functioning at all levels. All major decisions as
per the procedures in vogue are being taken at the initiation
of the case at the highest level in a time bound manner,
30

31
which is aimed to reduce the overall lead time for
procurement. These include:-
(a) Acceptance of Necessity
(b) Quantities to be procured
(c) Categorisation i.e. or ‘BUY’, ‘MAKE’ or ‘BUY & Make’.
(d) Single vendor Clearance (if applicable)
(e) Offset percentages (if applicable)
(f) Detailed scope of trials
(g) Nomination of production agency in cases involving
Transfer of Technology (ToT).
(ii) In order to reduce time taken at commercial negotiations
and in line with the recommendations of CVC, there would
no negotiations with L1 bidder in multi vendor cases.
(iii) The financial powers of RM & FM have been enhanced
along with delegation of financial powers to SHQRs (upto
10 crores) which would speed up the acquisition process.
The time frame given in the DPP-06 is indicative and not
prescriptive.
(iv) No comments can be offered on the issue of forwarding of
proposals time and again to the Ministry of Finance.
Ministry of Defence OM No.H-11013/28/2005/D(Parl) dt. 6.2.2007
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para 12 of Chapter – 1)
Recommendation (Sl. No. 1.17)
The technology design and other related information transferred
may be passed on to the DRDO/OFs/DPSUs/Private Sector engaged
in defence production for further modernization and upgradation of
the existing technology and development of new technology. In this
way, defence weapons and other equipment can be constantly upgraded
indigenously throughout their service life.
Reply of the Government
Categorization of the equipment into ‘Buy & Make’ is dealt by the
Categorization Committee of HQIDS and approved by DAC/DPB. The
appropriate production agency for absorption of technology would be

32
approved by the DAC based on the recommendations of the
Categorization Committee. The production agency could be selected
from any of the Public/Private firms based on the inputs from the
Department of Defence Production.
In case of the upgrades, Public/Private firms and DRDO would
be involved in the programme.
Ministry of Defence OM No.H-11013/28/2005/D(Parl) dt 6.2.2007
Recommendation (Sl. No. 1.19)
In case of procurement from foreign vendors with the transfer of
technology, the joint ventures may not be restricted to the OFs/DPSUs
only. Private manufacturers with adequate capabilities should also be
considered and encouraged to enter into such joint ventures. The
Committee also feel that joint ventures or collaborations of the OFs/
DPSUs with private entrepreneurs/foreign vendors should also be
encouraged.
Reply of the Government
The following provisions have been made in DPP-06 to encourage
joint venture/collaboration with the private sector:
(a) Cases where ToT is being sought, an appropriate Production
Agency (PA) is approved by the Defence Acquisition Council
(DAC). The PA is selected from any of the public/private
firms based on inputs from Department of Defence
Production (DDP). In cases where the response to the
Request for Proposal (RFP) is received from a joint venture
company, assessment of absorption of key technologies as
required under the ToT is carried out by a Committee
constituted by DDP as per Para 19 of DPP-06).
(b) The provision of ToT to an Indian Public/Private firm for
providing Maintenance Infrastructure for ‘Buy’ category cases
where equipment is being brought from foreign vendors
has been provided in Para 28 of DPP-06.
(c) The criteria for selection of Champions of Industry in the
Private Sector named as Raksha Udyog Ratnas (RURs) have
been laid down in Para 22, Chapter-II of DPP-06.
(d) High Technology Complex Systems as per ‘Make’ procedure
of DPP-06 would be undertaken by RURs/Indian Industry/
DPSUs/ OFB/Consortia on a level playing field as per Para
3(c) of Chapter II of DPP-06.

33
In accordance with the above provisions the Army has involved
the private sector in the production of equipment like Pinaka system.
Ministry of Defence OM No.H-11013/28/2005/D(Parl) dt  6.2.2007
Recommendation (Sl. No. 2.17, 2.19 & 2.20)
The Committee are happy to note that the Government has
promulgated a new Defence Procurement Procedure (DPP) – 2005 for
Capital Procurements and Defence Procurement Manual 2005 for
Revenue Procurements incorporating the suggestions of Central
Vigilance Commission and Comptroller & Auditor General and Ministry
of Finance. The Committee hope that the procedure and manual will
effectively address the shortcomings of the earlier procedure and make
the procurement process more transparent and faster.
The Committee note that for the first time the Ministry has released
a separate Manual for Revenue Procurement which accounts for nearly
55%^ of the total revenue expenditure of the Ministry of Defence. The
committee feel it will help in cutting down delays in procurement of
day-to-day requirements. The committee desire that the manual may
be constantly reviewed and updated by incorporating various
suggestions and experience of the Ministry of Defence so that it may
become more effective.
As the new DPP has become effective only from 1.7.2005, the
Committee do not have the benefit of Government’s experience in
working the new procedure. However, the Committee have made an
in-depth study of the new procedure and manual in conjunction with
the earlier procedures and have given their recommendations in the
succeeding paragraphs on some of the important stages involved in
the procurement procedure.
Reply of the Government
Defence Procurement Procedure (DPP) 2006 and Defence
Procurement Manual (DPM) 2006 are under implementation with effect
from 01.09.06. The changes made in the DPP and DPM were based on
the experience gained over a period of time to make it transparent
and reduce the time frame of procurement.
Defence Procurement Manual (DPM) 2006 is being constantly
reviewed and after the promulgation of DPM 2006, two amendments
have been issued based on the experience gained while implementing
this procedure.

34
The recommendations of the Committee have been addressed in
DPP – 2006 as indicated below :
Recomn. Recommendation Remarks/Updated
No. position
12 3
2.18 The Committee note that DPP-2005
caters only to Buy/Buy & Make
categories and the Government is in
the process of formulating a separate
procedure for defence acquisition in
respect of ’Make’ category of
projects. The Committee desire that
a clear-cut policy and procedure for
the same should be formulated at the
earliest, which should duly involve
the private sector to exploit their
capabilities. Efforts should be made
to synergise the capabilities of public
and private sectors and DRDO to
pave the way for attaining self-
reliance in defence production.
‘Make’ procedure has
been made a part of
DPP 2006 [Chapter II
of DPP 2006].  The aim
of the ‘Make’ procedure
is to ensure Indigenous
Research, Design,
Development and
Production of
capabilities sought by
the Armed Forces in
prescribed timeframe
while optimally utilising
the potential of Indian
Industry. In addition, it
would also achieve self
reliance in Defence
Equipment. The ‘Make’
procedure will cover all
capital acquisitions of
High Technology
Complex Systems and
upgrades undertaken
by Indigenous Research,
Design and
Development. These
would be undertaken
by Ordnance Factory
Board (OFB), Defence
Public Undertakings
(DPSUs) and Indian
Industry/Raksha Udyog
Ratna (RUR)/ Consortia
on a level playing field
on shared development
cost.

35
4.9 The Committee fully endorse the
amendment in new procedure of not
granting any waiver to SQR
amendment parameters after issue of
RFPs. The Committee feel that it will
improve transparency and would be
fair and impartial to the vendors.
4.10 The Committee, however, desire that
SQRs should be laid down after
careful evaluation of the equipment,
if already in use, during the trials
and exercises. The Committee feel
that for laying down SQRs, experts
from OFB / DRDO and outside must
be consulted so that deficiencies in
the equipment are identified and
technical parameters, after rectifying
the known deficiencies, are correctly
laid down for the procurement of
that equipment in future.
This has been
addressed at Para 17 of
DPP 2006. Waiver /
amendment to
parameters of GSQRs
may be obtained by
SHQ concerned before
issue of RFP . Thereafter,
no waiver of
parameters would be
granted.
Formulation of SQRs
have been addressed in
DPP 2006 (Para 13 to
16).
SQRs are formulated by
the User Directorate at
SHQ and circulated to
all concerned for
obtaining their views/
comments including
other possible user
directorates, mainte-
nance directorate, HQ
IDS, DRDO, Depart-
ment of Defence
Production (DDP),
Director General of
Quality Assurance
(DGQA)/Director
General of Aeronautical
Quality Assurance
(DGAQA), Directorate
of Standardisation,
Technical Managers and
any other department,
as deemed necessary.
(Para 13 to 16 of DPP
2006).
12 3

36
4.12. The Commitee suggest that, in order
to avoid single vendor situations a
new methodology be adopted which
should comprise inviting pre-bid
meetings of the various
manufacturers to discuss technical
specifications of the desired product
after floating global enquiries. Then
the respective service headquarters
can prepare their own technical
specifications from the above
discussion by involving the technical
experts from the user service, DRDO,
OFB, DGQA and reputed private
organisations having relevant
expertise, before inviting the
manufacturers to submit the technical
and financial bids according to the
specifications. This will be helpful in
avoiding manipulation and single
vendor situations as many
manufacturers will participate in
final bidding and accountability will
be there. The Committee would like
to emphasize that the system should
be foolproof so that there is no room
for accusation of corruption and
illegal transaction.
12 3
Reputed private
organizations having
relevant experience are
being consulted before
finalizing the SQR.
Formulation of SQRs
has been addressed in
para 13 to 16 of DPP
2006. The QRs shall be
prescribed in clear-cut
terms and they should
not vague or
ambiguous. Prior to
according approval to
the SQRs, the Staff
Equipment Policy
Committee (SEPC)
should assess that it
would result in a multi
vendor situation. If a
single vendor situation
is likely, then the
reasons for formulation
of such SQRs are to be
recorded. Such cases
would be debated in
the SCAPCHC meeting
while seeking AoN and
approved by DAC.
SHQ may issue
‘Request For
Information (RFIs)’,
where they are not
certain of the
specification of a
system, in order to
formulate realistic SQRs
(Para 14 of DPP 2006).
The issue of pre-bid
meeting of all the

37
5.6 The Committee note the provision of
offset clause which has been
introduced in the new procedure and
is being followed in many countries.
The Committee have been informed
about the benefits of offset clause
which has helped build up
indigenous defence industries in
some countries. Since the Indian
import of defence equipment is very
large, the Committee feel that the
provision should be utilized to
12 3
vendors has been
addressed in DPP-2006.
(Para 31)
SQRs are based on
operational require-
ments. Meeting with
vendors to discuss the
technical specifications
prior to formulation of
SQRs is not warranted
as it may lead to
dilution of operational
require-ments or SQRs
being vendor specific
which is not warranted.
However, it is made
sure that SQRs are
broad based to lead to
multi-vendor situation
in all cases. This has
been addressed at Para
13-16 of DPP 2006.
Reputed private
organizations having
relevant experience are
being consulted before
finalizing the SQR
wherever required.
Defence off-set
guidelines have been
incorporated in Para 22
of DPP 2006.

38
12 3
ensure the development of
indigenous defence industry. There
should be a national policy for
utilisation of offset clause for defence
procurement. The Committee desire
that efforts should be made to ensure
participation of private sector defence
industries and some of the benefits
of this clause should be passed on
to them also. The Committee,
therefore, strongly recommend that
the modalities for implementation of
offset contracts should be carefully
worked out so that foreign
technology could be adequately
imbibed by the carefully worked out
so that foreign technology could be
adequately imbibed by the Indian
industrial sector. A Committee of
experts from industry and other
relevant fields be constituted which
should examine each offset and
suggest as to how maximum
advantage can be derived therefrom
and also to monitor implementation
of the offset clause. The Committee
would again like to stress that no
royalty should be given for
subsequent upgradation /
modifications of the technology by
the foreign supplier during the
contract period.
6.9 The Committee have been informed
that the Ministry maintain data bank
of prospective vendors who are
suppliers of defence equipment.
Defence Attaches posted in various
countries are also involved in the
identification of vendors. The
Committee are of the view that
Provision has been
made in DPP 2006 to
generate maximum
vendor response
through vendor’s
registration through
internet, case specific
advertisement on the

39
Defence Attaches should be given a
meaningful role in identifying
technology and defence equipment
available with foreign suppliers and
they should regularly and adequately
apprise the Ministry of the various
advancements made and agencies
involved in the development of
defence equipment in the country of
their posting. They should also
provide data and evaluation of such
equipment and its tentative cost, etc.
The Ministry of Defence should have
sufficient data bank with them based
on such information.
7.6 The Committee are happy to note
the various steps taken by the
Government to avoid single vendor
situation including the flexibility
from case to case based o n merit.
The Committee further note that
procurement of state of the art
equipment on single vendor basis is
to be deliberated by DAC and
approval has to be given depending
on merit of the case. The Committee
desire that such cases should be
debated by DAC after proper
technology scan is carried out in
consultation with the DRDO
technical experts and users to ensure
that the same meets the requirement
of the user. The committee feel that
single vendor situation should be
applicable in exceptional
circumstance and for exclusive
weapon systems/items produced by
single manufacturer after DAC is
satisfied by the justification that these
systems and items are required for
operational exigencies.
12 3
internet, expression of
interest and
advertisement through
newspaper (Para 24 ).
As per Para 69 of DPP
2006, if certain state-of-
the-art equipment being
manufactured by only
one vendor is to be
procured to get
qualitative edge over
our adversary then such
case should be debated
by the DAC after
proper technology scan
is carried out by HQ
IDS in consultation with
the DRDO. Para 70 of
DPP 2006 has addressed
Cases Note Falling
Under ‘Single Vendor’
Situation.

40
7.7 The Committee have noted the
explanation furnished by the
Ministry about the single vendor
situation which can be a public
sector undertaking involved in
development of a product under ToT
etc. The Committee desire that such
a situation need not be treated as a
single vendor situation and orders
may be directly placed with that
undertaking.
10.7 The Committee note that with a view
to preventing corruption and to
bring transparency in defence
procurements, Integrity Pact clause
has been introduced in the new
procedure for defence purchases
above Rs. 300 crore. In view of
allegations of kickbacks made from
time to time, the Committee feel that
provision of Integrity Pact is
appreciable in the new procedure.
The Committee are of the view that
this will work effectively only when
there is more transparency in such
dealings. The Committee hope that
with the introduction of this clause,
the people of the country would
have more confidence in the process.
The Committee are, however, unable
12 3
Para 70 of DPP 2006
has provided for Cases
Not Falling Under
Single Vendor Situation.
As per Para 70 (b) of
DPP 2006, cases which
are undertaken by
DRDO/Defence PSUs/
OFB/ RURs, as a
design and
development projects,
would not fall in the
category of ‘single
vendor’ cases. However,
approval of DAC for
carrying out the design
and development need
to be sought prior to
commencing the design
and development
process.
As per Para 61 of DPP
2006, an ‘Integrity Pact’
would be signed
between Govt
department and the
bidders for all
procurement schemes
over Rs.100 Crores. The
pre-contract ‘Integrity
Pact’ document has
been included in the
Annexure-I to
Appendix-H of
Schedule-I (RFP format)
of DPP 2006.

41
12 3
to understand the rationale behind
signing of Integrity pact only for
purchases above Rs. 300 crore.
Corruption in the purchase of
defence equipment costing less than
Rs. 300 crore cannot be ruled out.
Therefore, the Committee desire that
the Ministry may amend the
provisions of DPP 2005 to bring all
kinds of defence deals upto Rs.100
crore under Integrity Pact.
13.8 The Committee note that the fast
tract procedure promulgated in
December, 2002 to facilitate speedier
acquisition of defence equipment in
an emergent situation has completely
failed to meet its objectives. A study
of the cases taken up under FTP
revealed that it took more than 12
months to sign the contracts
defeating the very purpose for which
it was established i.e. to meet certain
unforeseen eventualities. Actual
delivery of the equipment would
have taken some more time. The
Committee were informed that there
was mix up in the implementation
of the Fast Track Procedure, and the
government is in the process of
reviewing it. As an efficient Fast
Tract Procedure can play a vital role
in emergent situations, the
Committee recommend that the
Ministry should carefully analyse the
shortcomings of FTP and establish a
procedure for emergent purchases
which is truly fast tract and quick.
The Committee feel that the
conditionality of starting
A revamped Fast Track
Procedure 2006 has
been included in
Chapter –IV of DPP
2006.

42
12 3
procurement process after the
approval of RM only, in itself seems
to be time consuming in an emergent
situation where time is of great
essence. The Committee desire that
the requirements of emergent nature
after having been certified at the
level of GOC-in-C in Army and
equivalent level in other forces and
routed through Chief of Staff should
be considered emergent to start the
process. Approval of RM can be
taken when the proposal is put up
to him for financial sanction.
Ministry of Defence OM No.H-11013/28/2005/D(Parl) dt 6.2.2007
Recommendation (Sl. No. 2.18)
The Committee note that DPP-2005 caters only to Buy/Buy & Make
categories and the Government is in the process of formulating a
separate procedure for defence acquisition in respect of ’Make’ category
of projects. The Committee desire that a clear-cut policy and procedure
for the same should be formulated at the earliest, which should duly
involve the private sector to exploit their capabilities. Efforts should
be made to synergise the capabilities of public and private sectors and
DRDO to pave the way for attaining self-reliance in defence production.
Reply of the Government
‘Make’ procedure has been made a part of DPP 2006 (Chapter II
of DPP 2006) .
Ministry of Defence OM No.H-11013/28/2005/D(Parl) dt
Recommendation (Sl. No. 2.25)
The Committee note that there is a shortfall in acquisition of
submarines by the Navy. This is to be viewed in the context that
submarine building facility at MDL has been lying idle for more than
eleven years as no order was given to them. The Committee have
been informed that a decision has now been taken to manufacture
Scorpene class submarine with French technology and French parts at

43
MDL. Since the acquisition of submarines has been long delayed, the
Committee desire the Ministry to take urgent steps to upgrade the
submarine building facilities at MDL in a time-bound manner with
adequate allocation of funds and induction of technical manpower so
that any further delay in manufacturing of submarines may be avoided.
Reply of the Government
After receiving the requisite approval, Government signed the
contract for the indigenous construction of six Scorpene submarines at
MDL, Mumbai under transfer of technology from M/s Armaris, France
under Project 75. The first submarine is scheduled for induction in
2012 and the remaining five submarines at the interval of one year
thereafter. An amount of Rs.206 crore has been earmarked in the total
cost of project for the development of infrastructure at M/s MDL,
Mumbai.
Updated information on submarine construction has been indicated
in reply to para 2.24.
Min. of Defence OM No. H-11013/28/2005/D(Parl) dated 6.2.2007
Recommendation (Sl. No. 4.8 & 4.9)
The Committee note that the new procedure provides that SQRs
should be made broad-based so as not to restrict the technical choice
of equipment and that would help in avoiding single vendor situation.
While appreciating the intention, the Committee would like to caution
that by broadbasing SQRs, the Ministry should not compromise with
the quality of the equipment and the specialized requirements of the
Defence forces.
The Committee fully endorse the amendment in new procedure of
not granting any waiver to SQR amendment parameters after issue of
RFPs. The Committee feel that it will improve transparency and would
be fair and impartial to the vendors.
Reply of the Government
Formulation of SQRs have been addressed in DPP 2006 (Para 13
to 16).
SQRs are formulated by the User Directorate at SHQ and circulated
to all concerned for obtaining their views/comments including other
possible user directorates, maintenance directorate, HQ IDS, DRDO,
Department of Defence Production (DDP), Director General of Quality

44
Assurance (DGQA)/Director General of Aeronautical Quality Assurance
(DGAQA), Directorate of Standardization, Technical Managers and any
other department, as deemed necessary. (Para 13 to 16 of DPP 2006).
DPP-06 vide para 14 and 15 authorises the Service HQs to seek
information from public as well private organizations to provide inputs
for finalizing SQRs.
 Reputed private organizations having relevant experience are being
consulted before finalizing the SQRs wherever required.
Ministry of Defence OM No.H-11013/28/2005/D(Parl) dt  6.2.2007
Recommendation (Sl. No. 5.6 & 5.7)
The Committee note the provision of offset clause which has been
introduced in the new procedure and is being followed in many
countries. The Committee have been informed about the benefits of
offset clause which has helped build up indigenous defence industries
in some countries. Since the Indian import of defence equipment is
very large, the Committee feel that the provision should be utilized to
ensure the development of indigenous defence industry. There should
be a national policy for utilisation of offset clause for defence
procurement. The Committee desire that efforts should be made to
ensure participation of private sector defence industries and some of
the benefits of this clause should be passed on to them also. The
Committee, therefore, strongly recommend that the modalities for
implementation of offset contracts should be carefully worked out so
that foreign technology could be adequately imbibed by the carefully
worked out so that foreign technology could be adequately imbibed
by the Indian industrial sector. A Committee of experts from industry
and other relevant fields be constituted which should examine each
offset and suggest as to how maximum advantage can be derived
therefrom and also to monitor implementation of the offset clause.
The Committee would again like to stress that no royalty should be
given for subsequent upgradation / modifications of the technology
by the foreign supplier during the contract period.
The Committee also express their apprehension that this clause
will be utilized for trade accounts only. The Committee feel that
maximum benefit should be extracted from this clause. Private sector
along with the OFs/DPSUs should be permitted to participate in the
scheme envisaged under offset clause and allowed to enter into joint
ventures with foreign manufacturers for defence production under
technology transfer. The Committee also desire that there should be a

45
joint public and private sector venture to implement the benefits of
offset clause. This will be helpful in achieving self-reliance. A specific
time frame should be determined by the Government so that the offset
clause can make India self-sufficient in defence production.
Reply of the Government
The recommendations of the committee has been included wherein
defence off-set guidelines have been incorporated in Para 22 of DPP
2006.
Ministry of Defence OM No.H-11013/28/2005/D(Parl) dt 6.2.2007
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para 42 of Chapter – 1)
Recommendation (Sl. No. 6.10)
Over the years private sector has grown in capacity and capabilities.
The committee are therefore of the view that maximum possible RFPs
should be sent to private sector. The Committee desire that private
sector in India should be given preference over foreign suppliers and
only in situations when there is no public and private sector company
meeting the desired requirements, foreign suppliers may be considered.
As already stated in earlier chapters, the Committee desire that in
case of ‘off-set’ clause provision, the private sector companies may be
given due preference while implementing that clause.
Reply of the Government
Participation of private industry for procurement of Defence
equipment is being encouraged. RFPs are being issued to private firms
who have been granted Industrial Licence for defence related products.
The Offset procedure being implemented inter-alia provides that
the vendor will be free to select the Indian Offset partner for
implementing the Offset requirement.
Ministry of Defence OM No.H-11013/28/2005/D(Parl) dt
Recommendation (Sl. No. 7.6 & 7.7)
The Committee are happy to note the various steps taken by the
Government to avoid single vendor situation including the flexibility
from case to case based o n merit. The Committee further note that

46
procurement of state of the art equipment on single vendor basis is to
be deliberated by DAC and approval has to be given depending on
merit of the case. The Committee desire that such cases should be
debated by DAC after proper technology scan is carried out in
consultation with the DRDO technical experts and users to ensure that
the same meets the requirement of the user. The committee feel that
single vendor situation should be applicable in exceptional circumstance
and for exclusive weapon systems/items produced by single
manufacturer after DAC is satisfied by the justification that these
systems and items are required for operational exigencies.
The Committee have noted the explanation furnished by the
Ministry about the single vendor situation which can be a public sector
undertaking involved in development of a product under ToT etc. The
Committee desire that such a situation need not be treated as a single
vendor situation and orders may be directly placed with that
undertaking.
Reply of the Government
As per Para 69 of DPP 2006, if certain state-of-the-art equipment
being manufactured by only one vendor is to be procured to get
qualitative edge over our adversary then such case should be debated
by the DAC after proper technology scan is carried out by HQ IDS in
consultation with the DRDO. Para 70 of DPP 2006 has addressed Cases
Note Falling Under ‘Single Vendor’ Situation.
Ministry of Defence OM No.H-11013/28/2005/D(Parl) dt 6.2.2007
Recommendation (Sl. No. 8.2)
The Committee appreciate that standard contract clause has been
included in DPP-2005. The Committee are hopeful that this will make
the procedure transparent and curtail delays. The Committee desire
that this should now be strictly enforced.
Reply of the Government
Standard contract clauses provided in Appendix ‘H’ of DPP-2006
is being followed in all cases of defence procurement under capital
head wherever possible.
Ministry of Defence OM No.H-11013/28/2005/D(Parl) dt 6.2.2007

47
Recommendation (Sl. No. 9.5)
The Committee are of the view that broad time frame of 2-3 years
that has been prescribed for acquisition of defence equipment is very
much on the higher side and there is a need to curtail the time limit
at each level. The Committee are perturbed to note that though there
is an accountability for delay on Ministry of Defence, there is no
accountability on the part of other concerned Government of India
departments, including CNC, CFA or Ministry of Finance in the matter
of adherence to a prescribed time frame and as a result, prolonged
delays occur in the acquisition of defence equipment. In the present
world scenario, the technology of the Defence equipment and systems
is changing fast. Delay in procurement will result not only in acquisition
of weapon systems with obsolete technologies, but also cost escalation.
Keeping in view the fact that the defence deals have direct bearing on
the defence preparedness and security of the country, the Government
should lay down a time frame for disposal of these cases by the
Ministry of Finance and other authorities. This would ensure
expeditious procurement of the approved requirements of the Armed
Forces. In this connection, the Committee desire that a Committee
consisting of representatives of MoD, Ministry of Finance and other
concerned authorities be constituted who can take decisions together
so as to expedite decision making process and curtail inordinate delay.
Reply of the Government
Following steps have been taken to reduce time frame of
acquisitions:
(i) Financial powers of RM has been enhanced from Rs. 50
Crores to Rs. 100 Crores and that of FM from Rs. 100 Crores
to Rs. 200 Crores. This would further expedite the
Acquisition process. Delegation of financial power to the
Services in respect of Capital schemes/projects costing upto
Rs.10 Crores has been issued by MoD on 26-7-2006.
(ii) DPP-2006 has combined several acquisition process including
AoN (above Rs.40 crores), Categorisation, Qty. vetting, ,
percentage of offset requirement, single vendor clearance as
per DPP 2006 (Para 18 -20, 22, Para 69 of DPP 2006) to be
approved by DAC.
(iii) As per guidelines issued by CVC, DPP- 2006 provides that
there would be no negotiations with L-1 vendors in multi
vendor cases. However, negotiations would be carried out
only with L1 vendor in exceptional circumstance where valid
logical reasons exists.(Para 51 of DPP 2006).

48
The procurement process of defence acquisition involves many
activities such as AON, issue of RFP , TEC, trials, staff evaluation and
commercial negotiations. It has invariably been seen that maximum
time is devoted in conduct of field trials by the user in various terrains
and its subsequent evaluation at AHQ. Each equipment is to be trial
evaluated separately as per its operational requirement and accordingly
timeframe may vary for different equipments. Despite this, all efforts
are made by the conducting agency to stick to the laid down time
frame as given in DPP 2006. As per the DPP 2006 any major deviation
to the time frame are to be brought to the notice of DPB for corrective
measures. Hence, due to the complexities involved in the procurement
of defence equipments, the time frame can only be indicative and not
prescriptive. It is also envisaged that 30 to 35% of procurement schemes
would be upto Rs.10 Crores in a financial year and would, therefore,
lead to expeditious procurement of the equipment by the services.
This is the first time that financial provision for capital procurement
have been delegated to the services. From the experience gained it can
be revised subsequently.
Ministry of Defence OM No.H-11013/28/2005/D(Parl) dt. 6.2.2007
Recommendation (Sl. No. 9.6, 12.4 & 12.5)
The committee note that another reason for delays in procurement
of a major equipment which is to be introduced for the first time, is
that it has to be tried out during winter, summer, at high altitude, in
desert, forest and plains and, therefore it does take time. The Committee
desire that efforts should be made to reduce the time taken in the
trials of the equipment in all the different situations.
The Committee, also stress that all required trials should be done
in a time bound manner in conformity with the planned schedule.
The Committee note that field evaluation/computer simulation of
a new weapon system is normally done in all conditions where the
equipment is required to be deployed. The Committee are, however,
of the view that though field evaluation/computer simulation of new
equipment is very essential, this should be completed in a time-bound
manner so that the procurement process is completed in the prescribed
period.
The Committee further desire that in the field evaluation of new
equipment, the user and technical experts of Ordnance Factories, DRDO
and reputed private organization having relevant expertise, should
invariably be involved so that they may help in proper evaluation of

49
the equipment particularly in case involving integration of different
systems and sensitive equipment.
The Committee also desire that a floor level Committee should be
constituted for evaluating the field trials. The Committee should
comprise of the field level service officers, technical experts from DRDO,
OFs/DPSUs and reputed private organization having relevant expertise
and also the manufacturer. This will help in assessing the quality of
equipment more objectively.
Reply of the Government
Due to the complexities involved in the procurement of defence
equipments, it has invariably been seen that maximum time is devoted
in conduct of field trials by the user in various terrains and its
subsequent evaluation at SHQ. The equipment offered by the foreign
vendors are not specifically developed for Indian conditions and there
are number of short falls. The equipment is to be trial evaluated as
per our GSQR parameters. Prolonged trials take place till the time all
the parameters are validated.
Due to the complexities involved in the procurement of defence
equipments, it has invariably been seen that maximum time is devoted
in conduct of field trials by the user in various terrains and its
subsequent evaluation at SHQ. The equipment offered by the foreign
vendors are not specifically developed for Indian conditions and there
are number of short falls. The equipment is to be trial evaluated as
per our GSQR parameters. Prolonged trials take place till the time all
the parameters are validated.
The trials are carried out by the user who is going to operate the
equipment/weapon system in field conditions. The trials are also
witnessed by representatives of higher formations; service HQs and
even Technical Managers. The trials report is processed through the
chain of command where the commanders in chain give their
comments. While conducting trials, representatives of DRDO, DPSUs
and other agencies are also involved on case to case basis
Ministry of Defence OM No.H-11013/28/2005/D(Parl) dt 6.2.2007
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para 50 of Chapter –1)

50
Recommendation (Sl. No. 10.7)
The Committee note that with a view to preventing corruption
and to bring transparency in defence procurements, Integrity Pact clause
has been introduced in the new procedure for defence purchases above
Rs. 300 crore. In view of allegations of kickbacks made from time to
time, the Committee feel that provision of Integrity Pact is appreciable
in the new procedure. The Committee are of the view that this will
work effectively only when there is more transparency in such dealings.
The Committee hope that with the introduction of this clause, the
people of the country would have more confidence in the process.
The Committee are, however, unable to understand the rationale
behind signing of Integrity pact only for purchases above Rs. 300 crore.
Corruption in the purchase of defence equipment costing less than Rs.
300 crore cannot be ruled out. Therefore, the Committee desire that
the Ministry may amend the provisious of DPP 2005 to bring all kinds
of defence deals upto Rs.100 crore under Integrity Pact.
Reply of the Government
Reply to this para has already been covered in Para 2.20.
Ministry of Defence OM No.H-11013/28/2005/D(Parl) dt 6.2.2007
Recommendation (Sl. No. 11.5)
The Committee further observe that in certain cases a company
authorises a person to negotiate on its behalf. In that case, that person
becomes a representative of the company for negotiating with the
concerned authorities. The committee are of the opinion that to deal
with such representatives and ensure transparency in such cases and
check the possibility of any undue influence, the Ministry must evolve
a clear and firm policy for identifying and accepting a person as a
representatives of the company.
Reply of the Government
As per The Defence Procurement Procedure 2006 the Government
of India invites responses to request for proposals only from Original
Equipment Manufacturers (OEM) or Authorised Vendors or Government
Sponsored Export Agencies (applicable in case of countries where
domestic laws do not permit direct export by OEMs).
The negotiations are held with the representatives of foreign
companies, after seeking details of their representatives and after taking
security clearance.
Ministry of Defence OM No.H-11013/28/2005/D(Parl) dt  6.2.2007

51
Recommendation (Sl. No. 13.11)
The Committee also feel that 12 months time taken under FTP to
sign a contract will negate the very purpose of the procedure
particularly when something is ‘imminent’ or there is an operational
emergency. The Committee feel that there may be a need for separate
procedure under FTP for SOS supplies. The Committee desire that the
Government should examine this aspect also and check how far present
FTP can handle such a situation. The Committee may be informed of
the analysis made.
Reply of the Government
A revamped Fast Track Procedure 2006 has been included in
Chapter–IV of DPP 2006.
Ministry of Defence OM No.H-11013/28/2005/D(Parl) dt 6.2.2007
Recommendation (Sl. No. 15.4, 15.5, 15.6 & 15.7)
The Committee note that a time frame of 19 to 22 weeks has been
prescribed in DPM for placing orders and for revenue procurement
under single commercial bids and 23 to 26 weeks for two bids. The
Committee feel that the time frame is very much on the higher side
and efforts should be made to curtail the time. The Committee further
desire that a time frame should also be prescribed for getting delivery
of the items by the defence forces and the same should be strictly
adhered to.
The Committee also recommend that the Ministry of Defence
should make clear distinction between defence equipment and other
items such as telecom hardware, information technology hardware,
office equipment, spare parts, etc. which do not strictly come under
defence equipment. The Committee desire that the Ministry should
make clear distinction between the defence and non-defence items in
order to avoid complexities of procedure followed in procuring defence
equipment. The procurement of these items should be simplified on
the lines of the procedure followed in other Ministries / Departments.
This may be called as civil budget.
During the study visit of the Standing Committee on Defence to
Jammu, Leh, Srinagar and other forward areas, the Committee observed
that there were delays in supply of consumable and non-consumable
items to the Armed Forces. During the visit of the Committee to
Siachen Area, it was noticed that soldiers were being issued used

52
items of personal clothing which were not fit for reuse. The Committee
had expressed their concern about the continuous hardships the soldiers
have to face because of the shortage of essential items like shoes,
winter boots and winter clothing. The Committee, therefore, strongly
feel that a faster procurement process must be evolved to ensure that
the Armed Forces are not placed in difficulties because of the lack of
timely quality and adequate supplies.
The Committee further observed during the study visit that the
Armed Forces posted at Leh procure food and other agro based items
from Delhi and other cities instead of procuring those items from the
local farmers and producers. For the farmers at Leh and other border
areas, Armed Forces are the main consumers of local supplies.
Therefore, the Committee desire that the Ministry of Defence should
evolve a policy to procure consumable items from the local producers.
On the one hand, it will give a boost to the farming community in
the border and high altitude areas and on the other it will provide
fresh food items to the Jawans at a reasonable cost, by minimizing the
cost of transportation, etc. This will also be helpful in ensuring better
integration of the armed forces with the local population.
Reply of the Government
It is agreed that all efforts should be made to prescribe a time
frame for placing orders, which should be restricted to the minimum
possible and what is required to fulfill all the required procedures.
However, it merits attention that it is for the first time that a time
frame has been laid down under DPM-2005 in single bid and two bid
system which also indicates time frame at each stage of procurement
from indent till placement of Supply Order. This is to bring in
accountability at all levels and also to ensure that tenders are finalised
within validity period. This is being followed for less than an year till
now and has shown improvements in the time frame of procurements
being made. Further curtailment to the above mentioned prescribed
time frames would be made based on experience gained from the
ongoing procurements and after the system being followed fully
stabilizes. Service HQrs have been conveyed the instructions of the
Standing Committee in this regard.
With regard to making a distinction between defence and non-
defence items, the procedure envisaged in DPM is to go in for open
tender in respect of COTS items. Also, the guidelines of Finance bearing
No. 8/4./E-II(A)/98 dated 17.12.98, is strictly followed as per which
open tender procedure is followed without any brand name being

53
specified in respect of purchases of computer system. The objective
has been not to limit the tender base by unduly restricting the
specifications to military specifications. The recommendation of the
Standing Committee has been circulated to all concerned for
compliance.
The authorization of Special Clothing and Mountaineering
Equipment to the army has been enhanced from 19,754 sets to 27,351
sets. Further to this, 20 items of clothing have been placed in Category
I (to be retained by the troops) which will not be recycled and ensure
that jawans do not have to reuse the clothing. Each jawan thus would
be given a fresh set of clothing on induction.
Recognising the need and advantages of supporting the local
farming community and the fact that quite a few items of food and
fodder and other Agro products were being procured by the Armed
Forces from outside the state, the Ministry of Defence has evolved
practices that as far as possible such items would be procured locally ,
through Negotiated contracts with the local Cooperatives/Federations.
This would, as observed by the Standing Committee on Defence, result
in the availability of fresh food items and milk to the troops. This
move would also result in minimising of transportation effort and
cost. This would give a boost to the local Agricultural Sector in border
Areas/High Altitude Areas on one hand and will lead to better
integration of troops with the local population as there would be an
economic inter dependence of sorts. A few examples of such practices
are given below:-
(i) Instructions for conclusion of negotiated contracts with the
Cooperative Marketing Limited located at Leh (Ladakh),
Karu, Nimu, Nubra, Turtuk, Dah and Kargil for supply of
fresh vegetables, fresh fruits, potatoes, onions, garlic and
Lucerne Hay are already in force and these items are
procured from the cooperative marketing societies in these
areas through negotiated contracts.
(ii) Recently, Ministry of Defence issued instructions that local
Milk Co-operatives in the State of Jammu & Kashmir (J&K)
would be eligible to enter into Negotiated Contracts for
supply of Milk in Northern Command along with the
National Co-operative Dairy Federation of India Limited
(NCDF I). This initiative of Ministry of Defence was not
supported by the National Confederation/NCDFI, as J&K
Dairy Producers, Processor and Marketing Cooperative
Union Limited was not their member. However, the J&K

54
Government had supported the same, Keeping in view the
need to give a boost to the local economy , Ministry of
Defence has issued instructions and now JKDCUL is eligible
to enter into negotiated contracts to supply milk to the
Army. The policy initiative by Ministry of Defence would
result in giving a boost to Milk production by the local
farmers namely the Gujjar community which is spread all
over the border areas. This would result in better interaction
between the Armed Forces and the local, people.
(iii) In order to ensure that local milk producers are not forced
out of competition by the formation of cartels by established
suppliers from other States, instructions have also been
issued stating that local supplies from Co-operatives from
outside J&K will be considered only when local Co-
operatives/Federations are unable to meet the demand.
Min. of Defence OM No. H-11013/28/2005/D(Parl) dated 6.2.2007

CHAPTER III
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE
COMMITTEE DO NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE IN
VIEW OF GOVERNMENT’S REPLIES
Recommendation (Sl. No. 14.2)
The Committee are concerned to note that there is no empowered
body besides C&AG to monitor and find out whether the prescribed
procedure has been adhered to in letter and spirit in defence deals.
The Committee desire that in addition to C&AG, a separate empowered
Committee should be created to check each and every defence
transaction and fix accountability/responsibility in case of any deviation
from the procedure.
The Committee also desire that the suppliers should also be made
responsible for maintenance of the equipment as is being done in
other Departments.
Reply of the Government
As per existing instructions, all files relating to major Defence
procurements of a value of Rs.75 crores and above are subjected to a
time bound scrutiny/audit by the C&AG.
It may be mentioned that establishment of a separate empowered
committee to check each and every defence transaction for fixing
responsibility/accountability in case of deviation from the procedure
is likely to cause further delay in procurement of equipment. The
examination of procurement cases by the audit authorities leaves little
scope for instituting a separate empowered committee to check each
defence transaction.
It may be further mentioned that DPP-06 provides for Warranty
guarantee in all cases of capital procurement to ensure performance of
equipment according to the prescribed technical specifications. In
addition, provision exists for entering into Annual Maintenance
Contracts, wherever required.
Ministry of Defence OM No.H-11013/28/2005/D(Parl) dt. 6.2.2007
55

CHAPTER IV
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF
WHICH REPLIES OF GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN
ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE
Recommendation (Sl. No. 1.15)
The Committee note that 53.9% of procurements made in 2004 –
05 are through imports and only 46.1% of procurements are from
indigenous sources. In the case of Navy , procurements through imports
have increased from 36% to 57.81% during the last 5 years. It shows
that even after more than 55 years of Independence, cutting edge
technologies have not been developed in the country. This has resulted
in the large scale dependence on foreign suppliers for defence
procurements which are subjected to various constraints like technology
denials, sanctions, higher costs, etc. by the exporting countries. The
Committee feel that these constraints can be adequately addressed
through sufficient investments in R & D Sector as also through transfer
of design, data and technology agreements. The Committee, therefore,
are of the strong view that Government should lay stress on building
a strong R & D base with accountability so that development of defence
equipment within the country is encouraged and dependence on foreign
suppliers is minimised.
Reply of the Government
The Navy has been able to increase the indigenous procurement
from 40% in 2004-05 to 60% in 2005-06 as a result of the major thrust
given to indigenization. The increase in the content of indigenization
from 2000-01 to 2005-06 is given in the table below:-
 Year Total Imported (%) Indigenous (%)
2000-01 3752.52 1706.90 (36) 2045.62 (64)
2001-02 4829 2363 (48.93) 2466 (51.07)
2002-03 3810 1919 (50.36) 1891 (49.64)
2003-04 5175 2985 (57.68) 2190 (42.32)
2004-05 7882.76 4557.11 (57.81) 3324.89 (42.19)
A strong R&D base is important for achieving self sufficiency in
the Defence area. It may, however, be mentioned that R&D laboratories
56

57
undertake limited production of equipment developed by them which
leads to problems in providing adequate product support, supply of
spares, maintenance of equipment and training, as the R&D laboratories
are not geared to undertake such production related activities.
The Navy’s force level accretion plan is mostly based on indigenous
construction capability of the PSUs and the Private Sector. To further
this cause, Navy has established the Directorate of Indigenisation to
provide impetus and direction to the process of indigenisation.
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para 18 of Chapter -1)
Ministry of Defence OM No.H-11013/28/2005/D(Parl) dt 6.2.2007
Recommendation (Sl. No. 1.16)
Whenever imports are made, transfer of design, data and
technology should also be ensured. During the life of the agreement
or a reasonable period to be specified therein, if the weapon system
is upgraded, the foreign manufacturer should also transfer the upgraded
technology without payment of royalty.
Reply of the Government
It would not be financially prudent to take ToT for all equipment
procured from abroad. ToT is taken only in those cases where the
requirement of equipment is large. Categorization of the equipment
into ‘Buy & Make’ is decided by DAC/DPB.
Provisions have been incorporated at Para 11 of RFP (DPP-06),
wherein vendors are supposed to intimate about all upgrades and
modifications carried out in the equipment during its lifecycle.
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para 21 of Chapter - 1)
Ministry of Defence OM No.H-11013/28/2005/D(Parl) dt 6.2.2007
Recommendation (Sl. No. 1.18)
The Committee further desire that the private sector, which has
grown in its capabilities and resources over the years, should be actively
involved in the development/ production/ supply of defence

58
equipment. Instead of large scale dependence on foreign suppliers,
who work under constraints imposed by their respective Governments,
the Committee are of strong view that home-grown technologies should
be developed with coordinated and concerted efforts of DPSUs,
Ordnance Factories, Private Sector and DRDO. The Committee,
therefore, desire that an appropriate defence production and
procurement strategy be chalked out with emphasis on developing
indigenous technologies. The Committee further desire that sufficient
incentives with financial support be given to promote R&D in both
public and private sectors engaged in developing cutting edge
technologies. Similarly, in the case of Transfer of Technology (T.O.T.)
agreements, private sector should also be allowed to participate in/
take benefit of developing new technologies.
Reply of the Government
Design and development of High Technology Complex systems by
RURS/ Indian Industry / DPSUs/ OFB/ Consortia is being undertaken
as per ‘Make’ procedure of DPP-2006. [Para 3(c) Chapter-II of DPP
2006]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para 24 of Chapter - 1)
Ministry of Defence OM No.H-11013/28/2005/D(Parl) dt 6.2.2007
Recommendation (Sl. No. 2.24)
The Committee note with concern that with the scheduled de-
commissioning of the ships, the force level will fall to 132 at the end
of Eleventh Plan against DAC’s directive to maintain the force level of
140 ships. The Committee, therefore, strongly recommend the
government to take urgent steps to expedite acquisition of ships by
placing sufficient orders with Defence Shipyards so that the required
number of ships may be maintained. The Committee also desire that
sufficient funds may be allocated to Defence Shipyards to enable them
to undertake upgradation/modernization of their exiting infrastructure
and produce ships of latest technology, thereby facilitating the Navy
to induct them and to maintain their force level as per perspective
plan.
Reply of the Government
Concerted efforts are made to ensure that Navy’s force level of
140 ships as directed by DAC is maintained. There are 38 warships

59
and submarines presently being built at Indian shipyards, which are
at various stages of construction. Details have been furnished in
Annexure.
Cases for acquisition of ten new ships i.e. one Fleet Tanker, one
Sail Training Ship (STS) and eight Mine Counter Measure Vessels
(MCMVs) are under process.
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para 27 of Chapter - 1)
Ministry of Defence OM No.H-11013/28/2005/D(Parl) dt 6.2.2007
Recommendation (Sl. No. 3.5, 3.6 & 3.7)
The Committee note that acquisition of capital assets flows out
from the defence procurement planning process which covers 15 year
long Perspective Plan, 5-year Service Capital Acquisition Plan and
Annual Acquisition Plan. It is, therefore, imperative that the above
plans are formulated in time and timely approval is given by
Government with firm indication of available funds so that procurement
process progresses smoothly.
The Committee are constrained to note that there has been
abnormal delay in formulation and approval of LTIPP covering the
period 2002-2017 and since 3 years of the plan have elapsed, the
Ministry has now revised the period of LTIPP to 2007-2022. Even the
10th Defence Five Year Plan (2002-2007), which is in the fourth year,
has not yet been approved with firm indication of funds till now and
is now an academic exercise only. It shows the casual approach of the
Government in formulation of such an important plan as also adhocism
in decision making, adversely affecting the modernization plan of the
services. The Committee need not emphasize that in the long term
procurements, lead time is required for creating futuristic forces, making
it necessary to have long term defence planning. The Committee,
therefore, recommend that the Government should urgently finalize
the long term Perspective Plan and also initiate steps for finalization
of the 11th defence plan so that there is a clear direction of
procurements to be made. The Committee desire that the exercise be
completed in a time-bound manner preferably within a year. The
Committee further desire that the 11th Plan Approach Paper may be
made available to the Committee at the time of examination of Demand
for Grants 2006-07.

60
The early finalization of the LTIPP will also help in projecting the
financial requirements to Ministry of finance (MOF) well in advance,
so as to enable them to plan for the required funds accordingly. This
planning will also help the Ministry of Defence (MOD) in identifying
the requirements of the Services and initiating the procurement process,
well in time, thereby reducing the time lag. This will also help in
determining the broad based qualitative requirements by the services
and ensuring that the GSQRs are not frequently changed and single
vendor situations are avoided. The Ordnance Factories and public and
private sectors can also plan their investments accordingly.
Reply of the Government
Broad approval to LTIPP 2002-17 was given by DAC in its meeting
held on 19th June, 2006. Annual Acquisition Plan (AAP) of the three
Services and Coast Guard pertaining to Financial Year 2006-07 has
been approved by DPB on 11-4-2006 in respect of three Services and
on 5-10-2006 in respect of Coast Guard.
Broad approval to LTIPP 2002-17 was given by DAC in its meeting
held on 19th June, 2006.
Broad approval to LTIPP 2002-17 was given by DAC in its meeting
held on 19th June, 2006. 11th Defence Plan projections have been
forwarded to Ministry of Finance vide RM’s letter dt. 21-07-2006.
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para 31 of Chapter - 1)
Ministry of Defence OM No.H-11013/28/2005/D(Parl) dt 6.2.2007
Recommendation (Sl. No. 4.10 & 4.11)
The Committee, however, desire that SQRs should be laid down
after careful evaluation of the equipment, if already in use, during the
trials and exercises. The Committee feel that for laying down SQRs,
experts from OFB / DRDO and outside must be consulted so that
deficiencies in the equipment are identified and technical parameters,
after rectifying the known deficiencies, are correctly laid down for the
procurement of that equipment in future.
Similarly, if the equipment to be procured is not in use, the service
requirements should be clearly identified first by the user and thereafter
SQR may be laid down after consulting experts from DRDO, OFB and

61
reputed private Organisations having relevant expertise. This would
help in avoiding changes in SQR again and again
Reply of the Government
Reply to this para has already been covered in Para 2.20.
Formulation of SQRs has been addressed in DPP-2006 (Para 13 to 16) .
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para 35 of Chapter - 1)
Ministry of Defence OM No.H-11013/28/2005/D(Parl) dt 6.2.2007
Recommendation (Sl. No. 4.12)
The Committee suggest that, in order to avoid single vendor
situations a new methodology be adopted which should comprise
inviting pre-bid meetings of the various manufacturers to discuss
technical specifications of the desired product after floating global
enquiries. Then the respective service headquarters can prepare their
own technical specifications from the above discussion by involving
the technical experts from the user service, DRDO, OFB, DGQA and
reputed private organisations having relevant expertise, before inviting
the manufacturers to submit the technical and financial bids according
to the specifications. This will be helpful in avoiding manipulation
and single vendor situations as many manufacturers will participate
in final bidding and accountability will be there. The Committee would
like to emphasize that the system should be foolproof so that there is
no room for accusation of corruption and illegal transaction.
Reply of the Government
Reply to this para has already been covered in Para 2.20.
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para 38 of Chapter - 1)
Ministry of Defence OM No.H-11013/28/2005/D(Parl) dt 6.2.2007
Recommendation (Sl. No. 6.9)
The Committee have been informed that the Ministry maintain
data bank of prospective vendors who are suppliers of defence

62
equipment. Defence Attaches posted in various countries are also
involved in the identification of vendors. The Committee are of the
view that Defence Attaches should be given a meaningful role in
identifying technology and defence equipment available with foreign
suppliers and they should regularly and adequately apprise the
Ministry of the various advancements made and agencies involved in
the development of defence equipment in the country of their posting.
They should also provide data and evaluation of such equipment and
its tentative cost, etc. The Ministry of Defence should have sufficient
data bank with them based on such information.
Reply of the Government
Provision has been made in DPP 2006 to generate maximum vendor
response through vendor’s registration through internet, case specific
advertisement on the internet, expression of interest and advertisement
through newspaper (Para 24).
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para 45 of Chapter - 1)
Ministry of Defence OM No.H-11013/28/2005/D(Parl) dt 6.2.2007
Recommendation (Sl. No. 11.4)
The Committee note with concern that despite the guidelines issued
by the Ministry for appointment of authorised Indian representative
agents of foreign suppliers, nobody has registered himself as an
authorised Agent. The Committee are of the view that representatives
of the suppliers in the country can play a useful role in After Sale
Service and in sorting out problems during the warrantee period etc.
The Committee, therefore, strongly recommend that the Ministry may
analyse the reasons for non-registration of authorised representatives
with the Ministry and take remedial steps to make the procedure less
cumbersome and simple so as to encourage the authorised
representatives to come forward and register themselves.
The Committee also feel that registration of agents should be
encouraged so that the allegations of kickbacks may be minimised
and these agents may also facilitate better coordination between the
MoD and the supplier during trials, etc. This will also help in reducing
the time and cost overruns.

63
Reply of the Government
On the basis of Ministry of Finance’s instructions issued on 31st
January, 1989 relating to Indian Agents of foreign suppliers for all the
Ministries/ Departments under the Government of India,
supplementary instructions were issued by the Ministry of Defence in
April, 1989 and in November, 2001 to regulate authorized Indian
representatives/agents of foreign suppliers. The instructions provide
for the regulation of representational arrangements through a system
of registration, categorical and open declaration by the foreign suppliers
of the services to be rendered by their authorized representative/agents
and the remuneration payable to them by way of fees, commission or
any other method. So far no authorized Indian Representative/Agent
has been registered by the Ministry of Defence in terms of these
instructions.
There is no embargo on the foreign suppliers to open their own
offices in India in terms of RBI Notification No. FEMA 22/2000-RB
dated 3rd May 2000 and employing their representatives in such offices.
The Services are in touch with such offices for after Sale Service and
in sorting out problems during the warrantee period.
Ministry of Defence OM No.H-11013/28/2005/D(Parl) dt. 6.2.2007
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para 53 of Chapter - 1)
Recommendation (Sl. No. 13.8, 13.9, 13.10 & 13.12)
The Committee note that the fast tract procedure promulgated in
December, 2002 to facilitate speedier acquisition of defence equipment
in an emergent situation has completely failed to meet its objectives.
A study of the cases taken up under FTP revealed that it took more
than 12 months to sign the contracts defeating the very purpose for
which it was established i.e. to meet certain unforeseen eventualities.
Actual delivery of the equipment would have taken some more time.
The Committee were informed that there was mix up in the
implementation of the Fast Track Procedure, and the government is in
the process of reviewing it. As an efficient Fast Tract Procedure can
play a vital role in emergent situations, the Committee recommend
that the Ministry should carefully analyse the shortcomings of FTP
and establish a procedure for emergent purchases which is truly fast
tract and quick.

64
The Committee feel that the conditionality of starting procurement
process after the approval of RM only, in itself seems to be time
consuming in an emergent situation where time is of great essence.
The Committee desire that the requirements of emergent nature after
having been certified at the level of GOC-in-C in Army and equivalent
level in other forces and routed through Chief of Staff should be
considered emergent to start the process. Approval of RM can be taken
when the proposal is put up to him for financial sanction.
However, to check that every other case is not put under FTP , the
Ministry should lay down norms / guidelines which a procurement
case would have to meet to qualify for Fast Track Procurement. A
certificate to this effect can be furnished by GoC-in-C approving the
case.
The Committee also desire that the Ministry of Defence should
keep uptodate data-bank of different sources of supply, equipment/
weapons available, their evaluation and costs, etc. based on the
information sent by different Defence Attaches and from other sources.
This data bank should always be kept uptodate. This would reduce
the time lag under Fast Track Procurement as well as normal
procurement.
Reply of the Government
A revamped Fast Track Procedure 2006 has been included in
Chapter –IV of DPP 2006.
A revamped Fast Track Procedure 2006 has been included in
Chapter –IV of DPP 2006.
The data bank in respect of equipment and known manufacture
world vide is being maintained by Technical Managers except for the
cost factor. Approximate cost is however, ascertained through internet
and various journals / magazines available and at times even Defence
Attaches give such inputs. If the costs are not available, then in the
internal CNC meetings inputs from various agencies like DRDO, OFB,
and DPSU are taken to arrive at reasonable approximation of price.
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para 59 of Chapter - 1)
Ministry of Defence OM No.H-11013/28/2005/D(Parl) dt. 6.2.2007

CHAPTER V
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH
FINAL REPLIES OF GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED
—NIL—
  N EW D ELHI; BALASAHEB VIKHE PATIL,
12 July, 2007 Chairman,
21 Asadha, 1929 (Saka) Standing Committee on Defence.
65

MINUTES OF THE SIXTEENTH SITTING OF THE STANDING
COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE (2006-07)
The Committee sat on Tuesday the 16th January, 2007 from 1100
hrs. to 1300 hrs. in Committee Room ‘D’, Parliament House Annexe,
New Delhi.
PRESENT
Shri Balasaheb Vikhe Patil— Chairman
M
EMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Santosh Kumar Gangwar
3. Dr. K.S. Manoj
4. Ms. Ingrid Mcleod
5. Shri Asaduddin Owaisi
6. Dr. H.T. Sangliana
7. Shri Mahadeorao Shiwankar
8. Shri Rajesh Verma
Rajya Sabha
9. Shri Jai Parkash Aggarwal
10. Shri R.K. Dhawan
11. Smt. Viplove Thakur
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri P .K. Bhandari — Joint Secretary
2. Shri D.R. Shekhar — Under Secretary
LIST OF REPRESENTATIVES FROM MINISTRY OF DEFENCE
1. Shri Shekhar Dutt — Defence Secretary
2. Shri K.P . Singh — Secretary (DP)
3. Dr. M. Natarajan — SA to RM
4. Shri V .K. Misra — Secretary (Def. Fin.)
66

67
5. Shri S. Banerjee — DG (ACQ)
6. Dr. (Mrs.) Rekha Bhargava — Addl Secy (B)
7. Shri A.K. Jain — Addl Secy. (J)
8. Shri P .K. Rastogi — Addl. Secy. (DP)
9. Shri Alok Perti — JS (SY)
10. Shri T. Ramachandru — JS (S)
11. Shri C. Bachhawat — JS & AM (MS)
12. Shri Shashi Kant Sharma — JS&AM (Air)
13. Shri Gautam Chatterjee — JS (O/N)
14. Shri S.N. Mishra — Addl FA (M)
15. Shri Amit Cowshish — Addl FA (A)
16. Smt. Shobaba Joshi — FM (LS)
17. Maj. Gen. H.S. Sehgal — TM (LS)
18. Shri K.K. Kirty — Dir. (Acq)
19. Shri Mukesh Sinha — Dir. (Fin/Budget)
20. Shri S.K. Yagnik — Dir (Proc)
21. Smt. Namita Mehrotra — Dir (Vig)
22. Lt. Col. DPK Pillay — PO (Def)
23. Shri M. Fakruddin — Dir (Planning), HAL
24. Shri S.K. Sharma — Addl. DG/AV , OFB
DRDO
1. Dr. Prahlada — CCR&D (SI) & DS
2. Shri S.C. Narang — CCR&D (R&M) & DS
IDS
1. Lt. Gen. H.S. Lidder — CISC
2. Air Cmde K.G. Kumar — DACIDS (LTP)
ARMY HQTRS
1. Lt. Gen Deepak Kapoor — VCOAS
2. Lt. Gen Z. U. Shah — DCOAS (P&S)
3. Lt. Gen. S.S. Dhillon — MGO
4. Maj Gen. A.K. Mehra — ADGWE

68
AIR HQTRS
1. Air Mshl A.K. Nagalia — DCAS
2. AVM N. Vijaya Kumar — ACAS (FP)
NA VAL HQTRS
1. V . Adml. Nirmal Verma — VCNS
2. Rear Adml R.K. Dhowan — ACNS (P&P)
3. Shri S.P .S. Barsa — DDG, CG
2. At the outset, Hon’ble Chairman welcomed the Members and
representatives of Ministry of Defence to the sitting of the Committee.
The Chairman then requested the Representatives of the Ministry to
give clarifications on certain issues on the Action Taken Replies on
Sixth Report on Procurement Policy and Procedure and Eleventh Report
on Demands for Grants 2006-07 and drew their attention to the
Direction 58 of the Directions by the Speaker, Lok Sabha regarding
maintaining confidentiality of the deliberations of the sitting.
3. The Chairman and Members then requested the representatives
to enlighten the Committee on the important points viz., the Ministry
to build strong R&D base to encourage indigenization and minimise
dependence on foreign suppliers, service-wise information on percentage
of indigenous development of Defence equipment and procurement
made from foreign countries during the last five years, details of
acquisition of ships, time period prescribed in Defence Procurement
Policy 2006, and reasons for delay in procurement and remedial
measures thereof, adequacy of present delegation of financial power to
the services, offset provision and involvement of private sector etc.
4. The representatives of the Ministry of Defence clarified the points
one-by-one.
5. The Committee then decided to have oral evidence of the
representatives of the Ministry of Defence on some more points on the
Action Taken Replies on the Sixth Report on Procurement Policy and
Procedure and Eleventh Report on Demands for Grants (2006-07) in
the sitting of the Committee to be held on 19.02.2007.
6. The record of the verbatim proceeding was kept.
The Committee then adjourned.

MINUTES OF THE TWENTY-FIRST SITTING OF THE STANDING
COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE (2006-07)
The Committee sat on Monday, the 19th February, 2007 from
1500 to 1630 hrs. in Committee Room ‘D’, Parliament House Annexe,
New Delhi.
PRESENT
Shri Balasaheb Vikhe Patil— Chairman
M
EMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Santosh Kumar Gangwar
3. Dr. H.T. Sangliana
Rajya Sabha
4. Shri Abu Asim Azmi
5. Shri R.K. Dhawan
6. Smt. N.P . Durga
7. Shri K.B. Shanappa
SECRETARIAT
1. Shri Gopal Singh — Director
2. Shri D.R. Shekhar — Under Secretary
WITNESSES
REPRESENTATIVES OF MINISTRY OF DEFENCE
1. Shri Shekhar Dutt — Defence Secretary
2. Shri K.P . Singh — Secretary (DP)
3. Dr. M. Natarajan — SA to RM
4. Shri V .K. Misra — Secretary (Def. Fin.)
5. Shri S. Banerjee — DG (ACQ)
6. Dr. (Mrs.) Rekha Bhargava — Special Secretary (B)
7. Shri Alok Perti — JS (SY)

70
8. Shri T. Ramachandru — JS (S)
9. Shri Binoy Kumar — JS (E)
10. Shri S.N. Mishra — Addl FA (M)
11. Shri Amit Cowshish — Addl FA (A)
12. Smt. Shobana Joshi — FM (LS)
13. Maj. Gen. H.S. Sehgal — TM (LS)
14. Shri K.K. Kirty — Dir (Acq)
15. Shri Mukesh Sinha — Dir. (Fin/Budget)
16. Shri S.K. Yagnik — Dir. (Proc)
17. Smt. Namita Mehrotra — Dir (Vig)
18. Lt. Col. DPK Pillay — PO (Def)
19. Shri B.C. Biswas — Member, OFB
20. Shri S. Mukhopadhyay — Member Finance, OFB
21. Shri M. Fakruddin — Dir (CP&M), HAL
22. Shri Prahlada — CCR & D (SI) & DS
23. Air Mshl. A.V . Vaidya — Offg. CISC
24. Air Cmde K.G. Kumar — DACIDS (LTP)
25. Lt. Gen Deepak Kapoor — VCOAS
26. Lt. Gen. (Dr.) DDS Sandhu — ADC
27. Maj Gen A.K. Mehra — ADGWE
28. Air Mshl A.K. Nagalia — DCAS
29. AVM N. Vijay Kumar — ACAS (FP)
30. V . Adml. Nirmal Verma — VCNS
31. Rear Adml R.K. Dhowan — ACNS (P&P)
32. IG SPS Basra — DDG CG
2. At the outset, the Hon’ble Chairman welcomed the
representatives of the Ministry of Defence to the sitting of the
Committee and drew their attention to Direction 58 of the Directions
by the Speaker regarding maintaining confidentiality of the deliberations
of the Committee and invited them to render oral evidence on the
Action Taken Replies to the recommendations contained in the Sixth
Report on Procurement Policy and Procedure and Eleventh Report on
Demands for Grants (2006-07).

71
3. In regard to the Action Taken Replies to the recommendations
contained in the Sixth Report, the Chairman and Members raised certain
important queries viz. status of Eleventh Plan, delegation of financial
powers of Raksha Mantri and the Three Service Chiefs, off-set clause,
single-vendor situation and trend of incurring capital and revenue
expenditure and Fast Track Procedure for acquisition etc.
4. In regard to the Action Taken Replies to the recommendations
contained in the Eleventh Report, the Members raised some of the
vital points viz. the implementation status of all the recommendations
of GoM Report on reforming National Security System, challenges to
National Security, creation of the post of Chief of Defence Staff and
the present status of the construction of Air Defenceship etc.
5. The representatives of the Ministry of Defence answered the
queries of the Members one-by-one. On certain points they assured
the Committee to furnish written replies later on.
The witness then withdrew.
6. A verbatim record of proceedings was kept.
The Committee then adjourned .

MINUTES OF THIRTY-SIXTH SITTING OF THE STANDING
COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE (2006-2007)
The Committee sat on Wednesday, the 27th June 2007 from
1500 to 1600 hrs. in Committee Room ‘B’, Parliament House Annexe,
New Delhi.
PRESENT
Shri. Balasaheb Vikhe Patil – Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Dr. K.S. Manoj
3. Shri Shriniwas Patil
4. Shri Rajendrasinh Ghanshyamsinh Rana (Raju Rana)
5. Shri Arjun Charan Sethi
6. Shri Mahadeorao Shiwankar
7. Shri Manvendra Singh
8. Shri Rajesh Verma
Rajya Sabha
9. Shri Jai Parkash Aggarwal
10. Smt. Shobhana Bhartia
11. Smt. N.P . Durga
12. Shri S.P .M. Syed Khan
13. Shri. K.B. Shanappa
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri D.R. Shekhar — Deputy Secretary – II
2. Smt. J.M. Sinha — Under Secretary
2. At the outset, Hon’ble Chairman welcomed the members to the
sitting of the Committee. The Committee than took up for consideration
the draft Action Taken Report on the recommendations/observations
contained in the Sixth Report of the Committee (14th Lok Sabha) on
‘Procurement Policy and procedure’. As desired by the Chairman one
72

73
Chapter on ‘Fast Track Procedure’ was circulated to the Members
during the sitting of the Committee for incorporation in the report.
The Committee considered the above Chapter and after some
deliberations, same was approved to incorporate in the Action Taken
Report. Committee after some deliberation adopted the draft Action
Taken Report with some additions/modifications.
3. The Committee then authorised the Hon’ble Chairman to finalise
the report and present the same to both the Houses of Parliament.
The Committee then adjourned.

APPENDIX
ANALYSIS OF THE ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON
THE RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE 6th REPORT
OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE (FOURTEENTH
LOK SABHA) ON ‘PROCUREMENT POLICY AND PROCEDURE’
 Percentage
 of Total
(i) Total number of recommendations 28
(ii) Recommendations/Observations which have 17 60.71
been accepted by the Government
(Para Nos, (1.4 & 1.5), 1.17, 1.19, (2.17, 2.19
& 2.20), 2.18, 2.25, (4.8 & 4.9), (5.6 & 5.7),
6.10, (7.6 & 7.7), 8.2, 9.5, (9.6 & 12.4 &
12.5), 10.7, 11.5, 13.11 and (15.4, 15.5,
15.6 & 15.7)
(iii) Recommendations/Observations which the  1 3.57
Committee do not desire to pursue in
view of Government replies
Para Nos. 14.2
(iv) Recommendations/Observations in respect 10 35.71
of which replies of the Government have
not been accepted by the Committee:
(Para No. 1.15, 1.16, 1.18, 2.24, (3.5, 3.6 &
3.7), (4.10 & 4.11), 4.12, 6.9 11.4 and
(13.8, 13.9, 13.10 & 13.12)
(v) Recommendations/Observations in respect 0  —
of which final replies of Government are
still awaited:
(Para Nos. Nil)
74