18
STANDING COMMITTEE
ON DEFENCE
(2006-07)
FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA
MINISTRY OF DEFENCE
IN-DEPTH STUDY AND CRITICAL REVIEW OF
BHARAT ELECTRONICS LIMITED (BEL)
EIGHTEENTH REPORT
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
May, 2007/Vaisakha, 1929 (Saka)

EIGHTEENTH REPORT
STANDING COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE
(2006-07)
(FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA)
MINISTRY OF DEFENCE
IN-DEPTH STUDY AND CRITICAL REVIEW OF
BHARAT ELECTRONICS LIMITED (BEL)
Presented to Lok Sabha on 7.5.2007
Laid  in  Rajya Sabha  on 7.5.2007
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
May, 2007/Vaisakha, 1929 (Saka)

C.O.D. No. 82
Price : Rs. 103.00
© 2007 BY LOK S ABHA S ECRETARIAT
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of
Business in Lok Sabha (Eleventh Edition) and Printed by Jainco Art India,
New Delhi-110 005.

(i)
CONTENTS
PAGES
COMPOSITION OF THE C OMMITTEE .............................................................. (iii)
PREFACE ........................................................................................................ (v)
REPORT
CHAPTER I Introduction ................................................................... 1
CHAPTER II Organisational Structure ............................................. 13
CHAPTER III Navratna Status to BEL ............................................. 18
CHAPTER IV Performance and Capacity Utilisation
(i) Core Area of Business ....................................... 20
(ii) Diversification ....................................................... 23
(iii) A vailable Infrastructure and their
Upgradation .......................................................... 25
(iv) Utilization .............................................................. 27
(v) Order Book Position, Capacity Utilization
and  Delivery Schedule ..................................... 29
(vi)  Export Market .................................................... 35
(vii)  Competitiveness ................................................. 45
C
HAPTER V Indigenization ............................................................... 55
CHAPTER VI Modernisation/Upgradation
(i) Perspective Plan of BEL .................................... 59
(ii) Measures for modernization/upgradation .... 61
(iii) Status of Major Projects on hand ................... 63
(iv) Attrition of Engineers and Technical Staff ... 68
C
HAPTER VII Research & Development and Quality
Assurance ....................................................................... 75
CHAPTER VIII Private Sector Participation ....................................... 85
APPENDICES
Minutes of the sitting of the Committee held
on 4 October 2006, 12 December 2006 and
12 February 2007 ......................................................... 89

COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE
ON DEFENCE (2006-07)
  Shri Balasaheb Vikhe Patil —  Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Churchill Alemao
3. Shri S. Bangarappa
4. Shri Milind Murli Deora
5. Shri Santosh Kumar Gangwar
6. Shri Ramesh C. Jigajinagi
7. Shri Suresh Kalmadi
8. Shri C. Kuppusami
9. Dr. K.S. Manoj
10. Ms. Ingrid Mcleod
11. Shri Asaduddin Owaisi
12. Shri Adhalrao Shivaji Patil
13. Shri Shriniwas Patil
14. Shri Rajendrasinh Ghanshyamsinh Rana (Raju Rana)
15. Dr. H.T. Sangliana
16. Shri Arjun Charan Sethi
17. Prof. Mahadeorao Shiwankar
18. Shri Manvendra Singh
19. Shri Balashowry Vallabhaneni
20. Shri Rajesh Verma
(iii)

Rajya Sabha
21. Dr. Farooq Abdullah
22. Shri Jai Prakash Aggarwal
23. Shri Abu Asim Azmi
24. Smt. Shobhana Bhartia
25. Shri R.K. Dhawan
26. Smt. N.P . Durga
27. Shri S.P .M. Syed Khan
28. Shri K.B. Shanappa
29. Shri Arun Shourie
30. Smt. Viplove Thakur
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri S.K. Sharma — Additional Secretary
2. Shri P .K. Bhandari — Joint Secretary
3. Shri Gopal Singh — Director
4. Shri D.R. Shekhar — Deputy Secretary-II
5. Smt. Jyochnamayi Sinha — Under Secretary
(iv)

(v)
PREFACE
I, the Chairman, Standing Committee on Defence (2006-07) having
been authorised by the Committee to submit the Report on their behalf,
present this Eighteenth Report on the subject ‘In-depth Study and
Critical Review of Bharat  Electronics Limited (BEL)’. The subject was
selected for examination by the Standing Committee on Defence during
2006-07.
2. The Committee, during their examination of the subject, took
evidence of the representatives of the Ministry of Defence on 4 October
2006 and 12 December 2006. The Committee also undertook an on-
the-spot study visit to Bharat Electronics Limited, Bangaluru on 18
November 2006 for an in-depth analysis of the subject matter.
3. Based on the background note, written replies to the list of
points furnished by the Ministry of Defence on the subject, briefing/
oral evidence tendered by the representatives of the Ministry, including
the Chairman, BEL, and the observations made by the members of the
Committee during the Study visit, the Committee considered and
adopted the draft Report at their sitting held on 12 February 2007.
4. The Committee have inter-alia recommended for organisational
restructuring of the various units of BEL, need for conferring additional
power to the Board of Directors to enable it to take independent
decisions on project sanction, joint ventures with private sector and
R&D etc., Nava Ratna status for BEL, establishment of new
infrastructure to improve efficiency in BEL, need for expanding export
market by way of manufacturing diversified and high-end products,
need for regularly updating technologies to match the challenges of
international market, close examination of modernization/upgradation
measures, retention of R&D engineers and technical staff with
appropriate revision of pay structure and involvement of private sector
in manufacturing of items of critical/classified technologies.
5. The Committee wish to express their thanks to the representatives
of the Ministry of Defence for appearing before the Committee for
evidence and for furnishing the material and information in a very
short span of time which the Committee desired in connection with
the examination of this subject.
6. For facility of reference and convenience, the observations/
recommendations of the Committee have been printed in thick type in
the body of the Report.
  N
EW D ELHI; BALASAHEB VIKHE PATIL,
15 March, 2007 Chairman,
24 Phalguna, 1928 (Saka) Standing Committee on Defence.

CHAPTER I
INTRODUCTION
1.1 India continuously strives to achieve self-reliance in Defence
industries through indigenisation, development and production of
Defence equipment both in public and private sectors under the overall
supervision of Department of Defence Production of the Ministry of
Defence. The Department has eight Defence Public Sector Undertakings
which have substantially developed their infrastructure over the years
to cater to the basic strategic requirements of Defence Forces. Bharat
Electronics Limited (BEL) is one of the eight Defence Public Sector
Undertakings. It was established at Bangalore by the Government of
India under the Ministry of Defence in the year 1954.
1.2 BEL believes in the following values :—
• Putting customers first.
•W orking with transparency, honesty and integrity.
•T rusting & respecting individuals.
• Fostering team work.
• Striving to achieve high employee satisfaction.
• Encouraging flexibility and innovation.
• Endeavouring to fulfil social responsibilities.
•P roud of being a part of the organization.
1.3 The following are the objectives of BEL :—
•T o be a customer-focused company providing state-of-the-
art products & solutions at competitive prices, meeting the
demands of quality, delivery and service.
•T o generate internal resources for profitable growth.
•T o attain technological leadership in Defence Electronics
through in-house R&D, partnership with Defence/Research
Laboratories and Academic Institutions.
•T o give thrust to exports.
•T o create a facilitating environment for people to realize
their full potential through continuous learning and team
work.

2
•T o give value for money to customers and create wealth for
shareholders.
•T o constantly benchmark company’s performance with best-
in-class internationally.
•T o raise marketing abilities to global standards.
•T o strive for self-reliance through indigenisation.
DECADE WISE DEVELOPMENT OF BEL
1. The First Decade (1954-1964)—Infant Years of the Company
1.4 In April 1954, Bharat Electronics Limited (BEL) came into being
at Jalahalli, Bangalore. Starting with a modest turnover of Rs. 2 lakhs
in 1956-57, by the end of the decade, BEL registered a turnover of
Rs. 4.69 crores in 1963-64. BEL recorded its maiden profit of
Rs. 7 lakhs in 1959-60, which went up to Rs. 54 lakhs in 1963-64.
1.5 BEL started off with a core group of French and Indian
engineers and managers. The first batch of technicians was recruited
in October 1954. A training school, Technical Training Centre, was
established at that time to train the recruits. The first batch of senior
officers were recruited in 1955 and sent to France for training. With a
staff strength of 768 in March 1957, the number of personnel in BEL
rose to 4,035 by March 1964.
Difficulties/Challenges Faced
1.6 Like any other evolving company, BEL too had to face
challenges during its formative period. CSF, France who were assisting
BEL were not fully equipped to plan and construct a factory of BEL’s
size. Delays were also encountered in converting French documents
into English. Morale of the technical officers & workforce was low as
the pay scales were quite meagre. The Managing Director of the
company had to approach the Board for even trivial matters, as he
was not totally empowered. The company had also to face the challenge
of unreasonable terms & conditions set by the collaborators for entering
into ToT agreements.
2. The Second Decade (1965-1974)—Laying of R&D Foundation
Products & Infrastructure
1.7 Manufacture of a VHF transreceiver began in 1967 in
collaboration with RCA. HF communication sets were made in the

3
late Sixties with Siemens technology and in 1971 with BEL design.
BEL started manufacturing in-house designed V/UHF communication
sets in the early Seventies.
1.8 BEL started making radars in collaboration with LRDE – and
S-Band Local Warming Radar in 1967 and an X-Band Field Artillery
Radar in 1972. The second Unit of BEL was set up at Ghaziabad in
1974 to cater to the Air Defence Ground Environment Systems (ADGES)
of the Indian Air Force. This Unit started manufacture of an S-Band
3-D Radar with a range of 230 nautical miles for air surveillance in
1974 in collaboration with Thomson CSF. Secondary Surveillance Radars
were manufactured in association with DLRL from the early Seventies.
A Storm Warning Radar of BEL design was made in the early Seventies.
Frigate Radar Systems were manufactured in collaboration with HAS,
Holland, in 1964.
1.9 BEL pioneered the radio and television networks in India by
manufacturing transmitters for All India Radio from 1965 with
technology from NEC, Japan, and TV transmitters for Doordarshan
from 1973. BEL also started supplying Transmitting Tubes to AIR and
for civil and defence communication requirements in the late Sixties.
Microwave Tubes, Magnetrons and Small Signal Devices were
manufactured in the late Sixties in collaboration with Philips, Holland.
BEL started making Black & White TV Picture Tubes in 1970 with
NEC technology. In 1971, BEL started making Power Devices and
Digital ICs with RCA technology. BEL started manufacturing X-ray
tubes with Siemens technology in the early Seventies. BEL made UHF
Radio Relays for the Dept. of Telecommunication in 1974.
1.10 BEL started outsourcing by setting up the Ancillary Industrial
Estate in 1964-65 at Bangalore for offloading low-tech jobs.
1.11 Research & Development took root during this decade. R&D
departments were formed. Many products of BEL design rolled out
like HF and VHF radios and Storm Warning Radar. BEL continued to
benefit from collaboration with world technology leaders like Siemens,
Thomson CSF, HAS, NEC, RCA and Phillips. BEL’s association with
DRDO labs like LRDE and DLRL began. The ambitious plan to develop
a new generation almost state-of-the-art equipment necessitated a
massive upgradation of infrastructure.
1.12 BEL’s turnover rose from Rs 6.17 crores in 1964-65 to Rs 48.71
crores in 1973-74. A maiden dividend of 5% was paid during 1964-65.
From a PBT of Rs 0.97 crores in 1964-65, BEL registered PBT of
Rs 7.46 crores in 1973-74. Dividend of 12% was paid.

4
1.13 The staff strength nearly tripled during the decade - from
4,825 in 1964-65 to 14,053 in 1973-74. Lot of welfare activities were
started including setting up of Co-operative Society, Housing Society,
Death Relief Fund, Employees’ Welfare Fund, Creche, Hospital, School,
Sports Club and Fine Arts Club.
1.14 BEL’s association with reputed global companies gave it an
opportunity to evolve an integrated approach to Quality. Quality
Assurance became a way of life at BEL. Quality and Reliability
Departments were set up in 1972 as also Environmental Testing Labs.
A Quality Manual was brought out in 1974 and Quality of Designs in
the early Seventies.
Difficulties/Challenges Faced
1.15 After the first decade of existence, the business started growing
and the company felt a need to create five self-contained Divisions, in
a phased manner, for increasing its product profile. BEL had to go to
the Government to increase its level of production as it had no
authority for the same. The company also witnessed during its decade
a lockout of 18 days due to disturbance and disorderly behaviour
resorted to by a section of the employees. During this decade, the
company also had to reassess its plant, machinery, personnel, capital
investment to adopt itself to manufacture new generation of equipment
using advanced technology like Integrated Circuits, Multilayered Wiring
etc. One of the major challenges of this decade was preparing a detailed
project report for setting up a new Manufacturing Unit to meet the
Air Force requirement of Radars, Troposcatters and Microwave
Communication Equipment which led to the setting up of second unit
of BEL at Ghaziabad.
3. The Third Decade (1975-1984)—Expansion Phase
Products & Infrastructure
1.16 BEL supplied in-house designed HF and VHF transreceivers,
UHF Radio Relays, Radios and Analog Tropo – both static and mobile,
to the Indian Army in the Seventies. In the early Eighties, BEL
manufactured Automatic Electronic Switch for the Army with LRDE
technology. PSM 33, a 3-D Mobile Radar, was manufactured in
collaboration with Thomson CSF and supplied to the Indian Air Force
in 1983. BEL manufactured Cymbeline X-Band Tracking Radar under
licence from Thorn EMI, UK, for the Army in 1984. Naval Surveillance
Radars and Navigational Radars were supplied to the Navy in the
Eighties. Sonars with NPOL technology were supplied to the Navy in
the late Seventies.

5
1.17 BEL-made Microwave Transmitters, FM Transmitters,
TV Transmitters and TVROs continued to roll out during the Seventies
and Eighties. Manufacture of Vacumm Interrupter Tubes began in 1984
with Siemens technology.
1.18 The third Unit was established at Pune in 1979 to manufacture
X-ray Tubes and Batteries. In 1983, an ailing Andhra Scientific Company
(ASCO) was taken over by BEL as the fourth manufacturing Unit at
Machilipatnam, which made optical products. In 1980, BEL’s first
overseas office was set up at New York for procurement of components
and materials. CNC machines were introduced in the late Seventies. A
modern PCB manufacturing facility was set up. An antenna test facility
was set up at Sohna in 1974.
1.19 BEL matured in the development of VHF, HF and UHF
equipment as well as TV and audio broadcast equipment and TVROs.
BEL entered the 3-D Radar arena in a big way. BEL honed its
components manufacturing capabilities. The association with DRDO
labs continued. BEL developed the Electronic Voting Machine. The
D&E Divisions were organized on the basis of product specialization.
The concept of ‘equipment families’ was conceived and implemented
in D&E.
1.20 BEL gave ToT to GCEL for V/UHF receivers and Low Power
TV Transmitters; to ECIL for EVM; and to Suchitra, Hyderabad, for
Black & White TV Tubes.
1.21 The turnover tripled from Rs. 43.15 crores in 1974-75 to
Rs. 154.93 crores in 1983-84. The PBT rose from Rs. 4.82 crores in
1974-75 to Rs. 26.94 crores in 1983-84. The dividend was 12%.
1.22 The manpower rose from 15,340 in 1974-75 to 18,207 in
1983-84. The Office Order on Career Plan came out in 1975.
1.23 The Quality Control Circle (QCC) movement started in 1981
at Bangalore and Ghaziabad Units. It still is a vibrant activity at BEL.
Difficulties/Challenges Faced
1.24 As the company grew from strength to strength during the
last two decades, the company was also facing the challenge of
augmenting the strength of R&D engineers and provide them with
suitable incentives. The number of R&D projects on hand was ever
increasing. As the company’s operations increased, it felt the need for
computers to handle the task of inventory management, purchase follow

6
up, payroll preparation, book keeping and other labour intensive and
time consuming jobs. This led to creation of Electronic Data Processing
Centres in the factories. This decade also saw the company facing the
financial difficulties due to accumulated losses of Ghaziabad Unit and
high inventories at Bangalore factory due to recession in components
market. For the second time in the history of BEL, the company had
to face a prolonged strike and lock out on account of wage revision
of its employees.
4. The Fourth Decade (1985-1994)—Emergence of a Premier
Professional Electronics Company Products & Infrastructure
1.25 BEL-designed Fully Solid State HF receiver, VHF multi-role
transreceiver, Secure Tactical Radio in VHF Band for manpack role,
V/UHF transreceiver for ground-to-ground and ground-to-air
communication, Secure Message Terminals and Encryptors were brought
out in the Eighties and Nineties. In collaboration with LRDE, BEL
manufactured an encryptor for HF transreceivers, a microprocessor
controlled automatic exchange for use in the forward areas and a
portable telephone Switch Board for field use at the battalion level
during the Eighties.
1.26 BEL designed and manufactured Digital Tropo communication
equipment for the Army and Air Force in 1985. BEL designed and
supplied Control and Reporting Centre, a Satcom system for Radar
networking, to the Air Force during 1990-93.
1.27 The BEL-designed Cyclone Warning Radar was supplied to
the Indian Meteorological Department in 1985. The Flycatcher Radar,
an air defence weapon control radar, was manufactured in collaboration
with HSA and supplied to the Army in 1987. STENTOR, a long range
X-band battlefield surveillance radar manufactured in collaboration with
LCTAR, France, was supplied from 1990-92. INDRA Mk I, an air
defence radar which was engineered concurrently with LRDE, was
supplied to the Army and Air Force in 1992. Airport Surveillance Radar
and Monopulse Secondary Surveillance Radar were manufactured in
collaboration with Northrop Grumman, USA, and supplied to the
Airports Authority of India in 1994.
1.28 1985 saw BEL manufacturing on a large scale Low Power TV
Transmitters and TVROs for the expansion of Doordarshan’s coverage.
Transportable Satellite TV Uplink System was supplied to Doordarshan
in 1993. Digital Microwave Systems, MUX equipment and electronic
exchanges were supplied to DoT in the late Eighties.

7
1.29 BEL supplied the Navy with Shipborne Electronic Warfare
Systems manufactured with technology from DLRL in 1990 and the
Air Force with Radar Warning Receivers made with technology from
DARE in 1994.
1.30 Laser Range Finders were manufactured in the late Eighties.
Night vision binoculars with LRDE technology were made in the late
Eighties. BEL-designed Tank Fire Control Systems were supplied to
the Army in 1987. Gun Stabiliser System with Russian technology was
supplied to the Army in 1988. BEL has been supplying EVMs to the
Election Commission since 1989.
1.31 In 1985, the fifth Unit was set up in Chennai for supply of
Tank Electronics, with proximity to HVF, Avadi. The sixth Unit was
set up at Panchkula the same year to manufacture Tactical
Communication equipment. 1986 witnessed the setting up of the
seventh Unit at Kotdwara to manufacture Telecom Equipment, the eight
Unit to manufacture TV Glass Shells at Navi Mumbai (which now
makes Antennae, hydraulics, shelters and security systems) and the
ninth Unit at Hyderabad to manufacture Electronic Warfare Equipment.
1.32 The agreement for setting up BEL’s first Joint Venture
Company, BE DELFT, with M/s Delft of Holland was signed in 1990.
Recently, this became a subsidiary of BEL with the exit of the foreign
partner and has been renamed BEL Optronic Devices Limited.
1.33 BEL gained expertise in VHF/UHF/Tropo Communication
Systems and Secure Message Terminals. BEL’s fruitful association with
DRDO continued. BEL also continued to use technology from overseas.
BEL established two Central Research Laboratories – at Bangalore in
1988 and at Delhi in 1992, to focus on futuristic R&D in areas of
interest to BEL. R&D Departments were established in all the Other
Units of BEL.
1.34 BEL experienced a sever Foreign Exchange crunch in the early
Nineties. BEL, despite being dependent on import of professional and
defence grade components requiring FE, took up the challenge of
managing the FE crunch prudently and ensured that its performance
and growth were not adversely affected.
1.35 In 1992, the first disinvestments (20%) and listing of the
Company’s shares in Bangalore and Mumbai Stock Exchanges took
place. The second disinvestments (4.14%) took place in 1994.
1.36 The employee strength stabilized. It was 18,453 in 1984-85
and 18,422 in 1993-94. Thrust was given to training and development.

8
Advanced training for senior executives (GMs), managerial effectiveness
programme for middle level executives (Managers) and 6-month
management programme for Deputy Managers were introduced.
1.37 The Total Quality Management (TQM) philosophy was
adopted by BEL and the acronym TORQUE (Total Organisational
Quality Enhancement) was coined at BEL. The ISO certification
programme started in 1993 and was completed across all Units in
1999.
Difficulties/Challenges Faced
1.38 This decade saw the company transforming form a company
with a limited perspective into a multi-location, multi-product, multi-
unit organization by setting up new Units at different parts of the
country. The company faced the challenge of liberlization, privatization
and globalisation process initiated by the Government in the country.
The company had to face a severe foreign exchange crunch, which
had an impact on its performance. During this decade, the company’s
equity was disinvested in two phases. In the first phase, 20% of the
equity was disinvested and in the second phase disinvestments was
4.14%.
5. The Fifth & Early Sixth Decade (1995-2006) Till Date—A Decade
of Growth
1.39 This decade is remembered as the Golden Era in the history
of BEL. This decade saw growth of the company, manifold, created
many records, crossed Rs. 1000 crores turnover during 1995-96,
Rs. 2000 crores turnover during 2002-03 and Rs 3000 crores turnover
during 2004-05.
1.40 During this decade, BEL also faced the regime of US sanctions
and Passive sanctions from some of the European countries. These
resulted in awakening BEL by concentrating more on non-US
components in its design. BEL successfully faced the sanction regime
and it turned out very beneficial to the company as BEL could carry
out many design changes in its products to overcome the sanctions.
BEL successfully converted the adversity into an opportunity. BEL could
find out alternatives for many of the US components and, in many
cases, source it at lower prices.
1.41 To address the issue of sourcing of non-US components, BEL
started its second overseas office at Singapore. BEL Regional Office at
Singapore started its operation from 1998. It is involved in sourcing of

9
components from Japanese, Taiwanese, Chinese and other Asian sources.
This has helped BEL to create second source for sourcing of imported
components in addition to New York. There is cost advantage in
sourcing of components through this office also. In addition to sourcing,
this office is also used for developing business for our BEL products.
1.42 During this decade, BEL added many new products like
Reporter Radar, Upgrade Flycatcher Radar, Battle Field Surveillance
Radar – Medium Range, Battle Field Surveillance Radar- Short Range,
EW Systems for Army, Navy and Air Force, Hand Held Thermal
Imagers, Integrated Observation Equipment, VHF Radios, Radio Relays,
Solar Products and Solar Power Systems, Compact Vacuum Interrupters,
Gunner’s Main Sight etc. BEL successfully executed APNET on Build,
Own, Operate and Transfer model to the Government of Andhra
Pradesh. This was for the first time, a project of this nature was
undertaken. BEL also executed POLNET project (Police Network project)
connecting all the police stations in the country via satellite.
1.43 During this decade, globalisation started the entry of private
and foreign companies into Defence Sector. Kelkar Committee’s
recommendations leading to Defence Procurement Procedures (DPP)
paved the way for private sector participation in Defence Sector. BEL
geared up to face this competitive market scenario and planned
strategies to convert the perceived threats to opportunities. The
competition helped BEL to improve itself and has been successful to
face the challenges of new emerging market forces.
1.44 During this decade, BEL entered into two more Joint Ventures
with General Electric of USA and Multitone of UK. The Joint Venture
with GE was for the manufacture of X-Ray Tubes for Medical
Electronics and with Multitone for marketing of Pagers. The Joint
Venture with GE is performing well and has been paying dividend
regularly. As the pager market did not pick up in India, the Multitone
joint venture is in the process of winding up.
1.45 In order to give better customer focus, Bangalore Unit was
converted into six Strategic Business Units, with each SBU having clear
focus on its product range and customers. This has helped Bangalore
Unit to address the product/customer issue very effectively. The six
SBUs are Military Radar, Naval Systems, Military Communication &
Electronic Warfare Systems, Components, Export Manufacturing,
Telecom & Broadcast Systems.
1.46 During the decade, R&D has matured and R&D set up has
been restructured into a 3-layer organization to meet the needs of the
customers effectively and efficiently.
— Development & Engineering (D&E) groups in each of the
9 Units and 6 SBUs developing new products.

10
— Central D&E at Bangalore developing specialized technology
modules for Unit D&E.
—2  Central Research Laboratories (CRL) at Bangalore &
Ghaziabad for carrying out research in futuristic technology
areas.
1.47 The objective of this set up is identification and realization of
enabling/cutting edge technologies for core business areas.
1.48 Today, BEL spends around 4-5% of its turnover on R&D and
the returns from R&D is very significant as nearly 75% of BEL’s
turnover comes from indigenous R&D , both through in-house
development and development through DRDO Labs.
1.49 The company has received the following patent rights:
• Electronic Voting Machine (EVM)
• Solar Traffic Signalling System
• Phase Taping Technique for Beam Shaping of Cellular Base
Station Antenna
• Non-symmetric Surface Acoustic Wave Filter
In respect of EVM, patent right is obtained in Singapore and
Namibia also.
1.50 BEL introduced ‘60a’ concept, a powerful statistical quality
tool in the company during 1998. GE who is a leading practitioner of
this ‘60’ methodology trained our Senior Executives. Today, more than
400 executives have been trained and all the Units of BEL have adopted
this philosophy for Quality improvement.
1.51 Another Quality initiative which was taken up by the
company is the CII Exim Bank Excellence Model for all-round excellence
in the company. All the Units of BEL have adopted and are practicing
this methodology in their working. Six of our Units have been awarded
certificates of merit for strong commitment to Quality.
1.52 The performance of the company during this decade is as
follows:
Parameter 94-95 95-96 96-97 97-98 98-99 99-2000
12 3 4 56 7
Sales 934.61 1068.98 1226.24 1261.30 1198.87 1494.15
PBT 15.80 23.97 95.67 102.34 70.21 166.43

11
12 3 4 56 7
Equity 80 80 80 80 80 80
Dividend 16% 16% 20% 20% 20% 25%
Parameter 00-01 01-02 02-03 03-04 04-05 05-06
Sales 1715.33 1941.99 2508.02 2798.59 3212.09 3535.99
PBT 219.91 284.73 386.16 469.02 685.96 855.26
Equity 80 80 80 80 80 80
Dividend 40% 50% 70% 100% 112% 146%
1.53 Though supplies to Defence constitute a majority share in
BEL’s turnover, BEL realises that, to grow in the year to come, it has
to diversify into other areas. BEL is continuously upgrading its
technologies and introducing new products, every year, in its efforts
to be the leader in professional electronics. Some of the major areas of
diversification are as under:—
(a) Satellite Based Systems
(b) Networking Solutions
(c) Smart Card Based Access Systems
(d) Home Land Security Solutions
(e) Solar Photovolatic Systems
(f) Compact Vacuum Interrupters
(g) Set Top Box for DTH
(h) Asynchronous Digital Subscriber Line (ADSL2) Modem
(i) Airport Surveillance Radars
(j) Broadcast Transmitters
Difficulties/Challenges Faced
1.54 The biggest challenge the company had to face ever since its
inception was the regime of sanctions by U.S. Government and passive
sanctions imposed by some of the European countries. This resulted
in non-receipt of components/subsystems for its various manufacturing
programmes. The company had to initiate several actions like finding
out alternatives, design changes, indigenisation etc. to counter this
threat. The company was successful in its endeavour and the results

12
of the company in its succeeding years speak for itself. The company
converted this threat into an opportunity and came out quite
successfully. The manufacture of Black & White TV Glass shells at
Taloja Unit had to be discontinued on account of diminishing market
for Black & White TV sets in the country. BEL took steps to diversify
the Unit’s product range by creating manufacturing facility for Antennas
used in Radars, Electronic assembles, Hydraulics for Tanks and Shelter
facilities. This unit had to be converted into a support Unit for all
other Units of BEL. Today, this Unit is in the process of identifying
products of its own and is in the process of diversification. During
this decade, BEL took over the Joint Venture company viz., BEDELFT
wherein the JV partner M/s Delft did not show much interest and
wanted to withdrawn from its operations. This JV company has now
become a subsidiary company viz, BEL Optronics Devices Limited.
This subsidiary company is in the process of acquiring technology for
manufacture of Super Gen Tubes. The company also realized that
business is slowly shifting from equipment-oriented concept to the
customer demanding a total turnkey solution. To address this scenario,
the company had to create a system division for this purpose. Today,
the biggest challenge faced by the company is to attract and retain
skilled manpower. This is mainly on account of poor wage structure
in Public Sectors and inability to match the wage structure of private
companies. The company has taken steps to implement incentive
schemes for Executives and is also in the process of evolving a better
wage package in order to retain and attract talent.

CHAPTER II
ORGANISATIONAL STRUCTURE
Board of Directorate of BEL
2.1 Board of Directors of BEL comprises of Chairman and
Managing Director and Director In-charge of Finance, Research &
Development, Personnel, Marketing, Other Units and Bangalore
Complex. The Board of Directors also includes part time Government
Directors i.e. Joint Secretary (Shipyards) of the Ministry of Defence
and two representatives of Armed Forces. Besides, it has 09 part time
independent Directors. Two senior most Officers from Air Force and
Navy are the permanent specially invitees to all the Board meetings.
The Committee observe that Army has not been given representation
in the Board of Directors of BEL although it supplies majority of
equipment to Army.
2.2 When asked whether the Board of Directors is sufficiently
empowered to take  professional/business decisions and the powers
required to be conferred on the Board to make the company a truly
professionally managed entity, the Ministry of Defence in their written
replies stated :—
“Being a Mini Ratna company, sufficient powers have been
extended to the Board of Directors to take professional / business
decisions, including powers to enter into Joint Ventures / Co-
development and Co-production agreements. Some of the powers
are:
(a) Capital expenditure upto Rs 500 crores or Net worth,
whichever is less.
(b) Equity investment in Joint Ventures and subsidiaries or
mergers and acquisitions in India upto 15% of the net worth
or Rs. 500 crores in one project. Overall ceiling in all JVs
and subsidiaries or mergers and acquisitions upto 30% of
the networth.
(c) Opening of offices abroad with the concurrence of the
administrative ministry.
Further, with the restructuring of the Board of Directors of the
company to include various technical and management experts
13

14
from leading Business Institutions, IISc, IITs etc., the company is
managed in a highly professional manner.
Additional Powers required to be conferred on the Board to make
the company a truly professionally managed entity.”
2.3 On being asked, about the future plan to restructure the Board
of Directors in case of elevation to Navaratna status, the Ministry in
its written replies stated:—
“BEL Board of Directors was restructured last on 7th March, 2006
(Ref. GoI/MoD letter No. 19(2)/2005/D(BLE) dated 7th March 2006
to comply with the SEBI requirements for listed companies.
In accordance with the SEBI requirement that not less than 50% of
the listed Company’s Board should consist of Independent
Directors, the BEL Board was restructured on 7.3.2006 and 9 part-
time non-official Directors (independent Directors) were inducted
on 23.5.2006 for a period of three years. Thus, more than 1/3rd of
the members in the Board are part-time non-official Directors in
accordance with stipulations for Navaratna PSEs. Hence, BEL is
not required to plan further restructuring of the Board on elevation
to the status of Navaratna PSE.”
Restructuring of units
2.4 The Company has nine manufacturing units located at
Bangalore, Ghaziabad, Pune, Panchkula, Kotdwara, Hyderabad,
Machilipatnam, Chennai and Navi Mumbai. Each of the Units is
working in specific business areas as given below:—
Unit Major Products
12
Bangalore Military Communication & Electronic Warfare Systems,
Radars, Naval Systems and Sonars, CI Systems,
Simulators, Sound & Vision Broadcast Equipment,
Electronic Voting Machines, Simulators and Components
Ghaziabad Radars & Micro Wave Communication Equipment,
Antennas
Pune Batteries, X-ray Tubes, Electro Optics, Laser Range
Finders & Target Designators

15
12
Machilipatnam Night Vision Devices, Thermal Imagers and Surgical
Microscopes
Panchkula Military Communication Equipment
Kotdwara Defence Communication Equipment and Telecom
Products for Civil & Defence
Navi Mumbai Hydraulics for Stabilisers, Shelters, Mast, Flycatcher
Antenna System
Chennai Tank E lectronics, Stabiliser Drives, Advanced Land
Navigation Systems, Integrated Fire Control Systems,
Gun Upgrades
Hyderabad Electronic Warfare Equipment
2.5 All the above nine factories are certified for ISO 9001:2000 ISO
14001:2004. In addition, BEL has Regional Offices and Marketing
Centres at New Delhi, Kolkata, Mumbai, Chennai, Hyderabad and
Vishakapatnam to provide support to the units and customers. The
Company has set up two Overseas Offices in New York & Singapore
for cost effective sourcing of components and sub-assemblies.
2.6 Pertaining to the organizational structure of BEL, the Ministry
of Defence in a written note stated as under:—
“Under the liberalized business environment, increased global
competition and rapid technology changes, it has become
imperative for the company to evolve an organizational structure
to effectively respond to the dynamic conditions of the environment.
As a step towards achieving enhanced business performance,
increased customer satisfaction, faster response time, the biggest
unit of BEL at Bangalore Complex was divided into six Strategic
Business Units with clear products/business focus on major
business segments like.
• Military Radar
• Naval Systems
• Military Communication & Electronic Warfare
• Civil Telecom & Broadcast System
•C omponents
• Export Manufacturing

16
BEL is now in the process of restructuring its second largest Unit
at Ghaziabad into two Strategic Business Units.”
2.7 Pertaining to other seven units of BEL, it has been observed
that no action has been started to restructure on the line of Bangalore
and Ghaziabad Units with clear-cut focus on their different business
segments.
Recommendation No. 1
Restructuring of the Board of Directors
2.8 The Committee note that the Board of Directors of BEL
comprises Chairman and Managing Director, six Directors incharge
of Finance, Research and Development, Personnel, Marketing, Other
Units and Bangalore Complex respectively. The Board of Directors
also includes part time Government Directors i.e. Joint Secretary
(Shipyards) of the Ministry of Defence and two representatives of
Armed Forces. In accordance with the SEBI guidelines, BEL has
restructured its Board of Directors and has included part time
independent Directors and has also included various technical and
management experts from leading business institutions and IITs. Two
senior most Officers from Air Force and Navy are the permanent
special invitees to all the Board meetings. The Committee feel that
the restructuring of the Board of Directors is a positive step to
manage the Company in a professional manner. However, the
Committee note that Army has not been given representation on the
Board of Directors of BEL and only making the representatives of
the Armed Forces as permanent special invitees will not serve any
meaningful purpose. Therefore, the Committee desire that officers
from Army, Navy and Air Force should be made permanent Members
on the Board of Directors instead of designating them as permanent
special invitees to all the Board meetings. This will ensure active
and effective participation of the users in the projects from the
conceptualization stage to production and user will help BEL to take
decision in a more concerted way.
Recommendation No. 2
Need for organizational restructure in all the nine units of BEL
2.9 The Committee note that BEL has nine manufacturing units
located at Bangalore, Ghaziabad, Pune, Punchkula, Kotdwara,
Hyderbad, Machilipatnam, Chennai and Navi Mumbai. The
Committee observe that BEL has restructured its biggest unit at
Bangalore Complex into six Strategic Business Units and is now in

17
the process of restructuring its second largest unit at Ghaziabad in
order to achieve enhanced business performance, increased customer
satisfaction and faster response. The Committee note that the BEL
has not initiated any action to restructure the other units in the line
of Bangalore and Ghaziabad units. Therefore, the Committee desire
that the Ministry of Defence should appoint a Committee to examine
the restructuring of the other units to enable them to meet the
requirements of rapid technological changes in the liberalized
business environment.
Recommendation No. 3
Need for conferring additional power to the Board of Directors
2.10 The Committee observe that being a mini Ratna Company,
some powers have been extended to the Board of Directors to take
Professional/business decisions, including powers to enter into joint
ventures/co-development and co-production agreements. BEL’s Board
of Directors was restructured on 7 March, 2006 to comply with the
SEBI requirements for listed companies. In accordance with the SEBI
stipulation for Navaratna Public Sector Enterprises (PSEs), BEL has
included one-third of the Members as a part time non-official
Directors and has included various technical and management experts
and the users.
In view of the recent restructuring, the Committee feel that
additional powers may be conferred on the Board to make the
company a truly professionally managed entity, to enable it to take
independent decisions on project sanction, joint ventures with private
sector and R&D etc.

CHAPTER III
NAVRATNA STATUS TO BEL
3.1 Based on the MoU performance, the company has been rated
in the “Excellent” category continuously for the last 8 years by the
Department of Public Enterprises (DPEs) and was conferred the status
of “Mini Ratna” by the Department of Public Enterprises (DPE) during
the year 2001. All the nine factories are certified for ISO 9001:2000 ISO
14001:2004.
3.2 In the supplementary written replies the Ministry has stated
the following benefits the BEL is going to achieve if Navratna Status
will be accorded to it.
(a) Capital Expenditure: As a Navratna the PSE can incur capital
expenditure on purchase of new items or for replacement,
without any monetary ceiling (as against the monetary
ceiling of upto Rs. 500 crores as Miniratna);
(b) To establish financial Joint Ventures/Subsidiaries: Maximum
Permissible equity investment by a Navratna PSE is
Rs. 1000 crores in India & Abroad (as against Rs. 500 crores
in India by a Miniratna PSE);
(c) To establish offices abroad: Full powers as Navratna PSE
(as against with the concurrence of Administrative Ministry
in the case of Miniratna);
(d) Creation of posts: Navratna PSE can create and wind up
posts including and upto those of non-Board level Directors,
i.e. Functional Directors who may have the same pay scales
as that of Board level Directors, but who would not be
members of the Board, Power includes appointment to these
posts and internal transfers, redesignation of posts. Miniratna
PSE can create posts below Board level scales only.
(e) Raising debts: Navratna PSEs have been delegated with
powers to raise debt from the domestic capital markets and
for borrowings from international market, subject to the
approval of RBI/Deptt. of Economic Affairs, to be obtained
through Administrative Ministry. No such specific delegation
of powers to Ministry. No such specific delegation of powers
to Miniratna PSE.
18

19
Recommendation No. 4
Navaratna status for BEL
3.3 The Committee observe that BEL has been rated as an
“Excellent” Public Sector Undertaking for the last 8 years by the
Department of Public Enterprises (DPE) and was conferred the status
of Mini Ratna by the DPE during the year 2001.  All the above nine
factories are certified for ISO 9001:2000 ISO 14001:2004. The
Committee also note the benefits of conferring Nava Ratna status to
BEL, as this status will inter alia remove monetary ceiling for
incurring capital expenditure on purchase of new items or for
replacement to establish financial joint ventures/subsidiaries with a
maximum permissible equity investment of Rs. 1,000 crore in India
and abroad, full power to the PSE to establish Offices abroad without
the concurrence of Administrative Ministry, giving free hands to the
PSE in creating and wind up of post i.e. functional Directors and
internal transfers and re-designation of posts and delegation of power
to raise debt from the domestic capital markets and for borrowings
from international market subject to the approval of RBI/Department
of Economic Affairs.
In view of the above benefits of Nava Ratna Status and the
performance of BEL, the Committee strongly feel that BEL should
be elevated to Nav Ratna Status to make it truly professional body.

CHAPTER IV
 PERFORMANCE & CAPACITY UTILIZATION
(i) Core area of business
4.1 BEL has more than 350 products in its product range. All
these products can be broadly classified under the following core
business groups:—
• Radars and Sonars
• Communication
• Electronic Warfare Systems
• Electro Optics
•T ank Electronics
•T elecommunication and Broadcasting
•C omponents
•T urnkey Solutions
Customer’s profile
4.2 The customer profile of BEL can be broadly classified into two
groups viz., Defence & Non-Defence (Civil). While the Army, Navy &
Air Force constitute the Defence Services, other customers like Defence
Public Sector Undertakings viz., HVF, Avadi, Medak, the three
Shipbuilding Companies viz., Mazagon Dock Limited, Garden Reach
Shipbuilding and Engineers, Goa Shipyard Limited, Bharat Dynamics
Limited etc procure items from BEL for incorporation in the systems
viz., Tanks/Ships manufactured by them for eventual supply to Defence
Services. Apart from this, Paramilitary Forces like Border Security Force,
Assam Rifles, Central Industrial Security Forces etc also procure items
from BEL.
4.3 On an average, more than 80% of BEL’s turnover is for the
Defence Services and BEL’s contributions to the Services in their various
programmes like Plan AREN & PMO BSS for Army, Plan ADGES for
Air Force and Navy’s modernisation programmes have been very
significant. Today, BEL meets a variety of requirements of the Services
in the areas of Radars, Sonars, Communication Equipment and Systems,
20

21
SATCOM, Tank Electronics, Electronic Warfare Equipment, Command
Control Systems etc., meeting stringent Defence specifications with the
assurance of lifetime product support. R&D engineers also associate
with the projects being acquired through transfer of technology from
foreign countries to support documentation initially & to give product
support & Indigenisation activities. The products supplied to Defence
Customers are given in Annexure-I.
4.4 The Non-Defence (Civil)customers include All India Radio &
Doordarshan and Bharat Sanchar Nigam Limited (BSNL) emerge as
major customers. Other civilian customers include Airports Authority
of India, Indian Space Research Organisation, Railways, Election
Commission of India etc. Manufacturers of Consumer Electronic goods
like Radio, TV & other products constitute the customer profile for
components.
4.5 During the briefing before the Committee the representatives
of the Ministry of Defence has stated the following in regard to civil
market :—
“BEL has been trying to make a foray into the civil market and
in its diversified business efforts it has developed several products
for civil market like Satellite Communication systems, X-Ray
baggage machines, solar photovoltaic systems, compact vacuum
interrupters, set top box for DTH, etc. However the production of
the civilian market in its total revenue is 15 per cent.
Very recently, against very stiff competition, BEL has won a contract
for the supply, integration, annual maintenance and facility
management of the state-of-the-art call data record based convergent
billing system for MTNL in Delhi and Mumbai. The company has
also obtained an order from the Army for Rs. 126 crore to set up
a test bed for CDMA-based communication network. The Company
also bagged a contract for Rs. 4.3 crore to set up a satellite
communication network in Nigeria.”
4.6 During oral evidence, when pointed out that 13 per cent of
turn over of BEL comes from PSUs like MTNL, BSNL and Airports
Authority of India etc. Although, BEL is trying to reach civilian market
it is observed that only 2 to 3 per cent turnover comes from civil
market other than the above organizations. When asked whether BEL
is planning to bring any changes to enter into other new civil markets,
the CMD, BEL stated:—
“When we say civil market, it is non-defence. Even though MTNL
and BSNL and AIR are buying the products, it is against global
competition. When we did supply the photovoltaic solar systems
or broadcast systems for Prasar Bharati or telecom systems for
MTNL and BSNL, it was against competition. I fully agree with
hon. Member’s observation that last year, our supplies were

22
85 per cent to the defence and 15 per cent to the civil, but this
year it is likely to be 20 per cent to the civil and 80 per cent to
the defence. But our effort is to identify and diversify in new
areas of civil business so that we try to maintain 20:80 in the
future years also.”
4.7 When asked about the steps taken or proposed to be taken by
BEL to enter into civil market in order to identify and diversify the
new areas of civil business, the Ministry in their written replies to the
post briefing List of Points has stated:—
“BEL has identified the following areas to expand business in the
civilian market. The areas of diversification are:
(i) Systems/Products
(ii) Satellite Based Systems
(iii) Networking Solutions
(iv) Smart Card Based Access Systems
(v) Home Land Security Products
(vi) Railway Systems
(vii) e-Governance
(viii) Solar Photovoltaic Systems
(ix) Compact Vacuum Interrupters
(x) Broadband Modem
(xi) Airport Surveillance Radars
(xii) Broadcast Transmitters
(xiii) Contract Manufacturing.”
4.8 The products supplied to non-Defence civil Customers are given
in Annexure-II.
4.9 The following table shows the percentage of turnover in respect
of Defence and Civil Business of BEL during the last five years:—
Years Defence Civil Total Turnover
(Rs. in crore)
2001-02 72 28 1942
2002-03 80 20 2508
2003-04 77 23 2799
2004-05 88 12 3212
2005-06 86 14 3536

23
4.10 The Standing Committee on Defence in their Ninth Report
on Defence Public Sector Undertakings had recommended that while
meeting the demand of civilian sector, priority should always be given
to the Defence Sector. In response to this, the Ministry of Defence in
their Action Taken Replies has stated that BEL continues to give priority
to the Defence Sector.
(ii) Diversification
4.11 Though supplies of Defence constitute a majority share in
BEL’s turnover, BEL realizes that, to grow in the years to come, it has
to diversify into other areas. Some of the major areas of diversification
are as under:—
Systems/products
• Satellite Based Systems
• Networking Solutions
• Smart Card based Access Systems
• Home Land Security Solutions
• Solar Photovoltaic Systems
• Compact Vacuum Interrupters
• Set Top Box for DTH
• Asynchronous Digital Subscriber Line (ADSL 2+) Modem
• Airport Surveillance Radars
•B roadcast Transmitters
4.12 In regard to the strategy formulated by BEL in consultation
with the Ministry to increase the clientele of BEL particularly in civil
side in order to earn more revenue, the Ministry in their written reply
stated:—
“BEL has developed a good number of products for the civilian
sector to increase the revenue. BEL has sought the help of MoD
to facilitate BEL to make presentation to various Government
agencies. Some of the products for which BEL had made
presentation are:—
X-Ray Baggage inspection — Commerce Ministry, MHA,
system Surface Transport Ministry
Multi Purpose National — MHA
Identity Card

24
POLNET — MHA
e-Governance Project — Various State Government
Edusat — Department of Space
BEL has been addressing markets other than the Defence and
focusing on diversifying into certain areas of civilian electronic
products like SATCOM equipment, Airport Surveillance Radars,
Electronic Voting Machines, Solar Photovoltaic Systems (Traffic
Lights, Power Plants), Vacuum Interrupters, Set Top Box,
Multipurpose National Identity Card (MNIC) project, Simputer,
Smart Card Systems etc. BEL has executed SATCOM network for
Andhra Pradesh Government and SATCOM network for Police
network for the entire country. BEL is in the process of executing
Convergent Billing project for MTNL and Wide Area Network for
Cabinet Secretariat. BEL has also set up a Systems Strategic Business
Unit to explore and address the civilian market.”
4.13 The present status of the diversification of some of the major
products as submitted by the Ministry are given below :—
1. Set Top Box (STB): BEL has developed three types of STBs
for different market segment. The Direct-to-Home (DTH)
Free To Air (FTA) STB is being marketed through its various
marketing centres. This STB can be used to receive
Doordarshan’s channels. There is a huge potential for this
business segment once Conditional Access System (CAS) is
implemented throughout the country. BEL is also trying to
export STBs to other countries.
2. e-Governance Project: BEL has given presentations to some
of the State Governments on e-Governance Projects like State
Wide Area Network (SWAN), Document Control and Cyber
Security Systems. BEL is pursuing to get orders for these
projects.
3. Homeland Security Project: BEL has a wide range of
products like Perimeter Security, Sensors, X-ray Baggage
Inspection Systems. BEL is quoting for various tenders
floated by Paramilitary Forces, Defence and other
Government Agencies.
4. Compact Vacuum Interrupters: These miniature tubes
developed indigenously have got good market potential and
are being used by the Power Sector Industries. These tubes
are also exported to countries like Malaysia, Dubai, Turkey,
Uganda, UK etc.

25
5. Solar Systems: BEL is executing a good number of Solar
related orders for State Governments like Assam, Manipur,
Rajasthan, Uttaranchal, Gujarat, Karnataka etc. The solar
systems include Solar Traffic Signals, Solar Power Plants,
Solar Lighting Systems, Solar Lamps etc.
In addition to the market in India, BEL is also trying to
export Solar Systems to foreign countries like Suriname,
Guyana, Trinidad and Tobago, Yemen, Turkey etc.
6. Contract Manufacturing: BEL is exporting electromechanical
parts to General Electric, USA for medical applications since
last seven years. BEL is also exploring the possibility of
exporting similar kind of electromechanical parts for other
companies like Siemens, Varian, Philips etc. Apart from this,
BEL also takes up Contact Manufacturing on Build to Print
and Build to Specs basis.”
(iii) Available infrastructure and their upgradation
4.14 BEL has been continuously modernizing its infrastructure to
be in tune with the changing needs of the technology / products. On
an average the company has been spending more than Rs. 100 crores
on capital investment in creation of modern facilities in all its Units.
The expenditure on infrastructure is met wholly through the internal
accruals of the company and in the coming years the expenditure on
modernisation of infrastructure is expected to double.
4.15 The Ministry in a written reply has furnished the following
details in regard to infrastructure established in various Units :
Sl.No. Projects Established/ Status Date of Remarks
To be established Completion/
Expected Date
of Completion
12 3 4 5
1. Setting up of Near Field Test Completed Mar. 2006
Facility to develop and
manufacture state-of-the-art
phased array antennae.
2. Setting up of Manufacturing Completed Dec. 2006
Test Facility for SRE
3. Augmentation of Facility for Completed Jan. 2005
Manufacture of Space Grade
Receivers.

26
12 3 4 5
4. Mass Manufacturing Facility Completed Jul. 2004
for assembly of electronic
circuit boards using surface
mount devices.
5. Setting up of test facility, In Progress Dec. 2007 This facility is
Turret Stand for manufacture r equired for the
of Stabilizer and Automatic indigenous manufacture
Loading Gear for T 90 S of 100 Nos. of T90 S
Tanks at an estimated cost of tanks by HVF Avadi, for
Rs. 18.12 crores. which BEL has to supply
stabilizers and Auto
Loading Gear. Turret test
stands for checking the
stabilizer system are
required to be imported
from Rosoboronexport
Russia, and hence the
completion of the project
is dependent on supplies
from them.
6. Augmentation of IT In Progress June 2008 Implementation in all the
Infrastructure – units and offices will be
Enterprise Resource in place by October 07
Planning (ERP) at and this will be used.
an estimated cost However, additional
of Rs. 37.51 crores features such as
Customer Relationship
Management, Supplier
Relationship Manage-
ment/ Supply Chain
Management and other
modules such as Strategic
Enterprise Management
and Business Information
Warehouse will be added
by June 2008
7. Manufacturing facility Completed
for co-production of Dec. 2006
Micro Wave Assembly
for TARANG MK IB
for producing super
components for use
in Electronic Warfare
Equipment

27
12 3 4 5
8. Upgradation of Shelter In progress Jan. 2007 The major equipments
Manufacturing Facility to required for the facility
produce state-of-the-art have been received and
shelters required for are under installation.
Defence Forces at a cost The facility is expected to
of Rs. 6.60 crores be in place by January
2007.
9. Expansion of Capacity for In progress Mar 2007 Enhancement in capacity
Vacuum Interrupters from from 25000 Nos to 35000
25000 Nos. to 50000 Nos. Nos. has been completed
at an estimated Capital
Investment of Rs. 16 Crs. Capacity enhancement
from 35000 to 50000 is
expected to be completed
by Mar 07.
4.16 The Committee are informed that some of the new
infrastructure are in the process of establishment in various units of
BEL. The facilities so created will help in improving the process of
manufacture and these in turn improve the efficiency of manufacture
and productivity. This also adds versatility in Units to handle different
kinds of related jobs. When asked to explain about the modernisation
and diversification programme being hampered due to lack of these
infrastructure the Ministry in its supplementary replies has stated that:
“The projects are proactively taken up for modernisation &
diversification needs of the business. Some of the projects have
been completed and are being utilized for the intended purpose.
Balance projects are progressing as scheduled. Since these projects
are proactively taken up, programs are not hampered. No
constraints are being faced by BEL in establishing these
infrastructure projects”.
(iv) Utilisation
4.17 The Committee are informed that BELs aims to ensure that
all the Units are fully loaded in order to maximize the capacity
utilization. In this regard, the company shifts products/services from
one Unit to another Unit in order to utilize the available (surplus
capacities). Products are shifted from one Unit to other when the
receiving Unit has the capability and infrastructure to manufacture the
equipment without any difficulty. Thus the Units of BEL are geared
up to take up different kinds of jobs, other than their own products.
By doing so, they also acquire versatility in their manufacturing
capabilities.

28
4.18 In spite of adjusting/shifting the loads from one Unit to other
Unit, it may not be possible to fully utilize the capacities. Around
60-70% of the capacities of the Units are utilized. In order to increase
the utilization, Units are engaged in diversifying into new product
lines and businesses, taking up turnkey project solutions like
Convergent Billing, e-Governance projects etc.
4.19 When asked about the reasons for under utilization of
capacities of some of the units and steps taken by BEL to overcome
the difficulties and measures taken for hundred percent capacity
utilisation of these units, the Ministry in its supplementary replies
stated:
“The Units which are awaiting orders to be received and executed
during the year are Bangalore, Ghaziabad, Machilipatnam,
Panchkula & Kotdwara. BEL has been taking it up with Ministry
for early placement of orders to utilize the facilities and, in many
cases, the company in anticipation of order takes up advance
production activity. This not only helps in utilizing the facilities,
but also helps in meeting the urgent needs of the customers.”
4.20 Bangalore Unit is waiting for STARS ‘V’ FH, Radio Trunking
System (RTS), Mk II, Upgraded Flycatcher Radar, Battle Field
Surveillance Radar (Short Range), PRC 6020, Intelligent Message
Terminal (IMT), VPS Mk III, Ghaziabad Unit is waiting for order for
Battlefield Surveillance System (BSS) SANJAY, Machilipatnam Unit waits
order for hand Held Thermal Imager (HHTI), Night Vision Devices,
Kotdwara unit waits order SRAX Mk II and Panchkula Unit is waiting
order for STARS ‘V’ FH, VPS Mk III, Combat Net Radio (NCR).
4.21 BEL has taken the following steps for hundred percent
capacity utilization:-
“BEL has been taking up with the Ministry for early placement of
orders to utilize the facilities. These orders cover the supplies of
the order of Rs. 712 crores during the year 2006-07.
In the above projects, the projects like STARTS ‘V’ FH, RTS Mk II,
SHAKTI, SANJA Y, SRAX Mk II are going to be inducted for the
first time in the Services. These products have undergone extensive
trials and evaluation and are ready for induction. The above
projects are under various stages of ordering by MoD. RFP expected
shortly for Upgraded Flycatcher Radar, partial Upgrade of
Flycatcher, PRC 6020. CNC completed and order is awaited for
HHTI & BFSR – SR.

29
The company assigns products / services to Units so as to utilize
the available capacities to maximize capacity utilization. Apart from
this, company is also working on diversification areas to generate
business in the newer areas of Total Solutions, Homeland Security
Systems, e-Governance etc.”
(v) Order book position
4.22 During the study visit of the Committee to BEL, Bangalore,
they were informed that :—
“Order Position is a matter of concern as the yearly dispatches are
increasing every year but order book is not proportionately
increasing. For the year 2006-07, the dispatch plan is Rs. 4200
crores and order book as on 1st April 2006 is Rs. 6633 crores, out
of which executable orders is only Rs. 3541 crores. With this, there
is a gap of about Rs. 700 crores between the available executable
orders and the dispatch target for the current year. Some of the
SBUs/ Units viz., Military Communication & Electronic Warfare
(MC &EW) SBU of Bangalore Complex, Panchkula, Kotdwara and
Pune Units are not fully loaded. These Units are to get additional
orders and execute the same during the year.”
4.23 The Committee were further informed that:
“During the 10th Plan period (2002-2003 to 2006-07) till 1st October
2006, BEL has received a total of Rs. 12596 Crores orders from
Defence. The year-wise details of order receipt are given below:
Year Defence Orders received
(Rs. Crores)
2002-03 4548
2003-04 2018
2004-05 2175
2005-06 3021
Total 11762
2006-07* 834
*upto 1st October 2006, further orders are expected

30
(iii) Delivery schedule
4.24 The year-wise supply status is given below :—
Year No. of Indents                Indents Delayed
Indents Supplies in Less than 6 Greater than
time months 6 onths
Nos. % Nos. % Nos. %
2002-03 41 24 58 8 20 9 22
2003-04 25 16 62 6 23 3 15
2004-05 26 19 73 3 12 4 16
2005-06 10+20* 8 80 2 20 0 0
Total 102+29* 67 66 19 19 16 15
2006-07* 17
*Out of 39 indents received in 2005-06, 10 were planned in 2005-06. Out of balance 29,
19 indents are planned for completion during 2006-07 and 10 will be supplied in the
coming years as per delivery schedule.
4.25 The details of equipment, indent date, order quantity, order
value, delivery date, actual delay and reasons for delay are as given
in the following tables :-
Projects which got delayed—less than 6 months
Sl. Equipment Indent Order Order Delivery Actual Reasons
Date Qty. Value Date Delay
(Rs. (Original) (in
Lakhs) months)
12 3 4 5 6 7 8
1. IOE 04.10.05 129 7335 04.10.06 5 40 Nos. supplied in
Nov. 2006 and balance
will be completed by
Mar 2007. Delay is
due to user evaluation
of GPS.
2. RRF 08.10.02 1322 31656 12.05.04 4 Delay in supply of
ECCM by collaborator.
3. RRF LB 28.03.03 421 10536 27.06.04 4 338 Nos. supplied in
time. Only 83 Nos.
delayed by 4 months
on account of indepth
manufacturing.

31
12 3 4 5 6 7 8



 4. PRC 6020 17.03.03 1520 19624 30.06.04 3 1147 Nos. supplied in
time. Only 1373 Nos.
delayed by 3 months
on account of late
receipt of imported
material. 5. PRC 6020 17.03.03 1000 12909 30.06.04 3
 6. CNR 29.03.05 500 3400 28.12.05 3 Due to trials &
evaluation.
 7. ULSB Mk II 31.03.03 934 3135 31.12.03 1 Delay is on account of
failure of vendor
supplied item.
 8. HHTI 29.03.04 232 4587 31.05.05 1 Due to late receipt of
core kits from OEMs.
 9. HHTI 21.01.03 1188 25998 21.03.05 1 Due to late receipt of
core kits from OEMs.
10. HHTI 02.04.04 200 3627 31.05.05 1 Due to late receipt of
core kits from OEMs.
11. VCS Mk – II 03.04.03 1 1082 30.09.06 Delayed. To be
637 supplied. Revised
delivery date : March
2007.
12. SONOBUOY 18.09.02 1220 1464 07.01.03 1 Due to logistic
problem from supplier
end.
13. PRIME 26.03.03 605 1430 31.12.03 1 Delay in transpor-
tation.
14. RASHMI 13.12.02 3 Sets 552 30.04.06 3 Main equipments
3014-16 supplied. Only spare
items pending.
15. CCS Mk-II 13.12.03 1 Set 500 31.12.03 3 Delay in receipt of
imported items.
16. CCS Mk-III 24.03.04 3 3549 30.09.06 Delayed. 1 Main
equipment supplied.
Revised delivery
date: 31 March 2007.

32
12 3 4 5 6 7 8
17. R 173 06.06.03 80 664 31.12.03 1 Delay in receipt of
imported items.
18. R173 19.09.03 122 703 31.03.04 3 Delay in receipt of
imported items.
19. CDMA 24.10.05 MSC + 50 8712 23.10.06 Change in scope of
NETWORKS w ork – site related
issues. Revised
delivery date : 15 Feb
2007.
20. T 72 STAB 15.06.04 LOT 644 14.06.05 6 Delay in receipt of
SPARES imported items.
21. FLYCATCHER 29.03.03 16 25761 31.03.05 16 Due to US sanction
RADAR and obsolescence of
items.
22. ELLORA 25.03.04 4 26200 30.12.05 15 Delay is due to
completion of evalua-
tion and consequent
modification of final
system. 2 Nos.
supplied so far.
23. HHTI 09.08.02 1022 25998 09.06.03 7 972 Nos. supplied
in time. 50 Nos.
delayed on account
of indigenisation
and indepth manu-
facturing.
24. PNS 84 RIFLE 24.02.03 2675 748 06.08.05 13 Clearance of sample
delayed the supply.
25. SAMYUKTA 25.09.02 3CC 42541 30.11.05 24 2 CC Blocks supply
COM Blocks completed. Being
major EQ programme,
productionised first
time under concurrent
design and enginee-
ring concept. Delivery
programme extended
upto November 2007.

33
12 3 4 5 6 7 8
26. SAMYUKTA 07.03.05 2CC 43085 30.10.06 13 2 CC Blocks pending.
NON COM Blocks W ill be supplied as
per revised delivery
schedule. Being major
EW programme,
productionised first
time under concurrent
design and
engineering concept.
Delivery programme
extended upto
November 2007.
27. HOMI 04.10.02 5 4820 31.12.04 25 Flight trials of first
system was completed
only in Jan. 2005
on account of
non-availability/
modification of
aircraft. In view of
this, delivery of other
systems rescheduled. 4
Nos. completed.
28. SHAKTI 27.06.02 1 3650 26.09.03 18 Software testing,
(UACCCS) integration and site
trials delayed.
29. AERV 07.01.03 8 1428 30.11.03 This order consists of
fitment and integration
of instruments inside
BMP II vehicle which
is manufactured by
Ordnance Factory,
Medak under orders
from VRDE,
Ahmednagar and
supplied to BEL. The
delivery of the AERV
from BEL is done
within 3 weeks of
receipt of BMP II
vehicle from OF,

34
12 3 4 5 6 7 8
Medak. Till now, 6
Nos. of AERV have
been supplied.
30. VCS Mk-II 617 27.03.03 1 Set 1040 31.03.06 Main equipment
supplied. Spare items
pending. Revised
delivery date : March
2007.
31. VCS Mk-II 627 03.04.03 1 1048 30.09.05 Main equipment
supplied. Spare items
pending. Revised
delivery date : March
2007.
32. HUMSA LF 22.01.04 3 3708 22.01.06 Delayed. 1 System is
being supplied.
Revised delivery date:
January 2007.
33. HUMSA 28.02.03 3 Set 3441 31.12.05 Delayed. To be
supplied.
34. NAMICA 14.12.04 2 500 30.12.05 Design finalisation and
receipt of critical parts.
To be supplied.
Revised delivery date
: March 2007.
35. CTD 30.03.05 10 538 31.03.06 12 8 Nos. supplied. 2
Nos. pending. Revised
delivery date : March
2007.
4.26 From the above tables, it has been observed that in case of
20 projects the delay is less than six months. The period varies from
one to six months. In case of 15 equipment the delay is more than six
months. The period of delays varies from 7 to 25 months.
4.27 BEL has been analyzing the reason for delays in supplies and
taking suitable measures. Due to these measures, the percentage of
indents completed within delivery dates has gone from 58% in
2002-03 to 66% in 2005-06.

35
4.28 The major reasons for delays as identified by BEL are given
below :—
“Sourcing problems, Concurrent Engineering, design related issues,
Obsolescence, Trials and Evaluation related, Inspection by Customer
Agencies, Site Related issues, Delays in transportation to the
destination.”
4.29 Pertaining to the measures taken to reduce the delay the
Ministry of Defence in its written reply has sated –
“Over the years, BEL has introduced various measures and set up
processes to effectively control the timely supplies. These measures
are Close monitoring of supply schedules at Division and Unit
level, Fixing of quarterly targets for supplies and reviews of
achievements, Involvement of BEL engineers at early design stages
of project at DRDO labs, Thrust on multi-sourcing of items,
Indigenisation of critical single vendor imported items, Close co-
ordination agencies.
BEL has got an elaborate quality system, which is followed right
from inspection of incoming raw material and components to stage-
wise inspection and final inspection of the product both by BEL
inspectors and resident inspectors of customer. Utmost care is taken
to ensure high quality of the products so that the field level
problems are reduced to a greater extent. Sometimes, some
problems get reported in the field, which are attended to by BEL
team. However, in few cases, some subassemblies/components had
failures. BEL undertakes repair of such equipment at no extra cost
during warranty either in field or at factory to the full satisfaction
of the customer.”
(vi) Export Market
4.30 BEL is focusing on export as a major thrust area for growth.
Company has set up International Marketing Division exclusively to
promote export of equipment & components. Market development
activities are being pursued in SAARC countries, South East Asian
countries, African Countries, Middle East, Europe, USA, Latin America
and CIS countries. To identify the export opportunities BEL interacts
closely with MEA, MoD and Indian Embassies in various countries
and also participates in important International Exhibitions.

36
4.31 The product-wise exports of BEL since last six years is as
under :—
(Value in Rupees Lakhs)
Sl. No. Equipment/Systems 2001-02 2002-03 2003-04 2004-05 2005-06
12 3 4567
(a) Communication Equipment 11.54 86.56 19.72 9.78 973.97
Time Division Modular Exchange
(TIDEX)
Unit Level Switch Board (ULSB)
Secure Telephone (Shruti)
Secure Fax
Tank Intercom System
TDM Simulator for RRF
Accessories viz., Duplex Filter
Antenna, Antenna Mast
(b) Radars & Radar Sub-systems 848.67 2368.68 1293.90 564.15 1338.06
Battle Field Surveillance Radar
(BFSR-SR)
IFF Mk X with Antenna
Refurbishment of Cymbeline
Radar & Spares
Spares of IFF Mk X
Installation and Integration
Services for RWR
Air Defence System –
Skyshield
Transmitter sub-system for
X-Band Radar
3D Radar TRS 2215 Spares
Target Designator Sight (TDS)
(c) Telecom/Braodcasting/Satcom 290.42 144.97 39.44 2.09 4.65
1kW & 500 W FM Transmitter
C-Band 20 W SSPA
Digital TV Equipment for
Earth Station
TVRO System & VHF Single
Channel Equipment
Accessories for FM Transmitter
Station viz.,
TV Demodulator, Digital
Stereo Decoder
Spares for FM Transmitter
Software Support for TV Network

37
12 3 4567
(d) Night Vision Products 149.77 29.14 491.08 470.04 167.23
Hand Held Thermal Imager
(HHTI) and accessories
Laser Range Finder LH 30
Night vision Binocular,
goggles & Night weapon sight
Optical parts viz., Objectives,
Eye pieces, Lens, Filter,
Collimators
(e) Components 1240.44 1371.03 1260.41 3262.70 678.62
Small Signal Devices, Power
Devices
ICs, HMCs, Crystals/Crystal
Filters
Magnetrons
X-Ray Tubes
Vacuum Interrupter
Solar Cells/Modules/Systems
MgMnO2 Batteries
(f) Contract Manufacturing/Work 530.64 795.53 1025.00 1141.42 2928.10
Packages/Services
Contract Manufacturing
Mechanical Parts/Assemblies
X-Ray Casings, Magnetics,
X-Ray Parts
PCB Test Software Development
Illustrated Logic Support
and Engineering
TOTAL EXPORTS 3071.48 4795.91 4129.55 5450.18 6085.63
EXPORTS IN MILLION 6.34 10.16 9.23 12.50 13.70
US DOLLARS
4.32 From the above table it is observed that the export rate of
BEL is very low and inconsistence. In regard to communication
equipment, the export growth of BEL varies from Rs. 9.78 to
86.56 from 2001-02 to 2004-05. During the year 2002-03 the value of
export of communication equipment was Rs. 86.56 lakhs. It has
drastically reduced to Rs. 19.72 lakhs in 2003-04 and further reduced
to Rs. 9.78 lakhs in 2004-05. In 2005-06 the value is Rs. 973.97 lakhs.
In regard to radars and radar sub-systems, the export value has

38
drastically reduced to Rs. 564.15 lakhs in 2004-05 from Rs. 2368.68 lakhs
in 2002-03. During the year 2005-06 the value is Rs. 1338.06 lakhs. As
far as telecom/broadcasting/satcom devices the export value during
the year 2001-02 was Rs. 290.42 lakhs. It has drastically reduced to
Rs. 144.97 lakhs in 2002-03, Rs. 39.44 lakhs in 2003-04, Rs. 2.09 lakhs
in 2004-05 and Rs. 4.65 lakhs in 2005-06 so far as night vision products,
the export value during 2002-03 was only Rs. 29.14 lakhs. During the
year 2005-06 it has reduced to Rs. 167.23 lakhs from Rs. 470.04 lakhs
in 2004-05. In regard to components the export value has drastically
reduced to Rs. 673.62 lakhs in 2005-06 from Rs. 3262.70 lakhs in the
year 2004-05.
4.33 When asked about the reasons for low exports, the
representatives of the Ministry of Defence during oral evidence
stated :—
“The biggest importers of defence equipment, in the world China,
India and Pakistan. They are the three top defence equipment
buyers in the whole world. Therefore, the entire defence industry
in the world is concentrating on these three countries. Therefore,
it is not easy for us to sell our products in advanced countries.
But still there are some markets like South-East Asia, SAARC
countries. African continent, where we are trying to export. We
are developing the markets with there. Also, some specific products
are being developed for them to meet their requirements. They
may not need the state-of-the-art technology that is available in
the western world. We are working on improving our exports.
Presently, our export is low, but the new offset policy might help
us to improve the exports in the coming few years.”
4.34 During briefing, the representatives of Ministry of Defence
has informed that export potential of BEL is very low i.e. 14 million
US Dollars only. BEL is trying to tie up with some South-East Asia,
SAARC countries and African Continent to export their product who
do not need the state-of-the-art technology available in the Western
World.
4.35 The following products of BEL are currently being exported
to South East Asia and SAARC Countries.
Malaysia — Vacuum Interrupter Tubes
Singapore, Hong Kong — Electronic Components
Indonesia — Spare parts for Radar
Ground-to-Air Radio
Sri Lanka — Night Vision Goggles

39
4.36 There is no specific collaboration with any foreign country .
However, exports are effected based on the normal purchase contracts.
In some of the cases supplies are made against Government of India
Line of Credit.
4.37 When asked to state the steps taken by BEL to produce state-
of-the-art technology to compete with world technology, the Ministry
in its post briefing replies stated that :—
(a) Strengthening of in-house R&D
(b) Technology Planning group for emerging technologies
(c) R&D tie up with DRDO Labs for technology
(d) Tie up with foreign partners for identified technologies
(e) Investment in key technologies
4.38 In their written replies the Ministry informed the Committee
about the initiatives taken by them for enhancing export as under:
A. The various initiatives taken by the Ministry for enhancing
exports are:
(a) Under the chairmanship of JS(SY), a committee was formed
to expedite clearance of export proposals submitted by BEL
e.g. Sudan, Indonesia, Sri Lanka and Russia.
(b) JS(X) has recommended the visit of Malaysian Army Chief
to BEL.
(c) Defence Offset Facilitation Agency (DOFA) to facilitate and
monitor offset implementation is created.
(d) Offsets have been made mandatory for Defence contracts
worth more than Rs 300 crores.
(e) BEL has been participating in international exhibitions to
promote its products for exports. Some of the recent
exhibitions in the last 3 years:
 April 2003 Latin America Defence 2003, Brazil
 September 2004 Africa Aerospace & Defence 2004, South Africa
 May 2005 IMDEX (International Maritime Defence Exhibition &
Conference), Singapore
 September 2006 Africa Aerospace & Defence 2006, South Africa

40
4.39 During the study visit of the Committee to BEL, Bangalore,
when asked about the comments of the BEL on Global Positioning
System(GPS) for civil applications and the advertisement and Marketing
of the products, the BEL stated :—
“BEL is also exploring the usage of available expertise for satellite
based navigation applications in view of the programme GAGAN
of ISRO and Airport Authority of India.”
Appointment of agents for export
4.40 When asked whether BEL appointed agents for export and
paid commission to them and the number of cases in which the
commissions have been paid and under what guidelines, the Ministry
in its written replies stated :—
“BEL has not appointed any agents in India for export of its
products. BEL has not paid any agency commission to any
companies in India for export of its products.
BEL is appointing representatives in selected foreign countries for
export of its products. These representatives provide support to
BEL for various activities like business development, details of
market leads, liaising with the perspective customer, following up
for payments, after sales support etc.
The terms & conditions on which BEL appoints representatives
abroad are given below. These form part of the contract between
BEL and the representatives appointed.
Obligations of the agent
1. THE AGENT shall canvass for the sale of PRODUCTS in
the TERRITORY and direct all orders received from the
customers to THE PRINCIPAL. In respect of other countries
excluding countries where THE PRINCIPAL have already
entered into Agency Agreement, THE AGENT shall canvass
for the sale of PRODUCTS with prior consent of THE
PRINCIPAL.
2. THE AGENT shall periodically keep THE PRINCIPAL
informed of the activities of competitors of THE PRINCIPAL
in the TERRITORY.
3. THE AGENT shall not represent any other Firm/Company/
Institute for sale of goods similar to the PRODUCTS either
directly or indirectly.

41
4. THE AGENT shall not sell the PRODUCTS to customers
other than those within the TERRITORY, except with the
prior consent of the PRINCIPAL.
5. THE AGENT shall advise PRINCIPAL with a written sales
forecast for at least twelve subsequent months.
6. THE AGENT shall arrange for all Bid Bonds and
Performance Bonds whenever the tenders are submitted by
THE AGENT. In all other cases, PRINCIPAL will arrange
for such Bonds upon advice by the AGENT.
7. THE AGENT shall coordinate the repatriation of all moneys
due to THE PRINCIPAL by arranging Letter of Credit in
favour of the PRINCIPAL as per the contract terms and
also render such assistance as may be required in cases
where the customer places order on THE AGENT.
8. THE AGENT shall be responsible for assisting the
Customer/THE PRINCIPAL depending on specific project
requirements for customs and port clearance, local
transportation, labour contracts, clearance and payment of
bills and resolution of disputes, intimation of adverse/
positive feedbacks in time with respect to problems in
supplies etc.
9. THE AGENT shall carry on such advertising and sales
promotion campaign as deemed necessary in consultation
with THE PRINCIPAL to maximize sale of the PRODUCTS
in the TERRITORY, on terms to be mutually agree upon in
writing.
10. THE AGENT shall interact with the customer and liaise
with THE PRINCIPAL for any major problems within the
warranty period or after sales service. Minor problems of
PRODUCTS within warranty period will be looked after by
THE AGENT’s personnel. All local costs and expenses for
such after sales service shall be met by THE PRINCIPAL at
actuals. Subject to the prior approval of THE PRINCIPAL.
11. THE AGENT will liaise with the customer and inform THE
PRINCIPAL of any problems regarding license or authority
required to operate on specific frequency etc by the customer.
Obligations of the Principal
1. THE PRINCIPAL shall supply the PRODUCTS to the
customers against orders received through THE AGENT and
accepted by THE PRINCIPAL.

42
2. THE PRINCIPAL shall not be responsible for obtaining any
licenses or other permissions for holding and operating the
PRODUCTS in specific frequencies etc., by the customer shall
take sufficient care to comply with any statutory
requirements that may be applicable or imposed by the
Government/Regulatory Authorities for such PRODUCTS.
Compensation
1. For all orders on the PRODUCTS materialized through the
efforts of THE AGENT, the compensation payable to the
AGENT shall be mutually agreed on case-to-case basis,
subject to a maximum of 10%* on FOB value of the
PRODUCTS supplies to the TERRITORY which will be
payable on full realization of sale proceeds, except as
provided under clause 3.2 and 3.4 below.
2. For Turnkey Projects, in case of orders received through the
efforts of the AGENT, the compensation payable to the
AGENT to be mutually agreed upon on a case-to-case basis,
subject to a maximum of 10%* on FOB value of supplies
for the project in the TERRITORY which will be payable on
full realization of sale proceeds.
3. In case of orders received for supplies outside the
TERRITORY through the efforts of THE AGENT as
confirmed by the PRINCIPAL, the Compensation payable
to THE AGENT shall be mutually agreed on a case-to-case
basis provided THE AGENT has taken the prior consent of
THE PRINCIPAL before such supply.
4. For supplies covered under Indian (Government-of-India or
EXIM Bank) Line-of-Credit, the payment of Compensation
will be governed by the terms of the Credit, if any,
pertaining to Agency Compensation.
5. Both parties to this Agreement acknowledge that to obtain
some orders it may be necessary to reduce the selling price
and under such conditions Compensation payable may be
reduced by mutual agreement.
6. All Compensations that may accrue to THE AGENT shall
be remitted by THE PRINCIPAL subject to deductions of
taxes as per Indian Tax Laws as applicable for THE AGENTS
abroad. Unless otherwise agreed, the Compensations shall
*The percentage compensation varies depending on country, volume of business, nature
of contract etc.

43
be paid to THE AGENT in the same currency as that in
which THE PRINCIPAL received payments.
7. It is understood that the normal day-to-day operating
expenses like Telex, Fax, ISD Calls and local expenses etc.,
will be borne by THE AGENT.
8. Compensation will become due to THE AGENT on receipt
by THE PRINCIPAL of payments directly from customers
and will be paid by THE PRINCIPAL within 30 days of
full realization of sale proceeds.
9. The details in respect of exports with regard to appointment
of various representatives and commissions paid are given
at Enclosure.”
Sl.No. Country Name of Type of Date of Business Product Commission
the representative agreement appointment generated paid
Value Year (if any)
12 3 4 56 789
1. Algeria Hampton Non- 1st Aug. 2000 -
Capital exclusive
Corporation
2. Bangladesh (a) Star Non- 21st Jan. 2002 -
Trading exclusive
Corporation
3. Botswana Kudu Non- 5th Dec. 2004 -
Communication exclusive
(Pty) Ltd.
4. Brazil Tannay Non- 12th No. 2003 -
Holding Inc. exclusive
5. Egypt Britlodge Non- 4th Jun. 2004 -
Holding exclusive
6. Ghana Nodeco Non- 5th Nov. 2002 US 2001-02 to Spares US$ 4,740
Industrial exclusive $91,200 2003-04 of RAX
(GH) Ltd and Solar
Pelican
Signal
7. Malaysia Giditek Non- 12th Jun. 2006 -
Deterprise exclusive
8. Mayanmar Tractorsworld Letter of 21st Jul. 2005 -
Authorisation
9. Nepal (a) Arniko Non- 19th May 1999 US$ 1999-00 to Spares of US$21,250
International exclusive 1,474,000 2003-04 RAX,
Pvt. Ltd. TDMA-
PMP ,
V-SAT
System,
TV Uplink

44
12 3 4 56 789
(b) International Eexclusive 5th Nov 2004 US$ 2004-05 Night US$
Business Link 572,722 Vision 17,200
Goggles
and HHTI
10. Sri Lanka (a) Excel Non- 20th Aug 2003 US$ 2004-05 Night US$2,400
Communication exclusive 48,000 Vision
Systems (P) Goggles
(b) Swedish Non- 16th July 2004
Trading exclusive
Co. Ltd. -
11. Sudan Al Mawafi Non- 25th Oct 2004 -
Company exclusive
Ltd.
12. South Africa Al. Elwazani Letter of 31st Mar 2004 -
Mktg Pvt. Ltd. Authorisation
13. Saudi Arabia Wacker Letter of 27th June 2005 -
International Authorisation
Est
14. Sultanate Khimji Non- 30th Mar 2004 -
of Oman Ramdas exclusive
15. Suriname Elto NV Non- 4th Aug 2004 US $ 2004-05 to Solar -
exclusive 2,710,000 2006-07 Traffic
Signaling
System
and HF
Radios
16. Syria Adko Letter of 26th May 2004 -
Engineering Authorisation
& Gontracting
17. Thailand Milliard Non- 14th June 2005 -
International exclusive
Co. Ltd
18. Turkey Detronik Non- 19th Oct 2004 -
TIC Ltd exclusive
19. Zimbabwe Pentrad Letter of 10th Feb 2005 -
Investment Authorisation
Ltd.
20. Uganda Rank Consultant Letter of 17th Jan 2006 -
Pvt. Ltd. Authorisation
21. Yemen Al-gawf Letter of 28th June 2005 -
Trading & Authorisation
Services Ltd.
22. Cango DRC White Gem Letter of 30th April 2006 -
Pvt. Ltd. Authorisation
23. Israel Y. Sandak Letter of 16th Mar 2006 -
Holdings Ltd. Authorisation

45
(vii) Competitiveness
4.41 When asked about steps being taken to modernize BEL to
bring it to World Standard Company, the Ministry in their written
replies stated :—
“BEL is continuously modernizing facilities in order to bring it to
world standards. In this direction, the company has taken various
modernization activities of its Units. Some of the modernization
activities carried out by BEL are:
(i) Modernisation of Fabrication and Assembly Work Areas.
(ii) Creating Mass Manufacturing Facilities
(iii) Implementation of SAP across all Units/Offices
(iv) Addition of new facilities for Inspection & Testing
(v) Creation of modular offices
(vi) PC to all engineers
(vii) Establishing Intranet in all Units
(viii) Training of employees & executives in identified areas like
Phased Array Radars, Frequency Hopping, Encryption,
Networking, Electronic Warfare, Six Sigma, Team Building
etc.
As BEL is involved in the manufacture of sophisticated electronic
equipments wherein the technologies of not only the products, but
also the processes change continuously . Specific groups in all the
Units continuously scan the technology changes that are taking
place and identify new machines in the world market for
acquisition. This enables company to maintain the set up at par
with international standards. Further, whenever a new product is
introduced based on in-house/indigenous design or collaboration,
new manufacturing line/plant & equipment are acquired based on
the new product needs. To meet the stringent requirement of new
technology, BEL has adopted various Quality Initiatives like Six
Sigma Methodology as a process for achieving break-through
solutions, has set up Quality Improvement Teams in different work
areas, benchmarking of processes and self-certification of some of
its products. The company has been strategically adopting this
philosophy for introducing modern facilities and updating the
technology status in all its Manufacturing Units, like setting up of
Advance Manufacturing Facilities, CNC Facilities and Test
Facilities.”

46
(Recommendation No. 5)
Diversification
4.42 The Committee observe that in the last fifty years BEL is
doing good turnover and developing new products and technology.
The Committee note that in its endeavour, BEL always gives priority
to Defence Sector and on an average, more than 80 per cent of its
turnover is from the Defence Services. T urnover of BEL from the
production for the civilian market is 15 to 20 per cent. More than 13
per cent of business comes from PSUs, like MTNL, VSNL, Airport
Authority etc. and less than 2-3 per cent turnover is from the other
civilian market. In this connection, the Committee desire that the
Ministry should give a re-look for more diversification and explore
new civil markets. The Committee wish to emphasise that BEL should
explore the civil market and see what are the areas where it can
help the Ministries of Shippings, Railways and other private homes/
organizations in the field of communications to check, drug
trafficking and ensure effective safety and security of passengers
and goods.
The Committee wants that BEL must emphasise upon more
diversification and thereby earning more profits from the civil market
and can fund its R&D programmes.
The Committee further desire that for effective and efficient
business management BEL should have two separate divisions of its
business, one devoted completely for commercialising the civil market
and the other solely meant for Defence purpose.
(Recommendation No. 6)
Infrastructure and their upgradation
4.43 The Committee note that BEL has been pro-actively
modernizing and upgrading its infrastructure as per modernization
and diversification of the projects. Some of the new infrastructure
are in the process of establishment in various units of BEL. The
facilities so created will help in improving the process of manufacture
and in turn improve the efficiency of manufacturing and productivity.
This will also add versatility in units to handle different kinds of
related jobs. Therefore, the Committee recommend that the Ministry
should expedite the establishment of new infrastructure to ensure
the above improvements. The Committee further note that there is
a stiff competition in supplying electronic Defence equipment to
the developed countries and they are concentrating on South-East
Asia, SAARC countries and African Continent where state-of-the-art

47
technologies are not required. Therefore, the Committee desire that
keeping in view the rapid obsolescence of electronic equipment and
need for producing state-of-the-art technologies and more
diversification both in Defence and civilian market BEL must strive
to continuously and vigorously upgrade and modernise its
infrastructure so as to meet the ever-changing and increasing
requirements of the civil, Defence Markets and enhance export
potential.
(Recommendation No. 7)
Capacity utilization & order book position
4.44 The Committee note that Bharat Electronics Limited (BEL)
has 9 manufacturing units spread over different parts of the country.
The Committee further note that in spite of the diversification,
adjustment and shifting of loads from one unit to the other, some
of the manufacturing units at Bangalore, Ghaziabad, Machilipatnam,
Panchkula and Kotdwara units are not fully loaded where 30-40 per
cent capacity is lying idle for want of orders of vital Defence
equipment viz. MK II, Upgraded Flycatcher Radar, Battle Field
Surveillance Radar (Short Range), Intelligent Message Terminal (IMT),
BSS (Sanjay), Night Vision Devices etc.
The Committee are distressed to note that order book position
of BEL is a matter of serious concern as the order book is not
proportionately increasing in comparison to the yearly dispatches.
For the year 2006-07, the dispatch plan is Rs. 4200 crore and order
book as on 1st April 2006 is Rs. 6633 crore, out of which executable
order is only Rs. 3541 crores. With these, there is a gap of about Rs.
700 crores between the available executable orders and the dispatch
targets. Some of the units of BEL are not fully loaded and they are
yet to get additional orders. The Committee are further pained to
note that the amount of orders received from the Ministry of Defence
has been drastically reduced from Rs. 4548 crore in the year 2002-03
to Rs. 834 crore upto 1st October 2006. The Committee feel that this
drastic reduction is a very serious matter. This indicate lack of faith
of the Armed Forces on the products produced by BEL. Therefore,
the Committee strongly feel that the Ministry of Defence should
examine this matter carefully and find out the equipment for which
the units of BEL are lacking orders from the Armed Forces and
whether the same equipment is being procured from other sources.
Therefore, the Committee desire that there is an urgent need to give
a serious look to this matter and produce high-end technologies by
intensifying R&D as per the present day’s requirements to face the

48
ever changing security challenges. In this way BEL will attract more
customers and the Government will minimize foreign dependence
for procuring Defence equipment and promote indigenization. This
in turn will also improve the capacity utilization of all the units.
(Recommendation No. 8)
Delivery schedule
4.45 Pertaining to the delivery schedule of the various projects
under BEL, the Committee observe that in case of 20 equipment, the
delay is less than six months. The period varies from one to six
months. In case of 15 equipments, the delay is more than six months.
The period of delays varies from 7 to 25 months. The major reasons
for delay are sourcing problems, concurrent engineering, design
related issues obsolescence, delay related to trials and evaluation.
In view of the above problems, the Committee desire that the
Ministry of Defence and BEL should give a serious thought and
take corrective measures to minimize delays in completion and
supply of vital equipment and they must adhere to the prescribed
time schedule to avoid time and cost over run and deliver the same
to the Armed Forces and other customers at the earliest. Because for
getting the best value for the scarce resources being used for the
nobel job the Ministry should ensure to minimize delay. The
Committee also desire that the Ministry must strictly deal with the
recovery of payments by BEL.
(Recommendation No. 9)
Need for expanding export market
4.46 The Committee are distressed to note that the export value
of BEL’s different products is very low and inconsistence. Further,
BEL has admitted their incompetence to export their products to
advanced countries. The export market is limited to South-East Asia,
SAARC countries and African Continent where state-of-the-art
technologies are not required. This indicate that BEL has to walk a
mile ahead in producing high-end technologies in order to compete
with the defence industries of other countries. The Committee further
observe that there is no specific collaboration with any foreign
country. Exports are effected based on the normal purchase contracts
and in some of the cases, supplies are made against Government of
India Line of Credit. Further, there is stiff competition in the world
defence market. Therefore, the Committee strongly recommend that
BEL must take concerted efforts to keep abreast with the emerging

49
security scenario and rapid technological changes around the world
and intensify its R&D by strengthening the in-house R&D and tie
up with DRDO and leading foreign partners and putting sufficient
investment in key technologies to produce high-end products to
attract foreign countries apart from South-East Asia, SAARC
Countries and African Continent and earn foreign exchange for India.
The Committee further recommend that the Government should
consider evolving suitable arrangements in Indian Embassies abroad
through which a common outlet for sale of all the products of our
Defence PSUs can be found in order to maximize our export earnings
and also put to optimum use available surplus production capacities.
Besides the Defence attaches and other Officers posted in Indian
Embassies abroad must take concerted efforts to study the
requirements of that particular country and supply the inputs/
feedbacks to BEL through the Ministry of Defence in order to
intensify their R&D efforts and produce the products in order to
attract the foreign countries and expand its export market. The
Committee also wish to stress that BEL must explore the usages of
available expertise for satellite based navigation applications in view
of the programme GAGAN of ISRO and Airport Authority of India
for advertisement and marketing of the products.
(Recommendation No. 10)
Need to ensure competitiveness
4.47 The Committee observe that the objectives of BEL is to
attain technological leadership in defence electronics to constantly
bench mark company’s performance with best in class internationally
and to raise marketing availabilities to global standards. However,
the Committee are distressed to note that the same has not been
reflected in the export potential of BEL to different countries. BEL
is finding difficulties in exporting their products to the developed
countries and is only exporting to countries like South East Asian
Countries, SAARC Countries and African Continent where state-of-
the-art technologies are not required. The Committee do not agree
with this approach of BEL. Therefore, the Committee strongly desire
that to compete with international market which is full of challenges,
the BEL must make concerted efforts to update the technologies,
which have very high rate of obsolescence, and produce high-end
technologies to meet the changing requirements of the countries.
The Committee also desire that to ensure quality, BEL must adopt
the process of self-certification for all its products.

50
(Recommendation No. 11)
Appointment of Agents for export
4.48  The Committee note that BEL has appointed representatives
in selected foreign countries for export of its products. These
representatives provide support to BEL for various activities. The
compensation payable to the agent is mutually agreed upon case-to-
case basis, subject to a maximum of ten per cent on FOB value of
the products supplied to the territory and is usually payable on full
realization of sale proceeds. The percentage compensation varies
depending on country, volume of business, nature of contract etc.
The Committee desire that for maintaining transparency and to
ensure accountability of the representatives, the Ministry should
undertake a thorough exercise and brought out a detailed guidelines
regarding the terms and conditions for appointing the agents,
functions and procedure for payment of compensation etc. The
Committee may be apprised about the progress made by the Ministry
in this regard.

ANNEXURE I
PRODUCTS OF ARMY
Radars Communication Tank Electronics & Electronic
Opto Electroncis Warfare
Systems
Fire Control Manpack/Mobile Night Vision Devices Surveillance
(Goggles/Binoculars) Monitoring
Surveillance/ Truck/Ground Laser Range Finders Direction
Tracking Finding
Secondary Static/Mobile Digital Tank Fire Control Active
Troposctter Systems Jamming
Surveillance Satcom Stabilizers for Tank
(IFFs)
Switching Thermal Images
GPS Systems IOEs
Encryption/Applique
Units
PRODUCTS TO NAVY
Radars & Communication Control Electronic Others
Sonars Systems Warfare
Systems
12 3 4 5
Navigational Shipborne Modular Eqpt. Surveillane Simulators
Communication for Command & Monitoring
Eqpt Control Appln.
(EMCCA)
Surveillance/ Transreceivers EOFCS Direction Antena
Tracking Radars Finding
Fire Control Transmitters Active
Radars Jamming
Secondary Composite
Surveillance
Radars (IFFs)
51

52
12 3 4 5
Fixed/Variable Communication
Depth Sonars System
Towed Torpedo
Decoys
Data Handling &
Display
Systems
Sonobuoys
PRODUCTS TO AIR FORCE
Radars Communication Electronic Others
Warfare
Systems
Static/Mobile Transmitters Surveillance Antenna
Monitoring
Surveillance/ Ground to Air Direction
Low level Communication Finding
Tracking
Secondary Static/Mobile Active
Surveillance (IFFs) Digital Jamming
Troposcatter
SATCOM

ANNEXURE II
PRODUCTS TO CIVIL
Radars Communication Sound & Vision OPTO Components Others
Broadcasting Electronics
Airport Transreceivers Equipment to Night Vision ICs Solar
Surveillance AIR/DD MW/SWFM Devices Photo
Broadcast TX Voltaic
Systems
Satellite Transmitters Studio Eqpt for Ophthalmic HHMCs Simputers
Vehicle Air Laser
Tracking
Exchanges for DOT TV-Low/High Silicon Small Set Top Box
Power Signal/Power
Transmitters Devices
Satcom Stations TVRO-TV-Receive Crystals & Electronic
(APNET, POLNET) ONLY Terminal TCXOs Voting
Machine
Communication System Satellite Uplinks Microwave Surgical
for Railways Tupbes Microscope
TV Studio Eqpt Passive LCD
Vacuum Displays
for
Airports
Outside Devices Vehicle
Broadcast Vans Tracking
Systems
53

CHAPTER V
INDIGENIZATION
5.1 The Committee are informed that as part of its phased
indigenisation programme, BEL is progressively increasing
indigenisation of projects where TOT has been obtained, in order to
achieve self-reliance, increase work content, enhance value addition
and have better control of parts indigenised. The indigenisation activity
is an ongoing process in all Units of BEL to conserve Foreign Exchange.
Raw Materials, Components and Subassemblies are covered under this
activity.
5.2 Pertaining to the efforts being made by the Ministry for
Indigenisation of products the Ministry stated:
“Indigenisation is a continuous process and the Ministry was
initially directly involved in this through Technical committees
functioning under the DGQA. In Feb. 2002, the Ministry transferred
the responsibility of indigenization of material required for
production by DPSUs and Ordnance Factories to them. Further,
for spare part items, the service Headquarters have also assumed
responsibility for indigenization. Recently, in pursuance of the
recommendations of the Kelkar Committee, the Ministry has
notified the procedure for acquisition of items identified for
development and production in the country, i.e. the procedure for
“make” products. As far as the efforts made by DRDO are
concerned this is a continuous process, where products designed
and developed by DRDO labs in consultation with Armed Forces
are productionized through either DPSUs/OFs or Private industry.”
5.3 The success ratio in achieving indigenisation of products are
as under:
“The indigenisation effort in the company has been quite successful
and BEL could achieve substantial amount of cost reduction
through indigenisation. In some of the major projects, the current
level of indigenisation against start of the production is indicated
below:—
Equipment          Indigenous Content
At the start of Current
Production Level
12 3
 USFM Radar 28% 70%
 Flycatcher Radar 15% 60%
54

55
 Reporter Radar 5% 75%
 UHF Radio Relay RL 432 5% 56%
 Laser Range Finder LH-30 20% 70%
 HHTI 5% 35%
 PRC 6020 8% 66%
5.4 Regarding future strategy for indigenisation the Ministry in a
written note submitted as under:
“As far as the Ministry is concerned, the selection of “Raksha
Udyog Ratnas” and processing of “Make” category of cases using
the procedure promulgated recently is expected to give a fillip to
Indian Industry to take up indigenous production of sophisticated
Defence Equipment. As far as BEL is concerned, the future strategy
of the company with regard to indigenisation is to find out
alternatives for various imported sources in order to cut down
cost, sourcing of indigenous subassemblies and in the newer
projects also, introduce at design phase itself items like Microwave
Assemblies, Power Supply Units, Antenna, Electromechanical
components, Accessories etc. Some of the indigenisation efforts are
given below:
(a) Sourcing of indigenous sub-assemblies for Reporter Radar
(b) Sourcing of indigenous Tx Beamformer and Arrays for CAR
Radar
(c) Sourcing of RFUs from M/s Astra, Hyderabad
(d) Sourcing of indigenous accessories for PRC 6020”
5.5 Regarding the percentage of indigenous components in all the
equipment produced by the BEL since last five years are as under:
Year Total Material Indigenous % of Indigenous
(Rs. Crores) Material Content to Total
(Rs. Crores) Material
2005-06 1850.63 836.78 45.22
2004-05 1758.23 616.36 35.06
2003-04 1479.77 362.02 24.46
2002-03 1479.07 339.56 22.96
2001-02 1086.63 350.44 32.25
12 3

56
5.6 When asked whether BEL has any collaboration with any
Indian or Foreign Company to produce indigenous semiconductors to
meet our requirement, the Ministry in their written replies stated:
“BEL had the following major collaborations in the area of
Semiconductor manufacture:
1. 1963: Collaboration with Philips, Holland for manufacture
of Germanium Semiconductor devices.
2. 1967:  Collaboration with Philips, Holland for manufacture
of Silicon Small Signal Devices.
3. 1971:  Collaboration with RCA, USA for manufacture of
Silicon Power Transistors & Integrated Circuits.
4. 1983: Collaboration with ACRIAN, USA for manufacture of
RF power transistors.
5. 1987:  Collaboration with Ericsson, Sweden for manufacture
of Telecom ICs.
At present, BEL does not have any collaboration with any company
for semiconductors.
During mid 80’s and 90’s, BEL had made a proposal to upgrade
the semiconductor manufacturing facilities to meet partly the
country’s requirement. The chip manufacturing facilities are highly
capital intensive and BEL, on its own, was not in a position to
invest because the project was economically unviable. However,
BEL tried to get funding from the Government but it did not
materialise. Today , in view of liberalization and availability of
components with totally changed duty structure, BEL does not
find this investments in chip fabrication facilities, an economically
viable project.
BEL is making incremental investment to keep the existing
facility going and make best use of it. BEL is using facilities already
established to design and manufacture Semiconductor Devices viz.,
Small Signal Devices, Power Devices, Hybrid Microcircuits and
Integrated Circuits for use by Indian industry.”
5.7 When asked to state where India stands in terms of having
state-of-the-art-technology and Night Fighting Equipment, Tanks and
Aircraft which are being produced by BEL and upto what extent
country is dependent in these areas on foreign suppliers:
“BEL started the manufacturing of Night Vision Devices (NVDs)
in late 80’s in view of strategic importance of this technology in

57
modern warfare. Instrument Research and Development
Establishment (RDE), a DRDO laboratory was the technology
partner for BEL. The NVDs manufactured by BEL are based on
two types of technologies viz., Image Intensifier Tube based NVDs
and Thermal Imager based NVDs .
BEL has developed different versions of NVDs including Weapon
Sights based on image Intensifier Tubes. BEL also acquired the
technology to manufacture Image Intensifier tubes in 1990 by setting
up a Joint Venture with M/s Delft. The venture, which later became
a subsidiary of BEL, has been upgrading the performance of these
tubes.
The technology for II Gen I.I. Tubes was provided by JV partner,
M/s DELFT and this has helped BELP to meet the country’s
strategic requirement. Based on these tubes various types of NVDs
were manufactured and supplied to Armed Forces. BEL attained
self sufficiency for II Gen I.I. Tube based devices. The customers
are now asking NAVDs based on Super Gen / III Gen I.I. Tubes
with increased performance, light weight and compact devices.
MoD has given task for acquiring the technology for these NVDs
and associated I.I. Tubes to BEL.
For NVDs based on Thermal Imagers, BEL started manufacture of
Hand Held Thermal Imagers based on Cooled Thermal Imager
Technology obtained from M/s Elop as it was not indigenously
available. With this, BEL has developed expertise in 8 – 12 microns
T.I. technology and developed various variants of these NVDs.
BEL has now acquired Optical and Image Processing Technology
except for Thermal Detector component, which is being outsourced
from the vendors. BEL has established stat-of-the-art facilities for
the development, manufacture and testing of these NVDs. BEL is
also making efforts to acquire the technology for Thermal Detectors
from the reputed foreign vendors. BEL has also initiated
development work in 3-5 micron and uncooled T.I. technology.”
5.8 During oral evidence, the CMD of BEL stated :—
“We are doing R&D projects either ourselves or along with DRDO.
If they are meeting the customer’s requirements, then we are getting
a preference. Otherwise, for all orders, we are competing with
international manufacturers and private vendors. I would like to
submit to the hon. Members that out of our total revenue, 70 to
75 per cent revenue is coming from products manufactured based
on indigenous design and development.

58
Nearly, 75 per cent of the revenue is coming from the products
manufactured based on indigenous design and development, and
only about 30 per cent of the revenue is coming from products
manufactured based on technology transfer.”
(Recommendation No. 12)
Indigenization
5.9 The Committee observe that as part of indigenization effort,
BEL has got some success in achieving indigenization level in
equipments like USFM Radar, Flycatcher Radar, Reporter Radar, UHF
Radio Relay RL 432, Laser Range Finder LH-30, HHTI and PRC
6020. The Committee also note that there has been consistent
improvement of the percentage of indigenous content to the total
material of the equipment produced by BEL since 2001-02. However,
the overall indigenization level is not very satisfactory. The percentage
of indigenous content to the total material during 2005-06 is only
45.22% is very dismal. The Committee are informed that out of the
total revenue earned by BEL, 70-75 per cent of revenue is coming
from products, manufactured based on indigenous design and
development and only about 30 per cent of the revenue is coming
from products, manufactured based on technology transfer and BEL
is getting a preference if they are meeting the customers’ requirement.
Keeping in view the above facts, the Committee strongly feel that
BEL has to go a long way in achieving sufficient indigenization
level. Therefore, the Committee recommend that BEL must intensify
its in-house R&D and concerted efforts may be made to meet the
customers requirements and earn more revenue thereon. In case of
transfer of technology BEL must go beyond the position of system
integration after importing the parts. The Committee desire that BEL
must produce the systems/sub-system based on the technical know
how it has received from the foreign countries on the transfer of
technology agreement.

CHAPTER VI
MODERNISATION/UPGRADATION
(i) Perspective Plan of BEL
6.1 The various steps that are being followed in the company
towards formulating long-term business plans can be broadly classified
as follows:
(i) Study of the known Perspective Plan of the customers.
(ii) Technological assessment to identify sources of technology
like in-house R&D, R&D Institutions & DRDO, licensed
arrangement with foreign collaborators to meet the future
requirements of customers.
(iii) Identifying the gaps between our own intended growth
plans and what is achievable through (ii) above.
(iv) Identification of related diversification segments to fill up
the above identified gap (iii)
(v) Various actions required in advance to meet the above
strategic plan including R&D plans, diversification plans,
establishment of Joint Ventures etc.
6.2 The company has adopted a process of preparing a Roll-on-
Plan for a five-year duration. Every year, in the month of April, the
plans are presented by the Unit Heads/SBU Heads taking into account
orders on hand, products under development, business areas identified
for diversification, likely receipt of orders based on customer indication
and Unit/SBU growth.
6.3 The Roll-on-Plans are reviewed and updated annually taking
into account the changes in the requirements and needs of the
customers.
6.4 Targets fixed and achievements made during 10th Plan period
are given below:
(Rs. in Crores)
Year Sales Target Achievement % Achievement
2002-03 2050 2508 122
2003-04 2500 2500 112
2004-05 3050 3212 105
2005-06 3600 3536 98
2006-07 4000
59

60
6.5 As can be seen, the company is able to meet its targets and
has always been exceeding the target except during 2005-06 the
company could reach around 98% of the set target.
6.6 The Ministry in their written note informed the Committee
that:—
“For the 11th Plan period, BEL has worked out a business plan,
which is based on customers’ projected requirements and market
inputs. Even though BEL does not have access to the long-term
perspective plan of the ‘Armed Forces, the inputs regarding
customer need are collected during interactions in institutional
meetings, progress reviews with customers, interactions with DRDO,
business partners, interactions for proactively developed products
with customers etc. the business plan for the 11th Plan period
being pursued by the company is given below:
Year Turnover (Rs. in crore)
2007-08 5000
2008-09 5750
2009-10 6900
2010-11 8300
2011-12 10000
Every year, the business plan is fine tuned based on the marketing
inputs and turnover targets covering a period of three years are
worked out and put up to BEL Board for approval.”
6.7 During the study visit of the Committee to BEL, Bangalore,
when asked how the users are involved in the MoU target fixing the
Ministry in their written replies stated:
“MoU of the company is formulated every year based on the
guidelines issued by Department of Public Enterprises (DPE). The
guideline stipulates that the target fixed for the year should be
such that it is realistic and growth oriented. The targets are required
to be higher compared to the targets and achievements for the
previous year. The Budget Estimates approved by the Board, forms
the basic targets in respect of various MoU parameters and are
put in the ‘Very Good’ target column. The ‘Excellent’ targets are
normally 5% higher than the ‘Very Good’ target.

61
There is no direct user involvement in MoU target fixing. There is
however indirect involvement. Some of the important parameters
that constitute the MoU are gross margin, value of sales and
customer satisfaction. In drawing up targets for the financial year,
the current order book position, the feedback from the customer
as well as the projections of user requirements for the ensuing
financial year etc. are taken into account. Hence the MoU targets
relating to Defence orders are negotiated on the basis of projections
of the customer as well as ability of the company to executive the
orders. As far as civil customers are concerned, there is no
mechanism for user interaction in MoU fixing. However, wherever,
the customer is the State/Central Govt. the requirements are either
known or are discussed with the users and finalised at the
appropriate level.”
(ii) Measures for Modernisation/Upgradation
6.8 BEL has been continuously modernizing its infrastructure to
be in tune with the changing needs of the technology/products. On
an average the company has been spending more than Rs 100 Crs. on
capital investment in creation of modern facilities in all its Units. The
expenditure on infrastructure is met wholly through the internal
accruals of the company and in the coming years the expenditure on
modernization of infrastructure is expected to double.
6.9 Some of the new infrastructure established or in the process of
establishment in various Units are given below :
* Setting up of Near field test facility – To develop and
manufacture state-of-the-art phased array antennae at an
estimated cost of Rs 9 Crs.
* Setting up of manufacturing test facility for SRE – at an
estimated cost of Rs 20.21 Crs.
* Augmentation of facility for manufacture of space grade
receivers – For communication satellites launched by ISRO
at an estimated cost of Rs 5.2 Crs.
* Mass manufacturing facility – For assembly of electric circuit
boards using surface mount devices at an estimated cost of
Rs 10.9 Crs.
* Setting up of test facility, Turret Stand for manufacture of
Stabilizer and Automatic loading Gear for T90-S Tanks –
This will help in the indigenous manufacture of 1000 Nos.
of T90-S tanks for which BEL has to supply stabilizers and
auto loading gear.

62
* Augmentation of IT infrastructure – For implementation of
comprehensive ERP solution across all the Units/Offices at
an estimated cost of Rs 37.51 Crs.
* Manufacturing facility for co-production of Micro Wave
Assembly for TARANG Mk IB – For producing super
components for use in Electronic Warfare Equipment at an
estimated cost of Rs 8.85 Crs.
* Upgradation of shelter manufacturing facility – To produce
state-of-the-art shelters required for Defence Forces at a cost
of Rs 6.6 Crs.
* Expansion of Capacity for Vacuum Interrupters – From 25000
to 50000 at an estimated capital investment of Rs 16 Crs.
6.10 The facilities so created will help in improving the process of
manufacture and which in turn improve the efficiency of manufacture
and productivity. This also adds versatility in Units to handle different
kinds of related jobs.
6.11 About the upgradation the CMD, BEL during oral evidence
stated:—
“Some of our systems like L-70 guns and Zu-23 and Shilka are all
upgrade programmes. We are working on some of them on our
own. For instance, on L-70 we are working with Ordnance
Factories. On Zu-23 we are working with an Israeli company
because we do not have all the expertise to develop these upgrade
programmes.”
6.12 Pertaining to various international tie-ups with the BEL the
representatives of the Ministry of Defence during oral evidence
stated:—
“The Company has been exploring tie-ups for futuristic products
in the defence market. The company has developed several
products and upgraded versions of fire control radars for the Army-
Air Defence System. It has developed frequency hopping radios,
airport surveillance radars between ground to air and battlefield
surveillance radars. The company is in active discussion with
foreign companies for technology transfer. BEL is working on nano
technology and solar cells is another growth area for the company.
They are also looking for technology for some advanced products
form international companies because they do not have indigenous
answer for this.”

63
(iii) Status of major projects on hand
Sonars
6.13 The status report in respect of technology for sonars and
radars and efforts made by BEL to attain self-reliance as furnished by
the Ministry in their written replies are as under :—
Surface Ship Sonars
6.14 “The indigenous development programme started in 1974 and
up to now, 25 systems have been commissioned in Naval Ships. The
sonar system is manufactured completely in India and only components
are sourced form abroad. All sonars use transducers, which are also
manufactured in India. Sonars under this category are of NPOL design.
BEL has taken up the upgrade and reconfiguration of the original
systems. Some of the sonars developed and supplied under this
category are :
• Advanced Panoramic Sonar Hull Mounted 9APSOH)
• Hull Mounted and Variable Depth Sonar (HUMVAD)
• Hull Mounted Sonar Advance (HUMSA)
• NAGAN
•T owed Torpedo Decoy (TOTED)
With the experience of manufacturing these Sonars, BEL has
developed expertise for high frequency, hull mounted, single array,
dual array sonars. The special digital processing techniques for
getting better range and bearing accuracy have also been acquired.
Also, the digital beam forming technology has been deployed in
these sonars.”
Submarine Sonars
6.15 “The indigenous development programme started in 1990s
and up to now 5 systems have been manufactured and two are under
evaluation in Indian submarines. The sonar systems is manufactured
by BEL with designs from NPOL.”
Airborne Sonars
6.16 “BEL has been working in this range of sonars with designs
from NPOL since 1990. The sonars under this category are :—
• MIHIR – Light Weight Helicopter borne dipping sonars.
• SONOBUOYS – Air dropped passive non-directional radio
sonobuoy

64
Over the years, BEL has assimilated various technologies for
different types of sonars and also established in-house facilities for
testing and manufacture of these sonars. NPOL, Cochin is a
technology partner for BEL for meeting most of the requirements
of Navy. However, in certain emergent cases, with new
technologies, foreign collaboration is also resorted. BEL is trying
to tie up with foreign collaborator for Towed Array Sonars for
Submarines, Airborne sonars (LF version) and Mine hunting
sonars.”
Radar
6.17 “BEL started Radar manufacturing way back in 1964 and since
then, a large number of Radars have been supplied both for Military
and Civilian Customers. The Radars manufactured at BEL include a
wide variety of Radars for Land based and Ship borne applications.
These Radars have been manufactured through joint development/
collaboration with DRDO Labs or technology obtained from foreign
vendors.
BEL’s R&D strengths are aimed towards absorption of technology
and development of products, subsystems and systems. As a result,
BEL has been able to upgrade some of the Radars earlier supplied to
the customers. For an early introduction of some new technologies of
customer interest, BEL ties up with reputed foreign companies for
technology acquisition and tries to absorb the new technologies to
provide life cycle support for such products including obsolescence
management and subsequent product upgrades.
Fire Control Radars (Superfledermaus, SFM) is the first family of
Radars based on value technology was manufactured by BEL under
license collaboration from foreign vendor. These Radars have been
subsequently upgraded to incorporate the then technology of
Transistors/ICs as well as improvement in the performance level. These
SFM families of Radars were succeeded by Flycatcher.
Flycatcher Radar, an Air Defence Weapon Control search and track
radar backed by optronic tracking features was manufactured under
license production form HAS, Holland. Subsequently , these Radars have
been upgraded in-house, for Jam resistance, provided with Raster Scan
colour display replacing conventional CRT tube display.
With an experience gained in the field of Radars, BEL, in close
association with DRDO Labs, is in the process of introducing new
Radars with the state-of-the-art technology. Some of the Radars which

65
are based on the Passive/Active Phased Array Technology are being
concurrently produced at BEL, with the technology from LRDE
Bangalore viz., Central Acquisition Radar (CAR), Weapon Locating
Radar (WLR) and Battery Level Radar (BLR). Recently, BEL with DRDO
Labs has taken up the development of Multi-Function Radar (MFR)
based on Active Electronically Scanned Phased Array Technology, Radar
performing Multi-task, Multi-function viz., Long Range Surveillance,
Surface Search, Multitracking, Fire Control Capability and Missile
guidance.
Over the years, BEL has established an extensive manufacturing
and R&D infrastructure and facilities. Some of the specific infrastructure
facilities set up at BEL are (i) antennas Test Site at Sohna, Haryana (ii)
EMI/EMC Test facilities (iii) Environmental Test Facilities and (iv) Near
Field Antenna Test facility for Phased Array Radars.
With the focused attention of R&D, BEL gives greater emphasis to
proactively introduce cutting edge technology in hardware and
software. Interaction with indigenous design agency like DRDO will
be continued to introduce new generation products. Tie-ups with
reputed foreign companies will also be continued to introduce state-
of-the-art new products.”
Tarang
6.18 Pertaining to the present status of TARANG project and
regarding transfer of technology fees paid for this project before
entering into this contract for transfer of technology from Akon and
fees paid to Icon for obtaining, SKD, CKD, Gas Weeks entrans
equipments as well as other facilities, the Ministry in their written
reply stated that :—
“The order for TARANG Mk IB was received on 8th September
2005. The completion of 336 systems is over 60 months. The total
order value for TARANG project is Rs. 520 crores.
Bharat Electronics was supplying TARANG Mk I Radar Warning
Receiver (RWR) to Indian Air Force and this RWR was using
Switched Filter Assemble (SFA) or Radio Frequency Unit (RFU)
manufactured by recommended only M/s AKON for procurement
of SFAs to BEL as they were approved for use after undergoing
various tests by the designer. BEL, being the production agency
for TARANG project, sourced this component from recommended
vendor M/s AKON.

66
ToT & Technical Assistance
Sl.No. Item Period Payment
1. ToT - NIL
2. Training
(a) Mandatory training of BEL 6 to 8 months $775/working day
engineers at AKON for a batch of 3
engineers
(b) Further training if needed As required $775/working day for
a batch of 3 engineers
3 Technical assistance
(a) Mandatory assistance by 4 days per NIL
AKON in India month for a
period of
6 years
(b) Extra assistance beyond As required US $ 8600/week and
4 days if need US $ 975/day above
one week
6.19 The Ministry further informed the Committee that delivery
of Tarang MK 1 for Jaguar (75 systems) was delayed due to delays in
design finalization and flight trials.
Semi Conductors
6.20 BEL manufactures the following semi conductor devices viz.,
small signal devices, power devices, hybrid micro circuits and integrated
circuits for use by Indian industry besides its own requirement. When
asked to state the steps taken by BEL to produce indigenous semi-
conductors to meet our own requirements, the Ministry in their written
replies to the post briefing List of Points has stated :—
“During mid 80’s and 90’s, BEL had made a proposal to upgrade
the semi conductor manufacturing facilities to meet partly the
country’s requirement. The chip manufacturing facilities are highly
capital intensive and BEL, on its own, was not in a position to
invest because the project was economically unviable. However,
BEL tried to get funding from the Government but it did not
materialize. Today, in view of liberalization and availability of
components with totally changed duty structure, BEL does not

67
find this investments in chip fabrication facilities, an economically
viable project.
BEL is using facilities already established to design and manufacture
semi conductor devices. However, BEL is pursuing the following
new emerging technologies :—
(i) Micro Electro Mechanical Systems (MEMS)
(ii) Thermal Imaging (Infrared Detectors)
(iii) Quantum Well Infrared Detectors (QWIR)
(iv) Super bright LEDs (Light Emitting Diodes)”
Jammers
6.21 BEL has been manufacturing Jamming devices for military
purposes and Jamming systems for jamming of “Remote Controlled
Improvised Explosive Devices” (RCIED) for both Military and Civil
applications. BEL has the capability to develop and manufacture
jamming devices for Broadcast Radios. At present there is no proposal
to manufacture these jamming devices. However, BEL is ready to
supply these whenever requirements are received.
6.22 BEL has constantly been improving the technology of jammers
to match technological complexities of IEDs. In this direction BEL has
recently developed Multiradio pre-initiator type of jammers and is in
the process of developing new jammers to address the perceived
sophistication of IEDs. However, it is not possible to upgrade the
existing devices and these are to be replaced.
6.23 When asked about the plan of action conceived by BEL to
replace the existing devices of Jammers, the Ministry in their written
replies stated :—
“BEL regularly develops newer versions of jammers for meeting
the requirements of changing threats of RCIEDs. BEL has already
supplied the newer version of jammers to some of the users.
The existing jammers cannot be upgraded to address newer threats
as the technologies and circuits used are totally different. However,
if the user decides that the existing jammers can be replaced by
the newer versions, BEL is prepared to supply the newer jammers
soon after getting the necessary orders from the user who has to
get the necessary approvals from Cabinet Secretariat.”

68
(iv) Attrition of engineers and technical staff
6.24 The Ministry of Defence informed the Committee that
manpower planning is carried out in the Company after considering
the Business Plans/Strategy taking into account the various projects
being executed and future projects envisaged in relevant business areas.
The Manpower plan is approved by the Board of Directors. The
manpower Plan is reviewed annually for revision, if any. the Ministry
further stated attrition of high-tech engineers from BEL is a very
pertinent question. The details in respect of Engrs/Tech Staff/Officers
who left BEL in the last 10 years are given below:
RESIG- 1996-97 1997-98 1998-99 1999-2000 2000-01 2001-02 2002-03 2003-04 2004-05 2005-06 TOTAL
NATION
Engrs 160 160 141 141 265 73 27 52 122 98 1239
T.staff 25 13 18 1 10 7 4 7 14 11 110
6.25 In the written replies submitted to the Committee, the Ministry
stated that due to the opening up of economy, opportunities are
growing outside and large number of lucrative jobs are available to
attract BEL R&D engineers. The Ministry has taken the following
measures to retain executives :—
a) Exit interviews are held to find out the actual reasons for
leaving the Company. The feed back from the executives
are analysed and suitable measures adopted.
b) With a view to retaining younger executives, the promotion
policy was recently reviewed for their faster career growth.
c) The payment of perquisites and allowances have been
regulated upto a maximum of 50% of basic pay and
performance related payments are also made not exceeding
5% of the distributable profit of the Company as per extant
Govt. guidelines.
d) R&D awards, Patent awards, Excellence awards have been
instituted for rewarding significant contributions of
executives.
e) Extensive training opportunities are provided in managerial
and technology related areas.
f) Job rotation is being carried out for better exposure and for
the executives to acquire varied experience for their career
growth.

69
6.26 The Ministry has also stated the following policy level
intervention to address these serious issues for retention of technocrats:—
1. Attractive Compensation to technocrats comparable to
private sector.
2. Increase terminal benefits like gratuity.
3. Extension of pension benefits for PSUs employees.
4. Merger of 50% of Dearness Allowance with basic pay as in
the case of Central Government employees.
5. Maximum limit for payment of perquisites (50% of basic
pay) may be removed and PSUs may be allowed to decide
perquisites based on their performance.
6.27 The CMD, BEL stated that the engineers who are leaving are
from R&D area. When they join BEL, in the first three or four years,
they leave, and once they are here for four or five years, the number
of people who leave comes down.
6.28 When asked about the measures taken to control the present
rate of attrition, the representatives of the Ministry of Defence
stated :—
“It is a process, and there is no shortcut to this. We have to have
more intake and we have to cater for these types of eventualities
because with the opportunities arising all over the world as well
as in India, it cannot be controlled. You know, Sir, in India we
have been worried for the last so many years about the IIT
engineers are going away to America, and brain drain is going on.
In spite of that, we are managing.
Monetary benefits, unfortunately, are not in my hand, and you
can never compete with the private sector on this. They get lakhs
of rupees in this private sector and the Government service cannot
pay that sort of money.”
When asked about the mechanism like conditions of bond and
providing incentives, perks and privileges, the representatives of
the Ministry of Defence during oral evidence stated that
“conditions/bonds are there. But they jump the bond.”
6.29 When asked about the possibilities to appoint the engineers/
scientists on contract basis with a good remuneration on three or four

70
year basis as followed in the foreign countries, the representatives of
the Ministry of Defence during oral evidence stated :—
“Our Department is also doing. What they are doing is that they
are also giving projects sometimes to the outsiders. They are not
the employees of the company; they are given a task to do. DRDO
is doing; our company is also doing it; HAL is also doing it; BEL
is also doing it.”
6.30 The representatives further stated that :-
“I think the concern is absolutely genuine and vital because what
has happened is that ever since we have opened up, there is a
distinct difference between the remuneration of foreign companies,
foreign companies based in India, private companies dealing with
foreign companies – that means, they are doing the work for the
foreign companies at foreign rates – private companies and public
sector. This kind of attrition has been going on since the early ‘90s
when liberalization and all those things came. In fact, this kind of
dichotomy is not only in India but also at the extreme end in the
USA, which is the world’s largest paying economy. Now, in India,
with contract system or taking a project on contract, we say all
right we would take so many people on contract basis and pay
the best remuneration. When the job is completed, the contract is
complete and they can go. This is one of the methods. Certainly,
this is happening. It will have its pros and cons. The cons side
would be, let us say, Bharat Electronics has 3000 engineers. They
are working on the normal salary. They find people who are being
taken on shorter terms and given 10 times more than their normal
salaries. There is a little bit of difference.”
6.31 When asked whether autonomy could help in controlling the
attrition problems, the Defence Secretary during oral evidence stated:—
“So, a greater autonomy also could be one of the answers. But I
am sure all these things would be addressed continuously. In the
changed environment, public sector will have to see all these things
together. There is one things about BEL. In 1991, when India started
disinvestment, at that time BEL was one of the companies which
had done the disinvestment. Although it was a Defence company,
it was allowed to disinvest.”
(Recommendation No. 13)
Perspective Plan of BEL
6.32 The Committee note that BEL follows various effective steps
in formulating long-term business plans. BEL follows the guidelines

71
of Department of Public Enterprise (DPE), which stipulates that the
targets fixed should be realistic and growth oriented. The MoU target
for Defence orders are negotiated on the basis of projections of the
customer as well as ability of the company to execute the orders.
The inputs regarding customer need are collected during interactions
in institutional meetings, progress reviews with customers, interaction
with DRDO business partners. However, the Committee are pained
to note that BEL does not have access to the long-term perspective
plan of the Armed Forces. The Committee further note that there is
no direct user involvement in MoU target fixing.
The Committee are of the strong view that the perspective plan
of BEL is an unrealistic proposition by knowing the customer need
through institutional meetings and without access to long-term
perspective plan of the Armed Forces and without direct user
involvement in MoU target fixing. Therefore, the Committee strongly
recommend that the Ministry/Armed Forces should make available
the long-term perspective plan to BEL and involve the users directly
through out the process so that the perspective plan of BEL will be
realistic and growth oriented. Besides, the Committee desire that the
perspective plan should also address the threat perception, both
conventional and non-conventional, rapid technological changes and
new innovations in defence technologies taking place world wide
and intensify R&D activities through in house R&D and tie up with
R&D institutions and foreign collaborations. The Committee further
desire that BEL should constantly evaluate their product lines and
improve its technologies and products in order to bring into the
world standard and make its product cost effective.
(Recommendation No. 14)
Need for close examination of modernization/upgradation measures
6.33 The Committee note that BEL has been continuously
modernizing its infrastructure to be in tune with the changing needs
of the technology. Some of the new infrastructure have been
established or are in the process of establishment in various units.
The Committee further observe that order book position in some of
the units of BEL is very grim. The orders from the Armed Forces
has been drastically reduced from the year 2001-02 to 2005-06. Some
of the units of BEL are lacking orders and 30 to 40 per cent of their
capacity is lying idle. The export potential of BEL since last five
years is not satisfactory. Therefore, the Committee strongly
recommend that the Ministry should examine the available

72
infrastructure, modernization/upgradation already done and in view
of the above problem areas the need for further modernization/
upgradation in all 09 units of BEL and should take corrective
measures and inform the Committee regarding the action taken
thereon within three months of the presentation of this report. The
Committee feel that although modernisation is a continuous process,
the Board should fix a time schedule for modernisation of each of
the infrastructural unit and that should be strictly adhered to by
BEL.
(Recommendation No. 15)
Status of major projects of BEL
6.34 The Committee are happy to note that in the field of sonars
the country seems to be self-reliant. In the field of radar, BEL has
the infrastructure and capability to design and manufacture radars.
The Committee further note that BEL in close association with DRDO
labs is in the process of introducing new radars with the state-of-
the-art technology. In this connection, BEL has also tied up with
reputed foreign companies to develop high-end technologies.
However, the Committee during examination of Demands for Grants
2006-07 were dismayed to note that some of the ships inducted in
Navy are operating without radar and most of the radars fitted on
ships are imported. Therefore, the Committee desire that the available
infrastructure with BEL must be properly utilized and in this
connection reputed private sector firms having relevant expertise must
be involved in the designing and manufacture of radars to attain
indigenization in the field of radars.
In regard to jammers, the Committee note that BEL is constantly
improving the technology of jammers to match technological
complexities of IEDs and BEL has already supplied the new version
of jammers to some of the users. The Committee are further informed
that on demand of users the existing jammers can be upgraded and
BEL is prepared to supply the new jammers soon after getting the
necessary orders. Therefore, the Committee recommend that BEL
should constantly upgrade the jammer devices as per the changing
requirements and supply the same to the users at the earliest.
The Committee observe that during the mid 80’s and 90’s BEL
had a proposal to upgrade the semi-conductor manufacturing facilities
to meet the country’s requirement. As the manufacture of semi-
conductor was not economically viable for BEL and non-availability
of Government funding, manufacture of semi-conductor did not

73
materialize. However, BEL is using facilities already established to
design and manufacture semi-conductor devices. Therefore, the
Committee recommend that the Ministry of Defence must provide
adequate financial assistance to BEL in pursuing other new emerging
technologies like micro electronic mechanical systems, thermal
imaging etc. so that Armed Forces can avail benefits from it.
The Committee desire that BEL and Ministry of Defence should
have close monitoring on the ongoing projects to strictly adhered to
the time schedule for their completion and delivery to the Armed
Forces and they must closely watch the percentage of their
achievement against the targets fixed.
(Recommendation No. 16)
Need to retain R&D engineers and technical staff
6.35 The Committee note that the number of engineers and
technical staff resigning in BEL since 1996-97 to 2005-06 are 1239
and 110 respectively due to opening up of economy and lucrative
job opportunities available outside BEL. The Committee are distressed
to note that majority of engineers who are leaving BEL are from
R&D area and they leave BEL after three-four years of joining as a
result major R&D projects are getting delayed. The Committee also
note that the Ministry has taken a number of initiatives to retain
the executives. Besides, the BEL has sought some policy level
intervention to address these serious issues for retention of
technocrats like attractive compensation; increase terminal benefits,
extension of pension, merger of 50% Dearness Allowance etc.
The Committee, therefore, strongly recommend that urgent
attention of the Government must be drawn towards the above policy
level interventions and the pay structure of its engineers must be
adequately modified. The Committee desire that the Ministry should
take immediate steps to offer attractive job package to R&D
Engineers which can be comparable to the best package available to
them in job Market. They should also be provided on the job training
to update their knowledge. These measures will facilitated to retain
them and minimize the delayed R&D projects which cause a lot of
concern to the nation and huge sufferings to the Armed Forces.
The Committee further desire that to minimize delay in the R&D
projects the Ministry must strictly adhere the policy of not allowing
the R&D engineers to leave their job till the completion of the
projects. The BEL must also make concerted efforts to document the

74
R&D achievement step by step as they make progress so that the
new incumbent who may take up the R&D project from where the
predecessor had left so that the projects are not delayed. The
Committee feel that the salary and other benefits of R&D engineers
should be performance based. in order to attract young and talented
personnel. For retention of R&D engineers the Committee further
desire that the Government should resort to strong action against
those R&D engineers who are leaving BEL midway of the projects
assigned to them. They should be debarred to join any public sector
undertakings and Government Organizations. The Committee also
desire that the Ministry should frame a recruitment policy clearly
stipulating service conditions that the engineers joining the company
must sign a bond of compulsory service in the Company for at least
eight to ten year and in case of breach of the bond, the expenditure
incurred on their job specific training would be recovered from them.
The Committee are of the strong view that scientist and R&D
engineers are the actual brain of the projects. Therefore, the
Committee further wish to recommend that to attract the young and
experienced scientist, they can be appointed on contract basis with
a good remuneration on four to five years basis. While offering
incentives/promotional avenues and other facilities to the R&D
Engineers, the Government must take into account their individual
performance and contribution to the overall growth of the company.
In case of excellence performance they may be given acceleratory
promotions. The Committee further recommend that the Government
should extend royalty to the engineers for their original R&D work
done by them and any product developed thereon.

CHAPTER VII
RESEARCH & DEVELOPMENT AND QUALITY ASSURANCE
7.1 The R&D focus and R&D organisation of BEL stated in the
year 1963. Over the years, the R&D set up has grown and matured to
adequately address the new technology areas. BEL has evolved a three-
layer set up to effectively address the technology and product needs
of the customers. All the 9 manufacturing units have their own unit
Development and Engineering (D&E) groups developing new products
in their respective areas. Two Central Research Laboratories (CRLs) at
Bangalore and Ghaziabad are set up for undertaking research in
futuristic areas with a view to identify and realize enabling technologies
relevant to the company’s products. Central D&E group at Bangalore
is working to develop specialized technology module for the unit D&E
groups. More than 1600 qualified, scientists and support staff are
presently deployed in R&D by the company. Apart form in-house
Research & Development of new products, BEL is having a strong tie-
up with DRDO Laboratories and other national design agencies for
introducing new products continuously. In addition to this, BEL has
ToT tie-ups with the foreign vendors for some selected products.
7.2 Following are some of the major on-going R&D projects for
the Defence Services at BEL:—
Sl. Project Status Likely PDC for Projects
No. Productionisation started
12 3 4 5
1. Weapon Locating Radar (WLR) Under user assisted 2007-08 2002-03
evaluations at Field
2. Battery Level Radar — Under system level 2008-09 2002-03
(RAJENDRA-III) integration
3. Central Acquisition Under development 2008-09 2006-07
Radars (CAR)
[ROHINI & REVATHI]
4. Low Level Light Weight Under development 2007-08 2004-05
Radar (LLLWR) 2002-03
5. Upgradation of Reporter Under development 2009-10 2002-03
Radar
75

76
12 3 4 5
6. Upgradation of Schilka Under development 2007-08 2005-06
Radar
7. SV 2000 Radar Under user trials & 2007-08 2000-01
evaluations
8. Upgraded Naval Fire Under development 2007-08 2003-04
Control System (LYNX-U1)
9. Combat Management Systems Under development 2007-08 2004-05
(CMS) for Ships
10. Battlefield Surveillance Under user trials 2006-07 2002-03
System (BSS)
11. Artillery Command & Under user trials 2007-08 2002-03
Control System (SHAKTI)
12. Integrated Air Command & Under development 2007-08 2005-06
Control System (IACCS)
13. Air Defence Control & Under development 2007-08 2005-06
Reporting System (ADC&RS)
14. Tactical Communication Under development 2007-08 2004-05
System (TCS)
15. CDMA Encryptor Under development 2007-08 2004-05
16. Upgraded Semi-ruggedised Under evaluation 2007-08 2003-04
Automatic Exchange
(ULSB MK-III)
17. L-70 Gun Upgrade Under Trials & 2008-09 2002-03
evaluation
18. Zu-23 Gun Modernisation Under Trials & 2008-09 2002-03
evaluation
19. KITE EW System (MK-II) Under development 2007-08 2006-07
20. Advanced Ground Control Under development 2006-07 2005-06
Station for NISHANT
21. Night Vision Devices (NVD Under development 2006-07 2005-06
for MFC)

77
7.3 The Ministry in their written reply stated the following
constraints in timely completion of the projects:—
(a) Delays in Trials & Evaluation of equipments due to timely
availability of user provided items like vehicles, aircrafts,
ships etc.
(b) Changes in the scope due to feedback generated by the
users during the evaluation.
(c) R&D engineers leaving BEL also delays the projects.
7.4 When asked how BEL is taking help from DRDO in R&D
activities to set up a state-of-the-art manufacturing, testing and quality
assurance facilities, the Ministry in their written replies stated :—
“BEL has established effective methodologies to work with DRDO
for productionisation of products and also for joint development
of products to meet the needs of Defence Forces.
R&D divisions of BEL start interacting with the concerned DRDO
Labs from the early stages of design of a product and provide the
DRDO Lab various supports like taking up of development of
some sub-systems for the main system, concurrent engineering etc.
to speed up the design phase and associate with DRDO Labs for
the trials & evaluation stages. Association of BEL R&D Engineers
with DRDO in the early stages of a product development at DRDO
helps BEL to upgrade any manufacturing, testing & quality
assurance facilities required at BEL if the product is cleared for
production at BEL after the evaluations. One of the examples is
setting up of Near Field Test Facility for testing of Phased Array
Radars.”
7.5 When asked whether the Ministry is planning to delegate the
power of DRDO to BEL in regard to the R&D activities to set up the
state-of-the-art manufacturing and testing and quality assurance
facilities, the Ministry in their supplementary replies stated:—
“There are no such proposals of delegating powers of DRDO to
BEL by the MoD with regard to R&D activities.
Over the years, BEL has set up facilities which are required for
manufacture of various products/equipments for Defence. These
facilities are also being utilized by BEL for in-house R&D activities
and for DRDO development programmes where BEL is asked to
take up development of sub-systems.

78
BEL’s view in this regard is that DRDO may consider giving more
and more systems/sub-systems development and manufacturing
activities to BEL. This will allow sharing of BEL’s facilities for
DRDO’s development work and also a faster realization of final
product to defence customers.”
The R&D expenditure
7.6 The following are the R&D expenditure of BEL during the last
five years.
(Rs. in crore)
Year Expenditure
2001-02 89.6
2002-03 108.7
2003-04 130.6
2004-05 127.1
2005-06 130.1
7.7 The following are the turnover from indigenous products
(Rs. in crore)
Year Turnover
2001-02 1234
2002-03 1605
2003-04 1771
2004-05 1937
2005-06 2568
7.8 The percentage of revenue earned during the last three years
from DRDO, BEL in-house research and Transfer of Technology (ToT)
are as follows:—
Year DRDO In-house Research ToT
of BEL
2004-05 17% 43% 40%
2005-06 36% 37% 27%
2006-07(estd.) 27% 48% 25%

79
Quality assurance
7.9 Bharat Electronics has been addressing the problem of survival
in an environment of severe competition and an intense demand for
Quality goods and services. This has thrown up the need for TQM,
which would achieve:
•P roduct/Service Quality
• Low manufacturing Cost
• Shorter Lead times
• Better Customer Rapport/Support
• Low reaction—Time to the dynamic market.
7.10 As a first step to demonstrate the commitment to Quality
and Environment, the CMD has promulgated the Quality Policy &
Objectives and Environmental Policy & Objectives. A commitment to
deliver enhanced value to our customers through continual
improvement of our products and processes is the ‘Tag Line’ in our
Quality policy.
7.11 BEL adopted TORQUE (Total Organisational Quality
Enhancement) an acronym equivalent to TQM, in achieving continuous
improvement in Quality, Cost, Delivery & Safety aspects with the aim
of giving full satisfaction to customer. It encompasses the entire cycle
of manufacturing process starting from improvement in Quality of
design and proceeds with the improvement in Quality in conformance
& Performance, which results in Customer Satisfaction. Products are
designed and manufactured to meet the stated and implied needs of
the Customer by adopting National/International standards like JSS
55555/MIL/DEF/IPT 1001A/QM 333 to the extent that the
requirements of these are mutually agreed with the customer. The
Design Manual and the Company Standards are used as guiding
documents in design and manufacturing processes. A full fledge QA
department is set up in all Units to ensure all aspects relating to
quality management systems & procedures are effectively implemented
and adhered to.
7.12 Standardisation and Quality are two inseparable parts of TQM
process and they have a complementary role. The Corporate Standards
Division with over 4 decades of its activity has evolved more than
4000 standards, thus providing effective support for design and
manufacturing and vendor development. These standards have
since been captured on a CD for ready availability/reference to all
concerned.

80
7.13 The foundation for the overall structure for managing Quality
is the Corporate Steering Committee on TORQUE comprising the CMD
as the Chairman, all Directors as members and GM (TORQUE) as
Member secretary . The function of the Corporate Committee is to:
• Give Guidance to the Units
• Monitor the Quality Improvement Process in the Units.
7.14 All Units/SBU/Divisions have steering Committees on
TORQUE Chaired by Unit/SBU heads and all functional Heads—D&E,
Manufacturing, personnel, Finance, Services as members.
7.15 The function of these steering committees is to lay down
policies and plans for Quality Improvement in the Unit/SBU covering:
• QCC
• Suggestion Scheme
• Six Sigma
• CII EXIM Bank Business Excellence
• ISO Sustenance (ISO-9001: 2000, ISO 14001:2004—All Units/
SBUs / Divisions of BEL are certified for these standards)
• Educational & Training needs at all levels
• Restructuring of Organisation for implementation of
TORQUE
• Analyse reports on TORQUE parameters emanating from
Units/SBUs and action for improvement
• Monitor the MR meetings, Internal audits (IQSA & IEMSA),
analyze non-conformities, drive corrective/preventive action
and ensure sustenance if ISO
• Customer Satisfaction Surveys and Employee satisfaction
Surveys and action based on the feed back from the survey
reports
• Self certification of products.
Government assistance for strategic technologies
7.16 The Committee are informed that BEL has requested the
Government for funding for the following strategic technologies:
(i) Infra Red Detectors & Detector
Dewar Cooler Assembly (Rs. 250 Cr.)

81
(ii) Micro Electro Mechanical Systems (MEMS) (Rs. 100 Cr.)
(iii) Multi-junction Gallium Arsenide based
Solar Cells (Rs. 155 Cr.)
(iv) Super Gen Image Intensifier Tubes &
Micro Channel Plates. (Rs. 150 Cr.)
7.17 It has been informed that no such funds have so far been
received by BEL. In this regard when asked to state how the important
projects of BEL will take up and the reasons communicated by the
planning Commission for not providing the fund, the Ministry in their
written replies stated :—
“It may kindly be noted that development of stand alone
technologies in the Defence Sector is the responsibility of DRDO
whereas application of the same is done by the Industry.
In the ‘Make’ procedure as per DPP 2006, if BEL is identified as
the Prime Contractor in any project, funds can be provided for
development of the product or part of the product and also for
enhancing the designs, testing and manufacturing facilities where
required.
Government has no funds for directly funding Industry for
development of stand alone technologies, but profit making
companies like BLE can source such development and research
work from internal resources for which no government approval
is required.”
Request by BEL for Government funding for some of the strategic
technologies
7.18 In response to a written query regarding status of Government
funding for some of the strategically important projects, the Ministry
in their written replies stated as under:—
“Government funding was sought for the following strategically
important projects, which were found not economically viable to
take up development using BEL’s own funds:—
(a) Infra Red Detectors & Detector Dewar Cooler Assembly
(Rs. 250 Cr.)
(b) Micro & Nano Technology (Rs. 100 Cr.)
(c) Multi-junction Gallium Arsenide based Solar Cells
(Rs. 155 Cr.)

82
(d) Super Gen Image Intensifier Tubes & Micro Channel Plates
(Rs. 150 Cr.)
Although efforts have been made by the Ministry in this direction
no funding has been received so far.”
7.19 During the study visit of the Committee to BEL, Bangalore,
the representatives of BEL has sought Government funding for the
following projects:—
(a) MEMS — Rs. 95 crores
(b) Multi-junction Gallium — Rs. 155 crores
Arsenide based Solar Cells
(Recommendation No. 17)
Research & Development
7.20 The Committee are happy to note that over the years, BEL
has grown and matured adequately to address the new technological
areas. BEL is spending 4-5 per cent of its turnover in R&D activities.
All the 9 manufacturing units have their own unit development and
engineering groups to develop new products in their respective areas.
Two Central Research Laboratories at Bangalore and Ghaziabad are
set up for undertaking research in futuristic areas. Apart from
in-house Research & Development of new products, BEL is having
strong tie-up with DRDO laboratories. In addition to this, BEL has
ToT tie-ups with foreign vendors for some selected products.
However, the Committee are further informed that there is delay in
completion of some of the major ongoing R&D projects for the
Defence services at BEL. The delays are due to trials and evaluation,
changes in scope of the project due to feedback generated by users
during the evaluation and R&D engineers leaving BEL. In view of
the above, the Committee strongly recommend that BEL must take
urgent step to stop the brain drain by taking corrective measures
and provide attractive incentives at par with the private sectors to
the R&D engineers who are the brain behind the progress of BEL.
Further, the Committee desire that the time period for evaluation at
all levels should be reduced for the timely completion of the project.
The Committee further desire that the Ministry should chalk out a
well considered plan in order to monitor the development of various
projects being undertaken by BEL and accountability for the delay
in completion schedule must be fixed on the engineers/officials, in-
charge of the project. The BEL should make clear cut assignment of
project related jobs to officials at the start of the project. The

83
Committee further desire that the option of involving private sector
in the various projects must be explored at the beginning itself.
(Recommendation No. 18)
Need for extending financial help for undertaking some of the
strategic technologies
7.21 The Committee are happy to note that BEL has played a
significant role in meeting the requirements of Armed Forces for
electronic communication and Radar equipment. The Company has
developed indigenously a number of products with active support
of customers and DRDO laboratories. The Company has also been
making continuous efforts towards technology upgradation and
identifying new technologies and new products jointly or in
collaboration with Defence/National Laboratories and Institutes. The
Committee note that for establishment of some of the strategic
technologies inter-alia Infra-Red Detectors & Detector Dewar Cooler
Assembly, Micro Electro Mechanical Systems (MEMS), Multi-junction
Gallium Arsenide based Solar Cells and Super Gen Image Intensifier
Tubes & Micro Channel Plates, BEL has sought financial assistance
from the Government. The Standing Committee in their Ninth
Report, had also recommended for grant of financial assistance to
these projects. The Committee are constrained to note that till now
the same assistance has not been extended to BEL, as a result, vital
strategic projects will not be materialized and the same cannot be
extended to the Armed Forces. Besides the above projects, BEL has
also required Government assistance for MEMS and Multi-junction
Gallium Projects.
Since limited resources are available with the Company and huge
funds are required for meeting the expenditure on these strategic
projects, the Committee strongly recommend that the Government
must consider extending help to BEL for their timely completion
and extend the benefits to the Armed Forces.
(Recommendation No. 19)
Delegation of systems/sub-systems development and manufacture
activities powers of DRDO to BEL
7.22 The Committee observe that over the years, BEL has set up
research facilities required for manufacture of various products/
equipment for Defence. These facilities are being utilized by BEL
for in-house R&D activities and for DRDO development programmes

84
where BEL is asked to take up development of sub-systems. The
Committee are informed that as per BEL view points DRDO may
consider giving more and more systems/sub-systems development
and manufacturing activities to BEL. This will allow sharing of BEL’s
facilities for DRDO’s development work and also a faster realization
of final products to defence customers. In view of the above, the
Committee wish to recommend that the Ministry should examine
this aspect very carefully and may consider the delegation of systems/
sub-systems development and manufacturing activities of DRDO to
BEL accordingly.

CHAPTER VIII
PRIVATE SECTOR PARTICIPATION
8.1 In regard to specific measures/steps have been taken by the
Company for increasing the role of private Industries in defence
production in consultation with the Ministry of Defence, the Ministry
of Defence, in its written replies informed the Committee that :—
“BEL has been promoting small and medium scale industries right
from the beginning. In addition to ancillary units, BEL has got a
good number of private industries involved with BEL. To meet
the manufacturing requirements, BEL sources electronic sub-
assemblies, electronic sub-systems, mechanical/electromechanical
components and sub-systems, Diesel Generating Power Supplies,
Air conditioners, Battery Chargers, Hand Sets, Head Sets etc. There
are more than 5000 vendors involved with all the Units of BEL.
During the last three years, the volume of outsourcing by BEL has
been Rs. 399 crores during 2003-04, Rs. 885 crores in 2004-05 and
Rs. 737 crores in 2005-06. The outsourcing done during 2005-06 is
around 20% of its turnover.
In order to increase the role of private industries in defence
production, BEL had conducted vendor meet to attract private
parties in indigenization of various components and raw materials.
BEL had also participated in various Govt./Private Industries’ meets
organized by various industrial houses. During such programmes,
BEL had exhibited components, sub-assemblies, imported parts,
items where the company is seeking the help of private industries.”
8.2 When asked whether BEL has shared critical and classified
technologies for production and raw material of Defence equipment
with the private sector, the Ministry of Defence in their supplementary
replies stated:—
“In view of security reasons and commercial importance of critical
and classified technologies, items using such technologies are not
outsourced. BEL has infrastructure to manufacture such items.
However, components, materials and sub-assemblies required for
these equipments are outsourced to private sector. Based on the
overall specifications of the equipments, specifications and
requirements of these items are prepared and given to vendors.
The information is provided to vendors on need to know basis.”
85

86
8.3 Regarding outsourcing of various sub-systems, both medium
and low take components to the private sectors, name of the private
sector to whom the projects were given and the cost effectiveness
achieved in the manufacturing activities and the criteria for outsourcing
to a private industry, the Ministry in their written replies stated:—
“At the time of project development stage itself, the vendors are
selected for various assemblies/sub-systems, either by BEL or by
the Design Agency (DRDO). The vendors will develop the product
and thus will become the supplier for the production batches when
orders are received.
During the production phase also, BEL develops vendors to meet
the needs of indigenisation, multiple, sources, additional capacity
and special machines/processes etc.”
8.4 The major criteria for outsourcing to private sector are given
below:—
• Competencies available with vendor
• Infrastructure facilities available with vendor
• Design capabilities
• Quality Practices followed
• Cost Competitiveness
BEL outsources primarily to augment capacities, use design capabilities
of vendor for faster development and use infrastructure available with
private vendors to get items and services at competitive prices. The
benefits available are integrated with the pricing of the products.
Some of the vendors who have been developed for various ongoing
projects are given below:
MBTUs — M/s. Badawe Engineering
Liquid Cooling Unit — M/s. Pair Engineering
Pedestal, Rotating Platform — M/s. Involute
Racks — M/s. DINRAC
Super Component — M/s. Astra Microwave Products Flic
Microwave
Antenna — ACD Communication

87
Software Development — SOROKA SOFT, CMC, MELTRONIX
High Voltage PSU — LNT, V ersabyte
Hydraulic Mast — Hydraulic Actuation
Stabilised Platform — L&T
Launcher — L&T, Tata Power
Mobile Power Source V ehicle — L&T
Low Power Microwave Modules — Astra Microwave Products
(Recommendation No. 20)
Urgent need for involvement of private sector
8.5 The Committee observe that BEL has been promoting small
and medium scale industries right from the beginning to meet its
manufacturing requirements of electronic sub-assemblies, sub-systems,
mechanical and electro-mechanical components and sub-systems, etc.
This will primarily augment the capacities, use design capabilities
of vendor for faster development and optimum use of infrastructure
available with private vendors to get the items and services at
competitive prices. The Committee, are, however distressed to note
that BEL is hesitant to outsource the items using critical and classified
technologies due to security reasons and commercial importance. The
Committee feel that non-involvement of private companies in
manufacturing of items of critical/classified technologies is an explicit
indication of its monopolistic attitude in Defence production which
will ultimately lead to weakening the existing R&D base in the
country and expose itself in times of emergencies/war situations.
The Committee are of the strong view that the private sectors should
be encouraged to come up a particular level in order to share
responsibility with the public sector undertakings as the same will
strengthen the domestic R&D base to ensure timely and sustained
supply of equipment to the Armed Forces.
(Recommendation No. 21)
Concluding Observations/Recommendations
The Committee have made an in-depth study of the functioning
of BEL from various standpoints viz. organizational structure,
performance, capacity utilization and supplying products to Defence
Forces, modernization, research and development, indigenization and

88
private sector participation and thus made well-considered
recommendations under various chapters for improvement. The
Committee feel that BEL plays a crucial and vital role for the national
security of the country and therefore its functioning should be
organised and re-structured to make it an independent and
autonomous R&D body on the line of ISRO and Brahmos. In this
regard, the Committee wish to stress upon that DRDO must facilitate
the working of BEL in various projects and it should refrain from
being a controlling authority of BEL projects and the Ministry must
ensure to avoid bureaucratic red tapism. The Committee desire that
total leadership should be given to BEL to work on the corporate
lines so as to enable it to raise funds from domestic as well as
external markets. It should intensify its R&D projects and diversify
its production to meet the requirements of both defence and civil
markets as per the rapid scientific and technological advancement.
This will further facilitate BEL to produce high-end technologies to
attract the export market. In this regard, the Committee wish to
recommend that for a better functioning of BEL, its performance
must be reviewed by an independent body.
  N
EW D ELHI; BALASAHEB VIKHE PATIL,
12 February, 2007 Chairman,
23 Magha, 1928 (Saka) Standing Committee on Defence.

APPENDIX
MINUTES OF THE FOURTH SITTING OF THE STANDING
COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE (2006-07)
The Committee sat on Wednesday the 4th October, 2006 from
1100 hrs. to 1230 hrs. in Committee Room ’B’, Parliament House
Annexe, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Shri Suresh Kalmadi — In the Chair
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Milind Deora
3. Shri Santosh Kumar Gangwar
4. Shri Ramesh C. Jigajinagi
5. Dr. K.S. Manoj
6. Shri Adhalrao Shivaji Patil
7. Shri Shriniwas Patil
8. Shri Raju Rana
9. Dr. H.T. Sangliana
10. Shri Mahadeorao Shiwankar
11. Shri Manvendra Singh
12. Shri Balashowry Vallabhaneni
13. Shri Rajesh Verma
Rajya Sabha
14. Dr. Farooq Abdullah
15. Shri Abu Asim Azmi
16. Shri R.K. Dhawan
17. Smt. N.P . Durga
18. Shri K.B. Shanappa
19. Shri Lalit Suri
20. Smt. Viplove Thakur
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri S.K. Sharma — Additional Secretary
2. Shri S. Bal Shekhar — Joint Secretary
3. Shri R.C. Kakkar — Deputy Secretary
4. Shri D.R. Shekhar — Under Secretary
89

90
List of Representatives from Ministry of Defence
1. Shri Shekhar Dutt — Defence Secretary
2. Shri K.P . Singh — Secretary (DP)
3. Dr. M. Natarajan — SA to RM
4. Shri V .K. Misra — Secretary (Def. Fin.)
5. Shri S. Banerjee — DG (ACQ)
6. Shri K.P . Lakshamana Rao — FA (ACQ)
7. Shri N. Sitaram — CCR&D (ECS)
8. Shri Ranjan Chatterjee — JS (HAL)
9. Shri Mohd. Haleem Khan — Addl. FA (H) & JS
10. Shri P . Surendran — Director (SY)
11. Shri M.S. Seetharaman — Director (Finance/PSU)
Bharat Electronics Ltd. (BEL)
1. Shri Y. Gopala Rao — CMD (BEL)
2. Shri P .R.K. Haragopal — Dir.Fin. (BEL)
3. Shri V .V .R. Sastry — Dir. (Marketing) (BEL)
4. Shri M.K. Agarwal — Dy. Manager (IT) (BEL)
(as supporting staff)
Services Headquarters
1. Air Mshl. A.K. Nagalia — DCAS
2. Lt. Gen. Dilip N. Desai — DG Inf. System
3. Lt. Gen. S.P . Sree Kumar — Signal Offr. in Chief
4. R. Adml. Ganesh Mahadevan — ACOM IT & S
5. Col. S.L. Phirke — Dir. Sig.-5
2.In the absence of Hon’ble Chairman the Committee unanimously
chose Shri Suresh Kalmadi, M.P . and Member of the Committee to act
as Chairman for that sitting under rule 258(3) of the Rules of Procedure
and Conduct of Business in Lok Sabha. The Chairman then welcomed
the Members and representatives of Ministry of Defence to the sitting
of the Committee. The Chairman thereafter requested the representatives
of the Ministry to brief the Committee on the subject ‘In-depth Study
and Critical Review of Bharat Electronics Limited (BEL)’ and also drew
their attention to the Direction 58 of the Directions by the Speaker,
Lok Sabha regarding maintaining confidentiality of the deliberations
of the sitting.

91
3. In the briefing the representatives of the Ministry informed the
Committee that the core area of production BEL, was production of
electronics and communication equipment. It was established in 1954
and has nine operating units, one subsidiary company i.e. EBL optronics
devices and two joint ventures companies GE & BE. The supply of the
company to Defence Services was around 86 per cent of its turnover.
It’s spending on R&D activities was highest among all the companies
in terms of percentage of turnover spending on R&D activities. It
made a profit of Rs. 583 crore after paying tax which was an increase
of 30.62 percent over the previous year. The Company remained in
active discussion with foreign company for technology transfer. It has
been trying to make a foray into civil market also. BEL got a contract
for the supply of integration, annual maintenance and facility
management of the State of the Art call data record based convergent
billing system for MTNL Delhi and Mumbai. It also procured an order
from the Army for Rs. 126 crore to set up a test bed for CDMA based
communication work.
4. The Representative of the Ministry thereafter requested the
Chairman to permit CMD, BEL to give a small power presentation.
The Chairman agreed to the request.
5. CMD BEL then made a power presentation highlighting the
functioning and achievements, of BEL. Thereafter Members of the
Committee sought clarifications on various issues viz. functioning of
electronic voting machines, Night Vision Devices, Order Book,
indigenisation, radio jamming devices, IEd Jammers, provision of State
of the Art products, functioning of the Company and its overseas
offices in New York and Singapore, set up for cost effective sourcing
and components of sub-assemblies expansion of the Company activities
in Civil Market etc. The Representatives of the Ministry and BEL
responded to the above queries. Chairman also directed the
Representative of the Ministry to furnish the replies to the points for
which information were not readily available with them.
6. A copy of the Verbatim proceedings has been kept on record.
7. The Committee then adjourned to meet again on 13.10.2006 at
11 hrs.

MINUTES OF THE ELEVENTH SITTING OF THE STANDING
COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE (2006-07)
The Committee sat on Tuesday the 12th December, 2006 from
1500 hrs. to 1700 hrs. in Committee Room ‘D’, Parliament House
Annexe, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Shri Balasaheb Vikhe Patil — Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri S. Bangarappa
3. Shri Milind Deora
4. Shri Ramesh C. Jigajinagi
5. Shri K.S. Manoj
6. Shri Shriniwas Patil
7. Dr. H.T. Sangliana
8. Shri Manvendra Singh
Rajya Sabha
9. Dr. Farooq Abdullah
10. Shri Abu Asim Azmi
11. Shri R.K. Dhawan
12. Smt. N.P . Durga
13. Shri K.B. Shanappa
14. Smt. Viplove Thakur
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri S. Bal Shekhar — Joint Secretary
2. Shri R.C. Kakkar — Deputy Secretary
3. Shri D.R. Shekhar — Under Secretary
92

93
List of Representatives from Ministry of Defence
1. Shri Shekar Dutt — Defence Secretary
2. Shri K.P . Singh — Secretary (DP)
3. Shri V .K. Misra — Secretary (Def. Fin.)
4. Dr. M. Natarajan — SA to RM
5. Shri A.K. Jain — Addl. Secy. (J)
6. Shri P .K. Rastogi — Addl. Secy. (DP)
7. Shri N. Sitaram — CCR&D (ECS)
8. Smt. Kiran Chaddha — JS (X)
9. Shri Alok Perti — JS (SY)
10. Shri Y. Gopala Rao — CMD (BEL)
11. Shri V .V .R. Sastry — Dir. (Marketing) (BEL)
12. Shri P .R.K. Hara Gopal — Dir./Fin. (BEL)
13. Shri G.S. Malik — Director (ECS)
14. Shri S.K. Mehta — Dir. (R&D) (BEL)
Armed Forces Headquarters
1. V . Adml Nirmal Verma — VCNS
2. Air Mshl AK Nagalia — DCAS
3. Lt. Gen. Z.U. Shah — DCOAS (P&S)
4. Lt. Gen. Sreekumar — SO-in C
5. Maj. Gen. A.K. Mehra — ADGWE
6. Rear Adml. Ganesh — ACOM (IT&S)
Mahadevan
7. Rear Adml. R.K. Dhowan — ACNS (P&P)
8. Air Cmde S.S. Gunashekar — Offg. ACAS (Eng. B)
9. AVM N Vijaya Kumar — ACAS (FP)
10. AVM KM Rama Sundara — ACAS (Systems)
11. Cmde. P .A. Narayan — HQ IDS
2. At the outset, Hon’ble Chairman welcomed the Members to
discuss the issues raised during the study tour of the Committee to
Mumbai, Cochin and Bangaluru from 14 to 19 November, 2006. Then
the Members endorsed the important points raised in the draft tour
notes ciruclated to them.

94
3. The Committee then took oral evidence of the representatives of
Ministry of Defence on the subject ‘In-depth Study and Critical Review
of Bharat Electronics Limited’. During the discussion, the Members
putforth the following points:
(i) Feelings of Armed Forces about the supply of products by
BEL and their quality and competitiveness in comparison
to the equipment used by the neighbouring countries.
(ii) Number of cases of delay in supply and the reasons thereof
and sufferings of the Armed Forces due to such delays and
efforts made by the Ministry to reduce these delays.
(iii) Attrition of Engineers from BEL and possibility of
appointment of engineers on contract basis.
(iv) Evasive replies furnished by the Ministry of Defence to all
the post briefing List of Points and they desired that candid
written replies may be furnished to them.
(v) Single vendor system, offset clause and technology transfer.
(vi) Efforts being made by BEL for technological upgradation at
least to the level of satisfaction of the Armed Forces.
(vii) Clear cut division of business at the highest level in the
BEL to look after production for Armed Forces and civilians.
(viii) Research & indigenous development of BEL.
(ix) Overall upgradation programme of BEL.
(x) Under utilization of capability of some of the units of BEL
due to lack of orders.
4. The representatives of the Ministry of Defence answered the
queries one-by-one and on certain points they assured to furnish the
written replies later on.
5. The Verbatim Record of the proceedings was kept.
The Committee then adjourned.

95
MINUTES OF TWENTIETH SITTING OF THE STANDING
COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE (2006-2007)
The Committee sat on Monday, the 12th February 2007 from
1400 hrs. to 1430 hrs. in ‘Main’ Committee Room, Parliament House
Annexe, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Shri Balasaheb Vikhe Patil— Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri S. Bangarappa
3. Shri Santosh Kumar Gangwar
4. Dr. K.S. Manoj
5. Shri Asaduddin Owaisi
6. Shri Adhalrao Shivaji Patil
7. Shri Mahadeorao Shiwankar
8. Shri Rajesh Verma
Rajya Sabha
9. Dr. Farooq Abdullah
10. Shri Abu Asim Azmi
11. Shri R.K. Dhawan
12. Smt. N.P . Durga
13. Shri K.B. Shanappa
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri P .K. Bhandari — Joint Secretary
2. Shri Gopal Singh — Director
2. At the outset, Hon’ble Chairman welcomed the members to the
sitting of the Committee. The Committee, therefore, considered the
two draft reports on the subjects ‘Bharat Electronics Limited (BEL)’

96
and ‘Hindustan Aeronautics Limited (HAL)’ and adopted the same
with some additions/modifications as suggested by the members.
3. The Committee then authorised the Hon’ble Chairman to finalise
the reports and present the same to the Parliament.
The Committee then adjourned.