7
STANDING COMMITTEE
ON DEFENCE
(2005-06)
FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA
MINISTRY OF DEFENCE
DEFENCE ORDNANCE FACTORIES
SEVENTH REPORT
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
December, 2005/Agrahayana, 1927 (Saka)


SEVENTH REPORT
STANDING COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE
(2005-06)
(FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA)
MINISTRY OF DEFENCE
DEFENCE ORDNANCE FACTORIES
Presented to Lok Sabha on 12.12.2005
Laid  in  Rajya Sabha  on 12.12.2005
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
December, 2005/Agrahayana, 1927 (Saka)

C.O.D. No. 69
Price : Rs. 30.00
© 2005 BY LOK S ABHA S ECRETARIAT
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of
Business in Lok Sabha (Eleventh Edition) and Printed by Jainco Art India,
New Delhi-110 005.

CONTENTS
PAGES
COMPOSITION OF THE C OMMITTEE .............................................................. (iii)
PREFACE ........................................................................................................ (v)
CHAPTER I Introduction ................................................................... 1
CHAPTER II Organisational structure of Ordnance Factory
Board ............................................................................... 3
CHAPTER III Autonomy/Freedom to Ordnance Factories ......... 5
CHAPTER IV Share of Ordnance Factories in Total Defence
Production ..................................................................... 8
CHAPTER V Capacity utilization of Ordnance Factories........... 10
CHAPTER VI Modernisation Programme of Ordnance
Factories ......................................................................... 14
CHAPTER VII Quality Control Mechanism in Ordnance
Factories ......................................................................... 20
CHAPTER VIII Pricing System of Ordnance Factories ................... 23
CHAPTER IX R&D Activities in Ordnance Factories ................... 27
CHAPTER X Export Market of the Defence Products ............... 31
CHAPTER XI Outsourcing to Private Sector .................................. 37
CHAPTER XII Delay in Execution of Orders .................................. 40
CHAPTER XIII Fire incidents in Ordnance Factories ..................... 43
ANNEXURES ................................................................................................... 45
APPENDICES
Minutes of the Sittings of the Committee held on 24.05.05,
02.06.05, 08.11.05 and 23.11.05 .............................................................. 57
(i)

COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE
ON DEFENCE (2005-06)
Shri Balasaheb Vikhe Patil— Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Churchill Alemao
3. Shri Iliyas Azmi
4. Shri A.V . Bellarmin
5. Shri Suresh Chandel
6. Shri Thupstan Chhewang
7. Smt. Sangeeta Kumari Singh Deo
8. Shri Milind Deora
9. Shri Ramesh Jigajinagi
10. Shri Suresh Kalmadi
11.D r. C. Krishnan
12. Shri S.D. Mandlik
13. Dr. K.S. Manoj
14. Shri Raghuraj Singh Shakya
15. Shri Mahadeorao Shivankar
16. Shri Ganesh Prasad Singh
17. Shri Manvendra Singh
18. Shri Balashowry Vallabhaneni
19. Ms. Ingrid Mcleod
20. Shri Dharmendra Yadav
Rajya Sabha
21. Shri R.K. Anand
22. Dr. Farooq Abdullah
23. Shri T.T.V . Dhinakaran
24. Smt. N.P . Durga
(iii)

25. Shri Janardan Dwivedi
26. Shri Pramod Mahajan
27. Shri Mukhtar Abbas Naqvi
28. Shri Anand Sharma
29. Shri Lalit Suri
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri John Joseph — Secretary
2. Shri S.K. Sharma — Additional Secretary
3. Shri R.C. Ahuja — Joint Secretary
4. Smt. Anita Jain — Deputy Secretary
5. Shri D.R. Shekhar — Under Secretary
6. Shri Nilendu Kumar — Senior Executive Assistant
(iv)

PREFACE
I, the Chairman, Standing Committee on Defence (2005-06) having
been authorised by the Committee to submit the Report on their behalf,
present this Seventh Report on the subject ‘Defence Ordnance Factories’.
2. The subject was selected for examination by the Standing
Committee on Defence (2004-05). As the examination of the subject
remained inconclusive, it was re-selected by the Standing Committee
on Defence for examination during the year 2005-06.
3. The Committee, during their examination of the subject, took
evidence of the representatives of the Ministry of Defence on 24 May
and 2 June, 2005. The Committee also undertook an on-the-spot study
visit to some Ordnance Factories in Chennai and Pune during
September-October 2005 for an in-depth analysis of the subject matter.
4. Based on the background note, written replies to the list of
points furnished by the Ministry of Defence on the subject, briefing/
oral evidence tendered by the representatives of the Ministry, including
the Chairman, Ordnance Factory Board, and the observations made by
the members of the Committee during the Study visit, the Committee
finalised the draft Report at their sitting held on 8 November, 2005
and adopted it at the sitting held on 23 November, 2005.
5. The Committee have strongly recommended that the Ordnance
Factories should change their character and gradually should be
converted into PSUs according to their groups. The Committee also
recommend that the idle capacity should be fully utilized for export
market/Defence sector. The revenue thus earned from exports should
be utilized for modernization and upgradation of the Ordnance
Factories.
The Committee feel that no new Ordnance Factories should come
up and in case of requirement, the existing capacity and facilities should
be enhanced. In-house R&D activities by the Ordnance Factories should
be undertaken on large scale for product upgradation.
6. The Committee wish to express their thanks to the representatives
of the Ministry of Defence for appearing before the Committee for
evidence and for furnishing the material and information in a very
short span of time which the Committee desired in connection with
the examination of this subject.
(v)

7. For facility of reference and convenience, the observations/
recommendations of the Committee have been printed in thick type in
the body of the Report.
NEW D ELHI; BALASAHEB VIKHE PATIL,
 5 December, 2005 Chairman,
14 Agrahayana, 1927 (Saka) Standing Committee on Defence.
(vi)

CHAPTER I
INTRODUCTION
1.1 Ordnance Factories are an integrated base for indigenous
production of defence equipment and ammunition and form the
backbone of the country’s defence production. Defence production is
a highly specialised sector full of complexities and challenges, where
products have to be safe, reliable, consistent and capable of operating
under varying terrains as well as climates and in extreme conditions.
Accordingly, the technologies applied, which cover a wide spectrum
of engineering, metallurgy, chemical, textile, leather, optical technologies
etc. have to ensure high quality and productivity, apart from meeting
the primary objective of self-reliance. Ordnance Factories also fulfil
certain requirements of Paramilitary and Police Forces for arms,
ammunition, clothing and equipment. Ordnance Factories endeavour
to enhance their capacity utilization not only by securing orders from
the defence forces but also through sustained efforts in diversification
to non-defence customers and exports. However, priority of the
Ordnance Factories is indigenous production of defence products only.
1.2 They produce a wide range of arms and ammunitions for the
Infantry, Artillery, Air Defence Artillery and Armoured Corps of the
Army. Ordnance Factories produce ammunition for Navy and Air Force
and have taken up indigenous development of naval armaments. The
factories produce military transport vehicles, infantry combat vehicles,
armoured vehicles, optical and opto-electronic instruments, summer
and winter uniforms, parachutes, miscellaneous leather goods and
general stores.
1.3 Indian Ordnance Factories Organisation has completed 200 years
of its existence. The Ordnance Factories Organisation is a fine blend of
old and state-of-the-art factories, with the first Ordnance Factory
established in 1801 at Cossipore, near Kolkata, and the 40th factory
being set up at Nalanda, Bihar for production of Bimodular Charges.
The 40 Ordnance Factories are geographically distributed all over the
country at 25 different locations. The emphasis has shifted from
production of basic, intermediate inputs to production of finished stores
by outsourcing intermediate sub-assemblies from the private sector.
1.4 39 Ordnance Factories are divided into 5 operating divisions,
based on the main products/technologies employed:
(a) Ammunition & Explosive (A&E)—10 Factories
(b) Weapons, Vehicles and Equipment (WV&E)—10 Factories

2
(c) Materials and Components (M&C)—09 Factories
(d) Armoured Vehicles (AV)—05 Factories
(e) Ordnance Equipment Group of Factories (OEF)—05 Factories
A statement containing details of the establishment of various
Ordnance Factories alongwith their major products is appended in
Annexure-A.)
1.5 The Committee, in order to have a better understanding of the
working of Ordnance Factories, visited the following Ordnance Factories
during their study tour on 27 September and 4 October 2005:—
(i) Heavy Vehicle Factory, Avadi
(ii) Clothing Factory , Chennai
(iii) High Explosive Factory, Khadki (Pune)
(iv) Ammunition Factory , Khadki (Pune)
1.6 During their visit, the Committee had wide range discussions
with Chairman Ordnance Factory Board, General Managers and other
officers on various aspects of working of Ordnance Factories. The
Committee also had briefing/evidence of officers of Ministry of Defence
on the subject.
1.7 The Committee note that 39 Ordnance Factories are divided
into 5 operating divisions based on the main products/technologies
employed. 40th Ordnance Factory has been established at Nalanda
for production of Bimodular Charges. The Committee feel that it is
essential that Ordnance Factories, which are producing same kind of
products, should be merged/integrated into one in order to synergise
their resources and R&D and ensure optimal use of available
manpower and infrastructure. For the purpose the Committee strongly
desire that a Task Force of experts be constituted by the Government
to go into the details of restructuring/merging of existing Defence
Ordnance Factories. The Committee also desire that no new Ordnance
Factory should come up and during the process of restructuring/
merging of Ordnance Factories labours’ interest must be protected
by the Government.

3
CHAPTER II
ORGANISATIONAL STRUCTURE OF ORDNANCE
FACTORY BOARD
2.1 Ordnance Factory Board was set up in 1979 to provide for a
cohesive, effective and coordinated working of Ordnance Factories
based on the recommendations of an expert & high powered Committee
(Rajadhyaksha Committee). The Ordnance Factory Board is headed by
Director General who is also referred to as Chairman of the Board.
The Board has 9 members in the rank of Addl. DGOF. Five Members
of the Board head each of the operating divisions of factories. The
four remaining Members are responsible for staff functions viz.
Personnel, Finance, Planning and Management,  Projects & Engineering
and Technical Services. The Ordnance Factory Board operate from
Kolkata.
2.2 In addition to the above, there is also an extended Board/
Special Board which consists of the following Part-time Members apart
from Chairman/OFB and nine full-time Members of Ordnance Factory
Board:—
(a) MGO (Representative of Army)
(b) Chief Controller R&D (Representative of DRDO)
(c) DGQA (Representative of Quality Assurance
Organization)
(d) Joint Secy. (OF) (Representative of M of D)
(e) Addl. Financial Adviser (Representative of M of D/Finance)
2.3 The Ministry informed that Ordnance Factory Board meets once
a month. The Special Board meets twice a year.
2.4 On Committee’s query if there is any proposal/need to change
the composition of Ordnance Factory Board to make it more
professional by associating experts from private sector in the Board,
the Ministry stated:—
“There is no proposal to change the composition of the Board.
Experts from private sector cannot be associated in the Ordnance
Factory Board, as it is purely a government body.
To make it more professional, two senior officers viz. Master
General of Ordnance (MGO) and Directorate General of Quality

4
Assurance (DGQA) are in the Board to represent the users and
their interest on quality aspects. There is also the representation
from MOD as well as DRDO including Additional Financial
Advisor to provide appropriate inputs and perspective for planning
resources, upgrading technology demanded by products and
processes and on various other related issues, necessary for
functioning of the OFB.”
2.5 The Committee note that Ordnance Factory Board (OFB) was
constituted in 1979 in order to ensure cohesiveness and coordinated
approach in the working of Ordnance Factories. It comprises, besides
Director-General, nine members, five heading each of the five
operating divisions of Ordnance Factories and four responsible for
staff functions viz. Personnel, Finance, Planning and Management,
Project and Engineering and Technical Services. The Committee feel
that in view of the rapid technological advancement taking place
the world over in defence sector and the export potential of the
defence equipment, there is a need to redefine the role of OFB to
enable it to keep pace with the changing requirements and also to
tap the vast export market. There is also a need to restructure OFB
by including therein experts with proven records in marketing and
international trade who may give an export orientation to the
indigenously manufactured defence products and make effective
strategy for their export in the niche market. The Committee,
therefore, recommend that a high level Committee should be
constituted to go into the functions and organisational structure of
OFB and give its recommendations on restructuring of OFB to make
it a more professional and dynamic body responsive to the present
day needs.
2.6 The Committee note that in the extended Board there are
four more members who represent the Army, Defence Research &
Development Organisation, DGQA and Ministry of Defence. The
Committee desire that there should be a three-tier system with clear
delegation of powers for better performance at Apex, Middle and
Floor levels with interface between the Ordnance Factories, users
and DRDO.
2.7 The Committee also note that the Special Board Members
meet only twice a year. The Committee recommend that the number
of sittings be increased in order to ensure better interface between
DRDO, OFB and users. The Committee also recommend that the
performance of the Ordnance Factories should be periodically/
annually reviewed by the OFB.

5
CHAPTER III
AUTONOMY/FREEDOM TO ORDNANCE FACTORIES
3.1 The Committee enquired if the Ministry is satisfied with the
autonomy given to Ordnance Factories, the Ministry in a written note
stated:—
“Ordnance Factories function like a Government Department under
the administrative control of the Department of Defence Production
in the Ministry of Defence. Ordnance Factory Board was set up in
1979 to provide more flexibility and autonomy in management of
Ordnance Factories. There is a need to give greater autonomy to
the Management of Ordnance Factory Board for vendor
development, product improvement and development and making
commercial decisions. The Ministry is currently examining the issues
for arriving at a decision with regard to the form of the
management structure required to allow greater autonomy.”
3.2 When the Committee asked about the prospects of granting
greater autonomy and freedom to Ordnance Factories, the Ministry, in
their written note, have stated as below:—
“Ordnance Factories have been given autonomy and flexibility with
the creation of an Ordnance Factory Board. Board has been
functioning according to the administrative and financial rules of
the Government of India, which have been laid down by Ministry
of Finance and Department of Personnel. Within this framework
sufficient autonomy has been given.
OFB has been demanding freedom for quality assurance and
inspection activities, integration of finance function and freedom
to enter into MoU for co-development and co-production. Ministry
has given the task of vendor development and inspection of input
material to Ordnance Factories to ensure better quality and
accountability.”
3.3 On being asked by the Committee regarding merits and
demerits of the grant of status of Defence PSUs to Ordnance Factories,
the Ministry have stated as under:—
“Ordnance Factories function as a Government Department and
are accordingly governed by the applicable rules and regulations.

6
As an established National Policy Ordnance Factories are also
required to maintain idle capacities to take care of surge demand
in emergent war situation. In a purely commercial term,
maintaining idle capacity would be detrimental to the business
interest of the company (PSU) and would appear to be a reason
for low performance in terms of turnover and profits. In turn, it
would also place such DPSUs in disadvantageous position in a
competitive environment.
A Public Sector Undertaking has got more autonomy and
flexibility in decision-making. Most of the decisions related to
operations, finance, human resources etc. can be taken by the
Management of PSU. It has the freedom to enter into alliances
with other industries for diversifying its product profile and
markets. A PSU Board will have more flexibility as well as
compulsions to face the competition and take adequate steps for
growth.”
3.4 Regarding the necessity of autonomy in Ordnance Factories,
Chairman, OFB, stated during an oral evidence as detailed below:
“The major constraint for us is that there is autonomy problem.
There is no autonomy like the Railways. The Railways is also a
Government Department, but it has full autonomy. We do not
have that. The accountability for quality of inputs is defused.
If it is made PSU, there is both plus and minus sides to it.
Now, we have been given an order stating that we can have the
input material inspection. This is being finalized. In case of financial
advice, the role of finance is more of less limited to audit functions.
The autonomy for making investments as per the market
requirement is not with us today. The action of procurement for
inputs can be initiated only on receipt of the targets backed by
firm indents. Investment is restricted only to meet defence
requirement. If I have to create capacity only with reference to the
Armed Forces’ requirements, then with that capacity if we are
asked to export items or expand customer base, we find it a little
difficult. The production capacity is created for meeting wartime
requirements, but the wartime requirements do not remain all times.
Many a time the peacetime requirement is very less, and there is
uncertainty of load.”
3.5 He further stated:
“We have no control over product-mix. We did not have the
mandate for doing the research ourselves. We do not have,

7
therefore, adequate research & development and marketing
infrastructure. So, in all these proposals, OFB should have full
administrative & functional control over finance & accounts and
autonomy for making strategic investment and procurement
decisions. The Army Headquarters should give us a 4-year roll-on
supply plan so that we can plan the input material in advance.
OFB may be authorized to make financial commitment for targeted
items without awaiting indents. Now we have been given
permission to procure inputs for 25 per cent of target quantity in
absence of indents.”
3.6 The Committee note that with the creation of Ordnance
Factory Board (OFB), Ordnance Factories have been given some
autonomy and flexibility in their functioning and management. Still,
the Committee feel that greater autonomy is required to be given to
the Management of OFB. Keeping in view the wide range of changes
taking place the world over and requirement of specialisation in the
complex defence field, the Committee desire that the Government
must change its policy and give greater autonomy to the Ordnance
Factories in the field of vendor development, in-house R&D activities,
product improvement and making financial and commercial decisions
on the lines of Public Sector Undertakings. This will enable them to
enter into MoU with Indian and foreign companies for
co-development and co-production of items, giving enormous scope
for diversification of their product profile and attracting huge
markets.
3.7 The Committee feel that more functional and financial
autonomy to Ordnance Factories will help in ensuring desired results,
fixing greater accountability and maintaining better financial
management. The Committee, therefore, hold the view that gradually,
the Ordnance Factories may be converted into PSUs so that they
may have access to finances from the market, etc. At the same time,
care should be taken by the Government to ensure that this
arrangement of financial access does not lead to any reduction in
the budgetary allocation to the Ordnance Factories and OFB.

8
CHAPTER IV
SHARE OF ORDNANCE FACTORIES IN
TOTAL DEFENCE PRODUCTION
4.1 On being asked by the Committee on Share of Ordnance
Factories in Defence Production turnover for the last five years, the
Ministry submitted the details as under:
Turnover 2000-01 2001-02 2002-03 2003-04 2004-05
OFs 5535.83 6031.00 6508.05 6523.87 6150.30
DPSUs+OFs 13202.41 13949.38 15296.51 16416.60 17270.68
%Share of OFs in 41.93% 43.23% 42.55% 39.74% 35.60%
Defence Production
turnover
4.2 When enquired about the reasons for decrease is percentage
share of Ordnance Factories in defence production, the Ministry have
stated as under:
“Supply from Ordnance Factories to Defence Sector depends on
the annual target given by the Defence Force, based on operational
requirement, fund availability and relative priority of the items
required.”
The Committee was informed that in the year 2004-05 there were
orders but in order to meet fiscal discipline, the value of issues came
down. However, the annual turnover in 2005-06 will jump to higher
figure.
4.3 When the Committee desired to know the financial growth of
the Ordnance Factories over the last 5 years, the Ministry have
furnished the following details:
Value of issues to Armed Force and sale to non-Defence sector of
Ordnance Factories, for the last 5 years is given, as under:
(Value in Rs. Crore)
Indentor Defence Sector Non-Defence Sector Total
Year Amount Amount Amount
2000-01 4927 609 5536
2001-02 5312 719 6031
2002-03 5635 873 6508
2003-04 5547 977 6524
2004-05 5197 953 6150

9
4.4 The Committee desire that Ordnance Factories should speed
up efforts to produce new items to match the changing requirements
of the Defence Forces so that imports are reduced and Ordnance
Factories’ share in supplies to Defence Forces increases. The
Committee further recommend that besides fulfilling the
requirements of Defence Forces, Ordnance Factories should strive to
give market orientation to their products so that various other
organisations in non-defence sector also approach them to buy their
products as per prevailing market price.

10
CHAPTER V
CAPACITY UTILIZATION OF ORDNANCE FACTORIES
5.1 When asked if sufficient orders are being placed by Armed
Forces and Para-Military Forces with Ordnance Factories, the Ministry,
in written reply, stated:
“The details of capacity utilization of all the 39 Ordnance Factories
for the last 5 years is annexed. The capacity of the organization as
a whole is fully utilized though sometimes the capacity in a
particular area may remain under-utilized for a brief period. The
capacity utilization of the organization as a whole during last
5 years is a under:
(Numbers in Lakh)
2000-01 2001-02 2002-03 2003-04 2004-05
Input man-hours 1463.89 1428.74 1399.41 1362 1341
Output man-hours 1891.66 1880.11 1905.39 1911 1998
%Capacity 129.2 131.56 136.2 140.3 149.2
Utilization
Continuous endeavour is made by Ordnance Factories to
diversify their product range and establish new products/upgrades
to maximize capacity utilization in each area. Ordnance Factories
are also being modernized for better products, productions and
economy.
Supply to Defence sector is based on annual target given by
Defence Forces. Defence Forces make efforts to place orders/indent
for targeted items at the beginning of the financial year. At macro
level sufficient order exists with Ordnance Factories both from
Defence Forces and Para Military forces and Ordnance Factories
are likely to achieve turnover of Rs. 7240 crore during 2005-06
compared to turnover of Rs. 6157.31 cores achieved in 2004-05.
Further, a constant dialogue is made with the Defence Forces to
secure order in the area where capacity utilization is likely to be
low.
A perspective plan has been made in consultation with the
Defence Forces and DRDO to plan resources including capacity
creation to cater for both existing and new products being planned
for introduction in services. However creation of production
capacity is exclusively driven by the requirement projected by the

11
Defence Forces. The annual off-take from the Defence Forces varies
depending on operational requirement. Capacity, remaining surplus,
after meeting the requirement of the Defence Forces, is utilized by
supplying to the non-Defence sector.”
5.2 In a clarification as to how capacity utilisation in Ordnance
Factories was low while productivity is shown as high, the Ministry
of Defence in a written note have stated as under:
“Capacity utilization in Ordnance Factories is measured in terms
of (i) labour productivity and (ii) exploitation of available plant
and machinery. Labour productivity is computed as a ratio of
output time, a product of number of pieces/jobs produced and
time allowed per piece based on industrial norm, to actual time.
Human Resource Development Plan in Ordnance Factories
continuously attempts to improve skill and motivate employees to
produce more. This alongwith incentive scheme has enabled
Ordnance Factories to improve labour productivity over the years
even after reducing allowed time whenever technology upgradation
takes place or business process is reengineered.
Plant and machinery capacity is created for production as per
requirement projected by the Defence Forces. A group of plant
and machinery installed to take care of projected quantity of a
product cannot be uniformly utilized as the cycle time of the
component manufactured in each machine is different. Output of
this group of machine centres depends on exploitation of the most
critical machine of the group and the other machines may have
slack time. Change in product mix or variation of actual demand
with quantity projected during capacity creation also create
imbalance in capacity utilization of each machine. Further, product
specific machine may remain idle when the product is not being
indented. As such machine capacity utilization calculated on the
basis of time available for total population of machines and their
utilization is less than labour utilisation.
5.3 When asked about the capacity utilization of Ordnance Factories
vis-a-vis production capacity of the infrastructure, the Ministry have
furnished the following figures:
(In lakh hours)
2000-01 2001-02 2002-03 2003-04 2004-05
Available 2190.47 1917.05 1823.82 1733.88 1753.54
Utilised 1748.41 1432.45 1356.12 1310.65 1302.62
% Utilisation 79.82 74.72 74.36 75.59 74.28

12
5.4 On being asked by the Committee about the necessity of idle
capacity to be maintained to meet the emergent requirements, the
Ministry have stated as follows:
“Certain amount of idle capacity is required to be maintained to
take care of surge in demand in emergent war situation. The
difference between the surge capacity and capacity required to
execute annual target given by Defence Forces is utilized by
effecting supply to non-Defence sector. At present about 15% of
total turnover of Ordnance Factories are utilized for producing the
items for Ministry of Home Affairs and civil trade. Ordnance
Factories have supplied products worth Rs. 953 crore to non-
Defence sector during 2004-05, compared to supply worth Rs. 5197
crore to Defence sector.”
5.5 During the oral evidence, a representative of the Ministry of
Defence further informed:
“The requirement of the existing products from the Indian Armed
Forces is stagnant. There is an authorization level for every item
for the Armed Forces and once the authorization level is met then
we get very small orders. That is what we mean by stagnant
requirement. There has been changes in geo-political scenario. The
threat perception has changed and because of that it poses a new
challenge. The war technology has also changed. Now more of
electronic warfare is coming into play. The opening of Defence
sector to private sector is a challenge as well as an opportunity
which we have taken up and we are sure we will be able to
compete.”
5.6 During the study visit of the Committee to the Heavy Vehicles
Factory at Avadi to see the production of Arjun Tanks that were
developed indigenously by Defence Ordnance Factory as per design
and technology developed by DRDO, when enquired about the orders
received from Armed Forces for supply of Arjun Tanks, the Ministry
stated that Ordnance Factories have received an indent for supply of
a significant number of Arjun Tanks. Some tanks have been produced
and some more have been slated for production during current year.
The remaining tanks will be supplied in 2006-07 and 2007-08.
5.7 The Committee note that creation/utilisation of production
capacity is exclusively driven by the requirements projected by the
Defence Forces and the remaining surplus capacity is utilised for
meeting the requirements of the non-defence sector. The Committee

13
also note that some idle capacity is maintained by the Ordnance
Factories to take care of the surge in demands of the Defence Forces
in an emergent war situation.
The Committee are of the view that the idle capacity should be
utilized fully for catering to the International export market; and in
case any emergent situation arises, the entire capacity can be fully
utilized to meet the requirements of the Defence Forces. This will
help in ensuring increased productivity, optimum resource and
capacity utilization and better quality of the products, thereby making
them more competitive. In this connection, the Committee also stress
that the Ordnance Factories should concentrate on specialized and
high-end defence products.
5.8 The Committee are concerned about the delay in production
of Arjun Tanks and hope that the obstacles coming in the way of
final production of Arjun Tank would be taken care of by the
Defence Ordnance Factory in coordination with the DRDO and the
shortcomings would be corrected expeditiously so that the supply of
required number of tanks could be provided to the user as envisaged.

14
CHAPTER VI
MODERNIZATION PROGRAMME OF
ORDNANCE FACTORIES
6.1 Modernization of infrastructure is a continuous process in
Ordnance Factories with a view to update the plants and machineries
matching both qualitative and quantitative requirement of the products
projected in the perspective plan.
6.2 The Committee enquired about the amount of investment
projected on modernization vis-à-vis investment made by Ordnance
Factories, the Ministry in a written note stated:
The details of amount of investment projected on modernization
vis-à-vis investment made by Ordnance Factories are as under:
(Value in Rs. Crore)
2000-01 2001-02 2002-03 2003-04 2004-05
Projection 219 321 328 261 265
Actual Investment made 223 329 327 255 290
The total requirement projected by the Ordnance Factories for
modernization purpose, approved by the Ministry and fund utilization
by OFB during the last three years is given as under:
(Rs. in crore)
Year Projection Allocation Utilization
by OFB by MoD by OFB
2002-03 322 322 328
2003-04 280 280 255
2004-05 257 257 264
6.3 When asked by the Committee about the reasons for reduction
in investment in 2003-04, the Ministry in their written reply have stated
as follows:
“Modernization is a continuous process in Ordnance Factories to
update the plant and machineries. The plan has been made based

15
on continuous interaction with the Armed Forces and DRDO to
cater to the needs of both existing and new products identified for
induction into the Services and is reviewed in a time bound manner
to apply mid-term correction, driven by change in product-mix/
requirement plan of the Defence Forces. Reduction in investment
made in 2003-04 is the result of such corrections.”
6.4 In regard to the financial constraints for modernization if any,
the Ministry have clearly stated that the Ordnance Factories are not
facing any such problem.
6.5 On being asked by the Committee regarding effect of
modernization programme for Defence Ordnance Factories, the Ministry,
in their reply, stated that the modernization programme of the ordnance
factories, has resulted in to the following improvements;
(a) Improved productivity;
(b) Reduction in cost of the product;
(c) Technology up-gradation; and
(d) Improved capability to develop new product and upgrades.
6.6 In a presentation before the Committee, the Chairman, Ordnance
Factory Board, submitted the following investment plan for Ordnance
Factories:
Investment Plan
Investment Investment during Investment
9th Plan during 10th
(Actual) Plan
Renewal & Replacement 834 1456
New Capital 228 348
Nalanda Project — 531
Addl. Capacity for Propellant/ — 962
replacement of existing plant
at OFB/OFs
Total 1062 3297

16
6.7 On being asked by the Committee regarding improvements in
production capacity, resultant of modernisation process during the last
5 years the Ministry submitted as per given table:
Increase in output computed in terms of Man-hours (a product of
number of jobs produced and time allocated per job) vis-à-vis employees
strength during last 5 years is as under:
2000-01 2001-02 2002-03 2003-04 2004-05
Output Man-hours (in crores) 18.92 18.80 19.05 19.11 19.98
Present Employees 1,40,747 1,34,353 1,28,865 1,23,442 1,19,751
strength (As on) (1.1.2001) (1.1.2002) (1.1.2003) (1.1.2004) (1.1.2005)
(A Statement containing information on expenditure on
modernization of various ordnance factories is given in Annexure ‘B’).
6.8 During the visit of the Committee to High Explosive Factory,
Pune, the Committee noted that plant seemed to be old. There was
leakage of water, old pipes were being used. They have chalked out
plan to modernise it during the 10th and 11th plan of Defence
Ordnance Factories. But in fact, nothing has been done. On being
asked by the Committee regarding modernisation plan of the High
Explosive Factory of Pune, the Chairman, OFB submitted as under:
Civil Works
Improvement in water supply (Scheme to reduce consumption &
Wastages) total cost 9.31 Crore.
Phase I—Separate Fire fighting pipelines network with an
independent overhead reservoir-RIC 5.31 Crore.
Phase II—Replacement of old lines/pumps etc. for process and
drinking water to eliminate leakages and resultant wastages from
existing old lines-Expected rough cost Rs. 4 crore.
Renovation of Storm Water Drainage System: Work commenced
for execution through MES. Cost: Rs. 58.97 Lakhs.
Provision of Concertina Barbed Wire Fencing Along Perimeter Wall:
OFB’s administrative approval issued for execution through MES.
Estimated cost: Rs. 44.42 Lakhs.

17
Renewal/Replacement/Upgradation of Plants & Equipments
Steam Supply: 5 Nos. of Old fired boilers (3 tons/Hr) installed &
commissioned. Cost Rs. 1.27 Crore
New Electronic Telephone Exchange:-Commissioned. Cost
Rs. 32.54 lakhs
Electric Power Supply
Modernisation of main high tension receiving stations (From present
arrangements of 11 KV-3.3 KV-440 Volts to 11 KV-440 Volts, with dry
type transformers and Vacuum Circuit Breakers). Cost Rs. 1.64 Crore.
Chilled Water Plants
Replacement of 5 Nos. of Chilled water plants (1 each of 40TR &
50TR and 3 Nos. of 120 TR). Supply Order Placed. Cost Rs. 107.00
lakhs.
6.9 A representative further informed the Committee about the
ongoing modernization programme during the oral evidence:
“Any organization can survive only if every year it upgrades, stores
and develop new items. So, for upgrading or producing new items
we have to get technology. This technology can be obtained from
three method. Either we do our in-house R&D or we take the
help of the DRDO for the research or we buy the technology. We
have now evolved a 4th new system of work in which we have
decided that we will have co-partners. We will have partners for
development and co-production where we can leverage the
optimum strength of each of the partners and supply the goods to
the Indian market at the most optimum prices. So, we are trying
to upgrade our product range like this. But then to have the
upgraded product range, we must modernize our capabilities. So,
we have taken up a big modernization programme and to run
those facilities we must have proper HRD. We have taken HRD as
a focus point.”
6.10 As regards the budgetary support and increase in productivity
of the organization, Chairman, Ordnance Factory Board further
informed the Committee during a presentation as quoted below:
“From 1999-2000 we are not taking any budgetary support from
the Government. This is the amount of negative net Budget support
which we are earning. For the last four years we have decreased

18
the prices in 2001-02 by 3 per cent. Like that we have been
decreasing the prices for four years.
Basically, Sir, the economy of production scale of operation
and modernization, which we have carried out is responsible for
the decrease. In 2005-06, Sir, we are asking for 5.96 per cent increase
in issue price. This increase is because of very sharp rise in steel
prices by 40 per cent. Most of the increase is in the prices of
vehicles.
The value of issues per employees is also growing. There has
been a definite increase in the productivity of organization.
In summary, we can say, we have grown continuously in turn
over by more than 10 per cent per year, at an average, during the
last seven years. We have increased our productivity. We have
reduced our average weighted price and we have expanded our
customer profile. This was in brief what is status but then with
the time the challenges that we are going to face in the future
have been taken into account.”
6.11 Regarding quality management system he informed the
Committee as quoted below:
“As regards quality management system, our all the 39 factories
are ISO-9000 certified. Out of this, 33 factories have well established
laboratories. These are 58 in number. These laboratories in 29
factories have also been accredited by NABL.”
6.12 The Committee note that there is a constant need for
upgradation and modernisation of Ordnance Factories in order to
enable them to meet the Defence Forces’ demands for high quality
ammunition and reliable products keeping pace with the latest
technology. In this connection, a capital investment of Rs. 3297 crore
was planned during the 10th Plan against Rs. 1062 crore invested
during the 9th Plan. The planned amount includes Rs. 1804 crore for
modernisation and Rs. 1493 crore for new facilities. The Committee
are, however, surprised to note that during the first three years of
the 10th Plan i.e. from 2002 to 2005 the actual investment made is
only Rs. 847 crore as per the annual requirement projected by OFB.
The Committee would like that the full amount for modernisation
is utilised during the remaining period of the 10th Plan.
6.13 Many Ordnance Factories which were set up before
Independence are still using old technology and are in dire need of
massive infusion of funds for modernisation. The Committee would
like to be apprised of the detailed modernisation plan alongwith

19
projected fund requirements of OFB in respect of each Ordnance
Factory and the level of technology being presently used by it.
6.14 The Committee, during their recent study visit to the High
Explosive Factory and Ammunition Factory at Khadki, Pune observed
that several machineries and plant are quite old in High Explosive
Factory, Khadki and need immediate replacement for security of the
plant and to improve efficiency and meet the production targets.
The Committee, therefore, recommend that the Ministry should strive
to replace the ageing machineries and equipment in a time-bound
manner with state-of-the-art technology.
The Committee would like the procedures for purchase of plants
& machinery by the Ordnance Factories to be simplified. The
Ordnance Factory Board should be given full powers to procure
plant & machinery subject to budget provision and availability of
funds.
6.15 The Committee stress that restructuring of the production
system of Ordnance Factories is the need of the hour. The Armed
Forces should prepare a Long Term Integrated Perspective Plan
(LTIPP) as already recommended by this Committee, projecting clearly
their present and future requirements so that the Ordnance Factories
may also draw up their modernisation plan accordingly. The
modernisation plan of the Ordnance Factories should address not
only the issue of increase in productivity but also matters relating
to the range and quality of products to meet the new requirements.
The Committee recommend that to minimise imports, users should
be fully involved in the preparation of vision document. In this
connection, Government should immediately appoint an expert group
on the perspective plan which should submit its report within six
months from the date of presentation of this report.
6.16 The Committee note that entry of private sector in defence
production, especially in non-combat items has posed new challenges
before Ordnance Factories. The Ordnance Factories which had
complete monopoly over production of defence equipment and items
will now have to be more competitive and cost effective in order to
maintain their dominant position. They will have to undertake
modernisation programme in a broader way. If necessary for the
purpose, the Government may also allow them to raise financial
resources from the market. In this context, the Committee also desire
the Government to examine the feasibility of shutting down ageing
and non-revivable Ordnance Factories/Plants. The labour working in
these factories may be absorbed in other Ordnance Factories or
Voluntary Retirement Scheme (VRS) offer may be given to them.

20
CHAPTER VII
QUALITY CONTROL MECHANISM IN ORDNANCE FACTORIES
7.1 All 39 Ordnance Factories are ISO-9000 certified. Further due
to change in Quality System Standards by BIS and the International
bodies to ISO 9001:2000, all the factories have switched over to new
standard giving emphasis to continual improvement and customer
satisfaction. 52 laboratories have also been accredited with National
Accreditation Bureau Limited with the current ISO-IEC 17025 version
of quality system. In addition, Information Technology Division at
Ordnance Factory Board National Academy of Defence Production
(NADP), Ambajhari, Nagpur and two of the hospitals at Kanpur and
Ambajhari have also obtained ISO-9000 certification. The above
accreditions signify that facilities and quality systems in Ordnance
Factories are comparable to the best in the Indian Industry.
7.2 Quality assurance as a line function is the responsibility vested
in the Directorate General of Quality Assurance (DGQA), DGAQA/
DGNAI for products meant for Army, Air Force and Navy respectively.
These agencies assess the capacity and register the vendors for supply
of inputs, inspect input materials, function as Authority Holding Sealed
Particulars, and ensure conformance of products with laid down
specification before supply is effected.
7.3 Maintenance of quality of the defence items is an important
aspect to meet the challenges of competitive prices in the world market.
In this regard, on being asked by the Committee, the Ministry have
furnished a detailed note as under:
“Ordnance Factories manufacture products as per specification for
supply to Defence Forces duly quality audited by designated quality
assurance agency. MoD has recently decided to entrust the
responsibility of input material inspection and vendor registration
to Ordnance Factories and the modalities for taking over this
responsibility is being worked out. MoD has been emphasizing
that manufacturers should gradually move towards self-certification
of their products.”
7.4 On the initiatives taken for improvement of OFB, a
representative of the Ministry of Defence further stated:
“We have taken certain initiatives in OFB for continual
improvement. We have started visiting the troops in the forward

21
areas. We have started having more interaction with the user units
directly. We are organizing the meetings with the Army, Navy and
Air Force at Delhi and at the base level. We have introduced a
concept of Total Productivity Management. It is a technique for
quality production. We have on line measurement of products. We
are supplying certain items on self certification. Seven clothing
items are being supplied from 2002 under our own certification
and not by a certification by DGQA. Sixteen more items have
been approved by MoD for self certification where final inspection
only is by DGQA and rest of the inspection is with us. We have
proposed some more items for self certification and these items
include B-vehicles, 5.56 mm ball ammunition, 5.56 mm assault rifle
and overhauling of T-72 tanks.”
7.5 Regarding Self-Certification in Ordnance Factories, the Ministry
have informed that the Ordnance Factories have started the process of
self-certification since April 1, 2002, thereby, standing guarantee to its
products supplied to the Defence Forces. Presently, self-certification
extends to seven fast moving clothing and general store items
accounting for about 20% of the overall turnover of the Ordnance
Equipment Group of factories. Further, twelve clothing items and four
types of ammunition boxes are also being supplied under Revision
Inspection Procedure where input material and inter-stage inspection
is being carried out by Ordnance Factories. Many more items are being
planned to be covered under self-certification in due course of time.
7.6 When enquired whether indentors are satisfied with the
products being provided to them by the Ordnance Factories, the
Ministry in their written reply stated:
“In general indentors are satisfied with the products being supplied
by Ordnance Factories. However, there are some stray cases where
the products fail to meet the customer’s perception of quality
attribute, though it had been produced conforming to specification
and supplied duly proved and accepted by designated quality
assurance agency. On receipt of quality complaint from the
customer, ordnance Factories in consultation with Inspection and
Design Agency addresses the problem by undertaking modification/
repair.”
7.7 Maintenance of quality of the defence items is an important
aspect to meet the challenge of competitive prices in the world market.

22
In this regard, on being asked by the Committee, the Ministry have
furnished a detailed note as under:
“Ordnance Factories manufacture products as per specification for
supply to Defence Forces duly quality audited by designated quality
assurance agency. MoD has recently decided to entrust the
responsibility of input material inspection and vendor registration
to Ordnance Factories and the modalities for taking over this
responsibility is being worked out. MoD has been emphasizing
that manufacturers should gradually move towards self-certification
of their products.
7.8 The Committee note that quality upgradation and cost-
effectiveness of the defence products are imperative to keep the
Ordnance Factories vigilant, agile and responsive to the needs and
concerns of Defence Forces. The Committee endorse the view of the
Ministry that cost reduction of products may be a successful
proposition only when modernisation efforts aim at more
productivity. However, the Committee find that while the Ministry
have taken quite a few initiatives for quality upgradation and cost
reduction, export of the products, which is directly linked to the
two factors, is negligible.
7.9 The Committee feel that to achieve the goals of modernisation,
concerted efforts need to be made with a clear mandate. Production
of items should be undertaken side by side with quality upgradation
and cost-effectiveness so as to attract global vendors.
7.10 The Committee are concerned that only 20 per cent items
produced by these Factories are self-certified. These items are mainly
clothing and general store items. The Committee desire that self-
certification by ordnance Factories should be encouraged and these
Factories be given powers for self-certification of arms, ammunitions,
explosives and other combat products in a phased manner.

23
CHAPTER VIII
PRICING SYSTEM OF ORDNANCE FACTORIES
8.1 Ordnance Factories supply products to Defence Forces on the
basis of actual cost which means no loss no profit basis. For the
budgeting purpose, the price of each product is determined before the
commencement of the year and made available to the indentors.
8.2 An established system exists in Ordnance Factories to determine
and fix the price annually, based on actual cost of production of last
2 years computed by Defence Accounts, latest cost estimated during
the year of pricing and cost estimated/projected for the next year in
consultation with Associate Finance. The system aims at covering all
the cost incurred in manufacture of the product without charging any
elements of profit.
8.3 As regards pricing of products of non-defence sector, the
following system is follows:
(a) MHA is charged 5% more than the price charged to Armed
Forces with an aim to offset the capital financing charges
(met from Defence Budget).
(b) Supply to Civil Trade and Export sector is effected at a
maximum price that can be absorbed by the market with
an aim to recover full cost and profit. The profit so
generated is taken into consideration at the time of fixation
of price of defence products with a view to pass on the
benefit to defence sector as Ordnance Factories do not have
mandate to retain profit. A profit of Rs. 164.32 crore has
been generated from supply to non-defence sector during
2003-2004.
8.4 A constant endeavour is made to identify the cost drives and
exercise effective control apart from securing more order for improving
capacity utilization/scale of operation. As a culmination of these efforts,
Ordnance Factories could reduce the price of product supplied to Indian
Army during last 4 years, notwithstanding market inflation.
8.5 The Chairman, Ordnance Factory Board elaborated during
evidence:
“From 1999-2000 we are not taking any budgetary support from
the Government. This is the amount of negative net Budget support

24
which we are earning. We have been decreasing the prices of our
items for the last four years. We have decreased the price in
2001-02 by 3 per cent. Like that we have been decreasing the
prices for the last four years.
Basically, Sir, the economy of production, scale of operation
and modernisation which we have carried out is responsible for
decrease. In 2005-06, Sir we are asking for 5.96 per cent increase
in issue price. This increase is because of very sharp rise in steel
prices by 40 per cent. Most of the increase is in the vehicles.
The value of issues per employee is also growing. The blue bar
chart represents the expenditure on the employees. If you see the
growth in the expenditure on employees, it has not gone up that
much high but the value of the issue per employee has gone very
high. There has been a definite increase in the productivity of the
organisation.
In summary we can say, we have grown continuously in turn
over by more than 10 per cent per year at an average during the
last seven years. We have increased our productivity. We have
reduced our average weighted price and we have expanded our
customer profile. This was in brief what is the status but then
with the time the challenges that we are going to face in the
future have been taken into account.”
8.6 When the Committee asked regarding efforts for making the
Defence items cost-effective, representative of the Ministry stated during
oral evidence as follows:
“For the cost reduction, we have taken a lot of initiative viz.
modernisation of plant and machinery to improve productivity,
reduction in material, usage, reduction in rejection or wastages,
improvement in worker productivity, reduction in overheads, etc.
In the product development, as I said, it is the most focal point
for us. As I said, we are doing in house R&D, use of technology
developed by DRDO, or acquire technology by import or through
co-development and co-production. These are four methods which
we are attempting for product development or upgrade.
The limitation of technology acquired through import are many.
The cost of technology is high. Always a technology import is
clubbed with the imports of SKDs and CKDs. Then we have
restriction for export and right to produce upgrades. The transfer
of technology is sometimes incomplete and inadequate. If we want

25
to upgrade the products ourselves, then we have to go to OEM
for permission. The time for absorption of technology is long. By
the time the technology is absorbed, the requirement more or less
gets over. Therefore, taking this into consideration, we have evolved
a technique of co-development. This is restricted to import
substitution only. This is a win-win strategy for all partners. This
instrument of partnership is Memorandum of Understanding. No
payment for technology transfer is required. Product price is as
per the cost. The profit margin is to be as mutually agreed but it
cannot be more than five per cent. Marketing in respective countries
by respective partners. If I get the order, I will supply under my
brand name and if my partner gets the order, he will supply under
his brand name.”
8.7 In a presentation to the Committee, the Chairman, OFB gave
the following price comparison of certain OFB products with
international prices:
Product OFB Price International Price
5.56 mm Assault Rifle USD 450 USD 800-1000
130 mm Cargo USD 1250 USD 1600
155 mm Cargo USD 2000 USD 2300
8.8 The Committee note that the Ordnance Factory Board has
taken certain initiatives to exercise effective control over increase in
the prices of Defence products. The Committee feel that the
productivity and scale of production are the crucial issues which
need to be stressed upon to contain the sharp increase in prices.
The Committee, therefore, recommend that the Ministry should strive
to achieve economy of scale in Defence Production in the wake of
envisaged competition from the Private Sector. Towards this end,
modernisation of the existing plants & machineries and replacement
of the old equipment in the factories are required to be taken up on
priority. These steps will enable Ordnance Factories to participate in
global tenders in a competitive manner.
The Committee understand that Ordnance Factories are providing
defence products to armed forces on cost-to-cost basis. The Committee
also understand that Ordnance Factories do not have sufficient funds
for modernisation of the plants and machineries. The Committee,
therefore, desire that on sale of products to armed forces Ordnance
Factories should be allowed to have a fixed percentage of profit
which may be used for modernisation/ugradation of these factories.

26
8.9 The Committee note that international prices of arms and
ammunition required by the Armed Forces are on much higher side
as compared to the prices of Ordnance Factories. The Ministry should
carry out import substitution of arms and ammunition by placing
orders on Ordnance Factories. This will help in indigenisation of
the items and utilisation of full capacity of the Ordnance Factories.

27
CHAPTER IX
R&D ACTIVITIES IN ORDNANCE FACTORIES
9.1 The Committee enquired about the investments made by
Ordnance Factories in R&D, the Ministry stated:
“Ordnance Factories are making investments in modernising the
manufacturing capabilities by procuring high-technology machines
for production, quality control and testing purposes. This process
has enabled ordnance Factories to undertake the production of
latest generation arms and ammunitions, meeting stringent quality
requirements at competitive prices.
Ordnance Factories are also giving greater thrust to in-house
R&D efforts in order to develop new products. Emphasis is being
given to co-development and co-production of new products with
advance technology providers so that the product profile of the
Ordnance Factories is regularly updated. This process will also
help Ordnance Factories to complement their strengths.”
9.2 Investment made by Ordnance Factories on R&D during last 5
years is as under:
(Value in Rs. Crores)
2000-01 2001-02 2002-03 2003-04 2004-05 (Prov.)
6.39 5.24 7.26 7.77 8.66
9.3 Giving details of the items developed by the Ordnance Factories,
the Ministry furnished the following information:
1. Mine Proof Vehicles
2. Bullet Proof Vehicles
3. Coat ECC
4. Cap Glacier
5. Boot Ankle with toe and back
6. Ak-47 Ammunition
7. Socks Woollen Lycra

28
8. Ground Sheet PPO OG
9. Rain Coat Multi Purpose
10. Bag Kit Disruptive WP
11. Recoil System for 155 mm Field Howitzer
12. Integration of global positioning system in CMT
13. Driver’s Sight for BMP-II and T-72 Tank
14. Gun Barrel for 76/62 Naval Gun System
15. KAVACH
16. Signal Flare
17. 0.22” Sporting Rifle
18. 0.22” Revolver
19. Day and Night Vision Goggles
20. Refurbishing of Warhead Torpedo Impulse Catridge
21. Carbine 5.56 alongwith ammunition.
9.4 Chairman, OFB, has further informed the Committee about the
technological upgradation of equipment through in-house R&D during
the oral evidence as follows:
“We have submitted a proposal to the Indian Army to make an
in-house upgradation of 155 upgrade of Bofors guns ourselves.
The rest of the hardware of any gun which Indian Army is
importing or proposing to import can be made by us very easily.
There is no problem. The problem is of the various electronics.
World over, these things are being bought or are being outsourced.
So, we want to make these electronics in India. It is because
electronic industry is so developed. But for integration of these
electronic in the guns we need a partner. So, we have to take up
a project. We have taken up a project ourselves in which we have
made 45 calibre barrel instead of 39 calibre barrel. Now, we are
making a 52 calibre barrel. We have made a new muzzle brake for
the 45 Calibre and for the 52 Calibre. We have no problem in
making the hardware. Some of the systems, our sister Public Sector
Unit like BEL is making. Some of the inertial navigation systems
and GPS have been developed by the DRDO for the missile
programmes and the space. So, now we have submitted a project
that we under the leadership of the Army, want to take up. We

29
should be allowed to integrate all this together with the DRDO’s
help and with the help of third partner.”
9.5 A representative of the Ministry of Defence further strongly
felt the need of technological upgradation in the wake of changing
war situation, during the oral evidence:
“We require to upgrade our technology immediately because the
system of warfare is changing. Now the conventional weapon
systems are no longer required in that number and those which
are there have to be integrated with C4I scenario which means,
command, control, communication, computer and intelligence
models. So, they have to be integrated. This will lead to engaging
the right weapon with right ammunition in the least possible time
with the correct understanding of the target. This will also lead to
force multiplication. So, this is a battle field scenario. We have
taken into account all this and we have taken up certain
developments.”
9.6 On the possibility to involve private sector and user services
on R&D projects being taken up by DRDO, the representatives of the
Ministry, in their written reply, submitted as under:
“The DRDO undertakes projects based on the QR requirements of
three Services. The QRs themselves are evolved through discussions
by the Services with DRDO, DGQA, Defence PSUs and, in some
cases, potential private sector as well. DRDO takes up very few
projects under ‘Technology Competence Build Up’ and even here
if it is a high valued project, the broad acceptability and
concurrence of the concerned service is obtained. DRDO also gives
projects to Universities through the Research Boards to encourage
work in basic and applied science. These Boards have adequate
Services representations.
The efforts of DRDO have always been to take such
developmental projects or research pursuits that stay relevant till
the accepted period of delivery.”
9.7 The Committee note that the Ordnance Factories are giving
thrust to in-house R&D efforts in order to develop new products.
The Committee are, however, constrained to note that the investment
made on R&D during the last five years has been negligible, with
the result that no major project or upgradation activities could be
undertaken out of the allocated funds. Most of the projects being
undertaken by Ordnance Factories are through acquisition of

30
technology from DRDO or by import and there has been very little
achievement in developing new products through in-house R&D.
The Committee desire that Ordnance Factories should change their
role from technology recipients to technology producers through more
emphasis on-in-house R&D.
9.8 The Committee are constrained to note that in the era of
Nuclear, Biological and Chemical warfare, our Defence Forces are
still bound to depend on conventional weapons which need constant
upgradation. The Committee view it very seriously and recommend
that the Ministry should intensify efforts to provide sufficient funds
and logistic support to the Ordnance Factories to undertake mini
and major projects in collaboration with DRDO, Defence PSUs and
foreign partners and also continue with the technological upgradation
of the conventional weapons so as to meet the ever-growing
challenges of the modern warfare. The Committee also desire the
Ministry to explore the possibility to involve private sector in some
of the select R&D projects being taken up by DRDO/user services.

31
CHAPTER X
EXPORT MARKET OF THE DEFENCE PRODUCTS
10.1 On being enquired about the export performance of the
Ordnance Factories, the Ministry furnished the following information:
“Organized export commenced at OFB since 1989. The initial years
saw only trifle export orders from neighbouring countries like
Nepal, Myanmar and Maldives. Over the subsequent years OFB
made in-roads in many countries across the continents. Export
started picking up from 2000-01 and the value of export during
the last 5 years is under:
 Year Value (Rs. Cr.)
2000-01 12
2001-02 33
2002-03 60
2003-04 93
2004-05 41
During 2004-05, orders worth Rs. 135 Crores have been bagged.
All the orders could not be executed, as the goods could not be
delivered due to political crisis in Nepal, resulting in decline in
export figure.”
10.2 Giving details of potential items for exports the Ministry have
stated as under:
“OFB‘s export market largely caters to the replenishment market
in which the items are of conventional warfare. It is very
competitive market having large number of players. Apart from
political and geographic considerations, the market is also not
deterministic. Under this backdrop, the potential items of export
of Ordnance Factories along with their export potential can be
classified as:
(a) Weapons
Small Calibre—Largely consisting of Rifles, Carbines, Machine
Guns and Pistols-OFB has succeeded in export of 5.56mm Rifles
and 7.62mm Medium Machine Guns. Other 7.62mm Rifles and
Machine Guns and 9 mm Pistols have also been sold.

32
Medium Calibre—OFB has limited inventory under this
category, viz., the 30mm BMP Gun, which has licence restrictions
for export. A broader variant of this gun, viz., 30mm Medak Naval
Gun has been exported in recent time. A part from this, 40mm
L-70 Anti-aircraft gun is presently under negotiations for sale.
Large Calibre—Enough potential lies for the 84mmk RCL Gun
and 105MM Light Field gun but OFB has not been successful so
far.
(b) Ammunition
Small Calibre—OFB is not competitive in this sector. Calibres
like 5.56mm, 7.62mm and 9mm are available at much cheaper
prices internationally.
Medium Calibre—OFB has cost advantage for medium calibre
ammunition. Stores like 30mm Aden ammunition and 40mm L-70
ammunition are cheaper than prevalent international prices. L-70
ammunition has been sold in bulk in South East Asia.
Large Calibre-OFB is also cost effective in large calibre
ammunition. Prices of 81mm and 120mm Mortar ammunition are
comparable, while prices of 84mm, 105mm and 106mm are less.
(c) Chemicals, Propellants and Explosives
Chemicals like Isopropyl Nitrate have been sold in bulk to
quite a few countries world-wide. Ammonium Nitrate has ample
demand globally, but OFB’s capacity is very small. Propellant
components like Nitrocellulose and Nitroguanidine have great
potential and orders are being bagged. As regards explosives, both
TNT and Tetryl have been sold by OFB.
(d) Vehicles
Armoured vehicles like Tanks and Armoured Personnel Carriers
(APC) are made under licence and cannot be exported under
normal circumstances. However, the recently developed Mine
Protected Vehicle has good potential for export.
(e) Troop Comfort Items and Parachutes
Troop Comfort Items include clothings, tentages, leather items.
Though they possess enough potential, OFB has not been successful
so far. As regards Parachutes, OFB has been successful in bagging

33
many orders for Brake parachutes for MIG and Jaguar aircraft. It
is felt that OFB’s prices for man-dropping parachutes are lower
than international standards, but OFB is still to make a dent in
this sphere.”
10.3 When asked by the Committee about the constraints being
faced by the Ordnance Factory Board and its factories in promotion of
their export market, the Ministry have identified the following reasons:
(a) Ordnance Factories have started exports recently and they
have yet to establish a brand image as an exporters. The
marketing infrastructure is also developing. The export
efforts were also effected because of long list of countries
where defence export was not permitted.
(b) Non-compatibility of OFB items with those in use with many
countries world-over . Many items of the OFB product range
are either of indigenous design or of ex-Soviet origin,
whereas most of the countries worldwide use NATO
compatible products. This results in a narrow band or
products available for export.
(c) Lack of port infrastructure for handling hazardous cargo and
vessels carrying such cargo resulting in high freight charges . All
hazardous cargo are loaded mid-stream resulting in high
loading charges. No India Flag vessel carries hazardous
export cargo resulting in high freight charges. All these have
adverse effect on our pricing.
10.4 When asked by the Committee regarding steps taken by the
Ministry to increase OFB’s export, the Ministry submitted as under:
“In order to plan quantum increase in the OFB’s exports, the
following measures have been taken:
a. Increased generation of enquiries:
— Reduction in response time by introduction of online
response through dedicated e-mail.
— Electronic transmission of technical data and brochures
—P rovision of e-mailable and printable product CD
— Continuous product promotion in Military Technology &
Janes International Defence Review magazines.

34
b. Process of registration with Defence Foreign Procurement Offices
of other nations initiated through Defence Attaches. This leads to
procurement bulletins being directly sent to OFB.
c. OFB has hosted itself on an international generic website www.army-
technology.com where all major defence product manufacturers are
listed and from where a hyperlink is provided to OFB’s own
website www.ofbindia.com. This has led to greater dissemination of
information about OFB and generation of more enquiries.
d. Product demonstration in international defence exhibitions.
e. Enter into joint projects for higher end products and services
required by the international market and establish them within
short lead-time through synergy of competence of the partner(s)
involved.
f. Build up brand equity by association with leading partners.
g. Direct periodic interactions with the largest customers.
h. Resorting to strategic pricing based on marginal costing for
improving cost competitivenss.
i. Pruning of negative list of countries and relaxation of licence
restrictions of the original ex-Soviet suppliers.
j. Procedural simplifications to improve responsiveness.
k. Improving responsiveness to customer’s needs-follow up on
feedbacks, stock manufacturing for export.”
10.5 When enquired about the increase in number of export
enquiries received by OFB as a result of increased publicity given to
their products and numbers, that have been translated into actual export
order, the Ministry stated:
“In spite of OFB’s endeavour to give enough publicity to boost up
exports, the physical increase in the number of export enquiries
has not been substantial. Enquiries are mostly generated through
Agents and only a handful of tenders are received directly from
the procurement authorities of a particular country. Enquiries shoot
up immediately after the participation in an International Defence
Exhibition, largely because to obtain representation in a particular
country by a particular agent. But fructification of such enquiries
is minimal. In reality only 1-2% of the total enquiries received are
converted into orders. Certain enquiries are only probe enquiries
to ascertain our prices and one has to be cautious in such cases.”

35
10.6 As the Ministry have stated that most of the products are not
compatible to the specifications of NATO, thereby affecting the export
market, the Ministry in reply to a related supplementary question have
stated that:
“Certain NATO specific items like Cartg. 5.56mm, SS-109 and
M-193 of Shell 155mm Cargo are being planned to cater to foreign
markets in addition to Indian requirement.”
10.7 On a specific question whether any institution/board has been
created to promote/explore the export prospects of various products,
the Ministry stated that no standard institution or board has been
created to promote exports.
10.8 A representative of the Ministry of Defence further stated
during oral evidence that:
“There is a very little scope for growth in export segment we
operate. We operate in export segment, which is basically a
replenishment segment of conventional arms segment, where the
players are many and with the changes in geo-political situation,
competition is very stiff. The technology is available in most of
the countries. I would say that we have a little absence of level
playing field. We cannot diversify our product range much and
expand customer base. We have constraint because our customer
profile is not that type where we can increase supply by publicity/
propaganda the consumer items. Customer profile is limited to
Defence forces, paramilitary forces, State police forces or whatever
civil sector arms and ammunition they take.”
10.9 The Committee note that since the commencement of
organised export in 1989, value of export has been minimal over the
last five years. Export orders have generally been from the
neighbouring countries. The Committee note that as of now OFB’s
export market is largely of conventional items where a large number
of players are making it tough and competitive for Indian products
to make their presence felt. The Committee also note that the export
market of OFB products also suffers due to their non-compatibility
with NATO specifications. Despite continuous efforts of OFB to give
wide publicity to boost up exports, physical increase in quantum of
export is insignificant. At present, no board or institution has been
created within the OFB supervision to promote exports of defence
products.

36
10.10 The Committee, therefore, recommend that the Indian
Ordnance Factories should strive to diversify their product range to
grab the customer base in non-conventional arms segment of export
market. Keeping in view the requirements of NATO compatible items
in international market, the specifications of more and more
indigenous items should be planned to cater to the export market,
in addition to the Indian requirements. The OFB should also take
earnest initiatives to create an Export Promotion Board under their
supervision and entrust it with the task to explore optimal possibility
of export and to suggest ways and means to boost the export of
Ordnance Factories’ products, create infrastructure necessary for export
market and help in achieving the aim of Indian Ordnance Factories
to establish themselves as a brand leader in the world market. As
recommended in earlier paragraphs, the Committee desire that
Ordnance Factory Board should have experts from international trade
and marketing fields also who can play an effective role in preparing
strategy to tap the vast export market for armaments/ammunitions
and other defence products.
10.11 In view of the competitive prices of the ammunition of the
Ordnance Factories as mentioned in the earlier paras, the Committee
feel that these factories should look out for export market.

37
CHAPTER XI
OUTSOURCING TO PRIVATE SECTOR
11.1 Till recently , Defence production in India was reserved for the
Public Sector. Yet, a large number of private companies under the
small scale, medium scale and even some major corporate in the private
sector had also grown alongside public sector making their own
contribution to the Defence production and supplies. In order to harness
the vast potential of the private sector, Government in May, 2001
decided to open full Defence production for participation by the Indian
private sector including Foreign Direct Investment (FDI) up to 26%
both subject to licensing. The private sector would now have the
opportunity to manufacture full Defence equipment and system under
licence. With a view to take a holistic view of changes required in the
acquisition/procurement procedure for Defence equipment in vogue
etc., a Committee under the chairmanship of Dr. Vijay Kelkar has
been constituted in the Department of Defence Production. Besides,
Government has taken steps for continuous interaction between Defence
Organisations and private industries to create better understanding on
the requirements of the Armed Forces.
11.2 During the course of evidence the Committee was informed
by the CII that in spite of reforms policy of 2001 and opening up of
Defence production to private sector and allowing 26% FDI, imports
have not come down and India is the largest importer of the arms.
11.3 In this regard, the Ministry in their written reply submitted
that:
“In May 2001, the Defence Industry sector was opened up to 100%
for Indian private sector participation with FDI up to 26%, both
subject to licencing. So far, the Department of Industrial Policy &
Promotion, in consultation with the Ministry of Defence, have
issued 23 letters of Intent/Industrial Licences to entrepreneurs in
the private sector for manufacture of a wide range of defence
items. The private sector can also now take the advantage by
importing the technology from the foreign vendors and forming a
joint venture with foreign collaboration to respond to the Request
For Proposals (RFPs) being issued for Defence Procurements.
However, Private Sector has to compete with others to get the
orders in accordance with the provisions of Defence Procurement
Procedure 2005.

38
Imports are resorted to in order to meet the operational
requirements of the Armed Forces for sophisticated technology/
state-of-the art weapon systems, which are not available
indigenously.”
11.4 The Committee asked the Government regarding preference
given to foreign suppliers and to provide a level playing field to Indian
Industry vis-a-vis foreign suppliers in the area of Defence Procurement,
the Ministry, in their reply have stated that this proposal is under
consideration of the Government.
11.5 When the Committee desired to know the comments of the
Ministry, on the issue of “No cost No commitment” basis under which
private sector is asked to develop some product for the defence sector,
where they are never sure that after spending some amount they would
get some order from the Defence, the Ministry replied as under:
“The issue regarding “shared development cost” in “make” category
among Armed Forces, R&D organisation and Industry, both public
and private sector and placement of minimum order quantity to
sustain the financial viability of the development process have been
addressed in the report of the Kelkar Committee, which is under
active consideration of the Government.
Ordnance factories have been sourcing their requirement of raw
material, castings forgings, semi-finished components and
assemblies from the private sector in a big way. The amount of
outsourcing is in the range of Rs. 2500 crore per annum. Ordnance
Factories are mostly concentrating on production of high technology
critical components and systems. Production of components where
sufficient capability exists in private sector is usually not taken up
in the Ordnance Factories. Ordnance Factories also participate in
the buyer seller meets to develop new vendors from the private
sector. Ordnance Factory Board is a member of Confederation of
Indian Industry (CII), which provides it a forum for interaction
with the prominent industrial groups in the country.”
11.6 Asked if some private companies are producing ammunition,
the Ministry, in a written note, have stated that to the best of
information available, Indian private companies are not manufacturing
complete ammunition of the specification to which ordnance Factories
are manufacturing.
11.7 The Committee note that Defence Production Industry has
come a long way from being reserved entirely for the public sector

39
and is moving towards greater participation from the private sector.
The Committee are happy to note that keeping in view the
capabilities of private sector, the work of the value of Rs. 2500 crore
per annum is being outsourced to them. The Committee, desire that
ordnance Factories should strive to outsource more work in those
areas where there is sufficient capability of private sector and retain
production of only high-end items. The Committee at the same time
stress that Ordnance Factories during the process of outsourcing must
ensure strict adherence to the stringent quality standard of the
outsourced products.

40
CHAPTER XII
DELAY IN EXECUTION OF ORDERS
12.1 The Committee desired to know the number of cases where
delay occurred in execution of orders within the financial year for last
three years. The Ministry submitted details as under:
  Year No. of items for No. of items for No of items No of items for
which demands which target manufactured as which target
existed fixed per target fixed but
production was
behind
schedule
1999-2000 364 307 238 69
2000-2001 375 284 196 88
2001-2002 423 344 265 79
2002-2003 431 354 278 76
2003-2004 462 368 270 98
12.2 On being asked about the reasons by the Committee, the
Ministry in their written reply have identified the following individual
and/or collective reasons for delay in execution of orders:
(a) Late finalization of annual target
(b) Delay in placement of covering indents.
(c) Delay in issuing clearance of designs and other particulars
from respective Authority Holding Sealed Particulars in case
of new items.
(d) Modification of designs for existing items.
(e) Sudden increase in target by the indentors in the middle of
the financial year.
(f) Urgency shown by some indentors for some particular items
with enhanced target, affecting the target of same items for
other indentors.
(g) Unforeseen problem and delay in development for some
items.

41
(h) Delay in inspection proof and acceptance.
(i) Long lead time required in procurement of some input
materials particularly in case of imported ones, after receipt
of indent.
12.3 When asked to furnish the details of cases where delay in
execution occurred during the previous year 2004-05, the Ministry have
stated as under:
“The target for supply of defence items are given annually by the
Defence Forces. The shortfall in supply during previous year is
taken into consideration at the time of giving annual target for the
subsequent year. The supply is effected in a year at a predetermined
price for the year and ordnance Factories are reducing average
weighted price since 2001-02. There has been shortfall in supply of
77 items out of 331 items planned for supply during 2004-05.”
12.4 The corrective measures taken to obviate delay in supply of
annual target quantity are:
(a) Finalisation of annual target in advance to provide lead-
time for procurement of inputs and time for production.
(b) Dispensation given to OFB to procure inputs required for
25% of annual target quantity, wherever annual target is
not backed by indent.
12.5 The Chairman, OFB, informed that with the intervention of
Defence (Finance) and the Ministry, they have got this year all the
indents in time and the position is very good. But normally there is
delay in placement of orders and indents.
12.6 The Committee note that out of the demands for 2055 items,
target was fixed for 1988 items and actual manufacturing took place
for 1247 items during the period 1999-2000 to 2003-2004 which resulted
in the production of a number of items behind schedule. Further,
the Committee note with concern that there has been a shortfall in
supply of 77 items out of 331 items planned for supply during 2004-
2005. The data shows that Ordnance Factories have failed to adhere
to the targets fixed for all the demands placed by the indentors.
The Committee desire that detailed analysis be made for every
delay in execution of orders and responsibility/accountability be fixed
accordingly. Necessary steps should also be taken to ensure timely
production of items as per the targets fixed.

42
12.7 The Committee further note that one of the reasons for
delay in execution of orders is the late finalisation of annual targets
by the Ministry. It only shows lack of planning and coordination
among the various concerned departments. The Committee
recommend that advance planning should be done by all concerned
in this regard so that annual targets are finalized well in time.

43
CHAPTER XIII
FIRE INCIDENTS IN ORDNANCE FACTORIES
13.1 On being asked by the Committee regarding fire incidents in
Ordnance Factories occurred for last five years, the Ministry stated
that in 2004-05, 4 fire incidents were reported in Ordnance Factories
as against nil in 2003-04, and 2000-01, 2 in 2002-03 and 1 in 2001-02.
13.2 When asked the reasons for such incidents the Ministry have
stated as follows:
“Board of inquiry is invariably appointed to immediately investigate
incidence of fire with a view to find the reasons the causes of fire
of taking corrective measures to avoid such recurrence. All the
four fire incidents occurred in 2004-05, have been investigated. No
specific reason could be found for above four incidents of fire.”
13.3 When enquired by the Committee why the cause of fire could
not be ascertained by the Board and in the absence of the same how
the remedial measures could be taken, the Ministry have replied as
given below:
“In case of fire, equipment, accessories and surroundings at the
site of fire get damaged and the cause of evidence is lost. In such
cases, Board of Enquiry had to list out probable cause of fire and
then proceed based on oral evidence and remaining circumstantial
evidence and apply the process of elimination to arrive at most
probable cause of fire. The remedial measures suggested by the
board of enquiry are for the elimination of the identified most
probable cause of fire. The corrective measures recommended by
the Board of Enquiry are taken to prevent recurrence of fire
incidence due to identified probable reasons.”
13.4 When asked by the Committee regarding storage
accommodation for ammunition in Ordnance Factories and the funds
for the construction of such facilities, the Ministry have provided the
following note:
“The storage magazine for ammunition is made and managed
scientifically in Ordnance Factories, as per the rules of the Storage
and Transport of Explosive Committee (STEC) of the Ministry of

44
Defence. The magazines are made as per STEC stipulation, after
obtaining clearance from concerned authorities of Fire, Environment
and Explosive Safety. The regular Safety audits are carried out for
ensuring conformance of storage facility, within STEC provisions.
There has been no fire in the storage magazine area of Ordnance
Factories. The construction of storage facility is need based. No
separate account on expenditure for construction of storage facility
is maintained by Ordnance Factories.”
13.5 The Committee during the study visit to Avadi, High Explosive
Factory and Ammunition Factory, Pune, asked the number of fire
accidents cases occurred in those factories, the Chairman, OFB stated
that such cases were almost ‘Nil’ for the last few years and one minor
case of accident occurred which was duly compensated as per provision
of welfare scheme for employees.
13.6 The Committee are concerned to note that fire incident is a
frequent phenomenon taking place almost every year. During the
last year itself, four such incidents occurred, but surprisingly, no
reason or cause could be ascertained by the Board of Enquiry
constituted for the purpose. The Committee are unable to understand
how the remedial measures can be taken without first knowing the
definite cause of fire. Therefore, the logic of remedial measures, as
enunciated by the Board, to be taken to strike the most possible
cause of fire is outrightly refuted by the Committee. The Committee
feel that in the era of advanced Science and Technology, Ordnance
Factories should not function on indefinite conclusions.
13.7 Therefore, the Committee strongly recommend that the
Ministry should explore all scientific ways and means to obviate
such incidents in future. The Ordnance Factory Board should create
a watchful team for every Ordnance Factory particularly Ammunition
and High Explosive Factories to keep tight vigil on every possible
cause of fire and take suitable preventive steps.
N
EW D ELHI; BALASAHEB VIKHE PATIL,
23 November, 2005 Chairman,
21 Agrahayana, 1927 (Saka) Standing Committee on Defence.

45
ANNEXURE A
AMMUNITION & EXPLOSIVE DIVISION—TOTAL STRENGTH 34,661
Sl. Factories Location Major Products
No. (No. of Employees (Year of
as on 01-04-2004) Estd.)
12 3 4
1. Ammunition Factory Kirkee Pune, 5.56 mm Ammunition, Bombs, Grenades,
(6095) Maharashtra Cartridges for others Small Arms, Medium
(1869) Calibre Ammunitions.
2. High Explosive Factory Pune, TNT, HNS, Tetryl (CE), IPN, RFNA,
(1319) Maharashtra ‘G’ Fuel, ‘O’ Fuel, Initiatory Explosives,
(1940) Acids and Chemicals etc.
3. Ordnance Factory Chandrapur, Tank Gun Ammunition, Mortar Ammn., Anti-
Chandrapur (5028) Maharashtra T ank and Anti-Personnel Mines, Rockets,
(1964) Missiles War-Heads etc.
4. Ordnance Factory Varangaon Varangaon, Cartridges, viz, 7.62 mm Nato Ball M-80
(2852) Maharashtra Tracer M-62, 5.56 mm Ammunition.
(1962)
5. Ordnance Factory Bhandara Bhandara, Single Base propellant, Nitro-guanadine,
(2985) Maharashtra Guanadine Nitrate, Hexamine, Acids, RDX
(1962) compounds, PETN, Rocket Propellants, Nitro-
Glycerine, Nitro-cellulose, Commercial
Explosive etc.

46
12 3 4
6. Ordnance Factory Dehu Road Dehu Road, V arious Pyrotechnic compositions, Bombs,
(1399) Maharashtra Shells Cartridge-Illuminating and Smoke,
(1983) Cartg. Signal, Flare Trip wire etc.
7. Ordnance Factory Khamaria Jabalpur, Small Arms Ammunition, Anti Aircraft
(7655) M.P . Ammn., Heavy Calibre Anti-Tank Ammn.,
(1943) Bombs, Mines, Ammn. for Airforce and Navy.
8. Ordnance Factory Itarsi Itarsi, Double and Triple Base propellants, Small
(2422) M.P . Arms propellant, Acids Nitric and Suphuric,
(1970) Nitro Cellulose, Nitroglycerine, Picrite etc.
9. Cordite Factory Aruvankadu Aruvankadu, V arious Double Base/Triple Base
(2589) Tamil Nadu Pr opellants, Celluloid Products, Nitro
(1904) Cellulose, Nitro Glycerine, Acids, Acetone,
Paints etc.
10. Ordnance Factory Badmal Bolangir, T ank Gun Ammunition, Bar Mine, 30 mm
(2317) Orissa Ammunition, 155 mm Ammunition.
(1989)

47
WEAPON, VEHICLE & EQUIPMENT DIVISION—TOTAL STRENGTH 37,046
Sl. Factories Location Major Products
No. (No. of Employees (Year of
as on 01-04-2004) Estd.)
12 3 4
1. Gun Carriage Factory Jabalpur, T-72 Tank Gun Recoil System, Carriages for
(5905) M.P . Artillary Guns, Anti-Aircraft Gun, Tank Gun
(1904) Mounting, 81 mm Mortar, 51 mm Mortar, 12
Bore Pump Action Gun, Cluster Bomb Gas
System Assy., 73 mm Smooth Bore Barrel Assy.,
Ski Runners & various Ammn. Packages
2. Vehicle Factory Jabalpur Jabalpur, Army Transport Vehicles and variants, Civil
(7462) M.P . Joga, Spares Engines and others spares
(1969)
3. Grey Iron Foundry Jabalpur, Automobile Casting of Grey & Malleable
(1682) M.P . Iron for Vehicles & other applications
(1969)
4. Ordnance Factory Kanpur Kanpur, Medium & High Calibre Guns, Mortars Bomb
(5111) U.P . Bodies, Shell Empties, High Velocity Kinetic
(1942) Energy Shots.

48
12 3 4
5. Small Arms Factory Kanpur, 5.56 mm LMG, LMG 7.62 mm, MAG 7.62
(2537) U.P . mm, .50’Rifle Sporting, 51 mm Mortar, .32”
(1942) Revolver, 20 L steel Jerricans, 9 mm Carbine
6. Field Gun Factory Kanpur, High Calibre Ordnance & Spare Barrels,
(1925) U.P . (1977) .32” Revolver
7. Rifle Factory Ishapore Ishapore, 5.56 mm INSAS Rifle, Pistol 9mm Auto,
(4692) West Bengal .315’ Sporting Rifle, .22” Sporting Rifle.
(1904)
8. Gun & Shell Factory Cossipore, Medium Calibre Guns, Shells & Fuzes, 12
(3834) West Bengal Bore DBBL Shot Gun, .32” Pistol, 84mm
(1801) Rocket Launcher.
9. Ordnance Factory Dum Dum Dum Dum, V arious Precision Machined & Fabricated
(1318) West Bengal items for Army , Navy & Airforce including
(1846) Retarder Tail Units for Bombs
10. Ordnance Factory Trichy Tiruchirappally, 7.62 mm Rifle, 12.7 AD Gun & Spares, 30 mm
(2580) Tamil Nadu Cannon for BMP II, 14.5 mm Sub-Calibre
(1966) Device for T-72 Tank, 23 mm Ghasha Twin
Barrel Gun for MIG.

49
MATERIALS & COMPONENTS DIVISION—TOTAL STRENGTH 23,416
Sl. Factories Location Major Products
No. (Nos. of Employees (Year of
as on 01-04-2004) Estd.)
12 3 4
1. Metal & Steel Factory Ishapore, Various Ferrous and Non-ferrous castings &
(4232) West Bengal extrusion, component & other stores
(1872) including Cartg. Cases and shell forgings,
Light/Medium/Heavy Steel Forgings including
Gun Barrel Forgings
2. Ordnance Factory Ambajhari Nagpur, Ammunition Hardware (Shells, Fuzes and
(6930) Maharashtra cartg. Cases) for various Ammunitions
(1965) including 130 mm and 155 mm. Also light
metal Floating Bridge, Extruded Al. Rods/
Sections, Pressure and Die-Cast Components
etc.
3. Ordnance Factory Ambarnath Ambarnath, Brass and Guilding Metal cups of various
(13162) Maharashtra Calibres for Small Arms and Ammn. Thin
(1944) Gauge non-ferrous Strips, Medium and Heavy
Calibre Cartridge Cases. Low and High Tensile
Al. Alloy, Extruded sections

50
12 3 4
4. Machine Tool Prototype Fy . Ambarnath, Design, Development and Manufacture of
Ambarnath Maharashtra special purpose machine tools and
(1525) (1944) equipment, components and sub-assemblies for
Armoured and Transport vehicle and weapons
spares.
5. Ordnance Factory Bhusawal Bhusawal, Dr ums, Barrels, Ammn. Boxes, Boxes for
(1397) Maharashtra shells, Ammn. cylinders & Tin Containers,
(1949) Fuel tanks.
6. Ordnance Factory Muradnagar, Plain carbon and alloy steel castings for
Muradnagar U.P . Tanks, Empty Bodies of various ammn., Hot
(2763) (1943) Die tool, Steel forgings.
7. Ordnance Factory Katni Katni, Non-Ferrous Rolled & Extruded se ctions,
(1952) M.P . Cups for Small Arms Ammunitions, Die-cast
(1942) components, Heavy Calibre Cartg. Cases.
8. Ordnance Cable Factory Chandigarh Field Telephone cable, Carrier Quad cable,
Chandigarh (1963) 20 Conductor cable, 3KV Air Field Lighting
(624) cable, Beta light devices, various steel wire.
9. Heavy Alloy Penetrator Proj. Triruchirapally Empty Shots for Kinetic Energy Ammn. of
(831) Tamil Nadu various calibres (105 mm, 120 mm, 125 mm).
(1990)

51
ARMOURED VEHICLE DIVISION—TOTAL STRENGTH 12,212
Sl. Factories Location Major Products
No. (Nos. of Employees (Year of
as on 01-04-2004 Estd.)
1. Heavy Vehicle Factory Avadi, Battle Tanks viz . Ajeya T-72, Combat
(4870) Tamil Nadu Improved Ajeya, Variants, Tanks Spares &
(1961) Overhaul of T-72
2. Engine Factory Avadi Avadi, Engines for Battle Tanks and ICV , Overhaul
(1046) Tamil Nadu of Engines
(1995)
3. Ordnance Factory Medak Medak, Infantry Cambat Vehicle Sarath, Variants,
(2989) A.P . Bullet Proofing of Cars & Spares for ICV
(1987)
4. Ordnance Factory Dehradun Dehradun, Sighting & fire control instruments for
(1617) Uttaranchal, T anks, Fire control instruments for Guns &
(1943) Mortars, Range finder, Binoculars, Compasses,
Air field Lighting Equipment, Night Vision
Instruments.
5. Opto Electronics Factory Dehradun, Pr ecision Opto Mechanical/Electronic
(1690) Uttaranchal, instruments for sighting and fire control of
(1988) T-72 & Infantry combat vehicles, Laser Range
Finder

52
ORDNANCE EQUIPMENT DIVISION—TOTAL STRENGTH 13,225
Sl. Factories Location Major Products
No. (Nos. of Employees (Year of
as on 01-04-2004 Estd.)
1. Ordnance Equipment Factory Kanpur, Leather Items, Textile Items, Engineering
(4250) U.P . (1859) Equipments including Mountaineering Items
2. Ordnance Parachute Factory Kanpur, All types of Parachutes viz . Brake
(1744) U.P . (1941) Parachute, Supply Dropping & Man Dropping
Parachutes Tent, Clothing & Rubberised Items
like Floats for Bridges & Inflatable Boats
3. Ordnance Equipment Factory Hazratpur, Tents, Mosquito Nets & other Clothing
(645) U.P . (1983) Items
4. Ordnance Clothing Factory Shahjhanpur, All Combat Clothing, Mountaineering
(4286) U.P . Extreme Cold Clothing, Textile & Tentage
(1941) Items
5. Ordnance Clothing Factory Avadi, All Combat Clothing & Parade Garments,
(2300) Tamil Nadu Parachutes Tents, DLD covers, Vest etc.
(1961)

53
ANNEXURE B
ORDNANCE FACTORIES—EXPENDITURE ON MODERNISATION FOR LAST 5 YEARS
Sl.No. Factory Investment Made (Rs. in Crores)
2000-01 2001-02 2002-03 2003-04 2004-05
12 3 4 5 6 7
1. Gun & Shell Factory, 19.94 21.58 22.44 9.88 8.32
Gossipore, West Bengal
2. Ordnance Equipment 3.94 9.2 1.88 3.26 4.99
Factory , Kanpur, U.P .
3. Ordnance Factory , 3.91 6.34 7.24 2.98 2.41
Dum Dum, West Bengal
4. Ammunition Factory, Kirkee, 13.42 15.21 24.6 7.93 2.28
Maharashtra
5. Cordite Factory 2.22 2.96 1.79 2.38 1.21
Aruvankadu, Tamil Nadu
6. Gun Carriage Factory, 3.06 8.93 9.63 12.27 12.57
Jabalpur, M.P .
7. Rifle Factory 6.79 21.34 15.67 23.62 3.04
Ishapore, West Bengal

54
 12 3 4 5 6 7
8. Metal & Steel Factory, 6.23 32.23 40.63 22.23 95.11
Ishapore, West Bengal
9. Ordnance Clothing Factory 5.85 3.21 1.86 5.21 2.69
Shahjahanpur, U.P .
10. High Explosive Factory, 0.93 0.67 1.33 1.29 1.54
Kirkee, Maharashtra
11.O rdnance Parachute 0.33 5.52 2.13 1.44 0.02
Factory , Kanpur,U.P.
12. Ordnance Factory 11.17 14.24 12.15 12.32 9.77
Khamaria, Jabalpur, M.P .
13. Ordnance Factory , Katni, 2.68 3.03 2.85 2.3 1.5
M.P .
14. Small Arms Factory, Kanpur, 6.92 7.23 8.18 4.93 2.52
U.P .
15. Ordnance Factory 1.51 4.59 2.63 0.39 2.13
Dehradun, Uttaranchal
16. Ordnance Factory 4.89 5.87 6.62 2.06 3.58
Ambarnath, Maharashtra
17. Ordnance Factory 1.48 9.89 12.36 5.99 3.02
Muradnagar, U.P .
18. Ordnance Factory , Kanpur, U.P . 15.6 25.31 27.73 16.57 13.59

55
12 3 4 5 6 7
19. Ordnance Factory , Bhusawal, 3.09 2.62 2.42 1.44 0.64
Maharashtra
20. Machine Tool Prototype 2.7 1.88 5.35 4.73 3.17
Factory , Ambarnath, Maharashtra
21. Heavy Vehicle Factory, 4.67 8.61 8.64 11.46 16.48
Avadi, Tamil Nadu
22. Ordnance Clothing Factory 0.92 1.74 1.22 0.64 0.54
Avadi, Tamil Nadu
23. Ordnance Cable Factory 1.5 2.06 9.87 6.35 0.86
Chandigarh
24. Ordnance Factory 10.82 7.21 12.06 4.68 2.63
Varangaon, Maharashtra
25. Ordnance Factory 9.71 20.41 5.71 7.55 4.84
Bhandara, Maharashtra
26. Ordnance Factory 2.49 3.81 5.21 12.88 7.87
Chandrapur, Maharashtra
27. Ordnance Factory 34.32 40.93 31.74 33.74 20.54
Ambajhari, Nagpur,
Maharashtra
28. Ordnance Factory , 8.93 13.24 11.91 12.03 4.66
Tiruchirapally, Tamil Nadu

56
12 3 4 5 6 7
29. V ehicle Factory, Jabalpur, M.P . 14.17 12.02 9.29 9.75 6.9
30. Ordnance Factory , Itarsi, M.P . 3.87 2.5 5.25 2.48 2.57
31. Grey Iron Foundry, 0.77 0.87 2.31 2.52 2.3
Jabalpur, M.P .
32. Ordnance Factory , Dehu 1.04 1.06 1.3 0.42 1.52
Road, Maharashtra
33. Field Gun Factory, Kanpur, U.P . 2.99 2.39 3.9 1.86 2.88
34. Ordnance Equipment 1.02 1.32 0.32 0.14 0.14
Factory , Hazratpur, U.P .
35. Ordnance Factory , Badmal 3.13 0.93 1.25 1.21 0.46
Orissa
36. Ordnance Factory Medak, 1.99 2.4 3.19 1.44 30.93
Andhra Pradesh.
37. Opto Electronics Factory, 0.31 0.41 0.64 0.8 0.31
Dehradun, Uttaranchal
38. Heavy Alloy Penetrator 2.24 0.87 0.96 0.57 0.09
Project, Tiruchirapally,
Tamil Nadu
39. Engine Factory Avadi, 0.51 3.09 2.93 1.43 2.65
Tamil Nadu

57
MINUTES OF THE THIRTIETH SITTING OF THE STANDING
COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE (2004-05)
The Committee sat on Tuesday, the 24th May, 2005 at 1100 hrs. to
1235 in Committee  Room ‘B’, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Shri, Balasaheb Vikhe Patil— Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri A.V . Bellarmin
3. Shri Suresh Chandel
4. Shri Thupstan Chhewang
5. Shri Ramesh Jigajinagi
6. Dr. C. Krishnan
7. Shri S.D. Mandlik
8. Shri Ganesh Prasad Singh
Rajya Sabha
9. Dr. Farooq Abdullah
10. Shri Janardan Dwivedi
11. Shri Pramod Mahajan
12. Shri Anand Sharma
13. Shri Lalit Suri
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri P .D.T. Achary — Secretary
2. Shri P .K. Bhandari — Director
3. Smt. Anita Jain — Deputy Secretary
4. Shri D.R. Shekhar — Under Secretary
Representatives of Ministry of Defence
1. Shri Ajai Vikram Singh, Defence Secretary
2. Shri M. Natarajan, Secretary (R&D)
3. Ms. Somi Tandon, Secretary (Def. Min.)
4. Shri S. Banerjee, Addl. Secretary (DP)
5. Shri H.C. Gupta, Special Secretary (Acq.)

58
6. Shri V .R.S. Natarajan, CMD, BEML
7. Maj. Gen. R.S. Balyan, DQA (Armament)
8. Shri Sudhir Nath, JS (HAL)
9. Smt. Rita Menon, JS (SY)
10. Shri Alok Perti, JS (S/OF)
11. Shri Tapan Ray, JS (X)
12. Shri R.K.M. Bhattacharya, JS (C)
13. Shri P .K. Mishra, Chairman, OFB & DGOF
14. R. Adm. R.M. Bhatia, CMD, MDL
15. Shri Devasis Chowdhury, CMD, Midhani
2. At the outset, the Hon’ble Chairman welcomed the
representatives of Ministry of Defence to the sitting of the Committee
and invited them to brief the Committee on the subject ‘Defence
Ordnance Factories’ and ‘Defence Public Sector Undertakings’.
3. The Defence Secretary then informed that a presentation on
Defence Ordnance Factories and Defence Public Sector Undertakings
which would be made before the Committee by the concerned official.
4. The Chairman, Ordnance Factory Board then apprised the
Committee about the brief history of Indian Ordnance Factories
Organisation, location of ordnance factories, share of Ordnance Factories
in defence production and share of Ordnance Factories in Army Budget.
He also apprised the Committee about the ammunitions and explosives
being supplied to Defence Forces by the Ordnance Factories. He also
stressed for autonomy for Ordnance Factories.
5. Representative of the Ministry also informed the Committee
about the MBT Arjun and its production capacity which would be
fifty tanks per year from 2007-08 onwards. He further stated that there
would be continuous growth in turnover, productivity and expansion
of customer profile. The Ordnance Factories were facing challenges in
the field of stagnant requirement of Indian Armed Forces, changes in
Geo-political scenario, rapid advancement in war technology, opening
up of Defence sector to Private Sector, no scope for growth in export
in the operated market segment. The Ministry further informed that
the Ordnance Factories was also upgrading 155 mm Bofors guns.
6. The Chairman and Members raised certain queries on the
functioning of Ordnance  Factories and the same were resolved by the
Ministry.
7. The briefing remained inconclusive.
8. The verbatim record of the proceedings was kept.
The Witnesses then withdrew.
The Committee then adjourned.

59
MINUTES OF THE THIRTY FIRST SITTING OF THE
STANDING COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE (2004-05)
The Committee sat on Thursday, 2nd June, 2005 at 1100 hrs. to
1615 in Committee  Room No. 139, Parliament House Annexe,
New Delhi.
PRESENT
Shri, Balasaheb Vikhe Patil —  Chairman
M
EMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Ramesh Jigajinagi
3. Dr. C. Krishnan
4. Shri Raghuraj Singh Shakya
5. Shri Balashowry Vallabhaneni
Rajya Sabha
6. Shri Janardan Dwivedi
7. Shri Lalit Suri
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri M. Rajagopalan Nair — Additional Secretary
2. Shri P .K. Bhandari — Director
3. Smt. Anita Jain — Deputy Secretary
4. Shri D.R. Shekhar — Under Secretary
Representatives of Ministry of Defence
1. Shri Ajai Vikram Singh, Defence Secretary
2. Shri Shekhar Dutt, Secretary (DP)
3. Dr. M. Natarajan, Secretary (R&D)
4. Ms. Somi Tandon, Secretary (Defence Finance)
5. Shri H.C. Gupta, Special Secretary (Acquisition)
6. Shri S. Banerjee, AS (DP)

60
7. Shri Ranjit Issar, Additional Secretary (I)
8. Shri Sudhir Nath, JS (HAL)
9. Smt. Rita Menon, JS (SY)
10. Shri Alok Perti, JS (S/OF)
11. Shri Tapan Ray, JS (X)
12. Shri R.K.M. Bhattacharya, JS (COORD)
13. Shri S.C. Narang, CCR &D (R&M)
14. Shri K.U. Limaye, CCR&D (ECS)
15. Dr. D. Banerjee (CCR&D) (AMS)
16. Maj. Gen. R.S. Balyan, DQA (Armament)
17. Shri P .K. Misra, Chairman OFB & DGOF
18. Shri Ashok K. Baweja, Chairman, HAL
19. Shri V .R.S. Natrajan, CMD, BEML
20. Maj. Gen. R. Gossain, CMD, BDL
21. Shri Y. Gopala Rao, CMD BEL
22. R. Adm. R.M. Bhatia, CMD, MDL
23. Shri Devasis Chowdhury, CMD, Midhani
24. Rear Adm. Sampath Pillai, CMD GSL
25. Cmde. G.N. Sreekumar, CMD, GRSE
26. Shri B. Saha, Secretary , OFB
27. Cdr. Hardev Inder, Regional Chief Manager, GRSE
28. Shri K.G. Gupta, DDG/O.F. Cell
2. At the outset, the Hon’ble Chairman welcomed the
representatives of the Ministry of Defence to the sitting of the
Committee and invited them to make presentation on the subject
‘Defence Ordnance Factories’. The representatives of the Ministry
apprised the Hon’ble Chairman and some members of the Committee
of the various aspects of the ordnance factories viz. capacity utilization,
technological upgradation, manpower planning, etc. The Committee
felt that a roadmap should be prepared for the Defence Public Sector
Undertakings (DPSUs), Ordnance Factories and R&D Organisations with
the aim of attaining self-reliance in Defence technologies. The Defence
Secretary and other representatives of the Ministry further elaborated
the issues raised by Members.
*** *** ***
3. The representatives of the Ministry then responded to the queries
raised by the Chairman and other members of the Committee.
4. A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept.
The Committee then adjourned.

61
MINUTES OF THE NINTH SITTING OF THE STANDING
COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE (2005-06)
The Committee sat on Tuesday , the 08 November, 2005 from
1500 hrs. to 1530 hrs. in Committee  Room ‘53’, Parliament House,
New Delhi.
PRESENT
Shri, Balasaheb Vikhe Patil —  Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Suresh Chandel
3. Smt. Sangeeta Kumari Singh Deo
4. Shri Ramesh Jigajinagi
5. Shri Suresh Kalmadi
6. Dr. C. Krishnan
7. Shri S.D. Mandlik
8. Dr. K.S. Manoj
9. Shri Mahadeorao Shiwankar
10. Shri Manvendra Singh
11. Ms. Ingrid Mcleod
Rajya Sabha
12. Smt. N.P . Durga
13. Shri Janardan Dwivedi
14. Shri Lalit Suri
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri S.K. Sharma — Additional Secretary
2. Shri R.C. Ahuja — Joint Secretary
3. Smt. Anita Jain — Deputy Secretary
4. Shri D.R. Shekhar — Under Secretary

62
2. At the outset Hon’ble Chairman welcomed the Members to the
Sitting of the Committee of the Committee for finalizing the draft
report on ‘Defence Ordnance Factories’. Hon’ble Chairman requested
the Members to give their suggestions/modifications for incorporation
in the draft report. Members of the Committee then suggested some
minor changes/modifications. The Chairman further requested the
Members to give their suggestions in writing, if any, later on for
incorporation in the draft report. The Committee then decided to
consider and adopt the amended draft report at the Sitting to be held
on 17 November 2005.
The Committee then adjourned.

63
MINUTES OF THE ELEVENTH SITTING OF THE STANDING
COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE (2005-06)
The Committee sat on Wednesday, the 23 November, 2005 from
1230 hrs. to 1320 hrs. in Committee  Room ‘C’, Parliament House
Annexe, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Shri Suresh Kalmadi —  In the Chair
M
EMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Iliyas Azmi
3. Shri A.V . Bellarmin
4. Shri Suresh Chandel
5. Smt. Sangeeta Kumari Singh Deo
6. Dr. C. Krishnan
7. Shri S.D. Mandlik
8. Dr. K.S. Manoj
9. Mr. Ingrid Mcleod
10. Shri Dharmendra Yadav
Rajya Sabha
11. Shri R.K. Anand
12. Dr. Farooq Abdullah
13. Smt. N.P . Durga
14. Shri Janardan Dwivedi
15. Shri Anand Sharma
16. Shri Lalit Suri
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri S.K. Sharma — Additional Secretary
2. Shri R.C. Ahuja — Joint Secretary
3. Smt. Anita Jain — Deputy Secretary
4. Shri D.R. Shekhar — Under Secretary

64
2. In the absence of Hon’ble Chairman, Standing Committee on
Defence, the Committee unanimously chose Shri Suresh Kalmadi, M.P .
to act as Chairman for the sitting under rule 258 (3) of the Rules of
Procedure and conduct of Business in Lok Sabha.
3. The Committee, thereafter, considered the draft report on
‘Defence Ordnance Factories’ and adopted the same with some minor
additions/modifications as suggested by the Members.
4. The Committee then authorised the Chairman to finalise the
report with further minor modifications, if any necessary, and to present
the same to the Parliament.
The Committee then adjourned.