20
STANDING COMMITTEE
ON DEFENCE
(2006-07)
FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA
MINISTRY OF DEFENCE
[Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations contained in
the Seventh Report of the Committee (Fourteenth Lok Sabha) on
‘Defence Ordinance Factories’]
TWENTIETH REPORT
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
July, 2007/Asadha, 1929 (Saka)

TWENTIETH REPORT 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE 
(2006-2007) 
 
(FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
MINISTRY OF DEFENCE 
 
[Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations contained in the 
Seventh Report of the Committee (Fourteenth Lok Sabha) on ‘Defence Ordnance 
Factories’] 
 
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on  16.08.07. 
 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 16.08.07. 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
 
NEW DELHI 
 
July 2007, Asadha 1929 (Saka)

C.O.D. No. 84
Price : Rs. 103.00
© 2007 BY LOK S ABHA S ECRETARIAT
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of
Business in Lok Sabha (Eleventh Edition) and Printed by Jainco Art India,
New Delhi-110 005.

(i)
CONTENTS
PAGES
COMPOSITION OF THE C OMMITTEE  (2006-07) .......................................... (iii)
PREFACE ........................................................................................................ (v)
REPORT
CHAPTER I Report .............................................................................
CHAPTER II Recommendations/Observations which have
been accepted by the Government .........................
CHAPTER III Recommendations/Observations which the
Committee do not desire to pursue in view
of the Government’s replies .....................................
CHAPTER IV Recommendations/Observations in respect of
which replies of the Government have not been
accepted by the Committee ......................................
C
HAPTER V Recommendations/Observations in respect of
which final replies of the Government are still
awaited ...........................................................................
M
INUTES OF THE S ITTING ............................................................................
APPENDIX Analysis of Action Taken by Government on the
Recommendations contained in the Seventh Report
of the Standing Committee on Defence
(Fourteenth Lok Sabha) on ‘Defence Ordnance
Factories .........................................................................

COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE
ON DEFENCE (2006-07)
  Shri Balasaheb Vikhe Patil —  Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri S. Bangarappa
3. Shri Milind Murli Deora
4. Shri Santosh Kumar Gangwar
5. Shri Ramesh C. Jigajinagi
6. Shri Suresh Kalmadi
7. Shri C. Kuppusami
8. Dr. K.S. Manoj
9. Ms. Ingrid Mcleod
10. Shri Asaduddin Owaisi
11. Shri Adhalrao Shivaji Patil
12. Shri Shriniwas Patil
13. Shri Rajendrasinh Ghanshyamsinh Rana (Raju Rana)
14. Dr. H.T. Sangliana
15. Shri Arjun Charan Sethi
16. Prof. Mahadeorao Shiwankar
17. Shri Manvendra Singh
18. Shri Balashowry Vallabhaneni
19. Shri Rajesh Verma
Rajya Sabha
20. Dr. Farooq Abdullah
21. Shri Jai Prakash Aggarwal
22. Shri Abu Asim Azmi
23. Smt. Shobhana Bhartia
24. Shri R.K. Dhawan
(iii)

25. Smt. N.P . Durga
26. Shri S.P .M. Syed Khan
27. Shri K.B. Shanappa
28. Shri Arun Shourie
29. Smt. Viplove Thakur
SECRETARIAT
1. Shri S.K. Sharma — Additional Secretary
2. Shri P .K. Bhandari — Joint Secretary
3. Shri Gopal Singh — Director
4. Shri D.R. Shekhar — Deputy Secretary-II
5. Smt. Jyochnamayi Sinha — Under Secretary
6. Smt. Indu Kaushal — Executive Assistant
(iv)

(v)
PREFACE
I, the Chairman, Standing Committee on Defence (2006-07) having
been authorized by the Committee to submit the Report on their behalf,
present this Twentieth Report on Action Taken by the Government on
the recommendations contained in the Seventh Report of the Committee
(Fourteenth Lok Sabha) on ‘Defence Ordnance Factories’.
2. The Seventh Report was presented to/laid in Lok Sabha/Rajya
Sabha on 12 December 2005. The Government furnished replies
indicating action taken on the recommendations contained in the Report
on ‘Defence Ordnance Factories’. The Committee took oral evidence of
the representatives of Ministry of Defence on 12 February, 2007 and
heard the view point of Trade Union Leaders of Ordnance Factories
and Defence Public Sector Undertakings on 6 June, 2007 to have
clarifications on certain issues arising out of the action taken replies.
The Draft Action Taken Report was considered and adopted by the
Committee at their sitting held on 12 June, 2007.
3. An analysis of action taken by the Government on
recommendations contained in the Twentieth Report of the Standing
Committee on Defence (Fourteenth Lok Sabha) is given in Appendix.
4. For facility of reference and convenience, the observations/
recommendations of the Committee have been printed in thick type in
the body of the Report.
  N
EW D ELHI; BALASAHEB VIKHE PATIL,
11 July, 2007 Chairman,
20 Asadha, 1929 (Saka) Standing Committee on Defence.

CHAPTER I
REPORT
The Report of the Standing Committee on Defence deals with action
taken by the Government on the recommendations/observations
contained in their Seventh Report (Fourteenth Lok Sabha) on ‘Defence
Ordnance Factories’ which was presented and laid in both the Houses
of Parliament on 12.12.2005.
2. In the Seventh Report (Fourteenth Lok Sabha), the Committee
had made 29 observations/recommendations on the following
subjects :
Sl.No. Para No. Subject
1. 1.7 Restructuring of Ordnance Factories
2. 2.5 to 2.7 Or ganisational Structure of Ordnance Factory
Board
3. 3.6 & 3.7 Autonomy/Freedom to Ordnance Factories
4. 4.4 Share of Ordnance Factories in total Defence
Production
5. 5.7 & 5.8 Capacity utilisation of Ordnance Factories
6. 6.12 to 6.16 Modernisation Programme of Ordnance
Factories
7. 7.8 to 7.10 Quality control mechanism in Ordnance
Factories
8. 8.8 & 8.9 Pricing system of Ordnance Factories
9. 9.7 & 9.8 R&D activities in Ordnance Factories
10. 10.9 to 10.11 Export market of the Defence products
11.1 1.7 Outsourcing of private sector
12. 12.6 & 12.7 Delay in execution of orders
13. 13.6 & 13.7 Fire incidents in Ordnance Factories

2
3. Action Taken Replies have been received from the Government
in respect of all the recommendations/observations contained in the
Report. The Committee have examined the Action Taken Replies
received from the Ministry and the same have been categorized as
follows:
(i) Recommendations/observations which have been accepted
by the Government:
Para Nos 2.6, 2.7, 4.4, 6.13, 7.8 to 7.10, 8.9, 9.8, 10.11, 12.6,
12.7, 13.6 and 13.7
(ii) Recommendations/observations which the Committee do not
desire to pursue in view of the Government replies.
NIL
(iii) Recommendations/observations in respect of which replies
of the Government have not been accepted by the
Committee:
Para Nos. 1.7, 2.5, 3.6, 3.7, 5.7, 5.8, 6.12, 6.14, 6.15, 6.16, 8.8,
9.7 and 11.7
(iv) Recommendations/observations in respect of which final
replies of the Government are still awaited.
Para Nos. 10.9 and 10.10
4. The Committee trust that utmost importance will be given to
the implementation of the recommendations accepted by the
Government. In cases, where it is not possible for any reason to
implement the recommendations in letter and spirit, the matter
should be reported to the Committee with reasons for non-
implementation. The Committee desire that action taken notes on
the recommendations/observations contained in Chapter –I and final
replies to the recommendations contained in Chapter – V of the
Report be furnished to the Committee within six months of the
presentation of the Report.
5. The Committee will now deal with the action taken by the
Government on some of their recommendations contained in Chapter
– I of this Report.
Restructuring of Ordnance Factories
Recommendation (Para No. 1.7)
6. The Committee had noted that 39 Ordnance Factories were
divided into 5 operating divisions based on the main products /

3
technologies employed. 40th Ordnance Factory had been established
at Nalanda for production of Bimodular Charges. The Committee felt
that it was essential that Ordnance Factories, which were producing
same kind of products, should be merged / integrated into one in
order to synergise their resources and R&D and ensure optimal use of
available manpower and infrastructure. For the purpose the Committee
had strongly desired that a Task Force of experts be constituted by the
Government to go into the details of restructuring / merging of existing
Defence Ordnance Factories. The Committee had also desired that no
new Ordnance Factory should come up and during the process of
restructuring/merging of Ordnance Factories, labour’s interest must
be protected by the Government.
7. The Ministry in their action taken reply, have stated:
“The issue of re-structuring of Ordnance Factories is under
consideration of MoD. An Expert Committee under the
Chairmanship of Shri Vijay Kelkar has examined the issue and
submitted its report, which is being examined in MoD.
In the present structure of Ordnance Factories:
(a) Manufacture in more than one Ordnance Factory in some
cases has been planned as a strategy to maintain the supply
chain to Defence Forces even it production in one unit is
interrupted due to disturbances/sabotage/enemy strikes.
(b) Process and storage safety regulations in handling explosives
do not allow consolidation of production activities.
(c) Demand in excess of installed capacity of a product in the
dedicated factory necessities production in other factories.
(d) OFB has constituted a committee to examine and rationalise
workload between Metallurgical Group of Factories,
considering the core technologies and futuristic product
range.”
[Ministry of Defence OM No. H-11013/30/2005/D(Parl)
dated 23.03.2006]
8. When asked about the present status of the examination of Dr.
Vijay Kelkar Committee’s recommendation, the Ministry of Defence in
their written replies stated that :
“The recommendation made in Kelkar Committee Report (Part-II)
suggested major changes in the functioning of Ordnance Factories,

4
DGQA and DPSUs. The implementation of the recommendations
of the committee would necessitate large-scale changes in the
functioning, basic organization structure, mandate and status of
the organization. The report was circulated to all the stakeholders
for obtaining their views. On receipt of the view of all the
stakeholders, a meeting was held on 18th September, 2006, under
Chairmanship of Hon’ble RM with representatives of federations
of Ordnance Factories, wherein Hon’ble RM has stated that
Government has decided not to corporatise Ordnance Factories. It
has been decided by the Government that present position would
continue for some time.”
9. During oral evidence the representatives of the Ministry of
Defence also stated :
“This subject has been examined in the Ministry and after
consultation with everybody and with the approval of the Raksha
Mantri, it has been decided that in view of the prevailing
circumstances, it is not advisable to do anything drastically with
the structure of the Ordnance Factory Board.”
Comments of the Committee
10. The Committee note that the Government have examined
the recommendations of Kelkar Committee Report to restructure the
Ordnance Factories and decided that in view of the prevailing
circumstances, it would not be advisable to go for a drastic
restructuring of Ordnance Factory Board and the present position
would continue for sometime. The Committee would like to know
the details of the prevailing circumstances which are making it
difficult to restructure the Ordnance Factories. The Committee are
unhappy to learn that after lapse of 5 to 6 years, the Government
have not come out with a prescribed time frame by which they will
initiate some action in this regard. Therefore, the Committee strongly
reiterates their view that for a better future of Ordnance Factories
and for optimum use of available manpower infrastructure and R&D,
the Ministry must initiate the work of restructuring of Ordnance
Factories gradually, in a time-bound manner, wherever it is possible.
The Committee would like to be apprised of the progress made by
the Government in this regard.
Organisational Structure of Ordnance Factory Board
Recommendation (Para No. 2.5)
11. The Committee had noted that Ordnance Factory Board (OFB)
was constituted in 1979 in order to ensure cohesiveness and coordinated

5
approach in the working of Ordnance Factories. It comprises, besides
Director-General, nine members, five heading each of the five operating
divisions of Ordnance Factories and four responsible for staff functions
viz. Personnel, finance, planning and management, project and
engineering and technical services. The Committee had felt that in
view of the rapid technological advancement taking place the world
over in defence sector and the export potential of the defence
equipment, there was a need to redefine the role of OFB to enable it
to keep pace with the changing requirements and also to tap the vast
export market. There was also a need to restructure OFB by including
therein experts with proven records in marketing and international
trade, who might give an export orientation to the indigenously
manufactured defence products and make effective strategy for their
export in the niche market. The Committee, had therefore,
recommended that a high level Committee should be constituted to
go into the functions and organisational structure of OFB and give its
recommendations on restructuring of OFB to make it a more
professional and dynamic body responsive to the present day needs.
12. The Ministry in their action taken reply, have stated :
“MoD had already constituted a High Level Committee under the
Chairmanship of Dr. Vijay Kelkar to examine the changes required
to facilitate Ordnance Factories to assume the role of designer and
integrator for product development and production. The committee
has submitted the report, which is being examined in MoD.”
[Ministry of Defence OM No. H-11013/30/2005/D(Parl)
dated 23.03.2006]
13. When asked about the present status of the examination of Dr.
Vijay Kelkar Committee’s recommendation, the Ministry of Defence in
their written replies stated that :
“The recommendation made in Kelkar Committee Report (Part-II)
suggested major changes in the functioning of Ordnance Factories,
DGQA and DPSUs. The implementation of the recommendations
of the committee would necessitate large-scale changes in the
functioning, basic organization structure, mandate and status of
the organization. The report was circulated to all the stakeholders
for obtaining their views. On receipt of the view of all the
stakeholders, a meeting was held on 18th September, 2006, under
Chairmanship of Hon’ble RM with representatives of federations
of Ordnance Factories, wherein Hon’ble RM has stated that
Government has decided not to corporatise Ordnance Factories. It
has been decided by the Government that present position would
continue for some time.”

6
Comments of the Committee
14. The Committee are unhappy to note that the Government
have not accepted the recommendation of Kelkar Committee. The
Committee further note that the Government at this moment are not
inclined to Corporatise Ordnance Factories as it involves large scale
changes in the functioning, basic organisation structure, mandate and
status of the organisation. The Committee note that major portion of
the products manufactured by the Ordnance Factories is supplied to
the Armed Forces. Several machineries and plants of Ordnance
Factories are quite old and as a result they are unable to produce
state-of-the-art technologies to meet the requirement of armed forces
to meet the challenges of modern day’s technological warfare.
Therefore there is a high level of dissatisfaction of armed forces in
terms of quality, delivery schedule and warranty of the product. The
Committee strongly feel that with this background, it would be very
difficult for the Ordnance Factory Board to meet the requirement of
their primary consumer i.e. the armed forces and compete in the
world market in a qualitative manner which witnesses rapid
technological advancement. Therefore, the Committee, in addition to
endorsing the views of Kelkar Committee for bringing changes in
the structure and functioning of Ordnance Factories, also reiterate
their earlier recommendation for giving full autonomy to Ordnance
Factory Board for undertaking R&D and by including experts with
proven records in marketing and international trade who may give
a better export orientation to the indigenously manufactured defence
products by diversifying their products range and producing high-
end weapon system. The Committee strongly feel that by doing so,
the bureaucratic control over the functioning of Ordnance Factories
will be minimised and the management from top to bottom will be
fastened and accountability at each levels will be ensured.
Autonomy/Freedom to Ordnance Factories
Recommendation (Para No. 3.6 and 3.7)
15. The Committee had noted that with the creation of Ordnance
Factory Board (OFB), Ordnance Factories had been given some
autonomy and flexibility in their functioning and management. Still,
the Committee felt that greater autonomy was required to be given to
the Management of OFB. Keeping in view the wide range of changes
taking place the world over and requirement of specialisation in the
complex defence field, the Committee had desired that the Government
must change its policy and give greater autonomy to the Ordnance

7
Factories in the field of vendor development, in-house R&D activities,
product improvement and making financial and commercial decisions
on the lines of Public Sector Undertakings. This would enable them to
enter into MoU with Indian and foreign companies for co-development
and co-production of items, giving enormous scope for diversification
of their product profile and attracting huge markets.
The Committee felt that more functional and financial autonomy
to Ordnance Factories would help in ensuring desired results, fixing
greater accountability and maintaining better financial management.
The Committee, therefore, held the view that gradually, the Ordnance
Factories might be converted into PSUs so that they might have access
to finances from the market, etc. At the same time, care should be
taken by the government to ensure that this arrangement of financial
access would not lead to any reduction in the budgetary allocation to
the Ordnance Factories and OFB.
16. The Ministry in their, action taken reply, have stated :
“MoD has transferred the responsibility of vendor development to
ordnance factories. OFB has also been authorised to conduct in-
house R&D for product improvement and development of new
products. The accounting system followed by the ordnance factories
is being reoriented towards a commercial accounting format. This
change will enable the ordnance factories to perform financial
management functions more effectively.
Ordnance Factory Board enjoys considerable autonomy in day-to-
day functioning. However, the autonomy in taking financial
decisions gets restricted as ordnance factories function as
Government department within the purview of general financial
regulations.
MoD had constituted a Committee under the Chairmanship of Dr.
Vijay Kelkar, to examine the change required to facilitate ordnance
factories to build consortium of industries around them for product
development and production. The Committee has submitted its
report and has recommended Corporation of OFB. The
recommendations of the Committee are being examined in MoD.”
[Ministry of Defence OM No. H-11013/30/2005/D(Parl)
dated 23.03.2006]
17. On the query of the Committee regarding the specific area
where the Ordnance Factory Board need more autonomy for taking

8
decision in regard to financial and commercial matter and entering
into MOU with Indian and Foreign Companies for co-development
and co-production of items and giving enormous scope for
diversification of their products profile, the Ministry have stated :
“Orders for enhanced delegation of financial powers have already
been issued. Full powers have been delegated to OFB for
procurement of input materials and R&D Projects (within budgetary
provisions), for facilitating diversification of OFB’s product profile.
The procedure for Commercial Accounting of Ordnance Factories
has also been finalised and will be implemented on approval of
competent authority.
Further, proposal for enhancing delegation of administrative powers
to OFB is under examination of MOD, OFB also enjoys complete
freedom with regard to price fixation for civil trade/export and
marketing activities of its products.”
18. During the oral evidence, Dr. Vijay L. Kelkar submitted the
following written information on necessity for enhancing autonomy
and delegated power to Ordnance Factories  :
“The Committee is of the view that there is a case for enhancing
autonomy and delegating powers to these organizations enabling
them to form Joint Ventures, set up co-production or even create
consortiums which may be needed for developing and
manufacturing sophisticated equipment. This would require un-
shackling these units (Ordnance Factories) from the existing set-up
as department of the Ministry and put them in a structure that
would, to start with, give them basic operational and financial
autonomy and also makes them accountable and responsible for
their operations and performance.”
He further suggested:
“Ordnance Factories should be corporatized into a single
corporation under leadership of a competitive management. This
corporation should be accorded the status of Nav Ratna”.
Comments of the Committee
19. The Committee are not satisfied with the replies furnished
by the Ministry of Defence, as they are contradictory to each other.
At the one hand the Ministry of Defence have stated that Ordnance
Factory enjoys considerable autonomy in day to day functioning and

9
the accounting system followed by them is being reoriented towards
commercial accounting, on the other hand they have stated that the
autonomy in taking financial decisions is restricted because they
function as a government department within the purview of General
Financial Regulations.
The Committee are further concerned to note that the Government
is not inclined to implement the recommendations of Dr. Vijay Kelkar
Committee’s Report titled “Towards revitalizing Defence Public Sector
Undertakings and Ordnance Factories”, since its implementation
requires large-scale changes in the functioning, base organisation
structure, mandate and status of the organisation. The Kelkar
Committee in their report had observed that the structure of
Ordnance Factories is unusual with limited decision taking power
related to operations of production and almost negligible powers in
all other functions. Ordnance Factories have limited role only in
producing what has been nominated. These production units do not
have a world class defence production capability to undertake R&D
activities, raw material selection, vendor development, quality control
and assurance, raising financial resources, marketing and sales
capabilities etc. Consequently, the Armed Forces do not have high
level of satisfaction in terms of product quality, delivery schedule,
warranty and consistent supply of product upgrade to meet their
requirements. Therefore, in the existing set-up it is impossible for
these production units to play the desired role of designer and
integrators. The current structure not only lacks cost effectiveness
but also is strategically misplaced to sustain country’s defence
preparedness in the long run.
20. The Committee endorse the recommendations given by the
Kelkar Committee and strongly recommend that the Government
should change their mindset and corporatise Ordnance Factories and
give full autonomy to these production units and the Ordnance
Factory Board to manage their operations in the areas like R&D,
raw material selection, vendor development, quality control, financial
accounting on commercial line etc. directly under the management
of Ordnance Factories. These measures will not only strengthen
Ordnance Factories but also make them accountable for their
operation and bring competitiveness and in the long run to make
them integral part of indigenous world-class defence production base.
The Committee however desire that pending decision on Kelkar
Committee’s recommendations, immediate steps should be taken to
ensure the implementation of enhanced delegated financial powers
and finalisation of procedure for commercial accounting of Ordnance
Factories on corporate line.

10
Capacity Utilization of Ordnance Factories
Recommendation (Para No. 5.7)
21. The Committee had noted that creation /utilisation of
production capacity was exclusively driven by the requirements
projected by the Defence Forces and the remaining surplus capacity
was utilised for meeting the requirements of the non-defence sector.
The Committee also noted that some idle capacity was maintained by
the Ordnance Factories to take care of the surge in demands of the
Defence Forces in an emergent war situation.
The Committee had viewed that the idle capacity should be utilized
fully for catering to the International export market; and in case any
emergent situation arises, the entire capacity could be fully utilized to
meet the requirements of the Defence Forces. This would help in
ensuring increased productivity, optimum resource and capacity
utilization and better quality of the products, thereby making them
more competitive. In this connection, the Committee had also stressed
that the Ordnance Factories should concentrate on specialized and high-
end defence products.
22. The Ministry in their action taken reply, have stated :
“Product range of Ordnance Factories largely caters to the
requirements of conventional warfare. These armaments are
available the world over and are manufactured by many companies.
The scope of exports is further limited, because of restriction on
export of products being made with imported technology. Scope
of export also gets limited due to the policy/of negative list of
countries where defence exports are not permitted. OFB aims to
develop high end products, having potential for supply to both
internal and overseas market, through co-development and co-
production route. Concurrently, constant endeavour is made to
maximise utilisation of installed capacity by increasing supply to
non-defence sector.”
[Ministry of Defence OM No. H-11013/30/2005/D(Parl)
dated 23.03.2006]
23. On a specific question about the efforts made by Ordnance
Factories to develop high-end products for domestic use and export,
the Ministry in their written reply submitted:
“To enable OFB, to develop and create adequate infrastructure for
Research and Development activities for products up-grade on

11
existing products and new product developments, MOD has issued
orders, giving full financial powers to OFB, within the Budget
provisions in this regard in December 2006. OFB is promoting in-
house Research & Development activities through R&D Centres,
created in some of the factories, to facilitate development of design
of various tools and gauges for establishment of new products as
well as up-gradation activities of existing products in Ordnance
Factories. OFB has also been asked to formulate appropriate R&D
policy. R&D activities in Ordnance Factories will be a major thrust
area for future.”
Comments of the Committee
24. The Committee observe from the replies of Ministry of
Defence that the product range of Ordnance Factories largely cater
to the requirements of conventional warfare. The scope of exports of
these conventional equipment/weapon system is limited because of
restriction on export of products and overwhelming production of
these products world wide. The aim of Ordnance Factory Board is
to develop high-end products to meet the internal and overseas
market and is not commensurate with the initiatives taken by the
Ministry of Defence/Ordnance Factory Board. Ordnance Factory Board
has been given financial powers within the budgetary provision and
not full financial autonomy to raise money from the market and
Ordnance Factories are still considered as the government department.
Ordnance Factory Board is promoting in-house R&D activities
through R&D centers in some of the factories only and not in all
the factories. Ordnance Factory Board has been asked to formulate
R&D policy on which action is yet to start. The Committee strongly
feel that with this limited and slow pace of initiative, the Ordnance
Factory Board cannot achieve its objective to play the desired role of
designer and integrator and promote self reliance in defence
production to meet the requirements of Armed Forces and export of
high-end technology. Therefore, the Committee recommend that
Ordnance Factory Board must formulate appropriate R&D Policy to
give real thrust to R&D activities and the Ministry of Defence should
provide full financial autonomy to them to raise funds from open
market and utilize the amount for their upgradation and
modernization to promote indigenisation and achieve self reliance
in defence production and reduce foreign dependence. Therefore,
the Committee strongly feel that this is high time to restructure
Ordnance Factories gradually to meet the requirement of modern
defence world.

12
Capacity utilisation of Ordnance Factories
Recommendation (Para No . 5.8)
25. The Committee had expressed concerned about the delay in
production of Arjun Tanks and hope that the obstacles coming in the
way of final production of Arjun Tank would be taken care of by the
Defence Ordnance Factory in coordination with the DRDO and the
shortcomings would be corrected expeditiously so that the supply of
required number of Tanks could be provided to the user as envisaged.
26. The Ministry in their action taken reply, have stated:
“Main Battle Tank Arjun is under limited series production at
Heavy Vehicle Factory , Avadi. Certain teething problems are being
faced in the initial stages. Technical expertise of DRDO, as designer,
is needed to resolve the problems. Keeping this in view,
representatives of DRDO are deputed at HVF, Avadi. Further,
interaction with Combat Vehicle Research & Development
Establishment/DRDO, covering the areas of process guidance,
technical clarification, quality assurance, defect investigation and
remedial measure incorporation, is held regularly.
Production of MBT Arjun is also monitored regularly by a working
committee constituted with the representative of User, producer
and designer to steer productionisation. Steering Committee with
Secretary (DP) as Chairman, SA to RM as co-chairman and
representatives from User, DRDO and OFB as members also
monitors the production of the tank.”
[Ministry of Defence OM No. H-11013/30/2005/D(Parl)
dated 23.03.2006]
27. When asked about the Army’s opinion about the present status
of Arjun Tank, the representatives of Army Headquarters during
evidence stated :
“As per my information till now, we are supposed to receive a
total of 15 tanks, as part of the limited series of production. Out
of these till now five have been handed over to the Army. Balance
ten are still to be handed over to us.
As far as these five tanks are concerned, these required certain
amount of modification. We want to have a total of 15 tanks. The
balance ten are not with us. The moment, they come, we would
put them through trials. After the trials only , we will be able to
give a comprehensive report.”

13
Comments of the Committee
28. The Committee are deeply concerned to note that even after
a lapse of considerable period, the Main Battle Tank Arjun is under
limited series of production at Heavy Vehicle Factory, Avadi. Five
Arjun Tanks have been handed over to Army and these tanks still
require certain amount of modifications and the Army will give a
comprehensive report after receiving and putting all the 15 tanks
into trials. Therefore, the Committee desire that the Ministry of
Defence should give a serious re-look into the entire matter as how
to comply with Army’s requirement in a time-bound manner and
ensure the supply of remaining ten tanks to the Army so that the
trials can begin. The Ministry may apprise the Committee about the
schedule of the commercial production of Arjun Tank so as to meet
the requirement of Army.
Modernization Programme of Ordnance Factories
Recommendation (Para No . 6.12)
29. The Committee had noted that there was a constant need for
upgradation and modernisation of Ordnance Factories in order to enable
them to meet the Defence Forces’ demands for high quality ammunition
and reliable products keeping pace with the latest technology. In this
connection, a capital investment of Rs. 3297 crore was planned during
the 10th Plan against Rs. 1062 crore invested during the 9th Plan. The
planned amount includes Rs. 1804 crore for modernisation and Rs.
1493 crore for new facilities. The Committee were, however, surprised
to note that during the first three years of the 10th Plan i.e. from 2002
to 2005 the actual investment made was only Rs. 847 crore as per the
annual requirement projected by OFB. The Committee would like that
the full amount for modernisation was utilised during the remaining
period of the 10th Plan.
30. The Ministry in their action taken reply, have stated :
“The Capital investment of Rs. 3297 crores includes investment of
Rs. 531 crores propellant/explosive. The Nalanda project had been
put on hold and an expert committee had been constituted by
MoD to conduct a detailed review of the OF Nalanda project. The
expert committee has submitted the report, which is being
examined in MoD. Investment for creation of additional facilities
for manufactures of propellant/explosives is being reviewed in the
light of change in product mix and reluctance of overseas plant &
machinery manufactures to provide technology. OFB expects to
achieve the investment of Rs. 1348 crores on modernisation during
X Plan period.”
[Ministry of Defence OM No. H-11013/30/2005/D(Parl)
dated 23.03.2006]

14
Comments of the Committee
31. The Committee note that the Nalanda Project had been put
on hold and expert Committee had been constituted by Ministry of
Defence to review the Nalanda Project in detail. The expert
Committee’s report is being examined by the Ministry of Defence.
The Committee are concerned to note that due to this long gestation
period of review and examination, the amount allocated for
modernisation/upgradation was not utilized as a result thereof, the
upgradation and modernisation programme of Ordnance Factories to
produce high-end technologies to meet the present day’s requirement
of the armed forces had to put on hold.
The Committee are not inclined to accept the replies of Ministry
of Defence as the Committee have not been informed when the
expert Committee was set up, the terms and conditions of the
Committee, when the Committee submitted its report to Government,
since when the report is being examined by the Ministry of Defence
and when the examination will be completed by the Ministry of
Defence and final decision is likely to be taken.
Therefore, the Committee desire all the above information and
the Ministry of Defence should expedite the process of examination/
consideration of the expert Committee’s recommendation to
modernize all the Ordnance Factories to produce high-end
technologies and meet the requirements of Armed Forces in a time
bound manner and ensure full utilisation of allocated funds. The
Committee may be apprised of the progress made thereon.
Replacement of ageing machineries
Recommendation (Para No. 6.14)
32. The Committee, during their recent study visit to the High
Explosive Factory and Ammunition Factory at Khadki, Pune had
observed that several machineries and plant are quite old in High
Explosive Factory, Khadki and need immediate replacement for security
of the plant and to improve efficiency and meet the production targets.
The Committee, had therefore, recommended that the Ministry should
strive to replace the ageing machineries and equipment in a time-
bound manner with state-of-the-art technology.
The Committee would like the procedures for purchase of plants
& machinery by the Ordnance Factories to be simplified. The Ordnance
Factory Board should be given full powers to procure plant &
machinery subject to budget provision and availability of funds .

15
33. The Ministry in their action taken reply, have stated :
“Views of Standing Committee are noted for action. The issue
related to further delegation of financial powers to OFB for
procurement of plant and machinery is being examined in MoD.”
[Ministry of Defence OM No. H-11013/30/2005/D(Parl)
dated 23.03.2006]
34. On a specific question about the efforts being made by the
Ministry of Defence for replacing the ageing machineries and equipment
in a time-bound manner with state-of-the-art technology, the Ministry
furnished the following information:
“During 9th Plan period, an amount of Rs. 1062 crores has been
invested for modernization of plant and machinery of Ordnance
Factories. Investment during 10th Plan period is likely to exceed
Rs. 1348 crores in this regard. For 11th Plan period, a year-wise
plan of replacement of ageing machinery and equipments has also
been made as per the following table which will be closely
monitored for implementation:
(Rs. in crore)
2007-08 2008-09 2009-10 2010-11 2011-12 Total
367 574 608 496 329 2374
35. Regarding the present status of examination of the issue of
delegation of financial powers to Ordnance Factory Board for
procurement of plant and machinery, the Ministry stated :
“For procurement of plant and machinery, orders for enhanced
delegation of financial powers to OFB have already been issued.
OFB has been given powers to procure required P&M up to Rs.
50 crores in each case through competitive biddings and Rs. 3
crores in single tender and proprietary item category.”
Comments of the Committee
36. The Committee note that Ordnance Factory Board has been
given the financial powers to procure required plant and machinery
up to Rs. 50 crore in case through competitive bidding and Rs. 3
crore in single tender and proprietary item category. The Committee
feel that this amount is not sufficient to replace the ageing
machineries and for the modernisation of the plants. Therefore, the

16
Committee reiterate their earlier recommendation that Ordnance
Factory Board should be given full power to procure plant and
machinery subject to budgetary provision and availability of funds.
37. The Committee further note that the investment during 10th
plan period for modernisation of plant and machinery is likely to
be Rs. 1348 crore which is far below the original plan target of Rs.
1804 crore. For 11th plan, a year-wise plan of replacement of ageing
machinery and equipments has been made. The Committee hope
that modernisation of plant and machinery of Ordnance Factories
would be completed in a time bound manner. The Committee would
like to be apprised of the progress made in this regard viz. total
amount required to modernise each ordnance factory and the time
period required by Ministry of Defence to replace the ageing
machines.
Perspective Plan
Recommendation (Para No . 6.15)
38. The Committee had stressed that restructuring of the production
system of Ordnance Factories was the need of the hour. The Armed
Forces should prepare a Long Term Integrated Perspective Plan (LTIPP)
as already recommended by this Committee, projecting clearly their
present and future requirements so that the Ordnance Factories might
also draw up their modernisation plan accordingly. The modernisation
plan of the Ordnance Factories should address not only the issue of
increase in productivity but also matters relating to the range and
quality of products to meet the new requirements. The Committee
had recommended that to minimise imports, users should be fully
involved in the preparation of vision document. In this connection,
Government should immediately appoint an expert group on the
perspective plan which should submit its report within six months
from the date of presentation of this report
39. The Ministry in their action taken reply, have stated :
“Armed forces share the medium term perspective plan covering
a period of 5 years for capital acquisition with OFB.”
[Ministry of Defence OM No. H-11013/30/2005/D(Parl)
dated 23.03.2006]
Comments of the Committee
40. The Committee note that Armed Forces share the medium
term perspective plan covering a period of five years for capital

17
acquisition with Ordnance Factory Board. The Committee are not
satisfied with the replies furnished by the Ministry of Defence. The
Committee feel that along with the medium term perspective plan,
the Armed Forces should also share the Long Term Integrated
Perspective Plan (LTIPP) with the Ordnance Factory Board enabling
it to draw its long term modernization and production plan. The
Ordnance Factory Board should address the production of high-end
technologies on the basis of rapid scientific and technological
advancement. In this regard, the Committee reiterate that the users
should be fully involved in preparation of the vision document by
Ordnance Factory Board in order to ensure its success.
Modernisation Programme of Ordnance Factories
Recommendation (Para No. 6.16)
41. The Committee had noted that entry of private sector in defence
production, especially in non-combat items has posed new challenges
before Ordnance Factories. The Ordnance Factories which had complete
monopoly over production of defence equipment and items would
now have to be more competitive and cost effective in order to maintain
their dominant position. They would have to undertake modernisation
programme in a broader way. If necessary for the purpose, the
government might also allow them to raise financial resources from
the market. In this context, the Committee had also desired the
government to examine the feasibility of shutting down ageing and
non-revivable Ordnance Factories/Plants. The labour working in these
factories might be absorbed in other Ordnance Factories or Voluntary
Retirement Scheme (VRS) offer might be given to them.
42. The Ministry in their action taken reply, have stated :
“Modernisation of infrastructure, matching with requirement
projected by Defence Forces is being done continuously. OFB is a
government department, under the aegis of Department of Defence
Production. Therefore, the Board do not have the mandate to access
the market for finance under the present structure. All the ordnance
factories are being given importance by the OFB for modernisation.
Workload is distributed judiciously and new products are
introduced in the factories to ensure that the capacity is gainfully
utilized.”
[Ministry of Defence OM No. H-11013/30/2005/D(Parl)
dated 23.03.2006]

18
43. When asked about the initiatives taken by the Ministry of
Defence to restructure Ordnance Factory Board to access the market
for finance, the Ministry of Defence in their written replies stated :
“Ordnance Factories organisation is a Government Department and
is not a separate legal entity. Therefore, Ordnance Factory Board
can not access funds from the market. The funds required by
Ordnance Factories are being provided from the Budget of the
Government. As far as initiatives for restructuring of Ordnance
Factory Board are concerned, the recommendation made in Kelkar
Committee Report (Part-II) suggested major changes in the
functioning of Ordnance Factories, DGQA and DPSUs. The
implementation of the recommendations of the committee would
necessitate large-scale changes in the functioning, basic organization
structure, mandate and status of the organization. The report was
circulated to all the stakeholders for obtaining their views. On
receipt of the view of all the stakeholders, a meeting was held on
18th September, 2006, under Chairmanship of Hon’ble RM with
representatives of federations of Ordnance Factories, wherein
Hon’ble RM has stated that Government has decided not to
corporatise Ordnance Factories. It has been decided by the
Government that present position would continue for some time.”
Comments of the Committee
44. The Committee note that the Ordnance Factories Board do
not have the mandate to access the market for raising finance under
the present structure. The funds required by Ordnance Factories for
modernization are being provided from the Ministry of Defence’s
budget. So far as restructuring of Ordnance Factory is concerned, it
seems that presently the Ministry of Defence are not inclined to do
it. The Committee are perturbed to note that the Ministry of Defence
are content with the existing position of Ordnance Factories and do
not have strategy to improve the performance of Ordnance Factories
in order to make them able to face the new challenges of
competitiveness and cost-effectiveness of their products. Therefore,
the Committee strongly recommend that the Ministry of Defence
should reconsider the matter and restructure Ordnance Factories
gradually and allow Ordnance Factory Board to raise funds from
market for their modernisation and upgradation and also make them
accountable and responsible for their operations and performance.
For this purpose the Ministry of Defence may change the character
of the Ordnance Factories on the corporate line slowly which is not
privatization. In this way, Ordnance Factories will be self-financing
production units.

19
Pricing System of Ordnance Factories
Recommendation (Para No. 8.8)
45. The Committee had noted that the Ordnance Factory Board
had taken certain initiatives to exercise effective control over increase
in the prices of Defence products. The Committee felt that the
productivity and scale of production were the crucial issues which
needed to be stressed upon to contain the sharp increase in prices.
The Committee, had therefore, recommended that the Ministry should
strive to achieve economy of scale in Defence Production in the wake
of envisaged competition from the Private Sector. Towards this end,
modernisation of the existing plants & machineries and replacement
of the old equipment in the factories were required to be taken up on
priority. These steps would enable Ordnance Factories to participate in
global tenders in a competitive manner.
The Committee understood that Ordnance Factories were providing
defence products to armed forces on cost-to-cost basis. The Committee
also understood that Ordnance Factories did not have sufficient funds
for modernisation of the plants and machineries. The Committee, had
therefore, desired that on sale of products to armed forces Ordnance
Factories should be allowed to have a fixed percentage of profit which
might be used for modernisation / upgradation of these factories.
46. The Ministry in their action taken reply, have stated:
“The present policy does not permit ordnance factories to retain
surpluses generated out of supplies to customers. Change in pricing
policy by building in a fixed percentage of profit in sale price
would require change in procedures.”
[Ministry of Defence OM No. H-11013/30/2005/D(Parl)
dated 23.03.2006]
47. Regarding the change in pricing policy by building in affixed
percentage of profit in sale price would require change in procedure,
the Ministry has stated :
“In this regard, it is stated that till the Ordnance Factory Board
remain a Government Department, it has to function on ‘No profit
no loss’ basis, as far as supply to Defence Forces are concerned.
For non-defence supplies, a suitable margin of profit is added. It
is expected that the pricing system will be streamlined, when the
proposal on professional accounting in OFB is implemented.”

20
48. On the query of the Committee whether the Balance Sheet in
Ordnance Factories is made in the line of corporate sector, the Ministry
furnished the following :
“As the Ordnance Factory Board is a Government Department, the
balance sheet of OFB is being prepared as per Government
procedures for accounting. The process of preparation of balance
sheet in the line of corporate sector i.e. as per commercial sector
i.e. as per commercial accounting procedure, is now finalised and
will be implemented on approval of competent authority.”
Comments of the Committee
49. The Committee express their unhappiness over the vague
and unconvincing replies received from the Ministry. The Committee
would like to know the details of the procedures which are required
to be changed and why these can not be changed even on the
recommendations of the Parliamentary Committee. The Committee
observe that the replies of Ministry of Defence do not give any
indication pertaining to the concrete and positive steps taken or to
be undertaken by the Ministry in order to change the present pricing
policy in the line of corporate sector i.e. as per commercial accounting
procedure. Therefore, the Committee, strongly recommend that the
Ministry of Defence should approve the proposal for preparation of
balance sheet in the line of corporate sector at the earliest without
loss of time, so that Ordnance Factories can earn a fixed percentage
of profit from the sale of products to Armed Forces, which in turn
may be used for their modernisation upgradation.
R & D Activities in Ordnance Factories
Recommendation (Para No. 9.7)
50. The Committee had noted that the Ordnance Factories were
giving thrust to in-house R&D efforts in order to develop new products.
The Committee were, however, constrained to note that the investment
made on R&D during the last five years had been negligible, with the
result that no major project or upgradation activities could be
undertaken out of the allocated funds. Most of the projects being
undertaken by Ordnance Factories were through acquisition of
technology from DRDO or by import and there had been very little
achievement in developing new products through in-house R&D. The
Committee had desired that Ordnance Factories should change their
role from technology recipients to technology producers through more
emphasis on in-house R&D.

21
51. The Ministry in their action taken reply, have stated :
“Ordnance Factories being a production organisation do not have
infrastructure for conducting ab-initio research. They depend on
developing new products and upgrades in synergy with technology
providers. To enable Ordnance Factories to build infrastructure for
in-house R&D, following proposals are being examined in MoD:
• Enhanced delegation of financial power to OFB for R&D
• Allowing OFB for training (including overseas training) of
personnel in key technology areas.
• Sufficient freedom for appointment of consultant, as expert
assistance in R&D projects.
• Setting up a proof range for evaluation of products.”
[Ministry of Defence OM No. H-11013/30/2005/D(Parl)
dated 23.03.2006]
52. On a specific question about the efforts made to develop
adequate infrastructure for conducting ab-initio research and the
allocation and expenditure to be made thereon, the Ministry have
furnished the following information:
“Indian Ordnance Factories are traditionally production agencies
and do not have mandate to conduct ab-initio Research. Basic
Research & Development responsibility for production of Defence
products rests with DRDO. However, to enable OFB, to develop
and create adequate infrastructure for Research and Development
activities for products up-grade on existing products and new
products developments, MOD has issued orders, giving full
financial powers to OFB, within the Budget provisions in this regard
in December 2006. OFB has been asked to formulate appropriate
R&D policy, which specifies allocation of expenditure in the areas
of process and product improvement, cost reduction and product
development etc.”
53. Regarding the present status to enable Ordnance Factories to
build infrastructure for in-house R&D, the Ministry have furnished the
following information:
“To build required infrastructure for carrying out product and
process improvement and development of new products, OFB have
been delegated with full powers, within the Budget provisions.
Besides, full powers are also delegated for procurement of required

22
inputs/raw materials and components for such activities. For
procurement of Machinery & Equipments, powers have been
delegated upto Rs. 50 crores in each case and Rs. 3 crores in each
case for single tender and proprietary items. OFB has also been
delegated the financial powers to engage the consultants/specialists
of their choice up to Rs. 2 crores per annum for sanctioned project
and Rs. 1 crore per annum in other cases.”
Comments of the Committee
54. The Committee are concerned to note that the Ordnance
Factory Board, which controls and manages the functioning of 39
Ordnance Factories at present do not have infrastructure to undertake
basic research in their respective fields. The Committee are further
given to understand that DRDO has taken R&D responsibility of
the Ordnance Factory Board for development of Defence products.
The Committee note that the Ministry of Defence has issued orders
to enable Ordnance Factory Board to develop its own infrastructure
for R&D activities for products development.
In view of the foregoing, the Committee strongly recommend
that immediate steps should be taken by the Ministry of Defence to
provide sufficient physical and financial autonomy to Ordnance
Factory Board to create its own infrastructure base so that it could
undertake various R&D projects. Accordingly, the matching budgetary
allocation should be provided to Ordnance Factories by the Ministry
of Defence in this regard. The Committee are of strong view that
DRDO should not be only the controlling authority of products
development and R&D projects of Ordnance Factory Board, but
should rather assume the role of a facilitator to Ordnance Factory
Board in this regard. The Committee further recommend that the
Ministry should allocate a separate budgetary provision for the
Ordnance Factory Board specifically meant for undertaking R&D
activities. The Committee would also like to be apprised of the
progress made by the Ordnance Factory Board in formulation of its
R&D policy.
R&D activities in Ordnance Factories
Recommendation (Para No. 9.8)
55. The Committee were constrained to note that in the era of
Nuclear, Biological and Chemical warfare, our Defence Forces were
still bound to depend on conventional weapons which need constant
upgradation. The Committee had viewed it very seriously and

23
recommend that the Ministry should intensify efforts to provide
sufficient funds and logistic support to the Ordnance Factories to
undertake mini and major projects in collaboration with DRDO, Defence
PSUs and foreign partners and also continue with the technological
upgradation of the conventional weapons so as to meet the ever-
growing challenges of the modern warfare. The Committee had also
desired the Ministry to explore the possibility to involve private sector
in some of the select R&D projects being taken up by DRDO / user
services.
56. The Ministry in their action taken reply, have stated :
“Views of the committee are noted. MoD is committed to provide
full support to Ordnance Factories for taking up projects in
collaboration with DRDO, DPSUs and private sector industries.”
[Ministry of Defence OM No. H-11013/30/2005/D(Parl)
dated 23.03.2006]
Comments of the Committee
57. The Committee note that the Ministry of Defence are
committed to provide full support to Ordnance Factories for taking
up projects in collaboration with DRDO, DPSUs and private sector
industries. The Committee strongly feel that in this regard the
Ministry of Defence should supplement the efforts with adequate
budgetary provision and logistic support to the Ordnance Factories
to fulfil the above objectives.
Export Market of the Defence Products
Recommendation (Para No. 10.9 & 10.10)
58. The Committee had noted that since the commencement of
organised export in 1989, value of export has been minimal over the
last five years. Export orders had generally been from the neighbouring
countries. The Committee had noted that as of now OFB’s export
market was largely of conventional items where a large number of
players were making it tough and competitive for Indian products to
make their presence felt. The Committee had also noted that the export
market of OFB products also suffers due to their non-compatibility
with NATO specifications. Despite continuous efforts of OFB to give
wide publicity to boost exports, physical increase in quantum of export
was insignificant. At present, no board or institution had been created
within the OFB supervision to promote exports of defence products.

24
The Committee, had therefore, recommended that the Indian Ordnance
Factories should strive to diversify their product range to grab the
customer base in non-conventional arms segment of export market.
Keeping in view the requirements of NATO compatible items in
international market, the specifications of more and more indigenous
items should be planned to cater to the export market, in addition to
the Indian requirements. The OFB should also take earnest initiatives
to create an Export Promotion Board under their supervision and
entrust it with the task to explore optimal possibility of export and to
suggest ways and means to boost the export of Ordnance Factories’
products, create infrastructure necessary for export market and help in
achieving the aim of Indian Ordnance Factories to establish themselves
as a brand leader in the world market. As recommended in earlier
paragraphs, the Committee had desired that Ordnance Factory Board
should have experts from international trade and marketing fields also
who can play an effective role in preparing strategy to tap the vast
export market for armaments / ammunitions and other defence
products.
59. The Ministry in their action taken reply, have stated :
“The need for setting up an institution for marketing of products
of OFB at the global level has been felt by OFB. A proposal for
setting up Ordnance Factories Marketing Corporation has been
forwarded by OFB, which is being examined by the MoD. This
organisation can employ the services of specialists from
international trade and marketing fields.”
[Ministry of Defence OM No. H-11013/30/2005/D(Parl)
dated 23.03.2006]
Comments of the Committee
60. The Committee note that Ordnance Factory Board has
forwarded a proposal for setting up Ordnance Factories Marketing
Corporation which is under examination of Ministry of Defence.
The Committee would like to know when the proposal was sent by
Ordnance Factory Board and how much time is likely to be taken
by Ministry of Defence to examine the proposal. The Committee
desire that the Ministry of Defence should expedite the matter for
setting up an institution for marketing of products of Ordnance
Factory Boards at the global level and apprise the Committee about
the progress made in this regard. The Committee, however, would
like to reiterate earlier recommendation that NATO compatible items
should also be produced for exports, wherever the factories have the
capacity.

25
Outsourcing to Private Sector
Recommendation (Para No. 11.7)
61. The Committee had noted that Defence Production Industry
has come a long way from being reserved entirely for the public sector
and was moving towards greater participation from the private sector.
The Committee were happy to note that keeping in view the capabilities
of private sector, the work of the value of Rs. 2500 crore per annum
was being outsourced to them. The Committee, had desired that
Ordnance Factories should strive to outsource more work in those
areas where there is sufficient capability of private sector and retain
production of only high-end items. The Committee at the same time
had stressed that Ordnance Factories during the process of outsourcing
must ensure strict adherence to the stringent quality standard of the
outsourced products.
62. The Ministry in their action taken reply, have stated :
“Views of the Committee are noted for implementation.”
[Ministry of Defence OM No. H-11013/30/2005/D(Parl)
dated 23.03.2006]
63. During the oral evidence before the Committee, the
representatives of Trade Unions Forum on implementation of Kelkar
Committee Report and encouragement of private sector in Defence
Production, R&D, they submitted the following for consideration :-
“The composition of Kelkar Committee itself is questionable as it
did not include the major stake holder i.e. the employees. The
report is totally flawed in its approach when instead of reducing
import through strengthening the existing public sector defence
industry, it has embarked upon a policy of giving maximum space
to private sector in Defence. It has given undue stress on export
of arm which is not a sphere where country like India would try
to project itself like USA or Israel.
** ** ** **
It deprives DPSUs and OFB of a level playing field with private
industries. OFB and DPSUs are captive industries of defence
services. Unless they reach optimal capacity utilisation, technological
upgradation and necessary autonomy, the question of so called
competition with private sector does not arise.”

26
64. On being asked by the Committee regarding capacity utilisation
and Order Book position and outsourcing of work to private sector by
the Ordnance Factories, the representative of Trade Unions/Forum
stated as under:
“It is that in spite of the fact that the PSUs or the Ordnance
Factories have the capabilities, they are not being utilized as in
the case of Hindustan Aeronautics Limited. I am not quoting from
my figures. It is a figure from the C&AG. Where the capacity is
there, even that capacity is being outsourced and tomorrow the
RURs will be placed position.
…… The recommendation that you had made in the seventh report
that in all ordnance factories you must have an assessment of
their capacity, the technology and their upgradation. That is not
being done. What is being done is that instead of doing that, their
capacity is being under-utilised and you are giving orders to the
private sector. That is my point.”
He further stated :
“…….We have no quarrel about quality and time. These are the
factors for any unit to develop. Lastly, we would sum up with the
request that please see that the existing orders and existing capacity
is totally utilized before passing it to anyone else. Please put
pressure on the Government on this issue.”
Comments of the Committee
65. The Committee had recommended that Ordnance Factories
should strive to outsource more work in those areas where there is
sufficient capability of private sector and retain production of only
high-end items. The Committee, however, note that in some cases of
outsourcing the work to private sector, Ordnance Factories have in
house capacity to manufacture these products and due to this
outsourcing, their manpower is sitting idle and optimal capacity is
being under-utilised, which has caused some anxiety in the mind of
the workers.
66. The Committee, therefore, desire that Ordnance Factories at
the first instance must ensure to produce quality products to meet
the requirement of armed forces and ensure optimum utilisation of
their existing capacity and thereafter explore the possibility of
outsourcing work to the Private Sector where they have sufficient
capability as well as consider Joint Ventures with them. The

27
Ordnance Factories should retain production of only high-end
products. At the same time, the factories should ensure the quality
of their products and introduce accountability for the success and
failure of their products. At the same time, the Committee wish to
stress upon that Ordnance Factories must ensure timely supply of
their products to the Armed Forces, because delay in this matter
will hamper their preparedness, which the country cannot afford at
any cost. The Ordnance Factories must repair and upgrade their
products supplied to the users in the warranty/guarantee period. The
Committee again reiterate that Ordnance Factories during the process
of outsourcing, must ensure strict adherence to the stringent quality
standards of the outsourced work. The Committee would like to be
apprised about the action taken by the Government in this regard.

CHAPTER II
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN
ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT
Recommendation (Para No. 2.6)
The Committee note that in the extended Board there are four
more members who represent the Army, Defence Research &
Development Organisation, DGQA and Ministry of Defence. The
Committee desire that there should be a three-tier system with clear
delegation of powers for better performance at Apex, Middle and Floor
levels with interface between the Ordnance Factories, users and DRDO.
Reply of the Government
Special Board with representation from Army, DRDO, DGQA and
MoD provides an interface between the factories, Users and DRDO at
the apex level. Armament Development Monitoring Committee (ADMC)
is a structured institution between OFB and DRDO to monitor
armament projects at the middle level. Working groups are constituted
by ADMC for floor level coordination between DRDO and factories.
User interaction meetings are also held to get regular feedback from
the Users.
[Ministry of Defence OM No. H-11013/30/2005/D(Parl)
dated 23.03.2006]
Recommendation (Para No . 2.7)
The Committee also note that the Special Board Members meet
only twice a year. The Committee recommend that the number of
sittings be increased in order to ensure better interface between DRDO,
OFB and users. The Committee also recommend that the performance
of the Ordnance Factories should be periodically/annually reviewed
by the OFB.
Reply of the Government
Views of the Committee are noted. The performance of Ordnance
Factories is periodically reviewed by OFB and discussed in the meetings
of Special Board.
[Ministry of Defence OM No. H-11013/30/2005/D(Parl)
dated 23.03.2006]
28

29
When asked to furnish the details of the sittings of the special
members, the Ministry of Defence in their written replies stated :
“In view of the recommendation of the Committee, the numbers
of sittings of Special Board Members have been increased from
two times per annum to four times per annum. During the current
year, meetings have been held in June, August and October 2006
and February 2007.”
When asked about the frequency of the periodic review of
Ordnance Factory Board, the Ministry of Defence in their written replies
stated:
“Performance of Ordnance Factories is being reviewed at three
levels. Major performance parameters are reviewed on monthly
basis in Ordnance Factory Board’s monthly meetings. The Members
of Operating Divisions are also reviewing the performance of
Ordnance Factories coming under their purview on a quarterly
basis. Chairman (OFB) on his level also review the performance
twice in a year.
In above reviews, the physical achievement of production/issue
targets concerning all indenters, are being analysed. Factory-wise
major bottlenecks in production are being discussed, so as to find
a joint solution to resolve it. Issues concerning coordination between
the factories and help required from OFB are also addressed in
above review meetings.
The major findings in all above reviews are the difficulties in
production, planning, consequent to delays in getting production
targets and covering indents. Such constraints/difficulties are being
resolved through regular interaction with major customer by
holding early Target Fixation Meetings and close reviews/
monitoring of placement of indents.”
Recommendation (Para No . 4.4)
The Committee desire that Ordnance Factories should speed up
efforts to produce new items to match the changing requirements of
the Defence Forces so that imports are reduced and Ordnance Factories’
share in supplies to Defence Forces increases. The Committee further
recommend that besides fulfilling the requirements of Defence Forces,
Ordnance Factories should strive to give market orientation to their
products so that various other organisations in non-defence sector also
approach them to buy their products as per prevailing market price.

30
Reply of the Government
Views of the committee are noted. OFB has been asked to increase
the issues to Ministry of Home Affairs and develop products specific
to the requirements of Paramilitary of State Police Forces to further
the share of supplies to non-defence sector.
[Ministry of Defence OM No. H-11013/30/2005/D(Parl) dated
23.03.2006]
Recommendation (Para No . 6.13)
Many Ordnance Factories, which were set up before Independence
are still using old technology and are in dire need of massive infusion
of funds for modernisation. The Committee would like to be apprised
of the detailed modernisation plan alongwith projected fund
requirements of OFB in respect of each Ordnance Factory and the
level of technology being presently used by it.
Reply of the Government
The details of the investment made in the IX and X Plan so far
and proposed to be made in the remaining 2 years of Plan in the
ordnance factories set up before independence are indicated below:
Pre-World War-I
Sl.No. Factory Investment Major areas of investment
for modernisation
IXth Plan Xth Plan
02-03 to 05-06 & Total
04-05 06-07
(actual) (actual)
12 345 6 7
1. MSF 51.71 157.74 60.75 218.49 VDLF & ESR for steel,
Radial Forgoing for barrels,
2-Hi/4-Hi Rolling Mill etc.
2. GCF 14.60 34.36 32.00 66.36 CNC Technology
3. GSF 52.28 39.53 19.50 59.03 CNC Technology
4. RFI 40.30 40 19.32 59.32 CNC Technology & Cold
Swaging for barrels

31
12 345 6 7
5. AFK 37.58 27.95 25.53 53.48 Multi-station Transfer Press,
Multi-station auto loading
& assy . of SAA
6. CFA 6.92 3.98 13.62 17.60 SAC Plant
7. OEFC 15.13 9.63 8.82 18.45 CNC M/cs & H.S. Sewing
M/c
8. OCFS 9.31 8.76 4.64 13.40 Computerised Jersy/socks
knitting M/s
Pre-World War-II
1. OFC 54.74 58.20 71.12 129.32 CNC technology for
Ammunition, Ammunition
and Ordnance
2. OFK 37.68 33.73 27.99 61.72 CNC Technology for
Ammunition Hardware,
Semi-auto Progressive Press,
Initiator Composition
3. HEF 3.36 4.09 3.93 8.02 Upkeep of Chemical process
plant
4. OF Kat 16.09 6.56 1.79 8.35 Upgradation of production
facilities from 30mm CC
5. OFA 17.71 10.67 10.72 21.39 Auto high production
facilities from 130mm CC
6. OFM 14.38 21.18 5.00 26.18 CNC technology for
manufacture of Aerial Bomb
7. OPF 5.47 5.40 3.36 8.76 Line assy manufacturing
8. OF Dun 7.95 5.15 8.81 13.96 Vacuum coating plant, CNC
machining facilitator
Other Major Factories
1. OFAJ 105.88 85.98 21.02 107.00 155MM ERFB Shell, 130mm
Shell, 125mm SCCC Fuzes
2. VFJ 50.10 26.17 35.66 61.83 Stallion Mk-3 LPTA
3. SAF 48.37 15.66 10.97 26.63 5.56mm INSAS LMG, 5.56
mm INSAS rifle

32
12 345 6 7
4. OFT 36.63 28.55 9.05 38.05 5.56 mm INSAS Rifle
5. OFDC 16.06 12.54 1.75 14.29 Stabiliser & Fins for 125
mm Ammunition
6. FGK 7.01 8.43 6.00 14.43 155mm Ordnance, 0.32”
Revolver
7. MPF 9.39 12.84 2.89 15.73 Machine Tools
8. HAPP 8.08 1.68 3.22 4.90 125mm FSAPDS
9. OFBH 8.07 4.42 9.49 13.91 Box H2A/H5A, Carrier 6A/
7A
10. OCFC 6.70 17.05 7.01 24.15 Production of Cables
Upgradation of technology comparable with contemporary
industries is attempted during above modernisation.
[Ministry of Defence OM No. H-11013/30/2005/D(Parl)
dated 23.03.2006]
Recommendation (Para Nos. 7.8 & 7.9)
The Committee note that quality upgradation and cost-effectiveness
of the defence products are imperative to keep the Ordnance Factories
vigilant, agile and responsive to the needs and concerns of Defence
Forces. The Committee endorse the view of the Ministry that cost
reduction of products may be a successful proposition only when
modernisation efforts aim at more productivity. However, the
Committee find that while the Ministry have taken quite a few
initiatives for quality upgradation and cost reduction, export of the
products, which is directly linked to the two factors, is negligible.
The Committee feel that to achieve the goals of modernisation,
concerted efforts need to be made with a clear mandate. Production of
items should be undertaken side by side with quality upgradation
and cost-effectiveness so as to attract global vendors.
Reply of the Government
OFB has been able to hold the average weighted priced index for
the year 2005-06 at the level of 2000-01 for supply to Army by taking
various measures including modernisation. The effect of economic

33
measures does not have much influence in export due to limitation of
product range as mentioned in reply to Para 5.7.
[Ministry of Defence OM No. H-11013/30/2005/D(Parl)
dated 23.03.2006]
Regarding the various measures taken by the Ministry/OFB for
modernization of the Ordnance Factories, the Ministry furnished the
following :
“Modernization of infrastructure and required Plant & Machinery,
matching with requirement projected by Defence Forces is a
continuous process in Ordnance Factories, MOD fully supports
modernization plans of OFB. Full Budget is allocated/sanctioned
as per requirement projected by OFB. More financial powers to
OFB, for acquiring new plant, machinery and equipments, have
been delegated recently. Under the enhanced delegations, OFB have
been empowered to procure plant and machinery worth Rs. 50
crores in each case, in competitive bidding cases and Rs. 3 crores
in cases of single tender and proprietary item.
In last three years, many manual and mechanical machines have
been replaced with Computerized Numerical Control (CNC)
machines. Some of the high value modernization projects in
ordnance factories include, Radial Forging Plant, CNC Centre for
new Pinaka System, Rifling Centre, Cold Rolling Mill and Multi
Axis Turning Centre etc. In 11th Plan also, major modernization
schemes have been planned in the areas of Auto Fertage, Forging,
Machining of Ammunition hardware and Tank barrels, Extrusion,
and Rifle Manufacture.
Modernization proposals forwarded by the Production units in this
regards are given due importance, considering their areas of core
competencies, in fund allocation by OFB.”
Recommendation (Para No . 7.10)
The Committee are concerned that only 20 per cent items produced
by these Factories are self-certified. These items are mainly clothing
and general store items. The Committee desire that self-certification by
Ordnance Factories should be encouraged and these Factories be given
powers for self-certification of arms, ammunitions, explosives and other
combat products in a phased manner.

34
Reply of the Government
Ordnance Factories are supplying some of the clothing items to
Defence Forces on self-certification basis. The issue of supply of some
more products under self-certification is being examined by the User
and DGQA.
[Ministry of Defence OM No. H-11013/30/2005/D(Parl)
dated 23.03.2006]
The Ministry of Defence have furnished a note on the items being
examined for self-certification as under :
“As far as supplies to civil trade and Para Military Forces of MHA
are concerned, many ammunition, weapon and clothing items are
being supplied under self-certification. The value of such items in
last three years is given as under :
2003-04 2004-05 2005-06
CT 228.61 213.72 296.34
MHA 61.41 92.17 140.64
Further, value of Rs. 66.93 crores have also been exported to various
countries under self-certification. As far as Army is concerned, 14
items of OEF Group of factories are being issued under self-
certification so far. All garment items are issued to Navy under
self-certification. For Air Force, all garment items are issued under
joint inspection. The total value of items, issued to Defence Forces
under self-certification in last three years is approx Rs. 320 crores.”
Recommendation (Para No. 8.9)
The Committee note that international prices of arms and
ammunition required by the Armed Forces are on much higher side
as compared to the prices of Ordnance Factories. The Ministry should
carry out import substitution of arms and ammunition by placing
orders on Ordnance Factories. This will help in indigenisation of the
items and utilisation of full capacity of the Ordnance Factories.
Reply of the Government
Views of the Committee are noted. OFB will be asked to establish/
develop more import substitute products for supply to Defence Forces.
[Ministry of Defence OM No. H-11013/30/2005/D(Parl)
dated 23.03.2006]

35
Recommendation (Para No. 9.8)
The Committee are constrained to note that in the era of Nuclear,
Biological and Chemical warfare, our Defence Forces are still bound to
depend on conventional weapons which need constant upgradation.
The Committee view it very seriously and recommend that the Ministry
should intensify efforts to provide sufficient funds and logistic support
to the Ordnance Factories to undertake mini and major projects in
collaboration with DRDO, Defence PSUs and foreign partners and also
continue with the technological upgradation of the conventional
weapons so as to meet the ever-growing challenges of the modern
warfare. The Committee also desire the Ministry to explore the
possibility to involve private sector in some of the select R&D projects
being taken up by DRDO / user services.
Reply of the Government
Views of the committee are noted. MoD is committed to provide
full support to Ordnance Factories for taking up projects in
collaboration with DRDO, DPSUs and private sector industries.
[Ministry of Defence OM No. H-11013/30/2005/D(Parl)
dated 23.03.2006]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see para 57 of Chapter I)
Recommendation (Para No. 10.11)
In view of the competitive prices of the ammunition of the
Ordnance Factories as mentioned in the earlier paras, the Committee
feel that these factories should look out for export market.
Reply of the Government
Views of the Committee are noted for implementation.
[Ministry of Defence OM No. H-11013/30/2005/D(Parl)
dated 23.03.2006]
Recommendation (Para Nos. 12.6 & 12.7)
The Committee note that out of the demands for 2055 items, target
was fixed for 1988 items and actual manufacturing took place for 1247
items during the period 1999-2000 to 2003-2004 which resulted in the

36
production of a number of items behind schedule. Further, the
Committee note with concern that there has been a shortfall in supply
of 77 items out of 331 items planned for supply during 2004-2005. The
data shows that Ordnance Factories have failed to adhere to the targets
fixed for all the demands placed by the indentors.
The Committee desire that a detailed analysis be made for every
delay in execution of orders and responsibility / accountability be
fixed accordingly. Necessary steps should also be taken to ensure timely
production of items as per the targets fixed.
The Committee further note that one of the reasons for delay in
execution of orders is the late finalisation of annual targets by the
Ministry. It only shows lack of planning and coordination among the
various concerned departments. The Committee recommend that
advance planning should be done by all concerned in this regard so
that annual targets are finalized well in time.
Reply of the Government
Supply of items against target is reviewed regularly at unit level
apart from OFB HQrs. Further review is also carried out at MoD and
during interactive meetings with indenters. The reasons for shortfall
in supply of the above 77 items were due to:
(a) Delay in placement of indent - 7 Nos.
(b) Design problem - 17 Nos.
(c) Embargo by indenters - 2 Nos.
(d) Items under development - 3 Nos.
(e) Delay/difficulties in proof - 10 Nos.
(f) Non-availability of inputs ex-import - 8 Nos.
(g) Non-availability of inputs ex-trade - 30 Nos.
The views of the Committee are noted for compliance. However,
in the last two years the target fixation meeting were held 5-6 months
in advance, which helped OFB to get sufficient, lead time for
achievement of its production targets.
[Ministry of Defence OM No. H-11013/30/2005/D(Parl)
dated 23.03.2006]

37
On a specific question about the improvements made in minimizing
delay in execution of orders after conducting the review meetings, the
Ministry furnished the following :
“During various production review meetings, the major reasons
for delay in supply of some of the equipments are found to be the
delays in procurement of required input materials and non-
availability of targets and covering indents in time. However, for
minimizing the delay in procurement of various input materials,
enhanced financial powers of OFB have been delegated. OFB have
been given full powers for procurement of all required input
materials through competitive biding and Rs. 3 crores for single
tender and proprietary items. As far as timely availability of targets
and covering indents are concerned, with the mutual discussions
with various customers, Target Fixation Meetings are being held
much in advance, to facilitate better production planning.”
Recommendation (Para Nos. 13.6 & 13.7)
The Committee are concerned to note that fire incident is a frequent
phenomenon taking place almost every year. During the last year itself,
four such incidents occurred, but surprisingly, no reason or cause could
be ascertained by the Board of Enquiry constituted for the purpose.
The Committee are unable to understand how the remedial measures
can be taken without first knowing the definite cause of fire. Therefore,
the logic of remedial measures, as enunciated by the Board, to be
taken to strike the most possible cause of fire is outrightly refuted by
the Committee. The Committee feel that in the era of advanced Science
and Technology, Ordnance Factories should not function on indefinite
conclusions.
Therefore, the Committee strongly recommend that the Ministry
should explore all scientific ways and means to obviate such incidents
in future. The Ordnance Factory Board should create a watchful team
for every Ordnance Factory particularly Ammunition and High
Explosive Factories to keep tight vigil on every possible cause of fire
and take suitable preventive steps.
Reply of the Government
Equipment, accessories and surroundings at the site of fire get
damaged and consequently evidences are lost. Board of Enquiry
constituted with the experts, list out probable causes of fire and
suggests remedial measures to avoid recurrence. These measures are
studied and implemented to avoid recurrence. The application/fitment

38
of gadgets may not help in determining the cause of fire as the gadget
itself are likely to be destroyed in fire. However, views of the
Committee are noted for adopting modern methods of determining
causes of such incidents, including help of outside specialists.
All the Ordnance Factories have a separate Safety manned by
qualified Safety Officers as per provision of Factories Act to keep a
tight vigil on possible cause of fire and to take remedial measures,
apart from imparting training to employees on safety matters. A
detailed safety procedure in terms of general safety directives/standing
instructions and system of safety audit exits for handling/storage of
ammunitions and explosives. However, the views of the committee
are noted for further improvement in safety system in Ordnance
Factories.
[Ministry of Defence OM No. H-11013/30/2005/D(Parl)
dated 23.03.2006]
When asked about the modern methods adopted the determining
the causes of fire incidents including help of outside specialists, the
Ministry of Defence in their written reply stated as under:
“In Ordnance Factories, the fire accidents are investigated by a
Board of Enquiry appointed by Sr. GM/GM with an officer from
outside expert organisation i.e. Controllorate of Quality Assurance
(Military Explosives), as Chairman of the Enquiry Committee.
Investigation starts from identification of probable causes and
arrives to the most probable cause by process of elimination, as
fire leaves tell-tale footprint for the expert to read. The basis of
identification of fire origin and cause is dependent mainly on
practical knowledge and expertise, which is being provided by the
outside specialists of Military Explosives.
Modern methods’ being adopted prevention of fire in Ordnance
Factories includes Automatic fire detection and drenching systems
in more fire prone buildings, use of modern fire tenders, fire
fighting equipments and stringent and regular safety drills and
safety Audits.
Whenever new chemical plants are procured, OFB is going for
modern and state of the art plants, where human deployment is
minimal and a number of electronic controls are in-built to ensure
safety.”

CHAPTER III
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE
COMMITTEE DO NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE IN
VIEW OF GOVERNMENT REPLIES
-NIL-
39

CHAPTER IV
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF
WHICH REPLIES OF GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN
ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE
Recommendation (Para No. 1.7)
The Committee note that 39 Ordnance Factories are divided into
5 operating divisions based on the main products / technologies
employed. 40th Ordnance Factory has been established at Nalanda for
production of Bimodular Charges. The Committee feel that it is essential
that Ordnance Factories, which are producing same kind of products,
should be merged / integrated into one in order to synergise their
resources and R&D and ensure optimal use of available manpower
and infrastructure. For the purpose the Committee strongly desire that
a Task Force of experts be constituted by the Government to go into
the details of restructuring / merging of existing Defence Ordnance
Factories. The Committee also desire that no new Ordnance Factory
should come up and during the process of restructuring/merging of
Ordnance Factories labours’ interest must be protected by the
Government.
Reply of the Government
The issue of re-structuring of Ordnance Factories is under
consideration of MoD. An Expert Committee under the Chairmanship
of Shri Vijay Kelkar has examined the issue and submitted its report,
which is being examined in MoD.
In the present structure of Ordnance Factories:
(a) Manufacture in more than one Ordnance Factory in some
cases has been planned as a strategy to maintain the supply
chain to Defence Forces even it production in one unit is
interrupted due to disturbances/sabotage/enemy strikes.
(b) Process and storage safety regulations in handling explosives
do not allow consolidation of production activities.
(c) Demand in excess of installed capacity of a product in the
dedicated factory necessities production in other factories.
40

41
(d) OFB has constituted a committee to examine and rationalise
workload between Metallurgical Group of Factories,
considering the core technologies and futuristic product
range.
[Ministry of Defence OM No. H-11013/30/2005/D(Parl)
dated 23.03.2006]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see para 10 of Chapter I)
Recommendation (Para No. 2.5)
The Committee note that Ordnance Factory Board (OFB) was
constituted in 1979 in order to ensure cohesiveness and coordinated
approach in the working of Ordnance Factories. It comprises, besides
Director-General, nine members, five heading each of the five operating
divisions of Ordnance Factories and four responsible for staff functions
viz. Personnel, finance, planning and management, project and
engineering and technical services. The Committee feel that in view of
the rapid technological advancement taking place the world over in
defence sector and the export potential of the defence equipment, there
is a need to redefine the role of OFB to enable it to keep pace with
the changing requirements and also to tap the vast export market.
There is also a need to restructure OFB by including therein experts
with proven records in marketing and international trade, who may
give an export orientation to the indigenously manufactured defence
products and make effective strategy for their export in the niche
market. The Committee, therefore, recommend that a high level
Committee should be constituted to go into the functions and
organisational structure of OFB and give its recommendations on
restructuring of OFB to make it a more professional and dynamic
body responsive to the present day needs.
Reply of the Government
MoD had already constituted a High Level Committee under the
Chairmanship of Dr. Vijay Kelkar to examine the changes required to
facilitate Ordnance Factories to assume the role of designer and
integrator for product development and production. The committee
has submitted the report, which is being examined in MoD.
[Ministry of Defence OM No. H-11013/30/2005/D(Parl)
dated 23.03.2006]

42
Comments of the Committee
(Please see para 14 of Chapter I)
Recommendation (Para Nos. 3.6 and 3.7)
The Committee note that with the creation of Ordnance Factory
Board (OFB), Ordnance Factories have been given some autonomy
and flexibility in their functioning and management. Still, the
Committee feel that greater autonomy is required to be given to the
Management of OFB. Keeping in view the wide range of changes
taking place the world over and requirement of specialisation in the
complex defence field, the Committee desire that the Government must
change its policy and give greater autonomy to the Ordnance Factories
in the field of vendor development, in-house R&D activities, product
improvement and making financial and commercial decisions on the
lines of Public Sector Undertakings. This will enable them to enter
into MoU with Indian and foreign companies for co-development and
co-production of items, giving enormous scope for diversification of
their product profile and attracting huge markets.
The Committee feel that more functional and financial autonomy
to Ordnance Factories will help in ensuring desired results, fixing
greater accountability and maintaining better financial management.
The Committee, therefore, hold the view that gradually, the Ordnance
Factories may be converted into PSUs so that they may have access to
finances from the market, etc. At the same time, care should be taken
by the government to ensure that this arrangement of financial access
does not lead to any reduction in the budgetary allocation to the
Ordnance Factories and OFB.
Reply of the Government
MoD has transferred the responsibility of vendor development to
ordnance factories. OFB has also been authorised to conduct in-house
R&D for product improvement and development of new products.
The accounting system followed by the ordnance factories is being
reoriented towards a commercial accounting format. This change will
enable the ordnance factories to perform financial management
functions more effectively.
Ordnance Factory Board enjoys considerable autonomy in day-to-
day functioning. However, the autonomy in taking financial decisions
gets restricted as ordnance factories function as Government department
within the purview of general financial regulations.

43
MoD had constituted a Committee under the Chairmanship of Dr.
Vijay Kelkar, to examine the change required to facilitate ordnance
factories to build consortium of industries around them for product
development and production. The Committee has submitted is report
and has recommended Corporation of OFB. The recommendations of
the Committee are being examined in MoD.
[Ministry of Defence OM No. H-11013/30/2005/D(Parl)
dated 23.03.2006]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see para 19 & 20 of Chapter I)
Recommendation (Para No . 5.7)
The Committee note that creation /utilisation of production capacity
is exclusively driven by the requirements projected by the Defence
Forces and the remaining surplus capacity is utilised for meeting the
requirements of the non-defence sector. The Committee also note that
some idle capacity is maintained by the Ordnance Factories to take
care of the surge in demands of the Defence Forces in an emergent
war situation.
The Committee are of the view that the idle capacity should be
utilized fully for catering to the International export market; and in
case any emergent situation arises, the entire capacity can be fully
utilized to meet the requirements of the Defence Forces. This will help
in ensuring increased productivity, optimum resource and capacity
utilization and better quality of the products, thereby making them
more competitive. In this connection, the Committee also stress that
the Ordnance Factories should concentrate on specialized and high-
end defence products.
Reply of the Government
Product range of Ordnance Factories largely caters to the
requirements of conventional welfare. These armaments are available
the world over and are manufactured by many companies. The scope
of exports is further limited, because of restriction on export of products
being made with imported technology. Scope of export also gets limited
due to the policy/of negative list of countries where defence exports
are not permitted. OFB aims to develop high end products, having
potential for supply to both internal and overseas market, through co-

44
development and co-development and co-production route.
Concurrently, constant endeavour is made to maximise utilisation of
installed capacity by increasing supply to non-defence sector.
[Ministry of Defence OM No. H-11013/30/2005/D(Parl)
dated 23.03.2006]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see para 24 of Chapter I)
Recommendation (Para No . 5.8)
The Committee are concerned about the delay in production of
Arjun Tanks and hope that the obstacles coming in the way of final
production of Arjun Tank would be taken care of by the Defence
Ordnance Factory in coordination with the DRDO and the shortcomings
would be corrected expeditiously so that the supply of required number
of Tanks could be provided to the user as envisaged.
Reply of the Government
Main Battle Tank Arjun is under limited series production at Heavy
Vehicle Factory, Avadi. Certain teething problems are being faced in
the initial stages. Technical expertise of DRDO, as designer, is needed
to resolve the problems. Keeping this in view, representatives of DRDO
are deputed at HVF, Avadi. Further, interaction with Combat Vehicle
Research & Development Establishment/DRDO, covering the areas of
process guidance, technical clarification, quality assurance, defect
investigation and remedial measure incorporation, is held regularly.
Production of MBT Arjun is also monitored regularly by a working
committee constituted with the representative of User, producer and
designer to steer productionisation. Steering Committee with Secretary
(DP) as Chairman, SA to RM as co-chairman and representatives from
User, DRDO and OFB as members also monitors the production of the
tank.
[Ministry of Defence OM No. H-11013/30/2005/D(Parl)
dated 23.03.2006]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see para 28 of Chapter I)

45
Recommendation (Para No . 6.12)
The Committee note that there is a constant need for upgradation
and modernisation of Ordnance Factories in order to enable them to
meet the Defence Forces’ demands for high quality ammunition and
reliable products keeping pace with the latest technology . In this
connection, a capital investment of Rs. 3297 crore was planned during
the 10th Plan against Rs. 1062 crore invested during the 9th Plan. The
planned amount includes Rs. 1804 crore for modernisation and Rs.
1493 crore for new facilities. The Committee are, however, surprised
to note that during the first three years of the 10th Plan i.e. from 2002
to 2005 the actual investment made is only Rs. 847 crore as per the
annual requirement projected by OFB. The Committee would like that
the full amount for modernisation is utilised during the remaining
period of the 10th Plan.
Reply of the Government
The Capital investment of Rs. 3297 crores includes investment of
Rs. 531 crores propellant/explosive. The Nalanda project had been put
on hold and an expert committee had been constituted by MoD to
conduct a detailed review of the OF Nalanda project. The expert
committee has submitted the report, which is being examined in MoD.
Investment for creation of additional facilities for manufactures of
propellant/explosives is being reviewed in the light of change in
product mix and reluctance of overseas plant & machinery
manufactures to provide technology. OFB expects to achieve the
investment of Rs. 1348 crores on modernisation during X Plan period.
[Ministry of Defence OM No. H-11013/30/2005/D(Parl)
dated 23.03.2006]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see para 31 of Chapter I)
Recommendation (Para No . 6.14)
The Committee, during their recent study visit to the High
Explosive Factory and Ammunition Factory at Khadki, Pune observed
that several machineries and plant are quite old in High Explosive
Factory, Khadki and need immediate replacement for security of the
plant and to improve efficiency and meet the production targets. The
Committee, therefore, recommend that the Ministry should strive to
replace the ageing machineries and equipment in a time-bound manner
with state-of-the-art technology.

46
The Committee would like the procedures for purchase of plants
& machinery by the Ordnance Factories to be simplified. The Ordnance
Factory Board should be given full powers to procure plant &
machinery subject to budget provision and availability of funds .
Reply of the Government
Views of Standing Committee are noted for action. The issue related
to further delegation of financial powers to OFB for procurement of
plant and machinery is being examined in MoD.
[Ministry of Defence OM No. H-11013/30/2005/D(Parl)
dated 23.03.2006]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see para 36 & 37 of Chapter I)
Recommendation (Para No . 6.15)
The Committee stress that restructuring of the production system
of Ordnance Factories is the need of the hour. The Armed Forces
should prepare a Long Term Integrated Perspective Plan (LTIPP) as
already recommended by this Committee, projecting clearly their
present and future requirements so that the Ordnance Factories may
also draw up their modernisation plan accordingly. The modernisation
plan of the Ordnance Factories should address not only the issue of
increase in productivity but also matters relating to the range and
quality of products to meet the new requirements. The Committee
recommend that to minimise imports, users should be fully involved
in the preparation of vision document. In this connection, Government
should immediately appoint an expert group on the perspective plan
which should submit its report within six months from the date of
presentation of this report.
Reply of the Government
Armed forces share the medium term perspective plan covering a
period of 5 years for capital acquisition with OFB.
[Ministry of Defence OM No. H-11013/30/2005/D(Parl)
dated 23.03.2006]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see para 40 of Chapter I)

47
Recommendation (Para No. 6.16)
The Committee note that entry of private sector in defence
production, especially in non-combat items has posed new challenges
before Ordnance Factories. The Ordnance Factories which had complete
monopoly over production of defence equipment and items will now
have to be more competitive and cost effective in order to maintain
their dominant position. They will have to undertake modernisation
programme in a broader way. If necessary for the purpose, the
government may also allow them to raise financial resources from the
market. In this context, the Committee also desire the government to
examine the feasibility of shutting down ageing and non-revivable
Ordnance Factories/Plants. The labour working in these factories may
be absorbed in other Ordnance Factories or Voluntary Retirement
Scheme (VRS) offer may be given to them.
Reply of the Government
Modernisation of infrastructure, matching with requirement
projected by Defence Forces is being done continuously . OFB is a
government department, under the aegis of Department of Defence
Production. Therefore, the Board do not have the mandate to access
the market for finance under the present structure. All the ordnance
factories are being given importance by the OFB for modernisation.
Workload is distributed judiciously and new products are introduced
in the factories to ensure that the capacity is gainfully utilized.
[Ministry of Defence OM No. H-11013/30/2005/D(Parl)
dated 23.03.2006]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see para 44 of Chapter I)
Recommendation (Para No. 8.8)
The Committee note that the Ordnance Factory Board has taken
certain initiatives to exercise effective control over increase in the prices
of Defence products. The Committee feel that the productivity and
scale of production are the crucial issues which need to be stressed
upon to contain the sharp increase in prices. The Committee, therefore,
recommend that the Ministry should strive to achieve economy of
scale in Defence Production in the wake of envisaged competition
from the Private Sector. Towards this end, modernisation of the existing
plants & machineries and replacement of the old equipment in the

48
factories are required to be taken up on priority. These steps will
enable Ordnance Factories to participate in global tenders in a
competitive manner.
The Committee understand that Ordnance Factories are providing
defence products to armed forces on cost-to-cost basis. The Committee
also understand that Ordnance Factories do not have sufficient funds
for modernisation of the plants and machineries. The Committee,
therefore, desire that on sale of products to armed forces Ordnance
Factories should be allowed to have a fixed percentage of profit which
may be used for modernisation / upgradation of these factories.
Reply of the Government
The present policy does not permit ordnance factories to retain
surpluses generated out of supplies to customers. Change in pricing
policy by building in a fixed percentage of profit in sale price would
require change in procedures.
[Ministry of Defence OM No. H-11013/30/2005/D(Parl)
dated 23.03.2006]
Regarding the change in pricing policy by building in affixed
percentage of profit in sale price would require change in procedure,
the Ministry has stated :
“In this regard, it is stated that till the Ordnance Factory Board
remain a Government Department, it has to function on ‘No profit
no loss’ basis, as far as supply to Defence Forces are concerned.
For non-defence supplies, a suitable margin of profit is added. It
is expected that the pricing system will be streamlined, when the
proposal on professional accounting in OFB is implemented.”
In regard to Balance Sheet in Ordnance Factories is made in the
line of corporate sector, if so, details thereof, if not reasons thereon,
the Ministry furnished :
“As the Ordnance Factory Board is a Government Department, the
balance sheet of OFB is being prepared as per Government
procedures for accounting. The process of preparation of balance
sheet in the line of corporate sector i.e. as per commercial sector
i.e. as per commercial accounting procedure, is now finalised and
will be implemented on approval of competent authority.”
Comments of the Committee
(Please see para 49 of Chapter I)

49
R & D Activities in Ordnance Factories
Recommendation (Para No. 9.7)
The Committee note that the Ordnance Factories are giving thrust
to in-house R&D efforts in order to develop new products. The
Committee are, however, constrained to note that the investment made
on R&D during the last five years has been negligible, with the result
that no major project or upgradation activities could be undertaken
out of the allocated funds. Most of the projects being undertaken by
Ordnance Factories are through acquisition of technology from DRDO
or by import and there has been very little achievement in developing
new products through in-house R&D. The Committee desire that
Ordnance Factories should change their role from technology recipients
to technology producers through more emphasis on in-house R&D.
Reply of the Government
Ordnance Factories being a production organisation do not have
infrastructure for conducting ab-initio research. They depend on
developing new products and upgrades in synergy with technology
providers. To enable Ordnance Factories to build infrastructure for in-
house R&D, following proposals are being examined in MoD:
• Enhanced delegation of financial power to OFB for R&D
• Allowing OFB for training (including overseas training) of
personnel in key technology areas.
• Sufficient freedom for appointment of consultant, as expert
assistance in R&D projects.
• Setting up a proof range for evaluation of products.
[Ministry of Defence OM No. H-11013/30/2005/D(Parl)
dated 23.03.2006]
On a specific question about the efforts have been made to develop
adequate infrastructure for conducting ab-initio research and the
allocation and expenditure to be made thereon. The Ministry have
furnished the following :
“Indian Ordnance Factories are traditionally production agencies
and do not have mandate to conduct ab-initio Research. Basic
Research & Development responsibility for production of Defence
products rests with DRDO. However, to enable OFB, to develop
and create adequate infrastructure for Research and Development

50
activities for products up-grade on existing products and new
products developments, MOD has issued orders, giving full
financial powers to OFB, within the Budget provisions in this regard
in December 2006. OFB has been asked to formulate appropriate
R&D policy, which specifies allocation of expenditure in the areas
of process and product improvement, cost reduction and product
development etc.”
Regarding the present status to enable Ordnance Factories to build
infrastructure for in-house R&D, the Ministry have furnished the
following :
“To build required infrastructure for carrying out product and
process improvement and development of new products, OFB have
been delegated with full powers, within the Budget provisions.
Besides, full powers are also delegated for procurement of required
inputs/raw materials and components for such activities. For
procurement of Machinery & Equipments, powers have been
delegated upto Rs. 50 crores in each case and Rs. 3 crores in each
case for single tender and proprietary items. OFB has also been
delegated the financial powers to engage the consultants/specialists
of their choice up to Rs. 2 crores per annum for sanctioned project
and Rs. 1 crore per annum in other cases.”
Comments of the Committee
(Please see para 54 of Chapter I)
Outsourcing to Private Sector
Recommendation (Para No. 11.7)
The Committee note that Defence Production Industry has come a
long way from being reserved entirely for the public sector and is
moving towards greater participation from the private sector. The
Committee are happy to note that keeping in view the capabilities of
private sector, the work of the value of Rs. 2500 crore per annum is
being outsourced to them. The Committee, desire that Ordnance
Factories should strive to outsource more work in those areas where
there is sufficient capability of private sector and retain production of
only high-end items. The Committee at the same time stress that
Ordnance Factories during the process of outsourcing must ensure
strict adherence to the stringent quality standard of the outsourced
products.

51
Reply of the Government
Views of the Committee are noted for implementation.
[Ministry of Defence OM No. H-11013/30/2005/D(Parl)
dated 23.03.2006]
During the oral evidence before the Committee, the representatives
of Trade Unions Forum on implementation of Kelkar Committee Report
and encouragement of private sector in Defence Production, R&D, they
submitted the following for consideration :-
“The composition of Kelkar Committee itself is questionable as it
did not include the major stake holder i.e. the employees. The
report is totally flawed in its approach when instead of reducing
import through strengthening the existing public sector defence
industry, it has embarked upon a policy of giving maximum space
to private sector in Defence. It has given undue stress on export
of arm which is not a sphere where country like India would try
to project itself like USA or Israel.
** ** ** **
Kelkar Committee report unabashedly pleads for entry of private
sector at every level, not as a supplementary player, but as a
major player, creating “Raksha Utpadan Ratna” in private sector,
with public fund assured to private sector in the name of R&D for
earning profit through defence exports that too with tax concession.
It deprives DPSUs and OFB of a level playing field with private
industries. OFB and DPSUs are captive industries of defence
services. Unless they reach optimal capacity utilisation, technological
upgradation and necessary autonomy, the question of so called
competition with private sector does not arise.
Private sector, would be mostly in collaboration with foreign firms
under the cover of Indian private sector. Defence MNCs would be
given a straight forward entry in the most strategic area of the
country. This will jeopardise country’s security. With spectre of
terrorism looming large, a free access to private sector both Indian
and foreign in arms and ammunition manufacturing would be a
serious security hazards for the country.”
On being asked by the Committee regarding capacity utilisation
and Order Book position and outsourcing of work to private sector by

52
the Ordnance Factories, the representative of Trade Unions/Forum
stated as under:
“It is that in spite of the fact that the PSUs or the Ordnance
Factories have the capabilities, they are not being utilized as in
the case of Hindustan Aeronautics Limited. I am not quoting from
my figures. It is a figure from the C&AG. Where the capacity is
there, even that capacity is being outsourced and tomorrow the
RURs will be placed position.
…… The recommendation that you had made in the seventh report
that in all ordnance factories you must have an assessment of
their capacity, the technology and their upgradation. That is not
being done. What is being done is that instead of doing that, their
capacity is being under-utilised and you are giving orders to the
private sector. That is my point.”
He further stated :
“…….We have no quarrel about quality and time. These are the
factors for any unit to develop. Lastly, we would sum up with the
request that please see that the existing orders and existing capacity
is totally utilized before passing it to anyone else. Please put
pressure on the Government on this issue.”
Comments of the Committee
(Please see para 65 & 66 of Chapter I)

CHAPTER V
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN REPECT OF WHICH
FINAL REPLIES OF GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED
Recommendation (Para No. 10.9 & 10.10)
The Committee note that since the commencement of organised
export in 1989, value of export has been minimal over the last five
years. Export orders have generally been from the neighbouring
countries. The Committee note that as of now OFB’s export market is
largely of conventional items where a large number of players are
making it tough and competitive for Indian products to make their
presence felt. The Committee also note that the export market of OFB
products also suffers due to their non-compatibility with NATO
specifications. Despite continuous efforts of OFB to give wide publicity
to boost up exports, physical increase in quantum of export is
insignificant. At present, no board or institution has been created within
the OFB supervision to promote exports of defence products.
The Committee, therefore, recommend that the Indian Ordnance
Factories should strive to diversify their product range to grab the
customer base in non-conventional arms segment of export market.
Keeping in view the requirements of NATO compatible items in
international market, the specifications of more and more indigenous
items should be planned to cater to the export market, in addition to
the Indian requirements. The OFB should also take earnest initiatives
to create an Export Promotion Board under their supervision and
entrust it with the task to explore optimal possibility of export and to
suggest ways and means to boost the export of Ordnance Factories’
products, create infrastructure necessary for export market and help in
achieving the aim of Indian Ordnance Factories to establish themselves
as a brand leader in the world market. As recommended in earlier
paragraphs, the Committee desire that Ordnance Factory Board should
have experts from international trade and marketing fields also who
can play an effective role in preparing strategy to tap the vast export
market for armaments / ammunitions and other defence products.
Reply of the Government
The need for setting up an institution for marketing of products
of OFB at the global level has been felt by OFB. A proposal for setting
53

54
up Ordnance Factories Marketing Corporation has been forwarded by
OFB, which is being examined by the MoD. This organisation can
employ the services of specialists from international trade and
marketing fields.
[Ministry of Defence OM No. H-11013/30/2005/D(Parl)
dated 23.03.2006]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see para 60 of Chapter I)
  N EW D ELHI; BALASAHEB VIKHE PATIL,
11 July, 2007 Chairman,
20 Asadha, 1929 (Saka) Standing Committee on Defence.

MINUTES OF TWENTIETH SITTING OF THE STANDING
COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE (2006-2007)
The Committee sat on Monday, the 12th February 2007 from 1100
to 1430 hrs. in ‘Main’ Committee Room, Parliament House Annexe,
New Delhi.
PRESENT
Shri Balasaheb Vikhe Patil – Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2.  Shri S. Bangarappa
3.  Shri Santosh Kumar Gangwar
4.  Dr. K.S. Manoj
5.  Shri Asaduddin Owaisi
6.  Shri Adhalrao Shivaji Patil
7.  Shri Mahadeorao Shiwankar
8.  Shri Rajesh Verma
Rajya Sabha
9.  Dr. Farooq Abdullah
10.  Shri Abu Asim Azmi
11. Shri R.K. Dhawan
12.  Smt. N.P . Durga
13.  Shri K.B. Shanappa
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri P .K. Bhandari — Joint Secretary
2. Shri Gopal Singh — Director
WITNESSES
REPRESENTATIVES OF MINISTRY OF DEFENCE
1. Shri Shekhar Dutt - Defence Secretary
2. Shri K.P . Singh - Secretary (DP)

56
3. Dr. M. Natarajan - SA to RM
4. Shri S. Banerjee - DG (ACQ)
5. Shri V .K. Mishra - Secretary (Def. Fin.)
6. Dr. (Mrs.) Rekha Bhargava - Special Secretary (B)
7. Shri P .K. Rastogi - Addl Secy. (B)
8. Dr. W. Selvamurthy - CCR&D (LS&HR)
9. Shri Gautam Chatterjee - JS (O/N)
10. Shri Binoy Kumar - JS (E)
11. Shri Harcharanjit Singh - Secy (BRDB) / JS (ESW)
12. Shri S.N. Mishra - Addl FA(M)
13. Shri Alok Perti - JS (SY)
14. Dr. (Mrs.) Kiran Chadha - JS (X)
15. Shri T. Ramachandru - JS (S)
16. Shri Ranjan Chatterjee - JS (HAL)
17. Shri Mohd. Haleem Khan - Addl FA (H)
18. Smt. Anuradha Mitra - Addl FA (AM)
19. Shri Amit Cowshish - Addl FA (A)
20. Shri S. Ghosh - Chairman/OFB
21. Shri V . Somasuderam - JS (OF)
22. Shri B. Saha - Secy, OFB
23. Shri Sharad Ghodke - OSD (P)
24. Shri Ashok K. Baweja - Chairman, HAL
25. Shri V .R.S. Natarajan - CMD, BEML
26. Shri M. Narayana Rao - CMD, MIDHANI
27. Shri VVR Sastry - CMD (BEL)
28. Rear Adm (Retd.) A.K. Handa - CMD, GSL
29. Rear Adm T.S. Ganeshan - CMD, GRSE
30. Vice Admn S.K.K. Krishnan - CMD, MDL
31. Maj. Gen (Retd.) R. Gossain - CMD, BDL
32. Shri PRK Hara Gopal - Dir (Fin.), BEL
33. Shri SK Mehta - Dir (R&D), BEL
34. Shri Devjit Ghosh - LO. MIDHANI
35. Commdt. Sunil Mane Sinde - CM, GSL
36. Shri Yogesh Sharma - Regional CM, MDL

57
37. Commander Hardev Inder - IN (Retd.), Addl GM
38. Lt. Gen. HS Lidder - CISC
39. Lt. Gen. Deepak Kapoor - VCOAS
40. V . Adml. Nirmal Verma - VCNS
41. Air Mshl AK Nagalia - DCAS
42. Lt. Gen. SS Dhillon - MGO
43. Lt. Gen. Thomas Mathew - AG
44. Air Mshl VR Iyer - AOP
45. Vice Adml Sunil K. Damle - COP
46. Surg Vice Adml VK Singh - DGAFMS
47. Lt. Gen. LP Sadhotra - DGMS (Army)
48. Air Marshal HK Maini - DGMS (Air)
49. Surg Vice Adml Yogendra - DGMS (Navy)
Singh
50. Maj. Gen. Suresh Chandra - Addl DGAFMS
51. Maj. Gen. J. Jayram - Addl DGAFMS (MR)
52. Maj. Gen. R.K. Kalra - MD-ECHS
53. Maj. Gen. A.K. Mehra - ADG WE
54. AVM N. Vijaya Kumar - ACAS (FP)
55. R. Adml. R.K. Dhowan - ACNS(P&P)
56. Brig. Kunwar Karni Singh - Dy. DGAFMS (P&T)
57. Brig. Satish Malik - Dy. MD-ECHS
58. Col. A.K. Verma - Dir MS (H)
59. Col. Pawan Kapoor - Dir AFMS (P)
60. Col. G. Ghosh - Dir. ECHS
61. Lt. Col. SI Subhani - CRD Cell
62. Capt. Abhishek Saxena - SO to VCOAS
63. Shri S. Ahuja - INAS, DGONA
2.At the outset, Hon’ble Chairman welcomed the representatives
of the Ministry of Defence to the sitting of the Committee and drew
their attention to Direction 58 of Directions by the Speaker, Lok Sabha.
3.The Committee then took evidence of the representatives of
Ministry of Defence on Action Taken Replies furnished by the Ministry
of Defence on Seventh Report on ‘Defence Ordnance Factories’.

58
4. ** ** ** **
5. ** ** ** **
6. The Committee thereafter sought clarifications on the Action
Taken Replies to the observations/recommendations contained in the
Seventh Report on ‘Defence Ordnance Factories’ to which the
representatives of the Ministry of Defence answered one by one.
The witnesses then withdrew
7. The verbatim record of the proceedings was kept.
8. ** ** ** **
9. The Committee then authorised the Hon’ble Chairman to finalise
the report and present the same to the Parliament.
The Committee then adjourned.
**Not related to the subject.

MINUTES OF THIRTY-THIRD SITTING OF THE STANDING
COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE (2006-2007)
The Committee sat on Wednesday, the 06th June 2007 from
1100 to 1215 hrs. in Committee Room ‘C’, Parliament House Annexe,
New Delhi.
PRESENT
Shri Balasaheb Vikhe Patil – Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Santosh Kumar Gangwar
3. Shri C. Kuppusami
4. Dr. K.S. Manoj
5. Dr. H. T. Sangliana
6. Shri Rajesh Verma
Rajya Sabha
7. Shri Abu Asim Azmi
8. Shri R.K. Dhawan
9. Shri K.B. Shanappa
10. Smt. Viplove Thakur
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri P .K. Bhandari -  Joint Secretary
2. Shri Gopal Singh -  Director
3. Shri D.R. Shekhar -  Deputy Secretary-II
4. Smt. J.M. Sinha -  Under Secretary
WITNESSES
LIST OF NON-OFFICIALS
1. Shri Dipankar Mukherjee, Ex-M.P ., Convenor, Trade Union
Forum for Self-reliance in Defence, New Delhi
59

60
2. Shri A.D. Nagpal, Secretary, HMS, New Delhi
3. Shri S.N. Pathak, President, AIDEF, New Delhi
4. Shri C. Srikumar, General Secretary, AIDEF, New Delhi
5. Shri Saila Bhattacharya, General Secretary, AIDEF, New Delhi
6. Shri D. Ananthapadmnabha, Coordinator, JAF, Bangalore
7. Shri S. Prasanna Kumar, Convenor, JAF, Bangalore
8. Shri Sukumaran Pillai, General Secretary, BEL Worker’s Union
9. Shri Laxman Gauda, Working President, BEWUF
10. Shri S.R. Viswanath, President, HAEA, Bangalore
11. Shri Jagdish, President, BEML Employees Association, Mysore
12. Shri R. Sadanandan, General Secretary , BEL Head Office Staff
Association, Bangalore
13. Shri V . Prabhakar, President, Bharat Electronics Employees
Union, Hyderabad
14. Shri Rudresh, General Secretary, BEML Staff Association,
Bangalore
15. Shri J. Ramesh, Joint Secretary, BEMEA, KGF
16. Shri M. Shrinivasa Reddy, Treasurer, BEMEA, Bangalore
17. Shri C. Narayan Swamy, Organising Secretary, HAEA, Bangalore
18. Shri C.V . Krishnappa, Joint Secretary, BEWUF, Bangalore
19. Shri Gurudayal Singh, Vice President, INDWF (INTUC),
Dehradun
2. At the outset, Hon’ble Chairman welcomed the representatives
of various Trade Unions/Employees Unions of Defence Public Sector
Undertakings to the sitting of the Committee to render oral evidence/
suggestions on the subjects ordnance factories and Defence Public Sector
undertakings and drew their attention to Direction 58 of Directions by
the Speaker, Lok Sabha regarding maintaining confidentiality of the
deliberations of the sitting of the Committee.
3. The representatives of Trade Union Forum for self-reliance in
Defence mentioned the following points before the Committee :
(i) The moto of the Trade Union is to ensure self-reliance.
(ii) In the name of creating Rakha Utpadana Ratna, the
Government should not outsource to Private Sector.
(iii) Under -utilisation of the capacity in Ordnance Factories/
Defence Public Sector Undertakings.

61
(iv) There must be full capacity utilisation, technological
upgradation and improvement in-house production before
going for outsourcing the work to private sector. They did
not express reservation on entering into joint venture with
the private sector/foreign company for upgradation of
technology etc.
(v) There must be an assessment of internal production
capabilities and upgradation and also give autonomy to
these institutions.
(vi) They sighted many cases where low technology orders were
given to private firms but they had failed to produce the
quality items as per the requirement.
The witnesses then withdrew
4. The verbatim record of the proceedings was kept.
The Committee then adjourned.

MINUTES OF THIRTY-FOURTH SITTING OF THE STANDING
COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE (2006-2007)
The Committee sat on Tuesday, the 12th June 2007 from 1500 to
1600 hrs. in Committee Room ‘C’, Parliament House Annexe,
New Delhi.
PRESENT
Shri Balasaheb Vikhe Patil – Chairman
M
EMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Santosh Kumar Gangwar
3. Dr. K.S. Manoj
4. Shri Asaduddin Owaisi
5. Shri Rajendrasinh Ghans mhyamsinh Rana (Raju Rana)
6. Dr. H. T. Sangliana
Lok Sabha
7. Shri Jai Prakash Aggarwal
8. Shri Abu Asim Azmi
9. Smt. N.P . Durga
10. Shri K.B. Shanappa
11. Shri Arun Shourie
12. Smt. Viplove Thakur
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri S.K. Sharma - Additional Secretary
2. Shri P .K. Bhandari - Joint Secretary
3. Shri Gopal Singh - Director
4. Shri D.R. Shekhar - Deputy Secretary-II
5. Smt. J.M. Sinha - Under Secretary
2. At the outset, Hon’ble Chairman welcomed the Members to the
sitting of the Committee. The Committee then took up for consideration
62

63
the draft Action Taken Report on the recommendations/observations
contained in the Seventh Report of the Committee (14th Lok Sabha)
on ‘Defence Ordnance Factories’. The Committee after deliberation
adopted the draft Action Taken Report with some additions/
modifications.
3. The Committee then authorised the Hon’ble Chairman to finalise
the report and present the same to both the Houses of Parliament.
The Committee then adjourned.

APPENDIX
ANALYSIS OF THE ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON
THE RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE 7TH REPORT
OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE (FOURTEENTH
LOK SABHA) ON ‘DEFENCE ORDNANCE FACTORIES’
Percentage
 of Total
(i) Total number of recommendations 29
(ii) Recommendations/Observations which 14 48%
have been accepted by the Government:
(Para Nos 2.6, 2.7, 4.4, 6.13, 7.8 to 7.10,
8.9, 9.8, 10.11, 12.6, 12.7, 13.6 and 13.7)
(iii) Recommendations/Observations which — —
the Committee do not desire to pursue
in view of Government replies
NIL
(iv) Recommendations/Observations in respect 13 45%
of which replies of the Government have
not been accepted by the Committee:
(Para No. 1.7, 2.5, 3.6, 3.7, 5.7, 5.8, 6.12,
6.14, 6.15, 6.16, 8.8, 9.7 and 11.7)
(v) Recommendations/Observations in respect 2 7%
of which final replies of Government are
still awaited:
(Para Nos. 10.9 and 10.10)
64