 
 
  
      STANDING COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE 
34
(2008-2009) 
 
(FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
MINISTRY OF DEFENCE 
 
 
 
HUMAN RESOURCE PLANNING, SHORTAGE OF MANPOWER, 
INFUSION OF HI-TECH TRAINING AND INFRASTRUCTURE  
FOR THE ARMED FORCES 
 
 
Thirty Fourth Report 
 
 
  
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
 
February, 2009/Phalguna, 1930 (Saka) 

  
THIRTY FOURTH REPORT 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE 
(2008-2009) 
 
(FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
MINISTRY OF DEFENCE 
 
 
 
 
HUMAN RESOURCE PLANNING, SHORTAGE OF MANPOWER, 
INFUSION OF HI-TECH TRAINING AND INFRASTRUCTURE  
FOR THE ARMED FORCES 
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 24.02.2009 
 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 24.02.2009 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
 
February, 2009/ Phalguna, 1930 (Saka) 
 

  
 
C.O.D.  NO.  108 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Price :  Rs. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
© 2009 BY LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 

  
CONTENTS 
 
  Pages
Composition of the Committee (2008-09) …… (iii)  
Introduction ……  (v) 
 
 
PART-I  
BACKGROUND ANALYSIS 
 
Chapter-I Introductory  1 
    
Chapter-II Assessment of Manpower 
 
  
 Authorised and existing strength in the three Services ……… 5 
 Shortage of manpower in the Armed Forces ……… 7 
    
Chapter-III Recruitment procedures 
 
  
 Strategies for Motivation, Pre-Selection training ……… 15 
 Feeder Institutions for the Armed Forces ……… 15 
 Recruitment Procedures in the Armed Forces ……… 18 
 Short Service Commission for Armed Forces ……… 26 
 Changes in the Recruitment Procedure in the Armed 
Forces 
……… 34 
 Induction of Women in the Armed Forces ……… 38 
    
Chapter-IV Induction Training & Development 
 
  
 Training  41 
 Relevance of IMA and OTA as separate Institutions ……… 46 
 Stipend for the Cadets during the training ……… 47 
 Indian National Defence University (INDU) ……… 48 
Chapter-V Working Conditions 
 
  
 Management of Career & Promotion Policy ……… 51 
 Recommendations of the A.V. Singh Committee ……… 56 
 Time scale and Promotion ……… 60 
 Sixth Central Pay Commission ……… 61 
 Permanent Promotion Board ……… 64 
 Statutory Complaints ……… 65 
 Welfare Measures and Grievance Redressal System ……… 65 
 Education facilities for wards of Armed Forces 
Personnel 
……… 67 

  
(ii) 
 
 Sensitisation of the Civil Authorities ……… 76 
 Armed Forces Headquarters Civil Service (AFHQCS) ……… 82 
 Armed Forces Tribunal ……… 85 
    
Chapter-VI Exit Policy  
 
  
 Premature Retirement ……… 87 
 Retention Incentive ……… 90 
    
Chapter-VII Directorate General of Resettlement (DGR) 
 
  
 Ex-Servicemen commission ……… 93 
 Natural Disaster Organisations ……… 93 
 One-Rank-One-Pension ……… 94 
 Withdrawal of Army from deployment in counter 
insurgency operations 
 
……… 96 
 Lateral Induction of Ex-Servicemen  
 
……… 97 
Chapter-VIII Infusion of High-tech Training and Infrastructure 
 
  
 Technological advancement ……… 98 
 Technical Education ……… 100 
 Infusion of Hi-Tech Training in Army ……… 103 
 Delegation of Powers to Army Headquarters for 
purchasing equipment 
……… 104 
 Depleting Strength of Field Firing Ranges ……… 106 
 Infusion of High-Tech Training in Navy ……… 106 
 Infusion of High-Tech Training in Air Force ……… 110 
 CAG’s comments on Training of Pilots ……… 116 
 Inadequate Civilian Instructors in Training and other 
Technical Institutions 
……… 118 
 Foreign Training ……… 122 
 Joint Training ……… 123 
 Future vision for imparting hi-tech training ……… 124 
 
PART-II  
 
Recommendations/Observations of the Committee 
 
 ……… 125 
Appendices  Minutes of the sittings of the Committee held on  
18.12.2007, 18.01.2008, 28.01.2008, 26.05.2008, 
03.07.2008, 28.07.2008, 04.08.2008, 12.08.2008, 
26.08.2008, 02.09.2008, 16.09.2008 and 05.12.2008 
……… 148  
 

  
 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE (2008-09) 
   
  Shri Balasaheb Vikhe Patil   - Chairman   
   
 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri Vijay Bahuguna 
*3. Shri S. Bangarappa 
4. Shri Milind Murli Deora 
5. Shri Santosh Gangwar 
6. Shri Jigajinagi Ramesh Chandappa 
7. Shri Suresh Kalmadi 
8. Shri C. Kuppusami 
9. Dr. K.S. Manoj 
10. Ms. Ingrid Mcleod 
11. Shri Asaduddin Owaisi 
12. Shri Adhalrao Shivaji Patil 
13. Shri Shrinivas Patil 
14. Shri Raju Rana 
**15. Dr. H.T. Sangliana 
16. Shri Arjun Charan Sethi 
17. Prof. Mahadeorao Shiwankar 
18. Shri Manavendra Singh 
19. Shri Balashowry Vallabhaneni 
20. Shri Rajesh Verma 
21. Shri Anil Shukla Warsi 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
22. Shri A. Elavarasan 
 ***23. Dr. Farooq Abdullah 
24. Shri Jai Parkash Aggarwal 
****25. Shri  Abu Asim Azmi 
26. Smt. Shobhana Bhartia  
27. Shri R.K. Dhawan 
28. Shri K.B. Shanappa 
29. Shri Arun Shourie 
30. Smt. Viplove Thakur 
31. Shri M.V. Mysura Reddy 
32. Shri Munquad Ali 
___________________________________________________________________ 
*  Ceased to be a member of this Committee due to his resignation from 
Lok Sabha w.e.f. 12.02.2009 
**    Consequent upon his disqualific ation from Lok Sabha w.e.f. 3.10.2008. 
***   Ceased to be a member of this Committee due to his retirement from 
Rajya Sabha w.e.f. 29.11.2008. 
****   Ceased to be a member of this Committee due to his retirement from 
Rajya Sabha w.e.f. 25.11.2008. 
(iii) 
 
 

  
(iv) 
 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
  
1. Shri Rajeev Sharma  - Director 
2. Shri D.R. Shekhar  - Deputy Secretary 
3. Smt. J.M. Sinha  - Under Secretary  
4. Shri Om Prakash  - Executive Assistant 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

  
(v) 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
 I, the Chairman, Standing Committee on Defence (2008-09) having been 
authorized by the Committee to submit the Report on their behalf, present his Thirty-
fourth Report on the subject ‘Human Resource Planning, Shortage of Manpower, 
Infusion of Hi-Tech Training and Infrastructure for the Armed Forces’. 
 
2. The Committee had selected the above subject for examination during the 
year 2007-08. As the examination of the subject remained inconclusive, it was again 
selected by the Standing Committee on Defence for examination during the year 
2008-09. 
 
3. During the examination of the subject, the Committee took evidence of the 
representatives of the Ministry of De fence and Ex-servicemen having knowledge of 
the subject matter on 18 December 2007, 18 &28 January, 26 May, 3 & 28 July, 4, 
12 & 26 August, 2 and 16 September 2008. 
 
4. The Committee finalized and adopted the draft Report at their sitting held on 5 
December, 2008 on the basis of written information furnished by the Ministry of 
Defence; memoranda submitted by Ex-s ervicemen and experts; oral evidence 
tendered by the representatives of the Ministry and non-official witnesses; and the 
observations made by the members of the Committee during the Study visits to 
Visakhapatnam, Mumbai, Jodhpur, Barmer and Jaisalmer from 26 October to 1 
November 2007 and Chennai, Hyderabad, Bangaluru, Pune, Goa and Karwar in 
February 2008. 
 
5. The Committee’s examination has revealed certain deficiencies and 
shortcomings in manpower planning and human resource management in the armed 
forces. Broadly, the areas of concern noticed by the Committee are: absence of 
proper system for assessment of manpower requirement; inadequate initiatives to 
encourage and motivate the younger generation to join armed forces; need for 
improvement in the recruitment procedures; desirability of better management of 
career prospects and working conditions; and need for multipronged strategies for 
welfare of serving defence personnel and ex-servicemen.  
 
6. The Committee have also emphasised upon the need to gear up our armed 
forces to meet the challenges of growing threat perception in view of the fact the 
global security scenario is fast changing with the advent of technological 
advancement in the nature of warfare. The Committee have accordingly desired that 
the Ministry of Defence to pay serious attention towards this aspect and devise an 
effective training, strategy to meet the long term technological requirements of the 
armed forces keeping pace with changing times. 
 
7. The Committee wish to convey their thanks to the representatives of the 
Ministry of Defence and Ex-servicemen and experts for appearing before the 
Committee for tendering evidence and for furnishing the relevant information in 
connection with the examination of this subject. 
 
8. For facility of reference and convenience, the observations/ recommendations 
of the Committee have been printed in thick type in the body of the Report. 
 
 
New Delhi;           BALASAHEB VIKHE PATIL, 
23 February, 2008                             Chairman, 
04 Phalguna, 1930 (Saka)        Standing Committee on Defence. 

  
CHAPTER-I 
 
HUMAN RESOURCE PLANNING, SHORTAGE OF MANPOWER, 
INFUSION OF HI-TECH TRAINING AND INFRASTRUCTURE 
 
INTRODUCTORY 
 
 Human resource planning of the M ilitary flows from the National 
Security policy, which in turn is  based on a Nation’s social, economic and 
political institutions and threats from within and outside the Sovereign State. It 
is the foundation on which the security superstructure of the country rests. 
Closely related to maintaining a moti vated and a highly skilled Force, are the 
issues of training, which is incr easingly becoming hi-tech, related 
infrastructure and the challenge of  addressing the issue of manpower 
deficiencies, wherever existing. 
 
1.2. Today, the profession of arms involves highly specialized skills. A 
military professional is  an expert with specialized knowledge and skills. His 
expertise is acquired through prolonged training and experience. 
 
1.3. In any modern Armed Forces, there are specializations and sub- 
specializations, which cater to different  kind of warfare on land, on and under 
the seas, in the air and also the suppor t services including maintenance of 
modern weapons and equipment. 
1.4. Each Service has engineers, docto rs, lawyers and other specialists yet, 
within each Service, there will be divergent  vertical specializations, as their 
functional responsibilities will differ. T he Captain of an Aircraft Carrier and a 
Commander of an Infantry Division will be faced with a completely different set 
of problems, requiring different capabilities and experience. 
 
1.5. The Armed Forces, like any other  organization, seeks to attract the 
“best suited” for the job. Needless to say, they are required to conform to 
certain eligibility criteria, both in te rms of physical and m ental robustness. 
Standards for recruitments are based on t he principle of obtaining the basic 
building block in terms of manpower and thereafter provide training in stages, 
to meet on-the-job needs, in tandem with career progression. 
 
1 

  
2 
1.6. The founding principle of Human Re source Policy is to hone the talent 
of each individual and groom him to wards maximizing combat skills and 
achieving organisational effectiveness. 
 
1.7 The personnel management strategy comprises the following:- 
 
a. Recruit the “right” individual into the service. 
b. Optimum utilization of available human resources. 
c. Development of potential human resources through proper training, 
placement and promotion policies. 
d. Dovetail the individuals and serv ice requirements, as far as 
possible, with career prospects of the individual in the foreground. 
 
 Jointness of manpower planning among the three services  
 
1.8 When inquired about the joint- ness of three Services, the 
representative of the Ministry of Defence stated as under: 
“Frankly speaking, there is a debate going on. In fact, it is really for the 
Services to arrive at jointness. I do not want to make any comment on 
the subject”. 
 
Significance of Manpower 
 
1.9 Highlighting the importance of M anpower, a non-official witness stated 
during the evidence as under: 
“The point I wanted to highlight is that while keeping in touch with the 
technology, which is very crucial for a convention war, the kind of 
involvement that the I ndian Defence Forces, particularly, the Indian 
Army have involved in Jammu and Ka shmir over the last two decades 
and North-East and other regions for so many years, the technology 
does not play the decisive role”. 
That is the point I wanted to make. The man will continue to remain the 
critical factor in the Defence Forces, and we must focus on that man.  
The technology is fine for remaini ng prepared for a conventional war, 
which must remain.  But side by side, the man must not be ignored; he 
must remain the centre of our attention”. 

  
3 
1.10 The non-official witness further stated: 
“About the shortage, there are two aspects.  One is officers shortage; and the 
other is the shortage about the persons below officer rank or the PBOR, the 
term, we normally use.   In any Army, more so in the Indian Army, the crucial 
role in any unit is played by the officer.  We are an officer-led Army. That is for 
everyone to see.   You take the number of casualties suffered in every war, 
and you relate it to the  normal officer to man ratio, you  would find that the 
casualty ratio is much higher; and it is often and very rightly said that no unit 
is good or bad; it is the officer that makes it so.  You do not have the right 
quality of officers, which is not happening today, everybody knows it.  Quality 
is an aspect. We have been having shortage of nearly 35 per cent for more 
than 10 years.  Their sense of dedication, the sense of commitment can 
easily be seen. While in actual practice, an officer is doing two officers’ job in 
every unit. If you take the absence on courses and other training matters, no 
officer till today has complained to any authority that he is overworked.  
Number two, we are holding only 65 to 70 per cent of the officers; no unit has 
ever claimed that it would be able to produce only 70 per cent of the  results.  
We are still expecting and producing 100 per cent of the  results with that 
shortage.   I am not trying to say that this shortage should not be made up;  it 
must be made up and we must find methods.   
 I also want to refer to the recent Press reports and I do hope that they 
are false, where it was reported that an instruction has gone from the Ministry 
of Defence  to say that to make up the deficiency, we must have a one-time 
lowering of the selection standards. With all the emphasis at my command, I 
would advise against any such measure.  It would be better to let the Army 
remain with shortage if that is unavoidable rather than making it just to fill the 
ranks of people, who do not have the right kind of competence or motivation. 
 Now, as far as the PBOR are concerned, apparently there is no 
shortage.  But that should not give us a false sense of popularity of the 
Defence Forces.  We still meet our old JCOs or NCOs, who have put in their 
lifetime in the military uniform. There was a time not many years ago when 
they took pride in putting their son in the same unit that they served is not any 
longer. The Army is not their first choice.  They would like to put them in some 
other service.  Now, that is a kind of development, which we as, countrymen, 
need to take note and find corrective measures. 
 Although there is no shortage, because the number is so large, the 
unemployment is so high, that the people are still wanting to join but they are 
coming not out of choice but more out of compulsion”. 
 
1.11 About the Human resource planning issues related to the PBORs , a 
non-official witness stated as under: 
“Attractive, of course, it is only by higher emoluments. The jawans’ 
problem is that since we have a na rrow top, 80 per c ent or more than 
80 per cent of the PBOR they go hom e after 17 years of service when 
their age is between 35 and 40. Now, t hey suffer in two ways. Firstly 
because they have put in lesser years of service and, therefore, their 
salary is low and, therefore, the pension will be low. Secondly, they are 
left in the street at a time when their financial commitments are high. 
Their children are going to school, t heir sisters to be married or they 
have old parents to look after. I am talking of ex-servicemen”. 

  
4 
1.12 Giving the historical account of  the service condition of the Armed 
Forces personnel, the non-official witness further stated: 
 
“I would like to draw the attent ion of the honourable House that till 
1962-1963 the ‘colour service of a man’ that is the compulsory service 
was only seven years. They were not given any pension. Only the 
limited nucleus who were required for the higher ranks were given it; 
otherwise, they were sent home. There was no pension.  
 But, at that time, most of the so ldiery came from the rural areas 
where he went back to till his l and. Today the land holdings are no 
longer viable. He cannot subsist on l and. That is why, you increase the 
colour service. It was increased by a few years in 1963, then kept 
increasing. But today we see that the pension bill is very high. We have 
nearly 22 lakh pensioners which is a very high commitment for the 
country. We need to go back to tha t. That is why the recommendation 
comes in that you reduce the colour  service again; do not give the man 
a pension, but you give him a job a fter he leaves. Then he leaves after 
five years or six years or seven year s. He is fit for any job, he is a 
disciplined man, he is a national asset. But he must be absorbed”.   

  
 
5 
CHAPTER-II 
ASSESSMENT OF MANPOWER 
Authorised and existing strength in the Army   
 
2.1 When inquired about the assessment  of manpower in the Army, the 
Ministry of Defence stated in their written reply as under: 
 
“The manpower is periodically anal ysed and factored in the 15 Year 
Long Terms Perspective Plan and Five Year Plans of Army. In addition, 
manpower review if operationally imperative, is done during the mid-
plan period. The existing organisations / establishments are periodically 
reviewed by Army Standing Est ablishment Committee (ASEC).”The 
Cadre structure of officers in t he Army is based on operational 
requirement and hierarchic al structure of field formations. The Officers 
Cadre structure is steeply pyrami dal due to the organisation being 
command oriented.   
 
 
2.2 The details in respect of Office rs and Personnel Below Officers Rank 
(PBOR) in the Army as on July, 2007 are given below:-   
 
Category  Rank Auth Held Defi 
Gen 1 1 0 
Lt Gen 68 66 -02 
Maj Gen 216 205 -11* 
Brig 866 866 0 
Col 4238 4344 106 
Lt Col & below 41225 30069@ -11156 (27%) 
Total 46614 35551 -11063 (24%) 
Officers 
 
* Being promoted  @  Held Lt Col  11,131, Maj 8,813, Capt 6,745,  
Lt 3,380  
Junior Commissioned 
Officer (JCO) 86600 82300 -4300@ 
Other Rank (OR) 
1015000 1038300 +23300 
Personnel 
Below 
Officer 
Rank 
  Figures rounded off. 
 @ Temporary voids.  
3.  Surplus being liquidated by September 2008. 
 

  
6 
Authorised and existing strength in the Navy 
 
2.3 When inquired about the assessment of manpower in the Navy, the 
Ministry of Defence stated in their written reply as under: 
 
 “The Navy is pursuing a long term policy that places emphasis on 
restructuring by means of redeployment  of manpower resources arising from 
decommissioned ships / submarines / aircraft.  
 
2.4 Details in respect of Officers and PBOR (as on 30 June 2008) in the Navy are 
as under: 
Officers- Manpower Status  
Rank Sanctioned 
strength 
Actual 
strength 
Shortage 
Admiral 1 1 -
Vice Admiral 18 18 -
Rear Admiral 54 54 -
Commander/Captain 485 485 -
*Commander/Lt. Commander/Lieutenant/ 
Sergeant Lieutenant/Surg Captain (SPI)/ 
 Surg Commander 
7520 6269 (-)1251 
SD OFFICERS 841 600 (-)241
TOTAL 8919 7427 (-)1492 (16.7%) 
*No separate figures are available on the sanctioned strength of Commanders and below. 
 
Sailors- manpower status. 
Category Sanctioned strength Actual strength Shortage 
Artificers 6794  6453 (-)341 
Non-Artificers 44509 41498 (-)3011 
Total 51303 47951 (-)3352 
 
Authorised and existing strength in the Air Force 
2.5 When inquired about the assessment of manpower in the Air Force, the 
Ministry of Defence stated in their written reply as under: 
 
 “Manpower Planning is an ongoing process in Air Force. The strength is 
calculated depending upon the type of aircraft, weapon system, other 
equipment, envisaged role and task of the concerned formation. The cases 
for sanction of manpower are taken up as and when new equipment is 
inducted or new unit is raised.  If an existing equipment or aircraft is phased 
out or declared obsolete and the unit is closed down, the existing sanction for 
manpower is re-appropriated to a new raising or factored in while projecting 
the case for a new raising. Further, reassessment of the existing sanction is 
done unit wise on a periodical basis through  a body called Air Force Standing 
Establishment Committee (AFSEC) which carries out periodical reviews of the 
existing sanctions after due assessment of the current equipment, roles and 
tasks of the existing units. On an average 45 to 55 units are reviewed every 
year (4 to 5 units per month).  
 

  
7 
Officers 
 
Rank Sanctioned strength Actual strength Shortage 
Air Chief Marshal 1 1 - 
Air Marshal 23 23 - 
Air Vice Marshal 50 53 +3 
Air Commodore 150 158 +8 
Group Captain 555 651 +96 
Wing Commander 4095 4239 (+)144 
Squadron Leader 3828 2861 (-)967 
Flight Lieutenant 2469 1761 (-)708 
Flying Officer 965 890 (-)75 
TOTAL 12136 10637 (-)1499 
  
2.6 When inquired whether the short age of Airmen in the Air Force is 
because of the recruitment ban since 1984 or because of the unattractiveness 
of the career as mentioned by the Minist ry, a representative of the Ministry of 
Defence stated as under: 
“There is no contradiction as such.  In 1984, there was a ban, which got lifted 
in 2006 and the recruitment process has already begun.  There is tremendous 
response from all the State Governments.  They are holding rallies.  As far as 
airmen are concerned… “ 
  
Shortage of Manpower in the Armed Forces 
 
2.7 As regard the reasons for the shortage of manpower in the Armed 
Forces, the Ministry of Defence in their background note submitted as under: 
“It is an acknowledged fact that the best youth today is not joining the 
Armed Forces. The old values of patri otic feelings, family tradition and 
adventurous life which drov e hordes of youth to join the Armed Forces 
earlier giving ways to the values of  a materialistic world and other 
environment factors.   Some of t he major problems which act as a 
disincentive, have already been mentioned earlier.” 
 
 
2.8 The Ministry of Defence furn ished the reasons for the persisting 
deficiencies in the officer cadre as under: 
 
(a) Attrition in force levels from time to time. 
(b) Unpopular career because of: - 
(i) Lucrative alternative options available in the civil sector 
(ii) Unsettled life and frequent transfers. 
(iii) Early retirement ages based on rank. 
(iv) Risk factor. 
 
2.9 According to the information made ava ilable by the Ministry of Defence, 
the main reasons for the shortage of Manpower are as follows: 

  
8 
 
“Low priority accorded by the youth of this country adopting Army as a 
career.  With ever growing ex posures, the younger generation now 
evaluates various job opportunities av ailable in market in terms of 
status, pay package, cadre mobility and its cumulative effect in the later 
part of their life. At pres ent there is a deficiency of 27 % in the ranks of 
Lt Col and below. This is primarily due to Army being a comparatively 
unattractive career to the youth. T herefore, it is im perative that the 
career in Army is made attractive not  only to inspire the youth to join 
Army but also to retain serving officers in the organization. “ 
 
2.10 When inquired about the measur es undertaken to overcome the 
deficiency, the Ministry of Defence stated in their written reply as under: 
 
“Several measures have been undertaken by the three Services to attract the 
most talented youth towards the forces.  An Image Projection Campaign by 
the Army has been launched in 1997 and currently Phase-IV of the Campaign 
is under progress.  In addition seminars, lectures and presentations are 
organized by the Recruiting Offices at schools and colleges in order to 
motivate the youth to join the Army. Steps have been taken to make Short 
Service Commission (SSC) more attractive. All officers including those in 
SSC are now eligible to hold substantive rank of Captain, Major and 
Lieutenant Colonel after 2, 6 and 13 years of reckonable service respectively.  
Government has also issued orders extending the tenure of SSC officers from 
10 years to 14 years.  In addition, the commitment and bravery of the Armed 
Forces is consistently projected through the electronic and print media.  The 
Directorate of Public Relations of Ministry of Defence regularly interacts with 
media persons while giving defence related information and endeavours to 
ensure positive publicity.  Regular coverage of defence related events in the 
print and electronic media help in creating awareness among the masses and 
motivating the youth to join the armed forces.  Websites are also operative on 
the Internet providing career related information on the three Services. In 
addition to the above, as part of the ‘pull’ factors of the recommendations, 750 
posts of Lieutenant Colonels have been upgraded to Colonel’s rank. 
 
2.11 When inquired whether the 750 pos ts of Lt. Colonel that have been 
upgraded to that of Colonel are inclus ive of the authoris ed strength of 4238 
posts of Colonel shown in the cadr e structure is in clusive of 750 upgraded 
posts, the Ministry of Defence submitted in their written replies as under: 
 
 
 “The authorised strength of 4238 posts of Colonel shown in the cadre 
structure of Army is inclusive of 750 upgraded posts.” 
 
 
2.12 When asked to furnish year wise det ails of the recruitments made in 
the three Services through Short Servic e Commission in the last five years 
and also the efforts made to overcome th is shortage, the Mi nistry of Defence 
submitted in their written replies as under: 
  

  
9 
“Army: (a) Data on Shortage of Officers in the Army is as under :- 
State of Officers Year 
 Authorised Held Deficiency Percentage 
Remarks 
1957 13657 11713 1944 14.23 
1967 33890 28663 5227 15.42 
1977 37228 32741 4487 12.05 
1987 46796 35371 11425 24.41 
1997 49425 36440 12785 25.87 
2007 46614 35527 11087 23.78 
All figures  
are 
working 
figures 
only. 
Figures 
upto 1997 
include 
AMC and 
ADC. 
 
(b) Efforts Made to Overcome Shortage of Officers. 
(i) In service entries such as Permanent Commission 
(Special List) and Army Cadet  College were introduced post 
Independence. 
(ii) Emergency Commission wa s granted to eligible 
candidates during the period 1962-1966 with modification in 
training period.  Thereafter Short Service Commission was 
introduced in 1967 and still continues. 
(iii) During period 1999-2000, r eduction in training period 
was resorted to for commissioning more number of officers. 
(iv) From time to time, new entries have been introduced to 
enhance intake of officers  such as Technical Graduate Entry, 
University Entry Scheme and 10+2 Technical Entry Scheme.   
Efforts have also been made to enhance intake through in 
service entries such as Regimental Commissioned Officers and 
Special Commissioned Officers. 
(v) AV Singh Committee  recommended various measures to 
mitigate shortage of officers in the Army. AVSC-I has been 
implemented earlier. All officers including those in Short Service 
Commission (SSC) have been made elig ible to hold substantive 
rank of Captain, Major and Lieutenant Colonel and equivalents 
after 2,6 and 13 years of reckonable service respectively.  The 
tenure of SSC Officers has been extended to 14 years in the 
three Services. 
(vi) Government has recently decided to implement Phase - II 
of AV Singh Committee recommendations by 
creation/upgradation of  1896 additional posts in the ranks of 
Colonel, Brigadier, Major General  and Lt General in the three 
Services.  This will substantially improve the career prospects of 
Officers of the Armed Forces t hereby making the Services more 
attractive.  Further, the re cent implement ation of the 
recommendation of the VI CPC with substant ial improvement in 
the pay structure of officers of  Armed Forces will also go a long 
way in making the Services more attractive.  
 
 

  
10 
 
(vii) To increase the intake of officers for National Defence 
Academy (NDA)  
(viii) Augmenting the training capac ity of training institutions 
like NDA, IMA, OTA, AFA and naval Academy. 
(ix) To increase the intake through Short Service Commission 
(SSC).In order to increas e the intake through Short 
Service Commission the following measures are 
proposed  to make the SSC entry more attractive:- 
(a) Grant of lumsum amount of Rs.10 lakh after 10 years of 
service and Rs.2 lakh for every subsequent year till the 
14th year. 
(b) To confer the status of Ex-Servicemen to ex-SSC 
officers who have completed 14 years of service. 
(c) To extend CSD facilities to such released SSCOs. 
(d) Extension of benefits of Ex-Servicemen Contributory 
Health Scheme (ECHS) to Ex SSCOs.   
(e) To provide for re-employment of released SSCOs. 
(f) Grant of Professional Enhancement Leave  
(x) The terms and conditions for Special Commissioned 
Officers Cadre (SCO) have been am ended.  This  will facilitate 
the in service intake due to modified criteria for selection.  
(xi) Publicity Adequate publicity is undertaken to ensure 
maximum spread of information about  Army as a career.  The 
salient aspects are as under :- 
(a) Image Projection Campaigns.  Four such campaigns 
 have so far been undertaken with professional help 
 from civil agencies. 
(b) Recruitment notifications are published in leading 
 national dailies. 
(c) Publicity material is printed and distributed to schools 
 and colleges across the country. 
(d) Publicity stalls are put up and motivational lectures are 
 organized during fares in educational institutes. 
(e) Print and electronic media is adequately covered by 
 publicity advertisements. 
(f)     Calendars and diaries are printed and distributed in 
 the environment. 
 (g) The web site “Join the Army” is being redesigned. 
 
Navy: Details in respect of shortage of officers since 1957 are, as 
follows:- 
 
Officers 
Shortage 
 Year Sanctioned 
Strength 
Borne 
Strength No % 
1957 1442 1131 311 21.5 
1967 2773 2121 652 23.5 
1977 4724 3734 990 20.9 
1987 6576 5525 1051 15.9 
1997 7170 6581 589 8.2 
2007 8913 7420 1493 16.7 

  
 
 
11 
 
Measures Taken to Reduce shortage of Manpower 
 
Actions Taken to Reduce Shortage of Officers. The Navy has taken 
certain actions like increased publicity and candidate friendly 
recruitment procedures to attract more number of candidates.  In 
addition to general publicity, the Na vy is also carrying out focused 
publicity drive in various institutions to attract potential candidates.  
Motivation drive is also conducted in  various colleges/institutions in 
order to widen the scope of target population.  In addition, following 
steps have been taken to improve induction of officers:- 
 
Additional Services Selection Board (SSB) at Diamond Harbour . The 
selection rates of candidates appeari ng in the SSB interviews are low 
and ranges from 2 to 10%.  To augment the interviewing capacity 
provided by existing SSBs, the MoD has approved setting up of one 
additional SSB at Diamond Harbour.  The facility is expected to be 
operational by 2011, after which the efforts to reduce shortages will get 
augmented. 
Image Projection Campaign.  The Navy is rejuvenating the recruitment 
publicity efforts through an Image Projection Campaigns, as follows:- 
Use of job portal on Internet. 
Campaigns on Electronic Media (TV Advertisement). 
Advertisements in popular Magazines. 
Publicity through Hoardings/Bus Panels through DAVP. 
Introduction of New Entry Schemes for Specific Induction of Officers .
 To overcome shortages in t he specialised fields of Naval 
Architecture, Aviation, Submarines  etc dedicated and specific entries 
have been introduced.   
New Naval Academy at Ezhimala. A new Naval Academy has 
been constructed at Ezhimala, Kerala for the training of officers.  The 
new academy is offering additional capacit y for the ab initio training of 
officers. 
 
Air Force:  EST/STR OFFICERS : IAF 
 
SL. 
NO. 
YEAR EST STR ABSOLUTE 
SHORTAGE 
%  
SHORTAGES 
1. 1957 2688 2451 257 9.56 
2. 1967 8009 7100 909 11.35 
3. 1977 9197 8949 248 2.70 
4. 1987 10825 9558 1267 11.70 
5. 1997 10741 10028 713 6.64 
6. 2007 12135 10668 1467 12.09 
7. 2008 12120 10754 1366 11.27 
 

  
12 
 
The following measures have been undertaken by IAF to overcome 
shortages in the Officers Cadre:- 
 
(a) Publicity awareness Campaigns are being conducted at low 
response areas. These include Air Shows, Band Concerts, 
Recruitment Publicity Stalls, Sky Diving shows, Projecting 
documentaries on IAF etc. 
(b) Participation in Career Fairs and Exhibitions to enhance one-
on-one interaction. 
(c) Conduct of  Fast track Selection on the times of campus 
placement being undertaken by the civil agencies. 
(d) Reintroduction of University Entry Scheme for Aeronautical 
Engineering Branch.  
(e) Advertisements in Print and Electronic media including 
Recruitment and Career related articles. 
(f) Motivational lectures in school/colleges. 
(g) Distribution of creative  and eye catching publicity 
material/promotional material for distribution to target group. 
(h) Catchy display advertisements for recruitment of officers in 
various branches namely Flying, Technical and Ground Duties. 
(i) Visuals/signage points all over the country in phased manner 
at strategic locations. 
 
Establishment of Publicity Cells at Command HQ and all Air Force 
Stations. 
 
2.13 When inquired about the acceptanc e of the proposal made by the 
Armed Forces Headquarters by the Ministry  of Defence, a representative of 
the Ministry of Defence during evidence stated as under: 
“The first issue that you have raised is with regard to the apparent reduction 
in the induction, which is stated to be 170. I would just like to go through the 
details of the proposal, which was given by the Army Headquarters. Actually, 
they had given us a proposal wherein the present strength of the regular 
cadre was required to be reduced from 1,320 to 500, and the Short Service 
Commission (SSC) cadre was to be increased from 700 to 1,350. One 
particular segment which relates to the Special Commissioned Officers and 
the Permanent Commission Select List (PCSL) was not actually reflected in 
the discussions, which we had on 2
nd September where they had proposed 
for increase from 150 to 250. Here is the additionality that got missed out in 
the discussions, which we had in the meeting on 2
nd September.I would just 
like to reiterate what we had discussed on 2 nd September. Primarily, the 
proposal of the services was to make the SSC attractive and increase 
induction in the SSC and go in for inverse reduction in the regular cadre from 
1,320 to 500. This increase in the Short Service Commission induction could 
only happen when the Short Service Commission cadre is made attractive for 
which the proposal of the Army Headquarters has already been agreed to, 
and the in-principle approval of the Raksha Mantri has already been obtained 
on it. As stated in the last meeting, the Ministry has agreed to make the Short 
Service Commission attractive and a number of proposals which they had 
have been agreed to like, for instance, the reduction in the contract period”.  
 

  
13 
2.14 A representative of the Ministry of Defence further stated about the 
implication of accepting the proposals of the Armed Forces Headquarters as 
under: 
“The Ministry is convinced of thei r proposal. We can meet out their 
shortages. The Ministry is convinced of their proposals. They were sent 
after several discussions with the Ministry. We tried to assess what was 
possible. Some of these would r equire fresh financial approvals. For 
example, they have proposed to incr ease the intake in the NDA. That 
would mean sanctioning more posts  of teachers, and some more 
accommodation. Likewise, to incr ease the Short Service Commission 
induction and the direct entry, they have asked for another OTC. 
Another OTC has been approved in-princip le, but it would require fairly 
detailed financial approvals. Simila rly, they have proposed certain 
amounts to be paid to people for comple ting their education and so on. 
Now, those are new proposals and t hey would have to be cleared by 
the Finance Ministry. While we think that the package of measures put 
together would address t he shortage, it is not  as if they can be 
implemented immediately. This will ta ke a certain period in which we 
will have to create the infrastructure , obtain approvals, but I think we 
have made an important first step in that. The problem has been 
recognized; some steps have been ident ified, and we are trying to see 
that these are addressed on priority. As you know, Sir, this is a problem 
that basically affects the Army. Though there is a shortage to some 
extent in other Services, it coul d be described as a routine shortage. 
But it applies to the Army. Subs equently, the Pay Commission awards 
have also been announced, after the deliber ations on this took place. I 
do not know what the effect of t hat would be, whether it would be a 
case of too little too late or whether it would, in fact, as an inducement 
to people to join the Army. But it will make some difference.” 
  
2.15 When inquired about the measures bei ng taken by the Ministry of 
Defence to dissuade the officers fr om leaving the Armed Forces, a 
representative of the Ministry of Defence during evidence stated as under: 
“I do not think that we need to hav e any emergency measures to stop 
this. The Service conditions are still very good. I would say that as a 
profession it is fulfilling, if you take  the example of the Air Force. The 
civil aviation in India is in a very high growth phase, and the demand for 
pilots is enormous. I think we pay the Air Force pilots quite well; 
compared to the civil aviation sector , they are not that well paid. If 
somebody wants to become a pilot with Jet Airways, he will earn four to 
five times more than what he is being paid at present in  the Air Force. 
That is a choice for him. We can stop it in some ways by making it 
difficult for him to leave bec ause the Government makes a huge 
investment on his training”. 
 

  
14 
2.16 When inquired whether with advent  of technology, the reliance on 
manpower would decrease, an expert  during evidence stated as under: 
 
“My observation is that with the kind of involvement of the army for the last 
so many years since 1989 in a proxy war by our neighbour, the technology 
does not play a decisive role. The Amer ican lost this kind of warfare in 
Vietnam and the Russian lost in Afghani stan because it is the man who 
has to perform the task and technology  can be an addition. It cannot be a 
replacement. That is my point.” 
  

  
15 
CHAPTER-III 
RECRUITMENT PROCEDURE 
 
Strategies for Motivation, Pre-Selection training 
 
Feeder Institutions for the Armed Forces 
3.1 As informed by the Ministry of Defence, Rashtriya Indian Military College 
(RIMC), Five Military Schools and 22 Sainik Schools located in various parts of the 
country act as feeder institutions to the National Defence Academy (NDA).  The 
curriculums of these institutions are specifically designed to train the boys 
academically, mentally and physically for entry to NDA. The National Cadet Corps 
(NCC) is doing a yeoman service in attrac ting youth towards the Armed Forces by 
focusing on the high values of military traditions as part of their training curriculum.  
 
3.2 When inquired about the necessity of having some mechanism to impart pre-
selection training, a representative of the Ministry of Defence  stated as under:  
“Frankly speaking, I do not know the quality of these institutions in relation to 
this. We have not felt the need of it”. 
  
Strengthening the feeder institutions 
3.3 During evidence a representative of  the Ministry of Defence opined 
about the feeder institutions as under: 
“They have a large number of opportuniti es in the Rashtriya Military Schools 
which were designed to provide as a feeder for the Armed Forces.  What are 
the results as of now?  Only 15 per cent of those children who are being 
trained for five to seven years and who are there in the School, are given the 
training as to how the things are going to take place in the SSB and whose 
orientation in the studies also towards the Armed Forces. I would like to say 
here that only 15 per cent of children are coming in the Armed Forces.  There 
are reasons for that.  The first and foremost, as has been brought out, is that 
it is not a very attractive profession for any bright student.  Now, these 
Rashtriya Military Schools were created and they were picking up the best lot 
in the younger classes when they come to the Class X.  Take for example, 
the School in Ajmer where most of those students after Class Tenth want to 
go out.  Parents say that we want to put up our children there.  There are 
reasons for that.  You have a place called Kota where you have the best of 
the educational facilities which produces a large number of the children who 
get into IITs.  He says why should I go and serve in the Army where the life is 
tough.  Why I should get into a profession where I may be called upon to 
serve in Siachin on the day one.  So the reason for that is simple and 
straightforward.  You have to increase the perks in a great way.  That is the 
only answer; otherwise I think we are going to continue to face this problem. It 
is a serious issue.  I am very grateful to you that this august Committee is 
giving its valuable consideration”. 

  
16 
3.4 When inquired about the need of giving stipend to NDA cadets, a 
representative of the Mini stry of Defence during or al evidence stated as 
under:  
“We support it.  We had, in fact, felt that the NDA trainees should also be 
given stipend, but the proposal was not cleared by the Finance Ministry.  We 
had sent that proposal with our recommendations to the Pay Commission 
also that Rs. 8000 should be given as stipend.  All the NDA trainees do not 
come from affluent backgrounds.  There should be a level playing field in 
terms of pocket expanses”.   
 
Measures to make career in Army more attractive 
3.5 According to the background note furn ished by the Ministry of Defence, 
the following measures have been taken to make career in Army more 
attractive: 
 
 “Image Projection Campaign: An image Projection Campaign (IPC) was 
launched by the Army in the year 1997 through a renowned private 
advertising agency at a project cost of Rs.3.85 crores, to create awareness 
among the youth on the advantages of taking up a challenging and satisfying 
career in the Army. A decision was taken to continue the Campaign. 
Accordingly, IPC-II was conduct4ed during August 1999 to August,2000 at a 
cost of Rs. 4.40 crores and IPC-III was conducted during June 2000 to May 
2003 with a project cost of Rs.5.20 cores. IPC-IV is currently on through M/s. 
Lintas India Ltd. With a cost tag of Rs.7.34 crores. Implementation of 
A.V.Singh Committee Recommendations: The recommendations relating to 
reduction- in qualifying service required for time scale promotions and 
introduction of Colonel Time Scale have been implemented. With the 
implementation of these recommendations, career progression of Army 
Officers up to the rank of Colonel has been significantly accelerated as 
illustrated below: 
 
Rank Pre-A.V.SinghCommittee 
(Recommendations Commissioned Service)
Current (Reckonable 
Commissioned Service) 
Captain 04 02 
Major 10 06 
Lt. Colonel 20 13 
Colonel Not available 26 
ln addition to the above 750 posts of L t. Colonels have been upgraded to that 
of Colonel.” 
 
Measures to make career in Navy more attractive 
3.6 According to the background note furn ished by the Ministry of Defence, 
the following measures have been taken to make career in Navy more 
attractive: 
“The means of publicity adopted to attract better talent include Press 
Advertisements, advertisements in Journals/Magazines of educational 
institutions, hoardings, Information folders, leaflets, brochures, posters and 
blow-ups and through interaction at Exhibition and Fairs. 
 

  
17 
 
3.7 When inquired the Navy stated the measures taken by them to make 
up the shortage in their written note as under: 
 
 i) Creation of Infrastructure 
 ii) Setting up of Regional Career Counselling Offices (Navy) 
  a) Infrastructure 
  b) Manpower 
  c) Location of RCCO(N)s 
 iii) Building Recruitment and Training Capacity 
  a) Services Selection Boards (SSBs) 
  b) Assessors 
  c) Training Capacity of Naval Academy 
iv) Sainik Schools 
v) NCC Training 
vi) Making SCC Entries Attractive 
 a) Lump sum grant on release from service 
 b) Professional enhancement leave 
 c) Concessions for appearing in Civil Services Examination 
 d) Lateral absorption in Pa ra Military Forces and Central 
policy Organisations 
 
Compensation leviable from the Cadets leaving the training midway 
 
3.8  When inquired about recovery of training expenditure from the Cadets 
leaving the training midway, the Ministry of Defence submitted in their written 
replies as under: 
 
“Army (i) The cost of training viz expenditure incurred by the Govt on training, 
messing, accommodation and allied services, at the Indian Military Academy 
during the stay of gentlemen cadets, w ill be recovered from them before they 
are allowed to leave the Academy.  Travelling Allowance paid to gentlemen 
cadets at the time of reporting for training at academy will also be recovered 
from them.  All unused items of cl othing and equipment issued to gentlemen 
cadets out of Government outfit allowance, will be withdrawn.  The full cost of 
part worn items, including stitching charges of clothing, will also be recovered 
and credited to Government. 
(ii) The Govt have introduced a scheme for grant of Ex-Gratia awards in case 
of disablement of Cadets (Direct) due to causes attributable to or aggravated 
by Military Training wef 01 Jan 86.  The present effective rates on Invalidment 
due to causes attributable to or aggravated by Military Training with disability 
at 20% or more are as follows :- 
 
(a) Monthly Ex-Gratia  Rs. 1275/- per month. 
 
(b) Ex-Gratia disability Rs. 2100/- per month for 100% disability, to 
be reduced proportionately for lesser 
percentage of disability. 
(c) Constant Attendance 
Allowance 
Rs. 600/- per month for 100% disability on the 
recommendations of IMB. 
Note - Dearness Relief will be admissible on (a) and (b) above taken together. 
 

  
18 
Navy (i) The recoverable training and allied charges from Cadets 
who leave training midway at their own requests is as follows:- 
 
S.No. Particulars Rate 
 
(a) Cost of training. 1296.38 per week 
(b) Hospitalisation charges,  
if any 
As per actuals on rates prescribed 
by Govt hospitals 
(c) Cost of Uniform. 6519.00 
(d) Monetary Grant. 80.00 per month 
(e) Stationery Grant. 70.00 per month 
(f) Hair cutting allowance 75.00 per month 
(g) Messing charges. 54.65 per day 
(h) Stipend paid before grant 
of commission, if any 
As per actuals. 
  
(ii) Same as in case of Army  
Air Force (i) & (ii) The Cadets who leave the training institution midway fall 
under 2 categories:- 
(a) Voluntary withdrawal : In case of voluntary withdrawal by cadets, the 
cost of training, i.e. the training period upto which the training was rendered, 
is recovered from the cadet. 
(b) 
Medical unfitness or unable in cope up with training :   The trainees 
who are unable to cope with the training or become medically, unfit to 
continue with the training as per laid down criteria are not required to pay any 
cost to the service/Government.” 
 
Recruitment Procedures in the Armed Forces 
 
3.9 According to the Ministry of Defence recruitment to the Armed Forces is 
voluntary and open to all citizens of India irrespective of caste, class, religion and 
community, provided the laid down physica l, medical and educational criteria are 
met.  
 
Recruitment Procedures in Army  
3.10 According to the information made available to the Committee, induction to 
the Army as a commissioned officer is through UPSC, Non-UPSC and Service 
Entries. The type of UPSC Entries with eligibility criteria and mode of selection is 
attached as Annexure-I. Selection procedure for UPSC Entries includes written 
examination conducted by UPSC. Thereafter, Service Selection Boards (SSBs) 
interviews are conducted in Selection Centers at Allahabad, Bhopal or Bangalore for 
the UPSC written examination-qualified candidates. SSBs are conducted over five 
days of testing schedule. The selected candidates are put through a Special Medical 
Board (SMB).  Final merit list is prepared and declared by the UPSC, taking into 
account the written and SSB marks.  
 

  
19 
3.11 Commissioned Officers in the Arm ed Forces are recruited mainly 
through the UPSC which conducts the following two All India Competitive 
Examinations:-  
 
(a) National Defence Academy (NDA) and Naval Academy (NA).    The 
UPSC   holds entrance examination twice a year for entry into the 
NDA and NA.  Candidates on comple tion of 10 + 2 examination or 
while in the 12 th standard are eligible to compete.  Having cleared 
UPSC written examination, eligible candidates undergo Service 
Selection Board (SSB) interview. On being selected, successful 
candidates join the NDA or NA as per  their option of service exercised 
at the time of applying.  On completi on of the course, they are sent to 
the respective Service Academies for pre-commission training.  
(b) Combined Defence Service Examination (CDSE).    CDSE is 
conducted by the UPSC twice a year. University graduates or those in 
final year of graduation are eligible to appear in the examination.   
Successful candidates join the Indian Military  Academy /Air Force 
Academy and Naval Academy for Regular and Officers Training 
Academy (OTA) for Short Service Commission.   
 
3.12 Selection procedure for Non -UPSC Entries:-  There is no written 
examination. However, the initial screening is based on cut off percentages. 
SSB interviews are conducted in Sele ction Centers, for the selected 
candidates meeting the eligibility criteria.  Final merit list is prepared 
based on SSB marks. The type of Non-UPSC  entries with elig ibility criteria 
and mode of selection is attached as Annexure-I. 
 
3.13 Selection procedure for Service Entries: -Applications are processed by 
concerned units/Formation Headquarters through respective Records offices 
and personnel / Line Directorates. Application for Army Cadet College entry is 
processed only when eligible candidates have successfully attended 
Personality Development Training conduc ted by Army and qualified Written 
Entrance Examination. Elig ibility criteria for serv ice candidates are given 
below. SSB interviews are conducted over a period of five days by a team of 
three assessors comprising of Interviewing Officer (IO), Psychologist (Psych) 
and Group Testing Officer (GTO).  
           

  
20 
The selection procedure for service entries are as follows: 
 
(a) Stage I Tests : The candidates are required to undergo  (i) Officer 
Intelligence Rating (OIR) and Picture Perception and Description Tests 
(PPDT). 
 
(b) Stage II Tests: Stage I recommended candidates are assessed through 
(i) Interview (ii) Group Testing and  (iii) Psychological Tests. 
 
 
3.14  In case of civilians, the period of training before induction is counted as 
part of the service period, however, the same is not applicable in the case of 
the Armed Forces.  When asked about the view of the Government in this 
regard, the Ministry of Defence made the following submission in their written 
replies: 
“While training period is counted to wards service in case of PBOR, 
Cadets who are graduates, are granted stipend of Rs. 8000/- in their 
last yr of training.  The proposal for grant of provisional commission has 
not been accepted by VI CPC. “ 
 
3.15 Details of officers sele cted through UPSC and Non-UPSC 
entries from 2003-2007 are as follows: -  
 
No of Vacancies Year 
UPSC  Non 
UPSC  
   Total   
   Vacancies 
 Joined pre-
Commission 
 Training 
2003 1450 1059 2509 1967 
2004 1450 1093 2543 2221 
2005 1450 1125 2575 2165 
2006 1438 1682   3120 2230 
2007 1450       930 2380  2090 
 
 
UPSC ENTRIES 
 
Type of Entry Course 
Duration 
Age 
(Years 
Qualification  Mode of Selection 
National 
Defence    
Academy 
3 years 16 ½ -19 10+2 UPSC Examination& SSB 
Direct Entry 1 ½ years 19-24      Degree Combined   Defence 
Service   Examination  by 
UPSC&SSB         
Short Service 
Commission 
(Men & Women) 
(Non-Technical) 
11 Months 19-25      Degree Combined Defence      
Service Examination 
 

  
21 
 
  NON-UPSC ENTRIES 
 
Type of Entry Course 
Duration 
Age(Years) Qualification Mode of 
Selection 
Technical 
Graduates       
1 Year         20-27        Engineering 
Graduate 
SSB   
University Entry 
Scheme 
1 Year   19-25 Final/ Pre-Final of 
Engineering Degree 
SSB 
Technical Entry 
Scheme (10+2) 
4+1 Years   16 ½ -19 ½     10+2 with 70% in     
Science stream 
SSB 
Short Service     
Commission 
(Technical) 
11 Months    20-27          Engineering 
Degree(Notified 
Discipline 
SSB 
SSC 
Women(Tech) 
Scheme )        
11 Months     20-27          Post-Graduate 
Diploma in specified 
subject 
SSB 
NCC Special 
Entry (Men & 
Women) 
11 Months 19-25 Graduate (50% 
marks) & 2 years 
service in NCC 
Senior Division with 
minimum ‘B’ Grade 
in ‘C’ Certificate 
SSB 
Judge Advocate 
General (JAG) 
11 Months 21-27 Law degree with 
minimum 50% 
marks 
Written 
examination 
by JAG & 
SSB 
 
SERVICE ENTRIES 
                           
Type of Entry Course 
Duration  
Age (Years) Qualification Mode of 
selection 
 
Army Cadet College 
 
3+1 Year 
 
20-27 
 
10+2 
 
Written 
examination by 
Army Hqrs. & 
SSB 
Special Commissioned 
Officer 
1 Year 28-35 10+2 SSB 
Permanent Commission 
(Select List) 
1 Month Maximum 42 
years 
10+2 SSB 
           
 
Recruitment Procedure of PBORs in Army 
 
3.16  The policy and recruitment to the Army is open to all classes 
irrespective of class, creed, communi ty, religion or region provided they 
conformed to the prescr ibed age limits and physical, medical and educational 
standards. The recruitment is on all I ndia basis. Recruitment is made on the 
basis of the concept of census based Recruitable Male Population. 
 

  
22 
3.17 Recruitable Male Population (RMP ): To ensure equal opportunities to 
all sections of population the concept of RMP was evolved by the Army. The 
Recruitable Male Population (RMP) is that proportion of t he male population, 
which meets the Qualitative Recruitments (QR) laid down for recruitment. The 
RMP based on the ages of entry and qualific ation, was computed in 1966 as 
11.7 % of the Total Male Population (TMP). This percentage was rounded off 
to 10 percent for ease of calculation. The RMP varies from State to State. The 
current RMP in the Army is based on the 2001 census. 
 
3.18 On the issue, the Mi nistry of Defence submitted further in their 
Background Note as under: 
 
“The units of Indian Army fall into one of the following categories, depending 
upon the class composition of the troops:- 
One Class: Entire unit is of one class composition, except clerks and 
tradesmen. 
Fixed Class
: Each sub unit within the unit is of one class.  
Mixed Class: Units with more than one class in laid down percentages.  
All India All Class: Units represented by all classes in any proportion.”  
 
As per the Govt. policy all new raisings after independence have their class 
composition based on all India All class. 
 
3.19 About the education and age QR, the Mi nistry of Defence furnished the 
following information: 
“The education and age QR are bas ed on the job requirement. 
Recently, due to India being a signatory to the UN Protocol, wherein no 
one under the age of 18 should be in volved in armed conflict, the 
minimum age of recruitment has been enhanced from 16 to 17 ½ years 
without increasing the upper age limit to maintain the existing younger 
profile. The present education QR is related to the Pay Group as 
under:- 
 (a) X Group - Diploma entry 
 (b) Y Group - 10
th to 10+2 
 (c) Z Group - Below matric.” 
 
3.20 The Ministry of Defence submitt ed the followings in relation to the 
Recruitment Policy: 
“The recruitment is carried out of vari ous trades in the Army as per the 
laid down age, education qualificati on, physical and medical standards 
without any reservations for any class creed and region. Recruitment 
vacancies are allotted on a tw o years cycle based on the wastage 
pattern of various Arms/Services in each trade.” 
 

  
23 
 
3.21 About the Recruitm ent Procedure, the Mini stry made the following 
submission: 
 
 “Recruitment of the Army is made through recruitment rallies. The rallies are 
conducted in the interiors of each State so as to provide equal opportunities 
to all. Brief details of the recruitment system, which is transparent, are given 
below:- 
a) Recruitment is only through recruitment rallies. 
b) Recruitment rallies are planned in advance and sufficient publicity 
given in local newspapers and other agencies to enable the prospective 
candidates of that area to avail of the opportunities for recruitment. The 
publicity highlights the area where the rally is being held. 
c) Complete recruitment process including physical tests, medical tests 
and written test are completed at the rally site itself.” 
  
Recruitment Procedure in Navy 
 
3.22 According to the Ministry of Defence, the Method of 
Recruitment in the Indian Navy is as under :   
 
“There are two modes of induction in the Indian Navy viz. UPSC Entry and 
Non UPSC Entry.  The UPSC entries are National Defence Academy (NDA) 
& Naval Academy Examination and Combined Defence Services Examination 
(CDSE), and all are Permanent Commission (PC) entries.  In this case the 
UPSC calls for applications, conducts the examination and short lists 
candidates for SSB.  Short listed candidates are sent to the SSBs located at 
Bangalore, Bhopal and Coimbatore.  Result of SSB qualified candidates is 
forwarded to UPSC for making the final merit.  The non UPSC entries are 
both for Permanent Commission (PC) and Short Service Commission (SSC).  
In this case the applications are invited and short listed at Integrated 
Headquarters of the Ministry of Defence (Navy) [IHQ of MoD (Navy)].  The 
short listed candidates are sent for SSB interviews.  Thereafter, a merit list, 
comprising of qualified candidates, is prepared as per the availability of 
vacancies. “ 
 
3.23 The Ministry submitted the followi ng details in respect of both UPSC 
and Non-UPSC entries are as under:- 
 
“(a) UPSC Entry. The UPSC holds (twice a year) an examination for the 
entry into the National Defence Academy (NDA) and Naval Academy.  
Candidates on completion of the 10+2 (PCM) Examination or while in the 12
th 
standard are eligible to compete. Successful candidates join the NDA or 
Naval Academy as Naval cadets. On completion of the NDA/Naval Academy 
training, they are sent to training ships at Kochi for naval sea training.  For the 
Graduate Special Entry, the UPSC holds Combined Defence Services 
Examination (CDSE), twice a year.  Un iversity graduates are eligible to 
appear in the examination. Successful candidates join the Naval Academy for 
the Naval Orientation Course (NOC). 
 
 

  
24 
 
(b) Non UPSC Entry . Recruitment for the Non UPSC entries is 
made through Service Selection Boar d interviews for the following 
Branches/Cadres of the Navy:-  
  (i) Executive - SSC for ATC/Law/Logistic/NAI/Hydro Cadres   
and also PC for Law/NAI Cadres. 
(ii) Engineering (including Naval Architects)- SSC through 
University Entry Scheme (UES), Special Naval Architects Entry 
Scheme (SNAES) & SSC (E) Schem es.  PC through 10+2 (Tech) 
Scheme. 
(iii) Electrical Engineering – SSC entry through UES and SSC(L) 
Schemes.  PC through 10+2 (Tech) Scheme. 
(iv) Education Branch – PC and SSC” 
Recruitment through NCC. University graduates possessing NCC ‘C’ 
certificate, with minimum ‘B’  grading and 50% marks in the graduation 
degree examination, are inducted in the Navy as regular commissioned 
officers. These graduates are exem pted from appearing in the CDSE 
conducted by the UPSC and are se lected through the SSB interview 
only.  They join the Naval Academy for NOC along with the CDSE 
cadets. 
Intake through UPSC.   As mentioned above at Para 4(a) above, the 
officers are inducted through the following UPSC entries:- 
 
Ser  
No  
Entry Annual Intake 
(a) National Defence Academy (NDA) 86 
(b) Naval Academy Examination [10+2(X)] 70 
(c) Combined Defence Service Examination (CDSE) 60 
Total 210 
 
Direct Intake. Induction of officers through Non UPSC Entries are as follows:- 
Ser 
No  
Entry Annual Intake 
(a) 10+2(Tech) 90 
(b) Permanent Commission (Education)  10 
(c) Permanent Commission 
(Law/NAI/Musician) 
As per actual 
requirement (Approx 10 
Per Annum) 
(d) Short Service Commission Entries of 
ATC/Aviation/Observers/ Logistic/ 
Education/ Law/ Engineering/ 
Electrical/Executive 
250 (approx) 
 
 

  
25 
Recruitment Procedure for Air Force 
 
3.24 According to the Ministry  of Defence, the Method of 
Recruitment in the Indian Air Force is as under :   
 
“Induction to the Air Force as a commissioned officer is through UPSC, Non-
UPSC and Service Entries.. Selection procedure for UPSC Entries includes 
written examination conducted by UPSC. Thereafter, SSB interviews  are 
conducted in Selection Centers  for the UPSC written examination-qualified 
candidates. SSBs are conducted over five days of testing schedule. The 
selected candidates are put through a Special Medical Board (SMB).  Final 
merit list is prepared and declared by the UPSC, taking into account the 
written and SSB marks. The UPSC Entries are for Flying Branch through 
NDA Examination for entry into National Defence Academy after 10+2 as well 
as through CDSE for entry into Air Force Academy after graduation. 
Non UPSC Entry  - The candidates are recruited directly by issue of 
advertisement. Air HQ scrutinizes the applications for Flying entries and 
Command HQ for all other entries. Pilot Aptitude Battery Test is conducted for 
Flying Branch Entries at the Air Force Selection Boards. Conduct of 
Engineering Knowledge Test and Common Entrance Test for Technical and 
Non Technical Ground Duty Entries.  Selection tests are conducted at Air 
Force Selection Board for those candidates who clear the Engineering 
Knowledge Test/Common Entrance Test for Technical and Non Technical 
Branches respectively.   
The Non UPSC Entries are: (i)SSC Flying Branch (Men &Women),(ii)NCC 
Entry for Flying Branch,(iii) Airman Entry for Flying Branch, (iv)Permanent and 
SSC in Technical Branches (Men and Women).Permanent and SSC Non 
Technical Branches (Men and Women). Service Entry Commission for mid 
level air warriors in the age bracket of 36 – 42 years. 
Data on actual inductions through different medium from 2003 to 2007 is 
tabulated below: - 
 
  FLYING TECH NON TECH 
YEAR NDA CDSE NCC SSC AIR-
MEN PC  SSC  
MALE 
SSC 
WOMEN
SNCO
/SEC BC PC SSC 
WOMEN 
SSC  
MALE 
SNCO 
/SEC BC 
2003 125 17 05 07 - 187 0 08 10 06 89 57 N/A 04 05 
2004 137 33 02 19 - 186 0 28 31 0 97 73 N/A 19 01 
2005 121 39 11 20 - 102 0 11 15 08 102 82 N/A 17 16 
2006 124 45 10 12 02 74 22 18 07 N/A 87 41 13 08 N/A
2007 138 46 08 11 -- 119 05 30 -- N/A 54 45 26 03 N/A
Legend: PC-Permanent Commission, SSC-Short Service Commission 
  NCC-National Cadet Corps, Airmen- Commissioning of Airmen 
  SNCO/SEC-Commissioning of PBOR in Service Entry Scheme,  
BC-Branch Commission of PBOR 

  
26 
Short Service Commission: Army 
3.25 The candidates can opt to join the Indian Army as Short Service 
Commission Officers.  Candidates whose names appear in the merit list under 
go 11 months of basic military traini ng at Officers Training Academy to 
become Short Service Commission Officers. (SSCOs). 
 
Available Entries For Short Service Commission.       
3.26 The details of entries available for joining the Army as short Service 
commission officers is as under:- 
 
”(a) Combined Defence Service Examination (CDSE) for Short 
Services Officers (Non- Technical):   CDSE is conducted by the UPSC 
twice a year.  University graduates or  those in final year of graduation 
are eligible to appear in the examination.   Candidates qualifying in 
written examination for Officers  Training Academy have to undergo 
SSB interview and medical tests. C andidates whose names appear in 
the merit list undergo basic military tr aining of 11 months at Officers 
Training Academy (OTA) to bec ome Short Service Commissioned 
officers (SSCOs). SSCOs can se rve for duration of 10 years 
extendable to 14 years. However,  they can opt for permanent 
commission/ seek release after comple tion of five years of service, 
which is considered on case to ca se basis by Integrated Headquarters 
of Ministry of Defence (Army).  
(b)    Short Service Commission (Technical) Entry :   The Short 
Service Commission (Technical) En try Scheme provides avenue for 
recruitment to eligible technical graduates/post graduates into 
Technical Arms.  After SSB and Medical Board, the selected 
candidates are required to undergo      approximately 49    weeks      
pre-commission       training at OTA,  Chennai.  On completion of 
training, they are inducted as S hort Service Commissioned Officers.  
Cadets through this entry are also entitled to two years’ ante-date 
seniority on commissioning. Terms and conditions of other short 
service commission officers are applicable. 
(c)     
Short Services Commi ssion Officers Women  (Non Tech and 
Tech)     Eligible women candidates are recruited in the  Army as Short 
Service Commissioned Officers.  Commission is granted in Corps of 
Electronics and Mechanical Engineer s, Engineers, Signals, Army 
Education Corps, Military Inte lligence Corps, Judge Advocate 
General’s Branch and Army Air Def ence.  Women are offered Short 
Service Commission in three streams viz.  Non Technical,    Technical    
and Specialist for a period of ten years, extendable by additional    four    
years     purely    on voluntary basis.      The recommended Women 
candidates undergo 11 months of tr aining to be commissioned as  
Short Service   Commissioned  offi cers.   The applicants for Non 
Technical and Specialist streams     are required    to   apply through    

  
 
27 
 
UPSC and after written examination would  come up for SSB interview. 
However, widows of Service pers onnel are exempted from written 
examinations and would need to apply di rectly to Additional Directorate 
General of Recruiting, Integrated H eadquarters of Ministry of Defence 
(Army).  Additionally 20% allotted seats from Non Technical stream 
have been reserved for NCC ‘C’ certif icate holders women candidates 
with minimum ‘B’ grade and 50% aggregate marks in graduation 
examination.  The Technical candi dates seeking to join as Short 
services Commissioned Officers apply directly to Recruiting 
Directorate, Integrated Headquarters of Ministry of Defence (Army) and 
are made to undergo SSB and medical examination. 
(d) 
NCC (Special Entry Scheme)      University graduates 
possessing NCC ‘C’ Certificate wit h minimum ‘B’ grade and 50% 
aggregate marks in graduati on examination are eligible to apply for 
Short Service Commission through this entry.  Such cadets are 
exempted from written   examination   conducte d   by the UPSC and 
are directly put through the SSB interv iew followed by a medical board.  
Candidates meeting the qua litative requirements    have to   apply   
through    NCC Directorates at the St ate level.   After screening, by 
respective Group Headquarters, Directo rate General of NCC forwards 
the applications of eligible cadets to the Recruiting Directorate of 
Integrated Headquarters of Ministry of Defence (Army).  
(e) JAG Entry      Graduates with LLB/ LLM degree can seek to join 
the Army in the Judge Advocate Gen Branch as Short Service 
Commission Officer.  The graduates  with LLB/ LLM with 50% marks 
and who are registered with Bar Council of  India/ State are eligible to 
apply.  The candidates apply directly  to ADG Recruiting and the short 
listed candidates are made to face t he Services Selection Board.  The 
recommended candidates under go 11 mont hs of training at Officers 
Training Academy”. 
 
Short Service Commission: Navy 
3.27 The initial tenure of Short Serv ice Commission (SSC) in the Navy is 10 
years, extendable up to 14 years depending upon the require ment of the 
service and suitability of individual officers.   
 
3.28 Existing Terms & Conditions.   The duration of commission for SSC 
officers in the Indian Navy is governed by Articles 122(7), 124(7) and 126(7) of 
Regs Navy Part-III for Executive (General Service, Air Traffic Control, Pilots, 
Observers, Logistics, Law, Hydro & NAI) , Engineering (General Service, Naval 
Architecture & Submarine) and Electric al Branches (General Service, Naval 
Architecture & Submarine) respectively.   

  
 
28 
3.29 Details of induction of office rs, through Short Service Commission 
entries, in the last three years are, as follows:- 
 
Ser No. Entries 2005 2006 2007 
(a) SSC(Executive) 37 35 51 
(b) SSC(Tech)/UES 79 85 79 
(c) SSC(Tech)Submarines 19 8 9 
(d) SSC(Education) 12 12 8 
(e) SSC(Logistic) 19 17 22 
(f) SSC(Naval Architecture) 7 1 7 
(g) SSC(Aviation)  0  0 3 
(h) SSC(ATC) 9  0 4 
(j) SSC(Law)  0  0 3 
 
 
 Short Service Commission: Air Force  
 
3.30 The Short Service Commission ( SSC) scheme was initially introduced 
in the year 1985 for Aeronautical Engi neering (AE) Branch to overcome the 
large cadre deficiencies that existed then. Thereafter, similar SSC schemes 
were also introduced in other branches  progressively upto the year 1993. 
Since these schemes were introduced at different times, each scheme had 
different terms and conditions. In order to  bring uniformity in the major terms 
and conditions of service of various SSC  schemes in IAF, a Rationalized SSC 
scheme was introduced in the year 2001 for various branches of IAF with a 
common term of engagement. In Jun 2007, the SSC scheme of Flying branch 
was revised to make men also elig ible for SSC. Short Service Commission 
has been introduced for Flying Branch (M en) in 2007 for course commencing 
07 Jan 08.  For other branches, this mode of entry is in existence over the last 
decade.  
  

  
29 
Details of recruitment made through SSC  
3.31 When asked about the details of Induction made through Short Service 
Commission, the Ministry of Defence stated through a written note as under: 
 
Details of Recruitment in Last Five Years . Following are the details of 
vacancies released and officers commissioned through Short Service 
Commission in the last five years:-  
Army 
 
Short Service 
Commission (Non-
Technical) 
Short Service Commission  
(Technical) 
Women Service Entry 
Scheme (Officer) 
Year 
Vacancies 
Released 
Commis
sioned 
Vacancies 
Released 
Commissioned Vacancies 
Released 
Commissioned 
2003 485 341 100 45 100 111 
2004 475 389 100 64 150 147 
2005 450 371 100 83 150 140 
2006 450 378 100 56 150 141 
2007 450 304 100 40 150 153 
Total 2310 1783 500 288 700 692 
 
Air Force:  The year wise vacancies including PC and SSC are as follows:- 
 
Branch 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008  
Flying 220 220 220 220 220 260 
Technical 250 250 250 250 250 250 
GDOC 185 185 185 185 185 90 
Total 655 655 655 655 655 600 
 
Note:  Short Service Vacancies in Flyi ng Technical, GDOC Branches is 
limited to 20%  20% and 25% respectively of the Cadre vacancies. 
 
The year wise induction in Short Service Commission is as follows:- 
 
Branch 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 * 
Flying 07 19 20 12 11 40 
Technical 08 28 11 40 35 21 
GDOC 57 73 82 54 71 18 
Total 72 120 113 106 117 79 
Note:  *  Half yearly figures. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

  
30 
Navy: 
 
SSC Entry Vacancies 2004 2005 
 
2006 2007 2008 
  
Appointed 
Reported 
Appointed 
Reported 
Appointed 
Reported 
Appointed 
Reported 
Appointed 
Reported 
 
 
SSC (X) 60 43 43 45 37 37 35 61 51 60 49 
SSC 
(Aviation) 
10 - - - - - - 03 03 07 04 
SSC 
(Observer) 
10 - - - - - - - - 06 04 
SSC X 
(ATC) 
Periodic-as 
required 
- - 09 09 - - 04 04 - - 
SSC X 
(Logistics) 
20 10 10 20 19 18 17 22 22 20 20 
SSC (Law) Periodic -as 
required 
- - - - - - 03 03 - - 
SSC (NAI) Periodic -as 
required 
05 05 - - - - - - - - 
SSC (Edn) 10/15 23 15 15 12 14 12 08 06 06 04 
SSC E (NA) 10 10 10 07 07 04 01 10 10 08 08 
SSC (Tech) 100 89 79 108 79 88 85 98 80 62 45 
SSC (Tech) 
Submarines 
20 13 13 19 19 09 08 10 10 14 08 
Total - 193 175 223 182 170 158 219 189 183 142 
 

  
31 
Ways to Make SSC Attractive in the three services: 
 
3.32 The Ajai Vikram Singh Committee on restructuring of the officer cadre 
of Army had recommended that SSC  cadre should be enhanced with a 
corresponding reduction in the regular cadr e, in order to improve the cadre 
mobility and reduce the exis ting problem of high rate of super session. To 
make the recommendation workable, AVSC had also recommended that SSC 
would have to be made sufficiently attr active so that adequate number of 
candidates opt for this entry.  Some of the measures recommended to make 
SSC entry attractive are as follows:- 
“(a) Lumpsum grant of Rs 5 Lacs after 5 years of service and Rs 10 
Lacs after 10 years of service.  
(b) Grant of two years of ‘Professional Enhancement Training 
Leave’ in the 9th and 10th year of service. 
(c) Concessions for appearing in Civil Services Entrance 
Examination as given below: -  
(i) Reduction in number of papers from eight to four. 
(ii) Introduction of Military Sc ience as an optional subject. 
(iii) Age relaxation of five years for SSC years. 
(d)  Lateral induction into Para military Forces/ Central Police 
Organisations. 
(e) The recommendations submitted by  the Services to the VI Pay 
Commission include some of the above proposals.”  
 
3.33 When inquired about the difference in the modules of training imparted 
before induction to cadet officers in t he case of Graduate level entry for Short 
Service and Permanent Commission, the Mi nistry of Defence submitted in 
their written replies as under: 
       
 “Army: Difference in Module of Trai ning  imparted for Permanent 
Commission and Short Service Commission are as follows:- 
(a)  Graduates of Short Service Commission are imparted training  for 
one year (two terms) at OTA whereas  graduates of Direct Entry are 
imparted training for one and half year (three terms) at IMA.            
(b)  The training imparted for both Permanent Commission and Short 
Service Commission is with a view to develop the qualities of 
leadership, character and intellect as demanded of an Army Officer on 
commissioning,  to enable him to lead the troops both in war/operations 
and peace time. 
(c)  Training imparted for Permanent Commission is more rigorous as 
compared to training imparted for Short Service Commission. 

  
32 
 
Navy: There is no difference in the tr aining of Graduate level entry for 
Short Service and Permanent Commi ssion within each branch. Officer 
trainees under both the schemes under go 20 weeks Naval Orientation 
Course at Naval Academy followed by professional training of 
respective branches. 
Air Force:  The duration of training impar ted in the case of graduate 
level entry for both Short Service Commission (SSC) and Permanent 
Commission (PC) is the same. No difference exists in duration, 
syllabus, etc. between SSC and PC.” 
 
3.34 Armed Forces are making a conscious  effort to inspire the youth to 
choose the Services as a career option with wide rangi ng publicity through 
print and electronic media aimed at familiarising and relating opportunities 
available with the aspirations of the youth.   
 
3.35  When inquired about the proposal of the Armed Forces Headquarters 
for making the Short Service Commission more attractive, the representative 
of the Ministry of Defence stated during oral evidence as under: 
“We do not have any final decision on that. It is something that has to 
be deliberated as to what extent ther e is room in the market for these 
people. The fact is that I am not so sure that the Government needs to 
pay so much just to keep them. The jobs that they are getting are quite 
good and quite well paid. However, t he number of people who opt for 
the Short Service Commission is lar ge, but the number of those who 
are selected is very small. When this issue was raised through the 
media, it was said that the Ministry of Defence was trying to dilute the 
standards, which is far from the trut h. The Ministry of Defence has no 
thought of diluting the standards. But even so, that has to be seen in a 
balanced way for so many people apply whereas only a few are 
selected. Some of the tests ar e too rigorous, impracticable and 
procedural, require a fresh look. These are the things which we have to 
look at coolly without necessarily talking of dilution of standards”.  
 
Appearing for Civil Service Exam 
3.36 When asked whether the Armed Forces Officers should not again be 
permitted to appear for the Civil Service examination, the representative of the 
Ministry of Defence stated during oral evidence as under: 
“This is something slightly with a wider ramification and is outside the 
Ministry of Defence because the whole system of emergency 
recruitment and special induction has been stopped years ago”.   
 
 

  
 
33 
  
 
3.37 During evidence, a non-official  witness opined about making SSC more 
attractive as under: 
 
“After 1962 war, if you recollect we had Emergency Commission 
officers. Those who were not selected for regular commission, they 
were given exemption for certain subjects to appear in the Civil Service 
Examination. So, that is one fact  which I would recommend. It was 
discontinued for some reason”. 
 
 
3.38 When asked about the deta ils of facilities made available to the officers 
of Short Service Commission to facilit ate them in taking up another career 
after retirement and details of effort s being made by the Ministry to make 
Short Service Commission more attractive , the Ministry of Defence submitted 
in their written replies as under: 
 
“Facilities to SSCOs to facilit ate Post Retirement Career . At present 
officers of Short Service Commissi on are given gratuity and terminal 
leave for 28 days on release from service to enable them to subsist and 
take up another job.  
DG (Resettlement) plans and c oordinates the resettlement 
courses.  Short Service Commi ssion officers desirous to undergo 
course are required to apply for the c ourse.  The list of courses is as 
follows:- 
(a)   Management courses at MDI, Gurgaon. 
(b)   Management Courses at IIM, Ahmedabad. 
(c)   Management Course s at IIM, Kolkata. 
(d)   Management Courses at IIM, Lucknow (NOIDA). 
(e)   Management Courses at IIM, Indore. 
(f)   Management Course s at XLRI, Bangalore. 
(g)   Management Courses at XLRI, Jamshedpur 
(h)   Management Course s at NMIMS, Mumbai. 
(j)   Management Cour se at AIM, Jodhpur. 
(k)   Seafaring Naval Maritime Academy. 
(l)   Retail Management Course. 
(m)   Diploma in Computer Science. 
(n)   Industrial Security & Fire Protection. 
(a) Labour Laws & Human Resources. 
(b) Hotel Management Course. 
(c) Application in Computer. 

  
34 
 
 
Efforts to make Short Se rvice Commission attractive:  In order to 
increase the intake through Short Service Commission, the following 
measures  are proposed to make the SSC entry more attractive:- 
(a) Grant of lumsum amount of Rs.10 lakh after 10 years 
of service and Rs.2 lakh for every subsequent year till the 
14th year.  
(b) To confer the status of  Ex-Servicemen to ex-SSC 
officers who have completed 14 years of service. 
(c) To extend CSD facilities to such released SSCOs. 
(d) Extension of benefits of Ex-Servicemen Contributory 
Health Scheme (ECHS) to Ex SSCOs.   
(e) To provide for re-employment of released SSCOs. 
(f) Grant of Professional Enhancement Leave” 
 
Changes in the Recruitment Procedure in Army 
3.39 When inquired about the changes made in the preceding decades in the 
recruitment procedure in Army, the Ministry of Defence submitted in their written 
replies as under: 
 
“(a)   Inclusion of New Entries.   Following new entries have been 
introduced to facilitate broader spectrum of candidates to appear for SSB 
interview. Following new entries have been introduced:- 
(i) Short Service Commission (Technical) 
(ii) Short Service Commission (Non-Technical) 
(iii)  NCC Special Entry 
(iv)  10+2 Technical Entry Scheme 
(v) University Entry Scheme 
(vi)  Women Special Entry Scheme (WSES (O)) now Short Service 
 Commission Women (Technical, Non-Technical and NCC Special) 
(vii)    Technical Graduate Scheme 
(viii)   Judge Advocate General Entry 
(ix)   Service Entries viz Army Cadet College, Special Commissioned Officer 
 and Permanent Commission (Special List)    
(b)     Stage-I Testing. 
Stage-I screening test was introduced with effect from 
15 Oct 1998 to screen more number of candidates and provide adequate 
opportunity to candidates having aptitude to do well at the SSB. Following 
tests are conducted in Stage-I:- 
(i) Officers Intelligence Rating (OIR-I&II) 
(ii) Picture Perception and Description Tests (PPDT) 
(c) 
Comprehensive Battery of Cognitive Ability (CBCA) Tests.      CBCA 
has been formulated by DIPR, analysed, and trial conducted for introduction 
in place of OIR I and II to make Stage-I testing more comprehensive. This will 
ensure that no candidate with requisite qualities are left out at the initial 
screening. 
(d) 
Five Days Testing Schedule. In view of the introduction of Stage-I 
testing, the testing schedule was enhanced to five days from existing four 
days to have detailed and comprehensive assessment of prospective 
candidates.” 
 

  
35 
 
Changes in the Recruitment Procedure in Navy 
 
3.40 When inquired about t he changes made in the preceding decades in 
the recruitment procedure in Navy, the Ministry of Defence submitted a written 
note as under: 
 
“The selection procedure adopted by the Services Selection Boards is 
very scientific and is aimed at asse ssing the officer like qualities of an 
individual through psychological, reasoning ability and intelligence 
tests.  The ability of an individual  to withstand physical and mental 
stress is assessed to determine his/ her suitability for Armed Forces.  
The procedure adopted by the SSBs has evolved since its adoption 
during the Second World War.  The procedure is centrally standardized 
by Defence Institute for Psychological Research, New Delhi for all three 
services.  Though the basic format of  the selection process has not 
undergone any major changes in the la st three decades, the process 
has been divided into two stages now.  In the first stage, candidates 
are screened in the psychological tests and only those with the 
required bent of mind are assessed in the second stage.” 
 
 Changes in the Recruitment Procedure in Air Force 
3.41 When inquired about the changes made in the preceding decades in 
the recruitment procedure in Air Force, the Ministry of Defence furnished the 
following written replies: 
 
“The changes in the SSB test which have been done in the last three 
decades are as follows:- 
Introduction of Picture perception and discussion test which serves as 
Phase  1 of screening process. 
Computerisation of Pilot Aptitude Battery Test  (PABT)” 
 
Format of SSB Tests for Officers in combatant and non-combatant 
Services 
 
3.42 When inquired whether the format of SSB Tests is same for selection 
of officers for combatant and non-combatant/technical services, the Ministry of 
Defence submitted in their written replies as under: 
 
“The procedure/format for combat and technical service in SSB is the 
same.” 
 

  
36 
3.43 When asked whether the sele ction Procedure is too stringent, 
representative of Ministry of Defence stated as under: 
“Sir, it is being looked at very cl osely.  A Committee was appointed by 
the Chief of the Staffs Committee.  They have given us the report.  
There are many aspects to it.  O ne is also that the procedures for 
selection are extremely rigorous. So  there is a question whether we 
need to look at all these and whet her we need to have more Boards 
and whether we need to have more psyc hologists.    The shortage is 
there at various levels and because of which it cannot be speeded up.  
I have no doubt that if all the reasons  are addressed, this shortage can 
certainly be made good”.   
3.44 On the issue of infirmities of t he Selection Process in Staff Selection 
Board (SSB), non-official witness Shri Mrinal Suman, Major General (Retd.) 
in its written note submitted to the Committee stated as under:- 
“Infirmities of the Selection Process  
After clearing the written exam ination conducted by the Union 
Public Service Commission, candidat es are screened by the Services 
Selection Boards (SSB) based on three-pronged testing system – 
interview, tests of psychology and group testing. The three assessors 
use independent techniques to test individuals. During the final 
conference they exchange information to define the per sonality of the 
candidate. Interview is conducted by  President/ Deputy President of 
SSB, with the objective of probing for ‘clues to behaviour’ through 
adroit suggestions, comments and questioning to obtain inputs 
regarding strengths and shortcomings of the candidate. Psychological 
assessment is based on projective tests. These include intelligence 
test, thematic appreciation test, word association test, situation 
reaction test and self-descripti on. Group testing is based on the 
premise that group is a man’s most natural environment and his 
behaviour in a group will be his natural behaviour.   
Some of the major areas of concern of the SSB process have 
been discussed in the following paragraphs.  
Proclivity for Rejection   
The whole selection process is negative in approach and is 
directed towards finding limitati ons/angularities in a candidate’s 
personality. Positives are ignored and negatives are highlighted. As 
no human is perfect, most candidates  get rejected for one reason or 
the other. Inconsistent/incompl ete evidence or inconclusive 
assessment also provides adequate justification for rejecting a 
candidate. Even during the final conf erence, all three assessors give 
out limitations that they have noticed in a candidate. The whole 
exercise is directed towards finding enough reasons to reject a 
candidate rather than carrying out an appraisal of his good traits for 
selection.   

  
37 
 
Some assessors suffer from ‘error of contagious bias’, in that they get 
biased by their own likes and dis likes and tend to judge candidates’ 
traits by their own standards and by comparison without appreciating 
that attitudes and ethics have c hanged with time. This is normally 
referred to as ‘error due to false assumptions’. What was considered 
unethical not so long ago may have come to be accepted in the 
society as a fact of life now. 
It is an established fact that an assessor makes up to 10 value 
judgments on a candidate in  the first 30 seconds of an interaction. It 
influences further course of the assessment unless an assessor 
exercises due caution. Unfortunately, many assessors tend to develop 
an attitude of their own infallibility. They believe that they have the 
expertise to judge suitability of a candidate in a few minutes. Such 
assessors tend to make up thei r mind at the outset and the 
subsequent assessment gets reduced to a mere formality, devoid of 
purpose and objectivity. This is the single most important reason for 
distortions in the whole process.   
Attitude of Playing Safe  
Most assessors suffer from t he ‘error of central tendency’ 
syndrome, in that, they hesitate to give clear-cut assessments and 
keep most candidates as border-liner s. Candidates not falling in the 
category of Adequate or Inadequate zones are considered border-
liners. This is prim arily due to their lack of confidence in own 
assessment. They fear that their assessment may be at variance with 
the assessment of other two assessors and that they may stand out 
as the ‘odd-man’. Therefore, they prefer to keep a candidate as a 
border-liner and leave final decisi on making to the final conference 
which is attended by all the thr ee assessors – interviewer, group 
testing officer and psychologist. During the conference, they watch the 
trend of discussion and generally go with the majority opinion.   
Border-liners form a whopping 36 percent of all candidates. It implies that 
the whole selection process is unable to determine suitability of 36 percent 
candidates. It is certainly a cause for concern as it reflects weaknesses of the 
assessors and their inability to perceive the required qualities with accuracy. 
Here are some true cases in which candidates were rejected for alleged 
angularities of their personalities. It shows flippancy and frivolity of the whole 
selection process:-    
•   When asked about his Sunday schedule, a candidate replied that he liked 
to sleep till late and have a hearty breakfast of ‘ paranthas’. The assessor 
felt that the candidate was lazy and lacked an urge to utilize spare time for 
outdoor activities.  
•   A candidate was deemed to be lacking in integrity when he accepted that 
he had paid money to a railway conductor to get a berth, as he could not 
get reservation due to short notice for the SSB interview.  
•   Cooking as a hobby is considered ‘unofficerlike’ by SSB. A candidate learnt 
it the harder way. Similarly, another candidate was rejected when he stated 
that his hobby was to taste cuisines from different regions of India.  

  
38 
•   In reply to a question, a candidate (an Army officer’s son) replied that he 
would request help from the neighbouring unit to pack household goods for 
move on transfer in the absence of his father. He was found to be overly 
dependent on external help and hence declared unfit for the services.    
•   School Captain of a famous public school was rejected when he stated that 
he abhorred killing helpless animals for human consumption. The assessor 
thought he was soft and lacked the necessary killing instinct.  
•   When asked to name his best friends, a candidate gave out the names of 
three girls. The assessor considered him to be overly obsessed with the 
opposite sex and unfit for the service life.  
•   A candidate was asked to spell out three qualities in his mother which 
impressed him the most. “Sir, she is an excellent cook and cooks the best 
‘biryani’ I have ever tasted”, was his innocent and honest response. But the 
interviewer thought otherwise and felt that the candidate lacked focus in life 
with misplaced priorities.  
•   A college going candidate was considered to be undesirable when he 
admitted that he smoked without his parents’ knowledge. Yet another 
candidate was rejected when he admitted that he skipped classes to see 
movies during college hours.  
  
Inadequate Importance to Potentiality and Trainability  
 
Potentiality refers to the qualities which may not be fully developed at the time 
of selection but the candidate shows adequate potential for their subsequent 
development with facilitating environment and training. On the other hand, 
trainability is ability to assimilate training and acquire/develop required quality 
traits. Although the basic attitudes do not change appreciably, there are a 
number of developable qualities like power of expression, emotional 
development, width of interest, drive and insight.   
The present day candidates come from varied background and may not have 
had the opportunity to be exposed to many facilities whereas most candidates 
came from public schools earlier. Therefore, potentiality and trainability have 
become important factors to be considered while assessing candidates.  As 
gauging of potentiality and trainability is much more difficult than to determine 
current standards, there is a need to carry out an appraisal of the selection 
process and impart required training to the selection staff.” 
 
 
Induction of Women in the Armed Forces 
  
3.45 According to the Annual Report 2007-08 of the Ministry of Defence, the 
role of women has been increasing steadily  in the field of national defence.  
Women are employed in Defence Produc tion Units, Defence Research & 
Development Laboratories and as Doctors and Nursing Officers in the Armed 
Forces.  With the induction of women in various non-combatant branches of 
the Armed Forces like logistics and law, a larger role is envisaged for them.   
 
 

  
39 
3.46 Further, women officers have been serving in the Armed Forces for 
about 80 years, first inducted in the M ilitary Nursing Service in 1927 and then 
in the Medical Officers Cadre in 1943.  In the Armed Forces Medical Services 
there are both permanent and Short Service Commission Officers. 
 
3.47 In the Regiment of Artillery, Corps of Signals, Corps of Engineers, 
Corps of Electrical and Mechanical Engineers, Army Service Corps (Food 
Scientists and Catering Officers), Army  Ordnance Corps, Intelligence Corps, 
Army Education Corps, judge advocat e General’s Department, and the Army 
Postal Service, women officers join as Short Service Commission officers. 
 
 
3.48 As per a recent decision of t he Government, women Short Service 
Commission officers in the Army ar e granted time-scale substantive 
promotions to the rank of Captain, Major and Lt. Colonel rank after 2, 6 and 13 
years of reckonable service respectively.  This is as per with the promotions 
available to the Permanent Commission Officers.  In additions, with training 
period of women officers in the Army  in short Services Commission has been 
increased from 24 weeks to 49 weeks, to  be at per with male Short Service 
Commission officers. 

  
 
40 
3.49 About the Induction of  the women in the Armed Forces, the Ministry 
made the following submission: 
 
“Performance of all officers (inc luding women) is being assessed 
continuously.  However, no separ ate study has been conducted to 
specifically assess the performance of women officers. HQ Integrated 
Defence Staff has in 2006 conducted a study to analyse issues related 
with management of women officers in the Armed Force.  The following 
issues were recommended:- 
(a) Induction of Women Officers in to combat arms, where chances 
of physical contact   with enemy are high are not recommended 
(Armoured Corps, Mechanized Infantry, Artillery & Infantry). 
(b) Earlier women officers were imparted 24 weeks of training prior 
to commissioning.  This is being increased to 48 weeks with effect April 
2008. A gestation period of 10 to 14 years will be required to carry out 
any further realistic assessment as regards grant  of permanent 
commission. This is due to the following:-
 
(i)    Essential to obtain f eed back on their performance based on 
revised pre commissioning training.  
(ii) Derailment on courses such as Junior Command Course which 
is at 7 to 10 years of service.   
(iii) Assessment of their perfo rmance as sub unit Commanders 
especially in field areas can only be assessed at about 10 years 
service bracket” 

  
 
41 
 
CHAPTER IV 
INDUCTION TRAINING AND DEVELOPMENT 
 
Training 
 4.1 The basic objective of all military training is to develop martial qualities, 
leadership and skills in the service pers onnel so as to equip them for handling 
operational situations in the filed. 
 
Training of Officers in the Army:  
4.2 The primary focus at each level of tr aining is linked to various levels of 
military activity, viz, pre-induction, tact ical, operational or strategic, or in 
management terms, functional, directional or conceptual.  The training in the 
Armed Forces has a systems approach and is broadly managed at three basic 
levels as follows:- 
 
a) Pre-Induction: This is conducted at the level of National Defence 
Academy (NDA) Khadakvasala, Officers Training Academy 
(OTA) Chennai and the Indi an Military Academy (IMA) 
Dehradun. 
b) Tactical: These are orient ed to weapons and equipment, where 
professional skills and tuning physical and mental faculties relate 
to the specifics of job requirements. 
c) Technical: To enhance technica l expertise of the offices of 
technical Arms/Services or those employed on technical 
appointments. 
d) Operational:  At the operational level the course s are structured 
to meet service specif ic needs, where knowledge and 
understanding of operations and concepts is required. 
e) Strategic Level Training: Strategi c level training is targeted at the 
senior levels graduates fr om the operational to the 
Strategic/Directional level. 
 
Training of PBOR (Personnel Below Officer Rank):  
 
a) Recruitment Training:  the other ranks after the enrolment report to 
respective Regimental Centers for re cruitment training which includes Basic 
Military Training of 19 weeks followed by trade and specific to Corps/Arms 
training which varies from 9 months to 2 years duration. Thereafter, the 
recruits are attested and become trained soldiers. 
 

  
 
42 
 
b) Unit/Formation Level Training: On joining the unit, the solider  is put 
through the new entrant, individual and co llective outdoor training to improve 
his skills to perform  assigned duties in operational  areas.  In addition each 
individual is put through annual formati on level training in the form of 
exercises.  Besides, t here are periodic refresher/promotion cadres (as 
applicable) to meet his aspirations of carrier progression.  The individual 
based on skills acquired and demonstrated performance is also detailed for 
various courses of instruction conducted in  carious schools of instructions for 
specialist training.  In nut shell, the training is an ongoing process in the Army. 
 
Induction Training in the Air Force: 
4.3 The flying training system is current ly undergoing a transition, both in 
terms of re-equipment through fres h inductions and gearing up for enhanced 
intake requirements in keeping with pr esent and predicted shortages.  The 
Hawk aircraft will be inducted into t he IAF shortly with flying training 
commencing in July 2008.  18 OFIs and 62 ab-initio IAF trainees have already 
completed their training in UK while  10 trainees are undergoing flying training 
in UK.  Simulators for Hawk aircraft will also be inducted while CPT/PPP 
project which had been put on hold by the Ministry of Defence midway has 
now been cleared. 
 As regards infusion of hi-tec h training in IAF, considerable 
breakthrough has been achieved.  A si zeable number of officers and men 
have attended seminar and courses abroad as indicated below: - 
 
Sl. No. Name of the Country Number of officers 
a)  Bangladesh 06 
b)  Brazil 01 
c)  France 07 
d)  Indonesia 01 
e)  Poland 01 
f)  Thailand 01 
g)  UK 31 
h)  USA 19 
 Total 67 
 

  
43 
4.4 The ab-initio training in IAF for officers as well as airmen is highly 
structured. The ab-initio training for the airmen has  recently been restructured 
by introducing ‘Just-in-Time’ (J ITT) concept.  In addition to ab-initio  training, 
officers and airmen of the IAF are impar ted in-service training to update their 
knowledge level.  The various course s, which are, equipment specific, 
branch/trade specific or gener ic in nature, are conducted for IAF personnel at 
various stages of their career.  Some of the advanced level courses 
conducted for officers are covered at subsequent paragraphs: - 
 
(a) PG Engineering Courses:  The officers of Aeronautical Engineering 
branch of the IAF are deputed to various IITs, Indian Institute of 
Science, Bangalore, DIA T, Pune etc.  for two year long PG courses in 
various disciplines.  Every year  upto 28 AE branch  officers are 
deputed for such courses.  The vari ous areas of specialisation include 
Aerospace/Aeronautical Engi neering, Rubber Technology, 
Maintenance Engineering, Armam ent Technology, Communication 
Engineering, Computer Science,  RF & Microwave Engineering, 
`Special Weapons Technology, Microel ectronics, Integrated Circuits 
etc. 
(b) 
Technical Staff Officers Course : In addition to above mentioned  
Post  Graduate Engineering courses, t he AE branch officers are also   
deputed  for 1 year long Technical St aff Officers’ Course (TSOC) at 
DIAT, Pune. 
(c) Major Infrastructure:  The following major infrastructure is foreseen 
by 2014: - 
An additional training base in r easonable proximity of Bidar to 
accommodate enhanced training requirement. 
Instrumented firing ranges to support flying training as applicable. 
Networked and integrated simulators to optimise utilisation. 
 
Induction Training in the Indian Navy: 
4.5 The Indian Navy has a two-tier training pattern to met its objective to 
train the man for his next job, just enough, ju st in time’.  This comprises of Ab-
initio training and Advance training and specialization courses provided only to 
those capable of shouldering greater responsibilities and with a potential for   
Ab-Initio Training – Officers: Ab-initio training is completed when the 
officer, having undergone the minimum r equired courses is certified by a 
competent board of being capable of  independently discharging the duties 
envisaged. The ab-initio courses vary for different branches in job 
specification, course curriculum and consequently the duration. 
 

  
 
44 
 
Specialisation Courses (Officers): These are the fields of Navigation, 
Communication, Gunnery, ASW, NBCD and Hyderography and are conducted 
in the various training schools.  Techni cal Officers are deputed to technical 
institutes of repute like IITs, IISc, IA T etc.  in various disciplines of 
engineering. 
Ab-initio Training (Sailors): On recruitment the sailors undergo basic 
naval orientation training at INA Chilka,  Orissa after which the sailors are 
allocated various branches and sent to fleet ships for sea experience.  On 
completion of sea experience they proceed to respective schools like 
Engineers to INS Shivaji, Electrical to INS Valsura, and Logistics to INS 
Hamla for professional training, on comp letion of which they are appointed to 
ships/establishments. 
Advance Courses (Sailors):  The sailors who are assessed to be suitable for 
advancement in rank and capable to shoulder greater responsibility are further 
put through advanced and specialized training in their specific branches. 
Mid Level and Higher Training:  Selected officers and sailors with ability to 
shoulder greater responsibilities and pot ential for further advancements in 
service undergo mid level and higher courses. 
Foreign Training: The Indian Navy also conducts training for both officers and 
sailors of a number of friendly foreign Navies. 
Training Assets:  The Indian Navy as has over  40 training units engaged in 
conducting over one thousand course s   training about ten thousand 
personnel annually. 
 
Gainful utilisation of training  
 
4.6 When inquired as to how do the Mi nistry of Defenc e ensure that the 
training given to officers at different poi nts of their career is gainfully utilized 
and whether the competence attained through specialized training programme 
attended by an officer is taken into consideration at the time of his subsequent 
posting, the Ministry of Defence submitted in their written replies as under: 

  
45 
 
“Army: Training in the Army is an ongoing process which continues 
throughout an officer’s service.  Performance of officers o n courses of 
instruction run by the Army, as also expertise acquired in any field by 
officers through studies on own time, are maintained in the data-base for 
their future employability. 
(b)       Assignments in the Army are based on qualitative Requirements 
(QRs) which include parameters as service bracket and qualification on 
courses wherein competence attained through courses attended by 
officers during their services is factored in.  By posting officers in 
accordance with QRs; expertise gained through specialized training 
programmes are gainfully utilized in the best interest of the organisation. 
(B) Navy: The need for nurturing leadership and upgrading the 
professional expertise of officers has been the very hallmark of training in 
the Navy. An officer, right from his/ her commission to retirement is 
carefully nurtured and developed through various appointments, 
assignments and training courses with durations upto 24 months 
commensurate to the requirements of their envisaged employment. The 
general pattern of nurturing leaders through training is as appended 
below:-  
 
Sl. 
No Rank Years of 
Service Course 
(a) SLt On 
Commissioning SLt Technical Courses 
(b) Lt 4 – 6 Long/ Specialisation Course 
(c) Lt – Lt Cdr 6 – 8 PG/ M Tech in IITs for Technical and Education 
officers 
(d) Lt Cdr/ Cdr 12 – 14 Staff Course 
(e) Captain 20- 22 
Higher Command Course/ Higher Defence 
Management Course/ Army and Air Force Higher 
Command Courses/ Naval War College – 
USA/Higher Command Course in Indonesia 
(f) Commodore 28 - 30 National Defence College/ RCDS – UK/ Australia 
 
Besides the above-mentioned courses,  the officers are also put 
through various short-term courses ranging from one week to six 
months in leading institut ions in India and abroad. Some of the officers 
undergo the above courses in various nav al and military in stitutions of 
friendly foreign countries. In additi on, a large number of workshops, 
seminars, symposiums, etc are regul arly conducted on professional 
issues where there is large-scale interaction with the experts from 
civilian institutions. This exchange of information and ideas enable the 
Navy to nurture and groom the officers for higher responsibilities.  
 Study Leave / Deputation. There is a provision for granting study leave 
upto two years for officers who wish to pursue their academic interests, 
subject to Service requirements. Officers could opt for courses/ 
research work which benefit them, as  well as the Service. These can 
be pursued both within Indi a and abroad. In addition, officers are also 
being sent on deputation for research/ project work/ courses for 
academic excellence to leading institut ions such as the Institute of 
Defence Studies and Analysis (IDSA), United Services Institute (USI), 
IITs, IIMs, etc.  

  
46 
 
Post Courses Appointment/ Posting. As a policy, on completion of a 
professional course, the expertise gained by the officer is gainfully 
utilised by the Service by appointing him/her in specific assignments, in 
training institutions, etc such that the officer consolidates the 
knowledge gained and positively contributes towards enhancing 
organizational effectiveness. 
(C) Air Force :Training courses are facilit ated to mould the officers 
for ensuing assignments in the se rvice.  The competency gained 
through such courses is gainfully utiliz ed by the service.  For example, 
many pilots in the IAF are deta iled to undergo the Qualified Flying 
Instructors course between 8-11 years of service.   On completion of 
the Course, the officers are employed for a tenure as flying instructors 
in various flying training establishments.  Similarly, it is ensured that the 
competencies gained by officers th rough courses are optimally utilized 
in their ensuing assignments.” 
 
Relevance of IMA and OTA as separate Institutions 
4.7 When inquired about the relevanc e of having IMA and OTA as two 
separate Institutions, the Mi nistry of Defence submitt ed in their written replies 
as under: 
“IMA and OTA impart Pre Commission Training.  However merits cum 
requirement of having IMA and OTA are as under: - 
(a) The capacity and infrastructure available at IMA precludes concurrent 
conduct of training of regular and short service cadre, which necessitated 
establishment of OTA. 
(b) The course content and duration of training of both the courses is at 
variance, impacting directly on the course schedule.  The course content for 
short service cadres is compact and condensed; effort to conduct training of 
both the cadres concurrently at the same institution would adversely affect the 
training standards besides administrative inadequacies.” 
 
4.8 When inquired about the relevance of setting up another OTC (Officer 
Training Centre) like IMA and OTA as  proposed by the Armed Forces 
Headquarters, a representative of the Ministry of Defence during oral 
evidence stated as under: 
 
“As far as new OTC is concerned, this  is a proposal that has come to 
us from the Army Headquarters which in principle has been accepted.  
They have said that their existing facilities would not permit additional 
intake.  As far as drawing away  officers who might well be used 
elsewhere is concerned, I suppose there should be a surfeit of 
Generals to head these institutions.  In any case I am sure overall long-
term benefits might be there. As far as the earlier proposal of merging  

  
 
47 
 
the Chennai with IMA is concerned, as  you know in the Army much 
depends on the views of the person in  charge at a particular time.  
Once that view is expressed nobody goes against it when somebody 
else comes up with a contrary view.  We will try to see that rationale 
decisions are taken on this.  The present proposal for a new OTC has 
come to us through a filtration process and the Army has indicated a 
particular location where it wants to have it.  I do not remember off 
hand.  Perhaps they have got an establishment at Ranchi or 
somewhere which they feel could be used.  That I am told has a good 
climate but it is at an early stage.  The point that has been raised by 
you, I will certainly bounce it back at the Chief of Army Staff and get his 
reaction on this”. 
 
4.9  When inquired about the relev ance of keeping IMA and OTA as 
separate Training Instituti on, a representative of th e Ministry of Defence 
stated during oral evidence as under: 
“I must confess I have not cross-ex amined them on this issue.  Since 
you have raised it, I will ask them t hese questions.  They had said that 
in fact the existing facilities would not be able to cater.  We will try to 
get more details from them”. 
 
Stipend for the cadets during the training 
 
4.10  When asked about the proposals being contemplated to give Stipend 
to the cadets during the tr aining, the Ministry of Defence made the following 
submission in their written replies: 
 
 “Stipend to Cadets : Cadets will receive a fixed stipend Of Rs. 21000 
(Rs.15600 as pay in pay band plus Grade Pay of Rs. 5400), for the period of 
training after NDA as per the existing duration. The stipend will be converted 
to pay for all purposes on successful completion of training and allowances 
admissible will be paid. However period of training shall not be treated as 
commissioned service. 
PBOR trainees undergoing pre-commissioning training shall continue to 
receive pay and allowances as applicable to the rank held at the time of 
commencement of training and during the training period. On successful 
completion of training, the difference between the amount of stipend of Rs. 
21000/- P.M plus D.A minus pay & allowances received during the period of 
training shall be payable in lump sum. 
Pay of Recruits during training: All recruits shall receive a stipend of Rs. 5700 
p.m during their training. On successful completion of training, they shall be 
paid with retrospective effect an amount equal to the minimum of the pay 
scale including Grade Pay, Group ‘X’ pay (if applicable), Dearness Allowance 
and allowances of the trade to which they stand allotted less the stipend 
already paid. The rates of stipend will be increased by 50% every time the DA 
payable on revised pay band goes up by 50%.” 
 
 

  
48 
Stipend for trainees at NDA 
4.11 About need of giving stipend to the Cadets undergoing training at NDA, 
a no-official witness stated as under: 
“Sir, stipend should not only continue but it should also go to the 
National Defence Academy. They are not getting it. It is only the Indian 
Military Academy that is  getting it. I would go a step beyond. Not only 
that the stipend should be given, the training period should count 
towards the service which is happeni ng even with the Army. For jawan 
it is counted, but for officer it is not counted”. 
 
4.12 However, when specifically a sked about the Proposal relating to 
incentives, the representative of the Ministry of Defence stated as under: 
 
“In-principle, we have accepted it. We  can get into details. In-principle, 
we have absolutely accepted it. The details do need to be decided 
upon.” 
 
Indian National Defence University (INDU) 
 
4.13 When inquired about the constraint s being faced by the Army in the 
absence of Indian National Defence Univer sity (INDU), the Ministry submitted 
in their written replies as under: 
 
“The major constraint being faced by the Category ‘A’ Training 
Establishments of the Army and Tri Services Training Institutions (National 
Defence Academy, Defence Services Staff College and College of Defence 
Management) is the deficiency of civilian professional staff.   In order to 
overcome this constraint, a proposal for outsourcing to meet the requirement 
is being considered taking into account all relevant factors. 
The Committee on National Defence University (CONDU) among other things 
had opined that the proposed Indian National Defence University (INDU) 
while functioning as a Think Tank on security related issues would serve as 
the vehicle through which a beginning will be made towards propelling Indian 
security policy formulation into a synergistic exercise between academic 
research and the requirements of the Government.  The proposed INDU will 
instil the spirit and practice of joint military planning and operations. 
The following difficulties are being faced in the absence of a Defence 
University :- 
 (i) Non-availability of education Centres for Excellence. 
 (ii) Inability to synergise academic research and National Security. 
 (iii) Spirit of jointmanship is not being created between the  
   Services and other agencies of the Govt. 
 (iv) Difficulty in functioning as a ‘Think Tank’ to promote  
  debate / discussions on National Security issues. 
 (v) Difficulties are experienced in exposing the civil leadership  
  to the techniques and benefit of simulation and war gaming 
  to politico-strategic level. 
 

  
49 
4.14 When inquired about the constraint s being faced by the Navy in the 
absence of Indian National Defence Univer sity (INDU), the Ministry submitted 
in their written replies as under: 
 
“A number of courses are offered by the Navy like courses recognized by 
CUSAT e.g. Air Engineering Officers specialization, Air Technical Engineers 
course, Chief Artificer Apprentice, Communication Specialization, Long 
Logistics Management, Basic Engineering Course etc.  The difficulty being 
faced by Indian Navy in the absence of the Defence University is that 
precious man-hours and money is being spent for accreditment of courses for 
defence personnel in the recognized universities / institutions.” 
 
4.15 When inquired about the constraint s being faced by the Navy in the 
absence of Indian National Defence Univer sity (INDU), the Ministry submitted 
in their written replies as under: 
 
“In the absence of Defence University, difficulties arise towards recognition of 
ab-initio and in-service course.  Though courses curriculum and necessary 
facilities are available in the Air Force, the civil sector does not equate or 
provide a suitable degree/diploma to various courses.  This can be attributed 
to the lack of knowledge and understanding both by the private agencies as 
well as government organizations in civil.  However, there are some courses, 
which are recognized equivalent to Diploma/Degree. Some of these courses 
are like: Advanced Air Armament Staff Course, Diploma in Information 
Technology, Quality Assurance Service (Officers) Course etc.”
 
 
Courses Offered in the Armed Forces for Defence Personnel.  
 
4.16 The courses being conducted in the Army are primarily at Cat A Training 
Establishments for Officers and Cat B Training Establishments for PBOR.  Such 
courses are mostly of short duration (i.e. less than six months), and a few long 
courses (i.e. more than six months).  Short Courses generally pertain to keeping 
pace with the progressive development of an officer or PBOR, whereas, long courses 
pertain to attaining a defined level of expertise in technology.  Long courses also 
pertain to training on a particular equipment being inducted into the Armed Forces.  
Such long courses are as follows: - 
 
(i) Officers  
(aa) Graduate Level Engineering or Equipment Orientation Courses for 
 Officers primarily at Cat A Training Establishments. 
(ab) Post Graduate Level Engineering, Equipment Orientation or 
 Armament Technology Courses for Officers.  These are undertaken 
 as Army Courses in Cat A Training Establishments or even 
 subscribed to in reputed IIsT / IISc / BARC / ISRO etc in the 
 country. 
(ac) PhD Courses at various IIsT on latest technology to be exploited 
 for Defence usage are also undertaken, by only the selected few. 

  
 
50 
 
(ad) Defence Services Staff Course (DSSC) at ‘Defence Services Staff 
 College’ at Wellington, Technical Staff Officers Course (TSOC) at 
 ‘Defence Institute of Armam ent and Technology’ Pune, Higher 
 Command (HC) course at ‘Army War College’, Mhow and Higher 
 Defence Management Course (HDMC) at ‘College of Defence 
 Management’, Secunderabad are also conducted for few selected 
 officers. 
 
(ii) PBOR 
 
(a) PBOR courses are conducted in Cat B Training Establishments.  
 Some courses are also conducted in the officer oriented Cat  
 Training Establishments, because of better availability of laboratory 
 facilities.  Such courses for PBOR usually pertain to attaining 
 expertise in maintenance of sophisticated equipment or on training 
 in conversion / operation of sophisticated newly inducted 
 equipment. 
(b) Courses conducted at graduate engineering or post graduate 
 engineering levels for officers and Diploma level for PBOR at the 
 Cat A Training Establishments are normally affiliated with a 
 University for purposes of accreditation and grant of a degree / 
 diploma, e.g. Degree Engineering level courses at Technical 
 Training Cat A Establishments are awarded a B Tech degree in the 
 corresponding streams of ‘Electronics and Communication’, Civil, 
 Mechanical or Electrical Engineering by the Jawaharlal Nehru 
 University.  Also students attending courses such as DSSC, TSOC, 
 HC and HDMC are also conferred upon with post graduate degree 
 by various civil universities after fulfilling certain additional 
 requirements like submission of thesis / dissertation / paper etc. 
(c) Since, B Tech / M Tech courses can only be awarded degree if 
 they meet the four / two years duration  stipulation, courses of 
 lesser duration cannot be awarded recognized qualifications as 
 approved by the University Grants Commission.  Such courses 
 need to be recognized by our own Defence University. 
 

  
51 
CHAPTER V 
WORKING CONDITION 
Management of Career  and Promotion Policy 
 
Promotion Policy for officers in Army   
5.1 Officers of the Indian Army are commissioned in the rank of Lieutenant.  
Thereafter, promotions upto the rank of Lieutenant Colonel are carried out by 
time-scale. Promotions for the rank of Colonel and above are carried out by 
selection and are vacancy and competen cy based. Further, promotions are 
carried out only if officers meet cert ain criteria viz. consistency in
performance, qualifications, discipline, medical fitness, minimum reckonable 
service, prescribed age limit. 
 
 
(i) Promotion by Time Scale to The Ranks of Col (Time Scale) & Below 
 
Lieutenant Colonels and Below  - Substantive promotion upto and including the rank 
of Lieutenant Colonel is made by time scale on completion of the following periods of 
reckonable commissioned service, for the ranks indicated, provided the officer is fit in 
all respects:- 
 
Captain    2 years. 
Major   6 years. 
Lieutenant  Colonel 
 
13 years (provided the officer has passed the  
prescribed promotion examinations). 
 
Colonel (Time Scale)  Promotion to the rank of substantive Colonel, of officers not promoted 
by selection, is made subject to thei r being considered fit in all respects,  on completion of 26 
years of reckonable commissioned service.  Officers so promoted count against the 
authorised establishment of officers in the rank of Lieutenant Colonel.  
 
(ii) Promotion by Selection to the Ranks of Col (Selection) and Above -  
Promotion to the ranks of Colonel and above is made to fill vacancies in the 
cadre, provided the officer is fit in all respects. The present system of 
selection has evolved over the years and is designed to achieve the following 
twin objectives viz., serve the best inte rests of the service by selecting only 
those officers who are considered com petent to shoulder responsibilities of 
higher ranks and ensure objectivity and imparti ality in selection so as to give 
fair consideration to every officer eligible for promotion. 

  
52 
(iii)Promotion to Subs tantive Select Ranks   -  Officers are subsequently 
promoted to substantive ran ks, provided the officer is  fit in all respects and 
has, to his credit, the following mi nimum period of reckonable commissioned 
service for the ranks indicated:- 
 
Colonel      20 years 
Brigadier      23 years 
Major General     25 years 
Lieutenant General    28 years 
General      No restriction. 
 
Personnel Below Officer Rank (PBOR) 
5.2 Prior to 1965, Sepoys in General Duty (GD) categories were engaged for 7 
years of colour service and 8 years of reserve liability. Skilled categories were 
engaged for 10 years with colours and 10 years reserve. The colour service has 
been progressively increased and it now stands at 17 years for GD Categories. The 
immediate reason for increasing the terms of engagement was to expand the Army at 
a rapid pace post 1962. Induction of PBOR is also done through various entries viz 
Matric entry, 10+2 entry(Clerks and General Duties) , Graduate entry (Havildar), 
Graduate entry (Junior Commissioned Officer).  
AGE/TENURE/SERVICE LIMIT FOR RETIREMENT AND RESERVE LIABILITY OF PBOR 
 
(a) (i)   Sep. 
Gp-I 
17 years of service with colours ext endable by 2 years by screening and 2 years 
in reserve or till attainment of 42 years of age, whichever is earlier. 
 
 (ii)  Sep 
Gp-II 
20 years of service with colours ext endable by 2 years by screening and 3 years 
in reserve or till attainment of 48 years of age, whichever is earlier. 
 
(b) NK On completion of 22 years service with colours ext endable by 2 years by 
screening or 49 years of age, whichever is  earlier. The reserve liability is 51 
years of age or 2 years after retirement,  whichever is earlier. 
 
(c) Hav On completion of 24 years of serv ice with colours ext endable by 2 years by 
screening or 49 years of age, whichever is earlier.The reserve liability is 51 years 
of age or 2 years after retirement,  whichever is earlier. 
 
(d) Nb Sub 26 Years of pensionable service extendable by 2 years by screening and or 52 
years of age, whichever is earlier. The reserve liability is 54 years of age or 5 
years after retirement,  whichever is earlier. 
 
(e) Sub 28 years of pensionable service ex tendable by two years by screening or 52 
years of age, whichever is earlier. The reserve liability is 54 years of age or 5 
years after retirement,  whichever is earlier. 
 
(f) Sub Maj 32 years of pensionable service ex tendable by two years by screening or four-
year tenure or 54 years of age, whichever  is earlier. The reserve liability is 54 
years of age or 5 years after retirement,  whichever is earlier. 
 

  
53 
Promotion Policy for officers in Navy   
5.3 Promotion of officers in the Navy can be broadly classified under two 
heads viz.  Time Scale and Selective.  Time Scale promotion as the term 
implies is based entirely on completion of  stipulated time in the lower rank 
while Selective promotions are made to the ranks of Capts and above, based 
on comparative merit against available/ anticipated vacancies in the higher 
rank. 
Time-Scale promotion  - The revised promotion profile for time scale 
promotions post recommendations of  AV Singh Committee report is as 
under:- 
Time for promotion to Higher Rank Category 
SLt Lt Lt Cdr Cdr Capt (TS) 
General Lis t
Officers 
On 
commissioning  
2 years 
as SLt 
4 year s
as Lt 
11 years  
as substantiv e
Lt 
26 years 
commissione
d service 
 
Selection Based Promotions  - The system of se lective promotions 
followed in the Navy is based on compar ative merit against a fixed number of 
vacancies.   Depending on the number of vacancies available and the size of 
the batch being considered, the candidat es are select listed for promotion 
merit-wise. Fair, equitable and uniform promotion prospects are provided to all 
officers of the same branch, irres pective of varying batch size, over 
successive years. The system is judici ous, transparent, time tested and has 
evolved over many years of experience. 
(ii) Promotion Policy for Sailors  : Promotions of sailors  can be classified into 
three categories viz. time based, roster based and select ive. Roster based 
and selective promotions are against the available/ anticipated vacancies. 
Promotional avenues also exist for sailo rs to be promoted to officer rank 
through the Commission Worthy Scheme and the Special Duty List Scheme. 
The details of the promotions are given in the succeeding paragraphs. 
Time Scale Promotion - This is applicable for promotion from:- 
- Seaman IInd Class / equivalent to Seaman Ist Class / equivalent. 
 - Seaman Ist class / equivalent to Leading Seaman / equivalent. 
 - Artificer 5 th class to Acting Artificer 4 th class, Acting Artificer 4 th class to 
Artificer 4th class and Artificer 4th class to Artificer 3rd class. 

  
54 
Roster Based Promotion -   Promotions to the ranks of Petty Officer and Chief 
Petty Officer (including Chie f Artificer) are ‘roster-based’. For the purpose of 
promotion, a ‘Course-cum-Promotion’ ( CCP) Roster is maintained. A sailors’ 
position in the roster is determined by his seniority in the rank and on a 
number of performance param eters, which are regul arly fed to infuse 
dynamism into the roster. Sailors are promoted to PO / CPO rank based on 
availability of vacancies in each branc h / trade and relative position in the 
promotion roster. 
Selective Promotion - Based on the number of vac ancies anticipated in each 
branch / trade, CPOs / MCPOs II are recommended / empanelled for 
promotion to higher supervisory ranks by the ‘MCPO Selection Board’.  
  
The Navy has also forwarded a case fo r ‘Review of Career Profile of 
Sailors’ wherein time-scale promotions  up to the rank of MCPO II have been 
proposed for sailors of the ‘Y’ and ‘Z’ pay groups. The case has been 
forwarded by MoD to 6th CPC for consideration. 
 
Promotion from Sailor to Commissioned Officer  - Deserving sailors get an 
opportunity to get commissioned as officers under two schemes as follows:  
 
(a) CW Scheme  - This Scheme is open to non-artificer sailors up to the 
age of 22 ½ years and for artificer sailors  up to the age of 24 years. Eligible 
sailors undergo a selection process incl uding interview by Service Selection 
Board. Successful candidates undergo training as cadets at the Naval 
Academy and are subsequently commissioned as officers at par with the 
entrants through other schemes.      
(b) SD List Scheme - Eligible sailors between the ages of 28 and 37 years, 
duly recommended by their Commandi ng Officers undergo a selection 
process including interview by Serv ice Selection Board. Successful 
candidates undergo a Special Duties List Qualifying Course and are 
commissioned as Special Duty List Officers. 
 

  
55 
Promotion Policy for Officers in Air Force 
 
5.4 Promotions upto the rank of Wi ng Commander is time bound subject to 
the officers meeting cert ain minimum criteria in their appraisal reports and 
medical categories.  From  the rank of Group Captain onwards, the promotion 
is on select basis by means of boards specially ordered and conducted 
separately for promotion to each rank .  Appraisal reports form the major 
criteria for the select pr omotions.  Officers who are unable to get promoted to 
the select rank of Group Captain are pr omoted to the timescale rank of Group 
Captain on completion of 26 years of service. 
 
Promotion Policy for Airmen in Air Force 
5.5 Airmen Promotion Policy caters for adequate career enhancement of 
PBOR.  In response to about 7000 vac ancies in a year there is a good  
response from youth of this country.  The details of car eer progression of a 
PBOR are given below: 
 (a) The promotion to airmen is  granted on passing of promotion 
 examinations, completion of requisite  years of service and maintaining 
 medical fitness.  The various ti me frames for promotion are given 
 below:- 
  
RANK TOTAL YEARS OF SERVICE 
Aircraftsman/Leading 
Aircraftsman(AC/LAC) 
After training, under training airmen are 
passed out in the rank  of Aircraftsmen.  
Those airmen scoring >70% marks in 
Training Institutes passed out as Leading 
Aircraftsman. 
Leading Aircraftsman Direct, if scoring >70% marks in Training 
Institutes or total 3 y ears of service as AC 
(Time Scale Rank). 
Corporal 3 years as LAC or  total 5 years service, 
whichever is earlier (Time Scale Rank) 
Sergeant 13 ½ years minimum service (Time Scale 
Rank) 
Junior Warrant Officer Minimum 17 years of service onwards (By 
Selection) 
Warrant Officer Minimum 23 year s of service onwards (By 
Selection) 
Master Warrant Officer Minimum 28 years of service onwards (By 
Selection) 

  
56 
(b) On completion of 25 years of service Warrant Officer/Master Warrant 
Officers are considered for Honorary Commission. 
(c) Airmen are also promot ed to the officer rank on meeting the requisite 
qualification and passing of mandatory te sts including testing by Air Force 
Service Selection Board. 
  
Career Planning 
 
5.6 Consequent to recruitment, indi viduals report. to Training Centres 
depending upon their Arm/Service. The i ndividuals ("recruits") are now 
imparted Basic Military Tr aining and thereafter specialized trade training. On 
successful completion of the same t he individuals become "soldiers" and are 
attested and posted to units. 
 
 5.7 The soldier thereafter specializes in his trade and carries out trade 
upgradation and promotion tests for his career progression. This is in addition 
to his annual individual, refresher and collective training. Generally, a soldier's 
individuals career progression is as under: 
 
SrNQ Rank Average            Length of Service 
  Age(Yrs)                   (Yrs) 
(a) Sepoy 26 17+2 
(b) Lance Naik 28 17+2 
(c) Naik 34 22+2 or 49 yr of age 
(d) Havildar 38 24+2 or 52 yr of age 
(e) Naib Subedar 45 26+2 or 52 yr of age 
(f) Subedar 48 28+ 2 or 54 yr of age 
(g) Sub Major 52 32+2 or 54 or 4 yrs tenure 
 
Recommendations of the A.V. Singh Committee  
 
5.8 A Committee was set up in the y ear 2001 under the Chairmanship of 
Shri A.V.Singh, the t hen Special Secretary, to examine the Army 
Headquarters proposals with the aim of achieving optimal combat 
effectiveness by bringing down t he age profile of Battalion/Brigade 
Commanders and to make the organizati on more effective in fulfilling 
individual career aspirations of the Officers.  Whilst this report is primarily 
focused on the restructuring of the office rs’ cadre of the Army, it is applicable 
in nearly equal measure to the other two services also. 

  
 
57 
 
5.9 The Report has dwelt at length on the adverse impac t of the higher 
age profile at the cutting edge i.e. the unit command level.  It has been 
highlighted that high age profile im pinges on performance because (i) the 
risk-taking propensity diminishes; (ii) physical fitness standards required for 
high altitude and glaciated terrain are difficult to maintain and (iii) alertness at 
night gets adversely affected.  In its recommendations the Committee has 
however suggested lowering of  age profiles at all levels of the officers cadre 
of the Army to maintain the existing inter-se rank structure.  
  
5.10 As per the information furnished by  the Ministry of Defence, the 
recommendations of the A.V.Singh Committee are as under: 
“Age Profile  - The following age profile has been recommended to be 
adopted for restructuring the officers’ cadre of the Army. 
 
Rank Existing Ages in Years 
(Approx.) 
Proposed Ages in Years 
(Approx.) 
Lieutenant 22 22 
Captain 26 24 
Major 32 28 
Lt. Colonel 38-39 34-35 
Colonel 41-42 36-37 
Brigadier 50-51 44-45 
Major General 54-55 51-52 
Lt. General 56-57 55-56” 
5.11 Other measures recommended by  the A.V.Singh Committee are as 
under: 
“Short Term Measures: 
(a) Additional Deputational Vacancies and Lateral Absorption     Provision of 
additional deputational vacancies/lateral absorption in Government/semi-
Government undertakings and non-Govt. organisations for Army officers.  
Similarly, officers should be allowed to join private sector commercial 
organisations also on deputation basis. 
(b) Detailing of officers on Multidisciplinary Courses/Studies  – Officers can be 
detailed on long multidisciplinary courses/studies run by various Universities, 
Colleges and other Institutions, which besides being beneficial to the 
organization would also benefit the officers in preparing for an alternate 
career.
  
(c)  Industrial Attachment   - Industrial attachment be allowed on a trial basis 
up to two years with any of the private/industrial undertakings after which 
permanent absorption will be allowed.  During the attachment the officers will 
be borne on the strength of the Army and paid by the Army. 
 

  
 
58 
 
(d) Self Improvement Programme   - Up to two years’ study period may be 
allowed to any officer with more than 20 years of service for undertaking any 
recognized study programme. 
 (e)  Early Exit through Voluntary Service Severance Scheme  – Voluntary 
Service Severance Scheme with a suitable financial package be introduced.  
The scheme would involve Colonels and above (with priority to superseded 
officers) to avail of this option.  The broad parameters of the scheme are 
given below:- 
(i) Service Severance financial compensation will be based on 
residual service with a sliding scale, subject to a maximum of 60 
months’ pay to include basic pay, rank pay and DA. 
(ii) It will be applicable to officers after 20 years service. 
(iii)The package would be in addition to normal pension and  
      other retirement benefits. 
(f) Civil Services Examinations  – It has been recommended that Permanent 
Commissioned officers be permitted to appear in Civil Services Examinations 
after completion of 13 years of service with suitable age relaxation.   
(g) Upgradation in Ranks  - This recommendation envisages upgradation of 
large number of posts from Colonel to Lt.General in select ranks.  It has been 
proposed to upgrade 5 posts of Lt.Generals, 10 posts of Major Generals, 75 
posts of Brigadiers and 400 posts of Colonels in the first year. 
 Long Term Measures: 
(a)  Measures to make Short Service Commission(SSC) more attractive   The 
following measures have been recommended to make SSC more attractive 
(i) Lump sum grants, when the officers leave, of Rs.5 Lakhs after 5 years 
service and Rs.10 Lakhs after 10 years service. 
(ii) Grant of two years “Professional Enhancement Training 
 Leave’. 
(iii) Concessions for appearing in Civil Services Entrance 
 Examinations viz.:- 
a. Reduction in number of papers from eight to four. 
b. Introduction of Military Science as an optional subject. 
c. Age relaxation of 5 years for SSC officers to compete. 
(iv) Lateral induction into Para Military Forces/Central Police 
Organisations to be considered. 
(b)  Time based promotion to Lieutenant Colonel’s Rank   - The  rank of Lt. 
Col. is recommended to be on time-based at 13 years service to be granted 
on appropriate criteria.  Select ranks will be from the rank of Colonel upwards 
instead of Lt. Colonel. 
(c)   Reduction in Service for Substantive Rank of Captain and Major  -   The 
length of service for award of substantive rank of Captain  and Major is 
recommended to be of two  and six years respectively. 
(d)  Introduction of Colonel (Time Scale ) Rank  - It has been recommended that 
time-scale promotion to the rank of Colonel be granted after 26 years of age. 
(e) Pay Benefit – Senior Select Ranks   - It has been recommended that 
benefit of non-functional selection grade pay be given to Brigadiers and Major 
Generals who are approved fit for the next rank but cannot be empanelled for 
promotion due to lack of vacancies in the next rank.  
(f)  Army Commander’s Pay Equivalence   - Lt. Generals who have been 
found fit for promotion as Army Commander but cannot get the promotion due 
to lack of mandatory residual tenure, may be considered for grant of Army 
Commander’s pay scale, without any additional perks or facilities subject to a 
maximum of six officers at a time 

  
59 
 
(g)   Running Pay Band for Lieutenant General   - The senior Lt. Generals, 
who have reached the top of the existing pay scale of Rs.22,400-24,500, be 
considered for the intermediate scale of Rs.24,050-26000 by extending the 
pay band to Rs.22,400-24,500-26000.  The higher pay band should be given 
to those who fulfill the performance criterion, which may be proposed by 
Army Hqrs. and approved by the Ministry of Defence. 
 Orders regarding time based promotion to Lt. Colonel rank and 
equivalent, reduction in service for Substantive Rank of Captain and Major 
and introduction of Colonel Time Scale and equivalent have been issued by 
all the three Services. 750 posts of Lt. Col. to Col have so far been upgraded. 
Upgradation of balance posts in select ranks is being considered in a Draft 
Cabinet Note.  The proposals in respect of early exit through Voluntary 
Service Severance Scheme, reduction of regular cadre and corresponding 
increase of support cadre, measures to make Short Service Commission 
more attractive and ‘professional enhancement training leave’ are being 
considered. Issues relating to pay benefit for Senior Select Ranks, Army 
Commanders pay equivalence, Running Pay Band for Lt General have been 
referred to VI Central Pay Commission. 
The proposals in respect of the recommendations relating to additional 
deputational vacancies and lateral absorption, industrial attachment of 
officers, detailing of officers on multidisciplinary courses /studies, self 
improvement programme, grant of permission to commissioned officers of the 
Army to appear in the Central Civil Se rvices Examination/other competitive 
Exams. have been taken up with various Ministries/Departments.”  
 
5.12 When inquired about the status of implementation of the recommendations of 
the A. V. Singh Committee Report: A representative of the Ministry of Defence stated 
during oral evidence as under: 
 
“As far as the A.V. Singh Committee report is concerned, it is in two parts.  
The first part has been implemented which deals with ranks of colonel.  Those 
posts have been created at the level of full Colonel to prevent stagnation.  
Earlier, there were a lot of people who were not reaching that level.  Now, 
virtually there is a guarantee that everyone will get up to the level of Colonel.  
 The second phase seeks to deal with stagnation beyond the level of 
Brigadier, Major General and Lt. General in all the three Services.  This 
proposal has been finalised now and it has gone to the Ministry of Finance in 
the form of a Cabinet Note.  We expect the this Cabinet Note would be 
returned to us by the Ministry of Finance with their observations.  We 
expected in this week. Due to pressure of work, they were not able to do it. It 
will come back to us.  Then, we would put it up for Cabinet for a decision.  
I would say that a final decision on AVSC II is imminent.  Most of the 
proposal by AVSC had been accepted in terms of creation of posts.  They 
had made some proposal regarding increase and emergency commissioned 
and change in those ratios. This will take longer to address but I would say 
that main body of the recommendations have been accepted and would be 
implemented very shortly…..Almos t all the recommendations have been 
accepted. The A V Singh Committee had given recommendations only in 
respect of the Army. Taking those figures we have extrapolated certain 
figures for the other two services depending on their strength, proportion of 
higher ranks etc. That has been done with the concurrence of the Service 
Chiefs. Basically that was the crux of the recommendation. That has now 
been sent to the Cabinet for approval. We expect that it will come up soon”.  

  
60 
 
 
AV Singh Committee Report  Part II 
 
5.13 When asked about the implem entation of AV Singh Committee 
recommendations in Part II of the Report, the Ministry of Defence furnished in 
a written note as under: 
“The second stage was designed to take care of the first.  In other words, the 
first stage ensured promotion up to the rank of colonel and virtually every 
officer was guaranteed that he would over a time period reach that rank.  So, 
the number of colonels is now much and to put it in another way, the 
proposed level of stagnation has to be raised.  So, other posts have been 
created to ease the bulge as it is put.  These officers are very good officers 
but because of the steep pyramid, they do not have a promotional avenue.  
Very often the difference between an officer who is promoted and who is not 
promoted may be very had to detect in the Armed Forces.  So, that is why, 
this is being eased through the upgradation of certain posts.  So, basically, 
this will be at the highest level of Lt. Generals.  If I recollect, it is 20 Lt. 
Generals for the Army, six Air Marshals for the Air Force and four Vice 
Admirals for the Navy.  Below that, there are large number of Major Generals 
and equivalent ranks and then Brigadiers.  At these levels posts would be 
created through upgradation.  There is no significant financial liability on the 
Government.  The posts would be upgraded so there would be a slight 
difference in salary.  The over all financial implication as we have worked out 
is about Rs.8 crore per year which we feel can be absorbed.  But it has been 
a long standing demand and I think it would give some relief to the Services”. 
 
Time scale and promotions 
 
5.14 When inquired about the provision for promotion based on time scale in 
AV Singh Committee recommendation, a r epresentative of Ministry of 
Defence stated during oral evidence as under: 
“In the Army, there is a selection process that is quite deep and Lt. Colonel 
would normally get his rank in 13 y ears and by 20 years he should become a 
Colonel.  But if he does not make it, he would make it on a time-scale in 26 
years.  That is the way it is done.  But I think the present system of selection 
is very important in maintaining the quality in the Armed Forces. There is also 
a time scale for a Colonel level”. 
 
5.15 When inquired about the possibility of giving time scale for Brigadier or 
Major General,  the  repres entative of Ministry of Defence further stated as 
under: 
 “That selection process would appl y at the particular rank.  It only 
means that a larger number would be selected.  It does not mean that 
the unfit would be selected.   It would just give greater relief.  That is 
all”. 
 

  
 
61 
Sixth Central Pay Commission 
5.16 When asked about the proposal for the PBORs, the representative of 
the Ministry of Defence stated as under: 
 
 “It is an issue which has been taken note of even by the Pay Commission. In 
the PBORs, there are two categories “X” and “Y” that are now recognised. If I 
remember, the “Y” category  or the skilled people who handle the equipment 
and weapons, have actually been given a substantially higher scale. The Pay 
Commission has recognised that. Of course, it is true that they get very 
intensive in-service training also in Branches  like Corps of Engineers, EME 
and Signals. There is no problem of these people leaving. But it is true that 
when they do leave after a period of service of either  15 or 17 years, there is 
a demand for them in the private sector which is actually to everyone’s 
benefit. It benefits the individual and it certainly benefits the country. So, there 
is no specific problem in the Armed Forces. The very nature of the equipment 
is such that skill development is essential and compulsory. It does take place. 
I think it is recognised through their emoluments”. 
 
5.17 According to the information m ade available to the Committee the 
recommendation made by the 6 th Central Pay Commission in respect of the 
Indian Armed Forces Officers as against Officers on civil side is as under: 
ARMY RK SIXTH PAY 
COMMISSION 
SCALE  
GDE 
PAY  
CIV RK SIXTH PAY 
COMMISSION 
SCALE  
GRADE 
PAY  
LT 15600-39100 5400 JTS (IAS), AEE 9300-34800 5400 
CAPT 15600-39100 6100    
MAJ 15600-39100 6600 STS (NON IAS), EE 15600-39100 6600 
LT COL 15600-39100 7600 JAG (NON IAS), EE 
(NFSG) 
15600-39100 7600 
COL 37400-67000 8700 NFSG (NON IAS), SE 37400-67000 8700 
BRIG 37400-67000 8900 DIG, ACE 37400-67000 8900 
MAJ GEN 37400-67000 10000 IG (SAG), CE 37400-67000 10000 
LT GEN 37400-67000 12000 ADG (HAG) 37400-67000 12000 
 
5.18 When asked about a recommendation on Army Commanders pay 
equivalence, Lt. Generals who have been found fit for promotion as Army 
Commanders but cannot get their promotion due to lack of mandatory tenure may be 
considered for Army Commanders pay scale without any additional perks or facilities,  
whether they are getting the pay scale and the perks and facilities, the representative 
of the Ministry of Defence stated as under: 
“This is called the non-functional grade.  The idea was that they should be 
pegged at that pay so that they would get the pensionary benefit. It is roughly 
so but they would get the salary but in terms of the perks, there is virtually no 
difference.  The perks are for Lt. Generals. Whether he is the principal staff 
officer or an Army Commander, the difference is insignificant”. 

  
62 
Promotional avenues of PBOR 
 
5.19 When asked about the promoti on avenues  for the PBORs, the 
representative of the Ministry of Defence in a written note stated as under: 
S 
No 
CODE COURSE 
1 VAIR AIRLINE SECURITY COURSE 
2 VAMC ASSISTANT MANAGER CSD CANTEEN 
3 VAMS ASSEMBLING AND MAINTENANCE OF SOLAR EMERGENCY LAMPS 
4 VAPM AGRO PRODUCT MANAGEMENT IN MUSHROOM & HONEY BEE 
KEEPING 
5 VBCO BAKERY AND CONFECTIONERY 
6 VBPM BUSINESS PROJECT MANAGEMENT IN SCHOOL 
7 VCAR  CARPENTRY 
8 VCCS CERTIFICATE COURSE IN SUPPLY CHAIN MANAGEMENT 
9 VCDR CAR DRIVING 
10 VDBM DIPLOMA IN BUSINESS MANAGEMENT (DBM) 
11 VDFM DIPLOMA IN FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT 
12 VDMA DIPLOMA IN MARKETING AND SALES MANAGEMENT 
13 VDMG DIPLOMA IN MALL MANAGEMENT 
14 VDPS DIPLOMA IN PUBLIC HEALTH AND SANITARY TECHNOLOGY 
15 VEDT ENTREPRENEUSHIP DEVELP IN TRAVEL & TROURRISM 7 
16 VEIN ELECTRONIC INSTALLATION 
17 VFIN FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT 
18 VFPR FOOD PRODUCTION PRINCIPLES 
19 VGDA GRAPHIC DESIGN AND ANIMATION 
20 VHKE HOUSEKEEPING 
21 VHKS HOUSE KEEPING SUPERVISOR 
22 VHOU HOUSEKEEPING LOSS PREVENTION, KITCHEN STEWARDING AND 
STOREKEE 
23 VIRM INSURANCE & RISK MANAGEMENT 
24 VJCB JCB OPERATOR AND MAINTENANCE COURSE 
25 VLMV LIGHT MOTOR VEHICLE 
26 VMAM MARKETING AND SALES MANAGEMENT 
27 VMCS MODULAR COURSE FOR SEAFARING 
28 VMDM MOTOR DRIVING AND MAINTENANCE OF VEHICLES 
29 VMTV MGT OF TOURISM RELATED VENTURES 
30 VMUL MULTI SKILLED RESETTLEMENT COURSE 
31 VNGO NGO MANAGEMENT 
32 VOJT  ON JOB TRG, HOUSE KEEPING & SECURITY 
33 VORF ORGANIC FARMING 
34 VPCW PROFESSIONAL CARPENTRY, WELDING AND PAINTING 
35 VPDI PERSONALITY DEVELOPMENT & IMAGE ENHANCEMENT 
36 VRM RETAIL MANAGEMENT 
37 VSPT SECRETORIAL PRACTICE, TYPING, SHORTHANDS & OFFICE MGT 
38 VSTR STEWARDS TRAINING 
39 VSWM STORES AND WAREHOUSE MANAGEMENT 
40 VTCT TAILORING & CUTTING 
 “As far as their promotions ar e concerned, in addition to normal 
selection, we have time scale promotion.  It is at the service of 10 years 
and Havaldar at the service of 20 years.  Now, a question was asked 
about their progression into the officers cadre.  For the men to become 
officers basically we have three entries as of now”.   
  

  
63 
5.20 When asked about the various cour ses  offered to retiring PBOR to 
help them in taking up gainful employm ent during post-retirement period, the 
Ministry of Defence submitted in the written replies as under: 
“Army 
Details of courses offered to retiring PBOR to help them in taking up 
gainful employment during post-reti rement period is attached at 
Annexure. All the eligible volunt eer PBOR meeting the laid down 
Qualitative Requirements are given the opportunity to do these courses 
with 60% of them being nom inated for course of their choice, and 25% 
and 15% getting course of II & III choice respectively.    
Air Force 
Keeping in view the manning constrai nt in field units, 1920 PBOR are 
detailed for PRC every year. On an average 4472 PBOR retire (on RE 
completion and superannuation only) annua lly.  The data for last three 
years is given below.- 
 
 2005 2006 2007 
Retirements 4225 4943 4250 
No of PBOR detailed for course 1920 1920 1920 
Percentage 45.44 38.84 45.17 
 
3.      The average percentage of PBOR detailed for various PRC annually 
works out to 43.15% 
 
 
Armed Forces Officers as special secretary 
 5.21 When inquired whether it is not advisable to have Armed Forces 
Officers in the Ministry of Defence as special Secretary, the representatives of 
Ministry of Defence stated during oral evidence as under: 
[ 
“In fact, I am not aware that Govern ment is, in particular, thinking on 
this line. These proposals had come in  the past also that some of the 
civilian posts in the Ministry of  Defence should be manned by the 
Military Officers. In some manner, this was also alluded to in the Arun 
Singh Committee Report which came some years ago. But we find that 
the existing system, as it stands, has not posed any particular problem. 
In fact, I am not aware that Government is, in particular, thinking on this 
line. These proposals had come in t he past also that some of the 
civilian posts in the Ministry of  Defence should be manned by the 
Military Officers. In some manner, this was also alluded to in the Arun 
Singh Committee Report which came some years ago. But we find that 
the existing system, as it stands , has not posed any particular 
problem”. 
  
 

  
 
64 
Permanent Promotion Board 
5.22 When asked whether Armed Fo rces should not have permanent 
promotion board, a representative of the Ministry of Defence stated during oral 
evidence as under: 
“Sir, that is not exactly correct. There is no permanent Board like the 
UPSC, which is permanently constituted. But there are selection Boards for 
promotion from one rank to the other. There are different Selection Boards for 
different ranks. At the highest level is, I think, the one that is called the 
Selection Board Number 1, which deals with the promotion of Generals which 
is presided over by the Service Chiefs, below that at other levels. These are 
permanent bodies. In other words, their constitution is fixed. They meet 
depending on the anticipated vacancies. Basically the pressure to fill 
vacancies is so heavy that there is no question of these Boards not meeting. 
For example, we know that there are so me retirements of, for example, Army 
Commanders in September, so the Promotion Board have met in May and 
the process of filling those posts have started through sending proposals to 
the Appointments Committee of the Cabinet. Likewise, I know that vacancies 
at the level of Brigadier have been anticipated and those Boards also have 
been held to clear a much larger number of people. So, in the Armed Forces 
it is critical that these posts not be allowed to stay vacant and in fact, to my 
knowledge, they do not stay vacant for this reason. The Boards meet 
whenever required and in fact, very frequently”.  
  
Regular meeting of promotion board 
 
5.23 When asked whether promotion board has its meeting at regular 
interval, a representative of the Mini stry of Defence dur ing oral evidence 
stated as under: 
“Sir, they do meet regularly, I woul d say. Now, occasionally those who 
are not promoted say that  the dates are played with to rule them out. 
This is an allegation that  is frequently heard, whether it is true or not, I 
would not want to hazard a guess. But since this hon. Committee has 
raised this issue, we will certainly look into it”.  
 
5.24 When asked about the role of the Mini stry of Defence in affairs related 
to the promotion of Armed Forces office r, a representative of  the Ministry of 
Defence during oral evidence stated as under: 
  
“The Boards are always held prior to a particular year in which people 
fall into consideration for a promot ion. So, when they consider a group 
of people, in that year like for Air Force, we consider the Financial year, 
so all the people due for consideration in that peri od will be considered 
by a Board prior to that year  commencing and the results will be 
available for each individual to get  promoted or not promoted as per 
merit”.  

  
65    
Statutory Complaints 
5.25 When asked about t he number of Lieutenant Generals who have been 
promoted after making statutory complain ts and representations etc. and the 
role of the Ministry of Defence, a representative of  the Ministry of Defence 
during oral evidence stated as under: 
“Actually, I cannot give a precise answer. But I would say, very few”. 
5.26 The representative of  the Ministry of Defence further elaborated as 
under: 
“I would only like to add one thing, having seen how promotions work 
on the other side of Government, that  is the non-military side, I would 
say the military system is almost exem plary. It is very rigorous and fair. 
A lot of opportunities are afforded.  It is, I would say, as transparent as 
is possible. I am not saying that there may not be defects occasionally, 
but as systems within Governments go, I think, it is a very good 
system”.  
    
Welfare Measures and Grievance Redressal System 
Army 
5.27 Army personnel are entitled to redr ess of grievances relating to denial 
of military rights through Non Statutory Complaints. Such complaints are 
submitted and processed alongwith laid down channels.  If the complainant is 
not satisfied with the outcome of Non Statutory Complaint he may submit a 
Statutory Complaint on the same subject to the Central Government.   
Welfare Measures.   
The following welfare measures are being taken: 
(a) Army Group Insurance Fund (AGIF).    
(i) All officers are insured for Rs 15 lac at a monthly 
 subscription  Rs 1500/-. 
(ii) All PBOR are insured for Rs 7.5 lac at a monthly 
 subscription Rs 750/-. 
(b) Ex Serviceman Contributory Health Scheme (ECHS) 
(i) It is a public funded scheme underwritten by Govt of  
  India. 
(ii) There are 227 Polyclinics all over the country. 
(c) Army Welfare Housing Organization (AWHO) . Promotes housing 
schemes at various stations at ‘no profit – no loss’. 
(d) Education.  
(i) Army welfare education society has 123 army/army public 
schools all over the country. 
(ii) Professional colleges in engineering, management, hotel 
management, medical, dental and law have been established for 
wards of Armed Forces personnel. 

  
66 
 
(e) Educational scholarships and grants are being granted to wards of 
certain categories like battle casualties, death in harness, ex-servicemen and 
widows 
(f) Pre-release training is being provided to enable a second career on 
retirement.  
(g) Army Placement Cell assists in placement of retirees. 
(h) Vocational training courses are also being conducted. 
(j) Paraplegic Rehabilitation Centres are being run for medical care of 
affected persons.     
  
Employment Opportunities 
 
5.28 The following opportunities are in existence for employment: -   
  (a) Government Schemes for Compassionate Appointment only for  
  Personnel Below Officers Rank (PBOR). 
 (b) Enrolment of sons/dependents of Personnel Below Officers  
  Rank. 
 (c) Army Placement Agency. 
 (d) Teaching option in Army Welfare Education Society run Army  
  Schools. 
 (e) Directorate General Resettlement sponsored schemes for   
  Ex-Servicemen:- 
  (i) DGR sponsored Coal Tipper Scheme. 
  (ii) Kinetic Engineering/Hero Honda/Apollo Tyres/Pepsi/  
   Other  franchising agencies. 
  (iii) Allotment of Oil Product Agencies under 8% Defence  
   Category. 
  (iv) Entrepreneurship as KIDZEE education Centres. 
  (v) House keeping with ITC Group. 
  (vi) AWWA Vocational Centres and Projects. 
Navy 
5.29 Navy has a very effective grie vance Redressal System which is 
elaborated in Navy Order 24/2007.  In addition, the instructions regarding 
redressal of grievances of officers and sailors are contained in Regulation 235 
to 241 of Regulations of the Navy Part II(Statutory). 
Redressal and Complaints Advisory Board (RACAB).   
A Redressal and Complaint Advisory Board (RACAB) has been 
instituted at NHQ under t he chairmanship of a Fl ag Officer of the rank 
of Vice Admiral as nominated by  the CNS to introduce greater 
objectivity, quicker dispensation of justice and offer a greater measure 
of trust to personnel seeking justice. 
 

  
67 
Housing Facilities to Serving Personnel/Ex-Servicemen. 
The Army Welfare Housing Organisation (AWHO) provides housing facilities 
to both serving defence personnel and ex-servicemen of the Army. The State 
Governments could be  requested to provide suitable land to these housing 
societies at reasonable rates when required. 
Most State Governments provide reservations in allotment of plots/flats to 
serving defence personnel and ESM. However, there is a wide disparity in the 
reservation provided by the States. The State Governments could be 
requested to increase such provisions for allotment of house sites/flats to 
defence personnel/ex-servicemen. 
   
Education facilities for wards of Armed Forces Personnel 
 
5.30 When inquired about the specific policy/guidelines on domicile requirements 
both for wards of Armed Forces personnel and civilians for the purposes of 
admission to under graduate level courses in academic and professional institutions 
have been framed and put in place by the Mini stry of Human Resource Development 
for being followed by the Central/Autonomous and State-run educational institutions, 
the Ministry of Human Resource Development stated as under:- 
“The Central Government in the Ministry of Human Resource Development 
has not laid down any specific policy/guidelines on domicile requirements for 
wards of armed forces personnel and civilians for the purposes of admission to 
undergraduate level courses in academic and professional institutions. Under 
Article 5 of the Constitution there is only one domicile i.e. of the Union of India. 
The policy of the Central Government is laid down in the National Policy on 
Education (modified in 1992) as follows: 
 In higher education in general and technical education in particular, 
steps will be taken to facilitate inter-regional mobility by providing equal 
access to every Indian of requisite merit, regardless of his origins. The 
universal character of universities and other institution of higher education is 
to be underscored (para3.8). 
 The Common Admission Test for management courses and All India 
Engineering Entrance Examination for engineering courses have been 
instituted. For medical courses under the auspices of the Ministry of Health, 
there is the All India Medical Entrance Examination. More recently, a 
Common Law Admission Test has been introduced for admission to 
programmes in eight National Law Universities created by State Legislations. 
Educational institutions are established partly to address regional 
Iimbalances in education and therefore even though the Constitution proves 
for only one domicile (Article 5) for the territory of India, special provisions can 
be made to accord residential preferences in respect of those residing in a 
state/region where the institution is located. Such special provisions can be 
made by laws (e.g. in National Institutes of Technology (NIT) 50 per cent of 
the seats are given on the basis of merit to the students who are resident in 
the State where particular NIT is located. For this purpose a student is 
supposed to be resident of the State from where he or she has passed the 
qualifying examination. Similarly each State Legislature can provide for 
residential preferences) or by statutes or byelaws (as in the case of the North 
Eastern Regional Institute of Technology, NERIST). 
 

  
 
 
68 
 
5.31 When asked about the reservati on facilities being extended to the 
wards of defence services personnel for admission to under-graduate level 
courses in various academic/professional  institutions being run under public 
and private sector in the country, the Ministry of Human Resource 
Development stated during oral evidence as under:- 
 
“All the central universities and educational institutions are national 
institutions and follows a national admission policy. They do not have domicile 
requirements. The institutions enjoy  academic and administrative autonomy. 
Each university determines its own admission policy. Some of them like JNU 
conduct admission tests for some or all courses and the concerned academic 
bodies of the universities lay down the cut off percentage of marks prescribed 
for eligibility. However, the universities do follow the statutory orders of 
reservation of SCs/STs/OBCs both in admissions and appointments to vacant 
posts.  The reservation in admission is in accordance with the Central 
Educational Institutions (Reservation in Admission) Act, 2006. Many of the 
Central Universities give concession or weightage marks for admissions to 
the wards of servicemen laying down their live or disabled in action or those 
who are honoured gallantry awards. The Delhi University is giving a 
concession of 5 per cent in the minimum marks in the aggregate or in the 
subject, as the case may, to candidates belonging to the five top priority 
categories mentioned by the Ministry of Defence in their letter No. 
3547/AS(R)/94 dated 3
rd June, 1994. The Jawaharlal Nehru University is 
giving 5 deprivation points to candidates belonging to the top 4 categories 
mentioned by the Ministry of Defence. Similar concessions/relaxations are 
being given at present in several Universities.  
 The unaided deemed universities do not come within the purview of 
the State Government. However, some of the deemed universities like 
Symbiosis International University are giving 5 per cent of intake as 
reservation for serving/retired defence personnel and their children. Minority 
Educational Institutions are outside the purview of reservations in view of the 
protection under Article 30(1) of the Constitution. At present there is no law 
governing reservations in unaided deemed universities coming under the 
purview of the Central Government. 
 The following provision for reservation of seats/preferential allotment 
of courses has been made for defence personnel/wards of defence/para-
military personnel killed or permanently disabled in action during war or 
peace-time operations in Centrally funded Technical Education Institutions:- 
(a) NIT, IIIT and other Centrally funded Technical Education Institutions: 
The Central Government has introduced a Scheme of preferential allotment of 
courses of two candidates who are the children of Defence/paramilitary 
personnel killed or permanently disabled in action during war or peace time 
operations in each NIT, IIIT and other Centrally funded technical institutions 
where admission is through the All India Engineering Entrance Examination 
(AIEEE). 

  
69 
(b) Indian Institutes of Technology (IITs) undergraduate courses through 
Joint Entrance Examination (JEE):- 
Two seats are available for preferential allotment of courses in each institute 
for children of defence/paramilitary personnel killed or permanently disabled 
in action during war or peace time operations. 
 (c) Indian School of Mines University (ISMU), Dhanbad. 
The reservation of seats for the wards/windows of all categories of Defence 
personnel is being practiced in admissions of various programmes of ISMU 
as per details given below: 
(i) One seat each is reserved in MSc, MSc. Tech and M.Tech 
programs. 
(ii) Two seats are reserved for admission in MBA programme. 
(d) School of Planning & Architecture (SPA), New Delhi and National 
Institute of Foundry & Forge Technology (NIFFT), Ranchi. 
  5 % quota is given in admission to under graduate courses. 
Only one category, namely, children and widows of armed personnel 
or paramilitary killed or disabled in action during hostility has been 
covered. 
Education is in the Concurrent List under the VIIth  Schedule of the 
Constitution. Each State can have its own policy/law. The Central 
mandate is essentially in regard to coordination and determination of 
standards I higher education. In matters of admission, States follow 
their respective policy. For example when students from outside the 
state apply for admission in engineering examinations conducted by 
State Governments like Kerala, Karnataka, Maharashtra, the 
‘residential’ requirement is enforced by them. Each State has its own 
criteria for determining the ‘residential’ status which may include 
parameters like parents having studied in the State or the parents or 
the wards having been born in the State or the passing of the 
qualifying examination from the State etc.” 
 
5.32 In the light of the fact that frequent transfers and postings of armed 
forces personnel cause difficulties for their wards in getting admission to the 
under graduate level courses in the academ ic and professional institutions at 
the station of their choice for want of domicile requirements in different States, 
when asked to what measures if any, have been taken or contemplated by the 
Ministry to address this peculiar problem being faced by the wards of defence 
services personnel, Ministry of Human Resource Development submitted as 
under:- 

  
70 
 
“The problem of frequent transfers and postings throughout the country is 
common to most of the armed forc es personnel and central government 
employees. The Central Universiti es and other central educational 
institutions which are national institutions admit students based on merit on 
national basis. The Central Governm ent through the Universities Grants 
Commission is contemplating introducti on of credit transfer system to be 
introduced by all Universities so that  student mobility during or after the 
courses of study is facilitated. This  would address the problems faced by 
wards of transferable services personnel. In regard to facility for 
admissions, State universities will have to be requested to waive 
residential requirements. This matter can be taken up at the Conference of 
Chancellors of State Universities (G overnors) held by the President, in 
order to evolve a common agreement.” 
 
 
5.33 Since the subject matter relati ng to ‘Education including technical 
education, medical education and universities’ finds a place as Entry 25 in the 
Concurrent List in Sev enth Schedule of the Constitution of India, when asked 
whether it is not incumbent  on the part of the Government of India to take 
appropriate measures to facilitate admi ssion of the wards of defence service 
personnel to the undergraduate level cour ses in the State run educational 
institutions at the stat ion of their choice without  insisting on the domicile 
requirements imposed by different St ate Government, the Department of 
Personnel and Training submitted (DoPT) as under: 
 
“Admissions to higher educational institutions coming within the jurisdiction 
of the State legislation cannot be r egulated by the Central Government 
unless Parliament enacts laws to over  ride state legislations governing 
State institutions. This is perhaps not  desirable. The powers of the Central 
Government are confined to matters of ‘coordination and determination of 
standards in institutions of higher education or research and scientific and 
technical institutions.” Therefore, t he  relaxation of resident requirements 
or prescription of quotas in admission in such institutions fall within the 
purview of the respective state gover nments. Central institutions come 
under the purview of different Ministries: Ministry of Health in the case of 
medical colleges, the Ministry of Agri culture in the case of agricultural 
universities/colleges, Ministry of Commerc e in the case of institutions of 
foreign trade, Ministry of Textiles in the case of fashion technology, 
Ministry of Tourism and Culture in the case o hotel management and 
tourism etc., apart from the Ministry  of Human Resource Development 
which looks after higher and technical education.” 
  

  
71 
 
Reservation of Wards/Dependents of Serving Personnel/ESM/Widows in 
Admission to Professional Colleges/Institutions.   
 
5.34 Some State Governments/ Union Territory Administrations and Union Ministry 
of HRD have reserved seats for admission to professional colleges/institutions under 
their jurisdiction for the wards of serving personnel and ex-servicemen. Presently, the 
courses for which these seats exist are for MBBS, BDS, MBA, B Ed and BE. The 
number of seats reserved or the quota (in percentage term) is small and not in 
keeping with the number of service personnel and ex-servicemen or their dependents 
in various States.  
 
5.35 The State Governments/Union Territory Administration and the Union Ministry 
of HRD need to consider an increase in the number of seats meant for dependents of 
serving personnel and ex-servicemen. Further, in the States where no reservation 
exists, courses/institutions have to be brought into scheme enabling such 
reservations. All States need to provide reservation in admission by including more 
institutions in courses like Travel  Management, Hotel Management, Information 
Technologies and Service Industries. 
 
Removal of Domiciliary Restrictions by States/Union Territory Administrations .
  
 
5.36 In some of the States/Union Terri tories, admissions to Professional 
Colleges/Institutions falling within the jurisdiction of the respective State 
Governments is restricted to only thos e students who are either domiciled in 
that State and/or hav e passed both the 10 th as well as the 12 th standard 
examination from a school lo cated in that State/Union Territory. The wards of 
defence personnel are unable to fulfill t hese requirements for admission by 
the very nature of the jobs of their parents which involve frequent 
transfers/postings and movement of t heir families. Thus these wards are 
deprived of the chances of being considered in admissions to Professional 
Colleges/Institutions in States wher e the restrictions exist. The State 
Governments/Union Territories may consi der removal of these restrictions so 
that the wards of defenc e personnel get a fair chance and are allowed 
admissions to these institutions. 
  

  
72 
5.37 Apart from the above,  a large number of the defence personnel, owing 
to their peculiar service conditions dec ide to settle after their retirement 
permanently at places which do not  happen to be their native places 
depending upon the job opportunities  available. The State 
Governments/Union Territory administrat ions need to consider that domicile 
restriction be removed for ex-servi cemen and they may be considered as 
domiciles based on their registration wit h the respective Rajya Sainik 
Boards/Zila Sainik Boards. 
 
Variation in Welfare Benefits Provided by State Governments to Families 
of Defence Personnel Killed in various Operations.  
 
5.38 There is variation in welfare benef its provided by State Governments to 
families of Defence Personnel, who are killed in various Operations due to 
enemy action. All State Governments need to provide uniform welfare benefits 
to families of Defence Personnel killed in various Operations such as Ex-
Gratia for battle as well as physical casualties and war disabled.  
 
5.39 The wards of Armed Forces personnel face difficulties in getting 
admissions in Professional/ Technical colleges on two accounts, the first 
being inability to fulfill the Domiciliary conditions imposed by State Govts, due 
to frequent transfers, and the second bei ng, limited number of Defence Quota 
seats in Professional/ Technical colleges .  Both these issues were examined 
at various levels in the past. Based on the recommendation, the Raksha 
Mantri  has written following letters to the CMs of all states:- 
(a)  Waiving off Domiciliary condi tions for admission to professional 
colleges in respect of wards of Defence Personnel (DO No. 
6(01)/2005/Edu/II/D(Res.)/3362-F/RM dated 12 Jun 07(Copy annexed). 
(b) Increasing the Number of C AP (Children of Armed Forces 
Personnel) quota seats for admissi on to professional/Technical 
colleges vide DO letter No 6(01) /2005/Edu/D(Res)/1916F/RM dated 10 
Apr 07(Copy annexed). 
 In the above letters, the RM had s uggested that the State Governments 
take a favourable decision towards ex tending these benefits to the wards of 
Defence personnel.   

  
73 
Welfare Measures Undertaken in the Navy.  
 
 5.40 A large number of welfare measures have been instituted to ensure 
that the morale and motivation of sailors is maintained at high levels. Some of 
the measures initiated are enumerated below:- 
(a)    Divisional System.  In the Navy the ‘Divisi onal System’ is a time 
tested forum which provides for r egular interaction between officers 
and sailors. In this system a group of sailors are assigned to one 
Divisional Officer (who may also be the departmental Officer) acting as 
their ‘guide, philosopher and friend’. The sailors are encouraged to 
share all their problems including personal, domestic, service and any 
other issues which are agitating them. 
 
(b)    Management of Stress .  The daily routine of ships and 
establishments includes morning ph ysical training and evening sports 
activities. In addition, the living accommodation of all sailors is 
adequately provided with television, indoor games and internet facilities 
(wherever possible). Married sailors  are permitted to stay at home 
when in harbour. Further arrangem ents have also been made for 
conduct of stress busting classes like Yoga, Pranayam, Art of Living etc 
periodically. 
(c)   Harnessing Support from Civil Administration . Initiatives have 
been instituted to get support of the Civil Administration for the 
problems, if any, being faced by t he families of personnel in their 
respective villages/ towns or citi es. To streamline the procedure to 
redress a sailor’s complaint to civil authorities, following has been 
implemented:- 
(i)    A comprehensive letter for seeking assistance for a 
sailor’s domestic problem/ property dispute/ etc is forwarded to 
the SDM or District Magistrate or Collector of the region (as 
applicable) and the local police st ation with a copy addressed to 
the nearest Zila Sainik Board is issued by the Head of the unit. 
(ii) A follow up/feed back is thereafter obtained from local 
authorities by the unit within thr ee months of issuing the letter 
and the same is communicated to the sailor.  
In addition, a letter has been writt en by Raksha Mantri to  all 
Chief Ministers requesting them to institute mechanisms for 
early resolution of redressal of grievances pertaining to service 
personnel which is being given wide publicity. 
 
Welfare Measures Undertaken in the Air Force 
 5.41 Officers and airmen are entitled to submit a representation to Superior 
Officer, who shall investigate into the complaint.    Besides the above, a 
statutory right is also available to a person tried by a Court Martial to submit a 
petition against the finding and sentence of a Court Martial at the pre and post 
confirmation stage.    

  
74 
Welfare Measures 
The following welfare measures are in place in the IAF to prevent 
grievances:- 
(a) Constant improvement to livi ng and working conditions is being 
 ensured through provision of better infrastructure. Married 
 accommodation Project is catering to the residential 
 accommodation needs. Presently, phase I of four phases is on.  
(b) Grant of leave within their ent itlement is ensured for all air 
 warriors.  
(c) Sports facilities are continuously improved.  
(d) Welfare meetings and DSC Da rbars, are periodically held. 
 AFWWA meetings are held regularly  for the welfare of the wives 
 of air warriors. Welfare meeti ngs are also held for the civilian 
 staff of the stations. 
(e) Strict adherence to well est ablished system of redressal of 
 grievances under the Air Forc e Law is ensured. Further, the 
 facility of open interviews wit h Air Officer Commanding/ Station 
 Commander/ COs on any issue is available.  
(f) Facility has been provided to all service personnel to post any 
 suggestion/ complaint at the CAS Website on the IAF Intranet. 
(g)  Assistance through Station adm inistration and provost units to 
 family members of service personnel in addressing personal 
 problems, wherever required. 
(h) The IAF has recently intr oduced employment of clinical 
 psychologists at major stations under each Command for 
 counselling. So far 46 Psychological counsellors have been 
 employed all over the Air Force.  
(j) “Samvedna” Cells were formed at all Air Force Stations last year 
 to ensure that the family members/NOK of a deceased air 
 warrior receive the NE benefits expeditiously.  
 
 
Interaction between staff and officers 
 
5.42 When inquired about the  interact ion level between officers, PBOR and 
soldiers, the Ministry of Defence submitted in their written reply as under: 
 
“Army 
1.   A very close  interaction between and PBOR/soldiers is carried 
out while executing a task through out the day, almost on a minute to 
minute basis.   Tasks are invari ably executed after detailed co-
ordination.  Also sub unit/unit Commanders earmark time, where in 
PBOR/Soldiers can seek their formal interview for redressal of their 
grievances.  No prior formal appoint of Commanding 
Officer(CO)/Company Commander(Coy Cd rs)  is required for such 
interactions.  In addition, Coy Cdrs and CO conduct their monthly 
Sainik sammelans, where in PBOR are invariably given an opportunity 
to bring their problems to the personal knowledge of the CO/Coy Cdr. 

  
 
75 
 
2.     At the info rmal level, young officers visit PBOR mess and do 
interact with them for knowing and understanding their problems, so 
that these can be resolved.   This process forms part of initial grooming 
of an officers on joining of the R egiment and helps in establishing a 
rapport between young officers and sold iers.  Officers also informally 
interact with soldiers while regularly playing team games with them and 
during sub unit/sub unit Barakhana.  But these are normally held for 
festivity i.e. whenever unit/sub unit has won a sports competition or 
performed commendably in a professional event.  Barakhanas are also 
held on unit raising day. 
3.    The above measures immens ely contribute towards maintenance 
of a cordial relation in unit/sub unit.  
 
Navy 
In the Navy the ‘Divisional System ’ is a time tested forum which 
provides for regular interaction bet ween officers and sailors. In this 
system a group of sailors are a ssigned to one Divisional Officer (who 
may also be the departmental Officer) acting as their ‘guide, 
philosopher and friend’. The sailors are encouraged to share all their 
problems including personal, domestic,  service and any other issues 
which are agitating them. The Divisional Officer renders all possible 
help in the form of informing appr opriate agencies, authorities and 
command to ensure ‘Redressal of t heir Grievances’ in an informal 
environment. In addition ‘Divisional officer’s Period’ (DOP) are 
conducted periodically and problems posed by sailors are recorded 
with remedial measure taken. The sa ilors in the Navy have a well laid 
down system of forwarding their requests to Divisional Officer 
pertaining to their welfare, promot ion, domestic issues and the same 
are disposed off in a time bound m anner at appropriate levels which 
can reach right up to the ‘Chief of the Naval Staff’.
 
Air Force 
(i)  Daily morning section par ades are held wherein welfare and 
morale points are also discussed. 
(ii)  Station Commander & Unit Commander hold regular welfare 
meeting with PBORs.  
(iii)  Gatherings are or ganized at important occa sions at sections, unit 
and station level  where in all officers informally interact with 
PBORs, DSC Jawans and other station personnel. 
 (iv)  Organised PT and games are r egularly held jointly with officers, 
PBORs & Jawans particularly in them as a team. 
(v)  Joint adventure activities are planned with officers, PBORs & 
Jawans. 
vi)  Officers interact with PBORs  in Barakhana scheduled during AF 
Day celebrations. and other important occasions. 
(vii) Unit / station level picnics / excursions are organized wherein 
officiers, PBORs and their families participate”. 
 

  
76 
Dignified Treatment 
 
5.43 When inquired as to how  it is ensured that service personnel 
irrespective of their ranks are treated with dignity and what mechanism exists 
in services to prevent any instances  of humiliation of any  ranks by their 
superiors, the Ministry of Defence submitted in their written reply as under: 
(a) To ensure that the dignity of a subordinate is maintained is acme of 
leadership.  It is part of the motto that is inculcated in the soldier from 
the days of training academies. 
(b) Leadership training and awareness regarding respect and dignity is 
provided at all echelons and all levels of training. 
(c) Comprehensive instructions in the form of written communication have 
been disseminated to the environment from time to time. 
(d) Regular visit by senior officers is  planned and executed to establish a 
direct contact with the troops.  Max interaction with troops is ensured 
and problems addressed.  A Counseling team is established at 
unit/sub unit levels to monitor the mental health of troops.  All this 
cumulatively ensure that respect and dignity of subordinates is 
maintained through discipline and effective implementation. 
 
Sensitisation of the Civil Authorities 
 
5.44 There was a system in the past when the authorities like District 
Magistrate and Superintendent of Police as well as other State Government 
officials used to respond promptly to the communications received from the 
Commanding Officers (Cos) on matters concerning problems of the serving 
soldiers and their families living at different stations.  However, the system  
appears to have given way to a situation where such communications from Cos 
are taken in  a routine  manner and no prompt and concrete  action is taken 
thereon.  This situation is adversely affecting the soldiers who are unable to 
attend their domestic problems due to their hard service conditions and paucity of 
leave thus causing stress in their resulting in overall impact o the morale of 
Armed Forces, which any country can ill-afford. 
 
5.45 As a nodal agency for framing rules and regulations under the All India  
Services Act, 1951 and being the cadre controlling authority for the All  India 
Services including Indian Administrative Service and Indian Police Service when 
asked about the concrete measures  can be taken by DOPT to make a 
centralized policy to sensitise the administrative authorities   belonging to All India 
Services serving inn their cadre in various States/UTs  to promptly respond to the 
problems and grievances of serving army personnel and their family,  DOPT 
stated as under:- 

  
77 
 
“Rule 3 (2A) of the All India Services (Conduct Rules),  1968 envisages 
that every member of the Service shall in the discharge of his duties act 
in a courteous manner and shall not adopt  dilatory tactics in his 
dealings with the pubic or otherwise.  Our role may be confined to 
issuing instructions to the State Government/Union Territories under 
this rule to sensitise the members of the All India Services working 
under them to promptly respond to  the problems and grievances of 
serving army personnel and their family.” 
  
5.46  When inquired about the steps tak en by the DOPT to sensitise the 
Civil Authorities about the Armed Forces Personnel, a representative of the 
DOPT stated during oral evidence as under: 
 
“As regards sensitization of the Army personnel and their problems, the 
Department has issued guidelines from time to time as to what kind of 
inputs should be used in the traini ng of new recruits, and an Army 
attachment is included in the training programme of new recruits.   
Here, we are already issuing guidelines to the Lal Bahadur 
Shastri National Academy of Admini stration to further improve the 
sensitization process.  However, we have a direct responsibility for civil 
military liaison and for ensuring better facilities to service personnel as 
well as ex-servicemen.  That lie s within the ambit of the State 
Governments.  So, we will again bring this matter to the notice of the 
State Governments. 
As far as the institutional fram ework is concerned, we have the 
civil military liaison conference fo rmat, and the District Soldier Board 
which really has a direct interf ace between the administration and the 
personnel”. 
  
 
5.47 When inquired whether DOPT has  any feedback mechanism to see 
that its guidelines are being adhered to, a representative of  the DOPT stated 
during oral evidence as under: 
 
“Sir, we do set up feedback about some  issues; but it will be certainly 
difficult to get feedback about a whole range of issues. Whenever there 
are issues brought to t he knowledge of the Government India directly 
we do have them”. 
 

  
78 
5.48 When inquired about specific steps taken by the Ministry of Defence to 
facilitate educational facilities for the wards of service personnel particularly in getting 
technical education after 10+2 stage, the Ministry of Defence stated in their written 
replies as under: 
  
“(a)  Grant of education concessions to wards of Armed Forces personnel 
killed/missing/permanently disabled in Wars, Operations/Counter-Insurgency 
Operations include re-imbursement of tuition fee (full amount) and other fees 
(capitation fee and caution money not included) levied by the educational 
Institutions concerned (including  charges levied for the school bus 
maintained by the school or actual fares paid for railway pass for students or 
bus fare certified by the Head of Institute), expenditure on books and 
stationery, uniform and clothing.  This concession is applicable upto first 
degree course. 
(b) Reservation of Seats in Educational Institutions . All State 
Governments provide limited reservation of seats in institutions of higher 
education to cater to difficulties faced by serving personnel and Ex-
Servicemen due to their service conditions. Availability of these seats is 
coordinated by Kendriya Sainik Board.”
 
 
5.49 When inquired about the procedure put in place to pursue with the civil and 
police authorities the cases of civil an criminal nature faced by the family members of 
a soldier who is posted elsewhere and unable to attend to such problems due to 
exigencies of his duties, the Ministry of Defence submitted in their written reply as 
under: 
Army 
(a) For cases of civil and criminal nature faced by the family members 
of a soldier who is posted elsewhere and is unable to attend such problems 
due to exigencies of services, concerned authority is approached by the army 
authorities for speedy disposal. 
(b) Whenever such a contingency occurs, where the individual is unable 
to attend to such issues personally the unit Cdr approaches the concerned 
civil authority i.e. District Magistrate, SP through correspondence and liaison 
by sending a unit person to resolve the issue. 
(c) In this regard the Raksha Mantri and the Defence Secretary have also 
written to Chief Ministers and Chief Secretaries of State to instruct the District 
Magistrates and SPs to pay special attention to the problems of serving 
soldiers.  An effective implementation of the steps mentioned above could 
bring relief to a soldier who is serving in a difficult, inhospitable environment. 
(d) For speedy disposal and monitoring of such cases, Raksha Mantri had 
written to all State Chief Ministers, vide letter dated  19 Dec 2006 (copy 
enclosed), for  instituting a Grievances  Redressal  Monitoring Mechanism in 
all States.  Similar letter was also written by Defence Secretary to all State 
Chief Secretaries, vide letter dated 15 Jan 2007 (copy enclosed).  Till date, 
the States of Uttarakhand, Nagaland, Gujarat, Himachal Pradesh, Madhya 
Pradesh, Mizoram, Karnataka and Union Territory of Chandigarh have 
confirmed instituting such a monitoring mechanism. The issue is being taken 
up with remaining States through civil military liaison conference. 
 

  
79 
Navy 
To streamline the procedure so as to redress sailor’s complaints 
to civil authorities, following has been implemented:-  
(a) All letters seeking assistanc e for sailor’s domestic problems/ 
property disputes are forwarded to the SDM, District Magistrate or 
Collector of the region (as applicable) and the local police 
stations.  
(b) A copy of such letter is also addressed to the nearest Zila 
Sainik Board. 
(c) The letter issued by the Head of the unit brings out the kind 
of assistance required and all rele vant details of the problem. 
Sailor’s local address and the pers on to be contacted by local 
authorities is also brought out in the letter. 
(d) A follow up/feed back is thereafter obtained from local 
authorities by the unit within three months of issuing the letter and 
the same is communicated to the sailor. In the event of feedback 
not being received, a reminder is s ent with specific information to 
the Zila Sainik Board to obtain latest position of the case. 
(e) In addition a letter written by Raksha Mantri on the subject to 
all Chief Ministers of States has also been given wide publicity 
within the Navy.  
Air Force 
 In the case of serving pers onnel, the following provisions are 
available with regard to civil and criminal cases:- 
(i) Air Force Act, 1950  The Act provides for the following 
privileges:- 
 (aa) immunity from attachm ent from decree of civil or 
 revenue court (Sec.28) 
 (ab) immunity from arrest for debt on orders of civil or 
 revenue court (Sec.29) 
 (ac) immunity of persons attending courts-martial from 
  arrest (Sec.30) 
 (ad) Priority in respect of Air Force personnel’s litigation 
  (Sec.32) 
(ii) The Indian Soldier Litigation Act 1925  The Act lays down 
the provisions with regard to safeguarding the interests of 
serving soldiers in matters of litigation in civil courts. 
(iii)   Criminal Procedure Code  1973   The Code provides for 
the following privileges:- 
(aa) In matters of arrest. 
  (ab) Protection from vexatious prosecutions. 
(i) Civil Procedure Code 1908  The Code provides for the 
following privileges:- 
(aa) Power of Attorney. 
  (ab) Service of Summons. 
  (ac) Exemption of Properly from Sale and Attachment. 
  (ad) Notice for Suits”. 

  
80 
5.50 When inquired about the policy regar ding transfer of officers and the 
facilities extended in terms of posti ng, if both husband and wife are in the 
same service in Armed Forces, the Mini stry of Defence submitted in their 
written reply as under: 
“(A) Army   
 Spouse Posting   There has been increase in the number of women 
officers being commissioned into the Army and consequently the 
number of military couples in service.  The requirement of spouse 
posting is given due importance in t he Army.  Details in respect of 
service couples are maintained and factored in posting planning of 
such officers.  Of  563 service c ouples, 299 officers (53% ) are on 
spouse posting on date.  It is endeavoured  to extend maximum 
possible satisfaction , within organizational constraints, by ensuring that 
least alternate posting are toget her.  Spouse posting is also 
coordinated between MS Branch and DGMS (Army) in respect of 
officers having spouses in the Medial Branches. 
Posting Policy .   A detailed letter on posting policy has been 
promulgated to the environment which contains the guiding provisions 
for posting management.  Salient aspects  of the same are in following 
paragraphs. 
 (i)       Qualitative Requirement (QR)    All officers are posted on 
Regimental duties in their turn.  For appointments out side regimental 
duties, specific qualific ations has been laid down vide an Army Order.  
Dilution of QR is not acceptable in  the overall interest of the 
organisation except in some specif ic cases with the approval of the 
competent authority. 
(ii)    Exposure and tenur e.    In order to ens ure professional grooming 
and all round development of an officer,  it is endeavoured to ensure 
that the officers are given different kinds of exposure in various types of 
appointments and terrain provided  t hey meet the laid down QRs.  
Efforts are made to ensure that office rs get a chance to serve in all 
Commands and their field and peace t enures are balanced so that 
hardships and experience is equitably shared by all.  The number of 
exposures in each rank in various  types of appointment have been laid 
down.  The approximate tenure in the same in various terrains and 
field/peace locations have also been prolonged. 
 In order to enhance transpar ency in posting and increase 
involvement of officers in their posti ngs Army interacts with all officers 
above 16 years of service while pl anning  their next posting .  For 
officers below 16 years of service interactions for posting are carried 
out through their commanding offi cers.  The policies on posting 
management are adhered to n the Army.  Any deviation from laid down 
instructions is carried out only if in  the interest of the organisation and 
that too with the approval of competent authority.   

  
81 
(B) Navy  
 Appointment Planning and Transfer Norms. Transfers and 
appointments of officers are prom ulgated after due consideration, 
consultation and planning. These cater for meeting service 
requirements, career requirement s and aspirations of individual 
officers, with service requirement s taking primacy. In the normal 
course, such appointments are part of  a chain of transfers. It may be 
appreciated that a single change in the appointment planning can 
trigger a chain reaction affecting a number of units and officers. The 
transfer norms are based on the following broad guidelines:-  
(a)   Officers are given adequate notice for outstation transfers. 
(b)   Optimal utilization of  manpower is always ensured. 
(c)   Service requirements remain  paramount, but due consideration 
is given to the career and pers onal requirements of individuals 
whilst planning their transfers. 
(d)   Officers are not permitted to  select or decline appointments. 
(e)   Appointment in an ashore billet is for a duration of 2 to 3 years. 
(f)   The general stay in a station is 3-5 years, subject to Service 
exigencies. 
Norms on Co-Locating Spouse in Service. It is endeavoured in the 
Navy to post an officer and his spouse to the same station, to the 
extent feasible. This is subject to meeting Service requirements and 
ensuring that the career  requirements of both the individuals are not 
adversely affected.  
(C) Air Force : 
The posting policy amplifies the  following issues. 
(a)    Normal and hard area tenures 
(b)     Compassionate ground posting and screening of postings. 
(c)       Procedural Aspects. 
(d) Postings on superannuation. 
Co-location postings come under the clause of compassionate 
ground postings. The affected officers  are to apply formally for co-
location.  In most cases, the reques t is facilitated.  As per current 
statistics, more than 75% of married lady officers are collocated with 
their spouses.  It has not been feasib le to co-locate the others due to 
service exigencies like:- 
(a) Employability. 
(b) Availability of vacancy 
(c) Career Progression of either spouse” 
 

  
82 
 
 
Armed Forces Headquarters Civil Service (AFHQCS) 
 
 
5.51 When inquired about the responsibilit ies entrusted to the Department of 
Personnel and Training (DOPT) as nodal authority in the matters connected 
with recruitment, regulation of servic e conditions and in the management of 
career development of the officers/staff belonging to the cadre of Armed 
Forces Headquarters Civil Service (AFH QCS) and the monitoring mechanism 
put in place, the DoPT stated as under:   
 
 “The Department of Personnel and training (DoPT) has been entrusted 
with the responsibility of laying dow n broad policy parameters relating 
to recruitment, promotion and seniority pertaining to Central Services in 
general.  Proposals for framing/amendment of recruitment/service rules 
for Gr. A and `B’ post, in accordance with the general policy, require 
concurrence of this department and the UPSC.” 
 
5.52 According to the DOPT, “the respective administrative Ministries as the 
cadre controlling authority ar e required to take appropr iate steps to regulate 
recruitment/service conditions and the management of career development of 
the employees in accordance with the laid down general principles.  Such 
proposals regarding cadre restructuring,  amendment of Recruitment/Service 
Rules etc.  require consultation with t he DOPT in addition to other authorities 
cadre controlling authority in respect of AFHQCS is the Ministry of Defence. 
 
5.53 The relevant guidelines on frami ng/amendment of recruitment rules, 
policy instructions relating to seniorit y, promotion guideli nes etc.  have been 
put on the website of Depar tment of Personnel and Trai ning.  A user friendly 
software programme has been hosted on t he website of DOPT for assisting 
Ministries in framing of recruitment ru les.  A workshop for all Ministries was 
also organized recently on framing of Recruitment Rules. 
 

  
83 
5.54 DOPT is concer ned with the recruitment of the candidates 
recommended for appointment to the vari ous services through Civil Services 
Examination (CSE) conducted by t he Union Public Service Commission 
(UPSC).  The Civil Services Examinati on is conducted by the UPSC annually.  
The Civil Services Examination is a combined examination catering to 
recruitment of Group `A’ and Group `B’ ci vil services.  The Cadre Controlling 
Authorities sourcing their intake of di rect recruits through the Civil Services 
Examination determine the vacancies including vacancies reserved for 
SC/ST/OBC/Physically disabled etc. to be filled through Civil Services 
Examination in the service(s) under t hem and communicate the requisition to 
UPSC. The Union Public Service Commi ssion compiles the total vacancies to 
be filled category wise by summing up the vacancies communicated by 
respective Cadre Controlling Author ities (CCAs).  UPSC conducts the 
Examination and then recommends the candidates against these vacancies in 
two phases as provided in rule 16(4) & 16(5) of Civil Services Examination 
rules (CSE). That after recommendati on by UPSC, DOPT allocates the 
service to the candidates as per thei r rank, preference, medical fitness and 
vacancies available at their turn in various Group A and Group B Services.  
AFHQ is a Group B Service to which candidates are allocated as per the 
procedure mentioned above.  Thos Department plays no role in career 
development of AFHQ.  This respons ibility lies with the concerned Cadre 
Controlling Authority.” 
 
5.55 Following submission of Kargil Re view Committee Report, the Prime 
Minister set up a Group of Ministers (GO M) to review the National Security 
System.  This Group of Ministers had, in paragraph 6.76 of its Report on 
`Reforming the National Security System’, recommended in 2001 “a 
Committee may be set up to look into the issue of better utilization of 
AFHQCS Offices within the Ministry of Defence”.  While elaborating on the 
status of implementati on of recommendations pertaining to management of 
Defence in the GOM Report, the Mini stry of Defence had informed the 
Standing Committee on Defence in Decem ber 2006 that the issue is under 
deliberation with DOPT. 
 

  
84 
5.56 When inquired about the decisi on by DOPT on this specific 
recommendation contained in the aforesaid report of GOM and what is the 
present status of implement ation of that decision, t he representative of DOPT 
stated during oral evidence as under:- 
 
“On a proposal of the Ministry of Defence to earmark four posts of Deputy 
Secretary/Director under the Central Staffing Scheme in the Ministry of 
Defence for the Armed Forces Headquarter Service Officers, a meeting was 
held in the Ministry of Defence on 7.11.2007. 
In the meeting held on 7.11.2007 in which Shri R.K. Ojha, Deputy Secretary 
(CS-I) represented the DOP&T, it was proposed that the Cadre Restructuring 
has been done for the Central Secretariat Service Offices and posts for 
offices of the CSS have been earmarked in all the Central Government 
Central Staffing Scheme.  It was proposed in the meeting that the share of 
posts for the Armed Forces HQ Service could be worked out, by similarly 
earmarking for the Central Secretariat Service. It was further suggested in the 
meeting that out of 68 posts of Deputy Secretary/Director level in the MoD, 37 
are being filled under the Central Staffing Scheme. Therefore, about 10% of 
these posts i.e. 4 posts could be considered for earmarking/encadrement for 
the Armed Forces HQ Service. 
The minutes of the meeting were sent to the EO Division for examination on 
27.6.2008.  The EO had desired to see para 6.76 of the Group of Ministers 
report on National Security. 
Accordingly, the Ministry of Defence was requested to provide a copy of the 
said Report containing para 6.76 on 28.7.2008.  This was followed up with 
two reminders dated 14.08.2008 and 4.9.2008.  However, till date the copy of 
report has not been furnished by the Ministry of Defence.” 
 
5.57 The Committee have been given to  understand that once candidates 
have been recruited under aegis of DOPT to  join AFHQCS, little ownership is 
shown by the DOPT to address any of the problems faced by the cadre, which 
are left to MOD to resolve. 
 
5.58 In this context, when asked to elaborate as to wh ich authority is 
actually entrusted with the responsibilities of controlling the cadre of AFHQCS 
and what specific roles have been assigned to DOPT, Ministry of Defence and 
Armed Forces Headquarters in the ma tters connected with general policy of 
regulation of service conditions, training needs, administrative matters relating 
to transfer/posting/deputation, vigilanc e and disciplinary matters and aspects 
relating to career development of the o fficers/staff belonging to the cadre of 
AFHQCS, DOPT stated as under:- 

  
85 
 
“The appropriate cadre controlling author ity in respect of AFHQCS is 
the Ministry of Defence for regulat ion of service conditions, career 
development of the officers and sta ff & other administrative issues 
relating to transfer, posting deputation vigilance and disciplinary matter.  
The relevant general policy guideli nes issued by the Department of 
Personnel and Training are to be kept in view.” 
 
 
5.59 When asked as to why AFHQCS Officers are not been allowed to go 
on deputation, a representativ e of the DOPT stated dur ing oral evidence as 
under: 
 
“The decision of the ACC in this  matter has been that  only Class I 
officers will be considered in the C entral Staffing Scheme.  So, there 
are no posts available for other t han Class I officers in the Central 
Staffing. 
 As far as the AFHQCS is conc erned, if there are some other 
provisions or some other proposals that they have in mind, they can be 
considered in the Department. But so far, as per the existing policy, 
there is no position available or no quota available to the AFHQCS in 
the Central Staffing Scheme at all”. 
 
 
Establishment of Armed Forces Tribunal 
 5.60  A large number of cases relating to service matter of the members of 
the Armed Forces have been pending in the Courts for a long time. The 
number of cases pending before the Supreme Court and various Courts as on 
31.10.2005 were as under: 
 Supreme Court High Courts 
Army 94  7611 
Navy 12 463 
Air Force 22 1250 
Total 125 9324 
 
5.61 Stressing upon the need for  setting up of an appellate body composed 
of non-military personnel or civil personnel, the Supreme Court in its judgment 
in Prithvi Pal Singh vs Union of India (1982) had observed:- 
“with the expanding horizons of  fair play in action even in administrative 
decisions, the universal declaration of  human rights and retributive justice 
being relegated to the uncivilized days, a time has come when a step is 
required to be taken for at least one re view and it must truly be a judicial 
review by way of appeal to a body composed of non-military personnel or 
civil personnel.” 

  
86 
5.62 In view of the above judgement of Supreme Court as well as the 
recommendation of Law Commission, t he Committee in their Second Report 
on the Demands for Grants (2005-2006) had urged the Ministry to work out a 
new mechanism to deal with all the out standing court cases pertaining to the 
Armed Forces personnel. In pursuance to  this, the Ministry of Defence 
proposed to enact a new legislation by c onstituting an Armed Forces Tribunal 
for the adjudication of complaints and disputes regarding service matters and 
appeals arising out of the verdicts of the court martial of the three services. 
 5.63 The Armed Forces Tribunal Act, 2007 notified on 28 December, 2007 
provides for the adjudication or trial by Armed Forces Tribunal of disputes and 
complaints with respect to commi ssion, appointments,  enrolment and 
conditions of services in respect of persons subject to the Army Act, 1950, the 
Navy Act, 1957 and the Air Force Act, 1950 and also to provide for appeals 
arising out of orders, findings or sentences of court martial held under the said 
Acts and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto. 
 
5.64 The Committee in their 31 st Report (14th Lok Sabha) while stressing on 
establishment of Armed Forces Tribunal had recommended as under:- 
“The Committee understand that one of  the reasons for increasing 
stress in Armed Forces relates to non-availability of quicker appellate 
mechanism to deal with the service related problems and disputes, etc. 
They are, however, distressed to note that despite notification of Armed 
Forces Tribunal Act, 2007 on 28th De cember, 2007, the Ministry of 
Defence have not been able to estab lish the Tribunal even after lapse 
of a period of over nine months. Keepi ng in view the fact that a large 
number of cases relating to servic e matters of the personnel from 
Armed Forces are pending for a long time in various courts of law, the 
Committee are of firm belief that the Armed Forces Tribunal is required 
to be set up expeditiously to provi de quicker relief to the aggrieved 
Defence service personnel.” 
 

  
87 
CHAPTER-VI 
EXIT POLICY 
  
6.1 There are three categories of  officers, who serve and are 
superannuated or are released from service, their brief details are as follows: 
(a) Superannuation-The Armed Forces officers due to the pyramidical 
structure, superannuate bet ween the age of 54 to 60 years, whereas their 
counterpart in the government service, retire at the age of 60 years. Therefore, 
there is a need to bring uniformity and provide assured re-employment 
opportunities, to all Armed Forces officers up to the age of 60 years. 
(b) Pensionable Service   - The minimum period that an Armed Forces 
officer is required to serve for pensionable service, is 20 years. Those officers 
who consider, seek premature reti rement. These officers are young and 
energetic and are at a very critical juncture of life with major domestic 
responsibilities. These officers between the age group of 40 to 54 years, also 
seek assured job opportunities, to keep the service young. 
(c) Short Service Commission - The third category of personnel are 
the ones who have joined service as short service officers. This type of entry 
was started to keep the service young and the base of the pyramid narrow. 
These officers after spending the youth in the Armed Forces, do seek assured 
re-employment avenues on completion of their minimum i.e. five years term. 
 
Premature Retirement(PR)/Resignation of Indian Air Force Officers  
 
6.2 Officers on active Service may wish to leave the Air Force for varied 
personal reasons. It is the endeavour of  Personal Branch at Air Headquarter, 
to give due consideration to all such  requests on the merit of each case and 
seek convergence of individual aspirati ons and service interests. In this 
regard, several policy letters have been i ssued from time to time. However, 
there is a need to issue comprehensive guidelines on the subject and spell out 
involvement at each level in proce ssing of applications  on premature 
retirement (PR)/resignation from the service. 
 The aim of this HRP is to lay down comprehensive guidelines in 
respect of Premature Retirement/Res ignation of commission by Air Force 
Officers. 

  
88 
Grounds for Premature Retirement (PR)/Resignation 
6.3 According to the Ministry of De fence applications for PR/Resignation 
from officers would be considered on me rits of the case and requirements of 
service. PR applications s ubmitted by officers of the rank of Air Commodore 
and below would be decided at the level of Air Officer Personnel (AOP). In 
respect of officers of the rank of  Air Vice Marshal and Air Marshal, the 
applications would be forwarded to Minist ry of Defence for decision. Also, 
application for resignation of commission,  irrespective of rank, would be 
forwarded to MoD for decision.  
 
6.4 As informed by the Ministry of Def ence, the Ministry would consider the 
request for PR/Resignation based on t he recommendations of the CAS as 
under: 
“PR/Resignation on compassionate Grounds. 
Requests for PR/Resignation on compassionate grounds would be 
considered on merit. Officers must attach document in support of their 
grounds. 
PR/Resignation on Medical Grounds 
PR/Resignation on medical grounds would be considered when the 
applicant officer holds a permanent medical category, which is non-
promotable. 
PR/Resignation on Grounds of Supersession 
Request on grounds of supersession will normally be considered only 
after an officer has been finally super seded i.e. he has finished all the 
chances for promotion to the nex t higher select rank. However, 
requests of officers who have not been finally superseded for 
promotion may also be considered, subj ect to the exigencies of service 
and depending on the circumstances and merit of each case. 
Non-effective Benefits 
In accordance with the Pension R egulations, the minimum period of 
qualifying service required to be rendered by Permanent 
Commissioned officers for earning a retiring pension is 20 years. 
Pension is granted at the appropriate  rate, subject to the service 
rendered being satisfactory. For those who have rendered service for 
10 years or more but less than 20 years and have become eligible for 
gratuity, the full gratuity or a percentage thereof  is granted in 
accordance with laid down governm ent policies on the subject. The 
pattern of non-effective benefits fo r PR would continue to be in 
accordance with the policy on the subject.” 
 

  
89 
Criteria for Premature Retirement (PR)/Resignation from Service 
6.5 As informed, the Ministry of De fence has delegated the authority to decide 
upon requests for PR from officers upto the rank of Air Commodore to AOP vide 
GOI, MOD Letter No. 16(8)/2001-D (Air-II) dated 14 Aug, 2001. However, the 
authority to grant permission to resign commission remains with the MoD. Criteria 
for acceptance of requests from Defence Services Officers for PR/ Resignation 
have been laid down by MoD from time to time. The grounds on which 
applications would normally be made are as under:- 
 
“(a) Supersession: PR/Resignation on grounds of supersession in select-
ranks (Acting/Substantive) of Wing Commander and above would be 
favourably considered. Requests from officers not finally superseded, in 
whose cases it is felt by the Air Headquarter that they do not stand a 
reasonable chance of promotion in future on the basis of their record of 
service, would also be considered favourably subject to exigencies of service. 
(b) Extreme Compassionate Grounds Requests on extreme 
compassionate grounds would be considered after the facts represented by 
the officer are verified, to the extent possible, by the Service Headquarter.  
(c) Low Medical Category Requests from service officers whose 
permanent medical category is not low as to justify their invalidment, would be 
favourably considered on merits. 
(d) Better Employment in Civil Life If a service officer applies for 
premature retirement within a period of one year before the due date of 
superannuation for obtaining employment in private sector, the request would 
normally be acceded to.  For employment under public sector, Government 
controlled Corporation, Municipal Corporations etc., requests within a period 
of two years from superannuation  would be considered as a measure of 
rehabilitation assistance to the officers. 
(e) Participation in Political Activities  Applications for PR on 
this ground will be rejected. 
(f) Lack of Career Prospects A person seeking a career in the Air 
Force is expected to be aware of his career prospects at the time of his entry 
into the service. During his career, if an officer feels that he has no prospects 
for advancement in service, he may apply for PR/Resignation. However, the 
lack of career prospects of an Officer will be ascertained by the ‘P’ branch 
based on the inputs available with the Air HQ. Also, cases of officers having 
expertise/specialisation in certain specific fields would be dealt with 
circumspection.  
(g) Failure to Pass Promotion Exam C - Officers who, even after 
due efforts, fail to qualify in Promotion Examination ‘C’ or any such 
examination, as specified and are required to be retired/removed from service 
with reference to Rule ‘17’ of Air Force Rules 1969, would be considered for 
premature retirement, if they apply for PR. However, each case would be 
examined on its merit, so as to ensure that no officer misuses these criteria 
for seeking a release from service. 
(h) Evincing Lack of Interest in Service - This would not be a good and 
sufficient reason for Premature Retirement/Resignation. 

  
 
90 
 
(j) Officers trained in specialised courses  - Application for Premature 
Retirement/Resignation of officers who have been trained in specialised 
courses at Government expense, will not be considered before the expiry of 
the minimum period indicated below. However, due to extreme 
circumstances, if an officer’s application for PR/Resignation is considered by 
the Air HQs, then the officer would be required to repay the cost of training for 
the unutilised portion of the post-course utilisation period. 
 
(i) Courses abroad up to 6 months duration - 3 years 
 (ii) Courses abroad of over 6 months duration - 5 years 
 (iii) Study leave in India and abroad  - 3 years 
 (iv) Courses in India of over 6 months duration - 5 years.” 
 
Retention Incentives 
 
6.6 Details of retention incentives being offered by other countries as 
furnished by the Service are as under:- 
 
United States 
• Developed a multifaceted plan in 1990 
• Aviator bonus continuation pay (ACP)-Retention bonus starts from 8th 
year of service 
• Increase Aviator Career Incentive Pay-Flying pay or ACIP-Increases 
with increase in pay and continues even when pilot is in senior non-
flying assignments. 
- Major’s pay - $6000 
- F Pay  - $850 
- R Bonus - $2000 starting from 8 th year of  
    service  (33% of pay and 2.5 times  
    flying pay) 
France 
• 3000 pilot strength 
• 20 pilots a year join Air France (25 % fighter pilots) 
• Six years before completion of tenure FAF converts pilots wanting to 
separate 
• Contract Pilot – 17 years of service extendable to 20 years 
• Career Pilots – 54 years of age 
• Both categories are pensionable 
• FAF pilots pilot’s pay 4000 Euros (equivalent to pay of a civil pilot in a 
low cost budget European airline)
 
• Air France pay-7000 Euros. Governed by an agreement between FAF 
and Air France endorsed by their Defence Ministry.
 

  
91 
United Kingdom 
• Financial retention initiative introduced in RAF in 2002. 
• Highly successful 
• An RAF officer on attaining the age of 38 paid a lump sum of 
100,000/- for staying in service for five additional years. 
Israel 
 Retention Bonus for signing up for additional 5 years is:- 
• A Major will get US $ 10000 + New Car (Hyundai Accent +unlimited fuel) 
• A Lt. Col. will get US $ 15000 + new Mazda 5 Estate Car +unlimited fuel  
• A Col will get US $20000 + new car (dependant on family size) + 
unlimited fuel+driver 
• Pilots will get double retention amount (according to rank) +unlimited fuel 
+ car on lease + after 3 years new car 
• Submariners, Commandos & UAV pilots will get 1.5 times retention 
amount +unlimited fuel + car on lease + after 3 years new car 

  
92 
CHAPTER VII 
 
DIRECTORATE GENERAL OF RESETTLEMENT (DGR) 
 
7.1 DGR under the Department of Ex-Servi cemen (ESM) Welfare, Ministry of 
Defence is primarily responsible for resettlement and rehabilitation of ESM who retire 
at much younger age compared to their civilian counterparts by providing 
employment and self-employment opportunities.  Resettlement of ESM is the joint 
responsibility of both the Central and State Governments. It is clarified that, though 
the DGR was established in the year 1968, with the assigned roll of welfare and 
rehabilitation of ESM, widows and dependents, the Secretariat of Kendriya Sainik 
Board (KSB) was placed under the aegis of DGR in the year 1982.  A High Level 
Committee, headed by Shri KP Singh Deo was formed to study the problems of ESM 
and the functioning of DGR and Secretariat of KSB.  The Committee submitted the 
report in October 1984, where in the requirement of maintaining a data bank in 
suitable electronic form was brought out in the report. 
 
 
7.2 After the Indo-Pak wars of 1965, 1971 and 1999 Kargil war, the problems of 
resettlement, rehabilitation and welfare of war widows and personnel disabled in 
action have  assumed greater proportions.  Following the rapid expansion of defence 
forces, the number of ESM is also growi ng gradually year to year.  Presently, about 
60,000 defence personnel retire from the serv ice in a year.  Over the years the 
problems of ESM have been growing  rapidly.  The socio-economic changes, break 
up to joint family system, competition in market and increase in cost of living are 
some of the contributing factors.  Other problems of Ex-Servicemen (ESM) are 
normally related to their land holdings, pension related problems, medical facilities 
and children’s education. 
 
 
7.3 There are about 25 lac ESM and widows presently registered with the Sainik 
Board Organisation of the country.  Kendriya Sainik Board (the designation as such 
was introduced in 1951) is the apex body at the Central  level headed by Hon’ble 
Raksha Mantri.  The Board in its annual meetings lays down policy guidelines and 
schemes for the welfare of ESM which are to be implemented by the Central and 
State Governments.  It is pertinent, that the Centre and the States/UTs are jointly 
responsible for the resettlement and welfare of ESM.  

  
93 
7.4 Not withstanding the same, the comp ilation of data for registering ESM 
for employment has been ongoing proce ss in DGR/RSBs/ZSBs since 1994, 
albeit manually.  A total of 7,55,637 ESM  have been registered since 1994.  
The registration by ESM is a volunt ary and not a mandator y process.  The 
data is authentic to the ext ent that it is furnished by the various RSBs/ZSBs.  
As far as the number of WSM who has been employed, the record is being 
maintained in the DGR w.e.f year 2003.   
 
 
Ex-Servicemen commission 
 
7.5 When asked, whether the Ministry  of Defence are contemplating of 
setting up of a Commission for the Ex-s ervicemen,  a representative of 
Ministry of Defence stated during oral evidence as under: 
“In principle, the proposal has been cleared by the RM”. 
  
Natural Disaster Organisations 
 
7.6 About the suitabilit y of the Ex-servicemen for the Organisations 
related to natural disaster, a non-official witness stated as under: 
 
“Now that we have formed this Natural Disasters Organization, it should be 
largely manned by the Ex-Servicemen”.  
 
7.7 When asked about the details of m edical  and other fa cilities, if any, 
being made available to Ex-servicemen not  eligible to get pension after their 
retirement from service, the Ministry of Defence submitt ed in their written 
replies as under: 
“Provision of medical facilities dealing with  Ex servicemen has the  following 
twin conditions:- 
(a) Individual should have status of ESM. 
(b) Individual should be drawing pension of some kind 
Thus retired SSC personnel who are drawing a pension of any kind 
are entitled to medical facilities from the Armed Forces Medical 
Service(AFMS). For others, emergency medical services are provided when 
required and they may be provided indoor services as no-entitled, depending 
upon the availability of facilities”.
 
 

  
94 
One-Rank-One-Pension 
 
 7.8 The Finance Minister in his budget speech has announced that 
Government has fulfilled the long st anding need for retired Armed Forces 
Personnel Below Officer Rank (PBOR) for better pensionary benefits and 
about 12 lakh PBOR have benefited to  the tune of Rs. 460 crore w.e.f. 
January, 2006. 
 
 
7.9 During examination of Demands for Grants (2006-07), in reply to a 
question on details of pensionary benefits, the Ministry of Defence informed 
the Committee as under: 
 “With effect from 1.1.2006, t he weightage for the purpose of 
calculations of pension for past as we ll as future retirees Sepoy, Naik 
and Havildar and equivalent ranks in Navy and Air Force has been 
increased from 5 years to  10, 8 and 6 years respectively subject to a 
maximum qualifying service of 30 year s. In case a person is getting 
more than 30 years with existing we ightage of 5 years he will continue 
getting that. The above benefits would be only in respect of service 
pension including invalid pension, serv ice element of disability pension 
and war injury pension. In additi on, pension of Personnel Below 
Officers Rank (PBOR) granted Assu red Career Progression (ACP) 
upgradation would be computed with reference to the enhanced pay 
scale granted under ACP. The abov e benefits would meet the demand 
of the ex-servicemen to a large ex tent as revision of pension with 
reference to maximum pay of t he post—1.1.1996 pay scales in the 
case of pre—1.1.1996 retirees would in effect mean parity in pension 
between pre and post—1.1.1996 reti ree PBOR. The long standing 
demand of ‘one rank one pension’  has been examined by the 
Government. Considering the rele vant factors and various aspects 
including additional financial liability and repercussions elsewhere, it 
has not been found feasible to accept the demand. However, 
Government has significantly improved pensionary benefits of PBOR.” 
 
 7.10 During oral evidence, the repres entatives of the Ministry stated:  
 
“There will be outgo of Rs. 460 crore per annum in providing pension 
as per the new scheme. In implem entation of one rank one pension 
scheme Rs. 1200–1300 crore will be the out go as annual attrition is 
about 55 to 60 thousand personnel. It is an upward going curve for 
pension because the retired people ar e 23 lacs, whereas our standing 
army is 14 lacs, therefore, the outgo is going to increase further.” 
 

  
95 
 
7.11  During the oral evidence, Pr esident of Indian Ex-Services League 
stated: 
 
“ As far as welfare points are concerned, we have plenty of them. In a 
nutshell, I would like to say that parity in pension, which have been claiming 
or the last three decades, that is, one rank one pension. Secondly 50 per cent 
pay as pension. You know all the civilian retirees get 50 per cent pension of 
their pay. Whereas army person do not do that. One main difficulty is our 
jawans are retired compulsorily. ….Actually I would like to say it is very 
important that jawans must be looked after. He is the main person who fights 
the war. To my mind officers can look after themselves. They are educated.” 
 
7.12 During oral evidence another non-official expert stated on the issue of 
Ex-Servicemen as under: 
“There are two major aberration in the implementation of the Fifth Pay 
Commission. They need to be set right. The clause that a PBOR must complete 
33 years of service to be able to earn full pension needs to be abolished. 
Although some money has now been given, I have heard that it is not meeting the 
requirement…….There was another aberration, which made people to go to the 
Supreme Court. When the pensions were finalised, some Major Generals got 
lesser pension than Brigadiers. This has made them unhappy. They went to the 
Supreme Court. These kinds of aberrations are disheartening. Out of these, the 
first one is more important.” 
 
7.13 In their Action Taken Reply, on the observations/recommendations 
contained in the 16 th Report of the Committee on Demands for Grants (2007-
08), the Ministry of Defence had s ubmitted the following information on 
providing full pensionary benefits:  
“The issue of removal of 33 years of condition and/or enhancement of 
weightage to the extent of making Armed Forces personnel eligible for full 
pension admissible for 33 years qualifying service was considered in detail by 
the Government. Considering all relevant factors including financial 
implications and repercussions elsewhere, a conscious view was taken to 
enhance the weightage in the case of Sepoy, Naik and Havildar to 10, 8 and 
6 years respectively subject to maximum qualifying service of 30 years. 
However, if a person is getting pension for more than 30 years with the 
weightage of 5 years, he will continue to get that. It has not been found 
feasible to grant benefit for 33 years qualifying service to the Personnel below 
Officer’s Rank (PBOR) irrespective of length of actual qualifying service 
rendered.”  
 

  
96 
 
Withdrawal of Army from deployment in counter insurgency operations 
 
7.14 On withdrawal of Army from deployment in counter insurgency 
operations, the Committee in their 22 nd Report (14 th Lok Sabha) had 
recommended as under:- 
“The Committee note the views expressed by Subramanyam 
Committee in their report regarding deployment of army in counter 
insurgency operations to tackle terrorist problems in various parts of 
the country and other internal security  problems. As pointed out by the 
Subramanyam Committee, army’s prolonged deployment in counter-
insurgency role adversely affects its training programme which leads to 
fatigue and the development of mind-set that detracts from its primary 
role. Also, the State Governments and Para Military Forces tend to 
assume that army will always be ther e to combat insurgency. The net 
result of all this has been to reduce the role of the Indian army to the 
level of Para Military Fo rces and the Para Military Forces in turn to the 
level of an ordinary Police Force.  The view of the Subramanyam 
Committee is that the involvement of army in the counter-insurgency 
operations adversely affects its preparedness for its primary role, which 
is to defend the country against ex ternal aggression. The Committee, 
therefore, feel that army should be immediately withdrawn from internal 
security duties and this should be handled by Central Para Military 
Forces, Central Reserve Police Forc e and the State Police forces. The 
Committee desire that a fixed ti me schedule should be drawn up to 
withdraw army from counter-insurgency duties, etc. gradually.” 
 
7.15 In response to the above recommendat ions, the Ministry of Defence in 
their Action Taken Reply had stated as under:- 
“The Government agrees with the vi ews of the Committee with regard 
to the fact that it is not desirable to deploy Armed Forces for prolonged 
period for internal security duties. In  principle, the Ministry of Defence 
and the Indian Army should focus ex clusively on external military 
threats, while internal security  should be mandate of the MHA. The 
dimension and nature of internal threats have in cases like J&K 
enlarged, beyond the realm of  Aid to Civil Authority. The role of the 
Indian Army in such situations as  also in insurgency / militancy like 
situation such as those prevalent in the North East, is to bring down the 
violence to ‘manageable levels’ to enable the normal State apparatus 
to start functioning in a secu red environment. Considering the 
complexities of internal securi ty issues and dynamic changes in 
emerging law and order issues, a c onstant dialogue is held with MHA 
from time to time. The Indian Army can, and is, assisting in 
strengthening existing Police mechanism  by way of training of core 
groups of Police and Central Police Or ganisations, as also in acquiring 
the services of retired personnel to provide assistance.” 
 

  
97 
 
Lateral Induction of Ex-Servicemen  
 
7.16 On lateral induction of Ex-Servicemen, the Committee in their 22 nd 
Report of 14th Lok Sabha had recommended as under:- 
“However, the Committee have noted the views of the Subramanyam 
Committee which state that the Para Military Forces are not trained and 
equipped to deal with border terrorism by well trained mercenaries armed with 
sophisticated equipment continuously infiltrating across the border/LoC. The 
Committee would, therefore, reiterate their recommendation that the ex-
servicemen should be inducted into the Central Para Military Forces as well 
as State Police Forces to tackle all these problems as they are professionally 
qualified to handle all sorts of arms and ammunitions and have first hand 
experience of these problems at the border during their active service in the 
army. This would save the Government a lot of money in training Central Para 
Military Forces and Police Forces to handle the weapons and fire arms etc. 
The induction of ex-servicemen in Central Para Military Forces and the State 
Police Force will also save the Government’s huge amount in pension and 
other liabilities. The Committee, therefore, desire that this suggestion of the 
Committee should be implemented in the right earnest at the earliest. The 
action taken in the matter should be intimated to the Committee.” 
 
7.17 In response to the above recommendat ion, the Ministry of Defence in 
their Action Taken Reply had stated as under: 
“Reservation for ex-servicemen @ 10% in Group ‘C’ and 20% in Group ‘D’ 
already exists in the Central Para Military Forces (CPMFs), which has 
however not been fully utilized by ex-servi cemen, in the past. Induction of ex-
servicemen in State Police Forces is a subject matter pertaining to States. 
Moreover, CPFs are experiencing adverse fall-out of higher age profile, where 
a large number of Bns have been raised in recent years. While need for a 
fighting fit Army cannot be ignored requiring lower age profile, in times of 
peace it is the CPFs which bear the responsibility of securing the International 
borders and fighting insurgents, terrorists, extremists etc. Considering the fact 
that induction and retirement age in CPFs is higher than Army, any fresh 
move that would result in raising of age profile of CPFs would further 
compromise their operational efficiency. In addition to operational issues, 
there are other factors to be considered like 
¾ There being no reservation for SC, ST, OBCs in the Army which has 
constitutional implications. 
¾ Need to modify the recruitment rules. 
¾ Promotional avenues of CPF personnel, etc. 
This being a complex problem is being reviewed by Ministry of Home Affairs 
in consultation with Ministry of Defence as per decision in a meeting of the 
EMC held on 1st July, 2008.” 

  
98 
 
CHAPTER-VIII 
INFUSION OF HI-TECH TRAINING AND INFRASTRUCTURE 
 
8.1 The issues of training are closel y related to maintaining a motivated 
and highly skilled force. Training is in creasingly becoming high-tech with the 
advent of technological development  and the fast changing nature and 
concept of warfare.  Nuclearisation and Revolution in Milit ary Affairs(RMA) 
have added new dimensions to it.  
Technological advancement and steps taken by the Armed Forces 
8.2 Elaborating on the technological advancement in the Armed Forces 
world over and specific steps being ta ken by defence establishment to keep 
pace with such advancements, the Ministry  of Defence in their written note 
stated as under: - 
“Army 
(a) Technological advancements in the Indian Army are comparable to 
 the armies of rest of the world.  Hi-tech training is spaced commencing from 
 intake to the mid/senior service level officers progressively. 
(b) Army personnel are provided opportunities to attend courses which 
include B. Tech., Cyber Security, Computer sciences, Cryptology,  Armament 
and Tank Technology, Remote Sensing and Digital image  processing etc in 
various universities and colleges of repute like Indian Institute of Technology 
(IIT), Jawaharlal Nehru University (JNU), Defence Institute of Advanced 
Technology (DIAT), Pune, Bhabha Atomic Research Centre (BARC) as well 
as Indian Space Research Organisation (ISRO).  
Navy 
The Navies world over are becoming more and more technologically 
advanced by way of state of art weapon systems, communication networks, 
RADAR and SONAR and Network Centric Operations.  Indian Navy is 
keeping pace with the advancement of technology by inducting the state of art 
equipment for frontline Indian Naval Ships. Following measures are being 
taken for infusion of Hi-Tech training: - 
(a) Navy in collaboration with JNU has drawn up a curriculum that would 
not only provide adequate academic grounding for award of B. Tech degree 
but would also cater for over-all development of a service officer with the right 
mix of humanities, physical training, adventure activities and leadership 
building programmes. 
 (b) The Naval Training, keeping its aim of training any time anywhere 
have also taken up the latest technological innovations.  Simulators have 
been and are being inducted both by in-house fabrication and through 
external sources to ensure effective training, E-learning is being given 
adequate thrust to ensure anytime anywhere concept.   
(c) An allocation of Rs 500 crores has been made in the XI th Plan to 
procure new induction equipment for training schools. 

  
99 
 
(d) Affiliation of M.Tech. studies at Naval College of Engineering at INS 
Shivaji by IIT Powai, recognition of TMC at College of Naval Warfare by 
Jamunalal Bajaj Institute of Management, Mumbai, Naval Architecture by 
CUSAT, Diploma to Artifices from Shivaji and Valsura by AICTE etc. 
 
Air Force  
 
There have been a large number of technological advancements made in the 
last few years that have added great potency to the Air Forces all over the world. 
Technological advancements have also been made in the Indian Air Force. The 
IAF has made considerable progress in application of Information Warfare, 
Network Centric Warfare and the major components of the Revolution in 
Military Affairs (RMA). RMA is a major change in the nature of warfare 
brought about by the innovative application of new technologies. With the 
Integrated Air Command and Control System (IACCS) and Air Force Net 
(AFNET) nearing completion the net centricity of the IAF will be at par with the 
most advanced Air Forces of the world. With the induction of Aerostats and 
planned induction of AWACS the application of the Air Dominance Concept is 
within IAF capability. The concept of Precision Strikes has been enhanced by 
successful integration of Beyond Visual Range (BVR) weapons in all 
categories 
i.e. Air to Air and Air to Ground.” 
 
 
8.3 In order to meet t he changing security threat more effectively, the 
Armed forces are required to be advanced in electronic, nuclear, chemical and 
biological warfare.  In this contex t, when asked to state the training and 
infrastructure facilities being upgraded in the terms of capabilities, the Ministry 
in their written reply stated as follows:- 
“Well equipped training facilities for Nuclear Biological and Chemical 
(NBC) warfare are available with all t he three services in order to meet 
the stringent and specific requirements of each service. While the Navy 
possesses a Nuclear, Biological,  Chemical and Damage Control 
School at Indian Naval Ship (INS) Shivaji, Lonavla, which facilitates 
comprehensive training for all office rs and men, the Army has such a 
dedicated organisation at the College of Military Engineering (CME), 
Pune and the Air Force (AF) at Air Force  Station, Arjangarh.  All 
facilities are being progressively upgr aded in order to remain in tune 
with the dynamic requirements of  the environment.  For enhanced 
synergy amongst the Tri Services, an Armed Forces Training Institute 
(AFTI) is also in an advanced stage of establishment.” 

  
100 
8.4 Explaining the details of the hi-t ech training being imparted to officers 
and PBOR as per their service requiremen t, the Ministry of Defence in their 
written reply stated: 
 “All three services have kept pace with the induction of state of the art 
equipment through extensive upgrades in  technology intensive training 
aids.  Computer Based Training (CBT) packages have been introduced 
at all levels and remains an ongoing process in order to meet the 
challenges of the future effectively.   Specifically, the Armed Forces 
have vigorously pursued extensive establishment of Information 
Technology (IT) and networking assets to enhance training standards 
and provide flexibility in the process and scope of training”. 
 
Technical Education 
8.5 On being asked about the steps taken to enhance technical education 
for other ranks, both combatants and non-combatants, the Ministry of Defence 
in their written reply stated as under: 
“Army 
 The Army have taken several steps to enhance the technical 
education of Other Ranks (ORs). These include incorporation of 
Computers and Information Technology (I T) in the syllabus of various 
courses which the ORs undergo duri ng their career progression. 
Simulators and IT-related training aids are being utilized extensively 
during the technical training of recruits. 
Navy  
  The intake qualifications of all sailors have been enhanced w.e.f. 
Aug 2007. All the Matric tr ades have been enhanced to Senior 
Secondary (10+2) and the Non Matric  Trades (except Topass sailors) 
have been made Matric. Even the Topass sailors, who were required to 
be only literate so far, are r equired to be Class VI passed now. 
Consequently, the training curriculum and syllabi in the service has 
been revised in tandem with the higher  educational level intake to 
enhance technical education. 
Air Force 
Following steps have been undertaken in order to enhance the 
technical education for other ranks. 
(a) On the job training in Computer application is being imparted. 
(b) Defence Institute of Advanced Technology (Deemed University) 
at Pune has started conduc ting a Diploma Course on 
Information Technology of 13 weeks duration.”   

  
 
101 
8.6 When asked about the sanctioned and existing strength of officers and 
PBOR and approximate number of officers and PBOR being sent for various 
types of training in Army, Navy and Air Force, the Ministry of Defence in their 
written reply furnished the following information:-  
“Sanctioned and existing strength of officers and PBOR in Army, Navy and Air 
Force:- 
 Officers PBOR 
 Sanctioned  Existing  Shortage Sanctioned  Existing Shortage 
Army 46614 35495 11119 11,05,038 10,97,021 8017 
Navy 8945 7586 1359 51313 48286 3027 
Air 
Force 
12120 10768 1354 130992 118336 12656 
 
Approximate number of officer and PBORs being sent for various types 
of training per year:- 
 
 Officers PBORs 
Army 8670 18,700 
Navy 407 2320 
Air Force 305 7200 
 
8.7 Replying to a question as to how shortage of Officers/PBOR leads to 
shortage in the training strength in all t he institutions, the Ministry of Defence 
in their written reply stated:- 
“In the Army, shortage of offi cers coupled with deployment on 
operational tasks in Counter Insurgen cy/Line of Actual Control/Line of 
Control, impacts the training str ength in training institutions. The 
existing shortages do not lead to under subscription of in-service 
courses in the Air force.  In the Navy, while the s hortage of induction 
targets has a bearing on the strengt h of trainees undergoing training, 
the training is not affected by t he overall shortage of officers and 
sailors.” 
 
8.8 Explaining the constraints of manpow er to spare more for training, the 
representatives of Naval Headquarters, during oral evidence stated: - 
 
“My task is to man a Navy and the front end of the ships have to be 
manned first, the fighting end. Once we do that, then we spread the 
balance manpower in manning the other  places to run the Navy. So, 
perhaps, if manpower accretions come the way that we expect them to, 
we will be able to spare more pers onnel for training effort and that 
should also further improve the quality of training that we have.  
 

  
102 
8.9 In reply to  a specific query regar ding training capacity of services in 
case shortage of vacancies are filled up in one time induction, the Ministry of 
Defence in their written reply stated: 
“The present cadre shortages are primarily due to the one time 
sanction of 12,676 posts.   These pos ts cannot be filled up in one year 
due to the limitations of traini ng capacity and problems of cadre 
management which arise due to large one time inductions.” 
  
8.10 On being asked  the adequacy of the training institutions and need to 
expand them, the representat ives of the Air Force during their deposition 
before the Committee stated:- 
 “The Air Force Academy is training for the basic stage only, the basic 
flying stage. After that the Pilots ar e trifurcated and sent  out to various 
training systems to Hyderabad or Bangalore for specialised training, so, 
we have the infrastructure to train t he number of pilots.  At present, the 
present system is adequate.  If the in take increases, definitely, we 
would have to expand the infrastructure. The plan is already there.  We 
have already taken it up with the headquarters and they, in turn, have 
taken it up with the Ministry to increase at least one squadron about 
120 cadets.  We can increase on squadron of 120 cadets without very 
large increase in infrastructure.”  
 
8.11 The representative of Ai r Force further stated:-  
“…..You are well aware that for the pr esent time the infrastructure is 
adequate.  Of course, it is being upgraded in terms of computers, 
better learning systems, simulators, etc. but for the future, we will be 
short.  Our strength of the intact depends on how much infrastructure 
we have; how many people at a time can we take on.  For this we 
have already taken   up for increase of infrastructure to the tune of 
about Rs.540 crore as far as our tr aining institutes are concerned but 
you will also appreciate that it take s time and   during that time our 
requirement will keep increasing.  So we will be a little short by four to 
five years in terms of capacity percentage”. 
 
 

  
103 
Infusion of Hi-Tech Training and Infrastructure in Army 
8.12  As regard the infusion of hi-tech training and infrastructure in Army, the 
Ministry of Defence furnished the following information in their written note:- 
“Advent of modern technologies has impacted method of training in a 
significant manner.  Simulators and computer based training procedures have 
brought about changes in syllabus and duration of training capsules.  Latest 
technological advances for improving training standards of cadets/recruits in 
the Army are continually being impl emented.  Electronic targets have been 
introduced in firing ranges.  Computerised small arms training systems are 
being used for realistic sub unit level training in battle craft.  Modern audio 
visual systems are given wide usage in all the training centres of the Army.  
Computer labs, Computer based training packages and use of Internet is 
being given special emphasis in all training centres of recruits/cadets. 
Computerised modern training aids like small arms training system, 
simulators for practice on Air Defence target, computerised war gaming with 
realistic casualty ratios of men and equipment factored in, suitably imposed 
on terrain parameters have been introduced in the last few years.  In addition, 
wide varieties of other simulators like driving simulators, control of fire, mortar 
trainer etc have been introduced over a period of time.  Highly specialised 
state of art simulators are also being used for training in complex weapons 
platforms like tanks, helicopters and electronic warfare systems. Moreover 
`War Centres’, are being established, where virtual battles can be fought by 
adversaries in real time followed by an interactive sessions to bring out the 
lessons learnt. Policy on implementation of e-learning in Army was issued in 
August 2005.  It envisaged implantation of e-learning in three phases.  In first 
phase, selected course material is being converted in electronic form and 
made available for non contact distance learning.  In the second phase, 
manpower will graduate to web based learning.  The third phase i.e. by 2012 
is intended to have completely interactive virtual classrooms.  E-learning 
would endeavour to encourage web based training and deliver digitised 
course material to the officers posted far away from training establishments, 
thus,  saving on number of man hours wasted in to and fro journey to the 
training institutions. To provide necessary  impetus to implementation of this 
important tool for training an IT Advisory Group has been constituted by DGIS 
on the orders of the Vice Chief of Army Staff (VCOAS).  Various boards of 
officers have been convened to speed up implementation of different facets of 
e-learning.  Various training institutions have commenced the process to 
identify the course content which can be converted to digital format. In 
addition, courses for higher level technical training are also being subscribed 
to in various Indian Institutes of Technology, Indian Institutes of Science for 
providing opportunities to selected officers for upgrading their skills by 
admissions in Post Graduate Degree courses.  IIT, Kharagpur is also offering 
PhD in certain niche technology to defence officers.” 

  
104 
 
8.13 On being asked about the need for expansion/restructuring of training 
institutions to meet out the short ages, the representativ e of Army stated 
during oral evidence: 
 
“I will tackle this in two phases.  One is the training for PBOR which 
starts from the basic military trai ning, goes on to specialised skilled 
training, upgraded training and subsequent ly super-skilled training.   
Now, we are constantly revising all these training and as of now, we 
have gone for the format of e-learning which will be in place in the next 
couple of years.  It will not only shor ten the training duration but also 
enhance the capability level that  will come through with it.  
Simultaneously, we are also seeing t hat the basic entry level of PBOR 
has been enhanced.  At the entry also, we are making them to take a 
written test which was not there earlie r.  Now the entry level is also 
better and we are constantly in the process of revising the 
establishment and the trai ning system.  As I said, the most important 
thing is that e-learning will be introduced in a couple of years.” 
 
  
8.14 When asked to explain the r easons for long time taken for 
introduction of  e-learning, the Vice Chief of Army Staff during evidence 
stated as under:- 
  
“There are no constraint in the training”:   
 
Delegation of power to Army Headquarters for purchasing equipment  
 
8.15 On being asked about the aspects  relating to availability of 
infrastructure and speedy decision maki ng, a representative of Army stated 
during oral evidence: 
“Available infrastructure is not  adequate. We need to increase and 
increase it with speed.  The decision-making is the one that is taking 
place. Decision making should be dec entralised so that you can move 
in a faster time-frame”.   
 
8.16 In reply to a question about the utility of high-tech infrastructure in 
reducing deployment of manpower and effective surveillance, the 
representative of Army deposed as under:- 
 
 

  
105 
 
“With regard to infrastructure that will have to come up within the Army, 
especially high-tech infrastructure, they must be decentralised up to the Army 
headquarters. ….I will give an example of technology in 3 Corps. We recently 
got Electronic Warfare (EW) equipment. Now with the help of this EW 
equipment which is state of the art we are able to pinpoint eight figure grid 
reference in case a terrorist or a militant is making any particular intercept. 
Based on that, I make a UAV run. The UAV’s live input is coming into my 
computer or in my Ops Room. Simult aneously it is going to the Ops Room. 
The hit squad is sitting there. Now it is confirmed by two different sources - 
the EW and the UAV which is also giving you the picture of the thing. The hit 
squad goes and eliminates. Only ten men are required to finish those three 
people. Earlier, we had a coordinate of five kilometres of mountainous and 
jungle terrain. We sent one brigade to look for a needle in the hay stack”. 
 
8.17 Asked about the need for  better infr astructure, the representative of 
Army deposed  as under: 
“There is a need to upgrade these with better infrastructure, technology 
and facilities. Some newer projec tions have also been made – like the 
JCO and MCOs academies are being rais ed. Joint training is also 
being given the impetus”. 
 
8.18 Further clarifying about I-Tech track and its effect to reduce cost of 
training, the representative of Army stated: 
 
“This is the training.  What I am trying to say here is that training is the real 
shadow of war.  In case, it is not made as dark as possible, then, we will 
suffer.  Therefore, it is going to be costly but in the long run if we have 
simulators, war gaming and various other IT infrastructure, it would turn out to 
be cheaper”. 
 
8.19 On being asked about the availab ility of the training equipment like 
simulators and other IT infrastructure, the representative of Army stated as 
follows: 
“They are coming in but it is taking time. Actually, the first line equipment 
is so costly and thereafter, the replacements are not coming. So, 
therefore, these simulators are required wherein he acquires certain 
amount of efficiency and then, he has the feel of the actual equipment 
and he goes. These are the things that  are already coming in. We are 
also looking at delegating the authorit y or the powers or  the workload of 
the officers to them.  We are trying to  train our officers in a manner that 
they adapt themselves to the techni cal aspects of warfare in such a 
manner that they can relieve the officers in the discharge of their duties.”   

  
106 
 
Depleting Strength of Field Firing Ranges 
 
8.20 During the evidence bef ore the Committee on 4 th December, 2007 
representative of the Army stated that due to non clear ance of forest land and 
Supreme Court Judgement thereon, training to combat  forces were being 
affected adversely.  In this context, the Ministry of Defence, in their written 
reply stated as follows:-  
“At one point of time, Army had a total of 104 Field Firing Ranges (FFRs) 
comprising of 12 acquired Ranges and 92 notified Ranges. However, in case 
of 52 out of the 92 notified Ranges, the relevant State Government 
notification has expired, leaving only 40 notified Ranges available to the Army 
for carrying out field firing practices. Consequent to the enactment of Forest 
Conservation Act, 1980 and Supreme Court rulings in 2002, it has become 
binding on State Governments to obtain the clearance of Ministry of 
Environment and forests to permit use of forest land for non-forest use.  
Though field firing by Services is not mentioned as a non-forest activity under 
the Forests Act, it is considered as such. Accordingly, the Army is liable to 
pay huge amounts as Compensatory Afforestation and Net Present Value for 
obtaining the re-notification of the Firing Ranges by the concerned State 
Governments. Due to progressive de-notification of Firing Ranges, availability 
of training areas is gradually decreasing. By 2014, it is expected that only 7 
notified Field Firing Ranges would be available to the Army for training. 
Ministry of Defence has initiated the process of consultation with all stake 
holders in order to find a mutually acceptable solution to the issue”. 
 
Infusion of High-tech Training in Indian Navy  
 
8.21 Explaining about the arrangement s made for training of Naval 
Personnel to handle the state-of-the-art equi pment, the Ministry of Defence in 
their written reply stated as under: 
 
“The Indian Navy has a two-tier training pattern to meet its objective to train 
the man for his next job, just enough, just in time’.  This comprises of Ab-initio 
training and Advance training and specialization courses provided only to 
those capable of shouldering greater responsibilities and with a potential for 
further promotions. The training of officers is generally broad based with an 
integrated approach as the officers are required to shoulder leadership and 
managerial responsibilities at every stage of their career.  The sailors are 
vertically specialized primarily due to their limited responsibilities and shorter 
duration of initial engagement as compared to the Officers.  Broad based 
capsules on leadership and management are provided to selected sailors 
prior to their promotion to higher ranks. The training for officers and sailors 
are undertaken as Ab-initio Training – Officers, Specialisation Courses 
(Officers), Ab-initio Training (Sailors and advance Courses (Sailors)”.  
 

  
107 
Modernisation of infrastructure and infusion of Hi-tech Training in Indian Navy 
 
8.22 The training curriculum and methodol ogy is reviewed continuously to 
keep pace with advancement in technol ogy, introduction of new generation 
equipment and systems and enhanced qualific ations of the personnel.  
Consequently, adequate thrust is given to  Simulators and Computer Based 
Training (CBT) in the Navy. According to  Ministry of Defence, some such 
areas are as follows: - 
(a) “Simulators generate various real  time scenarios, which in turn 
enable the operators and maintainers to have a practical 
experience of the equipment.  Al though simulators cannot be a 
substitute for live equipment’ they are an effective training aid.  
The simulated training is subs equently reinforced with the On 
Job Training on live equipment.  All training establishments in 
the Navy have been installed with simulators for the major 
systems/equipment. 
(b) The CBTs are comprehensive, exhaustive and contain modules 
to suit various levels of training. The development of these CBTs 
is aimed at giving an insight  into the highly complex 
equipment/weapons using extensive animations; real life videos 
shot onboard the naval ships, dr awings, circuit diagrams and 
text.  The CBTs have proved to be excellent training aids for all 
levels of trainees for equipment.  Each establishment has been 
provided with adequate Computer  Aided Training Packages 
which are updated and supplement ed with additional packages 
on required basis. 
(c) New Induction Training Committ ee has been institutionalised to 
ensure concurrent creation of trai ning infrastructure like working 
models, simulators, CBTs etc. with induction of new systems 
and equipment.” 
 
8.23 As regards status of completion of new Naval Academy at Ezhimalai, 
the Ministry of Defence in their background note stated:- 
 
“The new Naval Academy at Ezhimalai is scheduled for completion in 2009.  
The academy would have state-of-the-art facilities to undertake enhanced 
training for cadets of the Navy, Coast Guard and the friendly foreign 
countries.   Modernisation of training infrastructure is an ongoing activity that 
is linked to technology updates and induction of modern hardware into the 
Navy.” 
 
8.24 Regarding modern equipment  procured by the Navy during the last five 
years and adequacy of trained manpower to man these equipments, the 
Ministry of Defence in their written reply stated as under: 

  
108 
 
 “In the X Plan, following type of ships were inducted in the Navy: - 
 (a) Frigates/Corvettes/LST (L) - 08 
 (b) Coastal Defence Boats - 11 
 (c) Ocean Going Tug  - 01 
 
In 2007 following platforms have been inducted: - 
 
(a) Landing Platform Dock INS Jalashwa. 
(b) Landing Ship Tank (Large) INS Shardul. 
 
Ships/Submarines under Construction: At present a number of 
ships/submarines are under constr uction at Indian Shipyards namely 
GRSE, CSL, MDL, GSL, Alcok As hdown Gujarat Ltd.  In addition, 
aircraft carrier, Ex-Gorshkov is  undergoing repair and refurbishment 
and three ships of follow on Talwar class are under construction at 
Russia.  
Aviation Assets: Growth of naval aviation in consonance with the 
envisaged expansion of the Navy’s surface assets has also been 
planned.  Accordingly, SRMR aircraft, light/UH3H utility helicopters and 
UAVs have been inducted in the last five years.  A number of measures 
have also been initiated for the m odernization of naval aviation with 
planned induction of carrier borne fighter aircraft, MR aircraft, 
helicopters and UAVs.  
Induction of Force Multipliers: In so far as replacement of old 
equipment, induction of new equipment  and force multipliers are 
concerned the following measures have been taken: - 
(a) The Navy is in the proce ss of networking its ships, 
 submarines,  aircraft and UAVs with the operational 
 centres ashore.   
(b) The induction of the Join t Venture BRAHMOS anti-ship 
 missiles with long reach and precision.  
(c) Introduction of Barak Anti-Missile Defence system.  
(d) Other advanced machiner y, sensors and system have 
 been  inducted onboard naval platforms. 
Training Equipment: As part of New Induction Training Committee a 
total of 15 equipment consisting of  simulators for gunnery systems, 
communication equipment, radars and side scan sonar simulators have 
been procured to ensure that naval personnel are adequately trained to 
exploit the equipment installed on the frontline warships.’’ 
 

  
109 
8.25 Comptroller and Auditor General (C &AG) in Report No. 5 on the Union 
Government Defence Services   for the year ending March 2007 has observed 
the following shortcomings in so far as training in Navy is concerned: 
 
“A simulator replicates the control room of a submarine and generates real 
time drills and emergencies that one may actually face at sea.  A Submarine 
Control Simulator (SCS) for the ‘Z’ Class of Submarine was commissioned in 
May 1989 at a shore unit. Audit observed that since November 2002, no 
practical training is being conducted on the SCS as it has become 
unsupportable due to obsolescence and lack of product support for the 
equipment. Though four years have lapsed, the issue of procurement of a 
new simulator is pending with the Ministry.  Non-availability of the simulator 
has adversely affected the operational training of the submarine crew as well 
as On-the-Job training.” 
 
Enhancement of Intake Qualification and Revision of Training Curriculum:   
 
8.26 Keeping pace with the advancement in educational base in the country 
and the availability of better talent and the skills required to man the future 
technology, it has been decided to enhance the intake qualifications for all 
personnel. On being inquired by the Co mmittee about the training facilities 
being offered in the Indian Navy and the issue regarding upgradation of 
training establishment, the Vice-Chief of  Naval Staff, in his oral deposition 
before the Committee stated: -   
 “….. At least, the Army have the same technical cadre like ours but 
they have a problem.   They want to catch the people young. Sir, we 
want technically qualified people.  That is the difference.  As it is we get 
a person to work on a warship whic h is the first basic level of 
requirement for an officer.  He is available after five and a half years 
from joining the NDA through various  training process that he goes 
through.  With this new scheme of  B.Tech., it might go up by another 
six months but we can reduce his further training. As you are aware, 
we have various traits of training.  After the initial basic training, there is 
upgradation training every five to ten years till the level Commodore. 
As far as sailors are concerned, we  have the artifices and non-artifices 
and they all sign in for an initia l engagement of 20 years and they go 
through the various processes of tr aining.  The artifices are the 
backbone of our technical plant because they maintain all the 
equipment and all these things.  They  are fairly satisfied with their 
entry.  As far as non-artifices are concerned, they are in the other 
branches.  We are now taking in 10+2 for sailors.   So, the entry is 
same for officers and sailors now.  These are only training processes 
that is going to convert that c andidate to an officer cadre and the 
sailors but it will be modified from w hat it is now.  We will try and get 
him up to a technician level so that he can be more satisfied with his 
job.” 

  
 
110 
Infusion of Hi-tech Training in Air Force 
8.27 Present Status :  The flying training system  is currently undergoing a 
transition, both in terms of re-equipm ent through fresh inductions and gearing 
up for enhanced intake requirements in  keeping with present and predicted 
shortages.  The Hawk aircraft will be induct ed into the Indian Air Force shortly 
with flying training during the year 2008.   18 OFIs and 62 ab-initio Indian Air 
Force trainees have already completed their training in United Kingdom while 
10 trainees are undergoing flying training in UK.  Simulators for Hawk aircraft 
will also be inducted while CPT/PPP pr oject which had been put on hold by 
the Ministry of Defence midway has now been cleared. 
 
8.28 As regards infusion of  hi-tech training in Indi an Air Force, considerable 
breakthrough has been achieved.  A sizeable number of officers and men 
have attended seminar and courses abroad as indicated below: - 
Sl.No. Name of the country Number of officers 
(a) Bangladesh 06 
(b) Brazil 01 
(c) France 07 
(d) Indonesia 01 
(e) Poland 01 
(f) Thailand 01 
(g) UK 31 
(h) USA 19 
 Total 67 
Courses: The ab-initio training in Indian Air Force for officers as well as 
airmen is highly structured. The ab-initio training for the airmen has recently 
been restructured by introducing ‘Just-in-Time’ (JITT) concept.  In addition to 
ab-initio  training, officers and airmen of the IAF are imparted in-service 
training to update their knowledge level.  The various courses, which are, 
equipment specific, branch/trade specific or generic in nature, are conducted 
for Indian Air Force personnel at various stages of their career.  Some of the 
advanced level courses conducted for officers are covered at subsequent 
paragraphs: - 
(a) Post-Graduate Engineering Courses :  The officers of Aeronautical 
Engineering branch of the Indian Air Force are deputed to various Indian 
Institutes of Technology, Indian Institute of Science, Bangalore, DIA T, Pune 
etc. for two year long PG courses in various disciplines.  Every year upto 28 
AE branch  officers are deputed for such courses.  The various areas of 
specialisation include Aerospace/Aeronautical Engineering, Rubber 
Technology, Maintenance Engineering, Armament Technology, 
Communication Engineering, Computer Science, RF & Microwave 
Engineering, `Special Weapons Technology, Microelectronics, Integrated 
Circuits etc. 

  
111 
 
(b) Technical Staff Officers Course : In addition to above mentioned Post 
Graduate Engineering courses, the AE branch officers are also deputed  for 
1 year long Technical Staff Officers’ Course (TSOC) at DIAT, Pune. 
(c) Major Infrastructure:  The following major infrastructure is foreseen by 
2014: - 
(i) An additional training base in reasonable proximity of Bidar to 
accommodate enhanced training requirement. 
(ii) Instrumented firing ranges to support flying training as 
applicable. 
(iii) Networked and integrated simulators to optimise utilisation. 
 
8.29 In a written brief to the Committ ee, a representative of the Indian Air 
Force stated as under: - 
“…….. the National Defence Academy Institution located at Pune conducts  
combined training for three years for the cadets selected for Army, Navy and 
Air Force.  Apart from the NDA, the IAF also inducts men and women 
trainees directly from university graduates as also from amongst suitably 
qualified airmen. 
(a)  Pre-commissioning flying training is conducted in two stages.  
The first stage or stage-I, common for all trainees of the flying 
branch has a syllabus of 72 hours flown in 24 weeks on the HPT-
32 and is conducted at this Academy. 
(b)  At the end of this stage, trainees are trifurcated into Fighter, 
Transport and Helicopter streams and move on to Stage-II.  
Fighter trainees move to Fighter Training Wing (FTW) at 
Hakimpet near Hyderabad and fly approximately 87 hours in 24 
weeks on the HAL built Kiran Mk-I jet trainer. Helicopter trainees 
move to Helicopter Training School (HTS) also located at 
Hakimpet and fly 65 hours in 24 weeks on the HAL built Chetak 
helicopters.  Transport trainees move to Fixed Wing Training 
Faculty (FWTF) at Yelahanka, Bangalore, and fly 78 hours in 24 
weeks on the Hindustan Aeronautics Limited built Dornier-228. 
(c) On successful completion of Stage II the trainees are awarded 
`pilots wings’ and `Presidents Commission’ as Flying Officers.  
After the award of wings and commissioning, the officers have a 
further 6 months of Stage III training. 
(d) Fighter trainees move to Bidar and fly 85 hours in 24 weeks on 
the Kiran MK IA. Helicopter trainees fly 65 hrs. on either the 
single engined Chetak or the twin engined Mi-8 and thereafter 
move on  to operational squadrons.  Transport trainees fly 78 
hours on the Dornier, Avro or AN-32 aircraft at Yelahanka before 
moving on to operational squadrons. 
Navigation Stream: Navigation training is carried out in three stages. Ab-
initio Stage-I navigation training (ground only) is conducted at Air Force 
Academy.  Stage-II Navigation Training consists of 89 hours in 29 weeks, on 
Avro aircraft and is conducted at Navigation Training School (NTS), 
Begumpet.  Post commission Stage-III training   comprises of 46 hours in 22 
weeks on An-32 aircraft at Yelahanka after which the officers are bifurcated 
to Nav (Weapons Systems Operator) and Nav (Transport).  The Weapon 
Systems Operators are employed in rear  seats of Air Superiority Fighters 
(ASFs) like the Su-30 MKI. 

  
112 
 
Non-Tech Training : Training for ground duty branches, i.e. Administration, 
Logistics, Accounts and Education is conducted at Air Force Academy.  After 
16 weeks of joint training, trainees are specialised in their respective 
disciplines for another 32 weeks before they are commissioned.  Selected 
officers of Administrative branch undergo Air Traffic Controllers training at 
AFA.  Fighter Controllers are trained at the Air Defence College, Lucknow.  
Selected post graduate trainees for the meteorological branch undergo 48 
weeks of ab-initio training at AFA and Air Force Administrative College 
(AFAC).  
 
An Overview of Airmen Training 
 Individuals selected to join the Indian Air Force as airmen in different 
trades are initially trained jointly for 12 weeks at Administrative Training 
School, Belgaum.  This, called the Joint Basic Phase Training (JBPT), 
facilitates uniform transition from civil to military way of life and helps to 
develop a degree of camaraderie before they are streamed to different 
institutions for specialised training.  Considerable emphasis is laid   on 
inculcation of military values and character building.  Airmen trainees undergo 
another 12 to 68 weeks, of ground training at respective training institutions, 
before they are posted to field units or stations.  Approx 40 trainees join the 
Joint Basic Phase Training (JBPT), having being specially recruited for the 
Commando Force of the Indian Air Force, known as the Garuds.   They 
undergo various specialised capsules of training with other special forces of 
the country, before being deployed at sensitive locations. 
While the Air Force need to increase its manpower for the reasons just 
mentioned, we are constrained to carry out this increased induction over a 
longer period in   a phased manner, due to a shortage of training aircraft and 
existing infrastructure. 
Shortage of Training Aircraft 
(a) HPT-32 
(i) The ab-initio trainer is the HPT-32 piston-engined propeller driven ac, 
which is flown here at Air Force Academy as well as the Flying 
Instructors’ School at Tambaram, near Chennai.  This HAL 
manufactured aircraft was inducted in 1987 and has been beset with 
engine and related maintenance problems since long. Apart from this, 
it is a rudimentary basic trainer aircraft, without modern 
instrumentation and avionics. 
(ii) We presently have 124 HPT-32 aircraft out of the 131 originally 
acquired.  These need-to be replaced with at least a similar number of 
Basic Turbo-prop Trainer aircraft, to sustain the increased ab-initio 
training task of approximately 300 trainees and upto 120 Qualified 
Flying Instructors per annum for the next eight to ten year.  The Air 
Force is in the process of taking up a case for their replacement with 
state-of-the-art Basic Turbo-prop Trainers (BTTs), which are available 
off the shelf abroad.  Hindustan Aeronautics Limited did make an 
attempt to come up with a BTT called the HTT-434, which was 
unsuccessful. 
 

  
113 
 
(b)  Kiran: This intermediate jet trainer of the mid-70s has served 
the Air Force well for over thirty years and is slated to end its life by 
2012.  It is currently plagued wit h spares problems and hence low 
availability, apart   from lacking m odern navigational aids and avionics. 
Its replacements is the Hindustan Aeronautics Limited’s Intermediate 
Jet Trainer (IJT), which is grossl y delayed.  Twelve Limited Series 
Production (LSP) aircraft have been order ed by the IAF, which are not 
likely to be ready before 2010-2011,  due to ac controls, engine and 
weapons integration problems.  These LSP aircrafts have been 
planned to be utilized by FIS, Ta mbaram.  Subsequent series 
production is not likely to commence before the year 2012.” 
 
 
8.30 As regards availability of Intermedi ate Jet Trainer (IJT) for training, a 
representative of Air Force Headquarter during his  deposition stated: 
“There was a query about the status of IJT. It is a new trainer that we 
are supposed to get because we ar e running short of our training 
facility. The Kiran aircraft is slowly phasing out. It is living out its life and 
we are running short at the moment. The Hawk trainer is there already 
established in Bidar and we are ge tting the fresh stock. The full 
complement is yet to come in. The first course on the Hawk has started 
on the 1st of July. They have start ed the ground training and the brand 
new cadets will start flying on the Hawk as of 4th of August...” 
  
8.31 Regarding adequacy of aircraft  for tr aining, the representatives of Air 
Force Head quarter stated during evidence: 
“HAL is to supply the aeroplanes for t he training.  I can take in 50 more 
cadets but I do not hav e the aeroplanes, because we are flying per 
hour.  We have so many institutions.  I can provide institutions and I 
can provide instructors also but I have just a physical limitation 
concerning the number of hours in a day.  If the HAL produce more 
aeroplanes, I can do the flying. ” 
8.32 When asked whether there wa s any crash of Hawks, the 
representatives of Air Force headquarter stated: 
 “That is right, Sir, we had a crash. The crash was on take off. As far as 
the pilot was concerned, he was trying to make some corrections. They 
were doing a pair take off, two aircraft together. Number Two is the one 
who crashed. He was trying to avoid the other one. He had gone a little 
too close and he had turned away and ca me too close to the ground. 
Thereafter he skidded off to one side. Because of that, one of the pilots 
has ejected and the other  stayed with the aeroplane. They were both 
injured but they are okay. The court of inquiry was completed on that.” 

  
 
114 
8.33 On being asked about the number of candidates  that can be  given 
flying training, the representatives of the Air Headquarter stated: 
 “At the moment, we have a capacity of training of 130 cadets that is a figure 
that we worked on.  We were 110 last year.  We have increased it to 130.  We 
are working to full capacity.  Leave is limited.  You get one week break in 
between semesters/terms.  Actually the sy stem is working very tight.  We are 
not getting really enough time.” 
8.34 When asked about the additional airc raft required for the training, the 
representative of Air Force Headquarters stated:  
“We have asked for 85 IJTs.  The first IJT actually should have come a couple 
of years back ago but is going to come end 2008, Limited Series Production 
Aircraft (LSP) will start coming to us in 2009.”
 
 
8.35 On being asked by the Committ ee about the problems being faced by 
the Air Force in terms of accommodat ion, simulators, training methodology, 
etc., the representative of Air Force during presentation stated as under:- 
“Accommodation: Air Force Academy, the alma-mater of officers of all 
branches of the IAF, is fairly well established to take on ab-initio flying, 
technical and non-technical training of the present strength of trainees, in 
terms of working and living accommodation as well as other   resources like 
aircraft,  airspace, instructors, classes, training aids, etc.  However, with the 
slated increase intake of trainees, there is an urgent need to construct 
additional classrooms form the Ground Training (GT) Faculty and a new ATC 
Officer’ Training Establishment (ATCOTE), along with a new or No.2 Flight 
Cadets’ Mess and living accommodation for foreign trainees as well as 
Instructional staff, Airspace at this training base will also be a limiting factor, if 
trainee strength is increased. Most training Institutes at Air Force Station 
Jalahalli in Bangalore are housed in vintage, world War-II POW barracks, as 
is the prestigious Air Force Technical College also located there.  Projects to 
replace these age old buildings with modern centres of learning are underway. 
Simulators: Synthetic training equipment or Simulators in military flying 
training are extremely useful.  As  the cost of flying training increases, so 
does the importance of simulation in the training syllabus.  For many years, 
the IAF has lagged behind in this aspect, probably because of their 
prohibitive initial costs as well as lack of indigenous development in this field.  
We have recently started addressing this short coming in our approach to  
training, with Cockpit Procedure Trainers(CPTs) and Practice Procedure 
Platforms (PPPs) for older ac and full-fledged simulators for new inductions.  
Simulator training as a rule is now dovetailed with the overall flying syllabus, 
with good improvements accruing in both quality of training as well as overall 
effectiveness. The CPTs and PPPs for our training aircraft like the HPT-32 
and Kiran were manufactured and installed in 2006 by  a private vendor, who 
was thereafter blacklisted by the Ministry of Defence.  This has  caused a 
temporary setback to our  efforts in integrating simulator training with flying 
syllabi, as some of these simulators are presently  not functional.  This 
situation is likely to improve shortly.” 

  
115 
Training Methodology  
 
Officers’ Training: 
(a) Flying Training: In order to  induct trainees into their 
respective streams and commence t heir specialised training earlier, 
trifurcation into Fighter, Trans port and Helicopter streams was 
advanced to the end of Stage-I flying tr aining, w.e.f. the year 2002.  
This is in consonance with the military aviation training ethos 
worldwide, with the added benefit of cost-saving by   replacing a 
common Stage-II or Advanced Stage of flying training for all, with a 
specialised one for each stream.  Simila rly, in Fighter training, with the 
long-pending induction of the Hawk AJT into Training Command (at 
AFS Bidar) this year, the time-fra me of inducting a young trainee into 
an operational fighter squander would be reduced by as much as six 
months.  The aberrations of having to train young fighter pilots on high-
speed Mig-21 immediately after the slow Kiran jet trainers will now be 
addressed, apart from ensuring safe r and better quality training on the 
Hawk ac with its state-of-the-art te chnology and systems. This will also  
ensure smooth transition to modern fighter ac. 
(b)  Distance Learning: Trai ning Command has introduced the 
modern concept of Distance-Learning  for officers of all branches of the 
IAF since the  year 2005, for all in -service courses.  This was done 
primarily to cut down the prolonged non- availability of officers in the 
field or fighting units and stations .  Along with this, the mandatory in-
service courses were also tweaked and refined so as to impart only the 
requisite knowledge for each level of experience.  Under Training 
Command, CAW at Secunderabad, AFTC  at Bangalore and AFAC at 
Coimbatore are the nodal Institut ions entrusted with conduct of 
Distance Learning as well as short C ontact Programmes for all offices 
of the IAF. 
Airmen Training: 
(a) Almost since inception, the IAF had followed a one-year training  
period  for non-tech  and two years fo r tech tradesmen.   After this, 
they  underwent  type training specif ic to the ac or system  employed 
on, apart from On-the-job Training( OJT). This system of training 
covered  a broad spectrum of subj ects, much of which did  not 
necessarily find application in their actual job.   To address this 
anomaly, a Modular or Capsul e-based training pattern was 
conceptualised as Just-in-Time Training or JITT, wef 2005.  Under this 
pattern, specialised, joint-specific training is imparted to the target 
group for short durations, ensuring early and optimum availability of 
adequately qualified personnel I the field units and stations. 
(b) Airmen are then periodically br ought back to specialised Training 
Institutions, to enhance their skill sets and knowledge base  as 
required. This also addresses upgr ades in technology or equipment 
being inducted.  Although there has  been a marked improvement in 
efficiency and availability of trai ned manpower, the full potential or 
efficacy of this Training pattern is yet to fructify. 

  
 
116 
 
 
(c) While modernising our training methodology, we have not forgotten 
our traditional roots and time-test ed `Guru-Shisya Parampara’.  
Instructors in the Air Force still resort to the age-old method of sitting 
down with a group of young trainees  and mentoring them whenever 
required.   The AIF has effectivel y adapted this very effective training 
method to present day requirements, by starting the `USTAD’ or Ultra 
Skilled in Trade Ability and Developm ent, for personnel below officer 
rank.  Airmen are tested for thei r knowledge and practical skills in 
respective trades annually, by  independent Regional Examining 
Boards (REBs) and awarded grades .  A select few `A’ Grade 
tradesmen in each unit or stn are then made USTADs, responsible to 
teach and upgrade/develop ot her below their level of performance. 
This has resulted in a fair degree of improvement in overall skills. 
E-Learning: Akin to most modern centres of learning, the IAF too has 
embarked on this latest training aid in  a big way.  All distance learning 
content for In-Service courses is  made available through CDs as well 
as accessed from web-sites/portals on-line, wherever feasible.  Once 
the high-speed, broadband, multi-m edia capable AF Net becomes 
operational shortly, student offi cers would be able to submit 
assignments, appear for tests and even in teract with instructional staff 
on-line through video-conferencing.  This is likely to become a 
revolutionary training aid in the near future”. 
 
Comptroller and Auditor General’s comments on Training of Pilots 
 
 
8.36 Comptroller and Auditor General (C&AG) in his report No. 5 on the 
Union Government Defence Services   for the year ending March 2007 has 
observed that certain lacunae so far as tr aining of pilots in Indian Air Force.  
These are as under: 
 
“Training of Pilots in Indian Air Force (IAF) is a complex process right 
from their recruitment to their ab-initio, intermediate, advanced and 
operational stage training.  The training consists of ground training, 
flying in simulated conditions and act ual flying in basic, sub-sonic and 
supersonic aircraft.  This Perform ance Audit sought to review the 
training of pilots in IAF in te rms of requisite capability and adequate 
capacity to meet the required force leve ls.  Some of the salient findings 
are given below: 

  
117 
Highlights: 
¾ IAF has not formulated any long-te rm training plan for pilots of 
fighter and other streams for developing an effective training 
strategy consistent with its long-term strategic objectives, desired 
force levels and technological changes .  The interim training plans 
for short periods of two years hav e led to short sighted decisions 
impacting quality of a pilot training. 
¾ The number of pilots trained in  various streams during 2001-2006 
was much lower than planned target s indicating that either the 
training targets did not take into a ccount constraints or IAF failed to 
ensure adequate intake of pilot trainees through an effective 
recruitment strategy. 
¾ IAF’s requirement of trained pilots  will substantially increase during 
2008-2018 to meet expansion needs of IAF squadrons, and fill up 
back log vacancies and also the vacancies arising from high attrition 
rates in recent years. IAF has  not implemented any effective 
training strategy for meeting the increased intake requirements by 
addressing problems related to limit ations of air space/runway 
occupancy and other infrastructural constraints. 
¾ The number of pilots failing to co mplete their training successfully 
was significantly higher than the assessed average wastage rates in 
45 per cent of courses. There was also lack of continuity in the 
transition of a pilot from initial training to intermediate and advanced 
stages of training in terms of qua lity, technology and avionics of the 
trainer aircraft used. 
¾ Need for improving quality of pilot training was highlighted by the 
fact that 42 per cent of 276 ai rcraft accidents reported during 1995-
2005, were attributed to human errors. 
¾ IAF lacks adequate number of  state-of-the-art aircraft for imparting 
pilot training. HPT-32 aircra ft used for Stage I training is 
technologically outdated and beset by f light safety hazards. In spite 
of the loss of 11 pilots and 15 aircraft, it continues to be used today. 
Further, HPT-32 does not aid in smoot h transition of trainees to the 
next stage of training. 
¾ Limited availability of Kiran fleet has resulted in important training 
like tactical training and low leve l navigation being denied to cadets 
of various streams before trifurcati on.  This constraint has also 
resulted in insufficient inputs to the trifurcation board for assessing 
suitability of trainees for fighter, helicopter and transport streams. 
¾ Intermediate Jet Trainer (IJT ) for Stage II training will not be 
available in the near future.  Delay in timely completion of 
development and induction of IJT would adversely affect the training 
of pilots and over-exploitation of Kiran fleet. 
¾ IAF took almost 25 years to induc t the Advanced Jet Trainer (AJT) 
which is critically required for smooth transition from the basic 
trainer to a high technology aircraft.  This was in spite of several 
recommendations and direct linkage of accidents to the absence of 
an AJT. 

  
118 
 
¾ Training to helicopter pilots cont inues to be imparted in Chetak 
helicopters inducted in late sixties, depriving the pilots of training in 
the latest avionics and flight control systems. 
¾ IAF failed to procure/upgrade simulators for trainer ai rcraft for more 
than decade thus depriving the tr ainees of a safe and non-
hazardous means of learning to fly t hese aircraft in a cost effective 
manner. 
¾ There was delay of more t han a decade in finalisation and 
acquisition of land for reestablis hment of weapon training range for 
two Flying Training Establishments.  In the absence of the training 
range, the cadets have to travel to other locations for range training 
incurring avoidable expenditure of Rs. 5.77 crore per year.” 
 
Inadequate Civilian Instructors in Training and other Technical Institutions  
 
8.37 When asked about the constraint s being faced by various training 
institutes and the specific  steps required to be taken to overcome the same, 
the Ministry of Defence in their written reply stated:  
“The major constraint being fac ed by the Category `A’ Training 
Establishments of the Army and Tri Services Training Institutions 
(national Defence Academy, Def ence Services Staff College and 
College of Defence Management) is  the deficiency of civilian 
professional staff.  In order to over come this constraint, a proposal for 
outsourcing to meet t he requirement is being considered taking into 
account all relevant factors.” 
  
8.38 Regarding the constraints of Infrastr ucture, the representatives of Army 
Headquarters during oral evidence also stated as under:  
 
“We have another problem. We are increasing the infrastructure in 
OTA, IMA and NDA. Buildings will be constructed for which funds have 
been released. The problem is of m anning it. We require lecturers. 
Some of them have to be civilians, and we are short of them. We want 
to outsource it. In the Parliament, the Raksha Mantri has already stated 
that we would outsource it. The Mini stry of Finance said that we could 
outsource it. We do not know under  which head we can deduct that 
amount and what is the amount. As  of now, what has been sanctioned 
is class C & D employees. These ar e certain functional problems that 
we are having. The instructors in t he training institutions are not getting 
UGC scales and that is why they are not coming.  All the lecturers who 
are appointed in not only these but also  in technical colleges, they are 
not getting UGC scales. That is wh y, they leave these jobs and go 
away.”  

  
119 
8.39 On being asked about the reasons fo r not providing UGC Pay Scale to 
the instructors, the representatives of the Army Headquarters stated: 
“The proposal was given to the Sixth Pay Commission also saying that we 
are not getting UGC scales. It is lying with the Sixth Pay Commission. 
Similarly, now that you have talked about it, the instructors who go there, when 
you want to train extra people, we send some more extra instructors to various 
academies. When additional people are posted for the last five or six years, 
they are not getting the instructional allowance.  People are doing the 
instructions as additional people there, but that additional instructional 
allowance or incentive is not there.”  
 
8.40 Clarifying further, the represent atives of Army Headquarter, during 
evidence, stated:  
“They are selected by UPSC but they do not get the UGC scales. So, they do 
not join the job and we are deficient. When we are deficient, we want to 
outsource. But we cannot do so because we do not have the funds. Then the 
UPSC has to go through the procedure once again. They select the new ones. 
When they send them to NDA, Khadakvasla they do not join because the 
scales are not as per UGC guidelines. Let me give you an update on the 
deficiency of instructors in Category A establishments, basically the technical 
institutions that we have. We have 53 per cent deficiency of instructors. Some 
of these deficiencies are due to the ten per cent cut ordered by the 
Government. We have been requesting the Government to lift this cut. The 
other deficiency existing as of now, in addition to what the Vice-Chief has 
mentioned, is with regard to the infrastructure. You spoke about the 
infrastructure. I will tell you about the infrastructure in case of the Indian 
Military Academy, Dehradun. IMA, Dehradun is structured to train 1650 
Gentlemen Cadets in a year. But as of now the total load that the Academy is 
taking is 1850. We have already taken up a case with the Government looking 
at the future requirement. We just now spelt out to you how we intend making 
up the deficiencies which are existing in the officers’ cadre. We want to 
increase the capacity to 2060. I would request the intervention of the 
Committee to see if they could expedite the sanction of this enhanced 
capacity.”  
 
8.41 The representatives of  the Ministry of Defence during oral evidence 
also  stated as under: 
“Yes, Sir, this is a very contentious issue. Last time, you will recall that when 
we had gone to visit NDA, this was raised and most of the faculty staff had 
raised this issue that because they are not getting the additional UGC benefits, 
therefore, people are not coming to these institutes, like NDA and INA, etc. We 
are progressing the case to get the additional UGC benefits for the faculty 
members in these institutes. It will take some time. There are so many cases 
like that. In fact, last two years, I recall at least six lecturers who got 
appointment, but then they refused to join. They did not join. This is the 
problem. This has already been approved by  RM and it will be taken up afresh 
with the Government.” 

  
120 
8.42 Explaining about the training for civ ilians in Navy, the representative of 
the Ministry of Defence, during oral evidence before Committee stated: 
“I have talked all this while about tr aining of uniformed personnel only. 
As far as civilians are concerned,  perhaps this was an area where 
enough attention had not been given in the past, but this is an area 
which has become our focus area in the Navy. We have had a series of 
conferences commencing 2003 to focus exactly on civilians’ training and 
civilians’ HRD issues. A number of proposals have emerged from that 
and these are being pursued. We are making use of existing training 
programmes which are there in the count ry to improve the skill levels as 
well as management aspects for the mo re senior supervisory staff. The 
upgradation of training establishment s is an ongoing process. One part 
of it is the equipment induction and other is annual training conferences 
that we have where they review  what happened the previous year and 
the feedbacks that have been received. We have an excellent system of 
feedback where every trainee who goes to  field, his performance at sea 
or on the training that he has under gone is kept as a feedback and that 
also indicates if any correctives hav e to be applied. That is also done. 
We keep track with those who have had opportunities for training on 
equipment abroad when something new is  coming to sea so as to see 
how we can improve things better.”  
 
8.43 Pertaining to the problems of Civ ilians’ academic staff for training 
institutions in navy, the r epresentative of the Ministry  of Defence, during oral 
evidence before the Committee stated as under: 
 
“An area of concern that is there in the National Defence Academy is 
the total number of civilian academic  staff that we have. We are 
authorised to have 122, out of whic h because of the ARDP, we have 
been cut by 23 people. So, we are down to 99. Out of these 99, 
presently I hold approximately 49. So, I am at the level of 50 per cent. It 
takes me two years from the time we  requisition the UPSC to be able to 
provide academic staff to us to the time that he arrives in the NDA. Two 
years is the minimum time period over  the last five years. They have 
taken more than two years all the time, but I am saying if you look at the 
minimum time period when an instructor has been requisitioned from the 
UPSC and has arrived at the Nati onal Defence Academy, the minimum 
time period is two years, which means that for two years, I have to bear 
with the shortage. Though we pre-empt, we have already given to the 
UPSC the people who are going to re tire in the next two years, 
notwithstanding what the recomm endations of Pay Commission are 
likely to be as far as extension of service is concerned, we believe that it 
is time that the academic staff, I am not talking only of the National 
Defence Academy, Gen. Goswami is  here, he was the Commandant of 
CME, he will bear me out, they are more than 50 per cent short. The 
AFMC is almost 75 per cent short. These are the three Service Training 
Establishments in Pune, which I can talk of because I have the figures. I  

  
121 
 
have interacted with various Comm andants also and I have the figures 
with me. They also get recruited from the UPSC. I think the first 
important step that we must take, and I believe must take, is to de-link 
the civilian academic staff from the UPSC. While it is a Government 
organization, the Universities today set up their own panels. We could do 
something very similar with representatives of the Service Headquarters, 
representatives of the Universities , to be able to form a panel, shortlist 
the instructors that we want and hold them on cont ract basis rather than 
a regular employment wh ich is presently being done. This is an area of 
concern, as far as we are conc erned because we then have to use ad 
hoc employment which has again a short while ago been stopped by the 
Government. We use many methods  to be able to overcome the 
shortages. But the only real method of overcoming the shortages of 
academic staff is I think de-linking from UPSC and setting up norms 
which could be with the Ministry of  Defence, and even the Government 
could set up such norms, under which we will recruit directly. The two 
years’ gestation period is a very, very long period.” 
 
 
8.44 The Committee also visited Na tional Defence Academy Khadakvasla 
during February 2008. The Committee obser ved that very important posts 
including posts of principal and vice-princ ipal were lying vacant for last 7-8 
years. There was deficiency of 50% in the posts of instructors which disturbed 
the academic training to a large extent  due to Mode of Equipment and vacant 
positions not being filled  on regular basis. The Committee were further 
informed that they outsource academic  faculties by paying rupees eight 
thousand per month to the in structors.  Therefore, the representatives of 
National Defence Academy (NDA) forwar ded certain suggestions to improve 
the positions in NDA. These are (i) De- linking from Ministry of Defence/DOPT 
and UPSC and Empower NDA to appoint se lection Committee, (ii) Campus 
Interview and (iii) use of University System of contract period for five years. 
 
8.45 The Committee are given to underst and that another problem of getting 
civilian teachers or instru ctors at NDA, IMA or OTA is because of their 
selection through the UPSC.  Ther e had been some delays and there had not 
been ample intake.  There is a huge shor tage particularly in NDA.  Clarifying 
on this issue, Defence Secretary, during oral evidence, stated as under: 
 
“We have sought a waiver from the UPSC process for the engagement of 
some of these teachers.  I think that was one of things that was discussed at 
the last meeting. Not yet.  I agree with you that this is a bottleneck.  The time 
taken is far too long and we end up with not enough names”. 

  
122 
Foreign Training 
 
8.46 In reply to a question regarding training abroad,  the representative of 
the Army stated as under: 
“Officers are being sent to abroad to get training in new technologies.  
Considering our size, it is minuscule. It depends on the vacancies. Even for 
training, one per cent out of 40,000 means 400. We are not sending out more 
than 100 or 200 people every year.” 
 
8.47 On the issue regarding sending office rs to Germany for getting training, 
the representatives of Army Headquarters stated during the oral evidence as 
under: 
“I have the figures from 2003-04. We have 21 officers out of 36,000.  Then, in 
2004-05 it was 30 and in the last year they were 100. In regard to the training 
abroad, as far as our Government is concerned, wherever our officers are 
being not charged any money for training abroad, they would send only for 
those courses.  This has been one of the biggest stumbling blocks for 
increasing the total number of persons.  That is the major points because as 
you know we get to send our officers only for those few courses where the 
Government is expecting the offices, they waive off tuition fees. Wherever they 
waive off the tuition fee, offices are permitted to go there.  Whereas in the case 
of other courses where we are required to pay, Finance Ministry said no, this is 
not permitted.  This is one of the big lacuna.”  
 
8.48 On being asked about the areas r equiring more training and focus, the 
representatives of the Ministry of Defence during oral evidence stated: 
“When we look at the training outside the areas which basically we are 
looking at are network centric warfar e, information warfare, operational 
research, systems analysis, integrated knowledge, etc. for Germany we 
did not have anyone from 1999 to 2001 because the requirement was 
for two years, one year for l anguage and one year other wise.  So, no 
Service was prepared to spare officers for two years and also the 
Ministry of Finance was not to give a llowances for two years.  In 2001, 
we restarted the course and it was supposed to be rotational – Army 
Navy and Air Force.  So, that has so mehow stuck on. This time, they 
have also give the concession that they can learn the language here. “ 
 
8.49 When enquired  about the constraint of funds for high-tech training, the 
Ministry of Defence, in their written replies stated:  
“Adequate training grants and specializ ed grants for technical training 
are provided to the Technical Training Institutes every year.  There has 
been no shortfall in budgetary provision.   Special budgetary provisions 
also exist for improving infrastructure , special technical projects and the 
modernisation of laboratories.” 
 

  
123 
 
Joint training 
 
8.50 On being asked about the efforts being made to impart joint training 
amongst the three services and the need to expand the training institutions 
and to upgrade them with better infrastructu re and other facilities, the Ministry 
of Defence in their written reply stated as under: 
“The concept of Joint Training for all three services commences with 
the three years of extensive traini ng at NDA, Khadakwasla.  This is 
followed by comprehensive intera ction at the junior and mid 
management levels alongwith civili an Govt. counterparts and Para 
Military officers, during the course s at the Defence Services Staff 
College, Wellington and the College of Defence Management (CDM), 
Secunderabad.  The higher echelon of  all three services and other 
civilian and para military force office rs then train at national Defence 
College (NDC), New Delhi. In the interim period between such structure 
Joint Training endeavours, numerous  multi services courses and 
attachments continue amongst the th ree services, to ensure a steady 
and graduated joint training.” 
8.51 In response to a specific quer y regarding enhancement of tri-service 
training for officers, the Ministry of De fence, in their written reply stated as 
under:  
 
“Jointness in warfare is the effective integration of the combat capabilities 
of the three services.  The issue of joint-ness and tri service training in the 
Armed forces is being addressed adequately.  The raising of 
Headquarters Integrated Defence Services and Theatre Command in 
Andaman & Nicobar Command (ANC) are some significant steps in this 
direction.  The issue of joint training of officers in the Armed Forces is 
addressed both at the pre-commissioning and in service stage.  National 
Defence Academy (NDA) is the main institution which imparts pre 
commission training to cadets of all the three services.  While in service, 
formations and units organize war games and exercises besides visits to 
each other’s stations to enhance awareness and understand each others 
capabilities and limitations.  Further, various Training establishments also 
impart joint training to service officers at the induction, middle and higher 
level like Defence Service Staff College, Wellington.  The Higher 
Command Courses of the Army, Navy and Air Force and Higher Defence 
Management course also contribute to the cause of joint training in a big 
way. Efforts are on to establish Armed Forces Training Institutes (AFTIs) 
for Helicopter, UAV, NBC Warfare and Advanced Light Helicopter 
TETTRA to promote joint training..  Army Helicopter Pilots are being 
trained at BFTS Allahabad by the IAF.  Similarly, Navy and Coast Guard 
ab-initio pilots are trained at Air Force Academy Dundigal, Naval 
personnel are also going through UAV Tettra training with the IAF at 
Bhatinda.”    

  
124 
Future vision for imparting hi-tech training  
 
8.52 As regards future vision fo r imparting hi-tech training, the 
representative of the Army during oral evidence stated as under:  
  
“This is what we are looking at, what  a soldier should be. Therefore, to 
meet these requirements we need better qualified people.  He will be 
required to perform various types of tasks. The training level, 
technological level and the communication levels should be high so 
that the officer who is standing on t he forward post can convey directly 
to the pilot, there is nobody in-between, and he comes and gives you a 
pinpoint strike. This mean upgradation of his responsibility, upgradation 
of technology and upgradation of communication systems.” 
 
8.53 In a written note on need to re cruit the finest soldiers, the 
representative of the Army stated as under:- 
“Need to recruit the finest `soldier material’ is one the biggest challenge 
facing the organisation.  We have to  increase the entry-level education 
of a recruit in view of modern weapons and technologies being 
inducted at a rapid pace.  This is now feasible in view of increased 
male literacy rate in the country wh ich is over seventy percent.  The 
requirements is of a physically fit, mentally robust soldier with minimum 
acceptable education standards so that he can to absorb latest 
technology.  As a result, the combat potential of the Army will increase 
and result in less expenditure on traini ng.  For example, a recruit of 
German Army is in position to effectively utilise high-tech equipment 
and weapons with just three months of basic military training”.  
 
8.54 In order to fulfil the above visi on, the representative of the Army 
suggested the following points: 
 
(a) “Minimum matriculate pass fo r general duty tasks but majority 
should be class Twelfth pass. 
(b) They would be required to handle night vision devices, operate 
sensors and imagers at second/pulse level.  Every junior leader 
and crew served weapon team will have to be in communication. 
(c) Every officer should be able to whistle in an air strike. 
(d) Every Havaldar/Junior Commissioned Officer should be able call 
in indirect artillery and mortar fire. 
(e) Global Positioning System and surveillance system will lessen 
fog of war and friend & Foe i dentification equipment will need to 
be handled.  In fact, this is a tu rning point for making the Army 
really lean and mean.” 
 

  
     125 
PART II 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE 
 
Human Resource Planning in the Armed Forces 
 The Committee’s analysis of the statistical information relating to the 
preceding fifty years as furnished by the Ministry of Defence (MOD) reveals 
that the shortage of manpower in the officers’ cadre has been persisting during 
all these years in all the three services of the armed forces.  These statistics 
also bring out that the extent of deficiency of officers notably in the army, has 
assumed alarming proportions after an increase in the authorized strength of 
officers in the army was made during the nineteen eighties.  In fact, the 
reported shortage of officers in the army stood at a staggering figure of 23.8 
percent of the authorized strength followed by 16.7 and 12.1 per cent in the 
navy and the air force respectively during the year 2007.  In terms of the 
absolute numbers, the deficiency of officers in 2007 was 11,087 in army, 1,493 
in navy and 1,366 in air force.  While several steps are stated to have been 
taken from time to time to overcome the problem of shortage of manpower in 
the armed forces, the Committee are perturbed to note that all these measures 
have not proved efficacious enough to meet the requirements of officers in the 
three services particularly during the last two decades.  To the utter dismay of 
the Committee, the MOD have attributed this shortage of manpower in officers’ 
cadre mainly to low priority being accorded to military career by the present 
day youth due to lucrative job opportunities available in civil sector. The 
Committee are not inclined to accept this plea of the MOD in view of the fact 
that a substantially large number of talented youth offer themselves both for 
competitive examinations conducted by the Union Public Service Commission 
(UPSC) for recruitment of officers in the armed forces as well as for non-UPSC 
entries.  The Committee’s examination of the subject matter and their 
interaction with the ex-servicemen and experts having experience in this field 
has brought out that the entire issue of shortage of officers in the armed forces 
continues to be viewed in isolation without properly appreciating the 
complexities of the various aspects of the manpower planning and human 
resource management in all its ramifications resulting in present state of 
affairs in the armed forces.    The Committee have dealt with some of the 
important areas of concern requiring urgent attention and priority action on 
this subject and other related issues in the succeeding paragraphs of this 
Report.  

  
126 
Assessment of Manpower 
2. The MOD have informed the Committee that the manpower planning 
in the army is a complicated issu e because of the factors like induction 
and wastage of personnel annually; large number of services within 
services with varied manpower requirement; wide rank structure with 
varying retirement ages for different categories; different recruitment 
patterns for various trades and regions; and above all, uncertainty in 
planning due to unforeseen and unpredictable circumstances such as 
wastages due to death; disciplinary cases; medical grounds; and pre-
mature retirement and the likes.   The Committee are unable to 
comprehend as to how Ministry could term manpower planning as a 
complicated issue on account of factors such as annual induction, 
wastages, large number of services within services etc., since these 
factors have been in existence for a long time and can easily be 
anticipated and taken care of well in time by the authorities entrusted with 
the task of maintaining service record s.  The Committee also feel that 
although the wastages due to death or disciplinary cases or pre-mature 
retirement can not be anticipated, yet these factors can not throw the 
process of manpower planning out of gear simply because the number of 
such cases is usually very small.   Obviously, the systems and procedures 
created in the armed forces for this purpose are not sound enough to 
generate precise information required for proper assessment of manpower 
requirements.   This view of the Committee is strengthened by the findings 
contained in Chapter-II of the report of the Comptroller and Auditor 
General of India for the year ended March, 2006 on Union Government 
(Defence Services), which clearly highlights that there was a mismatch 
between the authorisation and actual manpower held in respect of PBORs 
in the army due to incorrect assessment of manpower. In the opinion of 
the Committee, all these facts are clearly  indicative of the shortcomings in 
the existing system which ultimately have an adverse bearing on the 
recruitment in a timely manner.  The y, therefore, desire that the MOD 
should take appropriate steps to update their systems by utilising the 
latest technological methodology of  digital data base to  address the 
issue of assessment of manpower requirements for induction.  

  
 
127 
 
Persisting shortage of officers 
 
3. According to the MOD, the deficiencies in the officers’ cadre in the 
Army persist due to attrition of the force levels from time to time and the 
unpopularity of the military career on account of lucrative alternative 
options available; frequent transfers; early retirement age based on rank 
held; and risk factor.  The Commi ttee are unable to accept this 
reasoning in view of the fact that these aspects not only form essential 
part of military services but also cont inue to remain the basic tenets on 
which the manpower planning in military is based.  On the other hand, 
the Committee’s examination of the information furnished to them 
reveals that the shortage of offi cers have reached unprecedented levels 
in the range of 23 to 26 per cent only after the authorized strength of 
army officers was increased by 26 per cent in the nineteen eighties.  The 
fact that the number of officers in  the Army has been registering 
increase albeit marginally during the past two decades is a clear 
indicator that there has been no reduction in the availability of 
volunteers for induction in the Army as is being asserted by the MOD 
and it is only the lack of adequate infrastructure for pre-commission 
training which appears to be comi ng in the way of enhanced intake 
necessitated on account of substantial increase made in the authorized 
strength.  While expressing their grave concern over the failure of the 
MOD in initiating appropriate timely  measures to enhance the training 
infrastructure required for matching increased authorized strength of 
the officers, the Committee desire that the MOD should go into the entire 
gamut of this issue in all the three services and urgently formulate a 
plan of action for implementation in a time bound manner.  

  
128 
Encouragement and Motivation  
4. The Committee’s examination brings out that there is presently no 
shortage of manpower for holding ranks other than officers in the Army.  
The Committee are however, not inc lined to accept the contentious 
reasoning of the Ministry that such shortages in the Navy and the Air 
Force are within the manageable propor tions. Obviously, there is lack of 
appropriate advance action in making planned induction of manpower in 
both these Services. Although a large number of potential candidates 
volunteer themselves for a career both as officers and lower ranks in the 
armed forces, the Committee feel that  there is an imperative need to 
motivate and encourage the younger age-groups particularly in rural 
areas by way of wider dissemination of information for raising their level 
of consciousness about the positive aspects of defence services as well 
as the criteria of qualifications and the modes of selection prescribed for 
entry at different levels in various Branches/Cadres of the three 
services.  The Committee al so feel that the growing security challenges 
are becoming primary issues of c oncern before the nation and every 
Ministry/Department of the Government have to contribute their share in 
giving support to the various dimensi ons of the defence services.  The 
Committee, therefore, emphasi se that the MOD should devise 
multipronged strategies in consultati on with the three defence services, 
important Ministries/Departments having a bearing on the theme and 
also the State Governments so as to  have full impact on the target age-
groups. 
5. The Committee also feel that  it is equally important to 
simultaneously initiate concrete steps for larger involvement of the 
three services for imparting pre-select ion Services Selection   Board 
(SSB) oriented training in all sc hools and educational institutions 
including technical education institutions by utilizing the services of 
professionally qualified defence pe rsonnel so as to supplement the 
Governmental efforts in disseminati ng the defence related information 
especially in those areas where such infrastructure is weak, inadequate 
or non-existent. 

  
 
129 
 
6. The Committee in their 29 th Report (14 th LS) had, inter-alia, 
recommended that the sanctione d strength of NCC should be 
sufficiently augmented with adequate funding to cover all 
schools/colleges in the waiting list and also those who like to enroll their 
students.  The Committee are convinced  about the immense potential of 
NCC cadets and the infrastructure cr eated for the purpose and they 
strongly feel that the coverage under NCC needs to be widened within 
shortest possible time and earnest efforts directed towards optimal 
utilization of this resource.   
 
7. The Government have establishe d Rashtriya Indian Military 
College, five Military schools and 22 Sa inik schools in various parts of 
the country to act as feeder inst itutions for the National Defence 
Academy (NDA).  Although the curricula of these institutions are 
specifically designed to train the students for entry to the armed forces, 
the Committee are perturbed to find that a very small percentage of 
students from these institutions are presently opting for a career in the 
defence services.  The Committee feel that it is high time that the MOD 
took concrete policy initiatives to optimally utilise this infrastructure 
created for training the younger genera tion to prepare them for a career 
in the armed forces by further st rengthening the quality of teaching 
faculty and providing adequate fina ncial assistance to these institutions 
as well as to the students selected fr om economically weaker sections 
of the society. 

  
130 
Recruitment Procedures 
8. The Committee find that a numbe r of procedures for recruitment 
of permanent commissioned and short service commissioned officers 
through UPSC and non-UPSC modes have been put in place for entry in 
the combatant and other specialized and allied wings of the three 
services in the armed forces. However , all the candidates aspiring to 
become officers have to invariabl y under-go Services Selection Board 
(SSB) tests having same format both fo r combat and technical services. 
The Committee’s examination has brought  out that the format of SSB 
tests has not undergone any major ch anges in the last three decades 
except that the process now involves two stages in which the 
candidates are first screened on the basis of psychological tests and 
only those who qualify these tests are assessed in the second stage.  
Although this system is stated to be scientific enough to determine the 
suitability of a candidate for the a rmed forces, the Committee have been 
informed during the evidence that the present system of selection 
procedure has been examined by a committee appointed by the Chiefs 
of Staff and its report has inter alia highlighted that the “procedures for 
selection are extremely rigorous”.  The  Committee’s interaction with an 
ex-serviceman having expertise in this  field has also brought out that 
the selection process in the SSB tests is negative in approach and the 
whole exercise is directed towards finding enough reasons to reject a 
candidate rather than carrying out an appraisal of his good traits for 
selection.  It has also been pointed  out that the most of the assessors 
hesitate to give clear-cut assessments and keep most of the candidates 
as border liners implying thereby that  the whole selection process is 
unable to determine suitability of su ch candidates.  Even the Defence 
Secretary admitted during evidence that some of these tests are 
rigorous and impracticable and require  a “fresh look”.   These facts 
lends credence to the Committee’s view  that the SSB tests for selection 
of officers in the armed forces c ontinue to be based on antiquated 
practices and no serious attempt have been made to adopt and 
implement the modern techniques of selection.  While emphasising that  

  
131 
there should not be any compromise wi th the quality and traits required 
for serving the Armed Forces, th e Committee recommend that an 
exhaustive review of the selection process through SSB tests should be 
undertaken at the earliest and latest techniques available for selection of 
candidates in an objective manner should be put in place to inspire 
confidence among the candidates volunteering for a career in the Armed 
Forces. Since a good number of yout h coming from rural background 
face considerable difficulties in co mmunicating in a particular language, 
steps should also be taken to ensure that such candidates are not 
subjected to language barriers wh ile assessing their suitability for the 
armed forces.  Needless to say that language and communication 
capabilities of such selected candidat es can be improved to the desired 
levels while imparting pre-induction training to them.    
9. The Committee note that differe nt procedures are being adopted 
by the three services for recruitmen t of PBORS/Sailor/Airmen.  While 
Air Force and Navy adopt a system of recruitment on all India basis, the 
recruitment of PBORs in the army is made through recruitment rallies 
on the basis of the concept of census based Recruitable Male 
Population.  The Committee understand that the recruitment rallies so 
held in different parts of the country for recruitment of PBORs attract a 
large number of candidates. Besi des causing inconvenience to the 
candidates coming for the recruitment rallies, their large  number also 
some times assume unmanageable proportions resulting in stampede 
as is being reported in the media from time to time. Considering the fact 
that the recruitment procedure for PBORs involves a number of stages, 
the Committee strongly recommend that a system of inviting 
applications in advance for such ra llies should be put in place and the 
eligible candidates called in batc hes for smooth conduct of selection 
tests. The Committee are in no doubt that such a system will not only 
discourage instances of impersonati on and involvement of touts but 
also project a bright image of the defence services.     
 

  
132 
Pre-induction Training 
10. The Committee note that while the duration of pre-induction training in 
the case of graduate level entry for Short Service Commission (SSC) and 
Permanent Commission (PC) is same in the Navy and the Air Force,  the period 
of such training imparted to graduates of SSC  at OTA is  only one year as 
against  one and a half years  in the IMA for those seeking PC in the army. The 
Committee have been informed that the training imparted for PC is more 
vigorous than that of SSC.  Taking into consideration the fact that the pre-
induction training is imparted for developing the qualities of leadership 
demanded of every army officer after commissioning, the Committee find it 
rather strange as to why and how the candidates for PC and SSC are trained 
differently when they are expected to perform similar duties after being 
commissioned as officers in the army.  The Committee, therefore, desire that 
the modules and duration of training for graduate level entries for SSC and PC 
in the army may be thoroughly reviewed with a view to bringing in parity in 
imparting pre-induction training to them on the lines of practices being 
adopted by the other two services.   
 
Pre-Induction Training Infrastructure 
11. As brought out earlier in this Report, the pre-induction training 
infrastructure especially in the army is inadequate to meet the enhanced 
manpower requirement of the officers in the armed forces.  The Committee 
have been informed during evidence that a proposal to set up another officers’ 
training institute to meet the training requirement of increased induction of 
SSC officers in the army has been approved “in principle”  but it would require 
detailed financial approvals from the Ministry of Finance. In the light of the fact 
that creation of new infrastructure for imparting pre-induction training not only 
involves huge financial implications but also a long drawn and time consuming 
process, the Committee strongly feel that earnest efforts should be directed 
towards large scale and rationalised expansion of existing training institutes in 
a time bound manner so as to ensure optimal and efficient utilization of these 
institutions. The Committee are in no doubt that besides being cost-effective, 
such a step would also put minimal pressure on the manpower required for 
running such institutions and requisitioned from already depleted strength of 
the officers. 
 

  
 
133 
 
Reckoning of training period  
 
12. The Committee note that the tr aining period is counted towards 
service in case of PBOR in the armed forces.  However, the same benefit 
is not extended to officers inducted in the armed forces.  The Committee 
feel that there can be no plausibl e explanation for not adopting uniform 
practices in this regard and they desire that the period of pre-induction 
training imparted to the officers in the armed forces should be reckoned 
as service rendered for the purposes of pensionary benefits.  
 
 
Stipend during pre-induction training 
 
13. The Committee note that the cadets undergoing training before 
induction as officers are not being paid any stipend except in the case of 
graduate cadets who are reported to  be paid a monthly stipend of 
Rs.8,000/- during training.  The Committee understand that all the cadets 
taking pre-induction training for joini ng the armed forces in the officers’ 
cadre do not necessarily come from  effluent background and they 
strongly feel that there is an im perative need to extend appropriate 
financial support on the basis of their educational qualifications so as to  
enable them to meet their out of pocket expenses as well as the 
expectations of their family memb ers. They, therefore, strongly 
recommend that all the cadets undergoing pre-induction training at NDA 
or similar institutions must be paid Rs.10,000/- and the graduate 
entrants Rs.15,000/- as monthly stipend  during the entire period of  
training before being commissioned in the armed forces.   The 
Committee also desire that th e MOD should take up this matter 
expeditiously with the Ministry of Finance at the highest level and 
impress upon them the need for extending such a benefit.  

  
 
134 
 
Management of Career 
14. In order to improve the cadre mobility and reduce the existing 
problem of high rate of supe rsession, the AV Singh committee on 
restructuring of officers cadre of army officers had inter alia  
recommended that SSC cadre should be enhanced with a corresponding 
reduction in the regular cadre by m aking SSC sufficiently attractive so 
that adequate number of candidates opt for this entry.  The Committee 
have been informed that Raksha Mantri has since conveyed his “in 
principle” approval on certain proposals/action plans aimed at 
increasing the SSC entry with a view to restructuring the officers cadre 
and reducing shortage of officers in  the armed forces.  The Committee 
understand that all such proposals in cluding its financial implications 
are in the process of submission to the MOD for approval. While 
expressing the hope that these proposals will be expeditiously 
translated into reality, the Committee would like the Ministry to also 
consider the following suggestions so as to make SSC more attractive:- 
 
(i) One of the measures suggested  by the AV Singh committee to 
make SSC entry attractive related to lump sum grant of Rs.five 
lacs and Rs.ten lacs after five y ears and ten years of services 
respectively.  The Committee have been informed that a 
proposal is under consideration for grant of lumpsum amount 
to SSC officers at the rate of  Rs.ten lacs after ten years of 
service and for Rs.two lacs  for each completed year of service 
beyond ten years.   Keeping in vi ew the fact that SSC officers 
seeking release after rendering 14 years of services in the 
armed forces would be at such a crucial juncture of their age 
where they require financial support to meet their increasing 
liabilities, the Committee feel th at the rate of lumpsum amount 
to be made payable in this case should be kept at the rate of 
Rs.1.5 lacs for each year upto ten years of service followed by 
Rs.2.5 lacs for each completed year of service beyond ten 
years.  The Committee feel convinced that such an 
enhancement would go a long way in attracting larger 
segments of the youth towards SSC in the Armed Forces.  

  
135 
 
(ii) AV Singh committee had also recommended for reduction in 
number of papers for appearing in civil service entrance 
examination alongwith  age relaxation for SSC officers  The 
Committee note that the emergency commissioned officers 
inducted after 1962 war were given such an  exemption to appear 
in the civil service examination and the whole system of such 
recruitment has since been stopped years ago.  They find it rather 
strange that the Ministry have now put forth the plea that such a 
proposal at this stage has wider ramifications and is outside their 
purview.  Keeping in view the rich experience and knowledge 
gained by the SSC officers during their career and the services 
rendered to the nation by them during prime of their youth, the 
Committee consider it desirable that appropriate concessions for 
appearing in civil service entrance examination may be extended 
to the SSC officers on the same analogy as was adopted in the 
case of Emergeny Commissioned officers. Effective steps should 
also be taken for introducing innovative schemes for lateral 
induction of SSC officers into Central Paramilitary Organisation. 
 
15. The Committee note that the subs tantive promotion upto the rank 
of Lt. Colonel or equivalent in the three services is made by time-scale 
on completion of the stipulated period of 13 years of reckonable 
commissioned service.  However, promot ion of the officers to the rank 
of substantive colonel not promoted  by selection is made subject to 
their being fit, only after comp letion of 26 years of reckonable 
commissioned service.  The Committ ee’s examination has brought out 
that the rank structure in armed fo rces being of steep pyramidal shape 
leaves little scope for the officers to climb up the hierarchical ladder. 
The opportunities for their promotion are further restricted because of 
limited availability of training f acilities for Higher Command Course. 
Needless to say that the officers not selected for promotion or for 
Higher Command Course feels de-motivat ed which ultimately results in 
adverse affect on the overall effici ency of the armed forces.  The 
Committee, therefore, desire that in order to achieve the functional 
efficiency; combat effectiveness; and to keep down the age profile of 
the brigade commanders or equivalen t in the three Services of armed 
forces, the MOD should take appropriate measures to introduce a 
system whereby the strength of permanent commissioned officers vis-
à-vis SSC Officers is gradually brought  to level of 30 per cent of the 
authorized strength in each of the three Services and the time scale  

  
136 
 
promotions upto the rank of Brigadier and equivalent in all the Services 
are made by bringing in appropr iate reduction in the length of 
reckonable commissioned service so as to fulfill the individual career 
aspirations as well as to keep the morale of officers high.  The 
Committee need hardly point out th at such a measure would have 
negligible financial implications  consequent upon implementation of 
new pay-bands in the armed fo rces besides going a long way in 
keeping the rate of attrition at lower levels.   
16. Although the Government appointed AV Singh committee and 
implemented its Report with a vi ew to fulfilling individual career 
aspirations of the Officers in the armed forces, the Committee find it 
strange that no such efforts have been directed towards PBORs in the 
three Services. The Committee desire  that similar steps should be 
taken for career advancement of PBORs.   
 
Working Conditions  
 
17. The Committee note that limited opportunities exist for 
promotion of the officers in the armed forces due to steep rank 
structure. This fact necessitates that  fair and transparent systems are 
put in place for allaying the fears in the minds of officers serving armed 
forces.  Although the constitution of  selection boards for promotion is 
stated to be fixed, the Committee understand that there is no fixed  time 
schedule for holding the meetings of such boards in different services.  
Undoubtedly, any delay in holding th e meetings of such boards may 
sometimes result in denial of pr omotion to the officers otherwise 
eligible. During evidence, the Defence Secretary informed the 
Committee that he would not like to hazard a guess on the allegations 
made by those who are not promoted that the dates were played with to 
rule them out    and made a promi se that he would certainly look into 
this aspect.  The Committee trust that  the Ministry would not only pay 
serious attention towards streamlining the procedures in this regard 
but also ensure that the meetings of all selection boards for promotions  

  
137 
in different wings of the three services are held at a regular interval of 
six months every year to make select ion for the posts anticipated in 
ensuing six months so that not even a single deserving officer is 
deprived of his legitimate right. Any deviation from the stipulated time 
schedule in holding meetings of the selection boards for promotion 
should be viewed seriously and appr opriate action taken against those 
found responsible. 
18. The Committee note that statut ory and non-statutory channels 
are available to the Defence servi ce personnel for seeking redressal of 
their service related grievances. While  the efficacy of this system 
stands proved by candid admission of Defence Secretary that a few 
promotions had been given on the b asis of statutory complaints, the 
Committee need hardly emphasise that such complaints are required to 
be entertained on priority and first come first served basis so as to 
display a sense of equity, fair play and justice. The Committee trust that 
the MOD will expeditiously take appropriate steps in this regard. 
19. Appropriate steps should also be taken to ensure that the 
adverse entries made in the Annual Confidential Reports (ACRs) are 
invariably communicated to the officers concerned within a prescribed 
time frame with a view to affording them an opportunity to clarify their 
position for appropriate action. Prope r systems should also be put in 
place to avoid any delay in forwarding the ACRs to the concerned 
quarters for being placed before th e selection boards so as to avoid 
any cause of complaints from the e ligible officers in the zone of 
consideration. The feasibility of reducing the number of officers 
reviewing the ACRs should also be considered in the positive light.  
20. The fact that a large number of cases relating to service matters 
of armed forces personnel are pending wi th various courts of law is a 
clear indicator that the satisfaction level for seeking redressal of 
grievance through normal departmental channels is distressingly low. 
Obviously, the existing systems and procedures are not sound enough 
to provide appropriate remedy to the aggrieved defence personnel. The 
Committee are in no doubt that the laws governing the three Services  

  
138 
require a thorough review in the light of various judgments delivered by 
the courts during recent times. The Co mmittee also feel that there is a 
need to identify those weak spots in the system which open the 
floodgates of litigation.  The Commi ttee expect the MOD to give serious 
attention towards this aspect so  as to avoid unnecessary litigation 
involving huge financial burden and loss of man-hours.    
21. The Committee understand that preparatory action has been 
taken by the Ministry to establis h the Armed Forces Tribunal. However, 
the Tribunal is yet to be notified under Section 4 of the relevant Act. The 
Committee trust that an urgent action would be taken to operationalise 
the Tribunal without any further delay.   
22. The Committee are in no doubt th at while the chain of command 
and control has to be kept intact to maintain highest level of discipline 
in the Armed Forces, there is need for attitudinal change in the mindset 
of those in the higher echelon in view of the socio-economic changes in 
the society and the enhanced level  of the educational qualification 
amongst the personnel holding lower ranks in the armed forces. The 
Committee feel that it is high time  that multipronged strategies are 
devised and adopted with a view to bringing in necessary reforms in 
the armed forces. They, therefore, d esire that concrete steps should be 
taken to discard undesirable discriminatory practices based on rank 
structure and gender bias. Needless to  say that such steps would not 
only result in redressal of genuine grievances of lower ranks  but also 
help in better management of stress level in the armed forces. 
 
Welfare measures 
23. The Committee are of the view th at the Ministry of Defence may 
come forward on their own and play a proactive role in addressing the 
legitimate and genuine grievances of the members of the armed forces 
considering the fact that the constitu tional and legal provisions restrict 
them to form associations or unions. The Committee feel that such an 
act on the part of the Ministry will prove efficacious enough in boosting 
the morale of the armed forces personnel.  

  
139 
24. The defence service personnel are frequently deployed in different 
parts of the country and such transfers have an adverse impact on their 
wards in meeting domicile requirements specified in certain States for the 
purposes of admission to under-graduate level courses in academic and 
professional institutions. During their examination of the subject, the 
Committee have been informed by the Ministry of Human Resource 
Development (HRD) that “there is only one domicile i.e. of the Union of 
India” under Article 5 of the Constitution. The Ministry of HRD have also 
stated that the policy of the Central Government as laid down in paragraph 
3.8 of the National Policy of Education enunciates that “steps will be taken 
to facilitate inter-regional mobility by providing equal access to every 
Indian of requisite merit, regardless of his origins” in the matters 
connected with  higher education in general and technical education in 
particular. Considering the unique nature of duties required to be 
performed by defence services personnel in all parts of the country, the 
Committee desire the Ministry of De fence to take up the matter with the 
State Governments with a view to examining the feasibility of doing away 
with the domicile requirements atleast in the case of wards of defence 
services personnel till such time the Government enact an appropriate 
legislation to implement the consti tutional provisions and the policy 
framework envisaged in this regard.  
 
Exit Policy 
25. The Committee note that certain criteria have been laid down in the 
three Services for considering the request for pre-mature retirement or 
resignation from the Services. The Co mmittee’s examination of the subject 
matter has revealed that such requests from officers are considered on 
merits of the case and requirements of the Service. Undoubtedly, 
discretionary powers in such matters result in discontentment among 
officers in a number of cases.  The Co mmittee, therefore, stress that the 
Ministry of Defence should lay down clear-cut, objective and well defined 
policy guidelines in this regard leaving no scope for arbitrary decisions.  It 
should also be ensured that cases of similar nature are treated in an 
equitable manner. 

  
140 
26. The Committee consider it desi rable that the Government should 
make it mandatory for all the a rmed forces officers including those 
serving in Defence Public Sector Undertakings to seek permission from 
the Government for taking up post-retirement employment within two 
years of their release from the Se rvices. Stringent action should be 
contemplated against those violating such stipulations.  
 
Welfare of the Ex-servicemen 
27.  The Committee note that the Department of Ex-servicemen Welfare 
has been created in 2004 under the Mi nistry of Defence to formulate 
various policies and programmes for the welfare and resettlement of Ex-
servicemen (ESM) in the country. According to the information available 
with the Committee, this Department is assisted by Kendriya Sainik Board 
(KSB) and Directorate General of Resettlement (DGA). While the KSB lays 
down general policies for the welfare of ESM and their dependants and 
also administers welfare funds, the o ffice of the DGR has been entrusted 
with the responsibility of implementing schemes and programmes of the 
Government for ESM which includes pre and post retirement training, re-
employment, self-employment, etc. The Committee are however, surprised 
to find that despite existence of such an elaborate mechanism, there are a 
number of areas which require focussed attention for dignified 
resettlement and rehabilitation of ESM . Undoubtedly, there is an urgent 
and imperative necessity to address the legitimate needs of ESM and the 
Committee strongly recommend the following measures: 
(i) In order to enable ESM to derive their due benefits from the welfare 
schemes formulated for them by the Government. The Ministry of 
Defence should urgently devise a foolproof mechanism for 
compulsory registration of all ESM with the relevant Zila Sainik 
Boards which in turn should forward such data to Rajya Sainik 
Boards and DGR for being maintained of state and national levels. 
Needless to say that complete and precise data on the number of 
ESM in the various states and the country as a whole, would be 
immense use to the various agencies involved in formulating and 
implementing policies and programmes being contemplated for the 
welfare of ESM. 

  
141 
(ii) Based on the accurate data on ESM so available with DGR, the 
Ministry should ensure adequate  allocation of funds to DGR 
for efficacious implementati on of various schemes being 
launched for welfare of ESM in the country. 
(iii) In their 4 th Report (14 th Lok Sabha), the Committee had 
reiterated their earlier recommendation for setting up of 
‘National Commission on Ex- servicemen’. The Committee 
have now been informed during oral deposition that the 
proposal for establishing such a Commission has since been 
cleared by the Raksha Mantri. The Committee trust that the 
‘National Commission on Ex-ser vicemen’ with statutory 
powers will be established soon so as ensure accountability 
of existing structure put in place for implementation of 
various welfare schemes for ESM. 
(iv) The Committee understand that  the revised pension policy 
being implemented as a sequel to the recommendations of the 
Sixth Central Pay Commission, continues to remain a 
contentious issue between th e Government and the ESM. The 
Committee desire that appropr iate and expeditious action 
should be taken to resolve this issue in accordance with the 
general principles of equity. 
 
Induction of Ex-servicemen 
28. The Committee understand that   besides their primary 
responsibility of protecting the territori al integrity, the services of the 
armed forces personnel are often re quisitioned to assist the civil 
authorities during internal security problems and rescue/relief 
operations during natural calamities. Considering the fact that a large 
number of defence services personne l retiring at a comparatively 
younger age are well trained and experienced enough to handle 
problems of internal security and na tural calamities, the Committee are 
of the view that it would be in the national interest that the Government 
devised an appropriate scheme for inducting retiring armed forces 
personnel as a distinct force on the lines of Central Paramilitary Forces  

  
142 
(CPMF). The Committee are in no doubt  that such a scheme would not 
only address the problems being experienced in lateral induction of Ex-
servicemen in CPMF but also result in substantial financial savings to 
the Government on recruiting pro cedures, training and pension 
payments. It would also minimize in stances of frequent deployment of 
the armed forces for secondary duti es as the services of the distinct 
force having professional experience would always be available to 
assist the Civil Authorities. 
 
Civilian manpower and infrastructural support 
29. The Committee note that civilian manpower and infrastructural 
support to the Services Headquarters and the Headquarter Offices of Inter-
services organisations under the Ministry of Defence are provided by the 
office of the Chief Administrative Officer  (CAO). While the office of CAO is 
responsible for providing administrative cover to the civilian personnel so 
employed including various categories of Armed Forces Headquarter 
(AFHQ) civilian cadres, the Committee are surprised to find that the 
proposals regarding cadre restructuring etc., of AFHQ civil services 
require consultation with the Depa rtment of Personnel and Training 
(DOPT) which is reported to be play ing no role in career management of 
AFHQ civil cadres. While the Group of Ministers in paragraph 6.76 of its 
Report on ‘Reforming the National Security System’ had recommended in 
2001 that “a Committee may be set up to look into the issue of better 
utilization of AFHQ civil service officers within the Ministry of Defence”, 
the Committee’s examination of the subject matter has however, revealed 
that nothing substantial has been done in  this regard participation of this 
service within the Ministry remains inadequate. The oral deposition and 
the written submission made before the Committee also highlighted that 
despite recruitment to various groups of AFHQ civilian cadres through 
common examination, their service conditions continue to be at variance 
with similarly placed services under the Government. Undoubtedly, the 
bleak career prospects and absence of any lateral movements in the 
Ministry of Defence have an adverse impact on the functioning of these 
cadres where a number of cases relating to service matters are reported to 
have been under protracted litigation.  In the light of the fact that these  

  
143 
cadres were introduced with the speci fic aim of providing specialized 
infrastructural support to the three Service Headquarters and inter-service 
organisations, the Committee desire that appropriate steps should be 
taken to strengthen the AFHQ civilian cadres by restructuring their service 
conditions with a view to bringing in  parity with similarly placed services 
in the Government.  
30. Canteen Store Department is yet another organisation rendering 
useful contribution in providing ‘service to the Services’. The Committee 
are of firm view that organisations of such nature as well as the civilian 
employees contributing towards the functioning of the three Services in 
different parts of the country have to be treated in an equitable manner. 
They, therefore, desire the Gover nment to make an objective assessment 
of the service conditions of such civilian employees in the defence 
services with a view to taking appropriate steps to bring in requisite 
improvements for efficient functioning of the Services. 
 
Defence Research and Development Organisation (DRDO)  
31. The Committee note that the charter of DRDO requires them to render 
advice to the three Services and inter-services organisations on scientific 
aspects of weapons, military operations, support and logistics in all likely 
threats of conflict. Taking into account the multifarious responsibilities 
assigned to the Secretary (R & D) to act as Director General of DRDO and  DG 
of Aeronautical Development Agency besides being Scientific Advisor to 
Raksha Mantri, the Committee in their 14
th Report (14 th Lok Sabha) had 
observed that such a situation diluted the efficacy of the DRDO. They had 
accordingly desired that one person in DRDO should not be entrusted with a 
number of responsibilities.  The Committee have now been informed by the 
Ministry of Defence that the whole issue of management of DRDO was being 
looked into by a committee headed by Dr. P. Rama Rao and that committee 
had submitted its confidential report in March, 2008. Considering the fact that 
DRDO has an important role in rendering advice on scientific aspects of 
weapons and military operations to the three Services,  the Committee feel 
convinced that any further delay in taking decision in such a crucial matter 
will have an adverse impact on the effective functioning of both the DRDO and 
the three Services. 

  
144 
32. To sum up, the Committee’s exam ination has revealed certain 
deficiencies and shortcomings in manpower planning and human 
resource management in the armed forces. Broadly, the areas of 
concern are:-  
a) Absence of proper system  for assessment of manpower 
requirement; 
b) Inability to meet persisting shortage of officers; 
c) Inadequate initiatives to encourage and motivate the younger 
generation to join armed forces; 
d) Lack of awareness among the eligible youth regarding 
recruitment procedures; 
e) Need for improvement in the recruitment procedures;  
f) Inadequate pre-induction training infrastructure; 
g) Desirability of better manage ment of career prospects and 
working conditions; and 
h) Need for multipronged stra tegies for welfare of serving 
defence personnel and ex-servicemen.  
   
Although the MOD have maintained that several policy initiatives 
have been undertaken to address th e issues, the Committee are of 
considered view that some of th ese initiatives are still on paper while 
the others will take a long time to fructify.  The Committee strongly feel 
that the armed forces deserve to be accorded the status of a national 
service in view of the unique nature of duties being performed by them 
in all parts of the country. They, ther efore, desire that a permanent high 
powered Core Group comprising re presentatives from the MOD; the 
three defence services; and the Mini stries/Departments connected with 
the matter relating to the defen ce services in any manner should be 
constituted by the Government so as to ensure effective and timely 
implementation of the various steps c ontemplated from time to time or 
are in the process of being introduced  for improving the quality of life 
of defence service personnel engaged in protecting national security 
concerns in difficult situations aw ay from their family for prolonged 
periods. 

  
145 
Inadequate Training Infrastructure 
 
33. With the advent of technological development and fast changing nature 
of warfare in the modern times, the need for hi-tech training has become a 
necessity for maintaining a highly skilled force.   The Committee are, however, 
distressed to find that a number of  serving officers and other ranks being  
sent for training is abysmally low in the three services as is evident from the 
statistics furnished by the MOD which brings out that the percentage of 
officers sent for training as against the officers in position is 24 in army 
followed by 5 per cent and 3 per cent in navy and air force respectively.  The 
picture  in respect of PBORs sent for training is equally dismal with such 
figures being 6 percent in air force, 4.8 per cent in navy and a poor 1.7 per cent 
in army.    The Committee are dismayed to find that despite depleted strength, 
the services are not  able to impart requisite training to the majority of serving 
officers and other ranks on the latest technological changes and the state-of-
the-art equipment  inducted  from time to time.  Undoubtedly, availability of 
inadequate infrastructure and facilities in the training institutions is adversely 
affecting the modernisation of the armed forces.   The Committee, therefore, 
desire that the existing training infrastructure should be expanded at a large 
scale keeping in view the future requirements including those necessitated due 
to enhanced induction of manpower in the future.   Appropriate steps should 
also be simultaneously taken to expeditiously meet the manpower 
requirements in the training institutions and to ensure that the existing hi-tech 
training infrastructure is put to optimal use.  
 
Need to expedite e-learning 
 
34. The Committee note that a policy envisaging implantation of e-learning 
by 2012 in three phases in army was introduced in August, 2005.  Considering 
the fact that the format of e-learning will not only shorten the duration of the 
training but also enhance the capability level, the Committee desire the MOD to 
make concerted efforts to ensure that the policy is implemented strictly in 
accordance with the time-schedule prescribed in this regard.  They also desire 
that an appropriate mechanism to monitor progress of this policy be put in 
place in the Ministry and the project not allowed to languish on any account of 
any factor.   
 

  
146 
Delegation of  power to service headquarters 
35. It has been informed during evi dence by the representative of a 
Service that the available training in frastructure especially for hi-tech 
training needed to be increased with  “speed”.  The Committee consider 
that this aspect requires utmost attention in the MOD particularly in view 
of the findings of Comptroller a nd Auditor General of India (C&AG) 
contained in his report on Union Government (Defence Services) for the 
year ended March, 2007 which reveals an instance where the issue of 
procurement of new simulator has b een pending for over four years in 
the MOD thus adversely affecting th e operational as well as on-the-job 
training of the submarine crew.  The Committee, therefore, strongly 
recommend that the MOD should cons ider delegation of appropriate 
power and authority to the service h eadquarters to enable them to take 
timely measures on such issues so as to ensure increased and effective 
combat capabilities of the forces. 
Depleting strength of Field Firing Ranges 
 
36. The Committee are concerned to  note that the number of Field 
Firing Ranges (FFRs) is gradually decreasing over a period of time. 
Although the army had a total of 104 FFRs at one point of time, the 
number of such Ranges is expected to  come down to mere seven by the 
year 2014.  One of the important reas ons attributable to the depleting 
number of these Ranges is reported to  be the clearances required to be 
obtained by the State Governments fr om the Ministry of Environment 
and Forests to permit use of forest  land for non-forest activities in 
accordance with the Forest Conser vation Act 1980 and Supreme Court 
judgement delivered in 2002.  While the MOD is stated to have initiated a 
process of consultation with all stakeholders in order to find a mutually 
acceptable solution to the problem, th e Committee feel that it is high 
time that the Ministry initiated expeditious and concrete steps to resolve 
this issue in the national interest in a time bound manner.  

  
147 
Training abroad 
37. The Committee’s examination h as also brought out that the 
number of officers being sent for tr aining abroad is minuscule.  The 
Committee feel that the training abroad provide opportunity to the armed 
forces officers to upgrade their know ledge in a different environment 
and the skills so acquired can be sh ared and gainfully utilised by the 
services. The Committee, therefore, desire that the policy for sending 
officers for training abroad should be  reviewed in a positive light and 
emphasise should be laid on identify ing those specialised areas where 
inadequate facilities exist in the country. 
 
Long Term Training Plan  
38. The Committee understand that there is an urgent need to gear up 
our armed forces to meet the challeng es of growing threat perception in 
view of the fact that the global security scenario is fast changing with 
the advent of technological advancements in the nature of warfare.  This 
not only necessitates state-of-the-art tr aining facilities but  also requires 
sustained efforts for being read y for tomorrow.  The Committee, 
accordingly, desire that the MOD s hould pay serious attention towards 
this aspect and devise an effective training strategy to meet the long 
term technological requirements of the armed forces keeping pace with 
the changing times and implement it  in an efficient manner with 
adequate budgetary support.  Any constraints experienced in 
implementation of this strategy should be adequately addressed well in 
time so that the schedule of im parting knowledge on the upgraded 
technologies to the armed forces personnel is not disturbed.  The 
concept of jointness and tri-services training should also be taken into 
account so as to ensure effective in tegration of the combat capabilities 
and better coordination in situation of war.    
 
New Delhi;                 BALASAHEB VIKHE PATIL, 
05 December, 2008                                  Chairman, 
14 Agrahayana, 1930 (Saka)    Standing Committee on Defence. 

  
148 
APPENDICES 
 
MINUTES OF THE ELEVENTH  SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE 
ON DEFENCE (2007-2008) 
 
 The Committee sat on Tuesday, the 18 th December 2007 from 1100 to 
1250 hrs. in Committee Room ‘C’, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
 
PRESENT 
Shri Balasaheb Vikhe Patil – Chairman 
 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri Vijay  Bahuguna 
3. Shri Milind Murli Deora 
4. Shri Jigajinagi Ramesh Chandappa 
5. Shri Suresh Kalmadi  
6. Dr. K.S. Manoj 
7. Shri Asaduddin Owaisi 
8. Shri Raju Rana 
9. Shri Manavendra Singh 
10. Shri Rajesh Verma 
11. Shri Anil Shukla Warsi 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
12. Shri Jai Parkash Aggarwal 
13. Shri Abu Asim Azmi 
14.Smt.Shobhana Bhartia 
15.Smt. N.P. Durga 
16.Shri S.P.M. Syed Khan 
 17.Shri K.B. Shanappa 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri A. Louis Martin   - Joint Secretary 
2. Shri Gopal Singh - Director 
3. Shri D.R. Shekhar - Deputy Secretary-II 
 
WITNESSES 
MINISTRY OF DEFENCE 
 
1. Smt. Neelam Nath  - Addl.Secy (N) 
2. Shri M. Natarajan  - SA to RM  
3. Smt. Neelkamal Narang - FA (DS) 
4. Dr. W. Selvamurthy  - CCR&DD (LS&HR) 
5. Shri G. Elangovan  - CCR&D (R&M) 
6. Shri Ajay Tirkey  - JS(E) 
7. Shri Jatinderbir Singh - JS(Trg) & CAO 
8. Shri S.C. Barmma  - Dir (AG) 
9. Shri Bhaskar Verma  - DS(Trg) 
10. Dr. JP Singh   - Addl Dir (P&C) 

  
149 
ARMED FORCES HQRS. 
 
11. Lt Gen H.S. Lidder  - CISC 
12. V. Adml. Nirmal Verma - VCNS  
13 Lt Gen Thomas Mathew - AG 
14. Air Mshl  VK Verma  - DG (I&S) 
15. Vice Adml DK Joshi  - DCIDS (DOT) 
16. Maj Gen SR Ghosh  - ADG MP 
17. Maj Gen VK Ahluwalia - Offg. DGMT 
18. AVM PS Bhangu  - ACAS (PA&C) 
19. AVM LK  Malhotra   - ACAS (PO) 
20. AVM SP  Rajguru  - ACAS (Trg) 
21. AVM VK Dayalu  - ACAS (AF Wks) 
22. Rear Adml Satish Soni - ACOP (HRD) 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the r epresentatives of the 
Ministry of Defence and drew their attention to the Direction 58 of the 
Directions by the Speaker, Lok Sabha regarding maintaining confidentiality of 
the deliberations of the sitting. Thereafte r, the representatives of the Ministry 
briefed the Committee on the subject `Human Resource Planning, shortage 
of Manpower, In-fusion of hi-tech Training and Infrastructure for the Armed 
Forces’. 
 
3. The Committee sought clarificati on on the issues viz. rank-wise 
sanctioned strength of manpower in the Armed Forces and rank–wise 
shortage thereof, implementation status of the A.V.  Singh Committee, status 
of the proposed Central Def ence University,  details of the posts that had 
been abolished and  created in the past.  The Committee also desired to 
know the steps proposed to be taken  to   make the career in the defence 
services move attractive. 
 
4. The representatives of the Ministry  of Defence then clarified the issues 
raised by the Members.  As regards the points on which t he representatives 
could not readily respond, the Committ ee desired the Ministry to furnish 
written information at the earliest. 
 
5. As some of the senior officials from the Armed Forces as well as the 
Defence Secretary were  not present in  the sitting of the Committee due to 
their prior commitments, Committee deci ded to hold  another sitting  to hear 
views of the officials  on the same subject on a later date. 
 
6. A copy of verbatim record of the proceedings has been kept.  
  
The Committee then adjourned. 
 

  
150 
 
MINUTES OF THE FIFTEENTH SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE 
ON DEFENCE (2007-2008) 
 
 The Committee sat on Friday, the 18 th January 2008 from 1100 to 1300 
hrs. in Committee Room ‘B’, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
 
PRESENT 
Shri Balasaheb Vikhe Patil – Chairman 
 
MEMBERS 
 
LOK SABHA 
 
1. Shri Vijay  Bahuguna 
2. Shri Santosh Gangwar  
3. Shri C. Kuppusami 
4. Dr. K.S. Manoj 
5. Shri Asaduddin Owaisi 
6. Shri Raju Rana 
7. Dr. H.T. Sangliana 
8. Shri Manavendra Singh  
9. Shri Anil Shukla Warsi 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
10.        Shri Jai Parkash Aggarwal 
11.        Shri Abu Asim Azmi 
12.        Smt.Shobhana Bhartia 
13.        Shri R.K. Dhawan 
14. Smt. N.P. Durga 
15. Shri K.B. Shanappa 
16. Smt. Viplove Thakur 
 
SECRETARIAT 
1. Shri A. Louis Martin    - Joint Secretary 
2. Shri Gopal Singh       - Director 
3. Shri D.R. Shekhar  - Deputy Secretary-II 
 
WITNESSES 
 ARMY HQ 
 1. Lt. Gen. M..L.Naidu  - VCOAS 
 2. Lt. Gen Thomas Mathew - AG 
 3. Maj. Gen SR Ghosh  - ADG MP 
 4. Brig  Nirmolak Singh  - DDGMT `A’ 
  
NAVAL HQ 
 5. V Adml. Nirmal Verma - VCNS 
6. V Adm DK Dewarn  - COP 
7. R Adml Satish Soni  - ACOP(HRD) 
8. Cmde AK Sharma  - (DMPR) 
9. Cmde RM Purandare  - PDOP 
10. Cmde Nalin Dewan  - PDNT 
11. Cdr AK Meelu   - JDMPR  

  
151 
 AIR HQ 
12. Air Mshl PV Naik  - AS 
13. Air Mshl VR Iyer  - AOP 
14. Air Mshl JN Burma  -  AOA 
15. AVM LK  Malhotra   - ACAS (PO) 
16. AVM SP  Rajguru  - ACAS (Trg) 
17.  AVM S.P. Singh  - ACAS (PA&C) 
Directorate General of Defence Estate (DGDE) 
18. Shri Balsharan Singh  - DGDE 
19. Lt. Gen R.R. Goswami  - E-in-C 
20. Brig. S.S. Kelkar  - DDG (Pers), E-in-C Br 
21. Shri R.P. Singh   - Dire. (DGDE) 
 
HQ Integrated Defence Staff (IDS) 
 
22. V Adml DK Joshi  - DCIDS (DOT) 
23. Maj Gen MN Kashid  - ADG Rtg. 
24.  Brig AK Bali   - DDG PS 
25. Brig NM Rasquinha  - DACIDS (TSI) 
26. Brig George Mathai  - DDG MP 
27. AVM VK Yajurvedi  - ACIDS (TRADOC) 
HEADS OF TRAINING INSTITUTES 
28. Lt. Gen P.K. Rampal  -  Comdt Indian Military Academy  
29. Air Mshl. T.S. Randhawa -  Comdt National Defence Academy 
30. Maj. Gen. R.K. Swamy  -  Comdt., Officers Training Academy 
31. Brig. Gautam Moorthi  -  Secy. National Defence College 
32. AVM  D Kukreja  -  Comdt. Air Force Academy 
33. Capt MA Hamphiholi  -  CO, Naval Academy 
34. Wg. Cdr K.D. Beri  -  SO, National Defence Academy  
  
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the representatives of the Armed 
Forces Headquarters and Heads of Training Institutes and drew their attention to the 
Direction 58 of the Directions by the Speaker, Lok Sabha regarding maintaining 
confidentiality of the deliberations of the sitting. Thereafter, the representatives of 
the Armed Forces Headquarter briefed the Committee on the subject `Human 
Resource Planning, shortage of Manpower, In-fusion of hi-tech Training and 
Infrastructure for the Armed Forces’. 
 
3. The Committee sought clarification on the issues such as manpower 
shortage, Short Service Commission, upgradation of training infrastructure, hi-tech 
training of defence personnel, pre-selection training, working of Rajya Sainik 
Schools etc. The Committee   also desired to know the rationale behind having two 
systems of entry i.e. entry through UPSC and direct recruitment by the services. 
 
4. The representatives of the Armed Forces Headquarters and Heads of 
Training Institutes then clarified the issues raised by the Members.  As regards the 
points on which the representatives could not readily respond, the Committee 
desired the representatives to furnish written information at the earliest. 
 
5. A copy of verbatim record of the proceedings has been kept.  
 
The Committee then adjourned. 

  
152 
 
MINUTES OF THE SIXTEENTH SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE 
ON DEFENCE (2007-2008) 
 
 The Committee sat on Monday, the 28 th January 2008 from 1100 to 
1200 hrs. in Committee Room ‘B’, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
 
PRESENT 
 
Shri Balasaheb Vikhe Patil – Chairman 
 
MEMBERS 
 
LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri Vijay Bahuguna 
3. Shri Ramesh C. Jigajinagi 
4. Shri Asaduddin Owaisi 
5. Dr. K.S. Manoj 
6. Shri Raju Rana 
7. Ms. Ingrid Mcleod 
8. Shri Suresh Kalmadi 
9. Dr. H.T. Sangliana 
10. Shri Arjun Charan Sethi 
 
 RAJYA SABHA 
 
11. Dr. Farooq Abdullah 
12. Shri Jai Parkash Aggarwal 
13. Shrimati Shobhana Bhartia 
14. Shrimati N.P. Durga 
15. Shri K.B. Shanappa 
16. Shri S.P.M. Syed Khan 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri A. Louis Martin - Joint Secretary 
2. Shri Gopal Singh - Director 
3. Shri D. R. Shekhar - Deputy Secretary – II 
4. Shrimati J. M. Sinha - Under Secretary 
 
WITNESS 
 
Admiral (Retired) Arun Prakash - Former Chief of Naval Staff 
  
2. At the outset, the Chairman welc omed Admiral (Retd.) Arun Prakash 
to the sitting of the Committee for gi ving briefing on the subjects, “Human 
Resources Planning, shortage of manpower , infusion of hi-tech training and 
infrastructure for the armed forces and Threat Perception and Modernisation 
of Armed Forces and Long-Term Perspective Plan” and drew his attention to 
Direction 58 of Directions by the Speaker, Lok Sabha. 
 

  
153 
 
3. Then Admiral (Retd.) Arun Prakash, briefed the Committee on the 
above subjects and expressed his views on the following points and 
requirements relating to defence pr eparedness of the country which need 
immediate attention of the Government: 
 
i) Maritime threats for India is from state entities like our 
neighbouring countries and non-state entities  who operate on 
the Indian Ocean, like Al-Qaeda, Jamaia Islamia, and LTTE, 
etc.  
 
ii) Need to take care of national interest by having a strong 
maritime force. 
 
iii) Long-term funding should be provided to the Long-Term 
Perspective Plan of the three forces. 
 
iv) Till now India is importing most  sensitive technologies, thereby 
spending huge amount of money.  So far as transfer of 
technology   is concerned, our production agencies are 
importing spare parts and assembling the same and thus, there 
is no transfer of technology.  Ther efore, the need of the hour is 
to have transfer of technology, not import of spare parts to 
achieve self-reliance in defence production.  
 
v) Need for active Public-Private Partnership. 
 
vi) Need for active participation of Armed Forces in the decision-
making  process on national security. 
 
vii) Need to bring reforms in higher defence management and to 
have a National Security Act in the lines of United States. 
  
5. A copy of verbatim record of the proceedings has been kept.  
  
The Committee then adjourned. 
 
 
 

  
154 
MINUTES OF THE THIRTY - FIRST OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
DEFENCE (2007-2008) 
 
 
 The Committee sat on Monday, the 26 th May, 2008 from 1100 to 1255 
hrs. in Room No. `074’, Parliament Library Building,  New Delhi. 
 
PRESENT 
 
Shri Balasaheb Vikhe Patil – Chairman 
 
MEMBERS 
 
LOK SABHA 
 
1. Shri Milind Murli Deora 
2. Shri Santosh Gangwar 
3. Dr. K.S. Manoj 
4. Ms. Ingrid Mcleod 
5. Shri Raju Rana 
6. Dr. H.T. Sangliana 
7. Shri Rajesh Verma 
 
    RAJYA SABHA 
  
8. Shri Jai Parkash Aggarwal 
9. Shri R.K. Dhawan 
10. Shri K.B. Shanappa 
11. Shri M.V. Mysura Reddy 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri  A. Louis Martin  - Joint Secretary 
2. Shri Rajeev Sharma  - Director 
3. Shri D.R. Shekhar  - Deputy Secretary 
4. Smt. J.M. Sinha  -  Under Secretary 
 
WITNESSES 
 
1. Lt. Gen. G.D. Singh (Retd.) 
2. Brg. R.K.S. Gulia,(Retd.)     - President,  
Indian Ex-services League 
3. Brig. K. Narendra Singh (Retd.) - Indian Ex-services League 
4. Col. A. Sharma (Retd.)     - Indian Ex-services League 
5. Lieut. Col. C. S. Dhillon (Retd.)  -       President, Indian Ex Services 
League, Punjab & Chandigarh 
6. Brig. K.S. Kahlon (Retd.)            -       Indian Ex-Services League, 
 Punjab & Chandigarh 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcom ed Lt. Gen. G.D. Singh (Retd.)  to 
the sitting of the Committee  and request ed him to share his views with the 
Committee on the subject, ‘Human Re source Planning, Shortage of 
Manpower, Infusion of hi-tech Traini ng and Infrastructure for the Armed 
Forces’. He also drew his attenti on to Direction 58 of Directions by the 
Speaker, Lok Sabha. Lt. Gen. G.D. Singh (Retd.), then expressed his views 
on the issues relating to Human Resour ces Policy in Armed Forces, need to 
reduce the duration of mid-ca reer training of Defence officers,  outsourcing of 
non-strategic areas and soldier- officer relationship, etc. He also responded to 
the queries raised by the Members one by one. 
  Witness then withdrew. 

  
 
 
155 
 
3. The Committee then, r equested Brig. R.K.S. Gulia (Retd.), President,  
Indian Ex-Services League, and his colleagues to give their views on the 
aforesaid subject  Brig. R.K.S. Gulia (Retd.), then,  ex pressed his views on 
shortage of Officers in  the Armed  Forces’ and narrated the reasons for the 
same. In his suggestions, he stre ssed upon the need for highly skilled and 
educated manpower, redresse l of grievances on 6 th Pay Commission and 
`One rank one pension’ for Ex-servicemen.  Brig Gulia (Retd.), and his 
colleagues also responded to the queries raised by the Members. 
Witnesses then withdrew. 
 
4. The Committee then, welcomed Lt. Col. C.S. Dhillon (Retd.) and his 
colleagues and requested them to express their point of view on the 
aforesaid subject. Lt. Col. Dhillion (R etd.), then elaborated on the problems 
being faced by Serving Personnel’s as  well as Ex-servicemen, need for a 
national policy on rehabilitation of Ex-servicemen and establishment of 
National Commission for Ex-Servicemen  etc. He and his colleagues also 
responded to the questions raised by the Members.  
 
6. A copy of verbatim record of the proceedings has been kept.  
 
The Committee then adjourned. 

  
 
156 
 
MINUTES OF THE THIRTY-FIFTH SITTING OF THE STANDING 
COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE (2007-2008) 
 
 The Committee sat on Thursday, the 3 rd July, 2008 from 1500 to 1630 
hrs. in Committee Room No. `62’, Parliament House, New Delhi, New Delhi. 
 
PRESENT 
 
Shri Balasaheb Vikhe Patil – Chairman 
 
MEMBERS 
 
LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri Vijay Bahuguna 
3. Shri S. Bangarappa 
4. Shri Milind Murli Deora 
5. Shri Santosh Gangwar 
6. Dr. K.S. Manoj 
7. Ms. Ingrid Mcleod 
8. Shri Asaduddin Owaisi 
9. Shri Manavendra Singh 
10. Shri Anil Shukla Warsi 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
11. Shri Jai Parkash Aggarwal 
12. Shri Abu Asim Azmi 
13. Shri R.K. Dhawan 
14. Shri A. Elavarasan 
15. Shri M.V. Mysura Reddy 
16. Shri K.B. Shanappa 
17. Smt. Viplove Thakur 
SECRETARIAT 
1. Shri Rajeev Sharma  - Director 
2. Shri D.R. Shekhar   - Deputy Secretary 
3. Smt. J.M. Sinha  - Under Secretary 
 
MINISTRY OF DEFENCE 
 
1. Shri Vijay Singh  - Defence Secretary 
2. Shri P.K. Rastogi  -  Spl. Secretary 
3. Shri Ajay Tirkey  - JS (E) 
4. Shri Jatinderbir Singh - JS (Trg) 
5. Shri Dilip Biswas  -  Addl. FA (D) 
6. Shri S.C. Barmma  -  Director (AG) 

  
157 
SERVICES HEADQUARTERS 
 
7. Lt Gen HS Lidder   -  CISC  
8. Lt Gen ML Naidu   -  VCOAS 
9. V Adml. Raman Prem Suthan  - VCNS 
10. Air Mshl PV Naik   -  VCAS 
11. Lt Gen KR Rao   -  DG (MP&PS) 
12. Lt Gen Thomas Mathew  -  AG 
13. Air Mshl S Mukerji   -  AOP 
14. Air Mshl D Kukreja   -  DCIDS (DOT) 
15. Vice Adm DK Dewan   - COP 
16. Air Vice Mshl RC Kashyap  -  Addl DGAFMS 
17. R Adm P Murgesan   -  Asst Chief Per (HRD) 
18. Maj Gen SP Singh   -  Offg DGMT 
19. Maj Gen SR Ghosh   -  ADG MP 
20. Maj Gen Vinod Nayanar  -  Addl MS (B) 
21. Maj. Gen AK Singh   -  ADG PP 
22. Cmde RM Purandare  -  PDP 
23. Cmde NN Rao   -  PD MPR 
24. Shri Ajay Tirkey   - JS (E) 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairman fondly remembered the services rendered 
by Late Field Marshal Sam Manekshaw  and mourned his said demise. The 
Committee then stood in silence for a while.  
 
3. The Chairman, then, dr ew the attention of the representatives of the 
Ministry of Defence to the Direction 58 of the Direc tions by the Speaker, Lok 
Sabha regarding maintaining confidentiality of  the deliberations of the sitting.  
The Committee then took evidence of the representative of the Ministry on 
the subject ‘Human Resource Planning, Shortage of Manpower, Infusion of 
hi-tech training and Infrastructure for the Armed Forces’. 
 
4. The Committee sought clarification on the specific issues relating to 
the human resource management policy of the Armed Forces, method of 
induction of personnel, status of impl ementation of A.V. Singh Committee   
recommendations, merit of time bound prom otion in the higher ranks of the 
three services, transparency in the method of promotion of officers etc.  The 
Committee also discussed the issue of una ttractiveness of the three services 
as career choice among the youth of India.  
 
5. The representatives of the Ministry  of Defence answered to the issues 
raised by the Members one by one. As  regards the points on which the 
representatives could not readily respond, the Committee desired the 
Ministry to furnish written information on such aspects at the earliest. 
 
6. A copy of verbatim record of the proceedings has been kept.  
    
The Committee then adjourned. 
 
 

  
158 
 
MINUTES OF THE THIRTY-SEVENTH SITTING OF THE STANDING 
COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE (2007-2008) 
 
 The Committee sat on Tuesday, the 28 th July, 2008 from 1500 hrs to 
1710 hrs. in Committee Room No. ‘C’, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
 
PRESENT 
 
Shri Balasaheb Vikhe Patil – Chairman 
 
MEMBERS 
 
LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri Vijay Bahuguna 
3. Shri Santosh Gangwar 
4. Shri Jigajinagi Ramesh Chandappa 
5. Dr. K.S. Manoj 
6. Shri Asaduddin Owaisi 
7. Shri Raju Rana 
8. Dr. H.T. Sangliana 
9. Prof. Mahadeorao Shiwankar 
10. Shri Rajesh Verma 
 
    RAJYA SABHA 
 
11. Dr. Farooq Abdullah 
12. Shri Jai Parkash Aggarwal 
13. Shri A. Elavarasan 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri S.K. Sharma  - Additional Secretary 
2. Shri A. Louis Martin   - Joint Secretary 
2. Shri D.R. Shekhar   - Deputy Secretary 
3. Smt. J.M. Sinha  - Under Secretary 
 
NON-OFFICIAL WITNESS 
 
1.  Maj. Gen. Mrinal Suman (Retd.) 
 
MINISTRY OF DEFENCE :  SERVICES HEADQUARTERS 
 
1. Air Mshl PV Naik  -  VCAS 
2. V Adml. Raman Prem Suthan  - VCNS 
3. Air Mshl S Mukerji  -  AOP 
4. Vice Adm DK Dewan   - COP 
5. Air Mshl Dhiraj  Kukreja  -  DCIDS (DOT) 
6. R Adml.  P Murgesan  -  Asst COP (HRD) 
7. Cmde RM Purandare  -  PDP 
8. Cmde NNRao   - MPR 
 

  
159 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed Maj. Gen. Mrinal Suman 
(Retd.)  to the sitting of the Commi ttee  and requested him to apprise the 
Committee of his views on the subject, ‘Human Resource Planning, Shortage 
of Manpower, Infusion of hi-tech Trai ning and Infrastructure for the Armed 
Forces’ and  also drew his attention to Direction 58 of Directions by the 
Speaker, Lok Sabha. Maj. Gen. Suman (Retd.), then, briefed the Committee 
on the above subject and expressed his views on the issues connected with 
recruitment procedures in Armed Forc es, benefits of recruiting a cadet at 
younger age and other aspects relating to the present system of recruitment.  
He also responded to the queries raised by the Members one by one. 
 Witness then withdrew. 
 
3. The Committee then took oral evi dence of representatives Air Force 
and Navy on the aforementi oned subject.  The Committee discussed matters 
on specific issues connec ted with Training Infrastructure in Air Force and 
Navy, recruitment of the   cadets, welfare of service personnel and Ex-
servicemen, courses offered in the se rvice for the personnel for their post-
retirement resettlement, etc. 
 
4. The representatives of Air Fo rce and Navy gave clarifications the 
issues raised by the Members. As  regards the points on which the 
representatives of Air Force and Na vy could not readily respond, the 
Committee desired them to furnish written information at the earliest. 
 
5. A copy of verbatim record of the proceedings has been kept.  
    
The Committee then adjourned. 
 
 
 

  
 
160 
 
 
MINUTES OF THE THIRTY-EIGHTH SITTING OF THE STANDING 
COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE (2007-2008) 
 
 
 The Committee sat on Monday, the 04 th August, 2008 from 1515 hrs to 
1700 hrs. in Committee Room ‘B’, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
 
PRESENT 
 
Shri Balasaheb Vikhe Patil – Chairman 
 
MEMBERS 
 
LOK SABHA 
 
1. Shri S. Bangarappa 
2. Shri Milind Murli Deora 
3. Shri Vijay Bahuguna 
4. Shri Santosh Gangwar 
5. Shri Jigajinagi Ramesh Chandappa 
6. Dr. K.S. Manoj 
7. Dr. H.T. Sangliana 
8. Prof. Mahadeorao Shiwankar 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
9. Dr. Farooq Abdullah 
10. Shri Jai Parkash Aggarwal 
11. Shri Abu Asim Azmi 
12. Shri A. Elavarasan 
13. Shri K.B. Shanappa 
14. Smt. Viplove Thakur 
 
SECRETARIAT 
1. Shri A. Louis Martin   - Joint Secretary 
2. Shri Rajeev Sharma  - Director 
3. Shri D.R. Shekhar   - Deputy Secretary 
 
NON-OFFICIAL WITNESSES 
 
1. Lieutenant General (Retd.) Raj Kadyan 
2. Major General (Retd.) S.B.L. Kapoor, VSM 
3. Brigadier Balbir Singh Pama, SM  
 

  
161 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairman welc omed Lieutenant General (Retd.) Raj 
Kadyan, to the sitting of the Committee and requested him to brief on the 
subject, `Human Resource Planning, Shortage of Manpower, Infusion of            
hi-tech Training and Infrastructure for the Armed Forces’ and also drew his 
attention to Direction 58 of Directi ons by the Speaker, Lok Sabha. The 
Committee heard the views of Lieutenant  General (Retd.) Kadyan on the 
above subject. He expressed his views on the issues relating to role of the 
Armed Forces, role of technology, s hortages of manpower and reasons for 
shortages of manpower. Li eutenant General (Retd.) Raj Kadyan, also made 
certain suggestion for consideration of  the Committee. These suggestions 
related to the specific issues regar ding resettlement of Ex-Servicemen, 
training while in service, attr active salaries and emoluments and 
implementation of one rank one pension. The members sought clarifications 
on the aforesaid issues and Lieutenant General (Retd.) Kadyan clarified 
them one-by-one. 
 
3. The Committee then invited Majo r-General S.B.L. Kapoor, (Retd.) 
VSM to brief the Commi ttee on the subject under discussion and also drew 
his attention to Direction 58 of Directions by the Speaker, Lok Sabha.  Major 
General (Retd.) Kapoor briefed the Committee inter-alia,  on shortage of 
Manpower, lateral induction of Ex-Servi cemen to Para Military Forces and 
providing paid study leave. The member s sought clarificat ions on the above 
issues and Major-General S.B.L. Kapoor (Retd.) clarified them one-by-one. 
 
4. Thereafter, the Committee welc omed Brig. Balbir Singh Pama and 
requested him to brief on the subject under discussion and also drew his 
attention to Direction 58 of Directions  by the Speaker, Lok Sabha.  Brig. 
Pama, then briefed the Committee, in ter-alia, on ‘Revolution in Military 
Affairs’ (RMA), Combat Potential, need fo r hi-tech solders, Status of Training 
in Army, hi-tech Training, Modernisati on of Training Infrastructure and need 
for delegation of financial power in regard to purchasing of hi-tech 
infrastructure to the Army Head Quarter.   The members soug ht clarifications 
on certain points and Brig. Pama clarified them one-by-one. 
 
5. A copy of verbatim record of the proceedings has been kept.  
    
The Committee then adjourned. 
 
  

  
162 
 
MINUTES OF THE FIRST SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
DEFENCE (2008- 09) 
 
 The Committee sat on Tuesday, the 12th August, 2008 from 1500 to 1630 hrs. 
in Committee Room No. ‘139’, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
 
PRESENT 
 
Shri Balasaheb Vikhe Patil  -      Chairman 
 
MEMBERS 
 
LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri Santosh Kumar Gangwar 
3. Shri Jigajinagi Ramesh Chandappa 
4. Dr. K.S. Manoj 
5. Ms. Ingrid Mcleod 
6. Dr. H.T. Sangliana 
7. Shri Balashowry Vallabhaneni 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
8. Shri Jai Parkash Aggarwal 
9. Shri Abu Asim Azmi 
10. Smt. Shobhana Bhartia 
11. Shri R.K. Dhawan 
12. Shri A. Elavarasan 
13. Shri K.B. Shanappa 
14. Smt. Viplove Thakur 
SECRETARIAT 
1. Shri S.K. Sharma  - Additional Secretary 
2. Shri A. Louis Martin   - Joint Secretary 
3.  Shri Rajeev Sharma  - Director 
4. Shri D.R. Shekhar   - Deputy Secretary 
5. Smt. J.M. Sinha  - Under Secretary 
 
 
2. At the outset, Chairman welcomed the Members to the first sitting of the 
Committee on Defence constituted for the year 2008-09 and felicitated them on their 
re-nomination to the Committee.  The Chairman then informed the Members about 
the status of examination of subjects selected by the previous Committee and work 
done during the year 2007-08.  The Chairman then requested the Members to 
consider the Memorandum No. 1 regarding selection of subjects circulated to them 
by the Secretariat and give their suggestions for subjects to be selected for 
examination by the Committee during the year 2008-09. 
 
3. The Committee, after deliberation, decided to take up those subjects, which 
were selected during the preceding term and on which the process of examination 
had progressed substantially. The Committee also decided to take up five new 
subjects for examination during 2008-09 and authorized the Chairman to finalize the 
list of the subjects selected for the examination during the year 2008-09. 
Consequently, the following subjects were selected for detailed examination during 
the year 2008-09:  

  
163 
 
(i) Status of Married Accommodation in Defence and Allied Services; 
(ii) Indigenisation of Defence Production – Public-Private Partnership. 
(iii) Stress Management in Armed Forces;  
(iv)  Human Resource Planning, Shortage of Manpower, Infusion of  
  hi-tech Training and Infrastructure for the Armed Forces; 
(v) Functioning of Military Cantonments & Stations and Management of 
Defence Land; 
(vi) Status of implementation of Committee’s recommendations made 
during the 14th Lok Sabha. 
(vii) Impact of Frequent Deployment of Armed Forces on secondary duties/ 
miscellaneous work. 
(viii) Performance of Coast Guard Organisation. 
(ix) Status of implementation of Unified Command for Armed Forces. 
(x) Outsourcing of certain activities in Armed Forces.  
 
4. Then the Committee desired to hear the views of the Chief Secretaries of 
some of the States on various problems being faced by the Servicemen and Ex-
Servicemen, in connection with examination of the above-mentioned subject.  
 
5. Thereafter, the Committee invited the representatives of the Army for taking 
oral evidence on the subject ‘Human Resource Planning, Shortage of Manpower, 
Infusion of hi-tech Training and Infrastructure for the Armed Forces’. The following 
were present:-  
 
SERVICES HEADQUARTERS : ARMY 
 
1.  Lt. Gen. M L Naidu  - VCOAS 
2.  Lt. Gen Thomas Mathew - AG 
3. Lt. Gen K R Rao  - DG (MP & PS) 
4. Lt. Gen Avadhesh Prakash - MS 
5. Maj Gen MN Kashid  - ADG Rtg 
6. Maj Gen Vinod Nayanar - Addl MS (B) 
7. Maj Gen SP Singh  - Offg. DGMT 
8. Brig G Mathai  - Offg ADG MP 
9. Brig AK Bali   - DDG PS 
10. Col DPS Chahal  - Dir. MT-10 
11. Maj Abhinay Gupta  - ACD to VCOAS 
 
6. The Committee put probing questions on specific issues relating to the 
manpower management in the Armed Forces, methods of induction of officers and 
the problems of shortage of officers, importance of Short Service Commissioned 
Officers, time bound promotions in the higher ranks, transparency in the method of 
promotion of officers, educational standard of Rashtriya Military Schools, 
appropriate provisions for grant of study leave, delegation of power to commands, 
officer’s training abroad, etc. The representatives of Army responded to the queries 
explaining the problems faced by them and offered suggestions. As regards the 
points on which the representatives could not readily respond, the Committee 
desired the representatives of the Army to furnish written information at the earliest. 
 
7. A copy of verbatim record of the proceedings has been kept.  
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
 
 
 

  
164 
 
MINUTES OF THE SECOND SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE 
ON DEFENCE (2008- 09) 
 
 The Committee sat on Tuesday, the 26 th August 2008 from 1500 to 1650 hrs. 
in Committee Room ‘C’, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
 
PRESENT 
 
Shri R.K. Dhawan  -      Chairman 
 
MEMBERS 
 
LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri Vijay Bahuguna 
3. Shri Santosh Gangwar 
4. Shri Jigajinagi Ramesh Chandappa 
5. Shri C. Kuppusami 
6. Dr. K.S. Manoj 
7. Ms. Ingrid Mcleod 
8. Shri Asaduddin Owaisi 
9. Shri Shrinivas Patil 
10. Shri Raju Rana 
11. Prof. Mahadeorao Shiwankar 
12. Shri Manavendra Singh 
13. Shri Balashowry Vallabhaneni 
14. Shri Anil Shukla Warsi 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
15. Shri Jai Parkash Aggarwal 
16. Shri Abu Asim Azmi 
17. Shri A. Elavarasan 
18. Shri M.V. Mysura Reddy 
19. Shri K.B. Shanappa 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri S.K. Sharma  - Additional Secretary 
2. Shri A. Louis Martin   - Joint Secretary 
3.  Shri Rajeev Sharma  - Director 
4. Shri D.R. Shekhar   - Deputy Secretary 
5. Smt. J.M. Sinha  - Under Secretary 
 
MINISTRY OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT 
 
1. Shri R.P. Agrawal  - Secretary, Deptt. Of Higher Education 
2. Shri A. K. Rath - Secretary, (SE&L) 
3. Dr. R.K. Chauhan  - Secretary, UGC 
4. Shri R. L. Jamuda  - Commissioner, KVS 
5. Shri Ashok Thakur - Additional Secretary 
6. Shri Sunil Kumar - Joint Secretary 
7. Shri S.C. Khuntia - Joint Secretary 
8. Shri N.K. Sinha  - Joint Secretary 
 
165 

  
 
2. At the outset, the Chairman drew the attention of the representatives of the 
Ministry of Human Resource Development to the Direction 58 of the Directions by 
the Speaker, Lok Sabha regarding maintaining confidentiality of the deliberations of 
the sitting.  Then the Chairman desired the representatives of the Ministry of Human 
Resource Development to brief the Committee on certain issues related to the 
subject ‘Human Resource Planning, Shortage of Manpower, Infusion of hi-tech 
Training and Infrastructure for the Armed Forces’. The representative of the Ministry 
then briefed the Committee on the issues provision for wards of services Personnel 
and Ex-Servicemen in admission to various academic and professional institutions, 
domicile policy followed by various educational institution, etc. The Members of the 
Committee, then, inquired whether Ministry had made any effort to discuss the 
problems faced by wards of Services personnel with the State Governments. 
  
Witnesses then withdrew. 
 
DIRECTORATE GENERAL, RESETTLEMENT 
 
1. Maj. Gen. S.G. Chatterji, VSM - DG (Resettlement) 
2. Lt. Col Y.S. Katoch  - Adm. & Coord. Officer 
 
3. Then, the Committee requested the representatives of DG, Resettlement to 
brief the Committee on issues related to resettlement and rehabilitation of Ex-
Servicemen; DG, Resettlement then briefed the Committee on various measures 
such as schemes and training programme run by their department. Committee also 
inquired about number of person having attended the training programme and have 
been able to find second occupation. Further, the representative of DG, 
Resettlement responded one-by-one to the queries raised by the members.  As 
regards the points on which the representatives could not readily respond, the 
Committee desired DG, Resettlement to furnish written information at the earliest.  
 
Witnesses then withdrew. 
 
ARMED FORCES HEADQUARTERS CIVIL SERVICES (AFHQCS) 
 
1. Dr. Anjula Naib - Director (A) 
2. Smt. Archana Rai - Dy CAO (TCW) 
3. Smt. Nishi Srivastava  - Dy. Director 
4. Shri Anupam Misra  - Dy. Director 
 
 
4.  The Committee, then requested the representatives of Armed Forces 
Headquarters Civil Service (AFHQCS) to brief the Committee on the specific role and 
functions of the AFHQCS, process of their selection, career progression, their cadre 
controlling authority, etc. The representative of AFHQCS then made a small 
presentation and responded one-by-one to the queries raised by the members. 
 
5. A copy of verbatim record of the proceedings has been kept.  
    
The Committee then adjourned. 
 

  
 
166 
 
MINUTES OF THE THIRD SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
DEFENCE (2008- 09) 
 
 The Committee sat on Tuesday, the 2 nd September 2008 from 1100 to 
1225 hrs. in Committee Room  No. ‘G-074’, Parliament Library Building, New 
Delhi. 
PRESENT 
 
Shri Balasaheb Vikhe Patil  -      Chairman 
 
MEMBERS 
 
LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri Vijay Bahuguna 
3. Shri Santosh Gangwar 
4. Dr. K.S. Manoj 
5. Shri Raju Rana 
6. Dr. H.T. Sangliana 
7. Shri Arjun Charan Sethi 
8. Shri Balashowry Vallabhaneni 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
9. Shri Jai Parkash Aggarwal 
10. Shri R.K. Dhawan 
11. Shri A. Elavarasan 
12. Shri M.V. Mysura Reddy 
13. Shri K.B. Shanappa 
14. Smt. Viplove Thakur 
SECRETARIAT 
1. Shri S.K. Sharma  - Additional Secretary 
2. Shri A. Louis Martin   - Joint Secretary 
3.  Shri Rajeev Sharma  - Director 
4. Shri D.R. Shekhar   - Deputy Secretary 
 
MINISTRY OF DEFENCE 
 
1. Smt. Neelam Nath   - Additional Secretary (N) 
2. Shri R.K. Mathur   - Additional Secretary (M) 
3. Shri Jatinderbir Singh   - Joint Secretary (Trg.) 
4. Shri Binoy Kumar   - Joint Secretary (Navy) 
5. Shri Sanjeeva Kumar  - Joint Secretary (ESW) 
6. Shri Ajay Tirkey   - Joint Secretary (E) 
7. Shri Amit Cowshish  - Addl. FA(A) 
8. Ms. Shobhana Joshi - Addl. FA(S)  
9. Shri V.K. Langan  - Dir(AG)  
10. Shri C.N. Ganjoo  - Dir(Res) 
 

  
167 
 
ARMED FORCES HEADQUARTERS CIVIL SERVICES (AFHQCS) 
 
11. Lt. Gen. M.L. Naidu    - VCOAS 
12. V. Adml. Raman Prem Suthan - VCNS 
13. Air Mshl P.V. Naik    - VCAS 
14. Lt. Gen. Thomas Mathew   - AG 
15. Lt. Gen. V.K. Chaturvedi   - DG (MP&PS) 
16. Air Mshl. S. Mukherji   - AOP 
17. Air Mshl. D. Kukreja   - DCIDS(DOT) 
18. Vice Adml. D.K. Dewan  - COP  
19. Maj. Gen. S.P. Singh Offg.  - DGMT 
20. Maj. Gen. S.G. Chatterji   - DG (Restt) 
21. Maj. Gen. S.R. Ghosh   - ADG MP 
22. Maj. Gen. S.P. Kochhar  - ADG PS 
23. Maj. Gen. M.N. Kashid   - ADG  Retg. 
24. Smt. Shobhana Joshi   - Additional FA (S) 
25. Shri Amit Cowshish   - Additional FA (A) 
 
3. The Chairman and Members of  the Committee then sought 
clarification on the issues relating to the precise role and  responsibility of 
Armed Forces Headquarters Civil Serv ice, various  schemes run by 
Directorate General Resettlement, pr oposed changes in the policy regarding 
the recruitment of officers in the A rmed Forces, retention bonus for select 
cadre in Armed Forces, creation of a Permanent Commission for Ex-
Servicemen to look after their proper re settlement, issues related to wards of 
Ex-Servicemen, etc. 
 
4. The representatives of the Ministry of Defence gave their clarifications 
on the issues raised by the Members.   As regards the points on which the 
representatives could not readily respond, the Committee desired the 
Ministry to furnish written information at the earliest. 
 
5. A copy of verbatim record of the proceedings has been kept. 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 

  
168 
 
MINUTES OF THE FOURTH SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
DEFENCE (2008- 09) 
 
 The Committee sat on Tuesday, the 16 th  September 2008 from 1500 to 
1600 hrs. in Committee Room No. ‘53, Parliament House, New Delhi. 
 
PRESENT 
 
Shri Balasaheb Vikhe Patil  -      Chairman 
 
MEMBERS 
 
 
LOK SABHA 
 
1. Shri Vijay Bahuguna 
2. Shri S. Bangarappa 
3. Shri Jigajinagi Ramesh Chandappa 
4. Dr. K.S. Manoj 
5. Ms. Ingrid Mcleod 
6. Dr. H.T. Sangliana 
7. Shri Manavendra Singh 
8. Shri Balashowry Vallabhaneni 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
 
9. Dr. Farooq Abdullah 
10. Shri Jai Parkash Aggarwal 
11. Shri Abu Asim Azmi 
12. Shri M.V. Mysura Reddy 
13. Shri K.B. Shanappa 
14. Smt. Viplove Thakur 
 
SECRETARIAT 
1.  Shri Rajeev Sharma  - Director 
2. Smt. J.M. Sinha  - Under Secretary 
 
 
DEPARTMENT OF PERSONNEL & TRAINING (DOPT) 
 
1. Smt. Vibha Puri  -  Additional Secretary 
2. Smt. Trishaljit Seth  -  Director       
3. Smt. Smita Kumar  -  Director    
4. Shri Yatendra Kumar -  Deputy Secretary   
 

  
169 
2. At the outset, the Chairm an drew the attention of the representatives of the 
Department of Personnel and Training (D OPT) to the Direction 58 of the 
Directions by the Speaker, Lok Sabha regarding maintaini ng confidentiality of the 
deliberations of the sitting.   The Committee, then sought clarif ications from the 
representatives of DOPT on certain issues  relating to the matters connected with 
cadre of Armed Forces Headquarters Civ il Service (AFHQCS) and also on the 
need for taking appropriate steps to formulate  a policy to make the administrative 
authorities like District Magistrate and Superintendent of Police to respond 
promptly to the problems and grievances  to serving defence services personnel 
and their family. 
3. The representatives of DOPT, then, briefed the Committee on the 
issues related to the cadre control of  the AFHQCS and also on the All India 
Services and their cadre control. As regards the poi nts on which the 
representatives of the DOPT could nor readily respond, the Committee 
desired them to furnish written information at the earliest. 
 
4. A copy of verbatim record of the proceedings has been kept.  
    
The Committee then adjourned. 
 

  
170 
 
MINUTES OF THE FIFTH SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
DEFENCE (2008- 09) 
 
 The Committee sat on Tuesday, the 16 th  September 2008 from 1600 to 
1700 hrs. in Committee Room No. ‘53, Parliament House, New Delhi. 
 
PRESENT 
 
Shri Balasaheb Vikhe Patil  -      Chairman 
 
MEMBERS 
 
LOK SABHA 
 
1. Shri Vijay Bahuguna 
2. Shri S. Bangarappa 
3. Shri Jigajinagi Ramesh Chandappa 
4. Dr. K.S. Manoj 
5. Ms. Ingrid Mcleod 
6. Dr. H.T. Sangliana 
7. Shri Manavendra Singh 
8. Shri Balashowry Vallabhaneni 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
9. Dr. Farooq Abdullah 
10. Shri Jai Parkash Aggarwal 
11. Shri Abu Asim Azmi 
12. Shri M.V. Mysura Reddy 
13. Shri K.B. Shanappa 
14. Smt. Viplove Thakur 
SECRETARIAT 
1.  Shri Rajeev Sharma  - Director 
2. Smt. J.M. Sinha  - Under Secretary 
 
MINISTRY OF DEFENCE 
 
1. Shri Vijay Singh   - Defence Secretary 
2. Shri S.M.Acharya   - Secretary, (EWS) 
3. Smt. H.K. Pannu   - FA(DS) 
4. Smt. Neelam Nath    - Additional Secretary (N) 
5. Shri R.K. Mathur    - Additional Secretary (M) 
6. Shri Bimal Julka   - JS(G/Air) 
7. Shri Jatinderbir Singh    - Joint Secretary (Trg.) 
8. Shri Sanjeeva Kumar   - Joint Secretary (ESW) 
9. Shri Ajay Tirkey    - Joint Secretary (E) 
10. Shri Amit Cowshish   - Addl. FA(A) 
11. Ms. Shobhana Joshi  - Addl. FA(S)  
12. Shri C.N. Ganjoo   - Dir(Res) 
13. Shri Harbans Singh   - Dir(Pen) 
14. Shri V.K. Langan   - Dir(AG)  
15. Shri D.S. Chawla   - Dir(N-I) 

  
171 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairman drew the attention of the representatives of 
the Ministry of Defence to the Directi on 58 of the Directions  by the Speaker, 
Lok Sabha regarding maintaining confident iality of the deliberations of the 
sitting.  Then the Chairman desired the representatives  of the Ministry of 
Defence to brief the Committee on certai n issues viz. shortage of manpower, 
cadre control in respect of Arm ed Forces Headquarters Civil Service 
(AFHQCS) etc. related to the subject ‘Human Resource Planning, Shortage of 
Manpower, Infusion of hi-tech Traini ng and Infrastructure for the Armed 
Forces’.  
3. After completion of deliberati on on the subject, the Committee also 
sought some clarifications on some of the issues relating to Defence 
Procurement Procedure-2008. The representative of t he Ministry then briefed 
the Committee on the issues raised. As regards the poi nts on which the 
representatives of the DOPT could nor readily respond, the Committee 
desired them to furnish written information at the earliest. 
4. A copy of verbatim record of the proceedings has been kept.  
    
The Committee then adjourned.  
 
 

  
172 
 
MINUTES OF THE TWELFTH SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE 
ON DEFENCE (2008- 09) 
 
 The Committee sat on Friday, the 5 th December 2008 from 1100 to 
1130 hrs. in Committee Room No. `139’ , Parliament House Annexe, New 
Delhi. 
 
PRESENT 
 
Shri Balasaheb Vikhe Patil  -      Chairman 
 
MEMBERS 
 
LOK SABHA 
 
1. Shri Santosh Gangwar 
2. Shri Jigajinagi Ramesh Chandappa 
3. Dr. K.S. Manoj 
4. Shri Shrinivas Patil 
5. Prof. Mahadeorao Shiwankar 
6. Shri Balashowry Vallabhaneni 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
7. Shri Jai Parkash Aggarwal 
8. Smt. Shobhana Bhartia 
9. Shri R.K. Dhawan 
10. Shri A. Elavarasan 
11. Shri M.V. Mysura Reddy 
12. Shri K.B. Shanappa 
SECRETARIAT 
1. Shri A. Louis Martin                     -  Joint Secretary 
2. Shri Rajeev Sharma                    -  Director 
3. Shri D.R. Shekhar                       -  Deputy Secretary 
4. Smt. J.M. Sinha                           -  Under Secretary  
 
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcom ed the Members to the sitting of the 
Committee.  The Committee, thereafter, took up for consideration the draft 
report on the subject ‘Human Resource  Planning, Shortage of Manpower, 
Infusion of hi-tech training and Infras tructure for the Armed Forces’, and 
adopted the same, with minor modificati ons. The Chairman observed that the 
subject under Report being of vast nature, the members be requested to give 
their written suggestions if any, for bei ng considered for incorporation in the 
Report. The members agreed to the obser vation of the Chairman and it was 
decided that such suggestions by mem ber’s might be made available within a 
week. 

  
173 
 
3. The Committee then authorized t he Chairman to consider the 
suggestions so made by the members and finalise the report and present the 
same to the Parliament. 
 
4. The Committee then took up for c onsideration the request from the 
Ministry of Defence for granting three m onths extension of time for furnishing 
background material on the subject `Sta tus of implementation of Committee’s 
recommendations made during the F ourteenth Lok Sabha’. The Committee 
decided that the Ministry of Defence  might be requested to expedite and to 
furnish the requisite information within a month. It was also decided that the 
representatives of the Ministry might  be asked to attend already scheduled 
sitting of the Committee on 16.12.2008 to make presentation on those 
recommendations on which information was readily available with them. 
 
5. The Committee also expressed t heir condolence over the sad demise 
of former Prime Minister V.P. Singh. 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
 
 