27
STANDING COMMITTEE
ON DEFENCE
(2007-08)
FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA
MINISTRY OF DEFENCE
[Action Taken by the Government  on the Recommendations/Observations
contained in the 17th Report of the Standing Committee on Defence
(Fourteenth Lok Sabha) on ‘In-depth study and critical review
of Hindustan Aeronautics Limited (HAL)’]
TWENTY-SEVENTH REPORT
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
March, 2008/Phalguna, 1929 (Saka)

TWENTY-SEVENTH REPORT
STANDING COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE
(2007-08)
(FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA)
MINISTRY OF DEFENCE
[Action Taken by the Government  on the Recommendations/Observations
contained in the 17th Report of the Standing Committee on Defence
(Fourteenth Lok Sabha) on ‘In-depth study and critical review
of Hindustan Aeronautics Limited (HAL)’]
Presented to Lok Sabha on 19.3.2008
Laid  in  Rajya Sabha on 19.3.2008
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
March, 2008/Phalguna 1929 (Saka)


C.O.D. No. 93
Price : Rs. 45.00
© 2008 BY L OK SABHA  SECRETARIAT
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of
Business in Lok Sabha (Twelfth Edition) and printed by Jainco Art India,
New Delhi-110 005.

(i)
CONTENTS
PAGES
COMPOSITION  OF THE C OMMITTEE  (2007-08) ............................................       (ii)
PREFACE ........................................................................................................ (iv)
CHAPTER I Report .............................................................................  1
CHAPTER II Recommendations/Observations which have
been accepted by the Government .........................     14
CHAPTER III Recommendations/Observations which the
Committee do not desire to pursue in view
of the Government’s replies .....................................     30
CHAPTER IV Recommendations/Observations in respect of
which replies of the Government have not been
accepted by the Committee ......................................   34
CHAPTER V Recommendations/Observations in respect of
which final replies of the Government are still
awaited ........................................................................... 35
APPENDIX I Minutes of the Sitting ................................................  36
APPENDIX II Analysis of Action Taken by Government on
the Recommendations contained in the
17th Report of the Standing Committee on
Defence (Fourteenth Lok Sabha) ............................. 40

COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE
ON DEFENCE (2007-08)
  Shri Balasaheb Vikhe Patil —  Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Vijay Bahuguna
3. Shri S. Bangarappa
4. Shri Milind Murli Deora
5. Shri Santosh Gangwar
6. Shri Jigajinagi Ramesh Chandappa
7. Shri Suresh Kalmadi
8. Shri C. Kuppusami
9. Dr. K.S. Manoj
10. Ms. Ingrid Mcleod
11. Shri Asaduddin Owaisi
12. Shri Adhalrao Shivaji Patil
13. Shri Shriniwas Patil
14. Shri Raju Rana
15. Dr. H.T. Sangliana
16. Shri Arjun Charan Sethi
17. Prof. Mahadeorao Shiwankar
18. Shri Manavendra Singh
19. Shri Balashowry Vallabhaneni
20. Shri Rajesh Verma
21. Shri Anil Shukla Warsi
Rajya Sabha
22. Dr. Farooq Abdullah
23. Shri Jai Prakash Aggarwal
24. Shri Abu Asim Azmi
25. Smt. Shobhana Bhartia
(ii)

26. Shri R.K. Dhawan
27. Smt. N.P. Durga
28. Shri S.P.M. Syed Khan
29. Shri K.B. Shanappa
30. Shri Arun Shourie
31. Smt. Viplove Thakur
SECRETARIAT
1. Shri S.K. Sharma — Additional Secretary
2. Shri A. Louis Martin — Joint Secretary
3. Shri Gopal Singh — Director
4. Shri D.R. Shekhar — Deputy Secretary-II
5. Smt. Jyochnamayi Sinha — Under Secretary
6. Shri Kamal Khurana — Senior Executive Assistant
(iii)

(iv)
PREFACE
I, the Chairman of the Standing Committee on Defence (2007-08),
having been authorized by the Committee to present the Report on
their behalf, present this Twenty-Seventh Report of the Committee on
Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations contained
in the Seventeenth Report of the Committee (Fourteenth Lok Sabha)
on ‘In-depth Study and Critical Review of Hindustan Aeronautics
Limited (HAL)’.
2. The Seventeenth Report was presented to Lok Sabha and laid in
Rajya Sabha on 4.5.2007 and it contained 10 recommendations/
observations. The Ministry of Defence have furnished their Action Taken
Replies on all the recommendations/observations on 10.8.2007. The
Committee took oral evidence of the representatives of the Ministry of
Defence to have clarifications on certain issues arising out of the action
taken replies on 27.12.2007.
3. The Draft Action Taken Report was considered and adopted by
the Committee at their sitting held on 10.3.2008.
4. After adoption of draft Action Taken Report, the Committee
took oral evidence of the representatives of the Ministry of Heavy
Industries (Department of Public Enterprises) to have some more
clarifications on certain issues arising out of action taken replies on
3.3.2008. Minutes of the related sittings are given in Appendix-I to the
Report.
5. An analysis of action taken by the Government on
recommendations contained in the Seventeenth Report of the
Standing Committee on Defence (Fourteenth Lok Sabha) is given in
Appendix-II.
  N EW D ELHI ; BALASAHEB VIKHE PATIL,
10 March, 2008 Chairman,
20 Phalguna, 1929 (Saka) Standing Committee on Defence.

CHAPTER I
REPORT
The Report of the Standing Committee on Defence deals with action
taken by the Government on the recommendations/observations
contained in their Seventeenth Report (Fourteenth Lok Sabha) on ‘In-
depth study and critical review of Hindustan Aeronautics Limited
(HAL)’ which was presented to Lok Sabha and laid on the Table of
Rajya Sabha on 4 May, 2007.
2. The Committee’s Seventeenth Report (Fourteenth Lok Sabha)
contains 10 observations/recommendations on the following
aspects:—
Sl.No. Para No. Subject
 1. 2.8 & 2.9 Need for Restructuring of HAL
 2. 3.4 & 3.5 Industrial base for Engine Design and
Development
 3. 4.6 & 4.7 Improvement in Salary Structure of HAL
 4. 5.9 to 5.12 Checking time and cost overruns of HAL
projects
 5. 6.4 Need for a comprehensive perspective
plan
 6. 7.5 & 7.6 Need for strengthening R&D infrastructure
of HAL
 7. 8.5 & 8.6 Involvement of private sector from the
stage of design to final integration
 8. 9.5 Navratna Status to HAL
 9. 10.4 Market exploration for HAL Products
10 10.5 Concluding Observation/Recommendation

2
3. Action Taken replies have been received from the Government
in respect of all the recommendations/observations contained in the
Report. These have been categorized as follows:—
(i) Recommendations / Observations which have been accepted
by Government
Recommendation Sl. No.2 (Para No. 3.5), 3 (Para Nos. 4.6
and 4.7), 4, (Para Nos. 5.9, 5.10, 5.11, 5.12), 5 (Para No. 6.4),
6(Para Nos.7.5 and 7.6), 7(Para Nos.8.5 and 8.6), 8(Para
No.9.5) and 9(Para No.10.4)
(ii) Recommendations / Observations which the Committee do
not desire to pursue in view of Government’s replies
Recommendation No. 1 (Para No. 2.8), 2 (Para No. 3.4) and
10 (Para No. 10.5)
(iii) Recommendations / Observations in respect of which replies
of Government have not been accepted by the Committee
Recommendation No.1 (Para No. 2.9)
(iv) Recommendations / Observations in respect of which final
replies of Government are still awaited
Sl. No. NIL
4. The Committee trust that utmost importance will be given
to implementation of the recommendations except those which the
Committee do not desire to pursue in view of Government’s reply.
If it is not possible for any reason to implement any of the
recommendations in letter and spirit, the matter should be reported
to the Committee with reasons for non-implementation. The
Committee desire that action taken notes on the recommendations/
observations contained in Chapter-I of the Report be furnished to
the Committee within six months of the presentation of the Report.
5. The Committee will now deal with the action taken by the
Government on some of their recommendations.
A. Representation of users in the Board of Directors of HAL
Recommendation No. 1 (Para No. 2.9)
6. The Committee had desired that the Board of Directors must
have permanent representation from the Armed Forces with one
member each from Army, Navy and Air Force so as to provide a

3
platform to the users to stress their requirements and ensure timely
completion of the projects.
7. The Ministry, in their action taken replies have stated:
“The present structure of the Board of Directors is as per the
guidelines of Department of Public Enterprises which restricts the
Government nominees to two members only. However, one
representative each from Army (Master General Ordnance), IAF
(Deputy Chief of Air Staff) and Navy (Deputy Chief of Naval
Staff) is invited to participate in all the Board meetings of the
HAL”.
8. During oral evidence of the representatives of the Ministry of
Defence, when asked whether the Ministry of Defence or HAL have
ever proposed to modify the guidelines to include one representative
each from the three forces in the Board of Directors as permanent
member, Secretary, Defence Production stated:
 “As far as the number of Directors on the Company is concerned,
the Department of Public Enterprises have issued an order and
they have taken appropriate competitive authority’s approval before
doing that. That means they have taken the approval of the Cabinet
before doing that. When it comes to us, we have taken it up a
number of times with the Ministry and we did not implement this
order for a long time. This was put up to the then Hon’ble Raksha
Mantri and with his orders, it was decided to implement these
decisions in toto. So, independent Directors who are very competent
in this field were selected and put in place, and only two
Government Directors were allowed to work in any public sector
undertakings and that is what today we have.
As far as officers of the Armed Forces are concerned, they are also
Members of some Boards. In some Boards they are the members,
and in some Boards, Joint Secretaries in the Ministry are the
Members. But wherever one is not a Member, he has been made
a permanent invitee in that Board. That is how we have resolved
this matter. No Board has ever taken a decision where voting
takes place. It does not happen in our companies. Everything is
done by consensus”.
9. Since Hindustan Aeronautics Limited is a Defence Public
Sector Undertaking and Armed Forces are the main users for its
products, the Committee had recommended that there should be a
representative each from Army, Navy and Air Force in the Board of

4
Directors of HAL. In response, the Ministry of Defence have stated
that since the guidelines of the Department of Public Enterprises
have restricted the number of Government directors in the Boards
of PSUs to a maximum of two, an arrangement has been made
whereby one representative each from Army, Air Force and Navy is
invited to participate in all the Board Meetings of the HAL. The
Committee hold that this arrangement is not satisfactory to ensure
active involvement of the Armed Forces in the decision making body
of HAL. The Committee wonder why the representatives of
Armed Forces could not be accommodated in the HAL Board as
independent directors in their capacity as users of HAL. If the DPE
guidelines are in any way restrictive in this respect, the matter should
be taken up with the DPE at the highest level for suitable
amendment of the guidelines in their application to Defence Public
Sector Undertakings which have paramount duty to cater to the
strategic needs of the Defence Forces.
B. Rate of Attrition
Recommendation No.3 (Para Nos. 4.6 & 4.7)
10. The Committee had noted with serious concern the attrition
rate of manpower in HAL. The Committee noted the number of
Assistant Engineers/Engineers/Deputy Managers resigning in HAL
since 2003 is 756 and the number of officers in the rank of Managers
and above is 118; in a single year (2006—up to September) alone the
numbers being 314 and 52 respectively. The Committee also noted
that the engineers resigning from HAL were mostly from the four
disciplines viz . design, production shops, production engineering and
quality control. The Committee further noted that most of the engineers
resigning were in the Rank of Assistant Engineer, Engineer and
Deputy Manager, thus forming the young age group of the engineers.
The Engineers leaving HAL were taking up employment in the Aviation
Industry, IT Sector, MNCs, Navratna PSUs etc. The experienced
engineers of HAL were in great demand in disciplines like design,
production, computers, finance, human resource etc. in the job market
as the compensation package in these companies was far superior to
that in HAL. The Committee took a very serious note of the excessive
delay in project schedules of the company. The Committee understood
that HAL had submitted proposal for the revision of pay scales of the
Executives on the lines of pay scales of NTPC to the Board of Directors.
The proposal, after approval from the Board, was pending with the
Ministry of Defence for final clearance. The Committee felt that the
engineers resigning from HAL were from a few particular disciplines

5
and form part of a particular age group of the employees. The
Committee desired that the Ministry should take immediate steps to
offer attractive job package available to them in the job market. They
should also be provided on job training to brush up their knowledge.
The Committee at the same time also desired that the Ministry should
frame a recruitment policy clearly stipulating service conditions that
the engineers joining the company must sign a bond of compulsory
service in the company for at least 8 to 10 years and in case of breach
of the bond, the expenditure incurred on their job specific training
would be recovered from them. The Committee further noted that
attrition of manpower in HAL was inter-alia attributed to Voluntary
Retirement, Medical termination and death, the number being 406, 219
and 199 in case of officers and 1225, 970 and 1336 in case of workmen
respectively during the last 10 years, which was reflective of the fact
that the employees might have been denied basic facilities, necessary
for retaining the work force and affecting adversely their health. The
Committee were very unhappy to take note of this fact and strongly
felt that the Ministry should appoint a Committee to look into this
grave situation of attrition and find remedial measures to check it at
the earliest.
The Committee further noted that several global players in the
aviation field were setting up subsidiaries, joint ventures, etc. in the
country which would be offering attractive packages. The Committee
felt that this situation would further add to the attrition of talent in
HAL. The Committee, therefore strongly recommended that since HAL
is an intensive defence research organisation whose delayed project
schedules cause a lot of concern to the nation and huge costs to the
Armed Forces, the pay structure of all its employees must be adequately
modified so as to compete with the packages of the companies which
have been attracting its employees over the years. In addition to this,
the Company should also offer incentives to its employees comparable
to those being offered in private sector companies. While offering
incentives/promotional avenues and other facilities to the employees,
the Government must take into account their individual performance
and contribution to the overall growth of the company. The Committee
further recommended that the Government should extend royalty to
the engineers for their original R&D works and any product developed
thereon.
11. The Ministry in their action taken replies have stated:
“Considering need for retaining talent, HAL formulated a proposal
for revision of the pay scales in respect of the Executives of the

6
Company at par with the pay scales in NTPC with effect from
1-4-2006 and referred the proposal to Ministry of Defence for
approval. As the revision of pay scales in PSUs is the subject
matter of the Department of Public Enterprises, a proposal was
sent to the Department of Public Enterprises for consideration.
The Department of Public Enterprises informed that the
Government has set–up the Second Pay Revision Committee under
the Chairmanship of Shri M.J. Rao, retired Judge of Supreme Court
for making recommendations in respect of pay revision for Board
level, below Board level officers and non-unionised Supervisors of
the Public Sector Enterprises. As per the terms of reference the
Committee has to make its recommendations within 18 months i.e.
by end of May, 2008. HAL was accordingly, advised to send the
information in prescribed Questionnaire for transmission to
Department of Public Enterprises. Based on the recommendations
of the Committee and the directions which would be issued by
Government, thereafter, HAL would consider revising the pay
structure, allowances and benefits etc. of executives on par with
leading PSUs in the country, as well as industry specific
requirements, so as to ensure retention of talent in the Company.
Therefore, it is felt that there is no need to set up Committee at
this moment.
In the meantime, a Sub-Committee of the Board of HAL, including
two part-time Official Directors (Representatives of Ministry) was
constituted to examine the issue, among others, with a view to
arrest attrition of trained manpower in HAL. The Sub-Committee
made its recommendations on enhancement of compensation
structure of employees of HAL. After deliberations, the Board of
HAL approved the recommendations of Sub-Committee and the
Company decided to implement the decisions in respect of
Executives. The Company was advised that the perquisites and
allowances in respect of Executives must be in accordance with
the DPE‘s guidelines.
The scheme will be reviewed after one year of implementation to
assess the effect on attrition and retention of the Executives. These
revisions are also subject to Presidential directives which will be
issued by Department of Public Enterprises for revision of Pay
scales and allowances with effect from 1-1-2007 on receipt of the
report of the Second Pay Revision Committee. The Company would
review the matter on receipt of such directives and changes
required would be dovetailed ”.

7
During oral evidence, the Chairman of Hindustan Aeronautics
Limited (HAL) had stated:
“I must mention that there has been a lot of discussion about the
compensation packages. HAL is a navaratna company. We have
taken a number of measures, and you will be glad to know that
there are compensation packages in the form of project-linked
schemes, performance-related and profit-related. We are giving
additional allowances; we are giving conveyance allowance, housing
allowance. The result is this. In HAL, I had a wastage of 900
engineers last year. That attrition rate has now fallen by 65 to 70
per cent. People are not leaving any more. I am sending people
for training for post-graduate courses, for every possible course
that they would like to attend. A lot of motivation is given, with
the result that my attrition has come down by 65 to 70 per cent.”
12. When asked, whether Hindustan Aeronautics Limited (HAL)
has actually implemented the recommendation of Sub-Committee of
its Board of Directors in regard to attrition of manpower, the Ministry
of Defence, in a written reply have stated:
Executives
“The recommendations on (i) grant of Additional Increments in
the existing Pay Scales, (ii) revision of rates of certain Allowances,
(iii) Performance Related Incentive Scheme, (iv) engagement of
Experts as Programme Leaders and (v) payment to Trainees, have
been implemented.”
Workmen
“The recommendations on (i) grant of Additional Increments in
the existing Pay Scales and (ii) revision of rates of certain
Allowances have been implemented. Revision of Performance
Linked Incentive Schemes in respect of Workmen is under
finalization for implementation.”
13. In regard to the steps taken to put a check on the ongoing
attrition for the R&D activities, the Ministry have stated:
“The Terms of Appointment and Conditions of Service of the
employees in general, and R & D Engineers in particular, are being
closely monitored from the point of view of attrition. New
engineers joining the Company, as Management/Design Trainees
are required to sign a bond for 5 years. Those who like to apply
for jobs in other PSEs, Govt. Sector etc, have to apply through
proper channel. Resignation of Executives is being processed
centrally at the corporate office. Exit interviews are being held to
ascertain the reason for resignation. At senior level, candidates are

8
being called and appropriately counselled. Constant dialogue is
also established with the executives to appreciate their concerns.”
14. When asked whether the Ministry have made a well
documented record of the ongoing research in the projects step-by-step
simultaneously so that the research could be carried further in case
the engineer or the workmen associated with the project leave the
company, the Ministry have stated:
“Normally, Research Programmes are being taken up by PSUs on
their own. In HAL, design and development projects are
elementised into different activities and a group of designers is
assigned to each activity. In case an engineer or a workman leaves
the Company, his task is assigned to another employee by
redeployment / induction.”
15.  Pertaining to on-the-job training to the scientists, the Ministry
in their written replies have stated:—
“Jr. Scientists and Technical Experts in the Junior and middle levels
of Management are given on-the-job training. Fresh engineering
graduates inducted in the Company as Management/Design
Trainees are imparted structured training of one year, including at
IITs/Advanced Training Institute (ATI), Chennai, Airforce Technical
College (AFTC), Bangalore and other such Institutes, besides at
the HAL Management Academy, Bangalore. The training also
includes a structured on-the-job phase in the Divisions of the
Company. Requisite training inputs to the Engineers & Managers,
based on requirements as reflected in Performance Appraisal
Reports, are given from time to time. The training is imparted
both within the country and abroad, as needed. The Committee’s
recommendation is thus implemented.”
16. The Committee are happy to note that the attrition rate of
Scientist and engineers has reportedly fallen by 65% to 70% in HAL,
consequent on initiating measures such as grant of additional
increments, performance related incentives and revised rates of certain
allowances. The Committee feel that with upward revision of pay
scales that may be recommended by the Second Pay Revision
Committee, the attrition rate will hopefully decline further.
The Ministry of Defence have not given any response to the
Committee’s recommendation that the Government should extend
royalty to the engineers for their original R&D works and for any
products developed thereon. The Committee further informed that
Acceleratory Promotions and Royalty are not the subject of the
Department of Public Enterprises. These are the concern of the
concerned Ministry. Therefore, the Committee would await the
Ministry’s response in this regard.

9
C. Need for a comprehensive perspective plan
Recommendation Para No. 6.4
17. The Committee have noted the efforts made by HAL towards
modernisation and self-reliance of Indian Air Force. The Committee
have also examined the indigenisation content in the major projects
during the last 5 years. In some cases, this content has remained static
and in some cases it has increased only by 2 to 3 per cent in 5 years
time. The previous track record of HAL in terms of various delayed
projects also strengthens the fact that there is no concrete planning of
HAL for design and development of aircraft, engine etc. The continuous
unfulfilled requirements of the Armed Forces for the aircraft, helicopters
etc. also corroborates that the same had not been duly addressed by
the Company over the last several years. The Committee took a very
serious view of it. The Committee also felt that only those projects
need to be carried forward which met requirements of the Armed
Forces. The projects which have been showing inordinate delays and
cost overruns should be reviewed to see whether further investments
in such projects were worthwhile. The Ministry should chalk out a
well-considered R&D plan and focus only on result-oriented R&D
activities. The Committee felt that since upgradation and modernisation
was a continuous process, HAL should prepare a time-bound
programme for completion of upgradation and modernisation of
infrastructure in the various units of HAL and that programme should
have the approval by the Board of Directors.
18. The Ministry in their action taken reply have stated:
Indigenisation
“In licence production projects, the indigenisation effort usually
commences after absorption of the offered technology and
stabilisation of production. Indigenisation of items is taken up to
meet the requirement of the repair and overhauls. Indigenisation
is taken up based on design feasibility and economic viability to
increase the self reliance and to obviate export restrictions or
obsolescence.”
Design and Development
“HAL was not entrusted with any major new design and
development project of fighter aircraft after the HF-24 (Marut).
Initiating an indigenous design and development of an aircraft or
a helicopter requires large amount of funds. It is not feasible for
HAL to initiate a major project without the firming up of
specification and requirement by the domestic customer and
funding by the Customer/Government. During early 2000s, HAL
had proposed the development of an Indigenous Advanced Jet

10
Trainer (IAJT) to cater to the requirement beyond the 66 Hawk
aircraft and a Basic Turbo-prop Trainer aircraft to replace the
HPT-32. Confirmation of requirement and the Staff requirements
for these aircraft is not yet issued by the IAF. HAL has proposed
the co-development of Medium Lift Helicopter with an international
helicopter manufacturer to meet the requirement of a 10 Ton
helicopter by all the three Services.
The current major development programmes are the Intermediate
Jet Trainer(IJT) and Light Combat Helicopter(LCH) for IAF. These
will enter production stage in 2008 and 2010 respectively. There
are no cost overruns in any of the major projects currently being
progressed at HAL.”
Upgradation and Modernisation
“This is a continuous process at HAL and is planned to meet the
changing needs of the projects being undertaken. A five year
modernisation plan for the period 2006-07 to 2011-12 has been
drawn up by all the divisions of HAL with an estimated investment
of Rs.640 Cr. Approval of the Board of Directors is taken for
incurring the expenditure on capital investments as per the
Delegation of Powers.”
19. The Committee had recommended that a time bound
programme should be prepared for completion of upgradation and
modernisation of HAL units. In response, it has been stated that a
five year modernisation plan for the period 2006-07 to 2011-12 has
been drawn up by all the divisions of HAL with an estimated
investment of Rs. 640 crores. The Committee would like to be
apprised of the details of the plan and progress made in
implementation of the plan during 2006-07 and 2007-08.
D. Market Exploration for Hindustan Aeronautics Limited products
Recommendation Para No. 10.4
20. The Committee noted the export market of HAL products is
confined to only small developing countries viz. Nepal, Thailand,
Malaysia etc. and the monetary value of actual export over the past
few years had been insignificant and had shown declining trend after
the year 2003-04. The Committee also noted that a few work packages
related to forgings, drawings etc. are being exported to some developed
countries also which reflected that there was no serious export business
of HAL outside the country. The Committee therefore strongly felt
that there was no substantive efforts on the part of the Company to
explore the export market of its products. The Committee noted that
even though certain measures have been taken by the Ministry for the
improvement of export business on the fronts of pricing, skill

11
upgradation, diversification, outsourcing etc., the outcome had been
insignificant. The Committee therefore, desired that the Ministry should
take necessary step to implement these measures so as to produce
good export results. HAL should pursue with Ministry of Civil Aviation
to sign agreements with other countries to obtain international
certification for its products. The Government should also provide
grants/subsidy packages to HAL to help them increase the exports.
The most important requirement on the part of HAL is to maintain its
delivery schedule and cost to face the stiff competition in international
market. The Committee would also like to suggest that HAL should
encourage development of private sector industries by offering them
technologies etc. to reduce their costs as also to enable them to take
advantage of off set clause under various international arms deals.
21. The Ministry in their action taken statement stated that:
“Presently, HAL’s major thrust is on marketing of ALH. HAL is
pursuing with various prospective domestic as well as foreign
customers for supply of ALH because of its versatility & wide
spectrum of operational capability. Apart from supply of 2 Dhruvs
to Nepal, HAL has leased one helicopter to Israel for use by
Israeli MOD.
Capabilities of Dhruv have also been demonstrated in IDEF-07
(Turkey) in May’07, Farnborough Air Show 2006, Paris Air Show
in June’03/June’05, Asian Aerospace 2004 in Singapore which had
drawn major attention and created keen interest among various
civil and military operators.
ALH-Dhruv being the major focus for exports, HAL has taken
initiative for co-validation of Type Certification of the helicopter
by international agencies. The following are the details:
(a) Chile : After detailed interactions, submission of technical
documents & carrying out flight tests on Dhruv, compliance
with the requirements specified by the aviation regulation
applicable in Chile was confirmed. The Type Certificate of
Dhruv has been co-validated by Directorate General of Civil
Aviation (DGCA), Chile. Towards this, the certificate has
been issued to HAL recently. This is an important milestone
towards the promotion of ALH in Chile.
(b) Initiatives have been taken for EASA (European Aviation
Safety Agreement) & FAA (Federal Aviation Administration)
certification for Dhruv helicopter. HAL team visited EASA
and made the presentation indicating HAL’s willingness to
progress the case. Subsequent to this, EASA team visited
HAL and reviewed the design & quality system.

12
(c) HAL has also taken initiative for co-validation of Dhruv
certification by Israel & Malaysia. Bilateral Safety Agency
Agreement (BASA) has been concluded with Israel recently.
The Civil Aviation Authority in Malaysia has been reviewing
the technical documents submitted by HAL in this regard.
More than 1300 private industries are participating in HAL’s
outsourcing programme. HAL has been extending technical support
to private industries to upgrade their quality system. To capitalise
on the offset opportunities and global aerospace demand by
leveraging the strengths of partners, discussions are in progress
with reputed private industries for strategic alliances on Engineering
& Design services for structures and engines.”
22. When enquired whether HAL has any plans to diversify its
products for export market, the Ministry in their reply stated:
“Presently, HAL’s major thrust is on marketing of ALH. HAL is
pursuing with various prospective domestic as well as foreign
customers for supply of ALH, because of its versatility & wide
spectrum of operational capability. Two nos. of Dhruv helicopters
have been supplied to Nepal. Dhruv flight demonstrations were
conducted in Chile in June/July 2004 by a combined team of HAL
& IAF wherein wide range of applications of Dhruv were
demonstrated over land and sea including high altitude operations.
Capabilities of Dhruv have also been demonstrated in IDEF-07
(Turkey) in May 07, Farnborough Air Show 2006, Paris Air Show
in June 03/June 05/June 07, Asian Aerospace 2004 in Singapore
which had drawn major attention and created keen interest among
various civil and military operators.
HAL has initiated the process for international certification of
Dhruv. This includes Dhruv Type Certification revalidation by local
Civil Aviation Authorities in Israel & Malaysia. The co-validation
certificate of Dhruv has been received from Chile in April 2007.
Assistance of Indian Missions abroad is being taken to promote
HAL. Government of India is also supporting these efforts in its
bilateral talks with various countries.
HAL is participating in the global tenders for supply of ALHs.”
23. When enquired, whether HAL has pursued with the Ministry
of Civil Aviation to sign agreements with other countries to obtain
international certification for its products, the Ministry in their written
reply have stated:
“HAL is pursuing the case with Ministry of Civil Aviation for
early conclusion of Bilateral Aviation Safety Agreement (BASA)
with USA, France & Malaysia for promoting ALH in the region.

13
Exports, being identified as key thrust area, HAL has taken
initiative for certification of its products by international agencies.
The following are the details:
(a) Chile: After detailed interactions, submission of technical
documents & carrying out flight tests on Dhruv, compliance
with the requirements specified by the aviation regulation
applicable in Chile was confirmed. The Type Certificate of
Dhruv has been co-validated by Directorate General of
Civil Aviation (DGCA), Chile. Towards this, the certificate
has been issued to HAL in April 07. This is an important
milestone towards the promotion of ALH in Chile.
(b) Initiatives have been taken for EASA (European Aviation
Safety Agreement) & FAA (Federal Aviation Administration)
certification for Dhruv helicopter. HAL team visited EASA
and made the presentation indicating HAL’s willingness to
progress the case. Subsequent to this, EASA team visited
HAL and reviewed the design & quality system. Discussions
have also been initiated for EASA certification for structural
components.
(c) HAL has also taken initiative for co-validation of Dhruv
certification by Israel & Malaysia. Bilateral Safety Agency
Agreement (BASA) has been concluded with Israel recently.
The Civil Aviation Authority in Malaysia has been reviewing
the technical documents submitted by HAL in this regard.”
24. When asked whether HAL has approached the Ministry of
Defence for grants/subsidy package to enhance its export potential,
the Ministry of Defence in their written reply have stated:
“In order to increase exports, assistance of MOD has been taken
wherever needed.”
25. The Committee observe that HAL’s major thrust is on
exporting Advanced Light Helicopter (ALH).HAL is reportedly
pursuing with the Ministry of Civil Aviation for early conclusion of
Bilateral Aviation Safety Agreement with USA, France and Malaysia
for promoting ALH in the region. The Committee urge the Ministry
of Civil Aviation to take action in this regard expeditiously and the
Committee be informed of the outcome.

CHAPTER II
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN
ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT
Recommendation No. 2
3.5 The Committee feel that achieving self-sufficiency in engine
development is an imperative need and for that a robust industrial
base for engine design needs to be created so as to overcome the
dependence on foreign supplier and address the requirements of the
Armed Forces. The Committee also desire that HAL should explore
the possibility of entering into the joint venture/collaboration with
indigenous private companies/foreign companies which have proven
competence and capability in design and development of Aircraft
engines so that indigenous engines are available to power the aircraft
built by HAL. The Committee would like to be apprised of the progress
made by the HAL in this regard.
Reply of the Government
As recommended by the Committee there is a need to develop a
robust industrial base for engine design and production. A formal
working arrangement between HAL and GTRE could be established
to synergise the design capabilities of GTRE and production &
maintenance capabilities of HAL.
As per DRDO, the Action Taken through the proposed joint venture
for Kaveri intended to establish a strong design and development base.
There is currently no market for a smaller engine since HAL has
already contracted for the IJT. However, HAL‘s view is that the
complete development of a smaller engine than Kaveri could be
initiated with Government funding for mastering the engine design
and development technology base in the country. Subsequently,
transition to design and development of larger engines could be made
easily with the design and technology base developed.
Further, to meet the aircraft requirements, HAL has been
manufacturing engines under license utilizing its full capacity. During
the process of manufacture and overhaul of these engines, HAL has
built up sufficient knowledge of the performance of the engines and
their systems.
14

15
Recommendation No. 3
Improvement in Salary Structure of HAL
4.6 The Committee note with serious concern the attrition of
manpower in HAL. The Committee note the number of Assistant
Engineers/Engineers/Deputy Managers resigning in HAL since 2003
is 756 and the number of officers in the rank of Managers and above
is 118; in a single year (2006–up to September) alone the numbers
being 314 and 52 respectively. The Committee also note that the
engineers resigning from HAL are mostly from the four disciplines
viz. design, production shops, production engineering and quality
control. The Committee further note that most of the engineers
resigning are in the rank of Assistant Engineer, Engineer and Deputy
Manager, thus forming the young age group of the engineers. The
Engineers leaving HAL are taking up employment in the Aviation
Industry, IT Sector, MNCs, Navratna PSUs etc. The experienced
engineers of HAL are in great demand in disciplines like design,
production, computers, finance, human resource etc. in the job market
as the compensation package in these companies is far superior to
that in HAL. The Committee take a very serious note of the excessive
delay in project schedules of the company. The Committee understand
that HAL had submitted proposal for the revision of pay scales of the
Executives on the lines of Pay Scales of NTPC to the Board of Directors.
The proposal, after approval from the Board, is pending with the
Ministry of Defence for final clearance. The Committee feel that the
engineers resigning from HAL are from a few particular disciplines
and form part of a particular age group of the employees. The
Committee desire that the Ministry should take immediate steps to
offer attractive job package available to them in the job market. They
should also be provided on- job training to brush up their knowledge.
The Committee at the same time also desire that the Ministry should
frame a recruitment policy clearly stipulating service conditions that
the engineers joining the company must sign a bond of compulsory
service in the company for at least 8 to 10 years and in case of breach
of the bond, the expenditure incurred on their job specific training
would be recovered from them. The Committee further note that
attrition of manpower in HAL is inter alia attributed to Voluntary
Retirement, Medical termination and death, the number being 406,219
and 199 in case of officers and 1225, 970 and 1336 in case of workmen
respectively during the last 10 years, which is reflective of the fact
that the employees may have been denied basic facilities, necessary
for retaining the work force and affecting adversely their health. The
Committee are very unhappy to take note of this fact and strongly

16
feel that the Ministry should appoint a Committee to look into this
grave situation of attrition and find remedial measures to check it at
the earliest.
4.7 The Committee further note that several global players in the
aviation field are setting up subsidiaries, joint ventures, etc. in the
country which would be offering attractive packages. The Committee
feel that this situation will further add to the attrition of talent in
HAL. The Committee, therefore strongly recommend that since HAL
is an intensive defence research organisation whose delayed project
schedules cause a lot of concern to the nation and huge costs to the
Armed Forces, the pay structure of all its employees must be adequately
modified so as to compete with the packages of the companies which
have been attracting its employees over the years. In addition to this,
the Company should also offer incentives to its employees comparable
to the one being offered in private sector companies. While offering
incentives/promotional avenues and other facilities to the employees,
the Government must take into account their individual performance
and contribution to the overall growth of the company. The Committee
further recommend that the Government should extend royalty to the
engineers for their original R&D works and any product developed
thereon.
Reply of the Government
Considering need for retaining talent, HAL formulated a proposal
for revision of the pay scales in respect of the Executives of the
Company at par with the pay scales in NTPC with effect from
1-4-2006 and referred the proposal to Ministry of Defence for approval.
As the revision of Pay Scales in PSUs is the subject matter of the
Department of Public Enterprises, a proposal was sent to the
Department of Public Enterprises for consideration. The Department
of Public Enterprises informed that the Govt. has set–up the Second
Pay Revision Committee under the Chairmanship of Shri M. J. Rao,
retired Judge of Supreme Court for making recommendations in respect
of Pay revision for Board level, below Board level officers and non-
unionised Supervisors of the Public Sector Enterprises. HAL was
accordingly, advised to send the information in prescribed Questionnaire
for transmission to Department of Public Enterprises. Based on the
recommendations of the Committee and the directions which would
be issued by Govt., thereafter, HAL would consider revising the
Pay Structure, allowances and benefits etc. of Executives on par with
leading PSUs in the country, as well as , industry specific requirements,
so as to ensure retention of talent in the Company. Therefore, it is felt
that there is no need to set up Committee at this moment.

17
In the meantime, a Sub-Committee of the Board of HAL, including
two part-time Official Directors (Representatives of Ministry) was
constituted to examine the issue, among others, with a view to arrest
attrition of trained manpower in HAL. The Sub-Committee made its
recommendations on enhancement of compensation structure of
employees of HAL. After deliberations, the Board of HAL approved
the recommendations of Sub-Committee and the Company decided to
implement the decisions in respect of Executives. The Company was
advised that the perquisites and allowances in respect of Executives
must be in accordance with the DPE‘s guidelines.
The scheme will be reviewed after one year of implementation to
assess the effect on attrition and retention of the Executives. These
revisions are also subject to Presidential directives which will be issued
by Department of Public Enterprises for revision of Pay Scales and
allowances with effect from 1-1-2007 on receipt of the report of the
Second Pay Revision Committee. The Company would review the
matter on receipt of such directives and changes required would be
dovetailed.
Recommendation No. 4
Checking time and cost overruns of HAL projects
5.9 The Committee are concerned to note time and cost overruns
in a large number of projects undertaken by HAL so far. In some of
the cases like LCA, very small achievement appears to have been
made even after 15 years of efforts like LCA. The Committee also
note that, in some cases, delays have occurred due to changes in
scope of work. The Committee feel that due to time overrun, the user
is tempted to ask for latest changes in the product as the project had
not been completed in time. The Committee have examined various
important projects in the following paras:
IJT
Recommendation
5.10 The Committee note that the sanction for the development of
Intermediate Jet Trainer (IJT) was accorded in July 1999 at a cost of
Rs. 180 crore, which was revised in April 2005 to a cost of
Rs. 467 crore. The Committee are unhappy to note that the development
flight test of IJT are still being undertaken on Larzac engines from
Snecma, France and the production series is planned to be fitted with
higher powered AL-55I engine from Russia. The Committee feel that

18
despite the passage of a long period since the project was sanctioned,
HAL has not successfully developed the engine of the Aircraft and
unfortunately it has taken HAL more than 7 years to complete the
outer airframe of IJT. The Committee feel that much remains to be
done so far as the development of IJT project is concerned. The
Committee, therefore, recommend that HAL should concentrate on the
development of the indigenous engine for IJT instead of depending on
French and Russian Companies. The timeframe fixed in 2005 be strictly
adhered to.
Reply of the Government
The sanction was accorded in 1999 for the development of
Intermediate Jet Trainer. The total design and manufacture of first
prototype was completed in 44 months. The first prototype flew in
Mar. 2003 followed by the second in Mar. 2004. These prototypes were
fitted with Larzac engines which were readily available in the market.
During the development phase, it was considered necessary to fit
a more powerful engine to integrate additional systems on the aircraft
and to cater to future growth potential. Since no suitable engine was
available in the world market, the development of the engine was
contracted with the NPO-Saturn of Russia after a competitive bidding.
The sanction for the IJT project was accordingly revised in Apr. 2005
to include development of a new engine AL-55I in Russia. Though
AL-55I engine is developed in Russia, it will be manufactured by HAL
under licence from raw materials to meet the IJT requirements. Repair
& Overhaul facilities also will be established in HAL to offer life cycle
maintenance support to the customers without depending on the
foreign countries.
Flight evaluation of IJT is progressing and the general performance
of the aircraft is meeting the design specifications. The certification of
the aircraft will be completed in time to meet the induction of aircraft
as planned from 2008 onwards commencing with the Limited Series
Production aircraft.
LCA
Recommendation
5.11 The Committee further note that the Light Combat Aircraft
(LCA) project was conceived way back in 1987 and Full Scale
Engineering Development (FSED)— Phase 1 started in 1991. The
Committee are constrained to note that even after 15 years of its

19
initiation, the project of Kaveri engine which is being developed
indigenously and expected to power LCA has also no indication of its
completion. The Committee are dismayed to note that only structure
of the LCA has so far been completed. The Committee take a very
serious note of it and strongly recommend that the Ministry should
strictly fix deadline for the completion of the two projects. If the
deadlines are not met, HAL should enter into joint venture/
collaboration with private firms and R&D organisations which have
attained capability to design and develop such engine. The Ministry
should also ensure closer participation of Air Force in these projects.
Reply of the Government
It may be mentioned that LCA is a sophisticated 4th Generation
aircraft, development of which has been taken up in the country for
the first time. Design, Development and certification of such aircraft is
a long process even with experienced aircraft design houses.
Considerable progress has been made in the setting up of the
infrastructure and imbibing the knowledge in spite of external
constraints such as sanctions from the US development partners.
However, the experience gained in this program will be of immense
use in future programs.
Development project of LCA is assigned to ADA and the engine
development to GTRE. DRDO has noted that the joint development
and manufacture proposed for Kaveri will be comprised of management
and execution team comprising HAL, GTRE and an international
partner and is a major step in the direction indicated by the action
taken report. Future organisational structure will be derived from this
effort. Various high level user driven Committees closely monitor the
LCA Programme. Dy. Chief of Air Staff jointly reviews with DRDO
and HAL on a monthly basis and the Chief of Air Staff on quarterly
basis. The participation of Indian Air Force in the development and
flight testing efforts is also there right from the beginning of the
programme. In the recent past, an Air Force Team has been positioned
at ADA for ensuring early induction of LCA of the Air Force.
Other projects
Recommendation
5.12 The Committee further note the slow pace of progress of the
projects viz . Advance Light Helicopter (Dhruv) Weapon System
Integration to be powered with Shakti Engine being developed in joint
venture with M/s Turbomeca, France, Jaguar upgrade, Sea Harrier

20
upgrade and Light Combat Helicopter. The Committee feel concerned
about these projects as HAL has not been able to meet deadlines in
any project and therefore desire that HAL should not solely depend
on DRDO but also intensify its R&D efforts in order to achieve
comprehensive skills in design and development of engine. For the
purpose, it can use its young and talented engineers by providing
them optimal scientific environment and encouragement so that in
near future we may not have to depend on foreign companies for any
strategic crucial technology. The Ministry should also make all out
efforts for the timely completion of pending/delayed projects.
Reply of the Government
The weapon system integration on ALH was dependent on the
selection of weapons and systems by the Army, IAF and Navy. After
selection, orders have been placed for Turret gun, Air-to-Air Missile
and Rocket systems only in 2006. Anti-tank Guided Missile (ATGM) is
yet to be selected by the Army and IAF. As envisaged in the project
proposal, integration of weapon Systems will be completed within
3 years from selection. Weapon system Integration on ALH is expected
to be completed by 2009. Shakti engines for powering ALH is being
jointly developed with Turbomeca, France. Flight-worthy engines
received from Turbomeca have been integrated on ALH and are
undergoing ground tests. The flight tests are expected to commence in
July, 07.
Development of Jaguar Navwass Upgrade has been completed with
Final Operation Clearance (FOC) being accorded for Twin Seater aircraft
in Sep. 2006 and for Strike aircraft in Apr 2007. The project was
scheduled to be completed in Dec. 2003. The time overrun was caused
due to unreasonable cost hike demanded for the development of
Mission Computer by Smiths Aerospace, UK to whom the development
activity was contracted. Subsequently, the Mission Computer was
developed indigenously by DARE and HAL. This has built up the
capability to design, manufacture and integrate Mission Computers on
an aviation platform indigenously.
The contract for the Sea Harrier upgrade programme was concluded
in March, 2005. There has been a delay of around 4 to 5 months in
carrying out the first flight on upgraded prototype aircraft due to late
receipt of items from vendors and accessibility problems encountered
on aircraft for carrying out flight test instrumentation. This delay could
be recovered in the retro-modification of the fleet.
The sanction for the Light Combat Helicopter was accorded in
Oct. 2006 and the Initial Operation Clearance is to be achieved by
Oct. 2010. All the design activities are progressing satisfactorily and
no delay is anticipated in completing the project.

21
HAL has the requisite design capabilities in the design of airframe,
helicopters, upgrades, integration and flight testing. Achieving complete
design capabilities in all the spheres of aviation like airframe, engine,
accessories and avionics is a mammoth task. Companies world-wide
have not resorted to this approach and the leading companies like
Airbus, British Aerospace, McDonnel Douglas concentrate on system
design and integration work whereas the design of engines, accessories
and avionics are outsourced.
Recommendation No. 5
Need for a comprehensive perspective plan
6.4 The Committee have noted the efforts made by HAL towards
modernisation and self-reliance of Indian Air Force. The Committee
have also examined the indigenisation content in the major projects
during the last 5 years. In some cases, this content has remained static
and in some cases it has increased only by 2 to 3 percent in 5 years
time. The previous track record of HAL in terms of various delayed
projects also strengthens the fact that there is no concrete planning of
HAL for design and development of aircraft, engine etc. The continuous
unfulfilled requirements of the Armed Forces for the aircraft, helicopters
etc. also corroborates that the same has not been duly addressed by
the company over the last several years. The Committee take a very
serious view of it. The Committee also feel that only those projects
need to be carried forward which meet requirements of the Armed
Forces. The projects which have been showing inordinate delays and
cost overruns should be reviewed to see whether further investments
in such projects are worthwhile. The Ministry should chalk out a well-
considered R&D plan and focus only on result-oriented R&D activities.
The Committee feel that since upgradation and modernisation is a
continuous process, HAL should prepare a time-bound programme for
completion of upgradation and modernisation of infrastructure in the
various units of HAL and that programme should have the approval
by the Board of Directors.
Reply of the Government
Indigenisation
In licence production projects, the indigenisation effort usually
commences after absorption of the offered technology and stabilisation
of production. Indigenisation of items is taken up to meet the
requirement of the repair and overhauls. Indigenisation is taken up
based on design feasibility and economic viability to increase the self
reliance and to obviate export restrictions or obsolescence.

22
Design and Development
HAL was not entrusted with any major new design and
development project of fighter aircraft after the HF-24 (Marut). Initiating
an indigenous design and development of an aircraft or a helicopter
requires large amount of funds. It is not feasible for HAL to initiate
a major project without the firming up of specification and requirement
by the domestic customer and funding by the Customer/Government.
During early 2000s, HAL had proposed the development of an
Indigenous Advanced Jet Trainer (IAJT) to cater to the requirement
beyond the 66 Hawk aircraft and a Basic Turbo-prop Trainer aircraft
to replace the HPT-32. Confirmation of requirement and the staff
requirements for these aircraft is not yet issued by the IAF. HAL has
proposed the co-development of Medium Lift Helicopter with an
international helicopter manufacturer to meet the requirement of a
10 Ton helicopter by all the three Services.
The current major development programmes are the Intermediate
Jet Trainer(IJT) and Light Combat Helicopter(LCH) for IAF. These will
enter production stage in 2008 and 2010 respectively. There are no cost
overruns in any of the major projects currently being progressed at
HAL.
Upgradation and Modernisation
This is a continuous process at HAL and is planned to meet the
changing needs of the projects being undertaken. A five year
modernisation plan for the period 2006-07 to 2011-12 has been drawn
up by all the Divisions of HAL with an estimated investment of
Rs. 640 Cr. Approval of the Board of Directors is taken for incurring
the expenditure on capital investments as per the Delegation of Powers.
Recommendation No. 6
Need for strengthening R&D infrastructure in HAL
7.5 The Committee note that for strengthening R&D infrastructure
in HAL, the Ministry has also taken up technological upgradation
programme by which new technologies are being inducted under ToT
and indigenous development of the projects being emphasized. There
are efforts for continuous augmentation/Upgradation facilities on the
part of Ministry through Annual Capital Budget. The Committee,
however, feel that despite all these efforts several projects of HAL are
running behind schedule and thus causing cost overrun. The Committee

23
therefore, desire that well concerted efforts need to be taken by the
Ministry for the development of strong base of in-house design and
development by intensifying R&D activities of the company with full
fledged involvement of DPSUs, DRDO and private companies so that
their scientific and technological expertise/capacity could be gainfully
utilised to achieve the goal of self-reliance in Defence Production.
Reply of the Government
HAL has set up 9 R&D centres which undertake design and
development activities related to aircraft, helicopter, accessories and
avionics. HAL is strengthening these R&D centres by modernising their
facilities and induction of designers. Schemes are put in place to attract
and retain the designers. HAL has been collaborating with DRDO and
other research labs and the private industry in its R&D efforts. For
instance the items that have been developed recently through such
collaborations:
- Mission computer for Jaguar with Defence Avionics Research
Establishment (DARE)
- Radar Processing computers for SU-30MKI with DARE
- Engine fuel control system for Kaveri engine with GTRE
- Sonar/Sonics for ALH-WSI programme with NPOL
- Canopy severance system for IJT with ADRDE
- Pilot parachutes of MiG-21 and MiG-27 aircraft with ADRDE
HAL is making all efforts to progress the R&D programmes
expeditiously. There are time overruns due to the technical issues,
improvements sought during development stages and dependence on
some foreign vendors. However, there has been no cost overrun unless
the scope of the programme itself is changed.
Recommendation
7.6 The Committee further desire that the Ministry should fix R&D
targets and strive to achieve the same. Efforts must be taken to make
the coordination of the Company with DRDO and other agencies
stronger in all its R&D activities. The Committee take note of the
delayed projects of IJT and LCA whose flight evaluation trials are still
going on and final operational clearance is still awaited and therefore
strongly feel that the company should take steps to limit the number
of such trials and achieve final operational clearance for induction in
the combat strength of the Armed Forces. The Committee also feel
that proper care should also be taken to ensure ample staff strength

24
for the R&D activities so that the projects are not delayed. For the
purpose, the Ministry should also make strategy to attract the best
talent available in the Market and thus the best job package should be
offered to them so as to check the ongoing attrition of manpower. The
Ministry should also frame guidelines under which the engineers cannot
leave the company until completion of the project midway. The
Committee further desire that the Ministry should make a well
documented record of the ongoing research in the project step by step
simultaneously so that the research could be carried further in case
the engineer or workman associated with the project leave the company
due to reasons whatsoever. The Ministry must make out a time bound
programme for completion of the projects. The Ministry should also
take efforts to ensure proper coordination with private sector in various
projects of HAL.
Reply of the Government
Development of an aircraft or helicopter involves proving of the
systems both on ground and in air. As per the design requirements,
several tests are required to prove the aircraft systems beyond any
doubts that the machine is safe in all respects for use. The requirement
is more stringent in the case of aviation products as no design
deficiency will be tolerated in the actual operational environment. To
overcome unavoidable delays, HAL resorts to recovery plans such as
carrying out multiple test points during flight tests increasing the
frequency of flight tests and build of additional prototype/Limited
Series Production aircrafts/helicopters to join the evaluation.
There is a well defined documentation procedure for design and
production activities. Despite documentations, there are limitations to
the transfer of intrinsic knowledge from a person to others. To attract
and retain the talent, HAL has introduced certain packages to increase
the emoluments.
A comprehensive sub-contracting procedure has been compiled at
HAL for outsourcing/long term business agreements with private
sector. Sub-contracting is resorted to both in design and production
activities after the existing in-house capacity is fully exploited in the
Company.
Recommendation No. 7
Involvement of private sector form the stage of design to final
integration
8.5 The Committee note the efforts being made by HAL for
involving private companies in design and development of systems &

25
sub-systems. The Committee, however, feel that the efforts are not at
the required pace which can make some meaningful contribution. The
Committee feel that the role of private sector in research and design
activities should be recognised and they should be involved right from
conceptualisation (design & development) of the project to final
integration of the sub-systems. It will boost up the level of domestic
R&D base and thus gradually minimize the country’s dependence on
foreign supplier. Besides, HAL should share the available technology
with private companies to strengthen the defence R&D base in the
country, so as to contribute in the development of the company as a
strategic business unit of the country.
Reply of the Government
HAL has been encouraging participation of private industry in
design and development of various modules and systems. Some of
the design packages outsourced to private industries during 2006-2007
include:
• Fuselage and cockpit design for LCH
• Design and fabrication of Wind Tunnel model and Radar
Cross Section model for LCH
• Development of Integrated Standby Instrument System for
ALH
• Central Warning Panel for ALH
Earlier, the complete design, fabrication and qualification testing
of Oil Cooling System for the Shakti engine were outsourced to a
private enterprise.
In addition to the above major items, many design and
development projects for the indigenisation program on different
projects are being outsourced to private industries by HAL. Outsourcing
design packages in all new projects depending on the capabilities
established in the private sector would be continued.
Recommendation
8.6 The Committee note the benefits of implementation of offset
clause under Defence Procurement Policy, 2006 and the strategy
prepared by the HAL to utilise the opportunities out of it. The
Committee, therefore, desire that to take benefit of offset clause, HAL
should take immediate steps to develop alliance with the private
companies so as to facilitate the ongoing research and design projects
of the company. The Ministry should also make efforts to make

26
available the technology brought to the company under ToT to the
private sector companies which have proven track record of high
technological capability as well as financial capacity and which can set
up production lines of aircraft, helicopter and other avionics and
accessories in their joint venture-ship. At the same time, accountability
for timely completion or delays in the project should also be fixed on
the firms involved in the joint venture, etc. The Committee further
desire that while undertaking projects in alliance with other
Government agencies/organisations under offset clause, the existing
systems of nomination should be abolished and decision in this matter
should be merit-based.
Reply of the Government
HAL is exploring strategic alliances for cooperation in engineering
and design services with IT related companies. These alliances, forged
with the domain knowledge of HAL and IT expertise of private
industries, will offer cost effective solutions to international companies
in meeting their offset obligations.
It is desirable to have a nodal agency in India for the transfer of
technology from the licensor. In major aircraft licence production, HAL
is the organisation which can play the part of nodal agency to monitor
the ToT. HAL could in turn transfer the technology to suitable private
industries based on capabilities and long term commitment to fulfil
the licence manufacture obligations. The nodal agency could be from
private sector also, once requisite capability to deliver complete
integrated aircraft/helicopter is built up and demonstrated by them in
India. Then the selection could be based on tendering process in which
HAL and other DPSUs will compete with private sector.
In respect of offset there is no system for nominating an
organisation for liquidation of offsets under DPP 2006. As per the
DPP 2006, “offset obligations shall be discharged directly by any
combination of the following methods:
(a) Direct purchase of, or executing export orders for, defence
products and components manufactured by, or services
provided by, Indian defence industries, i.e., Defence Public
Sector Undertakings, the Ordnance Factory Board, and any
private defence industry manufacturing these products or
components under an industrial licence granted for such
manufacture. For the purpose of defence offset, “services”
will mean maintenance, overhaul, upgradation, life extension,
engineering, design, testing, defence related software or
quality assurance services.

27
(b) Direct foreign investment in Indian defence industries for
industrial infrastructure for services, co-development, joint
ventures and co-production of defence products .
(c) Direct foreign investment in Indian organisations engaged
in research in defence R & D as certified by Defence Offset
Facilitation Agency (DOFA)”
The vendor is at liberty to choose his offset partner.
Recommendation No. 8
Navratna Status to HAL
9.5 The Committee note that HAL’s performance has been consistent
over the past few years and has thus achieved excellent rating for the
same. The Committee also note that if HAL is accorded Navratna Status,
the Board of Directors of HAL would be empowered to exercise
enhanced powers viz. as against Rs. 500 crore for the Miniratna, there
will be no Monetary ceiling for the Board to approve capital
expenditure on new projects, modernisation, equity investment to
establish financial joint ventures and wholly-owned subsidiaries in India
and abroad; authorization to raise debt form domestic capital, market
and borrow from the international market; powers for merger and
acquisition; and delegation of powers relating to HRD. The Committee
note the immense benefit of Navratna Status and therefore feel that
the matter of according Navratna Status of HAL must be taken up at
the highest level so as to provdie flexibility in working of HAL enabling
it to take immediate decisions and build up its image in the domestic
as well as international market in the aviation industry.
Reply of the Government
With the recommendation of the Committee, the request of HAL
to be upgraded as a Navratna Company has been considered
favourably by the Government and Navaratna Status has been accorded
to the Company in 2007. The investiture ceremony to grant “Navratna”
status to HAL was held on 22 June, 2007.
Recommendation No. 9
Market Exploration for HAL products
10.4 The Committee note the export market of HAL products is
confined to only small developing countries viz. Nepal, Thailand,
Malaysia, etc. and the monetary value of actual export over the past
few years has been insignificant and has shown declining trend after
the year 2003-04. The Committee also note that a few work packages
related to forgings, drawings etc. are being exported to some developed

28
countries also which reflects that there is no serious export business of
HAL outside the country. The Committee therefore strongly feel that
there is no substantive efforts on the part of the company to explore
the export market of its products. The Committee note that even though
certain measures have been taken by the Ministry for the improvement
of export business on the fronts of pricing, skill upgradation,
diversification, outsourcing, etc., the outcome has been insignificant.
The Committee therefore, desire that the Ministry should take necessary
step to implement these measures so as to produce good export results.
HAL should pursue with Ministry of Civil Aviation to sign agreements
with other countries to obtain international certification for its products.
The Government should also provide grants/subsidy packages to HAL
to help them increase the exports. The most important requirement on
the part of HAL is to maintain its delivery schedule and cost to face
the stiff competition in international market. The Committee would
also like to suggest that HAL should encourage development of private
sector industries by offering them technologies etc. to reduce their
costs as also to enable them to take advantage of off set clause under
various international arms deals.
Reply of the Government
Presently, HAL’s major thrust is on marketing of ALH. HAL is
pursuing with various prospective domestic as well as foreign
customers for supply of ALH because of its versatility & wide spectrum
of operational capability. Apart from supply of 2 Dhruvs to Nepal,
HAL has leased one helicopter to Israel for use by Israeli MOD.
Capabilities of Dhruv have also been demonstrated in IDEF-07
(Turkey)in May’07, Farnborough Air Show 2006, Paris Air Show in
June’03/ June’05, Asian Aerospace 2004 in Singapore which had drawn
major attention and created keen interest among various civil and
military operators.
ALH-Dhruv being the major focus for exports, HAL has taken
initiative for co-validation of Type Certification of the helicopter by
international agencies. The following are the details:
(a) Chile : After detailed interactions, submission of technical
documents & carrying out flight tests on Dhruv, compliance
with the requirements specified by the aviation regulation
applicable in Chile was confirmed. The Type Certificate of
Dhruv has been co-validated by Directorate General of Civil
Aviation (DGCA), Chile. Towards this, the certificate has
been issued to HAL recently. This is an important milestone
towards the promotion of ALH in Chile.

29
(b) Initiatives have been taken for EASA (European Aviation
Safety Agreement) and FAA (Federal Aviation
Administration) certification for Dhruv helicopter. HAL team
visited EASA and made the presentation indicating HAL’s
willingness to progress the case. Subsequent to this, EASA
team visited HAL and reviewed the design and quality
system.
(c) HAL has also taken initiative for co-validation of Dhruv
certification by Israel and Malaysia. Bilateral safety Agency
Agreement (BASA) has been concluded with Israel recently.
The Civil Aviation Authority in Malaysia has been reviewing
the technical documents submitted by HAL in this regard.
More than 1300 Private Industries are participating in HAL’s
outsourcing Programme. HAL has been extending technical support to
private industries to upgrade their quality system. To capitalise on the
offset opportunities and global aerospace demand by leveraging the
strengths of partners, discussions are in progress with reputed private
industries for strategic alliances on Engineering and Design services
for structures and engines.

CHAPTER III
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE
COMMITTEE DO NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE IN
VIEW OF GOVERNMENTS REPLIES
Recommendation No. 1
Need for restructuring of HAL
2.8 The Committee note that the Board of Directors of HAL
comprises a Chairman, 7 whole-time Directors, 2 part-time official
Directors and 6 part-time non-official Directors. The Corporate
Organisation is headed by the Chairman. Apart from the Managing
Directors/Director heading the four Complexes i.e. Bangalore Complex,
MiG Complex, Accessories Complex and Design Complex responsible
for the production and R&D, 3 functional Directors are responsible for
Corporate Planning and Marketing, Finance, Personnel &
Administration respectively at the Corporate level. The Committee feel
that there is a need to decentralize the powers presently vested with
the Board of Directors so as to provide sufficient functional and
financial autonomy to the four complexes of HAL in order to enhance
their decision making powers. Each unit be headed by an independent
official who would be answerable to the Board in regard to the projects
being undertaken. The four complexes of HAL thus should be
recognised as separate and independent entities with freedom to have
joint venture/collaboration with private companies and research
organisations of the country and take immediate decisions. The
Committee also feel that an expert/independent Committee should be
appointed at the earliest to go into the whole issue of this re-structuring
so that the company emerges as an independent corporate body in
Brahmos Model, separate from DRDO with DRDO’s role just as a
facilitator in HAL’s projects. This re-structuring will give complete
leadership to HAL in aeronautics research, design and development.
Reply of the Government
The present organisation structure of HAL was decided on the
concept of accountability of each complex for its end product. Managing
Directors/Directors of the Complexes are delegated with necessary
administrative and financial powers to take necessary decisions for
their operations. All of them are the members of the Board of Directors
30

31
of HAL. They put up their proposals for joint ventures, collaborations
with private companies and research organisations where HAL Board’s
approval is required. Administratively all the full-time directors report
to the Chairman of the Company.
In the present set up, HAL has the flexibility to earmark the
projects to its different Production Divisions. For instance,
productionisation of IJT is proposed at Kanpur Division to utilize the
infrastructure available there. This would release the capacity at
Bangalore Division to produce AJT (Hawk) and LCA. Similarly, to
enhance the ALH production capacity in Bangalore, overhaul of
Cheetah/Chetak helicopters is being shifted to Barrackpore. Such
flexibility will be lost if the Company is converted into different groups.
Considering the world-wide trend of mergers and collaborative
arrangements in aerospace industry, it is proposed that the present
organizational set up is maintained.
HAL operates as an independent Corporate body governed by its
Board of Directors. It is autonomous in all its activities and seeks
MoD clearance only in case of major project approvals. Except for the
Government guidelines for PSUs, there is no interference from the
MoD. HAL is independent of DRDO and has no structural linkages
with DRDO in its organisation.
In view of the comments furnished above, Ministry is of the view
that no independent Committee is needed to be appointed for re-
structuring of HAL. Moreover, HAL had already been granted Navratna
status.
Recommendation No. 2
Industrial base for engine design and development
3.4 The Committee note that the Ministry have admitted during
oral evidence that the country does not have an industrial base for
engine design and also that it takes 15 to 20 years for a Chief designer
to take up the development of an engine, which is reflective of very
slow state of affair of R&D activities in the country. The Committee
also note the roadmap for engine development in the country i.e.
counting the indigenous development activities with national funding
as also joining hand with international design houses as co-development
partners. The Committee strongly feels that the aircraft industry in the
country till date has not made much progress in engine design and
development so far. The Committee further find it contradictory to
note that the capacity utilisation of the company in engines
development is near to 100 percent over the past few years which

32
shows that the utilisation of the capacity is related to only those engines
which are being built under Transfer of Technology (ToT) from abroad.
The Committee feel that even after spending about 20 years and a lot
of money much needs to be done for designing an engine. The
Committee desire that the matter should be examined and immediate
correcting steps be taken.
Reply of the Government
Gas Turbine Research Establishment (GTRE) was founded in 1965
to take up the design and development of aero-engine. Government
has sanctioned the project to develop Kaveri engine for LCA to GTRE.
While the engine is developed and prototypes are undergoing test bed
evaluation, it is seen that there are certain shortfalls in its performance.
GTRE is making efforts to resolve the issues through technical
consultancy with an experienced foreign engine design house.
Subsequent to the formation of GTRE, engine design in HAL was
restricted to design and development of small engines for PTA,
sub-systems of engine, engine starters and engine test beds. All these
programmes have been successfully completed and implemented.
However, to meet the aircraft requirements, HAL has been
manufacturing engines under licence utilising its full capacity. During
the process of manufacture and overhaul of these engines, HAL has
built up sufficient knowledge of the performance of the engines and
their systems.
DRDO has noted that the joint development and manufacture
proposed for Kaveri will be comprised of management and execution
team comprising HAL, GTRE and an International partner and is a
major step in the direction indicated by the Action Taken Report. Future
organizational structure will be derived from this effort.
Concluding Observations
Recommendation No. 10
The Committee have made an in-depth study of the functioning
of HAL from various standpoints and have thus made
recommendations under various chapters for effecting improvement in
overall working of HAL. The Committee concldue that HAL plays a
vital role for the national security of the country and therefore its
functioning should be so organized and re-structured as to make it an
autonomous R&D body on the lines of ISRO and Brahmos and it

33
should be totally independent from DRDO. DRDO however, can
facilitate the working of HAL in various projects but at the same time
it should refrain from being a controlling authority of HAL projects.
The Committee also feel that despite the passing of a very long period
from its inception, HAL has not been able to develop leadership in
aeronautic defence research projects which may be perhaps due to
bureaucratic control of the Ministry of Defence. The Committee
therefore strongly desire that HAL should be allowed to work in a
more flexible, independent and open atmosphere so that there is a
need for least governance and regulation. The Committee further wish
that HAL should be allowed to function on corporate lines in order to
enable it to raise finances from internal and external markets so as to
give fillip to R&D activities and produce high-end technologies for the
Armed Forces. In addition, the Ministry should also ensure that
Members from the corporate world/professional organizations may
invariably be appointed on the Board of Directors of HAL.
Reply of the Government
The present Corporate structure of HAL is functioning effectively.
For the time being, Government does not feel grant of an Autonomous
status to HAL. HAL has been granted Navratna status, which has
given wide ranging financial powers to Chairman & the Board. HAL
has full authority to raise finances from market based on sound
commercial consideration. As regards the constitution of the Board of
Directors of HAL, it is already being represented by the members
from the Corporate world/professional organizations. HAL is already
independent from DRDO. However, there is functional synergy between
HAL & DRDO, as in case of prototype development and subsequent
series production of ALH.

CHAPTER IV
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF
WHICH REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT
BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE
Recommendation No. 1
2.9 The Committee further note that HAL is managed by a
professional Board of Directors, selected from diverse areas of
specialisation such as industry, finance technocrats etc. The Committee
desire that the Board of Directors must have permanent representation
from the Armed Forces also with one member each from Army, Navy
and Air Force so as to provide a platform to the users to stress their
requirements and ensure timely completion of the projects.
Reply of the Government
The present structure of the Board of Directors is as per the
guidelines of Department of Public Enterprises which restricts the
Government nominees to two members only. However, one
representative each from Army (Master General Ordnance), IAF (Deputy
Chief of Air Staff) and Navy (Deputy Chief of Naval Staff) is invited
to participate in all the Board meetings of the HAL.
34

CHAPTER V
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH
FINAL REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED
—Nil—
  N EW D ELHI ; BALASAHEB VIKHE PATIL,
10 March, 2008 Chairman,
20 Phalguna, 1929 (Saka) Standing Committee on Defence.
35

36
APPENDIX I
MINUTES OF THE EIGHTEENTH SITTING OF THE STANDING
COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE (2007-2008)
The Committee sat on Monday, the 3rd March, 2008 from
1500 to 1535 hrs. in Committee Room ‘C’, Parliament House Annexe,
New Delhi.
PRESENT
Shri Balasaheb Vikhe Patil — Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Vijay Bahuguna
3. Shri S. Bangarappa
4. Shri Santosh Gangwar
5. Shri Ramesh C. Jigajinagi
6. Shri C. Kuppusami
7. Dr. K.S. Manoj
8. Shri Manavendra Singh
Rajya Sabha
9. Shri K.B. Shanappa
SECRETARIAT
1. Shri S.K. Sharma — Additional Secretary
2. Shri A. Louis Martin — Joint Secretary
3. Shri Gopal Singh — Director
4. Shri D.R. Shekhar — Deputy Secretary-II
5. Smt. J.M. Sinha — Under Secretary
Representatives of the Ministry of Heavy Industries and
Public Enterprises (Department of Public Enterprises)
1. Shri K.D. Tripathi — Joint Secretary
2. Shri G. Ramachandran — Director
3. Shri P.J. Michael — Under Secretary

37
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the repesentatives of the
Ministry of Heavy Industries and Public Enterprises (Department of
Public Enterprises) to the sitting of the Committee for oral evidence in
connection with the Action Taken replies furnished by the Ministry of
Defence on the recommendations/observations of the Committee
contained in their and Eighteenth Reports on Seventeenth ‘In-Depth
Study and Critical Review of Hindustan Aeronautics Limited (HAL)’
and ‘In Depth Study and Critical Review of Bharat Electronics Limited
(BEL)’ respectively. Then, the Chairman drew their attention to Direction
58 of Directions by the Speaker, Lok Sabha.
3. A representative of the Department of Public Enterprises briefed
the Committee regarding the guidelines governing on the composition
of Board of Directors of Hindustan Aeronautics Limited (HAL) and
Bharat Electronics Limited (BEL), matters of Second Pay Revision
Committee appointed by Department of Public Enterprises to
recommend the pay scales for Public Enterprises.
4. With regard to composition of Board of Directors of Defence
Public Sector Undertakings, representative of Department of Public
Enterprises stated that since the guidelines governing the structure of
Board of Directors had the approval of Cabinet Committee on Economic
Affairs (CCEA), any decision can be considered only if there is any
specific proposal in this regard from the Ministry of Defence.
5. The Committee were also informed that the issues regarding
acceleratory promotions and extending royalty to R&D scientist
engineers do not come under the purview of the Department of Public
Enterprises or the Second Pay Revision Committee.
6. A verbatim record of the proceedings has been kept.
The Committee then adjourned.

MINUTES OF THE TWENTIETH SITTING OF THE STANDING
COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE (2007-2008)
The Committee sat on Monday, the 10th March, 2008 from
1500 hrs. to 1545 hrs. in Committee Room ‘C’, Parliament House
Annexe, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Shri Balasaheb Vikhe Patil — Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Vijay Bahuguna
3. Shri Milind Murli Deora
4. Shri Jigajinagi Ramesh Chandappa
5. Shri C. Kuppusami
6. Dr. K.S. Manoj
7. Shri Asaduddin Owaisi
8. Shri Shrinivas Patil
9. Shri Arjun Charan Sethi
10. Shri Anil Shukla Warsi
Rajya Sabha
11. Smt. N.P. Durga
12. Shri K.B. Shanappa
13. Smt. Viplove Thakur
SECRETARIAT
1. Shri A. Louis Martin — Joint Secretary
2. Shri Gopal Singh — Director
3. Shri D.R. Shekhar — Deputy Secretary-II
4. Smt. J.M. Sinha — Under Secretary
38

39
2. The Committee considered the following Action Taken Reports
and adopted the same with some additions/modifications, as suggested
by the members:
(i) Draft Action Taken Report on the recommendations/
observations contained in the Fourteenth Report on ‘Defence
Research and Development Organisation (DRDO)’; and
(ii) Draft Action Taken Report on the recommendations/
observations contained in the Seventeenth Report on ‘In-
Depth Study and Critical Review of Hindustan Aeronautics
Limited (HAL)’.
3. The Committee then authorized the Chairman to finalize the
above-mentioned reports and present the same to the Parliament.
The Committee then adjourned.

APPENDIX II
ANALYSIS OF THE ACTION  TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT
ON THE RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS CONTAINED
IN THE 17TH REPORT OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON
DEFENCE (FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA) ON “IN-DEPTH
STUDY AND CRITICAL REVIEW OF HINDUSTAN
AERONAUTICS LIMITED (HAL)”
Total  Percentage
of Total
(i) Total number of recommendations 18
(ii) Recommendations/Observations which 14 78%
have been accepted by Government
(Para Nos. 3.5, 4.6, 4.7, 5.9, 5.10, 5.11,
5.12, 6.4, 7.5, 7.6, 8.5, 8.6, 9.5, 10.4)
(iii) Recommendations/Observations which 3 17%
the Committee do not desire to pursue
in view of Government’s replies
(Para Nos. 2.8, 3.4, 10.5)
(iv) Recommendations/Observations in respect 1 5%
of which replies of  Government have not
been accepted by the Committee
(Para No. 2.9)
(v) Recommendations/Observations in respect
of which final replies of Government
are still awaited
Sl. No. NIL
40