32 STANDING COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE
(2008-2009)
(FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA)
MINISTRY OF DEFENCE
[Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations contained in the
Twenty-Second Report of the Committee (Fourteenth Lok Sabha) on ‘Review
of Implementation Status of Group of Ministers (GoMs) Report on Reforming
National Security System in pursuance of Kargil Review Committee Report –
A Special Reference to Management of Defence]
THIRTY-SECOND REPORT
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
December, 2008/Agrahayana, 1930 (Saka)
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

THIRTY-SECOND REPORT
STANDING COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE
(2008-2009)
(FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA)
MINISTRY OF DEFENCE
[Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations contained in the
Twenty-Second Report of the Committee (Fourteenth Lok Sabha) on ‘Review
of Implementation Status of Group of Ministers (GoMs) Report on Reforming
National Security System in pursuance of Kargil Review Committee Report –
A Special Reference to Management of Defence]
Presented to Lok Sabha on 18.12.2008
Laid in Rajya Sabha on  18.12.2008
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
December, 2008/Agrahayana, 1930 (Saka)
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

C.O.D. No. 98
Price: Rs.
© 2008 By LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in Lok
Sabha  (Twelfth Edition) and printed by ………………….
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

(i)
CONTENTS
           P A G E
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (2008-2009).…………………….  (ii)
INTRODUCTION.…………………………………………………….… ………. (iii)
CHAPTER I  Report ……………………………………………….…. 1
CHAPTER II   Recommendations/Observations which have been
   accepted by the Government…….……………….…... 13
CHAPTER III  Recommendation/Observations which the Committee
   do not desire to pursue in view of Government’s
   replies…………………………………..…..……….….… 26
CHAPTER IV  Recommendations/Observations in respect of which
    replies of Government have not been accepted by
  the committee………………………..….…………..…… 33
CHAPTER V   Recommendations/Observations in respect of which
 final replies of Government are still awaited. …………39
MINUTES OF THE SITTING …………………………………………………….40
ANNEXURE  ………………………………………………………………41
APPENDIX    Analysis of Action Taken by the Government on the
recommendations contained in the 22nd  Report of the
Standing Committee on Defence (Fourteenth Lok
Sabha)………………………………………………….… 43
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

(ii)
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE (2008-09)
Shri Balasaheb Vikhe Patil   - Chairman
MEMBERS
LOK SABHA
2. Shri Vijay Bahuguna
3. Shri S. Bangarappa
4. Shri Milind Murli Deora
5. Shri Santosh Gangwar
6. Shri Jigajinagi Ramesh Chandappa
7. Shri Suresh Kalmadi
8. Shri C. Kuppusami
9. Dr. K.S. Manoj
10. Ms. Ingrid Mcleod
11. Shri Asaduddin Owaisi
12. Shri Adhalrao Shivaji Patil
13. Shri Shrinivas Patil
14. Shri Raju Rana
*15. Dr. H.T. Sangliana
16. Shri Arjun Charan Sethi
17. Prof. Mahadeorao Shiwankar
18. Shri Manavendra Singh
19. Shri Balashowry Vallabhaneni
20. Shri Rajesh Verma
21. Shri Anil Shukla Warsi
 RAJYA SABHA
22. Shri A. Elavarasan
 **23. Dr. Farooq Abdullah
24. Shri Jai Parkash Aggarwal
***25. Shri  Abu Asim Azmi
26. Smt. Shobhana Bhartia
27. Shri R.K. Dhawan
28. Shri K.B. Shanappa
29. Shri Arun Shourie
30. Smt. Viplove Thakur
31. Shri M.V. Mysura Reddy
_______________________________________________________________________________
*    Consequent upon his disqualification from Lok Sabha w.e.f. 3.10.2008.
**   Ceased to be a member of this Committee due to his retirement from Rajya Sabha w.e.f. 29.11.2008.
***   Ceased to be a member of this Committee due to his retirement from Rajya Sabha w.e.f. 25.11.2008.
SECRETARIAT
1. Shri Rajeev Sharma  - Director
2. Shri D.R. Shekhar  - Deputy Secretary
3. Smt. J.M. Sinha   - Under Secretary
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

(iii)
INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairman of the Standing Committee on Defence (2008-09), having
been authorized by the Committee to present  the Report on their behalf, do
present this Thirty-second Report  of the Committee on Action Taken by the
Government on the recommendations contained in the Twenty-second Report of
the Committee (Fourteenth Lok Sabha) on ‘Review of  Implementation Status of
Group of Ministers (GoMs) Report on Reforming National Security System in
pursuance of Kargil Review Committee Report – A Special Reference to
Management of Defence.
2. The Twenty-second Report was presented to Speaker, Lok Sabha and
Chairman, Rajya Sabha on 20 July, 2007 and it was subsequently presented to
Lok Sabha and laid in Rajya Sabha on 17 August, 2007. The Report contained 50
recommendations/observations and the Ministry of Defence have furnished their
Action Taken Replies on all the recommendations/observations on 10 March,
2008.
3. The Draft Action Taken Report was considered and adopted by the
Committee at their sitting held on 27 November, 2008.
4. An analysis of action taken by the Government on recommendations
contained in the Twenty-second Report of the Standing Committee on Defence
(Fourteenth Lok Sabha) is given in the Appendix.
    NEW DELHI;               BALASAHEB VIKHE PATIL,
 12 December, 2008 Chairman,
  21Agrahayana, 1930 (Saka) Standing Committee on Defence.
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

CHAPTER–I
REPORT
 This Report of the Standing Committee on Defence deals with action taken
by the Government on the recommendations/observations contained in their
Twenty-Second Report (14 th Lok Sabha) on ‘Review of Implementation Status of
Group of Ministers (GoMs) Report on Reforming National Security System in
Pursuance of Kargil Review Committee Report - A Special Reference to
Management of Defence’ which was presented to Lok Sabha and laid in Rajya
Sabha on 17.08.2007.
2. The Committee’s Twenty-Second Report (Fourteenth Lok Sabha) contained
observations/recommendations on the following aspects: -
Sl.No. Para No. Subject
1. 2.6 Delegation of Powers to Service headquarters
2. 2.7 Delegation of Powers to be Enhanced
3. 2.8 Delegation of Powers to the Lower Formations
4. 2.9A & B Air Travel for the relatives of Dead Soldiers and
Medical facility in Private Hospital for Soldiers
5. 2.10,2.11,2.12,2.13 Delegated power of RM to be Enhanced
6. 2.19 Creation of the Post of Chief of Defence Staff
7. 2.20 Upgradation of the Post of Defence Secretary
8. 2.21 Synergy amongst the Three Services
9. 2.25 & 2.26 Upgradation in the rank of Defence Secretary
10. 2.30, 2.31 & 2.32 Efficient working of Various Institutions
11. 2.38 Defence expenditure
12. 2.37 & 2.39 Long Term Integrated Perspective Plans (LTIPP)
13. 2.40 Periodic Review of Long Term Integrated
Perspective Plans
14. 2.45, 2.46 & 2.47 Creation of Non-Lapsable Fund
15. 2.53 & 2.54 A.V. Singh Committee Report
16. 2.61 Qualitative Human Resources
17. 2.62 Shortage of Manpower
18. 2.63 Upgradation of Service Condition
19. 2.64 Leave during peace time
20. 2.65 Setting up of Defence Service Software Institute
(DSSI)
21. 2.72, 2.73, 2.74 &
2.75
Employment Opportunity for Ex-Servicemen
22. 2.80 Synergy between Armed Forces and Civil
Authorities
23. 2.81 Civil Military Liaison Forum
24. 2.82,2.83 & 2.85 Civil Military Synergy
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

2
25. 2.84 Operation Sadbhavna and Good Samaritan
26. 2.91, 292 Recommendation of Subramanyam Committee
27. 2.96 Deployment in counter – insurgency area
28. 2.97 Induction of Ex-Servicemen in various Para-
Military Services
29. 3.24 One Border One Force
30. 3.25 Central Para Military Force
31. 3.26 Training Programme for the Personnel
32. 3.27 Addition Battalions of Central Para Military Forces
33. 3.28 Lateral entry of Ex-Servicemen in various units
3. Action Taken Replies have been received from the Government in respect
of all the recommendations/ observations contained in the Report. The information
furnished subsequently in the Statement on the Implementation Status of 22 nd
Report of the Standing Committee on Defence made by Raksha Mantri in Lok
Sabha on 23 rd October 2008 has also been suitably incorporated in the Report.
These replies have been examined and the same have been categorized as
follows: -
(i) Recommendations/observations, which have been accepted by the
Government (Please see Chapter II): -
Para No. 2.6, 2.7, 2.8, 2.9 A, 2.53, 2.54, 2.61, 2.62, 2.63, 2.64, 2.80, 2.81, 2.82,
2.83, 2.85, 2.91, 2.92, 2.96, 3.24, 3.25, 3.26 & 3.27
            (22 Recommendations)
(ii) Recommendations/observations, which the Committee do not desire to
pursue in view of the replies of the Government (Please see Chapter III): -
Para No. 2.9B, 2.10, 2.11, 2.12, 2.13, 2.19, 2.30, 2.31, 2.32, 2.37, 2.38, 2.39, 2.45,
2.46, 2.47 & 2.84
            (16 Recommendations)
(iii) Recommendations/observations in respect of which replies of the
Government have not been accepted by the Committee and which require
reiteration (Please see Chapter IV): -
Para No. 2.20,2.21, 2.25, 2.26, 2.40, 2.65, 2.72, 2.73, 2.74, 2.75, 2.97 & 3.28
         (12 Recommendations)
(iv) Recommendations/observations in respect of which final replies of the
Government are still awaited (Please see Chapter V): -
 NIL
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

3
4. The Committee desire that the Ministry’s response to the comments
made by the Committee in Chapter-I of this Report be furnished to them at
the earliest and in any case not later than three months of the presentation of
this Report.
5. The Committee will now deal with the action taken by the Government on
some of their recommendations in the succeeding paragraphs.
A. Upgradation of the Post of Defence Secretary
Recommendation (Para Nos. 2.20, 2.25 and 2.26)
6. In their earlier Report, the Committee had observed that the unequal status
being enjoyed by the Chiefs of Staff vis-à-vis the Defence Secretary had been
causing lack of coordination and synergy in the functional relationship between the
Ministry of Defence and the Service Headquarters. The Committee had
accordingly, desired that post of Defence Secretary should be upgraded to the
level of Cabinet Secretary or equivalent to the Chief of Service in order to enable
him to synergise the functioning of the Ministry of Defence and Armed Forces and
to promote improved understanding and efficient functioning of the Ministry as a
whole.
7. In their action taken reply, the Ministry of Defence have inter-alia, stated as
under:
“With regard to the question of upgradation of the post of Defence Secretary
to the level of Cabinet Secretary or equivalent to the Chief of Service, it is
reiterated that the recommendations may not be accepted at present as the
same is premature at this stage.”
8. The Ministry of Defence in  the statement on the Implementation Status of
22nd report of the Committee subsequently made by Raksha Mantri in Lok Sabha
in October, 2008 on the subject, stated as under:-
“The roles of Civilian and Military officers are defined. However, such issue
wherein there is a requirement of clarifying roles between the Civilians and
Military officers, the same is resolved through mutual consultations. With
regard to the question of upgradation of the post of Defence Secretary to
the level of Cabinet Secretary or equivalent to the Chief of Service, it is
reiterated that the recommendations may not be accepted at present as the
same is premature at this stage.”
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

4
9. Although the Committee had made the specific recommendation for
upgradation of the post of Defence Secretary to the level of Cabinet Secretary or
equivalent to the Chief of Service with the precise objectives of promoting
efficient functioning of the Ministry of Defence as a whole and to bring about
effective synergy amongst the three Services and the Ministry, nothing has been
mentioned in the reply as to what factors have weighed with the Ministry in
coming to the conclusion that this recommendation may not be accepted at
present being premature at this stage. The Committee would like to know the
precise reasons for considering their recommendation as “premature” at
present. The Committee do not expect the Ministry of Defence to be apathetic to
the present situation of lack of coordination and synergy in the functional
relationship between the Ministry and the Service Headquarters and they
strongly feel that reply of the Ministry clearly shows their intentions of avoiding
responsibilities. They, therefore, reiterate their earlier recommendation that the
post of Defence Secretary should be upgraded at the earliest.
B. Synergy amongst the Three Services
Recommendation (Para No.  2.21)
10. The Committee had observed that although the Government had taken a
number of steps to bring synergy amongst the three Services like planning and
formulation of Long Term and Five Year Plans, Tri-Service Commands like the
Andaman and Nicobar theatre command etc., the desired level of synergy in such
commands was missing and there was no jointness of Command and Control.
The Committee accordingly, pointed out that it was a very serious lacuna and
earnest efforts should be taken to correct it immediately.  The Committee also
stressed that Coast Guard Services might also be inter-connected with the
jointness of Command and Control of the three Services.
11. In their action taken reply, the Ministry of Defence have stated as under:
“HQ ANC briefed the concerned Parliamentary Committee in detail
regarding the joint aspects and it was suitably elaborated that joint ness lies
in functioning viz joint planning, joint training and joint operations.  It does
not involve melting down the identity of each Service to create a fourth/fifth
Service. The present system is working well with all the joint aspects being
coordinated by HQ ANC where staff from all the Services is posted at each
branch as per requirement.”
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

5
12. The Ministry of Defence in a the statement on the Implementation Status of
22nd report of the Committee subsequently made by Raksha Mantri in Lok Sabha
in October, 2008 on the subject, stated as under:-
“The present system is working well with all the joint aspects being
coordinated by HQ ANC where staff from all the Services is posted at each
branch as per requirement. Respective Component Commanders take
instructions from the joint staff of HQ ANC and execute the given task as
only they are competent to carry out the Service specific operations and it is
not advisable to allow outside interference in their specialized fields/ service.
ANC, as a tri Service organization, is relatively young.  Issues
relating to allocation of additional resources and upgradation of
infrastructure are being addressed, based on threat perception.
The integration of communication within components of the Army,
Navy and Air Force in ANC and from HQ IDS / Service HQ to ANC is in
progress as a recent initiative, to further improve and streamline
interoperability.
The personnel Branch of HQ IDS, alongwith reps of the JAG
Department, are examining the aspects of amendments required to Army,
Navy and IAF Acts for devolution of disciplinary powers to CINCAN in
respect of personnel of different services posted to ANC, to reemphasize
single point authority / responsibility.
Coast Guard is a service under Ministry of Defence and a system of
their deputation to joint command during peacetime needs to be resolved for
further integration.”
13. The Committee understand that due to lack of authority and power, the
present system of Unified Command is neither very effective nor able to
achieve its intended objectives as the aspects relating to single point
authority/responsibility are still being examined with a view to bringing in
requisite amendments in the Army, Navy and Indian Air Force Acts. The
Committee express their anguish over the routine nature of reply in the
instant case and they strongly recommend that the requisite amendments in
the relevant Act should be carried out expeditiously. The Committee also
observe that the reply of the Ministry is silent on the aspect of connectivity
of Coast Guard Services with Jointness of Command and Control of the
Services. The Committee, therefore, desire that urgent and concrete steps be
taken to ensure that the Unified Command is vested with adequate powers to
discharge its responsibilities. Steps should also be taken to resolve the
issues connected with integration of Coast Guard Services with the jointness
of Command and Control of the Services.
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

6
C. Efficient working of Various Institutions
Recommendation (Para Nos. 2.30, 2.31 and 2.32)
14. Taking note of the fact that the Group of Ministers (GoM) have recommended
for restructuring of Ministry of Defence and Service Headquarters and desired that a
Committee headed by the Defence Secretary should look into the delegation of
administrative powers and such restructuring, the Committee had expressed the new
that there was an urgent need to review the working of all these organizations set up
by the Ministry of Defence on the basis of recommendations made by GoM.
  The Committee had also desired that a team of experts should examine the
actual working of each and every organization to ensure their efficient working and
that these organizations should be given adequate flexibility in order to perform well or
to meet any eventualities as per the changed circumstances.
15. In their action taken reply, the Ministry of Defence have stated as under:
“In pursuance of the recommendations by GoM a number of institutions and
organizations like DIA, SFC, ANC, DAC, DPB etc have been established.  It
is considered that the efficacy of these institutions and organizations may be
reviewed by MoD since some of these organisations are chaired by the
Hon’ble Raksha Mantri and Defence Secretary.”
16.  Considering the fact that a number of institutions/organisations have
been established by the Government in pursuance of the recommendations
made in the Group of Ministers’ Report, the Committee had made a specific
recommendation that a team of experts should examine the actual working
of these organisations to ensure their efficient working and to have synergy.
The Committee are, however, surprised to find from the reply of the Ministry
that the Government consider that the efficacy of these institutions might be
reviewed by the Ministry of Defence since some of these organisations are
chaired by Hon’ble Raksha Mantri and Defence Secretary. The Committee
wish to point out that their recommendations did not call for any review by
the Ministry of Defence and what they intended was a review of the
functioning of these institutions by an independent expert body in order to
strengthen their functioning and ensure synergy amongst them. The
Committee trust that the Ministry of Defence would now move in the right
direction and take appropriate steps to implement their recommendation in
letter and spirit.
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

7
At the same time, the Committee also find that the reply of the Ministry
of Defence is completely silent on the aspect of giving adequate flexibility to
these organisations. The Committee would like to be apprised of the precise
measures taken by the Ministry in this regard.
D. Periodic Review of Long Term Integrated Perspective Plans (LTIPP)
Recommendation (Para No 2.40)
17. Taking a serious view of non-finalization of 11 th Defence Plan inspite of the
fact that the implementation period of the same had begun from April, 2007, the
Committee had desired that the Plan should be finalized at the earliest and should
be implemented in the right earnest.  The Committee had also expressed the hope
that the annual Plan for the year 2007-08 would be based on the targets set by the
Ministry of Defence for the 11 th Five Year Plan and also desire that the LTIPP
should be periodically reviewed in the light of the new developments and should be
kept updated.
18. In their action taken reply, the Ministry of Defence have stated as under:
“Concerted efforts are being made to get the 11 th Defence Plan approved.  The
annual plan for the year 2007-08 is based on the targets set by Ministry of
Defence for the 11 th Defence Plan.  LTIPP looks at a 15 years horizon and,
therefore, accommodates impulses of change that are a part of the
development cycle.  It is modified periodically based on perception across three
five year plans.  The current one under development will cover 2007-2022 while
the one that is being worked on covers 2002-2017.”
19. Although the implementation of the 11 th Defence Five Year Plan has
commenced from April, 2007, the Committee are distressed to note that the
proposals under this plan are yet to be approved. The Committee are unable to
comprehend as to how the Ministry actually work out the priorities for incorporating
the same in Long Term Integrated Perspective Plans (LTIPP) in the absence of any
perception about the current Defence Five Year Plan. In the opinion of the
Committee, the present state of affairs in the Ministry is clearly indicative of lack of
seriousness towards timely finalisation of Plans, which ultimately leads to adverse
bearing on modernisation process in the armed forces. The Committee trust that
concrete steps would now be taken by the Ministry of Defence to finalise the 11 th
Defence Plan. They would also like to be apprised of the precise steps taken in this
regard.
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

8
E. Setting up of Defence Service Software Institute (DSSI)
Recommendation (Para No. 2.65)
20. The GoM had recommended for setting up of an Air Force College of
Engineering (AFCE) and a Defence Service Software Institute (DSSI) for the
Armed Forces.  Taking note of the little progress made in this regard, the
Committee had recommended that the Ministry should take immediate steps in this
matter and apprise the Committee about the progress made from time-to-time.
The Committee had also reiterated their earlier recommendation for setting up Air
Force Pilot College at Nasik.
21. In their action taken reply, the Ministry of Defence have stated as under:
“The short term needs of the IT and software are adequately being met
through a combination of in-service courses and outsourcing. The long term
needs of the three services and the IDS are being addressed as part of the
IT HR consultancy being undertaken by IDS as directed by MoD.  This
consultancy will address the ICT training model requirement for the Defence
Forces that will leverage integration of Defence Capabilities.
Recommendation regarding setting of DSSI will be made after the
completion of the study.”
22. The Ministry of Defence in a the statement on the Implementation Status of
22nd report of the Committee subsequently made by Raksha Mantri in Lok Sabha
in October, 2008 on the subject, stated as under:-
“A core team constituted under DACIDS (DIARA) has been working on the
scope of the Detailed Consultancy Study. The scope has been forwarded to
leading IT Companies so as to facilitate preparation of an approach
document. Further action would be taken on receipt of the same.”
23. The Committee note that the issues relating to setting up  of Defence
Service Software Institute (DSSI) are still lingering on due to preparation of
an approach document and the study being undertaken in this regard.
Lamentably, the Ministry have not elaborated on the status of setting up of
Air Force College of Engineering (AFCE) and Air Force Pilot College at Nasik.
The Committee, therefore, desire that the Ministry of Defence should apprise
them of the latest position of the progress made in establishing these
institutions.
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

9
F. Lateral entry of Armed Forces Personnel and Induction of
 Ex-Servicemen in various Para-Military Services
Recommendation (Para Nos. 2.72, 2.73, 2.74, 2.75, 2.97 and 3.28)
24.  With a view to ensuring proper resettlement of service personnel being
retired to keep younger age profile of the Armed Forces, t he Committee had
desired that such Ex-servicemen should be given lateral entry into various
Para Military Border Security Force, Central Police Forces as well as in
State Police Forces and other such forces, as they were fully trained in
handling arms and ammunitions and had the first hand experience of
handling infiltrators and insurgents etc. The Committee also expressed the
view that induction of ex-servicemen into the para-military and other such
forces would lead to huge reduction in pension and other retirement benefits bill of
the Government.
25. In their action taken reply, the Ministry of Defence have stated as under:
“Based on the recommendations of the GOM report, an Apex Committee
consisting of Cabinet Secretary, Chief of the Army Staff, Defence Secretary,
Home Secretary and Secretary Expenditure was constituted to look into the
terms of engagement of soldiers and their lateral entry into other
organizations. In addition, a Working Group under the Chairmanship of
Adjutant General, Army Headquarters with Joint Secretary (Police), Ministry
of Home Affairs (MHA), representatives of Border Security Force, Central
Reserve Police Force, Central Industrial Security Force and National
Security Council Secretariat as Members, was constituted to carry out a
detailed study of various issues, and, work out modalities for lateral transfer.
The Home Secretary took a meeting on 2 nd November 2006.  As per the
decision taken in the meeting, a Committee under the Chairmanship of
Director General, Border Security Force has been constituted to work out
the modalities. Home Minister had earlier informed that further action in this
matter will be taken after receiving the report of the Committee under the
Chairmanship of DG, BSF.  Ministry of Home Affairs have recently intimated
that the said committee has had deliberations and that their report may be
awaited. ”
26. The Ministry of Defence in a the statement on the Implementation Status of
22nd report of the Committee subsequently made by Raksha Mantri in Lok Sabha
in October, 2008 on the subject, stated as under:-
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

10
“The Group of Ministers (GOM), appointed in pursuance of  the Kargil
Review Committee, had  recommended lateral transfer of Army personnel to
Para Military organizations in their report on ‘Reforming the National Security
System’ with the primary aim of keeping a young profile of the Army in  peak
combat effective state, capable of meeting the challenges of future conflict.
Based on the recommendations of the GOM report, an Apex Committee
consisting of Cabinet Secretary, Chief of the Army Staff, Defence Secretary,
Home Secretary and Secretary Expenditure was constituted to look into the
terms of engagement of soldiers and their lateral entry into other
organizations. In addition, a Working Group under the Chairmanship of
Adjutant General, Army Headquarters with Joint Secretary (Police), Ministry
of Home Affairs (MHA), representatives of Border Security Force, Central
Reserve Police Force, Central Industrial Security Force and National Security
Council Secretariat as Members, was constituted to carry out a detailed
study of various issues, and, work out modalities for lateral transfer.
The Working Group, after indepth deliberations submitted its report in
March 2002.  The recommendations of the Working Group envisages Long
Term and Short Term lateral transfer of Army personnel into Central Para
Military Forces (CPMFs). Since then, a number of meetings at various levels
including with the Cabinet Secretary and  Home Secretary have been held.
 The following issues largely remained contentious and intractable :
(a) Fixing the inter-se seniority of the transferees vis-à-vis original inductees
of CPMFs without adversely affecting the latter’s promotion prospects.
(b) Disparities in the pay and allowances and perks of CPMF personnel and
Army transferees.
(c)  Issue of reservation for backward classes.
 A meeting was taken by the Home Secretary on 2 nd November, 2006.  As
per the decision taken in the meeting, a Committee under the Chairmanship
of Director General, Border Security Force has been constituted to work out
the modalities.
 RM had also written to Home Minister in this regard to solve the impasse on
lateral transfer of Army Personnel to Central Para Military Forces.
 Home Minister had earlier informed that further action in this matter will be
taken after receiving the report of the Committee under the Chairmanship of
DG, BSF.  Ministry of Home Affairs have recently intimated that the  said
committee has had deliberations  and that their  report may be awaited.
The VI Central Pay Commission, in their report, have recommended a
scheme of lateral transfer of Defence personnel to Central Police
Organisations / Defence Civilian Organisations after rendering 7 – 17 years
service in the Defence, with a view to, inter-alia, provide lifetime employment
to Defence personnel.”
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

11
27. Taking note of the views expressed by the Subramanyam Committee that
the Para Military Forces are not trained and equipped to deal with border terrorism
by well trained mercenaries armed with sophisticated equipment continuously
infiltrating across the border/LoC, the Committee had made recommendations that
the ex-servicemen should be inducted into the Central Para Military Forces as well
as State Police Forces to tackle all these problems as they are professionally
qualified to handle all sorts of  arms and ammunitions and have first hand
experience of these problems at the border during their active service in the army.
The Committee had also observed that this would save Government a lot of money
in training Central Para Military Forces and Police Forces to handle the weapons
and fire arms etc.
 28. In their action taken reply, the Ministry of Defence have stated as under:
“This is a complex issue and has been discussed between MoD & MHA
several times. At present a Committee is in the process of identifying the
posts in CPMFs where such induction of ex-servicemen can start.”
29. The Ministry of Defence in a subsequent statement on the Implementation
Status of 22 nd report of the Committee made by Raksha Mantri in Lok Sabha in
October, 2008 on the same matter as under:-
“Reservation for ex-servicemen @ 10% in Group ‘C’ and 20% in Group ‘D’
already exists in the CPMFs, which has however not been fully utilized by
ex-servicemen, in the past. Induction of ex-servicemen in State Police
Forces is a subject matter pertaining to States. Moreover, CPFs are
experiencing adverse fall-out of higher age profile, where a large number of
Bns have been raised in recent years. While need for a fighting fit Army
cannot be ignored requiring lower age profile, in times of peace it is the
CPFs which bear the responsibility of securing the International borders and
fighting insurgents, terrorists, extremists etc. Considering the fact that
induction and retirement age in CPFs is higher than Army, any fresh move
that would result in raising of age profile of CPFs would further compromise
their operational efficiency. In addition to operational issues, there are other
factors to be considered like:-
Ø There being no reservation for SC, ST, OBCs in the Army which has
constitutional implications.
Ø Need to modify the recruitment rules.
Ø Promotional avenues of CPF personnel, etc.
This being a complex problem is being reviewed by Ministry of Home Affairs
in consultation with Ministry of Defence as per decision in a meeting of the
EMC held on 1st July, 2008.”
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

12
30. The Committee are not satisfied with the replies given by the Ministry
of Defence that the issue of lateral entry of Armed Forces personnel remains
contentious and intractable due to factors relating to fixation of inter-se
seniority and disparity of pay and allowances between transfers vis-à-vis
original inductees in the Central Para Military Forces. Yet another issue
stated to be contentious is reservation for backward classes. Although the
Working Group constituted by the Government for the purpose had
submitted its report way back in March, 2002, the Committee find it
distressing that the issues remain unresolved and precious time has been
lost in deliberations without arriving at a final decision. Considering the fact
that even Sixth Central Pay Commission, in their report, have recommended
for a scheme of lateral transfer of Defence personnel to Central Police
Organisations etc., the Committee would impress upon the Government to
make concerted efforts to arrive at positive conclusions without any further
loss of time.
31. The Committee find it rather strange that the Ministry of Defence have
termed induction of Ex-Servicemen in the Central Para Military Forces as a
complex issue. In the light of the fact that retirement age in Central Police
Forces is higher than that in the Armed Forces. The Committee are unable to
comprehend the plea now put forth by the Ministry that Central Police Forces
are also experiencing adverse fall out of higher age profile in the case of
large number of battalions raised in recent years. Astonishingly, the Ministry
have also tried to explain away that there are certain other factors like no
reservation for SC, ST, OBCs in the Army which has constitutional
implications; need to modify recruitment rules; promotion avenues of CPF
personnel etc., which need to be considered for coming to a decision. The
Committee are not inclined to accept these reasons as convincing enough
for the delay in settling this issue. The Committee feel that rather than
finding excuses, the Government should examine this issue in its entirety
and take concrete steps in the right direction in a time bound manner.
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

13
CHAPTER - II
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN
ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT
Recommendation (Para No.2.6)
The Committee note that the Group of Ministers (GoM) had recommended
that there was a need to progressively decentralize decision making and delegate
powers to the Service Headquarters, wherever feasible.  This process was
expected to ensure greater speed, higher levels of efficiency and accountability.
The Committee are informed that the Ministry had taken a number of steps to
involve Service Headquarters actively in decision making and had delegated
financial and administrative powers to them.  The Committee have been informed
that financial powers delegated to the Services were enhanced in 2002 and again
in 2006.  The powers to incur expenditure under the capital head upto Rs.10 crores
have been delegated to the Vice-Chiefs for the first time in 2006.
Reply of the Government
 Carrying the process of involving the Service Headquarters actively in
decision-making further, Ministry of Defence has issued orders on 12 th September
2007 enhancing the financial powers of VCOAS, VCNS, Deputy Chief of Air Staff
and CISC from Rs.10 crores to Rs.30 crores for sanctioning Capital acquisition
schemes for procurement of equipment and stores.
[Ministry of Defence O.M. No. H.11013/25/2007/D(Parl) dated  10.03.2008]
Recommendation (Para No.2.7)
The Committee feel that the amount of financial power delegated to the
Service Headquarters is of a meager amount and will hardly serve any meaningful
purpose in the context of purchase of arms and armaments.  The Committee feel
that delegation of financial and administrative powers to Service Headquarters
should be suitably enhanced keeping in view their higher cost and present rate of
inflation etc.  The Committee also wish to reiterate their earlier recommendations
given in their Sixteenth Report on Demands for Grants (2007-08) to give
appropriate financial delegation of powers to the Defence Secretary to further
speed up and facilitate the acquisition process.
Reply of the Government
Ministry of Defence has been consistently enhancing delegated financial
powers of the Services.  The last such revision was carried out in the year 2006.
In September 2007 financial powers of VCOAS, VCNS, Deputy Chief of Air Staff
and CISC were enhanced from Rs.10 crores to Rs.30 crores for sanctioning
Capital acquisition schemes for procurement of equipment and Stores.  As regards
appropriate financial delegation of powers to the Defence Secretary to further
speed up and facilitate the acquisition process, the matter is under consideration.
[Ministry of Defence O.M. No. H.11013/25/2007/D(Parl) dated  10.03.2008]
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

14
Recommendation (Para No.2.8)
The Committee also feel that there is no real delegation of powers at the lower
formations.  For example, a Brigadier level officer has been given powers upto Rs.1
lakh which is learnt to be revised recently upto Rs.10 lakh.  Now, he is required to
examine & sign al cases whether those are for Rs.1 lakh or Rs.1 only.  This is
because there is no delegation of power down below.  The Committee desire that
there should be suitable delegation of powers to the lower level officers also at the
earliest.  To ensure accountability, the Committee recommend that if sanctions to incur
expenditure are not made within the specified time, the proposals for expenditures
may be treated as deemed to be approved by the competent authority. The Committee
strongly feel that this delegation of power to the lower level officer will reduce the
burden of the senior officers and that will further facilitate them to concentrate on their
primary responsibilities.  The Committee recommend that for procurement of day-to-
day civil items, the Ministry of Defence should follow the procurement methods being
followed by other Ministries.
Reply of the Government
 The revised orders on delegation of financial powers to the Services issued
in July 2006 take into account the  requirement of the lower echelons also.  To
illustrate, as per relevant Schedules to Government of India, Ministry of Defence
Letter No. A/89591/FP-1/1974/2006/D(GS-1) dt. 26 July 2006 in respect of the
Army, financial powers now stand widely decentralized to all the field unit/lower
formation commanders.  Thus, the Officers Commanding (OsC)/Commanding
Officers (COs) of units/establishments/depots/workshops, even in the rank of
Lt/Capt. have been suitably empowered for administering all the grants locally
controlled by them such as Miscellaneous & Contingent Grant (Schedule I), Annual
Training Grant, TTIEG & Signals Works Services Grants (Schedule XX) and Local
Purchase of Miscellaneous Stores & Equipment required by lower formations and
units (Schedule XII).  In fact, care has been taken that adequate financial powers
are available with the junior-most unit/formation commanders, including certain
powers exercisable without consultation of IFA/CDA to functionaries in field areas
and remote locations for meeting emergent requirements of stores, repair and
maintenance and purchase of fresh supplies and medicines.  Financial powers in
the range of Rs.2,000/- to Rs.10,000/- per transaction have also been delegated to
functionaries upto the level of Maj/Capt for procurement of day-to-day civil end use
items like stationery, computer consumables, office equipment, etc. (Schedule
XIX).
2. As regards the procurement procedures, provisions of the Defence
Procurement Manual (DPM), 2006 and the general principles for purchases as
enunciated in the GFRs are applicable in the current delegation of financial
powers. In addition, the provisions of the Financial Regulations (Defence Services
Regulations) also apply, which are largely patterned on the GFRs but also take into
account the unique role and functions of the Defence Forces.
[Ministry of Defence O.M. No. H.11013/25/2007/D(Parl) dated  10.03.2008]
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

15
Recommendation (Para No. 2.9A)
The Committee, during their visit to Andaman & Nicobar Island and some of
the North Eastern States, had observed that in case of casualties/death of the
soldiers, the body is sent to their native place by flights but the family members of
the soldiers are not allowed  to travel in the same flight because this is not
mentioned in Guidelines.  This is a sorry state of affairs.  Therefore, the Committee
strongly feel that appropriate financial delegation at the lower level should be given
to incur travelling expenditure of the family members along with the body of the
deceased soldiers.
Reply of the Government
 Travel Regulations (T.R.), 1991 applicable on Armed Forces personnel
already contain  provisions for accompanying  dead bodies by one of their family
members in the entitled mode of transport i.e. Air/Steamer/Rail/Road.  Rule 216
(v) & Rule 217 (iv) of T.R.,1991 provide that  one member of the family of the
service personnel, who die while in service in Peace or Field  Stations including
those killed in action is allowed  to perform journey by Air/Steamer/Rail/Road
between  the place of death and the place of last rites to accompany the dead
body of the deceased, as per  entitlement of the deceased.  Extracts of these
rules are attached as Annexure I & II.
2. In addition to the above provisions, the dead bodies of service personnel
killed in Border/Line of Control (LC), Operations/Counter-Insurgency(CI)/
Operations in India and abroad are also transported by fastest mode of transport
available accompanied by one person who may either be a member of the family
or person deputed by the family or a unit representative  from the place of
occurrence , as the case may be , upto his home town or selected place of
residence (SPR) or place of  last rites. In this regard, the powers  have also been
delegated  to the lowest level i.e. Commanding Officer of the concerned
Unit/Formation to sanction the expenditure on transportation of Dead body
accompanied by one attendant vide Min. of Defence’s letter No.12011/Q Mov
C/2873/ D(Mov)/96 dated  7.10.96 attached as Annexure-III.
3. Incidentally, Indian Airlines Ltd. has also been allowing transport, free of
charge on its domestic sectors, of the dead bodies of officers and men of the
armed forces who are killed in war/insurgency operations/aid to civil power or die
in harness.  The airline does not provide free transportation of family members.
Service Headquarters have also moved a proposal to the VI Central Pay
Commission (CPC) on the following two issues:-
(i)  Conveyance of Dead Bodies by Air
           Free conveyance of the deceased from the place of death whilst on
duty/leave to the place of funeral as desired by the families be authorized.
All other travelling expenses as admissible on retirement be also made
admissible.  At present Indian Airlines transports the dead bodies free of
cost.  It will be appropriate if the employer i.e. the Government pays for the
transportation of dead bodies of its soldiers rather than a company granting
it as a concession.
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

16
(ii) Conveyance of relatives of Service Personnel placed on DI   list/
 Attending funeral of deceased personnel.
 The provision of TR 161 (A)/TR 161 (B)  be modified to incorporate
travel by fastest means including Air both for onward and return  journeys
in respect of deceased Service Personnel to conduct customary social rites
of the deceased personnel.
  The decision of CPC is awaited. Copy of the existing provision in TR
161 (A) & (B) is attached as Annexure-I.
[(Ministry of Defence O.M. No. H.11013/25/2007/D(Parl) dated  10.03.2008]
Recommendation (Para Nos.2.53 and 2.54)
 The Committee note that the Ministry had constituted A.V. Singh Committee
with the representative from Ministry of Defence and Service Headquarters to look
into all aspects of the Service conditions of Defence personnel and make
recommendation for implementation.  The Committee further note that the Ministry
have put efforts for Phase-wise implementation of so me recommendation of A.V.
Singh Committee.  The Phase-I is complete and the Phase-II is under scrutiny at
the Ministry of Defence.  The Committee desired that the Ministry should furnish
detailed Action Plan at the earliest for the Phase-II implementation of the
recommendations of the A.V. Singh Committee which is under scrutiny of the
Ministry of Defence.  The Committee note that as per A.V. Singh Committee's
recommendation, an officer shall get the rank of Colonel or equivalent after putting
in 26 years of service.  After the post of Colonel, there are four more ranks
available for promotion.  If an officer puts in minimum of three years of service in
each rank, he will reach the age of 60 years and it would be difficult to maintain
young profile in the armed forces and shall also result in dearth of officers to lead
the Armed Forces.  The Committee, therefore, strongly recommend that the need
of the hour is to examine the whole scheme of promotions.
The Committee desire that the practice followed by neighbouring countries
for keeping young profile at the senior levels of the armed forces should be
examined to take a decision in the matter and the Committee should be apprised in
this regard.
Reply of the Government
 A.V. Singh Committee recommendation regarding the reduction of rank/age
profile of non-select ranks were implemented in the three services w.e.f.
December, 2004.  For implementation of remaining recommendation of the report it
was desired that the  three services Chiefs should take a conscious views as to
whether they were seeking implementation of a new proposal or the
recommendations as contained in AVSC Report.  The consensus among three
Services could not be arrived at as yet and the matter is under consideration in
consultation with service Headquarters.
[Ministry of Defence O.M. No. H.11013/25/2007/D(Parl) dated  05.03.2008]
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

17
Recommendation (Para No. 2.61)
 The Committee note the GoM in their report have rightly pointed out the
need to attract qualitative Human Resources and nurture leadership in the Armed
Forces to meet the complex requirement of modern day's warfare because
tomorrow's war will be a technological war.  Therefore, ways and means of
attracting and retaining the best talent in the Armed Forces need to be evolved.  In
pursuance of the very spirit of this recommendation of GoM, the Committee
strongly desire that the senior officers from the Armed Forces should be sent to
IITs and other such institutions for higher studies/research activities, to widen their
knowledge in the various fields of operation to be undertaken by the Services to
improve the entire capability of Defence.
Reply of the Government
 The Army, Navy and Air Force are already implementing schemes for
detailment of officers to Indian Institutes of Technology (IITs), Indian Institutes of
Management (IIMs) and other such institutions for higher studies/research
activities to widen their knowledge in the various fields of operation.
 Since 2001, twenty Army officers have pursued post-graduate studies at
IITs and eighty-five Army officers have undertaken research fellowships at
institutions like Institute of Defence Studies and Analysis (IDSA), Centre for Land
Warfare Studies (CLAWS) and United Services Institute (USI).  Besides Army
officers are regularly subscribing to short duration courses at IIMs under the aegis
of the Army Management Studies Board (AMSB).  Similarly Naval officers are also
regularly being deputed for undertaking research/project work and higher studies
at IITs, IIMs, IDSA, USI and other such institutions.  The Air Force is also regularly
deputing its officers for Master of Technology/Mater of Engineering courses at IITs,
Indian Institute of Science (IISc) and for post-graduate courses in Management at
IIT Kharagpur and National Institute of Financial Management (NIFM), Faridabad.
 In addition to the above, officers of all the three Armed Forces are also
regularly being deputed abroad for professional courses at leading military training
institutions.
[Ministry of Defence O.M. No. H.11013/25/2007/D(Parl) dated  10.03.2008]
Recommendation (Para No. 2.62 )
 The Committee, in their report on Demands for Grants (2007-08), noted
that there had been a declining trend of youth joining Armed Forces and the
service conditions of the Armed Forces are not such as to attract best talent. As a
result thereof, a substantial number of Pilots, Doctors, Technicians, Scientists in
Armed Forces and from other Defence . organizations left the services as they
were in big demand outside the Services. The Committee feel that this is one of
the reason for shortage of personnel in forces.
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

18
Reply of the Government
 The shortage of personnel in the Armed Forces can be attributed to several
factors.  The private sector has turned out to be much more lucrative in terms of
pay, perks and comfort for the aspiring youth of our country. The Defence
Services have been losing priority among the youth over the years primarily
because of better salaries and comparatively easier conditions of service in other
sectors The disparity in inherent tough service conditions vis-à-vis civilians de-
motivates the youth.
 Several measures have been undertaken by the three Services to attract
the most talented youth towards the forces.  An Image Projection Campaign by the
Army has been launched in 1997 and currently Phase-IV of the Campaign is under
progress. Such publicity  campaigns are also undertaken  by the Navy and Air
Force.   In addition seminars, lectures and presentations are organized by the
Recruiting Offices at schools and colleges in order to motivate the youth to join the
Armed Forces. Steps have been taken to make Short Service Commission (SSC)
more attractive. All officers in the three Services  including those in SSC are now
eligible to hold substantive rank of Captain, Major and Lieutenant Colonel
equivalent after 2, 6 and 13 years of reckonable service respectively.  Government
has also issued orders extending the tenure of SSC officers from 10 years to 14
years.
 In addition, the commitment and bravery of the Armed Forces is consistently
projected through the electronic and print media.  The Directorate of Public
Relations of Ministry of Defence regularly interacts with media persons while giving
defence related information and endeavours to ensure positive publicity.  Regular
coverage of defence related events in the print and electronic media help in
creating awareness among the masses and motivating the youth to join the armed
forces.  Websites are also operative on the Internet providing career related
information on the three Services.
 In addition to the above, as part of the ‘pull’ factors of the AVSC
recommendations, 750 posts of Lieutenant Colonels in the Army have been
upgraded to Colonel’s rank.
 The Government has also appointed VI Central Pay Commission to go into
the question of revision of pay and allowances etc. of all the Government servants
including the Armed Forces.  The three Services have presented a joint
memorandum to the Pay Commission suggesting revision of pay and allowances
and other service conditions.
[Ministry of Defence O.M. No. H.11013/25/2007/D(Parl) dated  10.03.2008]
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

19
Recommendation (Para No. 2.63)
 The Committee therefore opined that in order to attract the talented and
best youth to the Armed Forces and to retain the existing strength, there was an
imperative need to approach the Sixth Central Pay Commission to make the salary
structure, facilities and working Service conditions of the personnel of Armed
Force Services more attractive vis-à-vis private sector which pay them
handsomely.  The Committee desire that in case of meritorious service, all the
award winners should be given the attractive one time monitory benefits in order to
further motive the Armed Forces Personnel.  The Committee had also opined that
there was need to introduce pre-selection training by the Ministry of Defence for
the youth which may include lodging, boarding and transport etc.  The aim of the
training should be to attract youth to Defence Services and equip them for final
selection.  The Committee reiterate the above recommendation for expeditious
implementation.
Reply of the Government
 The Government has set up 6 th Central Pay Commission (CPC) to go into
the question of pay and allowances and service conditions etc. of Central
Government employees including defence personnel.  The three Services have
submitted a joint Memorandum to the 6th CPC in April, 2007 which was followed by
an interaction of Defence Secretary, the three Service Chiefs and Heads of
Organizations with the Commission.   Subsequently, the Services have also
submitted to the Commission a Joint Memorandum comprising
additions/modifications to their Preliminary Memorandum.  These Memoranda
contain whole gamut of demands and aspirations made by the Services to the 6 th
CPC seeking, inter-alia, to improve the pay scales for Armed Forces Personnel.
The Armed Forces have also sought a better package for Personnel Below
Officers' Rank (PBOR) which includes better career prospects and enhanced
pensionary benefits.
 As part of the proposal to rationalize the monetary and other benefits to
gallantry award winners being paid by the Central Government, a case for revision
is under consideration in consultation with the Ministry of Finance.
 Sainik Schools and Military Schools have been opened by the Government
to cater to the overall growth of children and act as a feeder for the Defence
Forces.  Another excellent opportunity exists in the form of National Cadet Corps
(NCC), where extensive training is given not only on military aspects but also
overall personality growth by multifarious exposure.  Imparting of pre-selection
training has not been found feasible by the services.
 Armed Forces are making a conscious effort to inspire the youth to choose
the Services as a career option with wide ranging publicity through print and
electronic media aimed at familiarizing and relating opportunities available with the
aspirations of the youth.
[Ministry of Defence O.M. No. H.11013/25/2007/D(Parl) dated  10.03.2008]
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

20
Recommendation (Para No. 2.64)
 The Committee further desire that to avoid stress, the Jawans and officers
posted in the forward and border areas should be allowed to avail leave during
peace time.
Reply of the Government
 Instructions have been issued   emphasizing on the due weightage to be
given to leave management.  It has also been highlighted that leave is an important
function of command and needs to be addressed adequately to mitigate the
grievances of troops. The existing instructions have been reviewed and the
following fresh guidelines on leave have been issued /reiterated: -
(i) Annual Leave can now be taken in three parts instead of two subject to
exigencies of service.
(ii) Leave, as such should not be denied to troops except under exigencies
of service or on operational grounds.
(iii) No local restrictions on grant of leave shall be imposed, whatsoever,
except with the explicit permission of the competent authority.
[Ministry of Defence O.M. No. H.11013/25/2007/D(Parl) dated 10.03.2008]
Recommendation (Para No. No.2.80)
 The Committee note that the GoM had felt the need for a strong jointness
and synergy between the Armed Forces and Civil authorities at various levels from
Command headquarters to operative formations and therefore suggested several
measures for implementation.  The Committee note that some institutionalised
mechanism have been evolved in this regard.
Reply of the Government
The Committee has noted evolving of institutionalised mechanism and has
not made any further recommendations.  The Armed Forces would strive to further
strengthen the institutionalised mechanism for achieving jointness and synergy
between the Armed Forces and Civil authorities.
[Ministry of Defence O.M. No. H.11013/25/2007/D(Parl) dated  10.03.2008]
Recommendation (Para No. 2.81)
The Committee note that the GoM had recommended for setting up a Core
Group of existing Civil-Military Liaison Forum to identify the problem areas and
evolve a system of smooth mobilization and thereafter to meet the logistic needs of
the Army.  The Committee note that no action in his recommendation appears to
have been taken by the Government.  The Committee, therefore, desire that this
Core Group should be set up at the earliest and may be asked to furnish their
recommendation in a time-bound manner.  These recommendations should be
implemented without any further loss of time.
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

21
Reply of the Government
Civil-Military Liaison Conferences (CMLC) are regularly being conducted by
Command Headquarters and subordinate formations along with respective
counterparts of State Governments.  Mobilisation plans of the Army are supported by
local logistics capability and adequate synergy exists for cooperation between various
agencies.
[Ministry of Defence O.M. No. H.11013/25/2007/D(Parl) dated  10.03.2008]
Recommendation (Para No. 2.82, 2.83 and 2.85)
The Committee also feel that various Joint Training Programmes outlined by
the Government for Military and Civil Officers are meant only for various military and
civil officers.  There does not seem to be any proposals for interaction by military
personnel with the public at large.  We read in Newspapers frequently about the
military personnel involved in tiffs and brawns with the civilians in the railways and
buses.  The Committee feel that there is an urgent need to bring synergy between the
two at the earliest.  The Committee had also an experience to know that in
cantonment area run by the cantonment board, civilian dispensaries are not provided
with the same facilities as were available for the military personnel in their hospitals.
The Committee, therefore, desire that Armed Forces personnel, particularly
combat forces, be trained by the Ministry in order to develop rich culture and passion
to facilitate the amicable relation with the Civilians.
The Committee further desire that the Ministry should furnish implementation
status of every measure suggested by the GoM to strengthen Civil-Military synergy in
times of war and peace.
Reply of the Government
The need to have specific military and general public interaction is genuine.
Presently various measures catering to this requirement and also to strengthen the
Civil and Military synergy are being implemented.  Some of the prominent initiatives
which are being undertaken are as follows:-
(a) The National Cadet Corps which comprises of young boys and girls both
from schools and colleges are imparted training by military personnel.
(b) The Village Defence Committees in J&K State comprising young boys and
old men and women are trained by the Army.
(c) A number of weapon and equipment displays are held by the Army every
year all over the country to foster civil-military interaction.  These help the
public at large in interacting with the military personnel at very close
quarters.
(d) The display of military prowess during the Republic Day Parade is another
such event where the general public watches the Army at close quarters.
(e) Free medical camps are organized by the Army in J&K and North East as
well as other areas for the benefit of the people.
(f) A number of recruitment rallies are organized across the country at various
places to recruit candidates for the Army.  These rallies attract thousands of
youth who also learn about and interact with Army personnel.
(g) Assistance is regularly being provided by the Army during natural calamities
and disasters which provides an occasion for civil military interactions.
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

22
2. As desired by GOM, civil military liaison mechanisms have been
institutionalised at various levels.  Regular conferences are held at the level of
Command Headquarters and subordinate formations with appropriate
representation of the Army and State Governments with a view to foster mutual
trust and understanding as also to address specific issues such as those pertaining
to Internal Security deployments, disaster situations, welfare of serving personnel
and their wards, ex-servicemen.  Regular liaison is being made between field
formations and corresponding officials from the civil administration.
3. The Cantonment Board Hospitals and dispensaries are managed by the
Cantonment Board which comprises of Government officials and elected members.
The Cantonment Board decides the facilities to be created in these establishments
based on its felt needs and paying capacity of the local population.
[Ministry of Defence O.M. No. H.11013/25/2007/D(Parl) dated  10.03.2008]
Recommendation (Para No. 2.91 and 2.92)
 The Committee have noted the above mentioned instances quoted by
Subramanyam Committee in their Report, which pertain to intelligence apparatus.
Since not much record has been placed before the Committee regarding the action
being taken by the Government on these cases, the Committee feel that there is
an urgent need to strengthen the capabilities regarding the intelligence gathering,
the intelligence analysing, intelligence sharing and taking follow-up action on those
recommendations.  The Committee note that in many advanced countries,
technological intelligence collection is undertaken by an integrated Defence
Intelligence Agency with adequate resources made available to the Defence
Services for intelligence collection are not commensurate with the responsibility
assigned to them.  The Committee, therefore, desire that sufficient funds should be
made available to armed forces for the purpose as recommended by
Subramanyam Committee.
 The Subramanyam Committee have noted a number of instances in the
intelligence gathering during Kargil war.  The Report has pointed out that Kargil
highlighted the gross inadequacy in the nation’s surveillance capability, particularly
through satellite imaging.  They, therefore, recommended that Unmanned Aerial
Vehicles (UAV), also known as Remotely Piloted Vehicles (RPV), are extremely
useful and effective in surveillance, especially if they have a night vision and
thermal imaging capability.  The Committee, therefore, desire that the Government
should take immediate steps to strengthen the intelligence apparatus on the lines
indicated by the Subramanyam Committee.
Reply of the Government
. There is no cost factor that inhibits acquisition of high-end technology, as
adequate funds are available.  HQ IDS has approached MoD for devolution of
powers in this respect.  The acquisition of higher capability most of the time
depends on availability of technology indigenously.  Periodic scan of relevant
technology for Intelligence Surveillance & Reconnaissance (ISR) is undertaken at
respective Intelligence Directorates and Perspective Planning (PP) Directorates in
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

23
Defence HQs to counter the technical obsolescence/redundancy.  A Long Term
Integrated Perspective Plan (LTIPP) covering 15 to 20 years perspective of
acquisition of relevant technologies equipment is progressed through Government.
A Technology Coordination Group (TCG) has been established under the
Chairmanship of NSA to monitor induction of Technical Intelligence Systems for
Defence forces and other national intelligence agencies.
2. Defence Intelligence Agency as part of HQ IDS (which is a tri Service
organization) carries out the vital aspect of coordinating intelligence gathering,
analysis sharing and follow up amongst all the three Services Headquarters and
other in agencies.  Technology Intelligence (Tech Int) Branch of HQ IDS and
Defence Image Processing and Centre (DIPAC) are involved in carrying out this
task.
3. To further enhance the IMINT capability, the three Services have procured
UAVs that are being routinely tasked on surveillance and intelligence missions and
reports are being shared with all concerned agencies.  These UAVs are also
equipped with night vision and thermal capability.
 [Ministry of Defence O.M. No. H.11013/25/2007/D(Parl) dated  10.03.2008]
Recommendation (Para No.2.96)
 The Committee note the views expressed by Subramanyam Committee in
their report regarding deployment of army in counter-insurgency operations to
tackle terrorist problems in various parts of the country and other internal security
problems.  As pointed out by the Subramanyam Committee, army's prolonged
deployment in counter-insurgency role adversely affects its training programme
which leads to fatigue and the development of mind-set that detracts from its
primary role.  Also, the State Governments and Para Military Forces tend to
assume that army will always be there to combat insurgency.  The net result of all
this has been to reduce the  role of the Indian army to the level of Para Military
Forces and the Para Military Forces in turn to the level of an ordinary police Force.
The view of the Subramanyam Committee is that the involvement of army in the
counter-insurgency operations adversely affects its preparedness for its primary
role, which is to defend the country against external aggression.  The Committee,
therefore, feel that army should be immediately withdrawn from internal security
duties and this should be handled by Central Para Military Forces, Central Reserve
Police Force and the State Police Forces.  The Committee desire that a fixed time
schedule should be drawn up to withdraw army from counter-insurgency duties,
etc. gradually.
Reply of the Government
 Reply to Para No. 2.96 will be sent separately.
[Ministry of Defence O.M. No. H.11013/25/2007/D(Parl) dated  10.03.2008]
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

24
Recommendation (Para No. 3.24)
 The Committee note that Group of Ministers, in their report, had observed
that proper management of borders is vital for national security.  But there were
instances of more than one force working on the same border and question of
conflicts in command and control had been raised frequently.  Multiplicity of forces
on the same border also led to lack of accountability on the part of the officers.
The Group of Ministers, therefore, suggested the principle of "One Border One
Force". The Ministry of Home Affairs, during the oral evidence, informed that the
action one the issue of "One border One Force" has been taken and implemented.
Different forces have been named to man different borders.
Reply of the Government
 The principle of 'One Border One Force' has already been implemented.
[Ministry of Defence O.M. No. H.11013/25/2007/D(Parl) dated  10.03.2008]
Recommendation (Para No.  3.25)
 The Committee also note that the Central Para Military Forces have been
assigned different borders and as result they are now supposed to deal with
different problems at the border which earlier used to be handled by different
departments.
Reply of the Government
 No action is required to be taken.
[Ministry of Defence O.M. No. H.11013/25/2007/D(Parl) dated  10.03.2008]
Recommendation (Para No.3.26)
 The Committee, therefore, feel that there is an urgent need to sensitise
these forces with different aspects of the border management and they need
detailed training for the same.  The Committee, therefore, desire a time bound
training programme of the personnel manning these borders should be finalized to
give them detailed training about different aspects of border management like
smuggling of narcotics, illegal migration, etc.  At the same time, they may be
manning the border from where people shall be coming legally also from the
neighbouring countries.  They, therefore, also need elaborate training in dealing
with legal migration cases where they must be very polite and courteous to the
immigrants and present an affable face of the country to visitors, etc.
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

25
Reply of the Government
 CPFs personnel deployed in the border region have been given training on
different aspects of Border Management, smuggling of Narcotics and illegal
migration during their basic training and at the same time of their orientation
programme before their deployment in the border area.  These topics are also
covered in other in-service/promotional courses.  So far as behavior with legal
migrants is concerned, this aspect is broadly covered in the course syllabi of
various courses in which topics like awareness of concept of behavior with civil
population, liaison with border population and its importance, code of conduct for
Police officers/personnel, various Law are taught to CPFs personnel in the
basic/in-service attended by them.
[Ministry of Defence O.M. No. H.11013/25/2007/D(Parl) dated  10.03.2008]
Recommendation (Para No. 3.27)
The Committee also note that the Government have decided to raise a very
large number of additional battalions of Central Para Military Forces which need to
be deployed for internal security duty, to maintain law and order, to deal with
counter-insurgency and terrorist activities etc.
Reply   of the Government
 As per the recommendations of an Inter Ministerial Group set up in June
2000 to assess the futuristic requirement of CPF, 209 battalions of CPFs including
50 IR Battalions and 30 RR Battalions have been raised over a period of 5 years in
a phased manner.  Thereafter, 25 IR Battalions have been sanctioned to various
States during the period 2005-2006 to 2007-2008.  20 SSB Battalions have also
been raised for guarding Indo-Nepal and Indo-Bhutan borders in the year 2005-
2006 to 2006-2007.  Recently in January 2007, 20 ITBP battalions have been
sanctioned for raising in next 3 years.  All the CPF battalions as mentioned above
have been raised except 20 battalions of ITBP sanctioned recently.  The IR
Battalions sanctioned to various States are either raised or under various stages of
raising as per their policy.
[Ministry of Defence O.M. No. H.11013/25/2007/D(Parl) dated  10.03.2008]
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

26
CHAPTER–III
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT REPLIES
Recommendation (Para No. 2.9B)
 The Committee during the study visit to Guwahati had observed that for
specialized medical treatment, which is not available in Armed Forces Medical
Hospital, if the officer/jawan is referred to private hospital for treatment, he has to
pay cash deposit before getting prescribed treatment.  Later on claim is reimbursed
to the servicemen.  In the other hand retired person is availing empanelled private
hospital facilities without paying anything, as the Government is paying the
required amount to the hospital directly on behalf of the retired personnel.
The Committee, therefore, desire that medical facility, as is given to Ex-
Servicemen may also be extended to the Servicemen, who has been performing
more responsibility than the Ex-Servicemen.
Reply   of the Government
 Service hospitals are well equipped to provide comprehensive quality
medicare to service personnel and their families in most of cases.  However,
provisions also exist for 90% medical advance to Defence Service personnel
including their entitled dependants for emergency/elective specialized treatment,
for which the facility is not available in Military Hospitals, in recognized civil
hospital/institutions as approved by Ministry of Health & Family Welfare from time
to time for CGHS beneficiaries at package/CGHS approved rates.  The existing
system of medicare and referrals for service personnel is found to be adequate
and comprehensive.
2. In view of the above provision it is not considered necessary to extend
medical facility to service personnel on the lines of ECHS.
[Ministry of Defence O.M. No. H.11013/25/2007/D(Parl) dated  10.03.2008]
Recommendation (Para No. 2.10, 2.11, 2.12 and 2.13)
 In accordance with the existing delegated powers, acquisition/procurement
proposals upto Rs.20 crores are approved at the level of Defence Minister and
proposals upto Rs.50 crores are cleared by the Finance Minister.  Proposals
beyond this limit are required to be approved by the Cabinet Committee on
Security (CCS).  These powers were delegated almost a decade ago.  In the
meantime, inflation has grown, sophistication of equipment has considerably
enhanced the cost of equipping the armed forces.  Accordingly, the Group of
Ministers suggested that the existing limits be revised to Rs.50 crores and Rs.100
crores for the Defence Minister and Finance Minister respectively.
 The Ministry of Defence, in their Action Taken Replies, intimated that the
delegated powers had been enhanced accordingly.  The delegated powers of
Raksha Mantri are now Rs.100 crores for non-scaled items and upto Rs.200 crores
with concurrence of Finance Minster.
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

27
 The Committee, however, feel that the Defence Minister should be further
delayed financial powers upto Rs.200 crores in case of non scaled items without
the concurrence of the Finance Minster, if the purchase proposal is within the
allocated amount of Ministry of Defence, as the Finance Minister may not have that
knowledge of importance of the purchases to be made as the Defence Minister is
likely to have.
 On the other hand, if the purchases are to be made over and above the
allocations of the Ministry of Defence, the Finance Minister may have higher power
than the Defence Minister.  This will reduce the bureaucratic delays in acquisition
of defence equipment and will be cost-effective.
Reply of the Government
The Ministry of Defence is of the view that for the present the existing
delegation of powers is adequate.
[Ministry of Defence O.M. No. H.11013/25/2007/D(Parl) dated  10.03.2008]
Recommendation (Para No.  2.19)
 The Committee notes that it was the lack of synergy among the three
Services which caused difficulties to the Armed Forces during the Kargil War.  The
Chief of Staff assumed the role of operational Commander to the respective forces
rather than that of Chief of Staff to the Prime Minister and Defence Minister.  This
led to a number of negative results and protocol problems.  The Committee
understand that in pursuance of the observations and recommendations of Kargil
Review Committee as cited above, the GoM had felt seriously the need for creation
of the post of Chief of Defence Staff in order to boost synergy among the three
Services of Armed Forces and to provide a single point military advice to Prime
Minister and Defence Minister.  The Committee also notes the observations of
GoM that the functioning of Chief of Staff Committee has revealed serious
weaknesses in its ability to provide single point military advice to the Government.
The Committee, in their earlier report have recommended for the creation of the
post of CDS.  In view of this, the Committee, therefore, reiterates that the
Government should take the GoM's recommendations as well as this Committee's
concern in this matter seriously and take the final decision on CDS at the earliest
and till the final decision on CDS taken, the functioning of COSC should be
seriously streamlined and positively made effective."
Reply of the Government
 Based on recommendation of the Group of Ministers, HQ IDS was created
on 1st October 2001.  In the last five years much has been achieved by HQ IDS
towards greater integration and in promoting synergy and jointness between the
three services.  Some of the achievements are summarized in the succeeding
paragraphs.
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

28
Single Point of Military Advice:
2. Military advice to the Government continues to be provided by the COSC.
To support the Chairman and the COSC, in the optimal performance of their roles
and functions; Chief of Integrated Staff to the Chairman COSC (CISC) is carrying
out the following designated roles:-
(a) Supervise and control Integrated Defence Staff which is the principal
arm of and secretariat to the Chairman and the COSC.
(b) Serve as non-voting Member to the expanded COSC.
(c) Chair Defence Crisis Management Group.
(d) Supervise the co-ordination of Long Range Plans, Five Years Plans and
Annual Budgetary proposals for the three services and presenting
coordinated set of proposals to RM after discussion with Chiefs of Staff
in COSC and Defence Secretary.
(e) Coordinating and analysing  critical deficiencies in force capabilities,
assessing the impact of such deficiencies on National Military objectives
and prioritising requirements of individual services to remove specific
deficiencies so identified.
(f) Coordinating, Planning and conduct of Tri Service training.
3.  Joint Decision Making: A tiered system of decision making has been
adopted amongst the three services to address joint issues.  The important
elements include:-
(a)  Chief of Staff Committee (COSC):  Three Chiefs and CISC (non-voting) are
the members.  The enhanced roles and functions of the Chairman, COSC are:-
(i) Commanding such Joint Forces in the field as may be specifically
assigned to him from time to time.
(ii) Exercise administrative control but not command over Strategic Forces.
He is an adviser to the National Command Authority.
(iii) Exercising command and control over C-in-C Andaman & Nicobar
Command and forces deployed therein.
(iv) Exercising administrative, functional and operational control over the
Defence Intelligence Agency.
(v) Developing Joint Strategic doctrine and plans, including contingency
plans and recommending the same to Government for coordinating and
implementing.
(vi) Coordinating disaster management and relief operations.
(b) Vice Chiefs Committee (VCC):  The members are CISC (Chairman) and three
Vice Chiefs.
(i) Deals with all Tri-Service issues.
(ii) Resolves inter service disputes.
(iii) Military recommendations to MoD and CCS.
4. COSC is assisted by the following Tri-Service committees:-
(a) Principal Maintenance Officers Committee )PMOC).
(b) Principal Personnel Officers Committee (PPOC).
(c) Principal Supply Officers Committee (PSOC).
(d) Joint Operation Committee (JOCOM).
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

29
(e) Joint Service Intelligence Committee (JSIC).
(f) Joint Training Committee (JTC).
(g) Joint Planning Committee (JPC).
(h) Joint Operation Logistic Committee (JOLC).
(i) Joint EMC management Advisory Board (JEMCAB).
(j) Inter Service Equipment Policy Committee (ISEPC).
(k) Joint Electronic Warfare Board (JEWB).
Addressing Inter-Service Doctrinal, Planning, Policy and Op issues:
5. In order to address inter-service doctrinal, planning, policy and op issues
adequately, HQ IDS have achieved the following:-
(a) Disaster Management:  Coordinated relief operations during Tsunami, J&K
earthquake, Katrina relief, volcanic eruption in Indonesia, Lebanon crisis and
flood relief inside India. Also an integrated approach towards Disaster
Management has been set-up alongwith interaction with Government (MHA)
and civil authorities.
(b) Integrated Space Cell has been revitalized, Defence Space Vision 2020
(DSV 2020) has been formulated and fructification of DSV 2020 has
commenced.
(c) Coordination of C4 I2 concept implementation to facilitate development of C4
I2 concept, induction to technology and joint systems interaction.
Conclusion: It may be seen that a lot of action has been initiated by the HQ IDS with
regards to streamlining Chief of Staff Committee (COSC) functioning and improving its
effectiveness.  The process cannot be deemed as complete, nonetheless it is an
incremental process that would take both time and efforts and that is being pursued by
the Services and Ministry of Defence in right earnest.
[Ministry of Defence O.M. No. H.11013/25/2007/D(Parl) dated  10.03.2008]
Recommendation (Para Nos. 2.30, 2.31 and 2.32.)
 The Committee note that the Group of Ministers (GoM) have recommended
for restructuring of Ministry of Defence and Service Headquarters.  The Group of
Ministers desired that a Committee headed by the Defence Secretary should look
into the delegation of administrative powers and also finalise the details of such
restructuring.
 The Ministry of Defence, in their reply, have stated that in pursuance of
these recommendations, a number of institutions like Integrated Defence Staff, Tri-
Service bodies like the Defence Intelligence Agency, the Strategic Forces
Command and Andaman & Nicobar Theatre Command have been established.  In
addition to the above, Defence Acquisition Council, Defence Procurement Board,
Defence Production Board and Defence Research and Development Board have
also been established.
 The Committee, feel that there is an urgent need to review the working of all
these organizations set up by the Ministry of Defence on the basis of
recommendations made by GoM.  The Committee desire that a team of experts
should examine the actual working of each and every organization to ensure their
efficient working and also to have synergy.  The Committee may be informed of the
results thereof.  The Committee also desire that these organizations should be
given adequate flexibility in order to perform well or to meet any eventualities as
per the changed circumstances.
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

30
Reply of the Government
 In pursuance of the recommendations by GoM a number of institutions and
organizations like DIA, SFC, ANC, DAC, DPB etc have been established.  It is
considered that the efficacy of these institutions and organizations may be
reviewed by MoD since some of these organizations are chaired by the Hon'ble
Raksha Mantri and Defence Secretary.
[Ministry of Defence O.M. No. H.11013/25/2007/D(Parl) dated  10.03.2008]
Recommendation (Para No. 2.38)
 The Committee note that Subramanyam Committee, in their report, had
observed that over the past years, actual defence expenditure had been below the
amount required by the Defence Services to perform efficiently the tasks allotted to
them.
Reply of the Government
There has been a consistent increase in the budgetary allocation to Defence
Services during the previous years. The actual expenditure has, however,
generally been lower than the allocation under the Capital head on account of
several factors, such as slippage in cash outgo related to Committed Liabilities and
non-fructification of schemes as anticipated.
[Ministry of Defence O.M. No. H.11013/25/2007/D(Parl) dated  10.03.2008]
Recommendation (Para No. 2.37 and 2.39)
The Committee note that GoM have recommended for preparing a holistic and
integrated Defence Perspective Plan for 15 to 20 years through a process of inter-
service prioritisation.  The Five Year Defence Plans by the Services should be
prepared on the basis of LTIPP. MoD may be directed to ensure timely completion of
LTIPP, five yearly/annual Defence Plans apart from introducing all suggested
measures to bring about efficiency in defence expenditure.
 The Ministry of Defence have informed the Committee that LTIPP for the period
2002-17 is already in place.  The same is being reviewed and revised covering the
period 2007-22.  The Committee have been further informed that the 11 th Defence
Plan has been formulated in consultation with the Services and forwarded to the
Finance Minister in July, 2006.  Since then the matter is under consideration between
the two Ministries.  Since then the matter is under concerned that with the creation of
new bodies, there is a need to clearly lay down the field of responsibility between the
Ministry of Defence  and the three Services.  While the Ministry of Defence have to lay
down the Defence policies to draw up Long Term Integrated Perspective Plans as well
as Five yeart Plans and lay down different targets for the three Services and provide
funds for the same, on the other hand, the three services have to prepare Long Term
Plan and Five Year Plan for their respective forces.  Actual implementation of the
policies and achievement of targets have to be the part of the three Services
themselves.  This should be examined in depth in consultation with the three Service
Headquarters to avoid duplicacy, etc.
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

31
Reply of the Government
 As per the new approach of formulating the LTIPP, the National Security
Strategy would be spelt out by Gol and approved by the CCS.  Based on the threat
envisaged, Defence Planning Guidelines and Defence Capability Strategy would
be promulgated by the MoD.
2. The Defence Capability Plan and the LTIPP would be formulated with inputs
from the Service HQs.  However, to ensure Capability building in line with the
Defence Capability Strategy and Defence Capability Plan and the aspects of
commonality and inter operability, the LTIPP would be formulated by making
necessary amendments to the LTPPs of the Services.  These documents,
formulated by HQ IDS, would then be forwarded to various agencies of the MoD
including Service HQs for its implementation.
3. Procurement of equipment for building the capabilities of three Services
would be carried out as per the procedure laid down in DPP-2006.
[Ministry of Defence O.M. No. H.11013/25/2007/D(Parl) dated  10.03.2008]
Recommendation (Para No. 2.45, 2.46 and 2.47)
 The Committee note the recommendations made by Group of Ministers that
Defence Plan should be on zero-based budgeting approach and all on-going
schemes may be examined on the same concept in a time-bound manner.  The
Group of Ministers also recommended for constitution of a Study Group by the
Ministry of Defence.
 The Committee note that the Ministry of Defence have reviewed all the 11 th
Plan schemes on actual performance which is in the spirit of zero based budgeting.
The Ministry had also constituted a Study Group to make recommendations on
budgetary reforms.  This Study Group has submitted its recommendations, which
have been accepted and implemented by the Government.
 The Committee desire that budgetary allocation to the Ministry of Defence
should be based on various schemes to be taken up during the period of Five Year
Plans.  The Ministry should have the authority to spend that sanctioned amount
within that Five Year Plan period and not in a particular financial year only.  The
Committee observe that due to long gestation of procurement procedure and non-
fructification of some contractual liabilities, every years the Ministry have been
surrendering huge amount of their budgetary allocation.  Therefore, the Committee
had been recommending from time-to-time the operation of Non-Lapsable Fund so
that whatever money has been sanctioned by the Parliament for Ministry of
Defence, that should remain with them till the completion of the scheme for which
the money had been sanctioned and the Ministry of Defence should not be asked
to surrender the unutilised funds on year-to-year basis.  The Committee strongly
feel that the Ministry of Defence need reforms and procedural changes to
implement the principle of zero based budgeting.  Therefore, the Committee
strongly recommend that the Ministry of Defence should carry out the necessary
reforms and make concerted efforts to utilize the sanctioned amount within the
particular financial year itself so that there is no need to surrender the amount and
till the time the Ministry of Defence must create the non-lapsable fund so that
defence modernization programme does not face any financial crunch.
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

32
Reply of the Government
 The Defence budget is a line budget of Union Budget.  Therefore, any
change in the functional modality of Defence budget from the existing one to zero-
based budgeting will require a primary change in the concept of Union Budget
itself.  However, the 11 th Plan projections were finalized by applying the principles
underlying the concept of zero-based budgeting.
The issue has been examined and it is felt that at present there is no need
for a Non-Lapsable Defence Modernization Fund since adequate funds become
available under the budget in the beginning of the new financial year for capital
acquisitions.
[Ministry of Defence O.M. No. H.11013/25/2007/D(Parl) dated  10.03.2008]
Recommendation (Para No. 2.84)
 The Committee also noticed the good work being done by the Army in the
field of education and upbringing the children of terrorists who died during Army
operations.  Keeping in view the noble cause of the civic action programme of
Army, the Committee strongly recommend that the Ministry should allocate more
funds to Operation Sadbhavna and Good Samaritan and other similar new
programmes.  The Committee also desire that for this purpose, funds should be
collected from different heads of various Ministries like Health, Human Resource
Development, Rural Development and Road Transport, etc. so that money may not
be a constraint for this noble cause and army should continue to be the nodal
organization for their effective implementation.
Reply of the Government
 The Government allots adequate funds to the Army for Operations
'Sadbhavna' and 'Good Samaritan' considering Army's operational commitments
vis-à-vis commitments in developing projects.  The total allotments under
Operation Sadbhavna and Operation Samaritan have increased form Rs.16.00
Crores in the year 2003-2004 to over Rs.63.00 Crores in the year 2007-2008.
Based on the recommendations made by the Committee, Defence Ministry has
taken up the matter of allotment of funds for Operations "Sadbhavna" and "Good
Samaritan" with the Ministries of Health and Family Welfare, Human Resource
Development, Rural Development, Road Transport and Development of North
Eastern Region.
[Ministry of Defence O.M. No. H.11013/25/2007/D(Parl) dated  10.03.2008]
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

33
CHAPTER–IV
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH REPLIES OF THE
GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE
Recommendation (Para No. 2.20)
The Committee also desire that the Government should set up a high level
Committee to demarcate clear cut roles and functions of Civil and Military officials
so that duplication of work can be avoided to check delays and responsibility may
also be fixed in their respective field. As regards the easement of complex
procedure governing the exercise of administrative and financial powers and
concept of 'advice' to the Minister are concerned, the Committee are of the view
that post of Defence Secretary should be upgraded to the level of Cabinet
Secretary or equivalent to the Chief of Service in order to enable him to synergise
the functioning of the Ministry of Defence and Armed Forces and to  promote
improved understanding and efficient functioning of the Ministry as a whole.
Reply of the Government
The roles of Civilian and Military officers are defined. However, such issue
wherein there is a requirement of clarifying roles between the Civilians and Military
officers, the same is resolved through mutual consultations. With regard to the
question of upgradation of the post of Defence Secretary to the level of Cabinet
Secretary or equivalent to the Chief of Service, it is reiterated that the
recommendations may not be accepted at present as the same is premature at this
stage. This position is reflected in the reply of this Ministry to paras 2.25 and 2.26.
[Ministry of Defence O.M. No. H.11013/25/2007/D(Parl) dated  10.03.2008]
Recommendation (Para No. 2.21)
 The Committee note that the Government have taken a number of steps to
bring synergy amongst the three Services like planning and formulation of Long
Term and Five Year Plans, Tri-Service Commands like the Andaman and Nicobar
theatre command etc. The Committee, however, during their recent visit to the
Islands, found that the desired level of synergy in such commands is missing.  The
Committee understand that the senior officers of the Command can issue orders to
the personnel belonging to their respective forces only.  There is no jointness of
Command and Control.  The Committee feel that this is a very serious lacuna and
earnest efforts should be taken to correct it immediately.  The Committee further
wish to stress that Coast Guard Services may also be inter-connected with the
jointness of Command and Control of the three Services.
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

34
Reply of the Government
 The concerned Parliamentary Committee was briefed by HQ ANC in detail
regarding the joint aspects and it was suitably elaborated that jointness lies in
functioning viz joint planning, joint training and joint operations.  It does not involve
melting down the identity of each Service to create a fourth/fifth Service.
2. The present system is working well with all the joint aspects being
coordinated by HQ ANC where staff from all the Services is posted at each branch
as per requirement.
3. Respective Component Commanders take instructions from the joint staff of
HQ ANC and executive the given task as only they are competent to carry out the
Service specific operations and it is not advisable to allow outside interference in
their specialized fields/service.
4. Coast Guard is a service under Ministry of Defence and a system of their
deputation to joint command during peacetime needs to be resolved for further
integration.
5. ANC, as a tri Service organization, is relatively young.  Issues relating to
allocation of additional resources and up gradation of infrastructure are being
addressed, based on threat perception.
[Ministry of Defence O.M. No. H.11013/25/2007/D(Parl) dated  10.03.2008]
Recommendation (Para No. 2.25 and 2.26)
 The Committee understand that the decision on the post of CDS is, at
present, pending for political consultations.  The Committee note the observation of
GoM that the CDS, after its creation, will enjoy an equivalent status with Defence
Secretary in terms of their working relationship as distinct from the Warrant of
Precedence.  The GoM had further observed that the Defence Secretary should
enjoy equivalent status vis-à-vis the Chiefs of Staff in so far as their functional
relationship is concerned.  The Committee note that at present the  three Service
Chiefs enjoy the status of the Cabinet Secretary whereas the Defence Secretary is
only in the rank of 'Secretary' i.e. a step junior.  The Committee further note that
the recommendations of GoM i.e. 'the Defence Secretary will function as Principal
Defence Advisor to the Defence Minister in a manner similar to the role to be
performed by the CDS as the Principal Military Advisor and both will enjoy an
equivalent status in terms of their working relationship as distinct from the Warrant
of Precedence' and also that the Chiefs of Staff will also attend meetings convened
by the Defence Secretary, if required and vice versa are not being implemented.
 The Committee feel that the unequal status being enjoyed by the Chiefs of
Staff vis-à-vis the Defence Secretary at present has been causing lack of
coordination and synergy in the functional relationship between the Ministry of
Defence and the Service Headquarters.  The Committee, therefore, desire that the
Government should take immediate steps in regard to upgradation in the rank of
Defence Secretary equivalent to the status of Cabinet Secretary or in the rank of
Chiefs of Service and upgrade the functions of Defence Secretary as the 'Principle
Defence Advisor' so that the working relations amongst the Chiefs and the
Defence Secretary are brought on equal footing.  The Committee strongly
recommend that the GoM recommendation with regard to attending the meetings
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

35
convened by the Defence Secretary by the 'Chief of Staff' and vice-versa should be
made operational at the earliest.  These functional arrangements should be  done
at the earliest to bring about effective synergy amongst the three Services and the
Ministry of Defence and provide unified advice to the  Prime Minister and Defence
Minister.
Reply of the Government
 The contents of paras 2.25  and  2.26 of the subject report were considered
and it has been decided with the approval of RM that the recommendation made
by the Standing Committee in above paras of the subject report may not be
accepted at present as the same is premature at this stage.
[Ministry of Defence O.M. No. H.11013/25/2007/D(Parl) dated  10.03.2008]
Recommendation (Para No. 2.40)
 The Committee note that the 11 th Defence Plan is yet to be cleared by the
Ministry of Finance even though it was submitted to them about a year back.  The
Committee take a serious view of non-finalization of 11 th Defence Plan inspite of
the fact that the implementation period of the same has begun from April 2007.
The Committee, therefore, desire that the Plan should be finalized at the earliest
and should be implemented in the right earnest.  The Committee also hope and
trust that the annual Plan for the year 2007-08 is based on the targets set by the
Ministry of Defence for the 11 th Five Year Plan.  The Committee also desire that
the LTIPP should be periodically reviewed in the light of the new developments
and should be kept updated.
Reply of the Government
 Concerted efforts are being made to get the 11 th Defence Plan approved.
The annual plan for the year 2007-08 is based on the targets set by Ministry of
Defence for the 11 th Defence Plan.  LTIPP looks at a 15 years horizon and,
therefore, accommodates impulses of change that are a part of the development
cycle.  It is modified periodically based on perception across three five year plans.
The current one under development will cover 2007-2022 while the one that is
being worked on covers 2002-2017.
[Ministry of Defence O.M. No. H.11013/25/2007/D(Parl) dated  10.03.2008]
Recommendation (Para No. 2.65)
 The Committee note that the GoM had recommended for setting up of an
Air Force College of Engineering (AFCE) and a Defence Service Software Institute
(DSSI) for the Armed Forces.  The Committee are, however, unhappy to see little
progress in this regard.  Even though some efforts have been put in regard to the
setting up of AFCE but nothing has yet been  done for DSSI.  The Committee,
therefore, recommend that the Ministry should take immediate steps in this matter
and apprise the Committee about the progress from time-to-time.  The Committee
has reiterated their earlier recommendation for setting up Air Force Pilot College at
Nasik.
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

36
Reply of the Government
Defence Services Software Institute:
(i) The short term needs of the IT and software are adequately being met through
a combination of in-service courses and outsourcing.
(ii) The long-term needs of the three services and the IDS are being addressed as
part of the IT HR consultancy being undertaken by IDS as directed by MoD.
This consultancy will address the ICT training model requirement for the
Defence Forces that will leverage integration of Defence Capabilities.
(iii) Recommendation regarding setting of DSSI will be made after the completion
of the study.
[Ministry of Defence O.M. No. H.11013/25/2007/D(Parl) dated  10.03.2008]
Recommendation (Para No. 2.72, 2.73, 2.74 and 2.75)
The Committee endorsed the view of group of Ministers that the Armed
Forces need to maintain a younger age profile so that they are at their fighting
best at all times.
 The Committee also note that the Ministry of Home Affairs also desired
the younger age profile in the Central Para Military Forces. Therefore, there is
a need to lay down the terms of engagement of soldiers and their lateral
induction into other organizations.
 The Ministry of Defence have informed the Committee that there are a
number of problems in lateral induction of soldiers into the Central Para
Military Forces like BSF or CRPF.
 The Committee, however, are of the firm view that there is a need to
maintain younger profile with the Armed Forces. As a result, a large number of
ex-servicemen shall have to be re-settled in other professions. At present, this
responsibility is being catered to by the Director General of Resettlement.
However, there are not many opportunities for these ex-servicemen available
on the civil side. The committee feel that it is the  responsibility of the
Government to ensure proper re-settlement of these ex-servicemen if it is
decided to maintain younger profile in the Armed Forces. The Committee,
therefore, desire that these ex-servicemen must be given lateral entry into
various Para Military Border Security Force, Central Police Forces as well as
in State Police Forces and other such forces. The Committee feel that ex-
servicemen are fully trained in handling arms and ammunitions and they have
the first hand experience of handling infiltrators and insurgents etc. In the
border areas. The committee feel that their expertise can be gainfully utilized
in the Central Police Forces. The Committee also feel that these ex-
servicemen should also be absorbed in State Police Services as they are
disciplined and fully trained personnel having experience in arms and
ammunitions. The Committee suggest that the State Governments can be
asked to absorb at least those ex-servicemen in their State Police Force which
belong to their respective states. The Committee feel that induction of ex-
servicemen into the para-military and other such forces would lead to huge
reduction in pension and other retirement benefits bill of the Government. The
Committee, therefore, desire that Ministry of Defence and Ministry of Home Affairs
should jointly work out the modalities for lateral entry of ex-servicemen into Central
Para Military Forces and in the State Reserve Police Forces by making statutory
provisions in this regard.
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

37
To begin with, the Committee recommend that 10 percent reservation for ex-
servicemen should be made. The Committee should be kept informed of the action
taken in the matter.
Reply of the Government
The Group of Ministers (GOM), appointed in pursuance of  the Kargil
Review Committee, had  recommended lateral transfer of Army personnel to Para
Military organizations in their report on ‘Reforming the National Security System’
with the primary aim of keeping a young profile of the Army in  peak combat
effective state, capable of meeting the challenges of future conflict. Based on the
recommendations of the GOM report, an Apex Committee consisting of Cabinet
Secretary, Chief of the Army Staff, Defence Secretary, Home Secretary and
Secretary Expenditure was constituted to look into the terms of engagement of
soldiers and their lateral entry into other organizations. In addition, a Working
Group under the Chairmanship of Adjutant General, Army Headquarters with Joint
Secretary (Police), Ministry of Home Affairs (MHA), representatives of Border
Security Force, Central Reserve Police Force, Central Industrial Security Force
and National Security Council Secretariat as Members, was constituted to carry out
a detailed study of various issues, and, work out modalities for lateral transfer.
The Working Group, after indepth deliberations submitted its report in March
2002.  The recommendations of the Working Group envisages Long Term and
Short Term lateral transfer of Army personnel into Central Para Military Forces
(CPMFs). Since then, a number of meetings at various levels including with the
Cabinet Secretary and  Home Secretary have been held.
 The following issues largely remained contentious and intractable:
Fixing the inter-se seniority of the transferees vis-à-vis original inductees of
CPMFs without adversely affecting the latter’s promotion prospects.
Disparities in the pay and allowances and perks of CPMF personnel and
Army transferees. Issue of reservation for backward classes.
 A meeting was taken by the Home Secretary on 2 nd November, 2006.  As
per the decision taken in the meeting, a Committee under the Chairmanship of
Director General, Border Security Force has been constituted to work out the
modalities.
 RM had also written to Home Minister in this regard to solve the impasse on
lateral transfer of Army Personnel to Central Para Military Forces.
 Home Minister had earlier informed that further action in this matter will be
taken after receiving the report of the Committee under the Chairmanship of DG,
BSF.  Ministry of Home Affairs have recently intimated that the  said committee has
had deliberations  and that their  report may be awaited.
[Ministry of Defence O.M. No. H.11013/25/2007/D(Parl) dated  10.03.2008]
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

                                                                 38
Recommendation (Para No. 2.97)
 However, the Committee have also noted the views of the Subramanyam
Committee which state that the Para Military Forces are not trained and equipped
to deal with border terrorism by well trained mercenaries armed with sophisticated
equipment continuously infiltrating across the border/LoC.  The Committee would,
therefore, reiterate their recommendation that the ex-servicemen should be
inducted into the Central Para Military Forces as well as State Police Forces to
tackle all these problems as they are professionally qualified to handle all sorts of
arms and ammunitions and have first hand experience of these problems at the
border during their active service in the army.  This would save all Government a
lot of money in training Central Para Military Forces and Police Forces to handle
the weapons and fire arms etc.  The induction of ex-servicemen in Central Para
Military Forces and the State Police Force will also save the Government's huge
amount in pension and other liabilities.  The Committee, therefore, desire that this
suggestion of the Committee should be implemented in the right earnest at the
earliest.  The action taken in the matter should be intimated to the Committee.
Reply of the Government
 This is a complex issue and has been discussed between MoD  & MHA
several times.  At present a Committee is in the process of identifying the posts in
CPMFs where such induction of ex-servicemen can start.
[Ministry of Defence O.M. No. H.11013/25/2007/D(Parl) dated  10.03.2008]
Recommendation (Para No. 3.28)
The Committee feel that this is the right time when the ex-servicemen can
be given lateral entry into these forces as these units are being raised at present.
This will solve a lot of resettlement problems of our ex-servicemen and also save
money of the Government in training the new recruits to the battalions.  The
Committee desire that this aspect should be seriously considered and the rules
should be framed to give some percentage of the posts of ex-servicemen in these
services regularly.
Reply of the Government
 This is a complex issue and has been discussed between MoD & MHA
several times.  At present a Committee is in the process of identifying the posts in
CPMFs where such induction of ex-servicemen can start.
[Ministry of Defence O.M. No. H.11013/25/2007/D(Parl) dated  10.03.2008]
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

39
CHAPTER–V
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL
REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED
- NIL-
New Delhi;            BALASAHEB VIKHE PATIL,
27 November, 2008 Chairman,
6 Agrahayana Standing Committee on Defence
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

40
MINUTES OF THE ELEVENTH SITTING OF THE STANDING
COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE (2008- 09)
 The Committee sat on Thursday, the 27 th November 2008 from 1500 to
1530 hrs. in Committee Room `B’, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Shri Balasaheb Vikhe Patil  -      Chairman
MEMBERS
LOK SABHA
1. Shri S. Bangarappa
2. Shri Santosh Gangwar
3. Shri Jigajinagi Ramesh Chandappa
4. Dr. K.S. Manoj
5. Shri Shrinivas Patil
6. Shri Arjun Charan Sethi
7. Shri Rajesh Verma
8. Shri Anil Shukla Warsi
RAJYA SABHA
9. Shri Jai Parkash Aggarwal
10. Shri R.K. Dhawan
11. Shri A. Elavarasan
12. Shri M.V. Mysura Reddy
13. Smt. Viplove Thakur
SECRETARIAT
1. Shri Rajeev Sharma                    -  Director
2. Shri D.R. Shekhar                       -  Deputy Secretary
3. Smt. J.M. Sinha                           -  Under Secretary
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members to the sitting of the
Committee.  The Committee, thereafter, took up for consideration the draft Action
Taken Report on the observations and recommendations contained in the Twenty-
second Report of the Committee on the subject `Review of Implementation Status
of Group of Ministers (GoMs) Report on Reforming National Security System in
Pursuance of Kargil Review Committee Report – A Special Reference to
Management of Defence’, and adopted the same, without any modification.
3. The Committee then authorized the Chairman to finalise the report and
present the same to the Parliament.
The Committee then adjourned.
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

41
ANNEXURE
161: Conveyance for Relatives of Service Personnel in cases of
 Dangerous Illness or Bereavement etc.
Free conveyance either under clause (A) or (B) below, as the individuals
concerned may choose to avail of, will be granted to such number of persons
as mentioned below, one of whom must be a relative, to visit an officer, a
nursing officer, a cadet, a boy (only the son of a serving or ex JCO/OR of the
army, equivalent ranks in the Navy and Air Force) of Military School, Soldier,
Sailor, Airman.  Non-combatant (Enrolled) enrolled trainee and apprentice or a
boy reported as dangerously ill either in a civil hospital or a service hospital or
to attend the funeral of any such individual within Indian limits provided that
illness or death is not due  to the individual’s own misconduct :
(a) Individual placed on - Two persons dangerously ill list
(b) Funerals:
 (i) Married Service  -  Three persons Personnel (including Cadets
  Trainees etc)
 (ii) Unmarried service  -  Two persons personnel (including Cadets,
  Trainees etc)
(A) By rail/road :  The visitors will be entitled to the same class of
conveyance as the patient or the deceased.  Relatives visiting boys of a
Military School will travel on warrant in the class appropriate to their grades, if
in service, and on cash TA in the class admissible to them at the time of their
release etc., if no longer in service.  Civilian visitors of these boys will travel on
cash TA in second class of accommodation.
(B) By air:
1. Individuals placed on dangerously ill list:
To one relative.  The second person not necessarily a relative may
travel by rail/road under clause (A) above but this individual may also be
allowed to accompany the relative by air subject to the following conditions:
(i) Where the relative is a lady.
(ii) Where the relative is a male but is over 60 years of age or is infirm,
physically handicapped or ill at the time of departure to the bedside
of dangerously ill individual.
NOTE: The authorities to decide whether the conditions laid down in clause
(ii) above are fulfilled will be the OC/Officer in-Charge.  Hospital in the case of
service hospital and the authority who issues the notification of dangerous illness
in the case of civil hospitals and their decision will be final.
2. Funerals :
 Two or three relatives of the deceased as the case may be will be
allowed conveyance by air/rail/road to attend the funeral.   In cases where only
one relative travels, a second individual may travel by rail/road under clause
(A) above or may be allowed, subject to fulfillment of the conditions laid down
in sub-clauses (i) and (ii)  of clause (B) (1) above to accompany the relative by
air.
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

42
3. Return Journey
 The return journey in all cases referred to in (1) and (2) above will be
performed by rail/road only and will be limited to the same persons who were
provided free conveyance for the onward journey.
 The cost of conveyance to and from the hospital will normally be paid
after the arrival of the visitors in the hospital by the officer commanding/officers-
in-charge in the case of service hospital and the authority who issues the
notification of dangerous illness or death in the case of a civil hospital.  In
cases, however, where the cost of conveyance of relatives of
soldiers/sailors/airmen, non-combatants (enrolled) , apprentices  or boys for the
journey  to the hospital exceeds Rs. 10 or in  r/o service officers Rs. 50 the
authority  issuing the certificate  of dangerous illness will also send by
telegraphic  money order one single fare of the appropriate class for each
visitor.  In cases of death occurring at a place other than hospital, necessary
payment will be made by the O.C. Station or C.O. of the Ship/establishment.
NOTE: Free conveyance, as laid down above, will also be admissible to
one relative to visit a soldier/sailor/airman, non-combatant (enrolled), enrolled
trainee, an apprentice or a boy, who is reported to be dangerously ill due to
attempted suicide or to attend his funeral in case of death due to suicide . In
cases, however, when the relative is a male but over the age of sixty, or is a
lady or a minor, or is infirm or physically handicapped at the time of departure,
conveyance will also be admissible to a second person, not necessarily a
relative, under the conditions laid down in this rule.
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

43
APPENDIX
ANALYSIS OF THE ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE
RECOMMENDATIONS / OBSERVATIONS CONTAINED IN THE 30 TH REPORT
OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON REVIEW OF IMPLEMENTATION STATUS
OF GROUP OF MINISTERS (GOMS) REPORT ON REFORMING NATIONAL
SECURITY SYSTEM IN PURSUANCE TO KARGIL REVIEW COMMITTEE
REPORT-A SPECIAL REFERENCE TO MANAGEMENT OF DEFENCE
 Percentage
 of Total
 Percentage
of Total
1. Total number of recommendations 50
2. Recommendations / Observations which
have been accepted by Government
Para No. 2.6, 2.7, 2.8, 2.9 A, 2.53, 2.54, 2.61,
2.62, 2.63, 2.64, 2.80, 2.81, 2.82, 2.83, 2.85,
2.91, 2.92, 2.96, 3.24, 3.25, 3.26 & 3.27
22 44
3. Recommendations / Observations which
the Committee do not desire to pursue in
view of Government’s replies
Para No. 2.9B, 2.10, 2.11, 2.12, 2.13, 2.19,
2.30, 2.31, 2.32, 2.37, 2.38, 2.39, 2.45, 2.46,
2.47 & 2.84
16 32
4. Recommendations / Observations in
respect of which replies of Government
have not been accepted by the Committee
Para No. 2.20, 2.21, 2.25, 2.26, 2.40, 2.65,
2.72, 2.73, 2.74, 2.75, 2.97 & 3.28
12 24
5. Recommendations / Observations in
respect of which final replies of
Government are still awaited
NIL
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages