33 STANDING COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE
(2008-2009)
(FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA)
MINISTRY OF DEFENCE
INDIGENISATION OF DEFENCE PRODUCTION –
PUBLIC–PRIVATE PARTNERSHIP
THIRTY-THIRD REPORT
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
December, 2008/Agrahayana, 1930 (Saka)
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

THIRTY-THIRD REPORT
STANDING COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE
(2008-2009)
(FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA)
MINISTRY OF DEFENCE
INDIGENISATION OF DEFENCE PRODUCTION –
PUBLIC–PRIVATE PARTNERSHIP
Presented to Lok Sabha on 19.12.2008
Laid in Rajya Sabha on  19.12.2008
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
December, 2008/ Agrahayana, 1930 (Saka)
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

C.O.D. No. 107
Price: Rs.
© 2008 By LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in
Lok Sabha  (Twelfth Edition) and printed by. …………………
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

CONTENTS
Pages
Composition of the Committee (2008-09) ……… (ii)
Introduction ……… (iii)
PART-I
BACKGROUND ANALYSIS
Pages
Chapter-I Indigenisation of Defence Production – Public
Private Partnership
……… 1
Introductory ……… 1
Chapter-II Existing infrastructure of Defence Production
in Public Sector
……… 3
Defence Public Sector Undertakings (DPSUs) ……… 3
Ordnance Factories ……… 6
Extent of Indigenisation ……… 8
Chapter-III Private Sector participation ……… 12
Opening of Defence Industry to Private Sector ……… 12
Foreign Direct Investment ……… 13
Kelkar Committee ……… 15
Defence Procurement Procedure – Capital
Acquisition
……… 24
Offset Provision ……… 35
Level Playing Field ……… 42
Financial assistance to Small and Medium
Enterprises
……… 46
Raksha Udyog Ratnas ……… 47
Defence Production through public private
partnership
……… 50
Chapter-IV Research and Development Efforts ……… 56
PART-II
Pages
Recommendations/Observations of the Committee ……… 62
Annexure-I ……… 75
Annexure-II ……… 80
Appendices Minutes of the Sittings of the Committee
     held on 30.11.2006, 18.12.2006, 9.1.2007,
    10.5.2007, 3.1.2008, 11.1.2008, 26.9.2008
    and 5.11.2008
……… 85
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

(ii)
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE (2008-09)
Shri Balasaheb Vikhe Patil   - Chairman
MEMBERS
LOK SABHA
2. Shri Vijay Bahuguna
3. Shri S. Bangarappa
4. Shri Milind Murli Deora
5. Shri Santosh Gangwar
6. Shri Jigajinagi Ramesh Chandappa
7. Shri Suresh Kalmadi
8. Shri C. Kuppusami
9. Dr. K.S. Manoj
10. Ms. Ingrid Mcleod
11. Shri Asaduddin Owaisi
12. Shri Adhalrao Shivaji Patil
13. Shri Shrinivas Patil
14. Shri Raju Rana
*15. Dr. H.T. Sangliana
16. Shri Arjun Charan Sethi
17. Prof. Mahadeorao Shiwankar
18. Shri Manavendra Singh
19. Shri Balashowry Vallabhaneni
20. Shri Rajesh Verma
21. Shri Anil Shukla Warsi
RAJYA SABHA
22. Shri A. Elavarasan
 **23. Dr. Farooq Abdullah
24. Shri Jai Parkash Aggarwal
***25. Shri  Abu Asim Azmi
26. Smt. Shobhana Bhartia
27. Shri R.K. Dhawan
28. Shri K.B. Shanappa
29. Shri Arun Shourie
30. Smt. Viplove Thakur
31. Shri M.V. Mysura Reddy
______________________________________________________________________
*    Consequent upon his disqualification from Lok Sabha w.e.f. 3.10.2008.
**  Ceased to be a member of this Committee due to his retirement from Rajya Sabha
w.e.f. 29.11.2008.
***   Ceased to be a member of this Committee due to his retirement from Rajya Sabha
w.e.f. 25.11.2008.
SECRETARIAT
1. Shri Rajeev Sharma  - Director
2. Shri D.R. Shekhar  - Deputy Secretary
3. Shri Rahul Singh  - Committee Office r
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

(iii)
INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairman, Standing Committee on Defence (2008-09) having been
authorised by the Committee to submit the Report on their behalf do present this
Thirty-third Report on the subject ‘Indigenisation of Defence Production-Public
Private Partnership’.
2.  The Committee selected the above subject for examination during the
year 2006-07. As the examination of the subject remained inconclusive, it was
selected by the Standing Committee on Defence for examination during the
years 2007-08 and 2008-09.
3.  During their examination of the subject, the Committee took briefing and
evidence of the representatives of the Ministry of Defence on 30 November 2006,
10 May 2007, 11 January 2008 and 26 September 2008 on the various aspects.
At their sitting held on 18 December 2006, the Committee also invited Dr. Vijay
Kelkar as a non-official expert of the subject to hear his views on the
recommendations made in the reports on ‘Towards Strengthening Self-Reliance
in Defence Preparedness’ and ‘Revitalizing Defence Public Sector Undertakings
and Ordnance Factories’ submitted by the committee constituted by the
Government under his chairmanship.
4. The Committee also heard the views of the representatives of
Confederation of Indian Industry (CII), Federation of Indian Chambers of
Commerce and Industry (FICCI) and the Associated Chambers of Commerce
and Industry of India (ASSOCHAM) at their sittings held on 9 January 2007 and 3
January 2008. The Draft Report was considered and adopted by the Standing
Committee on Defence (2008-09) at their sitting held on 5 November, 2008.
5. In this Report, the Committee have observed that despite several
initiatives taken in the recent past for promoting indigenisation and achieving self-
reliance in the defence sector, there is still heavy dependence on foreign
suppliers and the goal of achieving self-reliance remains elusive despite a well
established network of the defence industries in the country.
6. The Committee have also expressed their strong displeasure over the
manner in which the data on the level of indigenisation in defence sector is being
maintained and have desired the Ministry to apply necessary correctives in order
to ensure an objective and incisive analysis of the realities of the situation.
7. The Committee have desired that a formal mechanism for sharing
information on the futuristic requirements and the perspective plans of the users
should be put in place in accordance with the practices adopted by certain
advanced countries so as to inspire the confidence of the private industries and
enable them to gear up their infrastructure well in advance.
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

(iv)
8. The Committee have also desired that the policy initiatives taken by the
Government in the recent past for creating public-private partnership and
indigenous development in defence sector should be suitably reflected in the
defence procurement procedures by clearly bringing out the specific provisions
made therein to facilitate indigenously developed products.
9. The Committee have also pointed out that the demand for state-of-the-art
weapon systems is poised to take a quantum leap in future and any let-up at this
stage in the implementation of Government’s policy of achieving self-reliance
through national efforts would only result in heavy dependence on foreign
sources. They have, therefore, expressed the hope that concrete and positive
action will be taken by the Ministry of Defence on the recommendations made in
this Report with a view to optimally exploiting the industrial capabilities and the
competence available within the country.
10.  The Committee wish to convey their thanks to the representatives of the
Ministry of Defence, Dr. Vijay Kelkar and representatives of CII, FICCI and
ASSOCHAM for appearing before the Committee for tendering evidence and for
furnishing the relevant information in connection with the examination of this
subject.
11.  For facility of reference and convenience, the observations/
recommendations of the Committee have been printed as Part-II in thick type in
the body of the Report.
  NEW DELHI;      BALASAHEB VIKHE PATIL,
 16 December, 2008 Chairman,
 25 Agrahayana, 1930 (Saka) Standing Committee on Defence.
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

CHAPTER I
INDIGENISATION OF DEFENCE PRODUCTION-PUBLIC-PRIVATE PARTNERSHIP
Introductory
  After independence, owing to the circumstances then prevailing, the
Government consciously restricted defence production to the public sector.
However, the private sector has been traditionally involved in supplying raw
materials, semi-finished products, parts and components, sub-assemblies and
sub-systems etc. to Defence PSUs and Ordnance Factories.
1.2 According to the Ministry of Defence, it is the policy of the Government to
encourage indigenisation, particularly in the field of defence to achieve self-
reliance. Various new policy initiatives taken by the Government in the recent
past are aimed at promoting indigenisation in defence production and with the
objective of strengthening self-reliance in the defence sector. It is also to
constant endeavour of the Government to achieve maximum synergy between
the public and the private sector with a view to creating a competitive defence
technology edge and strengthen the defence industrial base in the country.
1.3 The economic liberalization ushered in by the Government in 1991
resulted in a high degree of de-regulation and allowed the private industry to
progress more rapidly.  Consequently, there has been tremendous growth in the
Private sector with many of Indian industries becoming global players.
Considering the capital intensive nature of defence industry sector as also the
need to infuse foreign technology and additional capital including Foreign Direct
Investment (FDI), Government decided in May 2001 to open Defence industry for
Indian private sector participation up to 100% with FDI permissible up to 26% -
both subject to licensing. With this policy change, all defence related items were
removed from Reserved Category and transferred to the Licensed Category.  As
a result, private sector can now manufacture all types of defence equipment after
obtaining an Industrial Licence under the Industries (Development & Regulation)
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

2
Act, 1951.  Department of Industrial Policy & Promotion (DIPP), in consultation
with Ministry of Defence, issued detailed guidelines for licensing production of
Arms and Ammunition in January 2002.  Consequently, there has been a
paradigm shift in the role of private sector in the field of indigenisation, i.e., from
the role of supplier of raw materials, components, sub-systems, they have now
become partners in the manufacture of complete advanced equipment/system.
The basic objective of allowing private sector participation to harness available
expertise in the private sector towards the total defence efforts and search for
self reliance.  The Government inter-alia made provision of ‘Make’ category
under DPP-2006 and DPP-2008 to strengthen public private partnership in
Defence production.
1.4 During their examination of the subject matter, the Committee have taken
briefing/evidence of the representatives of the Ministry of Defence, Defence
Public Sector Undertakings (DPSUs), Ordnance Factories, DRDO as well as
representatives from the Confederation of Indian Industry (CII), Federation of
Indian Chambers of Commerce and Industry (FICCI), Associated Chambers of
Commerce and Industry of India (ASSOCHAM) and Dr. Vijay Kelkar.
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

3
CHAPTER II
EXISTING INFRASTRUCTURE OF DEFENCE PRODUCTION IN PUBLIC SECTOR
  The Department of Defence Production (DDP) of the Ministry of Defence,
which oversees the defence production units has a substantial infrastructure
developed over the years, consisting of 39 Ordnance Factories and 8 Defence
Public Sector Undertakings.
Defence Public Sector Undertakings
2.2 The following eight DPSUs under the Department of Defence Production
cater to the requirements of Defence forces:
(i) Hindustan Aeronautics Limited (HAL)
(ii) Bharat Electronics Limited (BEL)
(iii) Bharat Earth Movers Limited (BEML)
(iv) Mazagon Dock Limited (MDL)
(v) Goa Shipyard Limited (GSL)
(vi) Garden Reach Shipbuilders & Engineers Ltd. (GRSE)
(vii) Bharat Dynamics Limited (BDL)
(viii) Mishra Dhatu Nigam Limited (MIDHANI).
2.3 The product range of DPSUs include aircraft and helicopters, warships,
submarines, heavy vehicles and earthmovers, missiles, a variety of electronic
devices and components for the defence sector, besides alloys and special
purpose steel and other alloys. In keeping with the Government policy of
promoting indigenisation in the defence sector, the Defence PSUs and Ordnance
Factories are striving to minimize the import content and enhance the indigenous
content on their production programmes. The percentage of indigenous content
in the turnover of BEL and HAL during the 2006-07 was 81 and 72.4 %
respectively.
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

4
2.4 Replying to a specific query of the Committee regarding indigenisation
efforts made by DPSUs,  the Defence Secretary during oral evidence stated as
under:
“81 per cent of the Bharat Electronics total turn over, which is Rs.4,500
crore, is done by indigenous technology.  About 81 per cent of the
products come out of the indigenous technologies, DRDO or in-house
technology.  You have been continuously raising this issue in the
Committee that R&D must be improved.  Secretary, Defence Research
had also been mentioning that the number of people working on research
in DRDO also are not adequate enough.  So, more resources are required
and that is why all PSUs and Ordnance Factory Board have been
mandated to spend maximum amount of money as well as resources to
their in-house research and development.  That is why you will see that
larger PSUs, especially HAL and BEL are spending huge amount; HAL is
spending 8 per cent of its turn over on research and BEL is spending  5
per cent of its turn over on research with the result a number of products
are being indigenised.   Many systems have been indigenised.  They were
importing certain goods earlier but now they are doing in-house
production.  When we started we first had a TOT from foreign countries.
Only 28 per cent of the technologies we had in our hand and today in
some of these projects 100 per cent is done by BEL.   Similarly, 95 per
cent of OFB products depend totally on indigenous technology and 95 per
cent of its turn over come out of the indigenous technology.  You will
agree that five per cent of international work is to be done in a company.
If forging has to be done, private sector does not have the facility to do
heat treatment, which involves a huge investment.  HAL has its own plant
and give material to the private sector which does melting and conversion
into various parts.  So, it is a very good partnership.  It is a profitable
partnership for public sector as well as private sector.  That is how it is
flourishing.”
2.5 Elaborating further, the Defence Secretary stated during evidence:
 “Sir, as far as research and new projects are concerned, we have
mentioned before about ‘Make’ procedures which have set right what was
not available in the defence procurement policy.  We have given you a
detailed presentation on ‘Make’ procedures that will give a fillip for both
joint funding by the Government and the private sector.  Minimum quantity
is also provided to the private sector which was definitely coming in the
way.  That has also been addressed and similarly regarding public-private
partnership, there will be user committees which will be continuously
guiding how to develop this and also see what is required of that particular
system and how to go about it.  I am sure you will appreciate that defence
products are not something which can be picked off the shelf as and when
the needs are there.  Now a mechanism exists and I am sure on behalf of
defence services, the Chiefs  of PSUs would like to mention about this.
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

5
We know it because I have been watching them as we work together.
They are also very fond of private sector and they also want to encourage
them.  Basically the job of the Defence Department is not to ensure the
welfare of one or the other but to see that the Defence Forces are
prepared properly so that they can deliver the goods when required and
the benefits which go to the PSUs and others are only incidental to that.
Otherwise, it is the preparedness of the Defence Forces which is
paramount in our off set clause also.  You had mentioned the off set
where ever there are large quantity off sets, they are primarily because we
have also visited many countries and we have discussed with them as it is
of common interest to both of us.  Around 70 per cent or 75 per cent or 80
per cent off set condition you will see that clearing many of those 100 per
cent or 90 per cent would be indirect off sets.  There is a great difference
between direct and indirect off sets.  When we sit here it is not our desire
to improve the garment or some other industry of India.  We are sitting
here to see how to improve the defence industry of India.  So, that is why
direct off set means the off set only to the defence products.”
2.6 As regards the steps being taken to reverse current import/indigenisation
ratio of 70:30 in the next 10 to 15 years, the Ministry in their written reply,
submitted the following information:
“With a vision to reverse the existing import-indigenisation ratio, several
steps are being initiated by the Ministry. For example, in respect of Army,
vehicles i.e. 2.5 Ton Tata Ambulances, Mahindra & Mahindra Ambulance,
Maruti Gypsy, Ashok Leyland, BEML, Royal Enfield, Hindustan Motors,
Hero Honda, Ambulance Force Motors, Swaraj Mazda Ambulance have
been procured.
Navy has taken following steps:
(a) The Directorate of Indigenisation (DOI) has been set up in the year
2005, under Material Branch of the Navy, in order to give a focused
thrust to the indigenisation drive of the Navy.
(b) 10-15 year forecast requirements of the Navy were handed over to
the Confederation of Indian Industry (CII) for dissemination to the
industry. Since, then DOI is receiving enquiries from the industry.
(c) The necessary policies and procedures for undertaking the
indigenisation activity in a structured manner have been put in
place and a 15 year indigenisation plan was formulated in the year
2005 with a 3 year roll on plan. Equipment/Systems worth
Rs.113.87 lakhs and Rs. 2271.25 lakhs are under indigenisation in
the FY 2007-08 and FY 2008-09 respectively.
(d) In the past two years the Navy has taken up 36 equipment and
systems for indigenisation.
(e) It is also planned to set up a self encompassing Naval
Indigenisation Establishment (NIE) to deal with the indigenisation
activities.”
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

6
Air Force:
(a) “IAF has embarked upon a well conceived indigenisation plan
involving PSUs as well as private industry. While major airborne
equipment for these systems are being indigenised through PSUs
and private vendors.
(b) Spares are indigenised by Base Repair Depot (BRDs) for MiG 23,
29, Su-30, An-32, Mi- 8, Mi-17, Avro, Dornier, and aero engines like
Viper, M-53 and R-29, Missiles, Air Defence Radars, Ground
handling equipment, testers and Communication systems etc.
(c) 98 % indigenisation of mandatory spares and 94 % of ARS spares
of various fleets have been achieved in which 65 % of
indigenisation was done by outsourcing to the private industry.
(d) In the indigenisation programme of testers for SU-30, Air Force
saved on cost, reduced down time and reduced dependence on
Original Equipment Manufactures (OEMs) abroad.
(e) Indigenous development of Rocket 57, Rocket S24 B, AVU-ETM
Fuze, Carts 30 mm DEFA for Mirage-200 aircraft and IR Flare
cartridges.”
Ordnance Factories
2.7 The Ordnance Factories Organization is the largest and oldest
departmentally run defence production organization in the country. It is primarily
engaged in the manufacture of Defence hardware for the Armed forces.
2.8 The Ordnance Factory Board has a Chairman and 9 functional Members.
Out of these, five Members head operating divisions and four Members are for
Staff functions. The operating divisions are based on the main products/or group
of products. The five operating divisions are:
(i) Ammunition and Explosives (A&E)
(ii) Armoured Vehicles (AV)
(iii) Materials and Components (M&C)
(iv) Ordnance Equipment Group of Factories (OEF)
(v) Weapons, Vehicles and Equipment (WV&E)
2.9 In addition, the Government has constituted a Special Board, with
representation from the Ministry of Defence, Army and Defence Research &
Development Organisation for providing appropriate inputs on resource planning,
upgrading technology of products & process and on various other critical issues,
necessary for the efficient functioning of OFB.
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

7
The product range of Ordnance Factories is as under:
(i) Weapon
Items
Small Arms (Rifles, Pistols, Carbines, Machine Guns), Tank
Guns, Anti-Tank Guns, Field Howitzers, Artillery Guns, Mortars,
Air Defence Guns and Rocket Launchers.
(ii) Ammunition
Items
Ammunitions for all the above weapon systems, Rockets,
Missile Warheads, Mortar Bombs, Pyro-technique (Smoke,
Illuminating, Signal), Grenades and Bombs for Air Force, Naval
ammunition, propellant and fuzes.
(iii) Armoured
& Transport
Vehicles
Tank T-72 ‘Ajeya’, Tank T-90 ‘Bhishma’, Infantry Combat
Vehicles, Armoured Ambulance, Bullet Proof & 48 Mine Proof
Vehicles, Special Transport Vehiclesand Variants.
(iv) Troop
Comfort
Items
Parachute for Army & Air Force, High Altitude & Combat
Clothing, Tents of Various Types, Uniforms & Clothing Items,
Floats For Light Assault Bridges.
(v) Opto
Electronics
Optical Instruments and Opto- Electronic Devices/ Fire Control
Instruments for Armoured Vehicles, Infantry And Artillery
Systems.
(vi) Others Special Aluminum alloys for aviation and space industry, Field
Cables, Water Bowser etc.
WORKING RESULTS OF OFB
VALUE OF PRODUCTION AND SALES
2004-05 2005-06 2006-07
Value of
production
Value of Sales Value of
Production
Value of
Sales
Value of
Production
Value of
Sales
8332.00 6186.65 8811.59 6891.68 8282.72 6197.35
2.10 The Ministry in their written reply have stated that Ordnance Factories
have issued products worth Rs. 32,295  crores during last five years out of which
share of Defence Forces is 84 percent.
2.11 Ordnance Factories have a very impressive record of indigenisation.
Presently, the import content in their outlay of approximately Rs.6000 crore is
only about 5 % which is in the field of armoured vehicles, in particular T-90
Tanks, where the Transfer of Technology (TOT) has been taken recently.
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

8
Extent of Indigenisation
2.12. According to the information made available by the Ministry of Defence,
the service wise break up of indigenised and imported capital acquisition of the
defence products in terms of value and percentage for last three years is as
under:-
 (Rs. in crores)
Amount
Name of
Service
Financial
Year
Import* (%age) Indigenous (%age) Total
2005-06 1766.96 (30.17%) 4089.38 (69.83%) 5856.34
2006-07 876.61 (23.40%) 2868.40 (76.60%) 3745.01
2007-08 2856.66  (42.67%) 3838.87 (57.33%) 6695.53
Army
2005-06 2571.12 (33.92%) 5007.86 (66.08%) 7578.98
2006-07 3157.61 (34.15%) 6087.76  (65.85%) 9245.37
2007-08 2010.72 (23.47%) 6555.91 (76.53%) 8566.63
Navy
2005-06 3173.31 (26.33 %) 8881.90 (73.67%) 12055.21
2006-07 1507.06 (10.83%) 12403.00 (89.17%) 13910.06Air Force
2007-08 5294.47 (41.88%) 7346.79 (58.12%) 12641.26
Import* = Value of Capital acquisitions from various foreign sources (In Rs Crores).
Indigenisation** = Value of Capital acquisitions from various indigenous sources (In Rs Crores).
 This information is based on code head booking on account of Free Foreign
Exchange (FFE) and Non-Convertible Rupees(NCR).
2.13 In the context of examination of another related subject, the Ministry of
Defence submitted the following information in respect of Indian Army:-
“India being the largest importer of weapons & equipment, definitely
stands not very high in the indigenous manufacture capability. It is, in the
recent years, that the indigenous technology has got impetus due to
inclusion of technology transfer in various contracts. However, India lags
behind USA, Russia, most European countries, China and South Korea.
The ratio of Cash Outgo for Import/Indigenous Procurement for Army
Capital Acquisitions during last 10 years (9 th and 10th Plan) is 40:60.
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

9
2.14 In reply to a question on Indigenisation of Defence Production, the Defence
Secretary informed the Committee during evidence as under:
“The other point is, indigenisation is slightly complex issue.  For example, if you take
the light combat aircraft or the advanced light helicopter, these are heavily depending
on foreign components.   I understand that the foreign component is 55 per cent of it.
Systems, materials, engines are imported.  Even then you can describe it as an
indigenous effort and capability but we should not lose sight of the fact that
throughout the world, there is heavy interdependence on other countries and
companies.  To be fully indigenous, independent and self-sufficient in the manner
that you suggest may not be feasible in many years.”
2.15 In reply to a specific query about the components taken into consideration by the
Ministry of Defence for defining ‘Indigenisation’ of a defence product, the Ministry in their
written note stated as under: -
“Indigenisation of a defence product is done on a case to case basis in respect of
each scheme of capital acquisition.”
2.16 Elaborating further, another representative of the Ministry during evidence
informed the Committee as under:
“For 2006-07, the share of indigenously produced items in defence production
was about 77 per cent…. I am giving the figure which has been submitted to the
Parliament. I have the figures for the last three years. In 2006-07, the total
purchases was for Rs.33,356; out of that Rs.25,647 crore was indigenous
equipment, and the imported one was Rs.7,710….. That is the figures that I am
submitting.”
2.17 In reply to a question on indigenisation of Defence production and inclusion of
the same in DPP – 2008, the Secretary (Defence Production) deposed before the
Committee:
“Sir, this book indicates the various procedures of procurement. As far as
procurement overall policy is concerned, it is concerned with our threat
perception and what kind of an equipment or weapons system is required by
others in our neighbours. On indigenisation we had made a presentation last
time. Whenever we acquire an advanced new weapon system, then the
indigenisation level is low and then we progressively indigenise. To give you an
example, we have now absolved the technology for MiG. If we are making, MiG
they are nearly 85 per cent indigenous. But if we go in for a fifth generation
fighter aircraft today, because that is what may be required by the Forces, then
the indigenisation level will be low and then progressively we will indigenise. So,
when we talk of indigenisation we should see it in terms of the weapons systems
where we have acquired indigenisation capability because in a low-level
technology we can achieve 100 per cent indigenisation. But if you move to the
next level of technology which is a higher technology then we have to start again.
This is a submission that I had made last time also and I had made a
presentation that in some areas we have been able to do very good
indigenisation like in small arms. Now, T-72 etc.  are 95 per cent indigenised.
The small arms ammunition is indigenised. But when we go into new areas, it is
different”.
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

10
2.18 When the Committee asked on indigenisation of equipment in Army,
representative of the Army deposed as under:
“It is 60 per indigenised.  If you take in terms of quantity, quantity is much
higher, but when you take in terms of funds, it is 60 per cent
indigenised…. Quantity-wise the indigenisation content is almost 80 per
cent.”
2.19 On a later date another representative of Army deposed as under:
 “Sir, we are buying between 54 per cent and 78 per cent indigenous
content in the last five years”.
2.20 On the aspect of indigenisation of equipment in Air Force, representative
of the Air Force deposed as under :
“Out of the total Air Force capital budget for 2006-07, about 88.7 per cent
is indigenous, and 11.24 per cent is imported.  But this may be slightly
misleading because our main dealings are with HAL.  These figures do not
include the import content of the HAL part.  As far as revenue is
concerned, it is about 60:40.  Sir, 60 per cent is indigenous and 40 per
cent is imported.  Our BRD has made very great strides but only in limited
areas like the Auto Replenishment System (ARS) items, some testers etc.
We have made great strides there.  But they are less than one lakh or little
more than one lakh.
As far as ammunition is concerned, once again we would love to have
everything Indian but low-end and high-end is the same problem that
Army and Navy is facing.  We have got 1000-kg. bombs, 68-mm rockets.
They are already being used. But high-end things like air-to-air missiles
are still under development.  We still have to go because it is time-bound.”
2.21 On a later date another representative of Air Force deposed as under:
“Our average, for the last five years, has been 60 per cent, 53 per
cent, 93 per cent, 82 per cent and 65per cent capital procurement
from indigenous sources”.
2.22 When Committee asked about the extent of  indigenisation of products in
HAL, a representative of the HAL informed the Committee as under :
“I do not know but the percentage is very less. I would venture to say that
imported component is about 30-35 per cent. So, the indigenous content
is much higher. Most important is that the aircraft is designed in India. All
components are made in India. LCA has got 40,000 components. We are
making them. All systems are being made in India. Whatever components
that were earlier being imported are all being indigenised in India.”
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

11
2.23 On the issue of indigenisation of naval products in Mazgaon Dock Limited
(MDL), a representative of the MDL informed the Committee as under:
“It is 57 per cent by value. But actually in terms of items, it will cross about
73 per cent because some of the value is going into the missile systems
which we are so far importing. But from the next Destroyer onwards to
some 15 Alphabet that we are building now, when Brahmos comes in and
the long range SAM, which is being jointly developed by the DRDO and
the foreign country, comes in, the indigenous content will certainly shoot
up much better.”
2.24 On a later date another representative of Navy deposed as under:
“As far as Navy is concerned, I think that we have been averaging
between 61 per cent and 65 per cent as indigenous content of our various
capital acquisitions, and it is quite substantial. Out of Rs. 8,679 crore, we
have had orders up to Rs. 4,471 crore on the PSUs”.
2.25 On the issue of indigenisation of products in Ordnance Factories, a
representative from the Ordnance Factory Board informed the Committee as
under:
“Sir, against the ammunition requirement of Air Force, Navy and Army, we
are meeting almost more than 90 per cent of the projected requirements.
On the import element, our total cost of production is around 5 per cent
only; if we talk in terms of ammunition production, the import element is
just less than two per cent. The main weakness in ammunition, what we
face today, is the electronic fuses for which we have been talking to the
OEMs. But they are not willing to part with the core technology when it
comes to productionisation. Sir, I would like to make one more
submission. You mentioned about the rejection percentage. I would like to
submit that our rejection is at par with any of the world class
manufacturing units…..Sir, it depends upon the particular item, but it is
around 10 per cent. On average it is around 10 per cent.”
2.26 In reply to a specific question about the extent of Indigenisation, Defence
Secretary deposed during evidence:
“…..In this context, we have been analyzing that out of all our expenditure
on equipment, between 30 per cent and 35 per cent is from domestic
manufacturers.”
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

12
CHAPTER-III
PRIVATE SECTOR PARTICIPATION
Opening of Defence Industry to Private Sector
  As brought out earlier in this Report, the Government decided in May 2001
to open Defence industry for Indian private sector participation up to 100% with
FDI permissible up to 26% - both subject to licensing. With this policy change, all
defence related items were removed from Reserved Category and transferred to
the Licensed Category.  As a result, private sector can now manufacture all types
of defence equipment after obtaining an Industrial Licence under the Industries
(Development & Regulation) Act, 1951.  Department of Industrial Policy &
Promotion (DIPP), in consultation with Ministry of Defence, issued detailed
guidelines for licensing production of Arms and Ammunition in January 2002.
Consequently from the role of supplier of raw materials, components, sub-
systems, they have now become partners in the manufacture of complete
advanced equipment/system.
3.2 During the oral evidence, the Defence Secretary informed the Committee
as under:-
“Sir, for the past two years or so, we have been extensively modernizing
our procurement policies. At the beginning of this process, the
requirement of equipment is assessed by the three forces. It is then
addressed by a group consisting of the three Vice-Chiefs, members from
the DRDO, Defence Production, Finance, etc. All of them categorise the
required equipment into Make, Buy and Make and Buy categories.
 The whole idea is that what can be made in India should be
procured from our sources within India. On the other hand, if we require in
bulk and we do not have the technology for it, then it is cauterized as Buy
and Make, that is, we buy some and then we produce with that technology
transferred. Further, if the requirements are smaller or there is absolutely
no way that we can have the requirement met in a short time frame, then
we go for a categorizing that is known as Buy. After this categorization, it
is brought before the Defence Acquisition Council. This Council is headed
by the Raksha Mantri, and has membership consisting of the two Ministers
of State, the three Chiefs of Staff, and the Secretaries. They approve
these categories, and thereafter, it comes into the Annual Acquisition
Plans of each Service.”
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

13
Foreign Direct Investment (FDI)
3.3 Foreign Direct Investment (FDI) in its classic definition, is defined as a
company from one country making a physical investment into building a factory in
another country. Its definition can be extended to include investments made to
acquire lasting interest in enterprises operating outside of the economy of the
investor. The FDI relationship consists of a parent enterprise and a foreign
affiliate which together form a Multinational corporation (MNC). In order to qualify
as FDI the investment must afford the parent enterprise control over its foreign
affiliate. The UN defines control in this case as owning 10% or more of the
ordinary shares or voting power of an incorporated firm or its equivalent for an
unincorporated firm.
3.4 On a specific query about the benefit of FDI and its effect, if level of FDI is
increased, the Ministry of Defence in their written note submitted the following
information:
“The benefits of FDI will be:
(i) There will be an increased flow of funds from foreign source under
FDI.
(ii) Employment will be generated for the local population.
(iii) Taxes and other revenues will flow back to the local economy.
FDI levels of more than 50 per cent would imply that the management control
would be with foreign investors. Therefore due to the strategic nature of the
Defence Industry, there is an apprehension that such ventures would fail at
critical times since there would be possibilities of withdrawal on the basis of
embargoes/sanction/pressures imposed by foreign governments or international
agencies.”
3.5 Elaborating on the present policy of the Government on FDI, the
representative of FICCI stated during evidence as under:
“The original FDI was at 26 per cent.  When the country is buying directly
from the foreign suppliers, and they can produce and sell goods and services
from abroad directly then there is no incentive of creating 26 per cent owned
company in this country.  It is because they can supply everything from
abroad.  With 26 per cent the intellectual capital transfer will have to happen
much more.  That is one issue which we need to think very carefully and see
what is good for this country.  It is there in the recommendations that for the
‘buy’, and ‘buy and make’ procedures also, an Indian company must be
nominated as the maintenance partner at the RFP stage.  That will allow real
technology transfers to happen.  The ‘Make’ policy today allows that all
upgrades will have to happen by the Indian Companies only, but it needs to
be strongly implemented.
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

14
If we are deciding to put a ban on the imports then 51 per cent, 49
per cent will automatically start to happen.  At 51:49, a lot of investment
will come in.  If we decide that foreign company will not go on ‘buy’, and
‘buy and make’, but we will go with the make route and ask Indian
companies too, and then partner the foreigners to bring in the technology
gaps, foreigners having a 49 per cent stake will have to happen.  At 26 per
cent they will not come, but at 49 per cent they will start to roll in indoors.
Not just by saying that you are now allowed to do 49 per cent, what is
important is that we say that it has to be an indigenous company under the
‘make’ procedure to qualify for these programmes´
3.6 On the issue of increasing FDI in Defence Sector, the representative of
ASSOCHAM made the following submissions:-
“Any sensitive technology cannot be given with 26% equity in a joint
venture with any company sitting here.  If any foreigner says you want
100% of a technology to build a particular thing.  This 26% is not enough
for me.  How do I control it?  How am I responsible?  This 26% limit in
Defence is a problem. I think it must be 51% or, at least, 49% will be
worthwhile.  You will immediately see a change.  India has the capability
to absorb technology.  The success of Japan, which was the miracle of the
last century, their technology imports were their biggest foreign exchange
exports.  How did they  got control over the automobile industry. They got
the technology quickly and they overcame and optimized and became the
leaders.  ”
3.7 Elaborating further on FDI, Secretary (Defence Production) deposed
before the Committee as under:
 “In 2001-02, the Government said: “Now, the private sector should be
allowed to come into this.  So, then the  policy framework was changed. It
was said to have 100 per cent participation of the Indian companies
subject  to 26 per cent FDI.  Prior to that, it was only the Defence public
sector understandings. Increasingly, what is happening is that DPSUs are
also doing a lot. Then, L&T, M&M, Tata are  doing a lot of work across the
board in different areas of Defence procurement.  It is not limited.  My
colleagues from the public sector undertakings can elaborate it further.
But if you talk of a complete system integration,  that is to say whether
anybody has the capability of building a warship or a fighter aircrafts, that
kind of a capability correctly does not exist in the public sector.  It will take
some time to develop.  These are complex systems.  So, our effort is to
encourage them  to reach a requirement that they can be able to do it.
But these are complex technologies.  There are Defence areas”.
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

15
Kelkar Committee
3.8 The Committee have been informed that a committee was set up by the
Government under the chairmanship of Dr. Vijay L Kelkar in April 2004 to
examine the current procedures and recommend changes in the acquisition
process. According to the Ministry of Defence, the Terms of Reference of the
Committee were as follows: -
“(i) To examine the current procedures and recommend changes
required in order to modify acquisition process on an approach
based on a “product strategy” for items which need development
internally or through the ToT route.
(ii) To examine and recommend modalities of integration of the  User,
the Defence Ministry and the Indian Industry including both private
and public in the acquisition process of products required by the
Armed Forces and being procured through the “product strategy”
approach.
(iii) To examine and recommend changes required for increasing
defence exports and incorporation of offsets in defence acquisition.
This shall also include examination of the approaches to be
adopted for seeking credit lines at beneficial/differential rates,
facilitating export of Defence goods to countries, which are not
economically strong.
(iv) To set up a sub-group/sub-committees of members of the main
Group to examine and make recommendations for appropriate
changes in the areas indicated below:
To examine the changes required to facilitate DPSUs and
Ordnance Factories to assume the role of designer and integrator,
enabling them to build consortium of industries around them for product
development and production.
The members of that committee included three Vice-Chiefs of
Armed Forces, distinguished scientists and experts, representatives of
Integrated Defence Staff, Department of Defence, Department of Defence
Production, DRDO, Ministry of Finance and Defence (Finance). Two major
Industry Associations viz. Federation of Indian Chamber of Commerce
and Industry (FICCI) & Confederation of Indian Industry (CII) were also
adequately represented on the committee.
The report (Part I) of that committee, covering first three Terms of
reference of the committee was submitted to the Government on 5.4.2005.
Part II of the report of that committee, relating to its 4 th Terms of
Reference has been submitted by that committee on 10.11.2005
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

16
3.9 At the instance of the Committee, the Ministry of Defence submitted the
following information on Part-I of the report of the Kelkar Committee:-
Part-I of Kelkar Committee Report
“The thrust of Part I of the Report of the Committee is ‘Towards
strengthening self-reliance in Defence Preparedness’. This report takes
into account increased capabilities of Indian Industry and growing
globalization of Defence industry. The Committee's proposals focus on the
following key issues:
(i) Encourage involvement of country's best firms in Defence
Capability Building.
(ii) Pursue Offsets policy to bring in Technology and investment.
(iii) Explore synergies amongst private sector DPSUs, OFs and DRDO
to promote high technology capabilities.
(iv) Create an environment for quantum jump in export of defence
equipment and services.
The Committee has adopted a long-term approach to prepare a policy
regime that would encourage India’s best firms to enter in defence production.
To promote innovation, efficiency and cost cutting, the Committee has
adopted a strategic perspective in formulating proposals towards acquisition
policy reforms. The recommendations of the Committee revolve around:
• Preparation of a 15-year long term plan forming the basis for acquisition
programme.
• Information sharing of requirement of Armed Forces with the Industry.
• Identification of entry points for the private sector in the acquisition
process.
• Accreditation and fostering of Raksha Udyog Ratna (RUR)/Champion.
• Policy framework to promote participation of Small and Medium
Enterprises (SMEs) in defence production.
• New institutional architecture for defence acquisition towards setting up of
a professional agency for Defence acquisition.
• Defence R&D opportunities both with DRDO and industry.
• Promote transparency in decision making.
• Optimum utilization of existing capacity.
• RFP to include an Offset Clause for contracts valued at Rs.300 crores and
above.
• Re-examine the concept of Negative List for Defence exports and setting
up of Export Marketing Organisation.
       The Committee also suggested a strategy for implementation of its
recommendations, along with a time schedule.”
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

17
3.10 The Committee also carried out an impact analysis of the
recommendations made in Part I of its Report. This analysis indicates that
besides providing strategic depth for Defence preparedness, the implementation
of the recommendations of the  Committee would also result in substantial
economic benefits to the country. The measures outlined in the Report when
implemented would lead to a high degree of indigenous production, resulting in
increased growth in the manufacturing GDP, greater  employment opportunities
and substantial savings. There would be greater self-reliance in Defence
Production, benefits in terms of R&D, technology spin offs, higher industrial
growth, higher exports, increased competition and more employment
opportunities, besides cost savings.
3.11 On being asked by the Committee regarding the status of implementation
of Kelkar Committee’s recommendations, the Ministry submitted the following
information:
“Out of total 40 recommendations in part I of Kelkar Committee report, 26
recommendations were accepted for implementation out of which 18 have
been implemented so far. 8 recommendations were accepted for
implementation with certain modifications out of which 6 have been
implemented so far. Out of remaining 6 which were to be deliberated upon
further 2 have been implemented and 1 has been dropped after due
deliberations.”
 3.12 The status of implementation of the recommendation made in Part-I of the
Kelkar Committee report, as furnished by the Ministry of Defence is reproduced
at Annexure-I
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

18
3.13 The Ministry of Defence further submitted the following information on
Part-II of the report of the Kelkar Committee:-
Part-II of Kelkar Committee Report
“The Kelkar Committee constituted a sub-committee headed by Shri
Jagdish Khatter, CMD of Maruti Udyog Ltd. to examine and formulate
recommendations in respect of the 4 th Terms of Reference of the
Committee. The Sub-Committee formulated its recommendations after
hearing the views of all stakeholders, which included the Armed Forces,
the Chief Executive Officers (CEOs) of Defence Public Sector
Undertakings (DPSUs), Director General of Ordnance Factories (DGOF),
representatives of various Federations/Associations/Unions of employees
and officers from Ordnance Factories and DPSUs. The Committee also
had extensive interaction with the representatives of the recognized
Federations/Associations/Unions and heard their views. While formulating
the final recommendations, the inputs received from them have been
taken into consideration by the Committee. The thrust of Part II of the
Report is towards revitalizing the Defence Public Sector Undertakings and
Ordnance Factories. The focus of the recommendations is on the
following:
(i) Bring in changes in management enabling the Ordnance Factories
and Defence PSUs to have greater freedom and to become global
players in Defence Production and be able to effectively perform
the role of designer and integrator of large systems and platforms,
enabling them to build consortium of industries around them for
product development and production.
(ii) Give greater freedom to Defence PSUs to form joint ventures,
consortiums and to do cross investment in foreign countries for the
purpose of obtaining technology.
(iii) Adopt Vendor Development policies in all Defence PSUs on the
lines currently being followed by HAL.
(iv) Inject greater professionalism in the organization of Directorate
General of Quality Assurance (DGQA) for effective quality
assurance in manufacturing largely involving process audit and
quality surveillance work.”
3.14 The present status of implementation of the recommendations made in
Part-II of the report, as furnished by the Ministry of Defence, is at Annexure-II.
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

19
3.15 The Kelkar Committee in Part-II of its report ‘Towards Revitalizing
Defence Public Sector Undertakings and Ordnance Factories’ recommended as
under:
“(1) Ordnance Factories:
(i) All Ordnance Factories should be corporatised under one
single corporation under leadership of competitive
management.
(ii) This corporation should be accorded the status of Nav
Ratna.
(iii) The corporatisation could be on the lines of Bharat Sachar
Nigam Ltd. (BSNL).
(iv) The existing dispensations by the Government to Ordnance
Factories should continue for a period of three years to help
them to steer the changed process internally.
(v) Corporatisation does not necessarily mean privatization.
(2) Defence Public Sector Undertakings:
(i) HAL and BEL may be accorded the status of Nav Ratna by
relaxing the eligibility conditions.
(ii) BEML and MDL may be accorded the status of Mini Ratna
by relaxing the eligibility conditions.
(iii) All Defence PSUs except MIDHANI should be given the
freedom to cross investment in foreign companies from
whom they can obtain technology, which has remained out
of their reach so far.
(iv) DPSUs should explore the possibilities of mergers and
formations of consortia in order to achieve optimum level of
synergy and become globally competitive.”
3.16 Explaining the rationale behind his recommendations about Defence
Public Sector Undertakings (DPSUs), Dr. Vijay Kelkar during his oral evidence
informed the Committee as under:
“Here, I should tell you that we met the Ordnance Factories and Defence
Undertakings, labour unions.  They have thought a lot on this subject and
I would suggest the Committee to invite and meet them.  Many of them
have thought a lot on this subject.  You may or may not agree with their
views but you may get a viewpoint.  Ordnance Factories do not have their
own R&D and they cannot decide on their vendors, hence, they are not
efficient.  They shall have more autonomy.  Give them more powers and
make them autonomous.  Like any modern organization, let them choose
their own supplier and technology.  Each with Rs. 10,000 crore of annual
output they do not have R&D.  Even small Indian firms have their own
R&D.  There is a genuine demand of ordnance factories to have more
powers.  Once you corporatise them, I think, you should give them
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

20
adequate powers. The total strength of the ordnance factories is two
lakhs.  A private sector is producing ten times more than what they are
producing today. This is the kind of possible gains we can get in that case.
They are not allowed to produce for civilian market and they do not know
their strength.  Unless you give them more powers, more autonomy, I
think, situation will not be improving.  I think in Ordnance Factories, there
is very great technological power in India which is not exploited fully.  The
figure of Rs. 30,000 crores  is almost one per cent of the GDP.  That kind
of capabilities are there.  And we are losing that.  We are saying to
corporatise them.   BSNL is a good model.   We should corporatise them
without any employee losing their job or pension rights.  Put all the
pension rights there which is done by BSNL. Protect all their rights, give
them more powers and accountability. That is what we have
recommended for the ordnance factories.”
3.17    During oral evidence before the Committee, Dr. Vijay Kelkar elaborated on
the important recommendations of the committee and other issues related
thereto as under:
“The terms of reference of our Committee were precisely what you have
outlined as the main issues before the Committee. They are: how to
improve country’s self-reliance in defence preparedness, how to improve
efficiency and productivity of our defence public sector units and ordnance
factories. One more interesting term of reference was how to promote
defence exports. It was recognized that it is important not only in terms of
industry but also it had a political and strategic dimension that the country
should become an exporter of defence technology.
The report first takes into account the historical development. Why
did we make defence production a monopoly of the public sector? The
very simple reason is that when the country became independent there
was not much private industry. The only industry that was there was in the
Government hands. So, it was naturally thought that defence should be in
the public sector. In 1991 when the major liberalization took place, it
coincided with global changes in the defence industry.
Globally, the defence industry has undergone a revolutionary
change. There is an enormous amount of globalization in defence
production. These two things were happening in the rest of the world. One
is globalizing defence production and other is that it also has become an
extremely R&D intensive industry. Small companies cannot survive. In the
United States there were 22 or more large defence corporations but they
got reduced to only five to seven. The same tendency is there in Europe.
Even in Russia, the same process is seen. The number of Defence
equipment producing systems and platforms has became smaller and
smaller because of enormous amount of R&D.
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

21
Our first recommendation was to enable Indian industry to
participate in defence production. Indian Defence Ministry should follow
the global trend of publishing the long-term requirement of country’s
defence needs. The French publish a 30-year perspective. The United
States publishes a 15-year perspective. Australian Defence Ministry
publishes a 15-year perspective. So does UK. All major producing
countries have a long-term perspective made available to general public
as to what country’s needs are in terms of defence capability. There is one
more interesting point which an Air Marshal, one of the great Indian
thinkers said.  What is secret is not production but deployment of
equipment.  I am afraid, production is not secret.  Therefore, in this
country we can say that production is not secret.  Where you deploy is
secret but what the defence industry produce in this country is not. “
3.18 He further stated:
“Among the three Services, the most enlightened was Navy.  Navy already
have rudimentary 15-year plan, which makes it available.   We found Navy
as the most advanced of all the agencies.  They have a 15-year
programme I think which can be done by both the Army and Air Force.
First condition for doing what you have said is to reduce the imports
and increase defence preparedness of this country.  We must have long
term capability requirement.  We do not want to say where we are going to
deploy them but they must say these are the major threats which we are
facing and where capabilities will be required in this country.  Army
requires such kind of characteristics; may be Air Force.  So, making
available long-term plan is one requirement which we have recommended.
Secondly, in terms of details, we have differentiated between
acquisition and purchase. Acquisition is a more wider term, which means
building capabilities and I think, this Committee also give that kind of
emphasis and as to what is required is not purchase but capabilities.  We
must record Mr. Chairman that enormous strides made by the Ministry in
this area.  I think, they have now very detailed kind of procedure backed
acquisitions.  There is a silent revolution taking place.  We must help them
to make progress further.”
3.19 Apprising the Committee about the different public-private participation
models of development in the country, Dr. Vijay Kelkar stated during evidence as
under:-
“… We studied the experience of ISRO; ISRO is the most successful
example of how Indian industry participates in hi-tech area; just like Army,
they also wanted that; so, ISRO participated in that and created
infrastructure where large amount of requirement of space industry is
done by our own companies. So, let us follow the ISRO model. What is
ISRO model? First they made available their own in-house technology to
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

22
Indian industry. Second, they gave long-term commitments to Indian
industry. Third, throughout the whole process, they hold the hands and
guide them to what they want. So, there is holding of hands between the
buyer and the producer. So, they work as a team. Consequently, we have
this now in space industry. Incidentally, there is a study made by Prof. U.
Shankar of the Madras School of Economics, which showed that the
Indian Space industry is as efficient as anything in the world. In fact, we
are now sending commercial satellites. This happened with ISRO. The
rates are competitive; our costs are the lowest in the world today. ISRO
had done this and they have a long-term framework. This is what we have
recommended. There is a body in this country which has shown success
and you can do it. So, let us follow the ISRO model for defence industry
where we can reduce the imports, have domestic capabilities at efficient
and lowest possible cost. So, we looked at the three models – ISOR,
Atomic Energy and ONGC; and we have given what we have learnt from
each of the successful models for defence production. For instance,
ONGC runs the training programme. So, we have recommended that the
Institute of Defence Management, Ahmedabad should run specialized
training programme for defence officers on purchase procedures. So, from
Atomic Energy Commission, we have given the lessons; from space, we
have taken lessons; all the hi-tech industries in which our own companies
have shown that we can do it, we have looked at it. We have successful
experience; and so, let us look at this.”
3.20 When the Committee asked whether the private industries are satisfied
with the present pace of implementation of the Kelkar Committee’s
recommendations, CII in their written note submitted as under:
“(i) Ministry of Defence to notify Raksha Udyog Ratnas (RURs)
(ii) The Armed Forces to bring out a perspective document which
 outlines the Technology Perspective and Capability Road Map
 covering at least a period of 15 years. This document should be
 widely publicized and made available on MOD website.
(iii) The Ministry of Defence and particularly the Integrated Defence
 Staff (IDS) to bring in amendments in the constitution of the
 SCAPCC (Services Capital Acquisition Plan Categorisation Higher
 Committee) to ensure the participation of the Industry both Public
 and Private in Defence Acquisition.
(iv) The constitution of the Defence Production Board needs to be
 amended in order to have representation of the industry
 incorporated.
(v) Service Headquarters seek information in the form of RFI from
 prospective bidders in some ‘Buy’ and ‘Buy & Make’ cases.
(vi) In order to provide a level playing field to private sector industry,
 there is a need to gradually move away from the process of
 nomination.
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

23
(vii) Ministry of Defence should create a fund called ‘Defence
 Technology  Development Fund’ with the Department of Defence
 Production (DDP) which is to be used for providing a fund to Small
 and  Medium Enterprises (SMEs) to carry out design and
 development work either directly or through industry  champions/
 Defence PSUs/OFs.
(viii) In the area of Aerospace development an autonomous body be set
 up by the Government constituted with involvement of all stake
 holders.
(ix) Strategic Defence Industry Fund (SDIF) should be created on the
lines of North-East Development Fund where non-lapsable pool of
resources be utilized exclusively for the ‘Make’ category of products
of Indian Industry.”
3.21 In this context, the Federation of Indian Chamber of Commerce and
Industry  (FICCI) submitted the following information about the areas of concern
which need the attention of the Government:-
(i) “Non Notification of RURs has hindered the implementation
of policy operationalisation and participation of private sector
in the categorization process and sharing of long term plan.
(ii) Not a single ‘Make’ category Request for Proposal (RFP)
has been floated by the MoD since the operationalisation of
DPP 2006.
(iii) The intend of level playing field is only implemented under
the global buy category and that too for taxes and duties at
the point of sale to MoD and not for input that has been
borne by the Indian Industry.
(iv) Offset Banking has not been implemented so far.
(v) Nomination of DPSUs producing systems under TOT with 70
% imported contains will continues. Statistics on Nominated
programmes will along prove the point of the volumes being
nominated while Private Industry has been denied
opportunity to participate by categorizing the programmes
under ‘Make’ instead of ‘Buy & Make’
(vi) The DPP 2005 and DPP 2006 state that warship building
being a complex activity is to be given on nomination basis
to the shipyards. Today private sector has the capacity and
capability for taking up this complex job. However, inspite of
private sector holding the requisite license for more than five
years no warship construction contract has yet been
awarded.”
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

24
3.22 FICCI also  submitted  the following:
(i) “The Department of Defence Production to be strengthen
and be designated as Department of Defence Industries and
Production (DDIP) responsible for developing policies for
creating and enhancing industrial infrastructure for Defence.
It will act as the representative of Indian Defence Industry.
DDIP will prepare a 15 year long term plan to make India self
reliant in Defence needs.
(ii) The DDIP should also be held responsible to the Parliament
for the unspent defence budget being surrendered at the end
of each financial year.”
 Defence Procurement Procedure – Capital Acquisition
3.23 As part of the implementation of the report of the Group of Ministers on
reforming the National Security System, new Defence Procurement Management
Structures and Systems were set up in the Ministry of Defence (MoD). In order to
implement the provisions laid out in the new Defence Procurement Management
Structures and Systems, the procedure for Defence Procurement laid down in
1992 was revised. The Defence Procurement Procedure – 2002 (DPP- 2002)
came into effect from 30 December 2002 and was applicable for procurements
flowing out of ‘Buy’ decision of Defence Acquisition Council (DAC). The scope of
the same was enlarged in June 2003 to include procurements flowing out of ‘Buy
and Make through Imported Transfer of Technology (TOT)’ decision. This
procedure was reviewed and DPP- 2005 came into effect from 01 Jul 2005. The
Defence Procurement Procedure – 2005, has been reviewed and revised based
on experience gained in implementation and further enlarged to include
procurements categorized in the ‘Make’ category.
3.24 The Ministry introduced Defence Procurement Procedure 2006 to
strengthen public  private sector partnership in defence production and research
and development and to ensure expeditious procurement of items required by
defence forces,. The Ministry  of Defence subsequently introduced DPP-2008 in
July, 2008 for Capital procurement.
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

25
Aim
3.25 The objective of this procedure is to ensure expeditious procurement of
the approved requirements of the Armed Forces in terms of capabilities sought
and time frame prescribed by optimally utilising the allocated budgetary
resources. While achieving the same, it will demonstrate the highest degree of
probity and public accountability, transparency in operations, free competition
and impartiality. In addition, the goal of achieving self-reliance in defence
equipment will be kept in mind.
Scope
3.26 The Defence Procurement Procedure - 2008 (DPP-2008) will cover all
Capital Acquisitions, (except medical equipment) undertaken by the Ministry of
Defence, Defence Services and Indian Coast Guard both from indigenous
sources and ex-import. Defence Research and Development Organisation
(DRDO), Ordnance Factory Board (OFB) and Defence Public Sector
Undertakings (DPSUs) will, however, continue to follow their own procedures for
procurement.
Capital Acquisitions
3.27 In DPP-2008, Capital Acquisitions are categorized as under: -
(a)  Acquisitions Covered under the ‘Buy’ Decision. Buy would mean an
outright purchase of equipment. Based on the source of procurement, this
category would be classified as ‘Buy (Indian)’ and ‘Buy (Global)’. ‘Indian’ would
mean Indian vendors only and ‘Global’ would mean foreign as well as Indian
vendors. ‘Buy Indian’ must have minimum 30 % indigenous content if the
systems are being integrated by an Indian vendor.
(b)  Acquisitions covered under the ‘Buy & Make’ decision would mean
purchase from a foreign vendor followed by licensed production / indigenous
manufacture in the country.
(c)  Acquisitions covered under the ‘Make’ decision would include high
technology complex systems to be designed, developed and produced
indigenously.
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

26
Upgrades:
3.28 All cases involving upgrade to an in service weapon system / equipment
will also be covered by this procedure. Such cases could be categorized under
any of the categories as given in preceding paragraph. The categorisation may
be carried out depending on scope of the proposal, availability of technology
indigenously and the need for seeking critical technologies from foreign vendors.
3.29 When the Committee desired to know about the progress made by the
Government in introducing DPP-2008, the Ministry in their written reply to the
Committee informed that DPP-2008 is introduced recently with some
modifications. Salient features of DPP 2008 are as under:
(a) Transparency
Vendors will be given advance information before the issue of Request for
proposal (RFP) in all procurement cases excepting those for security sensitive
products.  This information given on Ministry of Defence website will provide
them a lead time for preparation of their offers in response to the RFP (Para 24-
page 7-8 of DPP-2008). All verbal communications with the vendors during the
course of trials will be confirmed in writing within a week (Para 37-Page 11-12).
The result of technical/trial evaluations along with reason(s) for disqualification
would also be intimated to vendors after the acceptance of technical/staff
evaluation reports (Para 43-page 13). Defence Public Sector Undertakings would
be required to sign Integrity pact with their sub-vendor(s) (Para 18.1 of Standard
Clauses in Contract Page 108) in all cases where the procurement value
exceeds Rs. 20 crores.
(b) Field Trials
 In order to increase the transparency in evaluation process, qualitative
requirement of the equipment under procurement, as laid down by the Services
headquarters, would be analyzed right at the inception stage for the methods and
agency responsible for its evaluation.  Trial methodology so prepared would be
incorporated in RFP for advance information of the vendors.  Inclusion of trials
methodology in the RFP would ensure that there is a common assumption by all
agencies involved in the trial including participating vendors.
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

27
 The result of trial evaluation of the parameters so far was being conveyed
to the vendors verbally in the form of debriefing on a day to day basis; this has
now been made mandatory to be confirmed as written communication also (Para
37 Page 11-12).  This would ensure adequate information is provided to the
vendors regarding the performance of their equipment and is well documented
for future references.  Another important aspect with regard to providing
oversight on the conducted trial procedure, in large value projects, is enlarging
the mandate of the Technical Oversight committee, which is responsible to see
whether trials has been conducted as per prescribed procedures.  Technical
Oversight committee has now been mandated to oversee whether the trials have
been carried out according to trial methodology given in the RFP as well as trial
directive (Para 46 – Page 14).
 A more broad based and multidisciplinary trial team has been proposed in
DPP-2008 for cases where equipment is being procured for more than one
service or if it involves transfer of technology (Para 37(b) – page 12).
(c) Encouraging Competition by Broadening the Vendor Base
 In order to make broad based Service Qualitative Requirements (SQRs)
Service Headquarters may obtain inputs by issuing Request For Information (RFI) on
Ministry of Defence website and by corresponding with maximum manufacturers. A
provision has been made for obtaining additional inputs from Defence Attaches,
Internet Defence Journals/Magazines/ Exhibitions, previously contracted cases in
such categories.  To ensure that SQRs are broad based and would result in multi-
vendor situation, a compliance table of SQRs, vis-à-vis technical parameters of
available equipment in as much details as feasible, would be prepared at the stage
of formulation/approval of SQRs (Para 14 – Page 5 Para 30 (b) of Draft RFP Format
– Page 69 and Appendix B – page 75).  If only one vendor is found compliant to the
SQR5 parameters after the technical evaluation stage, a review would be carried out
by the Technical Evaluation Committee (TEC) to derive causes of such single
vendor situation for recommending suitable corrective measures including
reformulating SQRs (Para 36 – page 11).  Restriction has been laid in Repeat Order
cases, limiting the quantity to be procured under Repeat Order category to 100% of
the previous order (Para 64 – Page 18).
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

28
(d) Transfer of Technology for Maintenance Infrastructure
 To optimally utilize assets of the Services, Para 28 of DPP-2008 has been
amended to include army Base Workshops/Naval Dockyards/Air Force Report
Depots for establishing maintenance infrastructure under M-ToT provisions on a
case-to-case basis at RFP stage.
(e) Quality and Reliability
 To ensure better reliability and quality assurance, vendors would be
required to give details of reliability model and basis of reliability prediction.  The
efficacy of such model will be verified during technical and environmental
evaluation.  A seller is required to rectify any failure in the equipment during the
period of warranty.  The seller however was not required to inform the cause of
such a failure.  Knowledge of cause of failure may be of valuable help to the user
in long term maintenance of the equipment.  The new provision in the warranty
clause requires that the seller shall intimate the assignable cause of the failure to
the user (Para 10 – page 66, Para 37 – Page 70 of RFP, Para 5 of Draft RFP
Format – page 65 & 76).
(f) Enhancement of Delegation of financial powers .
 The services have been given greater delegation of financial powers for
capital acquisition to enhance efficiency and expedite procurement.  Service
Headquarters now have delegated financial powers upto Rs. 50 crores.
Financial power delegated to the Defence Secretary has also been enhanced to
Rs. 75 crore.  Further, the Defence Procurement Board (DPB) would accord
AON (Acceptance of Necessity) to cases to Rs. 100 crores (Para 18 – page 6).
Only cases above Rs. 100 crores are to be brought before the Defence
Acquisition Council(DAF).
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

29
(g) Highlights of changes in Offset Provisions
Rationalisation of licensing condition, introduction of offset banking listing of
defence products and exemption from offset of acquisitions under fast track procedures
are some of the salient features of the New Defence Offset Policy as envisaged in the
Defence Procurement Procedure (DPP) – 2008.
 Under the existing offset guidelines, a private industry was necessarily required
to have an industrial license for being entitled to participate in the offset programmes.  In
the revised guidelines a private industry will be required to have an industrial license
only if so stipulated under the guidelines/licensing requirements for the defence industry
issued by the Department of Industrial Policy and Promotion (Para 2.2 of Offsets’
Provisions – Page 44).
 Offset policy has been revised to include offset credit banking enabling foreign
vendors to create offset programmes in anticipation of future obligations [(Para 2.1(d) –
page 44).  This will also enable foreign industry and their Indian offset partner to have
long term arrangements to discharge offsets and will thus enhance the capacity of the
Indian industry to absorb offsets.  Under the banking guidelines, a vendor will be able to
discharge the banked offset credits for the RFPs which have been issued  within two to
two and half years depending upon the date of issue of RFP.  The offset obligations are
to be fulfilled conterminous within the period of main contract.  If a vendor is able to
create more offsets than his obligations under a particular contract, the surplus offset
credits can be banked and would remain valid for the period of two financial years after
conclusion of the said contract.
 A list of defence products have been added to facilitate the foreign vendors in
implementing their offset obligations (Para 2.1a)
(h) Expeditious Procurement
 Some of the important provisions made in DPP-2008 to expedite the
procurement procedure are as follows:-
i) Maximum time stipulation has been incorporated for issuance of RFP within
two years of accordance of AON. In such cases, fresh AON will be
considered only after re-examination of available technology and operational
necessity.
ii) Extension of time for submission of offers now has been restricted to eight
weeks.
iii) In multi-vendor cases, once L-1 vendor has been identified, normally there
would be no need for any further price negotiations (Para 51 – page 15)
iv) Increased Delegation of Financial Powers of Service HQrs.”
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

30
For ‘Buy’ and ‘Buy & Make’ Categories
3.30 A scrutiny of DPP-2008 reveals that the following procedure has been
prescribed for Capital Acquisitions flowing out of ‘Buy’ and ‘Buy and Make’
categories:-
“Linkage to Acquisition Plans
   Proposals for acquisition of capital assets flow out from the defence
procurement planning process. This planning process will cover the long-
term, medium-term and short-term perspectives as under: -
(a) 15 years Long Term Integrated Perspective Plan (LTIPP).
(b) 5 years Services Capital Acquisition Plan (SCAP).
(c) Annual Acquisition Plan (AAP).
 Based on the Defence Planning Guidelines, Headquarters Integrated
Defence Staff (HQ IDS), in consultation with the Service Headquarters
(SHQs), would formulate the15 years Long Term Integrated Perspective Plan
(LTIPP) for the Defence Forces. The Five Year Defence Plans for the
services would also be formulated, by HQ IDS, which would include
requirements of five years Services Capital Acquisition Plan. The SCAP
should indicate the list of equipment to be acquired, keeping in view
operational exigencies and the overall requirement of funds. The planning
process would be under the overall guidance of the Defence Acquisition
Council. Its decisions as approved by the Raksha Mantri will flow down for
implementation to the Defence Procurement Board (DPB).While LTIPP and
SCAP would be approved by the DAC, the AAPs would be approved by the
DPB. The AAP would be a subset of the SCAP.”
Annual Acquisition Plan (AAP)
   Annual Acquisition Plan(AAP) of each service would be a two year roll
on plan for capital acquisitions and would consist of the schemes from
approved five year Services Capital Acquisition Plan(SCAP). Accordingly
draft AAPs would be prepared by the SHQs taking into account the carry over
schemes from the previous year AAP, schemes where AON has been
accorded by DAC/DPB/SCAPCHC in the current year and schemes proposed
to be placed before DAC/DPB/SCAPCHC in current/ensuing financial year.
 The draft AAPs would be prepared in two parts. Part A would comprise
of carry over schemes from the AAP of previous year and schemes where
AON has been accorded during the year. Part B would include the cases
likely to be initiated for seeking AON in the forthcoming year. The draft AAPs
would be circulated to respective AM/TM/FM in Acquisition Wing and
thereafter forwarded to HQ IDS by 31 December of each year by SHQs after
clearing the observations of Acquisition Wing. HQ IDS will allot a unique
identification number to each case and would obtain approval of final AAP
from DPB by 15th April of the relevant Financial Year. Part A would be the
working document for Acquisition Wing for issue of RFP and subsequent
monitoring of the progress of each case. Inclusion of fresh schemes to Part A
from Part B of AAP after accord of AON would be a regular process. Proposal
not listed in the SCAP may only be processed after due approval of the DAC.
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

31
In consonance with schemes likely to be included in AAPs, HQ IDS
would work out the annual requirement of funds for capital acquisitions of
each service taking into account committed liabilities and anticipated cash
outgo, likely to be incurred on account of the fresh schemes, during the
ensuing financial year.
The DPB may also carry out amendments in the Annual Acquisition
Plan, if considered necessary, on account of national security objectives,
operational urgencies, budgetary provisions or any other exigency based on
recommendations made by SHQ / HQ IDS / Department of Defence /
Defence (Finance). All proposals that need to be included in the AAP owing
to reasons stated above should be put up to DPB for approval prior to
inclusion in the AAP. The Acquisition Wing will process all acquisition
proposals incorporated in the ‘Annual Acquisition Plan’ under the overall
guidance of the DPB.”
Defence Procurement Procedure (Make)
3.31 The Defence Procurement Procedure 2002 came into effect from 30 Dec
2002 which was applicable for procurement under ‘Buy’ Category. The scope
was further enlarged to include ‘Buy and Make’ procurements through imported
Transfer of Technology decisions. Procedure for Indigenous Research, Design,
Development and Production of systems is now being addressed under ‘Make’
category.
3.32 The resurgence in Indian industry today offers scope for their greater
involvement in the Defence sector, due to availability of requisite skill and
infrastructure for undertaking defence production and even research and
development in some fields. Over the last four decades, considerable resources
have been invested in setting up our Defence Research and Development
infrastructure through which we have achieved enhanced capacities in the
Defence sector. We are also witnessing today a significant growth of our private
sector with many industries becoming global players. We have also seen a shift
in the role of the private sector in the field of indigenisation. From the role of
suppliers of raw-material, components, sub systems they have now become
partners and manufacturers of complete advance systems. Private Sector can
today harness available expertise of management, scientific and technological
skills and also raise resources for investment in research and development,
towards achieving our goal of self reliance in the defence preparedness of the
country.
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

32
3.33 The report of the Kelkar Committee on review of Defence Procurement
Procedure had recommended an integrated approach involving Users, Ministry of
Defence and the Industry in the ‘Make’ procedure. DRDO should concentrate on
projects requiring sophisticated technology of strategic, complex and security
sensitive nature. Outsourcing of Research and Development work of high
technology to private sector should be on the lines of parallel development for
which the cost should be shared. A minimum order quantity to sustain the
financial viability of development within the time schedule should be spelt out to
encourage private sector participation. These recommendations of the
Committee have been accepted by the Government for implementation. The
procurement through indigenous development would be divided into following
categories:-
(a)  Strategic, Complex and Security Sensitive Systems. These projects
would be undertaken by DRDO. The development of these systems would
be as per the DRDO procedure and would utilise DRDO funds for
execution. These projects would be managed through Defence R&D
Board.
(b) Low Technology Mature Systems. These projects would be
categorised as ‘Buy Indian’ and must have minimum 50 per cent
indigenous content.
(c) High Technology Complex Systems. Projects under this category
would be identified as ‘Make’. These projects would be undertaken by
RURs/ Indian Industry / DPSUs /OFB/ Consortia on a level playing field.
This procedure would also be adopted for all upgrades categorised as
‘Make’
3.34 The procedure set out in succeeding paras would cover ‘High Technology
Complex Systems’ identified under the ‘Make’ category. In formulating this
procedure the relevant recommendations of the Kelkar Committee Report have
been duly incorporated. This procedure would, however, not be applicable for
innovations / developments undertaken by the Services from their respective
Technology Development Funds.
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

33
Aim
3.35 The aim of this procedure is to ensure Indigenous Research, Design,
Development and Production of capabilities sought by the Armed Forces in
prescribed timeframe while optimally utilising the potential of Indian Industry. In
addition, it would also achieve self reliance in Defence Equipment.
Scope
3.36 The Defence Procurement Procedure ‘Make’ will cover all capital
acquisitions of High Technology Complex Systems and upgrades undertaken by
indigenous Research, Design and Development. These would be undertaken by
Ordnance Factory Board (OFB), Defence Public Sector Undertakings (DPSUs)
and Indian Industry and industries identified as Raksha Udyog Ratna (RUR) /
Consortia on a level playing field on shared development cost.
Procedure for Indigenous Naval Ship Building
3.37 A naval ship consists of an assortment of weapons, sensors and support
systems, along with propulsion, power generation and auxiliary systems, facilities
for crew and fuel and provisions. All the surveillance and weapon systems are
interlinked and integrated through an elaborate data management system. The
system integration of complex sensors and weapons between themselves and to
the ships systems and combat management system is crucial for a ship design
and construction project. The indigenous designs successfully integrate systems
acquired from different sources with indigenous systems on the same platform.
3.38 To achieve this successfully, a ship construction programme, therefore,
necessarily involves feasibility studies on the basis of the outline staff
requirements, concept design, model tests, preliminary design, specialist design
studies, detailed design, system integration, construction, tests and trials. It also
involves technology application and transfer, selection of various equipment,
development of new equipment, identification and purchase of a large number of
items, including weapons and sensors, from numerous indigenous and foreign
suppliers.
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

34
3.39 On being asked by the Committee to give some suggestions for
improvement in DPP –2006, CII inter alia submitted:
“Warship Construction
The procedure needs to indicate in unambiguous language that RURs are
allowed to participate in naval war-ship building, subject to their capability and
capacity assessment by the Indian Navy and this procedure shall be
applicable for purchases of such kind. It is suggested that private sector
players should be considered at par with DPSUs and should be considered
for warship construction.”
3.40 As regards the request for proposals, CII has stated that RFPs must
define in clear unambiguous terms, exact details including numbers and type of
equipment that are being sought. The Ministry of Defence were asked to  explain
and give comments on above statement of CII, the Ministry replied as under:
“The 'Make' procedure does not have a requirement for RFPs. Based on
Preliminary Services Qualitative Requirements (PSQRs), the HQ IDS will
order a Feasibility Study that will establish if Indian Industry has the
capability to produce the equipment and if so which industries/Consortia.
This will be followed by an Integrated Project Management Team which
will short list a minimum of two production agencies and prepare a
Detailed Project Report(DPR) that will spell out minimum order quantity to
be placed on the successful developer.”
3.41 On the  progress made in ‘Make’ category under Public Private
Partnership since introduction of  DPP-2006, FICCI in their written reply
submitted the following:
“The Industry has welcomed the Make category procedure in DPP 2006
but it needs to be operationalised. Despite the Make categorization being
announced and put in effect from 1 st November 2006, no project has been
brought in under this categorization. Currently, MoD has been going
ahead with nomination of DPSU under ‘Buy & Make’ category. It has been
observed that major projects like Tactical Communication System
Programme for Army as well as Network Centric Operations Programme
(N2C2) of Navy have been nominated to BEL as a Production Agency.
Given the credentials of Indian Private Sector companies in IT and
Communication worldwide, FICCI feels that if private sector is left out to
participate in communication program's, as the classification of these
programme under DPP-2006 is not Hi-Tech Make Programme, the
category Make, which was brought in with DPP-2006 is purely ornamental.
If private sector cannot participate in Defence Communication Programme
under ‘Make’ with their track-record in telecom sector then there is no
other area where Private Industry will qualify.
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

35
Similarly programs continue to be specified as Strategic Make
under DRDO where DPP-2006 does not apply e.g. MALE UAV
Programme of ADA, besides Command and Control Programme with IT
intensive Systems like ACCCS (Artillery Command and Control System)
and ADCNR (Air Defence Control & Reporting System) continue to be
nominated to DPSUs either directly or through DRDO (Strategic Make
Route). In most of these programs, it is noteworthy that the import content
is in the range of 70% - 80%.”
3.42 The Ministry were asked to explain the reason for not implementing the
‘Make’ procedure for development and production under DPP 2006, the Ministry
submitted as under:
“Ministry is ready to proceed with ordering the ‘Feasibility Study’ for the
Futuristic Infantry Combat Vehicle. Further Projects that can be progress
through the ‘Make’ procedure have also been short listed from the LTIPP
and the Service Headquarters have been asked to prepare the PSQR’s for
the same.”
Offsets Provision
3.43 An ‘Offset’ provision applicable to all Capital acquisitions effective from 1 st
July 2005 has been incorporated in the Defence Procurement Procedures.
Initially, a uniform offset of 30 per cent of the indicative cost of the acquisition in
‘Buy (Global)’ category acquisitions and 30 per cent of the foreign exchange
component in ‘Buy & Make’ category acquisitions, valued at Rs.300 crore or
more will be the minimum required offset. The Defence Acquisition Council
(DAC) may, after due deliberation, also prescribe varying offset percentages for
different classes of cases or for individual cases depending upon the factors
involved such as strategic importance of the acquisition on technology enhanced
ability of Indian defence industry to absorb the offset, export potential generated
etc.
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

36
3.44 The offset obligations can be discharged by direct purchase of, or
executing export orders for, defence products and components manufactured by,
or services provided by, Indian defence industries i.e. Defence PSUs, OFB or
any licensed private defence industry. The offset obligation can also be
discharged by Direct Foreign Investment in Indian defence industries for
industrial infrastructure for services, co-development, joint ventures and co-
production of Defence products. It can also be discharged by Direct Foreign
Investment in Indian organizations engaged in research in Defence R&D as
certified by the Defence Offset Facilitation Agency (DOFA), which has been set
up under the Department of Defence Production as a single window agency to
facilitate implementation of the ‘Offset’ policy.
3.45 This would not only strengthen the defence industrial base in the country
but would also enhance the pace of indigenisation in the defence sector. This
would also open up new avenues for growth within the country in terms of
Industry participation, technology upgradation and employment and throw open
business opportunities for the Indian industry in the Defence sector. This is also
expected to boost our Defence exports.
3.46 When asked about the steps being taken by the Government to make
offset clause more attractive, the Ministry in their written note stated as under:
“Based on the experience gained in the implementation of the offsets
provisions and also based on certain valuable inputs from Indian/Foreign
vendors, certain amendments to the Offset Policy, to make it more flexible
and broad based are in the active consideration stage by MoD.”
3.47 Elaborating on the Offset obligations, representative of the Ministry of
Defence stated during the evidence as under:
“I will tell you.  In Defence procurement with the Department of Defence, which is
more than Rs.300 crore, there is a minimum stipulation that the foreign vendor
must invest 30 per cent of that in either buying the Defence product of Indian
companies or provide money in R&D of those Defence production items and this
will be a direct off set.  It means, it will be only defence off set obligation only by
defence products.  This is in fulfilling the obligation and the foreign vendor is free
to decide from whom that vendor wants to buy.  There is no restriction.  It will be
a freedom given to him.  There is a facilitation agency formulated under the
Department which will only facilitate them in getting licence, etc. if they require a
licence to produce an item.  It is hoped that very large obligations of off set will be
available very soon and this will give a great fillip to private sector participation in
production of defence items.”
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

37
3.48 Clarifying further, the representative of the Ministry stated as under:
 “I would like to clarify one point here.  As far as the implementation of the
offset obligation is concerned, as the Secretary DP has also pointed out, and
as I had submitted before this Committee earlier, it is the direct offset
requirement in the Defence field.  The procedure that we have laid down is
this.  Before the main contract is negotiated, the commercial aspect is
negotiated, the offset contract would have to be discussed and finalized.
Actually, it is a separate contract which is entered into and concurrently.  So,
it is a specific document which comes out.  What would be the responsibility
of the company which is offering the offset; how it will be discharged; whether
it will be by sourcing equipment from here or it will be through investment in
R&D etc.; very specifically it is laid down.  That offset obligation will have to
be discharged concurrently with the main contract itself.  If there is any
failure, there is also a penalty clause of 5 per cent.  The penalty clause is also
made available over there.  In case they consistently fail, other action would
also be taken against the defaulting company.  The extension of time for
implementing the offset obligation can also be considered but that is again
with specific order.  We have made very specific commitments on that.
3.49 As regards, the issue of security, in exercising Offset Clause, the
representative of the  Ministry stated as under:
“I do not see any danger of security here. Of course, the companies from
overseas will have to get clearance with respect to sensitive technologies
from their own Governments, if they are going to pass them on to India.
But that is their problem. As long as we are insisting and making it part of
the condition of the offset, there is no problem.”
3.50 On the issue of  direct and indirect offsets, a representative of the Ministry
during evidence before the Committee stated as under:
“You had mentioned the offset where ever there are large quantity offsets,
they are primarily because we have also visited many countries and we
have discussed with them as it is of common interest to both of us.
Around 70 per cent or 75 per cent or 80 per cent offset condition you will
see that clearing many of those 100 per cent or 90 per cent would be
indirect offsets.  There is a great difference between direct and indirect off
sets.  When we sit here it is not our desire to improve the garment or
some other industry of India.  We are sitting here to see how to improve
the defence industry of India.  So, that is why direct off set means the
offset only to the defence products.”
3.51 The Defence Secretary further supplemented on the issue as under:
“Sir, we have said that minimum is 30 per cent.  Therefore, there will be
occasions when it will be 50 per cent or 60 per cent or even 100 per cent if
the economies of scales are there.”
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

38
3.52 In reply to another related question, the representative of the Ministry
submitted as under:
“As far as defence is concerned, the policy clearly states that the supplier is
to decide what he wants to buy. So, our recommendation is that, let there be
a nomination in offset. After I purchase an aircraft, offset will happen only
through HAL. Let the general industry grow and the decision as to what I want
to purchase is best left on the OEM. He has to fulfill and he has to decide who
he wants to go with and DOFA should certify that this is offset and that is
acceptable.”
3.53 When the Committee asked for the suggestion to make the offset policy
more efficacious, the CII in their written replies submitted as under:
“The Offset Policy announced by the Government leverages bargaining
power to get benefits to the country in the form of offsets. This as per the
current policy is 30 percent of all defence procurement above RS.300 crores.
The benefits are economic gains, skills development, technology gains,
employment generation etc. Given below are the specific recommendations
to make the offset policy more efficacious for the country:
(i) Objective of the Defence Offset Policy to be defined in DPP Offset
(ii) Offset Credit Banking
(a) Offset Credit Banking is a must to meet its set objectives.
(b) Complex mechanism at this stage will be difficult to implement
& monitor.
(c) Evaluation. of credits would need to be done by a dedicated
body within DOFA.
(d) A term of 10 years as to the validity of offset credit should be
utilized
(e) Trading of Offset Credits should not be permitted
(iii) Transfer of Technology
(a)  ToT is essential for upgrades. Thus, requirement of ToT to
 be identified and included in the RFP, but not as part of
 Offsets.
(b) ToT should not be considered for meeting Offset  obligations by
OEMs
(c)  There are inherent difficulties in valuation of technology
(d)  TOT transferred will never be part of core technology
(iv) Defence Offset Facilitation Agency (DOFA)
(a)  DOFA should be expanded to be able to fully provide the
 service expected from a body of this stature
(b) To give the perception of an unbiased and stand-alone  entity,
autonomy should be accorded to DOFA
(c) DOFA should have substantial representation from industry
 (v) No dilution of the current Offset Policy
CII strongly recommends that, the MoD should not dilute the current offset
policy. Indirect Offsets and Offset Multipliers should not be considered for the
time being.”
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

39
3.54 When the Committee sought suggestion of FICCI to make the offset policy
more efficacious, FICCI replied as under:
• “Offset Banking: FICCI complements DOFA to have accepted the clause
of Offset Banking in principle but urges DOFA for its early
operationalisation. Offset banking, as we are aware is a practice prevalent
in many countries where foreign vendors are allowed to set up projects in
partnership with the host country and then credit the value of business
generated as offsets for a future defence contract. Offset banking will help
India leverage the huge opportunity that exists in defence offsets now.
• Co-terminus offset obligation : Co-terminus offset obligation is causing
delays in the implementation of offset regime. Appropriate technology
induction and capability building through offset would usually go beyond
the supply period. Hence, the efficacy of coterminous offset regime needs
to be revaluated.
• FICCI welcomes DOFA's initiative in encouraging and facilitating more and
more industries to acquire licenses for manufacturing defence products
and thereby for more offset partnerships. Also, SMEs operating in system
domain should also be encouraged to apply for licenses. SMEs engaged
in building subsystems! components could operate as Tier II! Tier 11\ with
a system player (Tier I). FICCI feels the licensing norms should not be
diluted for security reasons. FICCI expects that this initiative would widen
the defence manufacturing base and result in greater offset partnerships.”
3.55 As regards the changes made in Offset Policy in DPP-2008, the Ministry
of Defence in their written note stated as under:-
“Rationalization of licensing condition, introduction of offset banking listing
of defence products and exception from offset of acquisitions under fast
tract procedures are some of the salient features of the new Defence
Offset Policy as envisaged in the Defence Procurement Procedure (DPP)
– 2008.
 Under the existing offset guidelines, a private industry was
necessarily required to have an industrial license for being entitled to
participate in the offset programmes.  In the revised guidelines a private
industry will be required to have an industrial license only if so stipulated
under the guidelines/licensing requirements for the defence industry
issued by the Department of Industrial policy and Promotion (Para 2.2 of
Offsets Provisions – page 44).
 Offset policy has been revised to include offset credit banking
enabling foreign vendors to create offset programmes in anticipation of
future obligations (Para 2.1(d) – page 44).  This will also enable foreign
industry and their Indian offset partner to have long term arrangements to
discharge offsets and will thus enhance the capacity of the Indian industry
to absorb offsets.  Under the banking guidelines, a vendor will be able to
discharge the banked offset credits for the RFPs which have been issued
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

40
within two to two and half years depending upon the date of issue of RFP.
The offset obligations are to be fulfilled conterminous within the period of
main contract.  If a vendor is able to create more offsets than his
obligations under a particular contract, the surplus offset credits can be
banked and would remain valid for the period of two financial years after
conclusion of the said contract.
 A list of defence products has been added to facilitate the foreign
vendors in implementing their offset obligations (Para 2.1a).
 Acquisitions under the Fast Track Procedure have to be
implemented in short time to meet imminent operational requirements.
These have been exempted from the requirement of offset (Para 1.6).
 These changes have been made keeping in view the requirement
of foreign manufacturers to speed up offset implementation over a period
of time.”
3.56 On latest development in the field of offset, Secretary (Defence
Production) deposed as under:
“The three contracts have already been signed.  One is on medium power
radars.  Here the total negotiated cost is Rs. 810 crore and the offset
value is Rs. 243.  The beneficiaries of this are L&T, which is a private
sector company and also Astra, which again is a small-scale sector,
private sector company.  The other one is fleet tanker for Indian Navy.
The total offset value here is Rs. 40.78 crore.  A number of companies are
the offset partners for this.  They are Wartsila India, OFB, BEL, Larsen &
Turbo, Almot, Velgear, and Johnson Pumps.  I am not reading the
products for which they are benefiting.  It is just to give you a flavour of it.
For MIG upgrade also, it has been done.  There the Base Repair Depots
of IAF are beneficiaries.  There are five more which are under the contract
negotiating stage.  Then there is Medium Lift Helicopters for IAF where the
total cost of the programme is Rs. 552 crore and the offset value is Rs.
165.6 crore.  Tata and L&T are the beneficiaries of the offset.  These are
the contracts that I am reading in the final CNC stage.  Then there is long-
range maritime reconnaissance anti-submarine war aircraft where the
offset value is approximately Rs. 2,625 crore.  HAL, BEL, L&T, Dynamitic,
Macmet, HCL and Wipro will be the beneficiaries when this contract is
signed.  For Jaguar upgrade again, the value is Rs. 330.6 crore and the
offset value is going to be Rs. 81 crore.”
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

41
3.57 On being enquired whether any specific provision has been made in DPP-
2008 on the aspects relating to upgradation of equipment, the Ministry of
Defence supplied the following information:-
“The upgrades of Defence equipment involved two main aspects – (a) Cost of the
upgrades and its operational necessity at later point of time. This cannot be
assessed during contract negotiation of the equipment, and (b) payment of
royalty for making additional equipment/platform. The requirement of additional
numbers, required in future, if any, of equipment/ platform cannot be foreseen at
the time of signing the contract.
 In this context, the following points need to be considered:-
(i) In any acquisition case vendors assign costs to each and every input of
RFP to arrive at a final cost, which has to be kept valid till 18 months from
the date of offer. Moreover, after conclusion of Contract, vendors are
obliged under option clause, to provide fresh quantity of equipment at the
earlier contracted cost, for next one or two years, as the case may be.
(ii) Upgrades/further modifications, which are not known to buyer at the time
of contract negotiation, and having a provision in the contract to provide it
free of cost by vendors, would compel vendor to hike its initial proposal.
There would be many cases where ultimately upgrades may not be of any
importance to Service.
(iii) It would be better to procure upgrades/modified equipment or part thereof
at a price later which can be justified rather than being an unknown figure
at the time of main contract.
In view of the above considerations, automatic transfer of upgraded
technology without the liability of additional royalty payment has not been
included in the Defence Procurement Procedure-2008.”
3.58 In reply to a question on sharing of technology, design and other related
information transferred from the vendor of foreign countries with
DRDO/Ordnance Factories/DPSUs and Private Sector, the Ministry furnished the
following information:-
“Provisions for sharing of technology, design and other related information with
DRDO/Ordnance Factories/DPSUs exists in the Defence Procurement
Procedure under ‘Buy and Make’ decision, such transfer of technology etc. can
take place from a foreign vendor to private industry or a Joint Venture also.  Para
19 of DPP-2008 provides that Production Agency for ToT could be selected from
any Public/Private firms including a Joint Venture.
 Field trials are the most important stage of procurement procedure.  While
all efforts are made to curtail the delay, field trial can not be substituted by other
methods in many cases.  However, provision for trials by computer simulation
exists in the Defence Procurement Procedure (Para 38 of DPP-2008 – Page 12).
Further, wherever necessary, field trials are allowed to be conducted at vendor’s
site on specific approval of the competent authority.
 In view of the provisions under Para 14 of DPP-2008 relating to
formulation of SQRs  and the requisite expertise available with Services, no
specific provision has been made in DPP-2008 to avail the services of private
consultant/experts in finalizing SQRs.”
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

42
Level Playing Field
3.59 On the issue of inherent benefit given to DPSUs and Ordnance Factories
in the field of defence production and on the demand of private sector for level
playing field to participate in defence production, the Ministry stated:
“The long standing demand of Indian private sector to provide a level
playing to them vis-a-vis foreign suppliers in the area of defence
procurement has since been addressed in the Defence Procurement
Procedure - 2006 and Defence Procurement Manual - 2006.”
3.60 The Ministry further elaborated on this issue as under:
“The long standing demand of the private sector projected through the
Confederation of Indian Industry (CIl) was to provide a level playing field
for Indian industry and foreign industry. It was recommended that the price
comparison between a foreign vendor and an Indian company should be
based in respect to a foreign company and custom duty should be added
to the price or Indian companies should be evaluated on factory price
(excluding excise duty and sales tax). With a view to neutralize the impact
of taxes and duties payable by Indian Industry while carrying out
evaluation of bids to determine L 1 vendor without making any changes in
the tax structure, the following decisions have been taken and
incorporated in the Defence Procurement Procedure - 2006 and Defence
Procurement Manual - 2006:
(i) In case of foreign supplier, the basic cost (CIF) quoted by him
should be the basis for the purpose of comparison of various
tenders.
(ii) In case of indigenous suppliers, Excise duty on fully formed
equipment be offloaded.
(iii) Ignore sales tax and other local levies, i.e., Octroi, entry tax etc. in
case of indigenous suppliers including Defence PSUs/OFs.
(iv) The payment conditions should be similar for domestic. Private
suppliers, Defence PSUs/Ordnance Factories and the foreign
suppliers.
DPSUs and OFB have also been requested to ensure that they follow
the above approach and principles while making purchases of items (other
than raw materials, components, assemblies, sub-assemblies, etc.,) for
their own production through the public and private sector as well as
through foreign sources, by incorporating the same in the tenders before
issue.”
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

43
3.61 In the context of level playing field, CII submitted the following:
“Nomination of Production Agencies
Unlike any other industry, defence is a monopsony - a single buyer
market. The Ministry of Defence, Government of India, is thus not only the
market definer but it is also the only buyer, or the market. The defence
forces must get the best of equipment that is operationally reliable during
times of emergency. It is therefore imperative that no distinction be made
between the private sector and public sector while procuring defence
equipment. In addition to ensuring quality, there is also a need to
encourage private players to be more involved in meeting the national
requirements. Nomination is apparently effective in two forms. First is
nomination for production. For indigenous manufacture and production,
DPSUsI OFs are nominated for ships, offshore patrol vessels, radars,
sonars, small arms, field guns etc. The second is the case of nomination
for TOT where a foreign supplier is specifically asked to partner with a
DPSU. This effectively keeps out private players. It is essential that this
practice of nominating the DPSUs / OFs must be done way with. MOD
must give equal opportunity to Indian private sector companies including
RURs to participate in the design, development and production of defence
equipment. The Department of Defence Production, which presently looks
after the Public Sector Industry, should also be responsible for the private
sector units involved in defence production. The Department could thus be
renamed as the Department of Defence Industry having specific targets
for indigenous defence production.
Discrepancies in Tax Structure
• DPSUs enjoy the benefit for Customs and Excise duty exemption
on inputs to them as well as tier 2 vendors. This advantage is not
available to private defence industry when competing with DPSUs.
Difference in Payment Terms
• Payments for Indian vendors should also be permitted through
Letter of Credit.
• Foreign exchange rate variation (FERV) is permitted to DPSUs but
is not clearly specified for the private industry. FERV risk coverage
is a must for private sector also as it can mean over pricing (non-
competitive bids) in current scenario of strengthening Rupee. Also
DPP 2006 has different payment terms for DPSUs and private
industries. It is also recommended that progressive payments may
be considered for long duration projects of high value. Corporate
bonds are not accepted by private industries as collateral for
advances, performance bonds and warranty bonds. Financing
costs and Bank Guarantee costs thus add to the costs that private
sector has to bear.”
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

44
3.62 The views of FICCI on this aspect as furnished to the Committee, are as
follows:-
“While the intent of DPP 2006 is to provide a "Level-Playing Field" to the
private sector engaged in defence production, this has still not been
operationalised. The following examples are mentioned below:
• For evaluation of commercial proposals, as mentioned in DPP 2006 , the
clause is applicable only to "BUY (Global)" category of tenders. This is not
applicable to either BUY Indian or "BUY & MAKE" and under "MAKE",
neither the Hi-tech MAKE or "BUY Indian" categories. DPP 2006 also
does not cover the Strategic "MAKE" part of Procurement. Different DRDO
labs continue to provide DPSUs with tax (Excise, Customs, Octroi and
other local taxes) benefits as they continue to compare for L1 purposes all
tax and duties applicable. Also within MoD procurement, the 'Revenue
Procurement' is not covered under the level playing guidelines. The
accreditation of RURs should logically mean that the private industry
partners would also be provided exemptions in Foreign Exchange Rate
Variation (FERV), duties and applicable taxes, on the same lines as being
done for the DPSUs, and this should be clearly laid down in the acquisition
policy.
• FICCI suggests that for evaluation of commercial proposals, as mentioned
in DPP2006 may be extended to all categories of procurement i.e. "Buy
Indian", "Buy Global", "Buy & Make", Strategic Make, Hi-tech Make and
mature systems. It should also be extended to all revenue purchases.
• For fully formed items used in defence, no excise duty is applicable.
However, for its sub-systems, excise duty, service tax/CST are applicable
which add to the bidders input cost. These costs will be indicated by the
bidder and not taken into L1 calculations. Therefore, FICCI suggests
reimbursements of these duties to be upon proof of payment by the
vendor at the time of supplies.
• Within DPP 2006 'level-playing field' is further compromised by providing
DPSUs with MOU based payment terms and exchange variation clause.
Operationally, this is even extended to "Global Buy" tenders where level
playing field on payment terms has been assured but not implemented in
tender evaluation. The Contract Negotiation Committee (CNC) considers
the MoU with DPSUs as the primary document and same terms are not
extended to Private Industry participating in a "Global Buy" tender.
• The payment terms for DPSUs are as per the latest MoU in vogue.
However, in case of Indigenous vendors 90% payment is to be made, on
proof of dispatch and inspection note issued by the inspection agency.
The ultimate consignee pays Balance 10% on receipt of goods. There is
no provision for Stage Payments. These terms of payment may be
acceptable for the commodities such as uniform, shoes, bullet proof
jackets, etc but cannot be applied for Engineered-to-Order (ETO) items.
Stage payments are industry norms for the ETO items even for the foreign
vendors. It is, therefore, requested that provision for Stage Payments be
included, especially for large value and long cycle projects and private
sector should not be expected to fund such projects.
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

45
Therefore, FICCI would like to suggest the following:
• The RUR should be treated 'at-par' with the defense PSUs! OFs for all purposes
including ToT from the foreign suppliers and thus provide a much-awaited 'level-
playing field' to Indian Industry.
• There needs to be parity between DPSUs and RURs also on Risk coverage
against advance and progress payments (Corporate bonds for DPSUs against
Bank Guarantees from corporates as well as FERV).
• Acquisitions covered under the "Buy Indian" decision must have a minimum of
30% Indigenous content, if the systems are being integrated by an Indian vendor.
In case this provision of DPP is not followed, it can give an opportunity for the
foreign vendor to use an Indian company as its front for marketing its product and
avoid offset implications. Such instances have been observed in some recent
cases.
• The nomination of DPSUs/OFs to be discontinued for defense projects or else,
RURs should also be considered for the nomination at par with the DPSUs/OFs.
• RURs should also be considered for the Purchase preference on the same lines
as that for the DPSUs, if applicable. This is in the interest that RURs are to
"Invest" in development programs (20% investment by RUR).
• The norms for FDI should also apply to RURs at par with those for the DPSUs. (It
is understood that the dilution of FDI norms are being considered for DPSUs).
•  Selection of Companies for Issue of RFI IRFP: It is observed that two extreme
norms are being followed for issue of the RFI IRFP for large Defence equipment
and projects. On the one hand, the nomination of DPSU I PSU continues for the
defence procurement. On the other hand, the RFP I RFI for large Defence
equipment and projects are being issued to every one including small companies
having no track record, technical abilities and dubious financial capabilities to
execute the project or sustain life cycle support. These small companies can at
best be fronts to foreign technology being imported by back door. Although for
the Make Hi-Tech category, a stipulation is made that Indian Industry Partner is
restricted to RUR or Indian Industry that should meet the criteria as per the
guidelines of selection of RUR. No Criteria has been stipulated for Buy Indian
categorization either under the Buy category or under the Make category.
Ministry of Defence (Finance) should evolve the guidelines for short-listing of
companies based on their technical as well as financial capabilities. This should
be in line with the RUR criteria and must include a need for defence license or
Defence Product License or application made for the concerned defence
production license before the party is issued an RFI I RFP for the product.
Currently such decisions are being taken by Technical Managers at their
discretions without any regards to Project execution capability. The selected firm
should have the ability to not only execute the project but also be able to sustain
the supplied products in terms of Technology, Finance and Maintenance Support
throughout the life of the product. e.g. a company with the financial turnover say
10 crore cannot be expected to execute a project valued at 500 crore or more.
The pre-qualification of the firms in terms of technical and financial capability
should become a criteria for issue of RFPI RFI. In case a firm meets these
criteria, then the lack of track record should not become a hindrance in issuing
the RFI / RFP provided the company apply for defence production licenses and
submits proof before the RFI/ RFP is issued.
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

46
Evaluation Procedure for the Bids : The existing procedure for evaluating the
Bids based purely on L1 criteria needs to be reviewed. In case of complex
projects, requiring high level of technical competence for execution of the
project, the Bids should be evaluated for technical capability of the vendor
and graded as T1, T2 etc. in addition to the price quoted (L1, L2 etc.). The
winner for the contract should be decided by a combination of T1 and L1. The
criteria for allocating the weightage for the Price and Technology aspects of
the Bid should be decided based on the technical complexity of the project
and declared along with the RFP. Such criteria must include the life cycle cost
element and must be spelt out in a transparent manner in the RFP based on
global practices and also practices in other Indian departments like Telecom,
Railways, and ISRO etc, industry would be keen to engage in a
comprehensive review with MoD.”
 Financial assistance to Small and Medium Enterprises (SMEs)
3.63 The Ministry of Defence have informed that the Government recognizes
that some of the SMEs have highly trained personnel and also the potential to
take up the development and design work.  In order to facilitate this,  the
Government has decided to formulate a Scheme for providing financial
assistance to the SMEs to take up design and development work in defence
production.  The Scheme is likely to be made operational shortly.
3.64 When asked about the status of scheme for providing financial assistance
to the SMEs to take up design and development work in Defence production, the
Ministry stated that the scheme is being formulated in consultation with Defence
Finance and Ministry of Finance.
3.65 The following suggestions have been made before the Committee by CII
for promoting participation of SMEs:
“(i) Setting up a ‘Defence Technology Product Development Fund’ to
 be used for providing fund to SMEs to carry out design and
 development work.
(ii) Designing of a scheme to provide institutional support to the SMEs
 to reduce transaction costs while tendering.
(iii) Framework for ‘RURs’ to promote SMEs on transparent basis.”
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

47
3.66 On the issue of participation of SMEs in defence production, a
representative of CII stated during evidence as under:
“I represent SMEs and want to tell the Committee that we will supply sub-
systems and systems to the larger companies. Some times we will supply
directly. It is not true that due to offset clause SME sector will not be able
to participate.  To manufacture defence equipment, they can participate
irrespective of size. The only eligibility criteria is that foreign direct
investment should not be more than 26 per cent. That is, as of now, the
eligibility criteria.”
Raksha Udyog Ratnas (RURs)
3.67 In reply to a question Raksha Udyog Ratnas (RURs), the Ministry
informed as under:
“A Selection Committee has been constituted on 9 th May 2006 for
selection/identification of Indian industries of proven excellence, which are
capable of contributing in defence production, depending upon their technical,
managerial and financial strength. Such industries will be named as ‘Raksha
Udyog Ratnas (RURs)’ and encouraged to contribute in defence production
and assume the role of main system integrators of large weapon systems and
producers of platforms required by the Defence Forces. The guidelines for
selection of RURs were also notified. There has been a very good response
from the industry considering the number of applications received for
selection as ‘RURs’. The Selection Committee shall give its recommendations
by 31 st March 2007 for consideration and acceptance of the Defence
Acquisition Council.”
3.68 The observations of Kelkar Committee in Part-I of their report ‘Towards
Strengthening Self Reliance in Defence Preparedness’ are as under:
“(i) The participation of the Indian Industry including private sector should
be at the level of design, development and production of major weapon
systems and platforms.
(ii) Such participation would be by firms of proven excellence and having
adequate technical, managerial and financial strength.
(iii) For the identification of such firms, public and private barring Defence
Public Sector Undertakings, to be known as ‘Raksha Udyog Ratna’
(RUR)/’Champions’, the Committee recommends:
(a) The identification is to be done through a high level Committee
supported technically by an organization like Engineers India
Limited and secretarially supported by the Department of
Defence Production.
(b) The criteria of identification should be transparent and should
involve the assessment of the company/industry for their
technical, financial, managerial and R&D capabilities.
(c) Once accredited RURs/Champions should be treated at par
with Defence Public Sector Undertakings.”
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

48
3.69 Dr. Vijay Kelkar stated during evidence as follows:
“So, we want to be sure that the only private sector, as they say, which is
the ‘top the class’ or champion or the best in the class, should be only
inducted in defence production. So, we have recommended the creation
of, what do you call, Raksha Udyog Ratna, that will be the best among the
best of the Indian companies which will be accredited and will become the
supplier for the Indian defence forces. So, for awarding Raksha Udyog
Ratna, there would be an independent committee, which will look into the
company’s capabilities, its track record, its R&D record, its financial
viability, etc. because armed forces will need a reliable supplier; it should
not be a fly by night one so, it has to be a company which had been there
for at least five years, with profit making, etc., minimum size should be
there; there should be good administrative capabilities. It will only become
Raksha Udyog Ratna. Once it is accepted as that, then they will be treated
on a par with the DPSU and there will be a level playing field, which will
promote competition. The one lesson that I learnt with whatever little work
that I had done in the Government is this: the most important is
competition for both the Government and the customer. When I was in the
Ministry of Petroleum, I introduced the NELP, which promoted competition
for ONGC; consequently, last five years, we have found more oil and gas
in this country than the last 25 years because there is competition;
everybody is doing better; ONGC is doing better and so is private sector.
The same concept will come once the Raksha Udyog Ratna comes and
competes with other PSUs and the benefits will come to this country and
to the purchasers, the Armed Forces. So, the second thing is the creation
of Raksha Udyog Ratna; the first is the long-term plan; second is the
participation of private sector in this process; third is creation of
champions or well-run Indian companies to participate in defence
production, that we call, Raksha Udyog Ratna.”
 3.70 In reply to a question regarding Raksha Udyog Ratna, CII submitted in
their written note as follows:
“A major recommendation of the Kelkar Committee that has been announced
as part of DPP 2006, as policy, but yet to be implemented, is on the RURs.
There is a need to identify firms with proven excellence that are capable of
contributing, depending on their technical, managerial and financial strengths
in order to ensure effective participation by the industry, both public and
private, in product development and production.
 In conformity with the recommendations of the Dr. Vijay Kelkar
Committee, the Ministry of Defence constituted a Selection Committee for
identification of RURs under the Chairmanship of Dr. Prabir Sengupta, IAS,
Former Director, Indian Institute of Foreign Trade and Secretary, Defence
Production and Commerce. This Selection Committee has already submitted
its recommendations to the Government. RURs that were to be effective by
31 March 2007 are yet to be announced by the Government. This is causing
a delay in the integration of the Indian private sector in indigenous defence
production.”
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

49
3.71 On the role of SMEs in providing defence systems and sub-systems, a
representative stated during evidence as under:
“…No large company makes any defence system by itself. A defence
system is a system of systems. It has a number of sub-systems, it has a
number of assemblies which go into it. In 90 per cent cases these
assemblies are actually made by the small and medium industries. We
generally put them together and do the integration activity. So, the
moment we become RURs the biggest benefit will actually pass on to
small and medium enterprises on whom we depend and whose business
will go manifold while we start working.”
3.72 In reply to a question on RURs, the representative of CII stated as under:
“The first one is, Raksha Udyog Ratnas, although promised and date and
time was given for their announcement, this has not happened.  This is
causing a certain amount of anxiety amongst the people who have applied
for it and I think it is also giving us a feeling that the great opportunity of
offsets which the Government has generated as part of their policy for
procurement of Defence equipment might also find this coming a little
unstuck. It is our humble opinion that RURs should be announced as soon
as the Government think it is possible.  We believe that it should be done
as soon as it can.  As you are aware, Sir, the CII is doing Defence
expositions along with the Ministry of Defence in the month of February.
The Who is Who in the world in the manufacturing of Defence equipment
is coming to India.  If by that time RURs are announced it will be a big step
forward for marriage making between those who will support the offset
clauses because 30- 50 per cent offset is required to be made in India by
the Indian industry which is both capable and rearing to do something
constructive in support of country’s defence requirement.
3.73 In this context, another representative of CII stated as under:
“Sir, licences have been issued to us.  The RUR status is not there.  Only
when the RUR status comes then we will be treated at par with PSUs.
This is what the General has mentioned.  This is an important part
because until we get the RUR status, we will not be treated at par.  So,
licences have been given.  It is not that licences have not been given.
Before giving licence, the Ministry do look at the valuation of the company,
whether you have the potential, whether you have capability and then
licences have been given.  Sir, all of you have given the policy directive.
Now the operationalisation of that policy is an issue.  This is what we are
trying to get across.”
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

50
3.74 During oral evidence, the Committee desired to know the views of Armed
Forces on the issue of RURs. The representative of the Army deposed as under:
“There has been a talk of the Armed Forces being in favour of importing
equipment at their cost. Sir, we tried our best to buy what is indigenised
but we cannot wait endlessly. We waited many, many years for air
defence systems, for tanks. Ultimately, we had to go in for import. So,
when the security of the country is at stake, we will be answerable and not
the producers…..
If you want the domestic industry to participate…… get them
declared as the RURs immediately.”
Defence Production through Public Private Partnership
3.75 Explaining the role of the private sector in Defence production in the
country, the Ministry of Defence submitted the following information:-
“After independence, owing to the circumstances then prevailing, the
Government consciously restricted defence production to the public
sector.  However, the private sector has been traditionally involved in
supplying raw materials, semi-finished products, parts and components,
sub-assemblies and sub-systems etc. to Defence PSUs and Ordnance
Factories.  Out of total purchase of Rs. 12931 crore made by the Defence
PSUs during 2006-07, approximately Rs. 2900 crore are obtained from the
private sector including the  SSI sector.  Similarly, outsourcing to the
private sector including SSI sector by Ordnance Factories during the year
2006-07 was to the extent of Rs. 2118 crore.”
3.76 On the aspect of public-private partnership in the Defence production, the
Ministry of Defence furnished the following information:-
“There are several instances of Defence PSUs having forged alliances or
partnerships with the private sector. HAL is also exploring ways to work in
partnership with private companies in the areas of software development,
engineering solutions and design support to tap the export market and
also to support indigenous requirement. MOUs have been signed with
Infosys, Tata Consultancy Systems, Satyam Computers.
 As a result of several new policy initiatives taken by the
Government, a congenial atmosphere has been created for public-private
partnership in defence production. There is now a great scope for forging
alliances between public and private sector in the strategic defence sector.
As indicated above, there is a provision in the ‘Make’ procedure for
execution of the projects categorized as ‘Make’ also through the consortia.
The development of new projects by public and private sector through
formation of consortiums or joint ventures could now be considered by the
Government.”
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

51
3.77 In reply to a question about the steps taken to increase participation of
private sector, the Ministry of Defence in their note stated as under:
“The following provisions have been made in DPP-06 to encourage joint
venture/collaboration with the private sector:-
a) Cases where ToT is being sought from appropriate Production Agency
(PA) is approved by the Defence Acquisition Council (DAC). The PA is
selected from any of the public/private firms based on inputs from Department
of Defence Production (DDP). In cases where the response to the  Request
for Proposal(RFP) is received from a joint venture company, assessment of
absorption of key technologies as required under the ToT is carried out by a
committee constituted by DDP a per Para 19 of DPP-06.
b) The provisions of ToT to an Indian Public/Private firm for provision
Maintenance Infrastructure for ‘Buy” category cases where equipment is
being brought from foreign vendors has been provided in Para 28 of DPP-06.
c) The criteria for selection of Champions of Industry in the Private
Sector named as Raksha Udyog Ratnas (RURs) have been laid down in Para
22, Chapter-II of DPP-06.
d) High technology Complex Systems as per ‘Make’ procedure of DPP-
06 would be undertaken by RURs/Indian Industry/DPSUs/ OFB/Consortia on
a level playing field as per Para 3© of Chapter –II of DPP-06.
In accordance with the above provisions the Army has involved the private
sector in the production of equipment like Pinaka system.”
 3.78 On the issue of need of Public Private Partnership, Dr. Vijay  Kelkar stated
during oral evidence as under:
“We studied the experience of ISRO; ISRO is the most successful
example of how Indian industry participates in hi-tech area; just like Army,
they also wanted that; so, ISRO participated in that and created
infrastructure where large amount of requirement of space industry is
done by our own companies. So, let us follow the ISRO model. What is
ISRO model? First they made available their own in-house technology to
Indian industry. Second, they gave long-term commitments to Indian
industry. Third, throughout the whole process, they hold Industry’s hands
and guide them to what they want. So, there is holding of hands between
the buyer and the producer. So, they work as a team. Consequently, we
have this now an Indian space industry. Incidentally, there is a study made
by Prof. U. Shankar of the Madras School of Economics which showed
that the Indian Space industry is as efficient as any other in the world. In
fact, we are now sending commercial satellites. This happened with ISRO.
The rates are competitive; our costs are the lowest in the world today.
ISRO had done this and they have a long-term framework. This is what we
have recommended for the defence. There is a body in this country which
has shown success and you can do it. So, let us follow the ISRO model for
defence industry where we can reduce the imports, have domestic
capabilities which are efficient and produce at lowest possible cost. So, we
looked at the three models – ISRO, Atomic Energy and ONGC; and we
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

52
have given what we have learnt from each of the successful models for
defence production. For instance, ONGC runs  a training programme. So,
we have recommended that the Institute of Defence Management,
Hyderabad should run specialized training programme for defence officers
on purchase procedures. So, from Atomic Energy Commission, we have
given   lessons; from space, we have taken lessons; all the hi-tech
industries in which our own companies have shown that we can do it, we
have looked at it. We have successful experience; and so, let us look at
this.  From them, we can learn.”
3.79 On the need for users’ participation in forming of policy, the representative
from FICCI submitted during oral evidence as under:
“Defence industry in this country is coming out.  Unlike any other industry,
the domain knowledge does not exist in the industry.  One cannot do
market research about this industry.  Unless and until there is a
mechanism in which the user directly is participating; right now even in the
make-procedure, there is an 80:20 clause which allows 80 per cent
funding coming from the Government and 20 per cent from the private
sector.  But the user directly is missing there.  If he is missing, he can
change his specification and his mind.  If he is there, he can tell us what
wrong we are doing.  We need to operationalise this part of the policy.”
3.80 On the role of private sector in defence production, the representative
from CII stated as under:
“So, the industry is trying to now look at linkages between science,
technology and products and now you are seeing a whole range of
products coming out from indigenous technology.   Therefore, there is a
major mindset change.  The industry is willing to invest money and the
industry is willing to look at technology and that to me is the key when you
look at the Defence requirement as we move into future.  To my mind, the
private sector is now reaching a point where when we talk about this
synergy between private and public sector, private sector can play a very
significant role in the coming years.   The important thing for me is to try
and imagine as to what is going to happen.   If you kindly see, we were
trying to look at roughly ten years from now as to what is going to happen.
If you look at our requirements today it may be about Rs. 38,000 to Rs.
40,000 crore a year and if you look at the production in the country, may
be it is about Rs. 18,000 to Rs. 20,000 crore and the balance we are
importing.   Now, if you just look even at ten per cent to 11 per cent growth
a year, it is not very significant.
You are looking at a requirement running into, at least, Rs.150,000
crore. So, when you are looking at a requirement of ten years from now  at
Rs.150,000 crore, we need to produce in the country at least to the extent
of Rs.80,000 crore from the present level. We are looking at a huge
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

53
requirement for production alone within the country.  If you add to this, a
very clear indication is coming out that the world is looking at India with its
technology, the way it is evolving and the capabilities and the skills that
exist. With this, another Rs.20,000 crore worth of export is possible ten
years from now. You are looking at a possible size of Defence industry at
Rs.100,000 crore ten years from now. This is a huge shift from the prevent
level of Rs.18,000-20,000 crore. Here, we can clearly see not only the
public sector infrastructure, what we have built over the years but also we
can see the joint venture between the public and the private sector, the
synergy between the two which is the second pillar; and the third pillar
should be the private sector should evolve, in its own right, as a major
player in the coming years. So, the challenges that we see are massive.
There is a need to think big. There is a need to think about policy
initiatives. So, this can also become a huge pillar for growth as we move
on into the future.”
3.81 In the context of public-private partnership, the representative of
ASSOCHAM inter alia stated during evidence as under :
“I would like to make three points.  One is that on this issue of R&D, we
should look at the US model, which is a perfect example of PPP.  They
explicitly define that we want shoes to be developed for war with Kuwait.
Specifications are given by the Air Force that we want an aircraft of so and
so capabilities.   Then, they go to the people and say to them their project
possibilities and project estimates, the duration of time, etc.  Then the
Defence Procurement Committee goes and listens to them.  They talk to
them and then decide as to who should manufacture the goods.  The
whole money is paid by the US Defence to these contractors.  In this
connection, there is a very good question which came from you side, i.e.,
as to how much money should be given to research. I think there is no
particular figure as to how much money should be given to research.  You
have to ask the industry to give you their offer.  I have been associated
with this industry for a fairly long time.  It is not the indigenous production,
but it is the technology import that we are talking about.  Our Air Force are
fully justified in saying that they do not want to develop anything and take
20 years in developing. LCA is the perfect example of it.  Why not buy that
technology on which others have spent millions of dollars and indigenize it
and transfer it to our country and create jobs.  There comes the problem
which you should consider.”
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

54
3.82 In reply to another related question, the representative of CII stated as
under:
“The next point is fear of competition.  The basis of growth is competition.
So, if the pubic sector is going to shy itself from competition, then there is
going to be no growth.   Then the question of national security is very
important.    The ability to design, produce and provide life cycle support to
platforms and associated equipment must be intrinsic to India’s capacity
by 2020.  If I am not part of the making, I will not be part of the
maintaining. If I am not part of the maintaining, I will be depending on
critical supplies as it has happened in Kargil or any other war where for
sea hawk helicopters, America told that they will not give components.
Helicopters were lying on one side although we bought them. We do not
want that to be repeated.  So, whether you allow us to be part of the
manufacturing, or the designing or the production or maintenance, they
will be a growth  of our capability including planning. Now, when we talk
about convergence technologies in place, imported equipment cannot be
entirely relied upon.  Today, technology is getting embedded into the
system. What information is getting passed on is not known. If you think
that you are the only person who knows about the e-mail you are sending,
you are mistaken.  Somebody else in the world knows what you are
sending, what you are receiving and what you are transacting, with whom
you are talking, etc. because the information is going out.  This is going to
happen in this technology. If you do not take our industry into the fold now,
not inclusive of the public sector but in partnership with the public sector,
both of us will not grow.  Our vision of 2020 will remain just a vision
regretfully but that is what is going to happen.  The question the industry
asking is: Are the foreign suppliers more sensitive to national security than
the Indian industry?”
3.83 On being enquired about the initiatives taken by Government for
encouraging private sector participation in defence production, the Ministry of
Defence in their written reply submitted the following:
“The Ministry has recently taken a number of initiatives in the direction of
fruitful Public-Private Partnership like provision of level playing field to
Indian industry vis-à-vis foreign suppliers, provision of ‘Offset’ clause in
DPP-2006, formation of JVs etc. Ministry would invite suggestions/
comments of Private industry in the areas of concern to them at various
interactions with the private sector and would make all efforts to address
them.”
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

55
3.84 On the question about the of the order of product being given to private
sector, a representative of CII further submitted the following before the
Committee:
“That does not mean that it is not happening.  Let me give some
examples. When Indian industry is doing mergers and acquisitions,
technology is coming to India.  For example, take M/s Corus.  Upto now,
Tata was producing steel for trucks and other things.  By Corus coming
into the Tatas, they are making aircraft steel.  It is available now. Should
that be bought from someone else now?  It should be bought from the
Tatas. The mergers and acquisitions process in which the Indian Industry
has got itself engaged in is nothing else but the transfer of high value
addition in terms of technology.   I do not know whether this group knows
and I do not know whether some people in this group know that most of
the fortune 500 companies have the design capital which is in India.  We
are designing for them.   It is going out by a route, coming back to us to be
bought by us at a higher price. The point is that are making is that the
talent that is available is so phenomenal that we need to get a playing
ground by which we can play this part. I will invest Rs. 100 only if I will get
a return from it and I should face the risk to fail and I am prepared to fail.
.If I succeed, and you will still say that you are going to buy from
Singapore, then why should I  make an investment?   I have no assurance
that you will be able to give it to me.   You can even say that if I succeed
you will be able to give me only five out of ten parts.  I will do that but I am
not getting it today.
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

56
CHAPTER-IV
RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT EFFORTS
4.1 The Department of Defence Research and Development is headed by a
Secretary, who is the Scientific Advisor to the Raksha Mantri. Its function is to
advise the Government on scientific aspects of military equipment and logistics
and the formulation of research, design and development plans for equipment
required by the Services.
4.2 Replying to a question about provisions in DPP for indigenous R&D work
and development and production of parallel system, the Ministry in their written
note furnished in May, 2007 submitted as under:
“Based on the recommendations of the Standing Committee on Defence
and Kelkar Committee, the procedure for Indigenous Research, Design,
Development and Production of systems has been addressed under
'Make' category. The aim of the 'Make' procedure is to ensure Indigenous
Research, Design, Development and Production of capabilities sought by
the Armed Forces in prescribed timeframe while optimally utilizing the
potential of Indian Industry. In addition, it would also achieve self-reliance
in Defence Equipment. The 'Make' procedure will cover all capital
acquisitions of High Technology Complex Systems and upgrades
undertaken by Indigenous Research, Design and Development. These
would be undertaken by Ordnance Factory Board (OFB), Defence Public
Undertakings (DPSUs) and Indian Industry/Raksha Udyog Ratna (RUR)/
Consortia on a level playing field on shared development cost. The major
issues addressed under the 'Make' procedure is indicated below :-
(a) The development process will comprise of fourteen stages including
SQRs, categorization, AON, constitution of Integrated Project
Management team, detailed project report and design and
development of Prototype.
(b) The Services Qualitative requirements (SQRs) would be broad based
and realistic. The PSQRs must express the Key Performance
Parameters i.e. Essential Parameters and Desirable Parameters. First
prototype should be able to meet the Key Performance Parameters i.e.
Essential Parameters. Subsequent upgrades/ development should
include Desirable Parameters.
(c) The feasibility study is to be carried out with the aim to identify the
projects which DRDO, DPSUs Indian Industry has the capability to
design and develop within the timeframe required by the respective
Services.
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

57
(d) The Categorisation and AON will be based on considerations such as:
estimated capital expenditure, sharing of development cost, likely
development agency (ies) and Minimum order quantity. After the AON
has been accorded by the DAC, an Integrated Project Management
Team (IPMT) would be constituted for each project. It would be a
multi-disciplinary team headed by a Service Officer, capable of using
methods and tools to analyze and assist in preparing a Detailed
Project Report (DPR) by short listed agencies. The IPMT would
monitor and report the progress of the Project as per the milestone laid
down. It would be an interface between the Service HQ, R&D
Organisation and Development agency.
(e) In case where the system configuration is complex, development lead
time is relatively long, technological risks are substantial, the Defence
Acquisition Council (DAC) would approve the sharing for the
development cost with the development agency (ies). The sharing cost
would normally be in the ratio of MoD (800/0) and the industry (200/0).
The IPMT would identify important milestones during the development
of prototypes. Funds would be released by MoD to the industry based
on the recommendations of the IPMT as per schedule of release of
payments linked to achievement of milestones.
(f) The design and development agencies would adopt the development
strategy which would be clearly indicated in the Detailed Project
Report.
(g) User Trials would be carried out in a time bound manner by the SHQ
in close consultation with IPMT to validate the performance of the
system against the parameters/specifications approved for the
development of prototype.
(h)  In case the project does not proceed according to the predetermined
milestones and there are time and cost overruns the project may be
foreclosed as per the exit criteria given in the DPR.”
4.3 Replying to a question about the areas where private industry could be
involved in R&D activities with the Ministry of Defence, CII in its written note
stated as under:
“The private industry has the capability and the capacity to take up R&D
projects under the following categories:
§ Ship Design Centre
§ Defence Electronics
§ C412RS areas
§ Weapon Systems
§ Platform Specific Machinery for Ships, Submarines, Battle Tanks
§ Electronic Warfare
§ Avionics and airborne systems
§ Sensors
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

58
  Private Sector industry would be willing to invest in R&D for
defence, however it would be in order to mention here that unlike the civil
sector, this sector of the industry depends very little on market forces.
This sector depends on Government support and policy directions. With
the current policy of NCNC (No. Cost, No Commitment), industry would be
reluctant to invest in defence R&D. Industry inputs must be obtained for
any acquisition through Defence Procurement Board and Defence
Acquisition Council.”
4.4 In this context, FICCI submitted the following:
“Currently, both SME’s and large private sector have been engaged in
Defence R&D with DRDO.  Pinaka, Samyukta Electronic Warfare
Systems, IGMDP, LCA, ALH, Brahmos, MBT Arjun etc. are some
successful examples of this co-operation. Currently, all technology
developed by DRDO goes for productionisation to DPSUs (Pinaka, the
only exception).  Once the RURs are in place, it is imperative that private
sector also becomes recipient of these technologies as Prime Contractor
and thus lead the Design to Engineering effort and subsequent life cycle
support leading to obsolescence management and upgrades.  This follows
the Defence Value chain and thus will come naturally to the industry and
was the basis of Kelkar Committee recommendation on Product Strategy.
Also, as far as strategic projects are involved, where investments
are high and where civilian advantages are limited, a DARPA like
approach of 100% financing in a partnership between Industry, DRDO and
User must be established.
The companies involved in R&D project with DRDOs must be given
assurance and long-term commitment for future orders.  Such a step
would being in established corporates to the Defence Industry fold and get
involved in (committed to) some serious Defence R&D with eye on
possible future gain subject to successful development of the
technology/product they are involved.  Private sector industry today has
Systems & Engineering capability for other products, which can be applies
to defence cutting down the indigenous development time and cost.
On par with DPSUs, RURs should also be included in the steering
committees and DRDO programme management boards.  This is to
ensure level paying field by avoiding undue advantage to the DPSU at
production stage by being part of the management board of large
programs.”
4.5 On developing Public Private Partnership in defence R&D, a
representative of CII submitted the following during evidence:
³Yes. ISRO is a prime example of how Aerospace and the public sector
have worked very closely with each other and in this field the country’s
progress has been very significant. But DRDO and the public sector do
not have the flexibility to form a consortium or join hands with the private
sector.”
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

59
4.6 On being enquired whether there was any policy prompting DRDO for not
going to form consortium etc., the representative of CII informed as under:
 “There is no policy initiative for DRDO to do it. They do not know how
they can enter into an economic partnership with the private sector. This
needs to be addressed. DRDO has its strengths. DRDO is the repository
of many of the developments. DRDO has the infrastructure to do which
otherwise is not available with the industry. There is a big gap between
design and development and actually realizing the product and this
engineering skill is available with the industry and not with the DRDO.
When you join in a partnership with a developer, with the engineering
skills of the industry, you actually realize the product.”
4.7 During oral evidence on the issue of private sector participation in defence
research, Secretary, R&D informed the Committee as under:
“As far as the funding of R&D into private sector is concerned, that is not
something new to us.  We have been doing it for the last 15 years.  The
problem is industry is able to handle fabrication and handle certain
assembly tasks and very few of them are in a position to handle total
design responsibility.  Over this period, there is improvement.  We have
already given instructions to the Project Chiefs that wherever outsourcing
is possible in an integrated manner, including design and that can still fit in
with the total system, they can go ahead and give such tasks.  Such tasks
have been given, for example in radar, some parts have been given to
L&T and some parts of radars are built by BEL.  This kind of enhancement
is happening.  It is not possible to lay them down.  It is a greater inflow in
terms of funding……What we have done is that there are research boards
available in certain areas like, Aeronautics Research Board, Naval
Science and Material Research Board, etc.  Here, those laboratories and
in the labs in the universities which are in a position to handle, we directly
fund them.  But there is a committee which looks into the worthiness of the
project.  Then, we are also willing to fund industries, which are registered
with the Department of Scientific and Industrial Research.  They also can
be funded for this kind of R&D through these boards.  Apart from this, we
have provisions, what is called Contracted Acquisition of Research
Services to the Laboratories, by which they acquire research services
from the university.  So, we can avail those services.”
4.8 On the funding of R&D to private sector, the representative of the Ministry
of Defence stated during evidence as under:
“In the make procedure, the Defence Ministry would finance 80 per cent of
the development cost which is there…. What has been done in the ‘make’
procedure is this.  We fund 80 per cent of the development cost.
Secondly, we also give them a minimum order quantity which would be
given to the private sector parties so that if we successfully develop the
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

60
prototype, then there will be minimum order quantity which will make it
worthwhile…..I would like to submit that It would be difficult for us to
expect the private sector to invest in fundamental research in Defence…..
 This is precisely the reason why we said that when we identify an
equipment which is to be made in India by the private sector then we
would fund 80 per cent of the development cost.
4.9 On investment made in R & D by private sector, a representative of CII
submitted the following before the Committee:
“When you ask what investment has been made in research and
development, it comes out of an understanding of two clear facts.  One is, if
I am to invest Rs. 100, at the end of the tunnel 20 years down the road, I
must get the value.  I may either fail for which I should be prepared.  But if I
succeed, this Rs. 100 will find a return.  Today there is no assurance. How
do you expect them to make an investment in research and development for
a defence product when I am not going to be nominated? ³
4.10 During oral evidence, the Secretary (DRDO) deposed before the
Committee as under:-
“Our policy is very clear.  We are willing to work with any company in
India. We are not drawing any distinction between private or public or
anybody.  All that we are interested in is this.  Certain conceptualisation of
design only we do.  Certain strengths we have inside the laboratory.  That
part we do.  In fact we are even asking whether it is BEL or a private
sector, if certain modules you can even get from abroad under the offset
or otherwise also under your own FDI and those arrangements, you can
exploit that also.”
4.11 He further added:
“Even in the case of earlier one, it is yet to get fully operationalised.  There is an
exclusive provision of the private sector to be funded for what we call
development leading to acquisition.  It is like DRDO is doing.  For example,
DRDO, today, is not doing any work on armoured wheeled vehicle of four by four
or six by six.  We are not doing it but we have told to Mahendra or Ashok Leyland
or whoever it is that we will give you this much free.  As a Scientific adviser, I
have taken this decision.  DRDO will only focus on certain special trials for
missiles and things like that, and those for which reasonable design capability
exists in India in terms of design of axles, wheels, brakes and engine appropriate
modified.  We are even willing share it.  There are structural aspects of how to
build armour design.
Take the example of Mahendra.  Let me just give you an illustration.  If Mahendra
feel that for that engine, let us say, rehashed for a desert application, then that
will be funded as a part of 80:20.  It is only to bring a commitment from the
industry that this 20 per cent is being asked.”
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

61
4.12 As regards private sector participation in Defence R&D, the representative
of IDS during the oral evidence stated as under:
“In the past, DRDO used to take on most of the R&D projects.  The new
procedure enjoins upon them to go for strategic systems which others
cannot make normally and which involves sensitive technology research.
All other areas are open to research for private sector in which the
percentage is 80 per cent by Government and 20 per cent  by the private
company whichever is taking up that R&D project.  Where has this
process stuck?  This process has stuck at my level because what we are
doing is, we have now taken up the Eleventh Plan.  We have involved the
DRDO and the Services to see what is it that falls under the category of
sensitive systems which DRDO will do.  The balance have been identified.
We are in the process of strengthening the headquarters because now,
the responsibility enjoins.  Therefore, every system that we have to offload
to the private sector, we have to do the feasibility study.  Whether this
actually can be made, etc. involves officers to sit with the industry, take
their capabilities on board which are as yet unknown in the defence field
and then based on the feasibility study, offload the research. Also based
on the feasibility study, we are supposed to produce the project
management team which is also part of our strengthening who will the
oversee the research project to be offloaded so that we have a timeline
process of that R&D.”
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

62
PART-II
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
1. The defence requirements of the country are presently met through
imports as well as indigenous production both in public and private sector.
According to the Ministry of Defence, it is the policy of the Government to
encourage indigenisation in the defence production and various initiatives
have been taken in the recent past for promoting indigenisation and
achieving self-reliance in the defence sector.  The Committee’s
examination of the statistical data furnished to them, however, reveals that
the extent of import content in production of various defence equipment by
public sector defence production units continues to be substantially high.
Undoubtedly, there is still heavy dependence on foreign suppliers and the
goal of achieving self-reliance in such an important area as defence
remains elusive despite a well-established network of the defence
industries in the country. In the light of the rapidly changing global security
environment and its implications on the national interests, the Committee
strongly feel that the Ministry of Defence should expeditiously
conceptualise the realities of the situation and contemplate concrete and
result oriented steps from time to time to harness and integrate the vast
potential of the increasing technical and manufacturing capabilities of both
public and private sector industries in the country so as to minimise the
dependence on foreign sources for defence procurement.  The Committee
have dealt with some of the important aspects related to the subject in
succeeding paragraphs of this Report.
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

63
Extent of Indigenisation
2. The Committee are constrained to observe that no scientific system
has been put in place by the Ministry of  Defence to assess the exact level
of indigenisation achieved by defence production units in the country.  In
fact, the statistical information on extent of Indigenisation furnished to the
Committee fail to reflect true picture as some of these figures admittedly,
do not include the quantum of import content utilised in products
manufactured by public sector units.  The Committee find it distressing
that while one representative of the Ministry of Defence claimed during
evidence that the share of indigenously produced items in defence
production was about 77 per cent in 2006-07, the Defence Secretary was
candid enough to admit that only 30 to 35 per cent of defence expenditure
on equipment was met from domestic manufacturers.  Undoubtedly, the
quantum of financial outgo to the foreign and indigenous sources for
procurement of defence equipment continues to be the primary criterion
for evaluating the level of indigenisation in defence sector in the country.
The Committee wish to remind the Ministry that the main plank of
indigenisation in defence production is to reach higher levels of self-
reliance in development and production of state-of-the-art equipment and
weapon systems and this issue of national importance cannot be viewed in
a mere commercial and statistical jargon.  The Committee express their
strong displeasure over the manner in which this data is being maintained
and they desire the Ministry to apply necessary correctives in order to
ensure an objective and incisive analysis of the realities of the prevailing
situation.
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

64
Private Sector Participation
3. The Committee have been informed that there has been a paradigm
shift in the role of private sector in the field of indigenisation consequent
upon Government’s decision in May, 2001 to open defence industry for
Indian private sector participation upto 100 per cent with permissible limit
of 26 per cent in Foreign Direct Investment (FDI).  Although several new
policy initiatives have been taken for promoting public-private partnership
in defence production during the recent years, the statistics furnished to
the Committee reveal that the share of private sector including small scale
industries was a meager 23 per cent of the total purchases made by DPSUs
during 2006-07.  Undoubtedly, this situation is far from satisfactory
particularly when the Government aims at harnessing available expertise
and the capabilities of the private sector towards the total defence efforts
and search for self-reliance.   The Committee are of firm view that there is
an imperative need for exploring further ways and means for substantially
increasing the indigenous efforts in development and production of
defence equipment by active participation of both the public and the
private industries so as to achieve greater self-reliance.   They feel that this
task can be accomplished by taking timely and appropriate initiatives to
integrate the private industries of proven capabilities in the defence sector
without compromising national security.  Efforts are also required to be
directed towards earnest implementation of the policy framework
envisaged from time to time with a view to achieving the desired
objectives.
4. The Committee understand that a congenial atmosphere has been
created for public-private partnership in defence production as a result of
several new policy initiatives taken by the Government in the recent past.
They  feel that an enhanced participation by the private sector would not
only promote healthy competition between public and private sector but
would also give an impetus to industrial and economic growth in the
country.  While commending the Government’s decision to accept a
majority of recommendations made by Kelkar committee for encouraging
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

65
involvement of private sector in promoting defence capacity building and
high technology capabilities in defence sector, the Committee strongly feel
that a formal mechanism for sharing information on the futuristic
requirements and the perspective plans of the users should be put in place
in accordance with the practices adopted by certain  advanced countries.
The Committee feel convinced that such a mechanism would inspire the
confidence of the private industries and enable them to gear up their
infrastructure well in advance.  The Committee, therefore, desire that the
Ministry of  Defence should address this issue in the right perspective and
apprise them of the precise steps taken in this regard.
5. During their interaction with Dr. Vijay Kelkar, the Committee have
been informed that Indian Space Research Organisation (ISRO) embraced
the private sector industries in the country to meet their requirements in
the high-tech area and their experience has been fruitful both in terms of
efficiency and economy.  The Committee would, therefore, like the Ministry
of Defence to make an indepth study of the practices and procedures being
followed by ISRO with a view to exploring the feasibility of adopting the
same in defence sector.
Defence Procurement Procedure
6. The Committee note that the Ministry of Defence have introduced a
revised Defence Procurement Procedure (DPP) in July, 2008.  A scrutiny of
DPP-2008  reveals that while certain procedural changes have been introduced
with a view to strengthening the procurement framework and transparency in
operations, the procedure does not specifically mention about the
procurement policy of the Government for achieving self-reliance and
indigenisation in defence production.  The Committee are of strong view that
the policy initiatives taken by the Government in the recent past for creating
public-private partnership and indigenous development in defence sector
should be suitably reflected in the defence procurement procedures by clearly
bringing out the specific provisions made therein to facilitate indigenously
developed products.   The Committee trust that the Ministry of Defence would
take appropriate steps in this regard.
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

66
Review of µMake¶ Category
7. The Committee note that the Kelkar committee on review of Defence
Procurement Procedure had recommended an integrated approach
involving Users, Ministry of  Defence and the Industry in the ‘Make’
procedure and the recommendations of the Kelkar committee have been
accepted by the government for implementation.  The Committee have
been informed that the procurement through indigenous development
would now be undertaken under three categories. While strategic and
security sensitive systems would be undertaken by DRDO and managed
through Defence R&D Board, the projects under high technology complex
systems would be undertaken by RURs/Indian Industry/DPSUs/OFB/
Consortia on a level playing field and this procedure would also be adopted
for all upgrades categorised as ‘Make’.  The projects under low technology
mature system would be categorised as ‘Buy Indian’ and must have a
minimum of 50 per cent indigenous content.  Considering the fact that the
`Make’ category incorporated in the Defence Procurement Procedure  way
back in 2006 has not yielded any tangible results despite the private
industries in the country having registered a significant growth in
indigenous capabilities in development and manufacture in the defence
sector,  the Committee feel that there is an urgent need to fine tune and
rationalise the procurement procedures under ’Make’ category so as to
achieve the goal of self-reliance in real sense.  The Committee therefore,
desire that an expert Committee should be constituted at the earliest to
review the existing procurement procedures under ‘Make’ category so that
the capabilities and expertise available with the defence industries in the
country can be gainfully utilized.
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

67
Field Trials
8. The Committee had observed in their Nineteenth Report (Fourteenth
Lok Sabha) that long evaluation trials by the Armed Forces even in case of
equipment produced indigenously has been one of the major causes for
delay in procurement of defence equipment. While acknowledging the need
for comprehensive evaluation of  the new equipment in different
conditions, the Committee wish to point out that the quality of indigenously
produced equipment should be conducted expeditiously so that the
manufacturer can make timely efforts in finding out solutions to the short
comings noticed during field trials and the goal of self-reliance is achieved
within shortest possible time.  The Committee, therefore, suggest that the
Ministry of Defence should consider procuring sufficient number of
prototypes of the indigenously produced defence equipment so that the
field trials can be conducted simultaneously in various terrains of the
country and inordinate delay in development and production of such
equipment could be avoided.  Similar measures should also be
contemplated for procurement of defence equipment from abroad.
Foreign Direct Investment (FDI)
9. During their examination of the subject, the representatives from
FICCI and ASSOCHAM have expressed the view that the present limit of 26
per cent FDI in defence sector needed to be enhanced to attract foreign
investors.  On the other hand, the Ministry of Defence have put forth the
plea that any increase in FDI level beyond 50 per cent would imply
management control with foreign investors and such ventures might fail to
deliver at critical junctures due to factors such as sanctions imposed by
foreign governments etc.  While giving due weightage to the numerous
benefits that would accrue to the industry and economy as a result of
increased in-flow of FDI, the Committee are of  the firm view  that the
possibility of increasing limit of FDI upto 49 per cent in defence sector
should be examined by the Government after keeping in view the fact that
national interest must reign supreme in defence related matters.
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

68
Offset Provision
10. The Committee note that an `off-set’ provision applicable to all
capital acquisitions effective from July, 2005 has been incorporated in the
Defence Procurement Procedures (DPP) which stipulates a minimum
required offset of 30 percent of the indicative cost of the acquisitions under
‘Buy(Global)’ category and 30 percent of the foreign exchange component
in ‘Buy and Make’ category in respect of acquisitions valued at Rs. 300
crore or more.  The Committee have been informed that although offset
obligations have to be discharged concurrently with the main contract, any
failure on this account attracts a meager penalty of 5 percent and other
action can also be initiated against the defaulting company in case of
consistent failure.  Strangely enough, extension of time for implementing
the offset obligation is also stated to be considered with specific order.
The Committee are in no doubt that such options leave limited scope with
the Government in strictly enforcing the requirements under offset
provision which ultimately proves detrimental to the national interests.
While certain changes are stated to have been made in DPP-2008 in view of
the requirement of foreign manufacturers to speed up offset
implementation over a period of time, the Committee would like to
emphasise that time limit for discharging liabilities under the offset
provision have to be made essence of the relevant contracts.  They,
therefore, desire that stringent and specific clauses should be incorporated
in the contracts for imposing heavy financial penalties at the rate of a
minimum of 15 per cent per annum  in all cases of default and no room is
left for any discretion in such matters.
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

69
Level playing Field
11. The Committee are fully conscious of the role being played by the
DPSUs and the Ordnance Factories in meeting the national security
requirements.  However, they are at the same time of the view that the
contribution being made by the private sector in defence production
cannot be marginalised by the Ministry of Defence in their capacity as the
sole buyer of military equipment.  Although the long standing demand of
private sector for providing a level playing field vis-à-vis foreign suppliers
is stated to have since been addressed in DPP-2006, the Committee have
been given to understand that there are several areas where distinction is
made between the private and public sector while procuring defence
equipment. These are, inter-alia,  (i) nomination for transfer of technology
where the foreign suppliers are specifically asked to collaborate with an
DPSU; (ii) discrepancy in tax structure for exemption of customs and
central excise duties as well as foreign exchange rate variation ; and (iii)
non-acceptance of corporate bonds as collateral etc.  The Committee
consider that these issues need urgent attention with a view to doing away
with discriminatory treatment so that the necessary thrust is provided to
private sector striving hard to augment indigenous defence production in
the country.  The Committee are of strong view that level playing field and
equal opportunities would not only promote healthy competition between
the public and private sector but would also result in cost effectiveness of
indigenously produced defence equipments.  The Committee expect the
Government to move in the right direction expeditiously.
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

70
Financial Assistance to SMEs
12. Having recognized the potential of some of the small and medium
enterprises (SMEs) in the country, the Government have decided to
formulate a scheme for providing financial assistance to these enterprises
to take up design and development work in the defence production.  The
Committee urge the Ministry of Defence to take care that the scheme is
finalised and implemented after due consultation with the agencies
concerned so that the potential of these enterprises is utilised to its
optimum level without any loss of time.  The Committee also desire that
some institutional arrangement in collaboration with DRDO and other
research organisation should be put in place to gainfully utilise the efforts
of these enterprises in promoting indigenous defence production.
Indigenisation of defence equipment
13. The Committee learn that certain equipment like night vision devices,
special clothing and mountaineering kits, etc. are being imported for the
use of defence service personnel deployed in high altitude areas. While
expressing their surprise over the continued import of such basic
equipment, the Committee feel that the Indian industries have also attained
capabilities in developing and manufacturing of such types of items. They
therefore, urge the Ministry to explore the feasibility of procuring such
items from the indigenous manufacturers within the country.
14. Considering the fact that armed forces personnel are being
increasingly deployed in counter-terrorist and counter-insurgency
operations, the Committee strongly feel that there is imperative need to
provide body protective gears to soldiers and also to use robots for
handling hazardous tasks like laying and retrieving of land mines so as to
protect the precious lives of trained soldiers. The Committee therefore,
desire that efforts should  be made to encourage indigenous development
and manufacture of  body protective gears and robots in active
participation of defence industries both in public and private sector. The
Committee would like to be apprised of the precise steps contemplated in
this regard.
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

71
Raksha Udyog Ratnas (RURs)
15. In pursuance of the Kelkar Committee’s recommendation, the
Government constituted a selection committee in May, 2006 for
identification of companies of proven excellence in development and
production of major weapon systems and platforms for being accorded the
status of Raksha Udyog Ratnas (RURs),.  Although this selection
committee was required to give its recommendations by 31 March, 2007 for
acceptance of the Defence Acquisition Council, the issue has been stated
to be still under deliberations.  In the absence of any plausible explanation
emanating from the Ministry of Defence in this regard, the Committee
express their  displeasure over the manner in which such important issues
are being allowed to linger on.  The Committee, therefore, strongly desire
that the Government should take expeditious steps to select and notify
RURs at the earliest so that the misgivings among the defence industries
are removed and they gear themselves up for effective participation  in the
national effort for self-reliance. The Committee also recommend that the
Ministry of Defence should also put in place a scientific system for
selection and notification of RURs from time to time in future.
Research and Development Efforts
16. The Committee have been given to understand that the new
procedures put in place enjoin upon DRDO to undertake research and
development in the areas where indigenous technologies may not be
available or may be cost exorbitant to develop by the Indian industry
because of their high research content.  The projects covered under `Make’
category would be undertaken by defence industries in public or private
sector or consortia where fundamental research is not required.  Keeping
in view these policy changes, the Committee would like to stress that
appropriate financial support systems must be put in place to promote
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

72
R&D both in public and private sector particularly for projects relating to
development of cutting-edge technologies.  The Committee also desire that
the Ministry of Defence should themselves take the onus of giving such
grants to the defence industries and the role of DRDO in such matters be
eliminated to the extent possible.
17. The Committee also wish to emphasise that innovative schemes for
promoting research and development activities in the defence sector have
to be devised by the Ministry of Defence to achieve an enhanced level of
self-reliance in this area. The Committee therefore, recommend that a
comprehensive plan of action should be formulated to recognize the
research and development work undertaken by the defence scientists / the
industry by extending them appropriate incentives  for different projects
and payment of royalty, etc.  The industry should also be assured of orders
in case of development of product within a given time frame in conformity
with the specific qualitative requirements of the users.
18. The Ministry of  Defence should also consider creation of a separate
head of account in their budget for grant of funds for R&D  activities
undertaken by the Defence scientists in the public and private industries in
the Defence Sector.
19. The Committee understand that the Government extend certain tax
concessions to the companies for expenditure incurred by them on
research activities related to the business. The Committee desire that in
order to ensure that such concessions achieve the objectives of
indigenisation in the defence areas in a timely manner, the companies
availing such benefits should be made to complete their research projects
related to business in these areas within a fixed time frame. They therefore,
urge the Ministry of Defence to move the right quarters for appropriate
action in this regard.
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

73
20. The Committee also feel that the changing technological and
industrial scenario in defence sector warrant an imperative need for
removal of different kinds of control regimes in the R&D area.   They are of
firm view that the R&D efforts being made by the private industry  keeping
pace with latest technological innovations in defence sector must be
encouraged and supplemented by the Government organisations
particularly when infusion of foreign technology in defence areas is leading
to huge capital outgo from the country with additional burden of heavy
dependency on such sources in future.   The Committee would like to be
apprised of the precise steps taken in this regard.
21. Since DRDO have a well-established and vast network of laboratories
spread over the country, feasibility of extending research facilities to
defence industries in private sector in DRDO laboratories should also be
examined in the interest of national
security.  The Committee trust that this issue will be considered by the
Ministry of Defence in proper perspective so that the R&D infrastructure
created in the country is put to optimum use.
Autonomy to DPSUs and Ordnance Factories
22. The Committee are of strong view that there is also an  imperative
need to improve the functioning of DPSUs and Ordnance Factories
Organisation by giving them more autonomy  so that the defence
infrastructure created in public sector is exploited to its full potential. In
order to achieve this objective, the Committee would like the Ministry of
Defence to consider the following suggestions:
(i) The DPSUs and Ordnance Factories should be given adequate
freedom in decision making and to enter in joint ventures with other
companies having proven competence in the defence sector.
(ii) DPSUs should be permitted to raise money through borrowings by
way of equity/bond/loan from the market so that they do not face
financial crunch for carrying out their expansion plans and for
investments in R&D activities.
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

74
(iii) The feasibility of reconstituting the Board of Directors of
DPSUs by nominating non-official Directors particularly those
having expertise in the area of specialization of respective
DPSUs should be examined in consultation with the
departments concerned.
(iv) After meeting their prime responsibility for production of
defence equipment, the DPSUs and Ordnance Factories
should be permitted to use their spare capacity if any, for
diversification in production with a view to optimally utilizing
the manpower available.
General
22. To sum up, the Committee wish to point out that the demand for
state-of-the-art weapon systems is poised to take a quantum leap in future
and any let-up at this stage in the implementation of Government’s policy
of achieving self-reliance through national efforts would only result in
heavy dependence on foreign sources.  They also feel that the present
global scenario of recessionary economic trends may also make it’s mark
on our future defence procurement plans and it is high time that the
Ministry of Defence took appropriate policy initiatives to meet the future
challenges by strengthening and encouraging the public and private sector
defence industries in the areas of research, development and manufacture
of defence equipment. The Committee trust that concrete and positive
action, without making any compromises with the national security, will be
taken by the Ministry of Defence on the observations and
recommendations made in this Report with a view to optimally exploiting
the industrial capabilities and competence available within the country.
  NEW DELHI;      BALASAHEB VIKHE PATIL,
 5 November, 2008 Chairman,
 14 Kartika, 1930 (Saka) Standing Committee on Defence.
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

75
ANNEXURE-I
(Vide Para 3.12)
Sl.
No.
Para No. Recommendation Apex Committee Decision
1. 6.4 (i) Information sharing –
creation of public version of
Armed Forces Perspective
Plans.
Accepted
2. 6.7(i) Entry point for Private Sector
– Defence Acquisition
Amendment to (a) SCAPCC
(b) SCAPCHC.
Accredited industry to be associated in
the categorization process depending
upon the item under consideration.
3. 6.7(ii) Limited consultation with
industry where TOT for
production or maintenance
involved before finalizing RFP
and in preparation of SQRs
when the system matures.
Industry may be consulted both in “Buy”
and “Buy & Make” category of cases
wherever there is ToT.
No action need be taken at this stage for
consulting industry in the preparation of
SQRs.
4. 6.7(iii) Amendment to incorporate
provision of servicing,
maintenance and upgrade in
Procurement Procedure for
“Buy” Category.
Accepted. However, instead of
maintenance ToT it should be
maintenance infrastructure to be clearly
stated in the RFP.
5. 6.7(iv) Amendment to Defence
Production Board to include
representation  of CII and
FICCI etc.
Amend the Constitution of DPB with the
approval of Competent Authority to
incorporate representation of Industry
(“RUR”/“Champion”) on a case-to-case
basis. General representation of Industry
Association not to be allowed.
6. 6.7(v) Setting up of Committee for
working out a scheme on the
basis of DARPA model.
There must be a multi disciplinary task
force to prepare the proposal and indicate
fund requirement etc. and also how it
should function. This task force should
evolve a model for consideration of
Government.
7. 6.7(vi) Devising a mechanism to
provide level playing field to
private sector industry.
A proposal to provide level playing field
between the Indian industry vis-à-vis foreign
suppliers in the area of Defence Procurement
is already under consideration of Committee
of Secretaries. On the Issue of ‘nomination’
Apex Committee noted that DPSUs and OFs
have been set up for specific purposes and
full utilization of their installed capacities must
be taken into account.
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

76
8. 6.15(i) Guidelines for Identification
of RURs/Champions –
Approval of Draft.
Accepted
9. 6.15(ii) Constitution of Committee
for RUR identification.
Accepted
10. 6.15(iii) Draft agreement covering
the Code of Best Practices
to be followed by RURs.
Accepted
11. 6.18(i) Creation of “Defence
Technology Development
Fund”.
May be accepted in principle.
A view may be taken with the approval of
RM to have a provision in the Budget
instead of creating separate Fund in view
of the recent instructions of Ministry of
Finance. Formulate guidelines/modalities
for operation/utilization of the
Fund/Budget provision.
12. 6.18(ii) Budgetary Provision for R&D
between DRDO, Defence
Technology Development
Fund and Service HQrs to
be provided separately.
Accepted
13. 6.18(iii) Scheme for giving
institutional support to SMEs
for Defence supplies.
Accepted
14. 6.18(iv) Guidelines/Code of Practice
for prime contractor
involvement in maximizing
SMEs’ participation in
Defence contracts.
Accepted
15. 6.20(i) Inclusion of representatives
of CSIR and ISRO in
Defence R&D Board.
They may be associated with the Defence
R&D Board at macro level on case-to-
case basis, wherever required.
16. 6.20(ii) Review of DRDO by
independent committee –
initiation.
Accepted
17. 6.23(i) Manual for Defence
Acquisition Procedure for
“Make” Category.
Accepted
18. 6.23(ii) Constitution of a Committee
to recommend restructuring
of MOD on the lines of DGA
of France.
Accepted
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

77
19. 6.27(i) Taking up pilot projects to try
modified approach for
acquisition of items
categorized as “Buy &
Make”.
Service HQrs and DRDO would provide a
list of such cases where they had already
followed this procedure. A study of such
cases as well as some new projects may
then be undertaken to assess the
practicability of the suggested modified
procedure in order to see what
improvements are needed therein.
Thereafter, a final view may be taken on
the recommendation.
20. 6.35(i) DRDO to concentrate on
high technology and offload
R&D work as much as
possible to industry;
implementation of scheme
for parallel development on
the lines of DARPA through
NCSIT recommended in
Para 6.7(v).
Since the issue relating to setting up of
National Centre for Strategic Information
Technology (NCSIT) is to be further
discussed with NASSCOM, the
recommendation for implementing
DARPA through NCSIT may not  be
accepted. As far as DARPA itself is
concerned, the matter has been dealt with
in another recommendation.
21. 6.35(ii) Upgrades of existing
Platforms should be taken
up by indigenous industry.
Accepted
22. 6.35(iii) Introduce a policy of ‘Shared
Development Costs’ in
‘Make’ category.
Accepted
23. 6.35(iv) Accept principle of acquiring
‘Minimum Order Quantity’.
Accepted
24. 6.36(i) Placement of Fund – Service
Headquarters for R&D work
– Preparation of scheme.
Accepted
25. 6.36(ii) Suitable guidelines for
project-wise allocations from
within funds placed at the
disposal of SHQ for R&D
projects.
Accepted
26. 6.37(i) Preparation of proposal for
strengthening IDS.
Accepted
27. 6.42(i) Introduction of the concept of
assessing Life Cycle Cost in
all Capital Acquisition
Projects valued over Rs.300
crores.
Accepted
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

78
28. 6.46(i) Internal Process Compliance
arrangement to be
strengthened.
Since the question of accountability and
responsibility is involved, a final view may
be taken in the Apex Committee.
29. 6.47(i) Armed Forces to introduce
outsourcing of Services to
public and private sector and
increase progressively.
Accepted
30. 6.50(i) Develop Training Courses
for (a) Tendering and
Contracting. (b) Project
Management.
Accepted
31. 6.50(ii) Allocating funds for providing
fellowship for higher studies
for serving Service Officer.
Accepted. Need for post-course utilization
of such trained officers in service and
necessity for establishing Centers of
Excellence in the country by retaining
such highly trained officers and creating a
good faculty for long term benefits to be
kept in view.
32. 6.50(iii) Establishment of a National
Defence University.
Accepted
33. 6.55(i) Set up an Autonomous Body
for Aerospace development
with involvement of all stake
holders
Requires greater deliberation.
Modalities for setting up of the proposed
Aerospace Body need to be worked out,
considering its usefulness, composition
and objectives.
34. 6.55(ii) Creation of National Centre
for Strategic Information
Technology. (Need for a
separate procurement
procedure for ICT items)
Requires greater clarity for consideration.
It would be advisable to have further
interaction with National Association of
Software Service Companies
(NASSCOM).
35. 6.57(i) Need to review the whole
concept of indigenisation
and self-reliance.
Accepted
36. 6.59(i) Creation of the “Strategic
Defence Industry Fund”
(SDIF) – Non-Lapsable Pool
Recommendation only linked with “Make”
projects. Requires further scrutiny by a
Group of Officers for making it far more
workable and acceptable.
37. 7.9 Introduction of ‘Offset’ clause
in RFPs for procurement
under Capital & Revenue
Budgets.
Accepted
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

79
38. 7.12 (i) Maintain licensing
regime;
(ii) Constitute an Inter-
Ministerial Committee;
(iii) Free licensing for Africa,
Latin America, North
America, Europe, Australia;
(iv) Export control regime on
a case-to-case basis for
Export to countries in India’s
strategic neighbourhood.
1 & 2 – may be accepted.
3 & 4 – approach should be based on
case-to-case without any free licensing
areas.
39. 7.13 (i) Consortium approach to
international marketing;
(ii) Encourage private/public
sector participation in export
marketing with consortium
approach.
(iii) Industry Associations to
set up Export Houses in
select countries.
Accepted
40. 7.15 (i) Information on the line of
credit facility should be
made available to DDP from
MEA;
(ii) Encourage active
involvement of the defence
industry to promote defence
products and services to
beneficiary countries under
the line of credit;
(iii) Long-term engagement
of the Defence industry in
the recipient country – life
cycle product support;
(iv) Reimbursement of
certain costs to facilitate
exports.
Accepted
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

80
ANNEXURE-II
(Vide Para 3.14)
Sl.
No.
Para
No.
Recommendation in Brief Decision
1. 3.18(i) The Committee recommends that
HAL and BEL be accorded the
status of Nav Ratna by relaxing
the provisions of eligibility. BDL
already has the status of Mini
Ratna.
Nav Ratna status has been accorded
to both BEL & HAL.
Recommendation has been
implemented.
2. 3.18(i) The Committee also recommends
that BEML and MDL be accorded
the status of Mini Ratna by
relaxing the provision of eligibility.
Mini Ratna-I has been accorded to
MDL & BEML. Recommendation has
been implemented.
3. 3.18(i) The Committee also recommends
that DPSUs like HAL should be
listed for improved Corporate
Governance and access to
Capital markets.
HAL has got enough cash surplus
with it and therefore does not need
access to capital markets for funds.
Hence, there is no need for listing of
HAL at present. BEML Ltd. & BEL
have already been listed.
No further action envisaged.
4. 3.18(ii) All Defence PSUs except
MIDHANI should be given the
freedom to do cross investment in
foreign companies from whom
they can obtain technology, which
has remained out of their reach
so far.
Any proposal for cross investment in
foreign companies would be guided
by the guidelines & powers given to
Mini Ratna/Nav Ratna companies.
Provision exists under the rules to
implement the recommendation.
Further action not required.
5. 3.18(iii) DPSUs should explore the
possibilities of mergers and
formation of consortia in order to
achieve optimum level of synergy
and become globally competitive.
BEL has started discussions with
some DPSUs and has so far entered
into MOU with HAL and OFB. GSL
too has formed a consortium with
other defence Shipyards to secure
export orders. Provision exists under
the rules to implement the
recommendation. Further action not
required.
6. 3.18(iv) The Committee also suggests
horizontal mobility between
Ordnance Factory Corporation
and DPSUs for confidence
building.
As Government has not decided to
corporatise Ordnance Factories, no
further action envisaged on this
recommendation.
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

81
7. 3.18(v) There should also be synergy
between DPSUs and Private
Sector and formation of Joint
Ventures should be encouraged.
FDI upto 50% may be permitted
for Joint Ventures between the
two.
BEL & BEML have created
subsidiaries, who in turn have JVs
with foreign companies. GSL has
entered into MOUs/agreements with
a number of foreign and Indian
companies. BEML has entered into a
JV for contract mining. In it 26%
equity is of one of the foreign firms.
Recommendation regarding FDI up
to 50% not to be implemented. No
further action.
8. 3.34(a) The QA agencies should confine
their spheres of activities to
essentially Quality Assurance
work and functions like Vendor
Development, Vendor
Registration, Indigenisation,
Product development, Capacity
assessment of Vendors,
Inspection of input material of all
types should not be performed by
them. These functions should be
the responsibility of the
Manufacturing Units. QA
agencies should become
professionally more competent
and confine their functions to
Quality Surveillance and process
auditing apart from final
inspection.
Vendor registration, their capacity
assessment and inspection of input
material already handed over to
Ordnance Factories/DPSUs. Self
certification by OFB of intermediate
products issued by Ordnance
Factories to sister factories as IFD
item (Inter Factory Demand) is under
examination of MOD. Alteration
Committees have been set up to
take up product development/
improvement. Indigenisation
activities to have been handed over
to the Services. The Quality Audit,
Surveillance, Process Audit and
Final Acceptance Checks are
essential elements of QA functions
and shall remain with QA agencies.
Recommendation has been
implemented.
9. 3.34(b) QA agencies should continue to
give QA cover to imported items
and the stores directly procured
by the Army, Navy and the Air
Force through their Depots and
such Organisations like Base
Workshop, Base Repair Depots
and Dockyards.
The recommendation is agreed to by
DGQA. Activities related to capacity
assessment/registration as regards
to procurement by MGO/DGOS/
Depot/ Naval procurement agencies,
shall continue with DGQA, DGAQA,
DQA(N), as the case may be. DGQA
will continue providing QA coverage
to imported items/stores.
Recommendation has been
implemented.
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

82
10. 3.34(c) There is a need to radically
review the role of AHSP’s and
redefine the concept, enabling the
Manufacturer to take up
improvement, upgradation more
easily, but ensuring that form, fit
and functionality are in complete
conformity with the requirements
as articulated by the Users viz.
SHQs.
A statement of case on the ‘Role and
Function of DGQA’ is under
examination. The Role of AHSP will
be aligned with the orders issued in
this regard. Government has already
issued orders for creation of
Alteration Committee at OFs to
facilitate product development,
product improvement/upgradation.
For naval stores, product
improvement by OEM can be carried
out only after consultation with Naval
HQ, being AHSP. Recommendation
under examination.
11. 3.34(d) As other Defence PSUs, the three
Shipyards should be allowed to
develop vendors for ships being
constructed by them and also for
life long maintenance services for
these ships, as far as possible, for
“ship construction activities only”
and not for other equipment fitted
on board. This would create the
environment for growth and
development for these Shipyards.
The system of nomination of
vendors should be discontinued
as soon as possible.
Shipyards have been duly
empowered vide Para V of MOD
letter.16(2)/2004-D(QA) dated
20.12.2005 to develop vendors
should be able to execute the
functions in line with ISO 9000
guidelines and also be in position to
be auditable by DGQA for its ability
to build quality into the product
during its realization. Indigenisation
for Naval equipment has already
been transferred to NHQ in January
2006. No further action required.
12. 3.34(e) For product development
undertaken by DRDO there is
need to involve the Industry,
which will take up LSP (Limited
Series Production) and BP (Bulk
Production) from initial stages in
vendor development. Ideally the
Industry should do the vendor
selection and development but
this can be taken up gradually.
DROD involves industry during
product development and for many
complex products, industry is a major
partner from the early stages of R&D
and product development. The
present procedure works well for
initial delivery and for repeat order
for relatively small numbers. For
large volume of production, the
infrastructure of these industries is
not sufficient. DRDO is of the view
that involvement of industry is
economically sound and has several
benefits. DRDO, therefore, reiterates
that there should be “stake holdings”
in establishing all private and public
partnerships, in undertaking R&D
leading to engineering development.
DRDO is willing to assist the industry
in funding in the ratio 70/30: 80/20.
No further action required.
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

83
13. 3.34(f) The Industry, both Public and
Private and particularly the
corporatized OFs must move
towards a regime self-certification
by first obtaining certification
relating to international standards
or satisfying the requirements
enunciated by QA agencies in
their guidelines (ideally it should
be the same).
The Group of Officers in their report
on “Improvement in the present
system of Quality Assurance in the
Ministry of Defence” has
recommended that the production
agencies in the Government sector
such as DGOF, DPSUs should make
concerted efforts to sell under self
certification DGQA and DGAQA to it.
In fact OFs have been granted self-
certification for few clothing items.
BEL too has been granted self-
certification status for certain product
ranges.
No further action required.
14. 3.34(g) The DGQA and DGAQA must amend
the rules to include provision for
deputation from other scientific
organizations, corporatized OFs,
DPSUs to fulfil the gaps for areas
requiring highly trained manpower in
the field of higher technologies.
Acceptance of the recommendation
necessitate amendment in Service
Rules. Recommendation not
implemented.
15. 3.5(1) Ordnance factories should be
corporatized into a single
corporation under leadership of a
competitive management. This
corporation should be accorded
the status of Nav Ratna.
Government has not decided to
corporatise the Ordnance Factories
and there is no intention to
implement this recommendation at
present.
No further action envisaged.
16. 3.5(2) Corporatisation could be on the
lines of BSNL.
No further action envisaged.
17. 3.5(3) The process of corporatisation would
require lot of hand holding for the
Ordnance Factories in order to
address their sensitiveness and
insecurities. As part of handholding
process, the existing dispensations
by the government to the Ordnance
factories should continue to be given
to Ordnance factories for a period of
three years to help them steer the
change process internally. The
dispensations should be gradually
tapered off during the three year
period for the Ordnance Factory
Corporation to be completely
independent at the end of this time
period.
No further action envisaged.
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

84
18. 3.5(4) Along with this financial support,
Ordnance factories would also
require training support not only
to upgrade their skill sets but also
adopt modern management
practices.
RM has directed Ordnance Factories
to focus on training of personnel in
the modern management practices
and latest technologies through
reputed institutes of India and
abroad. Recommendation has been
implemented.
19. 3.6 The Committee would also like to
mention that corporatisation does
not necessarily mean
privatization.
No further action envisaged.
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

85
APPENDICES
MINUTES OF THE EIGHTH SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON
DEFENCE (2006-07)
 The Committee sat on Thursday, the 30 th November, 2006 from 1500 hrs.
to 1700 hrs. in Committee Room ‘D’, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Shri Balasaheb Vikhe Patil  -      Chairman
MEMBERS
LOK SABHA
2. Shri Santosh Kumar Gangwar
3. Shri  C. Kuppusami
4. Shri K.S. Manoj
5. Shri Adhalrao Shivaji Patil
6. Shri Shriniwas Patil
7. Dr. H.T. Sangliana
RAJYA SABHA
8. Dr. Farooq Abdullah
9. Shri R.K. Dhawan
10. Smt. N.P. Durga
11. Shri Arun Shourie
12. Smt. Viplove Thakur
SECRETARIAT
1. Shri S.K. Sharma  -  Additional Secretary
2. Shri R.C. Kakkar  - Deputy Secretary
3. Shri D.R. Shekhar  - Under Secretary
LIST OF REPRESENTATIVES FROM MINISTRY OF DEFENCE
1. Shri K.P. Singh   - Secretary (DP)
2. Dr. M. Natarajan   - SA to RM
3. Shri S. Banerjee   - DG (ACQ)
4. . Shri V.K. Misra   - Secretary (Def. Fin.)
5. Shri P. K. Rastogi   - Addl. Secy (DP)
6. Shri Ashok K. Baweja  - Chairman, HAL
7. Dr. Prahlada     - CCR&D (SI) & DS
8. Shri Ranjan Chatterjee  - JS (HAL)
9. Shri Alok Perti   - JS (SY)
10. Shri V. Somasundaran  - JS (OF)
11. Smt. Anuradha Mitra  - Addl. FA (AM) & JS
12. Shri Mohd. Haleem Khan  - Addl. FA (H)
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

86
13. Shri A.K. Lamba   - DGOF
14. Shri B Saha    - Secy (OFB)
15. R Admn (Retd) A K Handa  - CMD, GSL
16. Shri V R S Natrajan   - CMD, BEML
17. V Adml SKK Krishnan  -  CMD, MDL
18. Adml T S  Geneshan  - CMD, GRSE
19. Maj.Gen (Retd) Raajnish Gossain- CMD, BDL
.
ARMED FORCES HEADQUARTERS
1. Air Mshl B.N. Gokhale  - VCAS
2. Lt. Gen. Z.U. Shah   - DCOAS (P&S)
3. Air Mshl BU Chengappa  - AOM
4. V Adml B.S. Randhawa  - COWP
5. Maj Gen A K S Chandele  - ADG EME (M)
6. Rear Adml. RK Dhowan  - ACNS (P&P)
7. Air Cmde. P. Ramu   - PD (Plans)
8. Gp, Capt. P.K.S. Prasad  - Director (Indigenisation)
OTHER OFFICERS PRESENT
1. Comdt (Retd) Sunil Manshinde - CM, GSL
2. Shri S. Radhakrishnan Dir.  - Tech  Acq.
3. Shri Saurabh Kumar  - Dir. (P&C), DDP
4. Shri  Ashok Kumar   - Dir. (S-II), DDP
5. Shri P.K. Hans   - CPO (H), DDP
6. Shri V.V.R. Shastri   - Dir. BEL
2. At the outset, Hon’ble Chairman welcomed the Members and
representatives of Ministry of Defence to the sitting of the Committee.  The
Chairperson then requested the Representatives of the Ministry to brief the
Committee on the subject ‘Indigenisation of Defence Production – Public-Private
Partnership’ and drew their attention to the Direction 58 of the Directions by the
Speaker, Lok Sabha regarding maintaining confidentiality of the deliberations of
the sitting.
3. The Members expressed their concern over the articles published in the
Indian Express a news daily regarding functioning, projects and programmes of
DRDO and desired that Ministry should investigate the matter and place facts
before the Committee.
4. The representatives of the Ministry briefed the Committee about the efforts
made by them for indigenisation of Defence production and Public Private
Partnership.  They also informed about the joint ventures in the private sector
which were approved for production of equipment, optical instruments and repair
of radar apparatus.  Regarding joint ventures with Defence Public Sector
Undertakings (DPSUs), they informed that British Aerospace and HAL Software
Limited had joined hands in 1993 as an export oriented unit for Defence
Software.
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

87
5. They also gave details about the other joint ventures between Defence
PSUs  and Ordnance Factory Board (OFB) with private sector/foreign industries.
6. The representatives also informed the Committee about the procedure to
be followed in direct offsets that was to be discharged concurrently with the main
contract itself.  They further informed that in case of failure there was provision
for paying penalty by vendors from outside.
7. On the question whether there was any clash of interest between the
DPSUs and private sector, the representatives informed the Committee that
there could be a clash of interest, as private sector was free to choose its
products.  The representatives further informed that 29 licenses were given to
private companies to produce Defence items and also they have taken policy
initiative to introduce ‘make’ procedure which was recommended by the Kelkar
Committee for participation of the Indian Private Sector in R&D and
high-technology areas.
8. On Defence capability plans, they stated that the Ministry had conducted
studies by the Headquarters/IDSA and divided them into three categories.  One
is the high technology and security sensitive areas which were to be done by the
DRDO; another was mature technologies.
Witnesses then withdrew.
9. The record of the verbatim proceeding was kept.
The Committee then adjourned.
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

88
MINUTES OF THE THIRTEENTH SITTING OF THESTANDING COMMITTEE
ON DEFENCE (2006-07)
 The Committee sat on Monday the 18 th December 2006 from 0900 hrs to
1015 hrs in Committee Room ‘E’, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Shri Balasaheb Vikhe Patil  -      Chairman
MEMBERS
LOK SABHA
2. Shri Santosh Kumar Gangwar
3. Shri Adhalrao Shivaji Patil
4. Shri Shriniwas Patil
5. Dr. H.T. Sangliana
RAJYA SABHA
6. Dr. Farooq Abdullah
7. Smt. N.P. Durga
8. Shri K.B. Shanappa
9. Smt. Viplove Thakur
SECRETARIAT
1. Shri D.R. Shekhar  - Under Secretary
LIST OF NON-OFFICIAL WITNESS
1. Dr. Vijay Kelkar
2. At the outset, Hon’ble Chairman welcomed Dr. Vijay Kelkar to brief the
Committee about the salient features of the recommendations in the reports viz.
‘Towards Strengthening Self-Reliance in Defence Preparedness’ and
‘Revitalising Defence Public Sector Undertakings and Ordnance Factories’ and
after implementation. He further stated that how these recommendations would
be helpful to have a synergy between public and private partnership for the
benefit of the country.  The Chairman also drew his attention to the Direction 58
of the Directions by the Speaker, Lok Sabha regarding maintaining confidentially
of the deliberations of the sitting.
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

89
3. Dr. Vijay Kelkar then briefed the Committee about the historical
development which paved the way for Private Sector Participation in Defence
Production.  He then briefed the Committee on the following important
recommendations :-
(i) The first part of the report was ‘Towards Strengthening Self-Reliance in
Defence Preparedness’ and the second part was ‘Revitalizing Defence
Public Sector Undertakings and Ordnance Factories’.
(ii) The first recommendation of the report was to make the report public.
(iii) The terms of reference of Kelkar Committee were how to improve
country’s self-reliance in Defence preparedness, to improve efficiency in
productivity of public sector undertakings and ordnance factories and to
promote Defence exports.
(iv) The major recommendation was to make available the 15-years Long
Term Perspective Plan to public. The plan should contain long-term
capability requirement and the motto to reduce imports and increase
defence preparedness of this country, Indian Private Industries should be
involved in the long-term planning for acquisition.  The representatives of
private industries should be members in the categorization Committee
which categorised the equipment that should be imported or to be
produced domestically.
(v) There should be an independent Committee to judge the private industries
capabilities, its track record, its R&D record and the financial viability and
to designate them as Raksha Udyog Ratna in order to ensure the best
private industries to produce Defence equipment for the services and
should be allowed a level playing field to promote competition.
(vi) He emphasised on to follow ISRO, Atomic Energy, CSIR and ONGC
models for effective participation of private industries.
(vii) Need for an independent scientific and technological review of the overall
functioning of DRDO, on the line of review being done in all other scientific
institutions like ISRO, CSIR, Atomic Energy Commission and ICMR etc.
(viii) A member of CSIR should be represented on Defence R&D Board and
DRDO should follow democratic approach by consulting other scientific
institutions.
(ix) One of the most important recommendations was in regard to giving
scholarship to the Armed Forces Officers for higher education in scientific
and technological studies.
(x) Need for professionalisation of different acquisitions.
(xi) The Defence Public Sector Undertakings and Ordnance Factories should be
given more autonomy which can facilitate to have their own R&D and to
decide the vendors and to fully exploit their technological capabilities.  In this
regard, Dr. Kelkar recommended to follow BSNL model.
(xii) Regarding quality assurance our public sector undertakings and ordnance
factories should have their own quality assurance organization.
(xiii) Dr. Kelkar also emphasised that for effective Private Sector Participation in
Defence Production, the title of Department of Defence Production in the
Ministry of Defence should be changed to Department of Defence Industry.
(xiv) Purchase and AQ (Capital) should be separated.  These are two separate
subjects.
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

90
4. The Members then put forth certain queries on the above mentioned
issues and Dr.  Kelkar replied them one-by-one.
The witness then withdrew.
5. A verbatim record of proceedings was kept.
The Committee then adjourned.
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

91
MINUTES OF THE FIFTEENTH SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON
DEFENCE (2006-07)
 The Committee sat on Tuesday the 09 th January, 2007 from 1100 to 1315
hrs. in Committee Room ‘D’, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Shri Balasaheb Vikhe Patil  -      Chairman
MEMBERS
LOK SABHA
2. Shri Milind Deora
3. Shri Santosh Kumar Gangwar
4. Dr. K.S. Manoj
5. Shri Adhalrao Shivaji Patil
6. Shri Raju Rana
7.        Shri H.T. Sangliana
8.        Shri Mahadeorao Shiwankar
9.        Shri Balashowry  Vallabhaneni
10.      Shri Rajesh Verma
RAJYA SABHA
11.      Dr. Farooq Abdullah
12.      Smt. N.P. Durga
13.      Shri K.B. Shanappa
14.      Smt. Viplove Thakur
SECRETARIAT
1. Shri P.K. Bhandari  - Joint Secretary
2. Shri D.R. Shekhar  - Under Secretary
REPRESENTATIVES OF CII
1. Sh. Satish Kaura
2. Col. R.S. Bhatia
3. Shri Ashok Kanodia
4. Shri R. Kakkar
5. Shri S. Niyogi
6. Shri R.K. Verma
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

92
REPRESENTATIVES OF FICCI
1. Shri Rahul Chaudhry
2. Shri Vivek Pandit
3. Ms. Vasundhara Bhargava
REPRESENTATIVES OF ASSOCHAM
1. Shri K.R. Palta
2. Shri Anup Keni
2. At the outset, Hon’ble Chairman welcomed the representatives of CII,
FICCI and ASSOCHAM and requested them to brief the Committee on existing
capabilities of private sector which could be used to reduce our imports and
building self-reliance in major defence systems, benefits accrued to the private
sector after implementation of Defence Procurement Policy 2005 and 2006; to
keep revenue and capital items  separate in order to ensure timely availability of
items to the services as suggested by the various experts and also on benefits of
‘offset clause’ to be accrued in terms of increasing defence production and
making Indian Defence goods competitive in international market.  The Chairman
also drew their attention to the Direction 58 of the Directions by the Speaker, Lok
Sabha regarding maintaining confidentially of the deliberations of the sitting.
3. The representative of CII informed that they took initiative to start Defence
industry 14 years back and constituted their own Committee in 1993.  He stated
that efforts were made to make the country self-reliant in Defence Sector but
there are still some areas which are to be addressed.  He further stated that to
make the country self-reliant in the field of Defence production, there was a need
to cut the import bill, develop indigenous capability and provide the best
technology equipment to the Armed Forces for the Defence of the country.  He
further stated that industry was trying to look at linkages between science,
technology and products coming out of using indigenous technology.  At present,
the industry was willing to invest money in that area as the requirement was
about Rs. 38,000 to Rs. 40,000 crore a year and the production was only Rs.
18,000 to Rs. 20,000 crore.
4. As regard the Public and Private Partnership in Defence Sector he also
highlighted the following points: -
(i) Need to have a very focused and concerted efforts towards developing the
local industries.
(ii) To include the private sector as a key player along with the public sector
for Defence production.
(iii) Need to frame clear guidelines through policies to facilitate the building
process.
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

93
5. Through slide presentation, representative of CII briefed the Committee on
flexibility to form a consortium or join hands with the private sector;
availability of Infrastructure with DRDO; offset clause  allowing foreign
supplier to choose Transfer of Technology partner from public and private
sector companies having defence manufacturing licence; sharing of long
term procurement plan in order to utilise that the capability skills of the
industry.
6. Through slide presentation, representative of FICCI briefed the Committee
on the following points :-
(i) There was no incentive for creating 26% owned company in the
country.
(ii) Implementation of make policy which stated that all upgrades
should be done by Indian Companies only.
(iii) A ban on the imports could bring FDI to the tune of 49 per cent and
Indian Companies with the help of foreign partners could fill
technology gaps.
(iv) On the question of following the U.S. Model by the industry, he
replied that the US was the most vibrant and largest Defence
industry.  Out of 300 billion dollars capital defence equipment,
contribution of US was about 200 billion dollars.
(v) There was a need for strong public private partnership even after
the implementation of Defence Procurement Policy -2006.
(vi) There was a need to get offset banking introduced so that the
industry and foreign partners engaged before finalisation of RFPs.
(vii) To curtail the time of procurement he suggested that user should
directly be involved in the process.  Even a 80:20 clause of make
procedure the user was missing, therefore, there was a need to
involve the user so it could tell whether the process was going right.
(viii) The fall clause of DPP- 2006 stated that if a company which has
provided a system, has to guarantee that it has not provided that
system to the Government in any other form or cost.
(ix) In Twined Lead Approach where two development agencies should
be involved should be implemented.
7. The representatives of CII stated that DRDO should not waste their
energy on small areas.  They should try and excel in strategic areas and
rest should be handed over to private sector.
8.  The representative of ASSOCHAM informed that the country was
importing expensive equipment without any technology built up, therefore,
private sector should be allowed to experiment in the Defence Sector also
on the lines of ISRO.  He further stated that if Indian vendor partnering
more than 51%, than foreign vendors would also come into but any
industry  which was supposed to enter in Defence Sector, they have to do
‘No Cost No Commitment (NCNC)’ trial.
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

94
9. In reply to a query regarding how SMEs would be benefited, through offset
obligation, representative of CII informed the Committee that SMEs supply
the sub-assemblies to the bigger manufacturers and sometimes SMEs
could supply directly.
10. The representatives of the industry also replied to the queries of the
Members on DGQA, Certification on Procurement, etc.  They also stated
that after the development of the product in partnership with DRDO there
was no seamless transfer from development to production.  Therefore,
order for production should be given to the industry which developed the
product and not to a nominated agency.
The witnesses then withdrew.
11. A verbatim record of proceedings was kept.
The Committee then adjourned.
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

95
MINUTES OF TWENTY- NINTH SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE
ON DEFENCE (2006-2007)
 The Committee sat on Thursday, the 10 th May 2007 from 1500 to 1615
hrs. in Committee Room ‘D’, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Shri Balasaheb Vikhe Patil – Chairman
MEMBERS
LOK SABHA
2. Shri Santosh Kumar Gangwar
3. Shri Shriniwas Patil
4. Dr. H. T. Sangliana
RAJYA SABHA
5. Shri Jai Prakash Aggarwal
6. Smt. N.P. Durga
SECRETARIAT
1. Shri P.K. Bhandari  -  Joint Secretary
2. Shri Gopal Singh  -  Director
3. Shri D.R. Shekhar  -  Deputy Secretary-II
4. Smt. J.M. Sinha  -  Under Secretary
WITNESSES
REPRESENTATIVES OF MINISTRY OF DEFENCE
1. Shri Shekhar Dutt    - Defence Secretary
2. Shri K.P. Singh   - Secretary (DP)
3. Dr. M. Natarajan   - SA to RM
4. Shri S. Banerjee   - DG (ACQ)
5. Shri V.K. Mishra   - Secretary (Def. Fin.)
6. Dr. (Mrs.) Rekha Bhargava - Special Secretary (B)
7. Shri P.K. Rastogi   - Addl Secy. (B)
8. Dr. W. Selvamurthy   - CCR&D (LS&HR)
9. Shri Gautam Chatterjee  - JS (O/N)
10. Shri Binoy Kumar   - JS (E)
11. Shri Harcharanjit Singh  - Secy (BRDB) / JS (ESW)
12. Shri S.N. Mishra   - Addl FA(M)
13. Shri Alok Perti   - JS (SY)
14. Dr. (Mrs.) Kiran Chadha  - JS (X)
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

96
15. Shri T. Ramachandru  - JS (S)
16. Shri Ranjan Chatterjee  - JS (HAL)
17. Shri Mohd. Haleem Khan  - Addl FA (H)
18. Smt. Anuradha Mitra  - Addl FA (AM)
19. Shri Amit Cowshish   - Addl FA (A)
20. Shri S. Ghosh   - Chairman/OFB
21. Shri V. Somasuderam  - JS (OF)
22. Shri B. Saha    - Secy, OFB
23. Shri Sharad Ghodke  - OSD (P)
24. Shri Ashok K. Baweja  - Chairman, HAL
25. Shri V.R.S. Natarajan  - CMD, BEML
26. Shri M. Narayana Rao   - CMD, MIDHANI
27. Shri VVR Sastry   - CMD (BEL)
28. Rear Adm (Retd.) A.K. Handa - CMD, GSL
29. Rear Adm T.S. Ganeshan  - CMD, GRSE
30. Vice Admn S.K.K. Krishnan - CMD, MDL
31. Maj. Gen (Retd.) R. Gossain - CMD, BDL
32. Shri PRK Hara Gopal  - Dir (Fin.), BEL
33. Shri SK Mehta   - Dir (R&D), BEL
34. Shri Devjit Ghosh   - LO. MIDHANI
35. Commdt. Sunil Mane Sinde - CM, GSL
36. Shri Yogesh Sharma  - Regional CM, MDL
37. Commander Hardev Inder  - Addl GM
 IN (Retd.)
38. Lt. Gen. HS Lidder   - CISC
39. Lt. Gen. Deepak Kapoor  - VCOAS
40. V. Adml. Nirmal Verma   - VCNS
41. Air Mshl AK Nagalia   - DCAS
42. Lt. Gen. SS Dhillon   - MGO
43. Lt. Gen. Thomas Mathew  - AG
44. Air Mshl VR Iyer   - AOP
45. Vice Adml Sunil K. Damle  - COP
46. Surg Vice Adml VK Singh  - DGAFMS
47. Lt. Gen. LP Sadhotra  - DGMS (Army)
48. Air Marshal HK Maini  - DGMS (Air)
49. Surg Vice Adml Yogendra Singh - DGMS (Navy)
50. Maj. Gen. Suresh Chandra  - Addl DGAFMS
51. Maj. Gen. J. Jayram   - Addl DGAFMS (MR)
52. Maj. Gen. R.K. Kalra  - MD-ECHS
53. Maj. Gen. A.K. Mehra   - ADG WE
54. AVM N. Vijaya Kumar  - ACAS (FP)
55. R. Adml. R.K. Dhowan  - ACNS(P&P)
56. Brig. Kunwar Karni Singh  - Dy. DGAFMS (P&T)
57. Brig. Satish Malik   - Dy. MD-ECHS
58. Col. A.K. Verma   - Dir MS (H)
59. Col. Pawan Kapoor   - Dir AFMS (P)
60. Col. G. Ghosh   - Dir. ECHS
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

97
2. At the outset, Hon’ble Chairman welcomed the representatives of the
Ministry of Defence to the sitting of the Committee and requested to tender oral
evidence on the subjects ‘Review of Defence Procurement Policy, 2006’ and
‘Status of New Acquisition’ and ‘Indigenisation of Defence Production – Public-
Private Partnership’ and read out Direction 58 of the Directions by the Speaker,
Lok Sabha regarding maintaining confidentiality of the deliberations of the sitting.
The Committee desired to be briefed on the overall improvement made in the
procurement procedure to cut delays and speed-up the acquisition programme
including the fast-track programme after commencement of the Defence
Procurement Policy 2006. The Committee also desired to know about the
involvement of producers, Government, private, experts/scientists/ technologists
in preparing the long-term plan, preparing of roadmap for indigenisation,
modernization, Defence preparedness, optimum use of existing capabilities of
the Defence PSUs, Ordnance Factories and of private sector to reduce imports
and providing level playing field to the private sector through direct funding for
R&D activity in various industries etc.
3. The representatives of the Ministry briefed the Committee about the
number of steps taken by the Government for speedy acquisition of capital items
and to strengthen the public private partnership by formulation new DPP 2006.
The Ministry further informed that the budgetary allocation in comparison to the
beginning year’s Tenth Plan i.e.  Rs. 54,265 crore, has been increased to Rs.
96,000 crore during the year 2007-08.  He expressed the feeling of gratitude for
the interest shown by the members of the Committee which resulted in a number
of positive changes in the policies and abilities of Ministry of Defence.
4. He further briefed the Committee on the issues of encouraging  industries
by direct funding by the Ministry of Defence and project-wise funding by DRDO,
as per the need.   On indigenous R&D, he also informed that out of Rs. 4500
crore turnover of the Bharat Electronics 81 percent was done by indigenous
technology.  HAL and BEL were spending 8 per cent and 5 per cent of their  turn
over on research respectively.  95 per cent of OFB products and its turnover
depend totally on indigenous technology.
5. On categorization of acquisition, he informed that there were three main
categories under which acquisitions were made i.e. Buy, Buy and Make and
Make under New DPP 2006 first time, make procedure would cover all capital
acquisition of high technology complex system upgrades undertaken by
indigenous research, design and development.  These would be undertaken by
Ordnance Factory Board (OFB), Defence Public Undertakings and Indian
Industry/Raksha Udyog Ratna (RUR)/Consortia on a level playing field on shared
development cost.
6. The representatives of the Ministry also resolved the other queries raised
by the members one by one.
The witnesses then withdrew
7.       The verbatim record of the proceedings was kept.
The Committee then adjourned.
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

98
MINUTES OF THE THIRTEENTH SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE
ON DEFENCE (2007-2008)
 The Committee sat on Thursday, the 3 rd January 2008 from 1130 to 1310
hrs. in Committee Room ‘E’, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Shri Balasaheb Vikhe Patil – Chairman
MEMBERS
LOK SABHA
2.  Shri Santosh Gangwar
3. Dr. K.S. Manoj
4. Prof. Mahadeorao Shiwankar
5. Shri Manavendra Singh
6. Shri Anil Shukla Warsi
RAJYA SABHA
7. Dr. Farooq Abdullah
8. Smt. Shobhana Bhartia
9. Shri R.K. Dhawan
10. Smt. N.P. Durga
11. Shri K.B. Shanappa
12. Smt. Viplove Thakur
SECRETARIAT
1.   Shri  Gopal Singh  - Director
2.   Shri  D.R. Shekhar   - Deputy  Secretary-II
WITNESSES
REPRESENTATIVES OF CONFEDERATION OF INDIAN INDUSTRIES (CII)
1. Lt. Gen. S.S. Mehta, PVSM, AVSM & Bar, VSM (Retd.), Director
General.
2. Brig. K.A. Hai (Retd.), Chairman, CII Defence Sub Committee on
  Land Systems and Chief Executive.
3. Shri  N. Nigam, Chairman, CII Defence Sub Committee on R&D
and Executive Vice President.
4. Shri Vikram Sahgal, Chairman, CII Defence Sub Committee on
SMEs and Chairman and Managing Director
5. Shri Ashok Kanodia, Chairman, CII Defence Sub Committee on IT
and Chairman and Managing Director.
6. Shri Pradeep Sharma, Chief Executive Officer.
7. Shri S. Niyogi, Deputy Director General.
8. Shri Vikram Badshah, Head - Public Policy.
9. Shri Sujith Haridas, Director & Head Defence & Aerospace.
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

99
REPRESENTATIVES OF FEDERATION OF INDIAN CHAMBERS OF
COMMERCE AND INDUSTRIES (FICCI),
1. Shri Rahul Chaudhry, CEO-Strategic Electronics Division, TATA
Power Co. Ltd. & Co-Chairman, FICCI Defence Committee
2.      Shri Jayant D. Patil, Vice President, Larsen & Turbo Ltd.
3. Shri Partha Guhapatra, Wipro
REPRESENTATIVES OF ASSOCIATION OF CHAMBERS OF
COMMERCE AND INDUSTRIES (ASSOCHAM)
1. Shri M.M. Bhagat, MD, Bhagat Group of Companies.
2. Shri Anil Kapoor, Manager, Bhagat Group of Companies.
3. Shri Ashish K. Mukherjee, MD, Textron Global Technology Centre
Pvt. Ltd.
4.        Shri Rahul Gangal, General Manager, Tata Industrial Services Ltd.
2.     At the outset, Hon’ble Chairman welcomed the representatives of the CII,
FICCI and ASSOCHAM to the sitting of the Committee on the subject
‘Indigenisation of Defence Production – Public - Private Partnership’ and drew
their attention to Direction 58 of Directions by the Speaker, Lok Sabha.  The
Committee desired to be briefed on joint ventures signed by the Private Sector
with the foreign companies for transfer of technology and defence production etc.
3. During the discussion following points were raised by the members viz.
difficulties being faced by Private Sector in implementation of Government
Policies, i.e. buy, buy & make and make procedures, status of Raksha Udyog
Ratnas(RURs), Private Sector Participation with Defence Public Sector
Undertakings(DPSUs)/Ordnance Factories(OFs) and Defence Research &
Development Organisation(DRDO), effects of Foreign Direct Investment (FDI),
Process of Nomination of DPSUs to perform certain works, investment in R&D by
Private Industries,  letter of credit, level playing  field , uniformity in Taxes &
Payment, Brahmos model, offset clause etc.  ASSOCHAM during the interaction
favoured US model to select two vendors to work on R&D under Public Private
Partnership and Transfer of Technology wherever necessary. The
representatives of CII, FICCI and ASSOCHAM clarified the issues one by one.
4. The Committee also desired that a joint memorandum from CII, FICCI and
ASSOCHAM highlighting the views and difficulties of the Private Industry might
be submitted to the Committee at the earliest.
5. A copy of verbatim record of the proceedings has been kept.
The Committee then adjourned.
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

100
MINUTES OF THE FOURTEENTH SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE
ON DEFENCE (2007-2008)
 The Committee sat on Friday, the 11 th January 2008 from 1100 to 1300 hrs. in
Committee Room ‘D’, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Shri Balasaheb Vikhe Patil – Chairman
MEMBERS
LOK SABHA
2.  Shri Santosh Gangwar
3. Dr. K.S. Manoj
4. Shri Raju Rana
RAJYA SABHA
5. Dr. Farooq Abdullah
6. Shri Abu Asim Azmi
7. Smt.Shobhana Bhartia
8. Shri S.P.M. Syed Khan
9. Shri K.B. Shanappa
SECRETARIAT
1. Shri A. Louis Martin  - Joint Secretary
2. Shri Gopal Singh - Director
3. Shri D.R. Shekhar - Deputy Secretary-II
REPRESENTATIVES OF THE MINISTRY OF DEFENCE
1. Shri Vijay Singh  - Defence Secretary
2. Shri Ajoy Acharya  - Addl. Secy (Defence Production)
3. Shri S.N. Misra  - JS (HAL)
4. Shri V.Somasundaran - JS (OF)
5. Shri Satyajeet Ranjan  - JS (X)
6. Shri T.Ramachandru  - JS (S)
7. Smt. Sungita Sharma  - Dir. (S-I)
8. Shri V.K. Adhana  - CPO (A)
 9. Shri Ashok K. Baweja  - Chairman, HAL
 10. Shri V.V.R.Sastry  - CMD (BEL)
11. V.Adml. S.K.K.Krishnan - CMD (MDL)
12. Shri A.M.Naik   - Member, OFB
 13. Dr. Prahlada   - CCR&D (SI)
 14. Shri G.Elagovan  - CCR&D (R&M)
 15. Lt Gen HS lidder  - CISC
 16. Rear Adml S. Chakravorty - ACIDS (WSOI)
 17. Lt. Gen. M.L. Naidu  - VCOAS
 18. Lt. Gen ZU Shah  - DCOAS (P&S)
 19. Air Mshl PV Naik  - VCAS
 20. Air Mshl NAK Browne  - DCAS
 21. Air Mshl KM Rama Sundara - AOM
 22. AVM LK Malhotra  - ACAS (PO)
 23. V Adml. Nirmal Verma - VCNS
 24. V Adml Dilip Despande - CWP&A
 25. Rear Adml. V.Karunanithi - DG WESEE
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

101
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the representatives of the Ministry
of Defence and drew their attention to the Direction 58 of the Directions by the
Speaker, Lok Sabha regarding maintaining confidentiality of the deliberations of
the sitting. Thereafter, a representative of the Ministry of Defence briefed the
Committee regarding `Indigenisation of Defence Production- Public Private
Partnership’.
3. The points raised by the Members during the discussion included
involvement of the Private Sector in indigenisation of Defence Production,
nomination of Defence PSUs only for defence production, involving private sector
in categorization Committee, role in Ordnance Factories etc.  The
representatives of the Ministry of Defence responded to the queries.  As regards
the points on which the representatives could not readily respond, the Committee
desired the Ministry to furnish written information at the earliest.
Witnesses then withdrew.
4 .    x x x x x x x x
5. A copy of verbatim record of the proceedings has been kept.
The Committee then adjourned.
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
x Not related with the sitting of the Committee.
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

102
MINUTES OF THE SIXTH SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON
DEFENCE (2008- 09)
 The Committee sat on Friday, the 26 th September 2008 from 1100 to 1245
hrs. in Committee Room No. ‘53’, Parliament House, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Shri Balasaheb Vikhe Patil  -      Chairman
MEMBERS
LOK SABHA
2. Shri Milind Murli Deora
3. Shri Santosh Gangwar
4. Dr. K.S. Manoj
5. Shri Raju Rana
6. Dr. H.T. Sangliana
7. Prof. Mahadeorao Shiwankar
RAJYA SABHA
8. Shri Jai Parkash Aggarwal
9. Shri Abu Asim Azmi
10. Shri R.K. Dhawan
11. Shri A. Elavarasan
12. Shri M.V. Mysura Reddy
SECRETARIAT
 1. Shri A. Louis Martin   - Joint Secretary
2.  Shri Rajeev Sharma  - Director
2. Smt. J.M. Sinha  - Under Secretary
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

103
MINISTRY OF DEFENCE/ARMED FORCES HEADQUARTERS
1. Shri Vijay Singh   - Defence Secretary
2. Shri M. Natarajan   - Secretary (R&D)
3. Shri Pradeep Kumar  - Secretary  (Def. Prod)
4. Smt. H.K. Pannu   - Financial Advisor (Def. Services)
5. Shri S.K. Sharma    - DG (Acquisition)
6. Shri R.K. Mathur    - Additional Secretary
7. Shri Shekhar Agarwarl   - Financial Advisor (Acquisition)
8. Shri Sudipta Ghosh   - Chairman & DG OF
9. Shri Ashok K. Baweja  - Chairman (HAL)
10. Shri V.V.R. Shastry   - CMD, BEL
11. Dr. Prahlada    - CCR&D (SI) &DS
12. Shri Binoy Kumar   - JS (O)
13. Shri Bimal Julka   - JS (Air)
14. Shri T. Ramachandru  - JS (S)
15. Shri S.N. Misra   - JS (Aero)
16. Smt. Preeti Sudan   - JS& AM (MS)
17. Shri Chaman Kumar  - JS& AM (LS)
18. Shri R.K. Ghose   - JS & AM (Air)
19. Dr. K.K. Kirty    - Director (Acquisition)
20. V Adml. Raman P. Suthan  - VCNS
21. Lt. Gen. M.S. Dadwal   - DCOAS (P&S)
22. Air Mshl NAK Browne  - DCAS
23. Lt. Gen. I.J. Koshy   - DG Arty
24. Lt. Gen. J.S. Dhillon   - DGQA
25. Lt. Gen. S.S. Dhillon  - MGO
26. Maj. Gen V.K. Tiwari  - ADG Arty (A)
27. Maj. Gen. Surendra Kalra  - ADG QA (L)
28. Maj Gen. S. Sunder   - ADG WE
29. Maj Gen. I. S. Chaturvedi  - TM (LS)
30. R. Adm. Samir Chakravorty - ACIDS (WSOI)
31. R. Adml Girish Luthra  - ACNS (P&P)
32. AVM R.K. Srivastava  - ACAS (ENG A)
2. At the outset, the Chairman drew the attention of the representatives of
the Ministry of Defence to the Direction 58 of the Directions by the Speaker, Lok
Sabha regarding maintaining confidentiality of the deliberations of the sitting and
invited the representatives of the Ministry of Defence to brief the Committee on
salient features of Defence Procurement Policy - 2008. The representative of the
Ministry then briefed the Committee on the issues relating to the fast tack
procedure, five year defence plan, sharing of defence plan with public and private
sector, availability of perspective plan regarding requirement of the forces on
website, upgradation of equipment during the contract period etc.  During
deliberations, the representatives of the Ministry also informed the Committee
that power has been given to Defence Acquisition Council to vary the percentage
of the offset in certain cases.
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

104
3. On the question of identification of organisations for selection as Raksha
Udyog Ratnas (RURs), the representative of the Ministry informed that it was still
under considerations and it had not been notified so far.
4. The representative of the Ministry also clarified the points raised by the
Members on the issues relating to Foreign Direct Investment and present level
of Indigenisation.
5. As regards the points on which the representatives could not readily
respond, the Committee desired the representatives to furnish written information
at the earliest.
6. A copy of verbatim record of the proceedings has been kept.
The Committee then adjourned.
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

105
MINUTES OF THE NINTH SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON
DEFENCE (2008- 09)
 The Committee sat on Wednesday, the 5 th November, 2008 from 1500 to
1530 hrs. in Committee Room `B’, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Shri Balasaheb Vikhe Patil  -      Chairman
MEMBERS
LOK SABHA
2. Shri Santosh Gangwar
3. Shri Jigajinagi Ramesh Chandappa
4. Dr. K.S. Manoj
5. Shri Shrinivas Patil
6. Shri Raju Rana
7. Prof. Mahadeorao Shiwankar
8. Shri Rajesh Verma
9. Shri Anil Shukla Warsi
RAJYA SABHA
10. Shri Jai Parkash Aggarwal
11. Shri Abu Asim Azmi
12. Shri R.K. Dhawan
13. Shri K.B. Shanappa
14. Smt. Viplove Thakur
SECRETARIAT
1.  Shri A. Louis Martin  - Joint Secretary
2. Shri Rajeev Sharma  - Director
3. Shri D. R. Shekhar  - Deputy Secretary
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members to the sitting of the
Committee.  The Committee, thereafter, took up for consideration the draft report
on the subject `Indigenisation of Defence Production – Public Private
Partnership’, and adopted the same, without any modification.
3. The Committee then authorized the Chairman to finalise the report in light
of the factual verification of the narrative portion of the draft Report by the
Ministry of Defence and present the same to the Parliament.
The Committee then adjourned.
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages