6
STANDING COMMITTEE
ON DEFENCE
(2005-06)
FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA
MINISTRY OF DEFENCE
PROCUREMENT POLICY AND PROCEDURE
SIXTH REPORT
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
December, 2005/Agrahayana, 1927 (Saka)


SIXTH REPORT
STANDING COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE
(2005-06)
(FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA)
MINISTRY OF DEFENCE
PROCUREMENT POLICY AND PROCEDURE
Presented to Lok Sabha on 12.12.2005
Laid  in  Rajya Sabha  on 12.12.2005
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
December, 2005/Agrahayana, 1927 (Saka)

C.O.D. No. 68
Price : Rs. 81.00
© 2005 BY LOK S ABHA S ECRETARIAT
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of
Business in Lok Sabha (Eleventh Edition) and Printed by Jainco Art India,
New Delhi-110 005.

CONTENTS
PAGES
COMPOSITION OF THE C OMMITTEE .............................................................. (iii)
PREFACE ........................................................................................................ (v)
CHAPTER I Introduction ................................................................... 1
CHAPTER II Defence Procurement Procedure—A Brief History .. 10
CHAPTER III Linkage to Acquisition Plans ................................... 19
CHAPTER IV Formulation of Service Qualitative Requirement ... 23
CHAPTER VO ffset Clause................................................................. 26
CHAPTER VI Solicitation of Offers ................................................... 29
CHAPTER VII Single Vendor Situation ............................................. 33
CHAPTER VIII Standard Contract Clause .......................................... 37
CHAPTER IX Broad Time Frame for Procurement Activity ...... 38
CHAPTER X Integrity Pact (IP) ........................................................ 42
CHAPTER XI Appointment of Indian Authorised Representatives
of Foreign Supplier ..................................................... 46
CHAPTER XII Field Evaluation ........................................................... 48
CHAPTER XIII Fast Track Procedure .................................................. 50
CHAPTER XIV Post Contract Monitoring .......................................... 54
CHAPTER XV Revenue Procurement ................................................. 55
APPENDICES
Minutes of the Sittings of the Committee held on 13.12.2004,
4.2.2005, 20.6.2005, 12.9.2005, 7.11.2005 and 17.11.2005 .................. 59
(i)

COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE
ON DEFENCE (2005-06)
Shri Balasaheb Vikhe Patil —  Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Churchill Alemao
3. Shri Iliyas Azmi
4. Shri A.V . Bellarmin
5. Shri Suresh Chandel
6. Shri Thupstan Chhewang
7. Smt. Sangeeta Kumari Singh Deo
8. Shri Milind Deora
9. Shri Ramesh Jigajinagi
10. Shri Suresh Kalmadi
11.D r. C. Krishnan
12. Shri S.D. Mandlik
13. Dr. K.S. Manoj
14. Shri Raghuraj Singh Shakya
15. Shri Mahadeorao Shivankar
16. Shri Ganesh Prasad Singh
17. Shri Manvendra Singh
18. Shri Balashowry Vallabhaneni
19. Ms. Ingrid Mcleod
20. Shri Dharmendra Yadav
Rajya Sabha
21. Shri R.K. Anand
22. Dr. Farooq Abdullah
23. Shri T.T.V . Dhinakaran
24. Smt. N.P . Durga
(iii)

25. Shri Janardan Dwivedi
26. Shri Pramod Mahajan
27. Shri Mukhtar Abbas Naqvi
28. Shri Anand Sharma
29. Shri Lalit Suri
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri John Joseph — Secretary
2. Shri S.K. Sharma — Additional Secretary
3. Shri R.C. Ahuja — Joint Secretary
4. Smt. Anita Jain — Deputy Secretary
5. Shri D.R. Shekhar — Under Secretary
6. Smt. Jyochnamayi Sinha — Committee Officer
(iv)

PREFACE
I, the Chairman, Standing Committee on Defence (2005-06) having
been authorised by the Committee to submit the Report on their behalf,
present this Sixth Report on the subject ‘Procurement Policy and
Procedure’.
2. The Committee selected the above subject for examination during
the year 2004-05. As the examination of the subject remained
inconclusive, it was re-selected by the Standing Committee on Defence
for examination during the year 2005-06.
3. The Committee, during their examination of the subject, took
briefing and evidence of the representatives of the Ministry of Defence
on 13 December, 2004, 4 February, 20 June and 12 September, 2005.
The Committee also heard the views of representatives of Confederation
of Indian Industry (CII) on 10 October, 2005 on the subject.
4. Based on the background note, written replies to the list of
points furnished by the Ministry of Defence on the subject, approach
paper submitted by CII, briefing/oral evidences tendered by the
representatives of the Ministry and CII and the observations made by
the members of the Committee during the Study visit to Jammu, Leh
and Srinagar in October, 2004, the Committee finalised the draft Report
at their sitting held on 7 November, 2005 and considered/adopted it
at their sitting held on 17 November, 2005.
5. The Committee are concerned about the single vendor situation
which frequently arises in Defence Procurement and have suggested
that the GSQRs should be broad based and not be changed frequently.
The Committee also stressed that the Ministry should draw the Long
Term Integrated Perspective Plan, which will be helpful in projecting
the requirements of the Services well in time. This will also be helpful
to the Ordnance Factories, Defence PSUs and the Private Sector to
plan their investments in future.
The Committee also stressed that the Ministry should encourage
registration of authorized agents. This will facilitate in better
co-ordination between the Services and the manufacturer. The
Committee also recommend that the benefits of Transfer of Technology,
joint ventures should be extended to the private sector also. This will
be helpful in achieving Self-reliance.
(v)

The Committee also feel that the provision of an Offset Clause is
a welcome step and should be used for the development of indigenous
Defence industry. The Committee desire that efforts should be made
to ensure participation of private sector and benefits of this clause
should be passed on to them also.
6. The Committee wish to express their thanks to the representatives
of the Ministry of Defence and the Confederation of Indian Industry
(CII) for appearing before the Committee for evidence and for
furnishing the material and information in a very short span of time
which the Committee desired in connection with the examination of
this subject.
7. For facility of reference and convenience, the observations/
recommendations of the Committee have been printed in thick type in
the body of the Report.
N
EW D ELHI; BALASAHEB VIKHE PATIL,
 6 December, 2005 Chairman,
16 Agrahayana, 1927 (Saka) Standing Committee on Defence.
(vi)

CHAPTER I
INTRODUCTION
1.1 India’s strategic location, its long coast line, distant island
territories and the continuing acts of terrorism from across the border,
require India to maintain a high level of vigilance and defence
preparedness. To this end, the Armed forces are required to be
adequately equipped with the best state-of-the-art equipments available
in the world, within the shortest period of time because in modern
warfare ‘speed’ is the key to success in operational matters.
1.2 Defence expenditure accounts for nearly 13% of total Central
Government expenditure, 23% of non-plan expenditure and around
2.38% of GDP as per 2005-06 Budget Estimates. In order to ensure
better management of public money and procure defence equipments
in shortest possible time, a fast and transparent defence procurement
policy is the need of the hour. Acquisition of defence equipments is a
complex and intricate process which has evolved over the years taking
into account threat perception, security environment and requirements
of Defence forces. Unlike procurement of other items, it is a long,
deliberate and arduous process involving a number of steps like
evolution of qualitative requirement by the Services, acceptance of
necessity, identification of suitable vendors, issuance of Requests for
Proposals, technical evaluation of offers, invitation for trials of selected
equipments, General Staff evaluation and finally opening of the
commercial quotes of the acceptable equipment. Care has to be taken
at each step to maintain transparency and probity to ensure that the
country gets best value for money. However, keeping in view the
strategic importance of such deals, there is a need to keep certain
amount of secrecy as well which make it difficult to issue open tenders
etc. for such procurements.
1.3 It is seen that Defence purchases in recent times have become
a subject of controversy. In view of the importance of the transparency
and timely acquisition of defence equipments in the context of the
present security scenario, the Committee selected the subject
Procurement Policy and Procedure for detailed examination. The
Committee decided to make an indepth study on new Defence
Procurement Procedure-2005 for capital procurement and Revenue
Procurement Manual-2005 which has been introduced for the first time
so as to bring greater transparency in defence procurements and cut
down delays in acquisition.

2
1.4 The Committee are happy to note that the Government has
promulgated the new Defence Procurement Procedure-2005 for Capital
Procurements; and also, for the first time, Defence Procurement
Manual-2005, for Revenue Procurements. The Committee feel that it
will bring about greater transparency in defence purchases and make
procurements speedier thereby ensuring timely utilization of funds.
This way it can be ensured that our soldiers get timely and quality
supply of defence items.
1.5 The Committee desire the Government to examine whether
the stages for procurement can be reduced to curtail the time
involved. With a view to avoiding delays the Committee also desire
that once allocation has been made in the budget for a particular
procurement, the same should not be sent again and again for
approval to Ministry of Finance.
1.6 Defence Acquisitions
Defence procurements are made both from indigenous sources and
through imports. In response to a query from the Committee about
the percentage-wise break-up of procurement made through imports
and from indigenous sources during the last 5 years, the Ministry
furnished the following information:
(in %)
Year Navy Army Air Force Total for the three
Services
Imported Indigenous Imported Indigenous Imported Indigenous Imported Indigenous
2000-01 36.00 64.00 46 54 81 19 54.3 45.7
2001-02 48.93 51.07 34 66 74 26 52.3 47.7
2002-03 50.36 49.64 65 35 70 30 61.8 38.2
2003-04 57.68 42.32 52 48 76 24 61.9 38.1
2004-05 57.81 42.19 42 58 62 38 53.9 46.1
1.7 When enquired about the variation in percentage of indigenous
and imported procurements had over the last 50 years and the concrete
steps taken or proposed to be taken by the Government to boost up

3
the indigenous production and self-reliance, the Ministry in their written
reply gave the following information:
Year Procurement of Percentage of Percentage of
stores (Revenue+ Indigenous Imported
Capital) Procurement Procurement
(Rs. in crores)
1994-95 12610 31.21% 68.79%
1995-96 14857 30.50% 69.50%
1996-97 15953 30.68% 69.32%
1997-98 18006 44.04% 55.96%
1998-99 20882 53.66% 46.34%
1999-2000 26674 54.00% 46.00%
2000-01 27440 53.28% 46.72%
2001-02 31353 58.03% 41.97%
2002-03 31089 53.73% 46.27%
2003-04 34021 58.63% 41.37%
They have further stated that:
“The Acquisition Wing was created to deal with Capital
Acquisitions in 2001. Earlier procurement used to include Revenue
as well as Capital Acquisitions. In the year 2004-05, 53.9% of
procurement of Capital Acquisitions of Rs. 27,236 crore was through
imports.
It can be seen from the trend that percentage of imported
procurement has decreased over the last decade from 69% to about
41%.”
1.8 As regards constraints in increasing indigenous production, the
Ministry stated:
“The constraints in increasing indigenous production of Defence
Equipment have been examined by Kelkar Committee set up by
the Govt. Its recommendations to boost up the indigenous
production and self-reliance are being examined for
implementation.”

4
Special Features of Defence Industry
1.9 While explaining the special features of Defence industry and
Defence equipment acquisition, the Ministry furnished the following
information:
“In India, defence equipment is being produced primarily in the
public sector. Defence industry in the private sector is still in an
embryonic stage. It will take private sector some time to come of
age. There are a number of constraints in development of defence
industry in private sector. For example:
(i) Initial cost of investment in setting up infrastructure and
production facilities is prohibitive. Rapid obsolescence of
technology demands constant and sustained investment in
Research and Development (R&D) and technology
upgradation.
(ii) Procurement procedures of all countries are lengthy and
entail ground trials for long periods of time. Even thereafter
decision-making is very time-consuming. Market for defence
equipment is highly restricted and competitive. All countries
protect, nurture and further the cause of their indigenous
industry.
(iii) Major difficulties are faced when there is a need for
integration of complex systems in a weapon system. These
difficulties got compounded if the major sub-systems belong
to different types of technologies.
Special Features of Defence Equipment Acquisition
As with the defence industry, there are some special features which
characterize defence equipment acquisition. These have been discussed
in the succeeding paragraphs.
(a) Level of Technology
Most of the important defence acquisitions pertain to high-end
technology. It is quite understandable that the services should seek the
latest high-tech systems with cutting-edge technology with a view to
maintain superiority over potential adversaries. But the procurement
of such technology is not easy as it is well protected and not available
freely.

5
(b) Complexity of Systems
No Original Equipment Manufacturer (OEM) produces a complete
system. Complete Integrated systems are difficult to be sourced from
one vendor. Invariably , sub-systems based on different hardware and
software have to be procured from varied sources and their matching/
integration is got done according to specific requirements. This entails
close coordination amongst various agencies making it a time
consuming process.
(c) Modernisation of Equipment
It is not possible to have all equipment of the same generation at
any given time as complete inventories cannot be turned-over en-masse.
Modernisation is a continuous process and is implemented in planned
phases and for which a three-tier approach is adopted. At the lowest
tier are equipments of obsolete technology whose useful life cycle is
over and which need to be phased out. The middle tier consists of the
equipment which still have considerable residual life. Their technology
is mature but still relevant. Most of our inventory falls under this
category. The upper tier consists of the state-of-the-art equipments
which act as force multipliers and are generally expensive. Moreover,
evaluation of such frontier technologies to ascertain their suitability to
our environment is a time-consuming process. This three-tier system
implies that maintenance, overhaul and upgradation of various systems
assume significance. Availability of spares and product support have
to be ensured.
(d)  Denial Regime
Defence acquisitions have to be made within the constraints
imposed by technology denial regimes. Many foreign Governments
deny export licenses for the defence equipment sought and their spares.
Invariably political and strategic considerations of the supplier country
come into force. Unreliability of such sources has to be taken into
account while planning acquisition.
(e) Commercially Available Equipment
With the development of our own industrial sector, a number of
items can be procured commercially off the shelf (COTS). Such items
are usually at the lower end of technology.

6
(f) Quality Control
Specialist organizations such as Directorate General of Quality
Assurance (DGQA) have been assigned the responsibility of carrying
out inspections and ensuring quality control. No equipment is accepted
unless inspected and accepted by DGQA. It is a very deliberate process
and guards against delivery of sub-standard goods by unscrupulous
vendors.
(g) Exploitation of Equipment
Optimum exploitation of any equipment can be achieved only if
both man and machine are fully integrated. Therefore, while identifying
the equipment for procurement, training of the crew and their
competence to absorb instructions have to be kept in mind. This
invariably forms a part of the contract.
(h) Upgradation of Qualitative Requirements (QRs)
User services always want the best and the latest equipment. Even
during the currency of a procurement process, users want to upgrade
QRs. Such mid-course updates of QRs delay the completion of the
acquisition process.
(i) Secrecy v/s Transparency
Procurement of any major military equipment cannot be carried
out through open advertisements. The degree of secrecy required to
be maintained will vary. On the other hand, transparency demands
that maximum publicity be given and open competition be generated.
These are contradictory requirements necessitating delicate balancing.”
1.10 When asked about the role envisaged for the private
participation in establishing joint ventures with the foreign countries,
DRDO/DPSU/Ordnance Factories in development of defence
equipment, the Ministry in a written note stated:
“As per the policy announcement made by the Government in
May 2001, the Defence Industry sector was opened up to 100% for
Indian Private Sector participation with Foreign Direct Investment
(FDI) permissible up to 26% both subject to licensing. So far,
23 Letters of Intent (LOI)/Industrial Licences (IL) have been issued
to entrepreneurs in the Private Sector by the Department of
Industrial Policy & Promotion in consultation with the Ministry of
Defence for manufacture of various Defence items.

7
As far as the role of Private  Sector participation in establishing
joint ventures with the foreign countries, DRDO, Defence PSUs/
Ordnance Factories in development/production of Defence
equipment is concerned, a much greater role is envisaged for
participation of Private Sector in establishing joint ventures for
development and production of Defence equipment. Government
would consider on merits the establishment of new projects by
public and private sector through formation of consortiums or joint
ventures.”
1.11 When asked about the roadmap developed by the Ministry
for the next ten or fifteen years, in enhancing indigenous defence
production, the Defence Secretary during oral evidence stated:
“I would like to say that the capability of the domestic industries—
whether private sector or public sector—is increasing every year.
We have also to see the requirement of the Defence Services. Here
are certain areas where the capability does not exist, the import
route has to be taken. If the volume is large, then, as I explained
earlier, the technology transfer is taken. Thereafter, that becomes
indigenous production in a phased manner.”
1.12 When asked as to how the Ministry are planning to ensure
acquisition of design and development of technology, particularly at
the level of sub-systems components and spares, which at a later stage
can be best produced by PSUs or small-scale private company with
licence in the new procurement procedure, the Ministry of Defence in
their written reply stated:
“Acquisition proposals are forwarded to the Headquarters
Integrated Defence Staff (HQ IDS) by the Service Headquarters.
HQ IDS along with the representatives of various departments
carry out technology scan in consultation with Defence Research
and Development Organisation (DRDO) and then takes a holistic
view of any proposal and categorise the case as ‘BUY’, ‘Buy and
Make with Transfer of Technology’ or ‘Make’. The issue of transfer
of Technology is analysed depending on the cost effectiveness and
economy of scales. These recommendations are put up to the
Defence Acquisition Council (DAC) which is headed by the Raksha
Mantri. This Committee approve the proposal after due analysis.
As a policy the Ministry is seeking maximum transfer of technology
in cases which are approved as ‘Buy and Make’. It also monitors
the level of technology being absorbed over the years and the
same is reflected in the notes that are sent to the Cabinet Committee
on Security (CCS).”

8
1.13 When asked whether the Govt. propose to allow private sector
participation in ToT agreements to take benefit of developing new
technologies, the Ministry in their written reply have stated:
“The Kelkar Committee has, inter alia , made certain
recommendations regarding greater participation of the Private
Sector in Defence Production. The recommendations made by the
Committee are under active consideration of the Government.”
1.14 During oral evidence, the Defence Secretary, further emphasized
this point:
“It is a great field of integration and things like that. We require
independent configuration in most of the critical technologies. The
Services, DRDO and the production agencies have participated very
keenly right from the research stage, and all these things are done
stage by stage. There is a good deal of partnership, and certainly
our aim is to become self-sufficient in areas of critical technologies.”
1.15 The Committee note that 53.9% of procurements made in
2004-05 are through imports and only 46.1% of procurements are
from indigenous sources. In the case of Navy, procurements through
imports have increased from 36% to 57.81% during the last 5 years.
It shows that even after more than 55 years of Independence, cutting
edge technologies have not been developed in the country. This has
resulted in the large scale dependence on foreign suppliers for
defence procurements which are subjected to various constraints like
technology denials, sanctions, higher costs, etc. by the exporting
countries. The Committee feel that these constraints can be
adequately addressed through sufficient investments in R&D Sector
as also through transfer of design, data and technology agreements.
The Committee, therefore, are of the strong view that Government
should lay stress on building a strong R&D base with accountability
so that development of defence equipment within the country is
encouraged and dependence on foreign suppliers is minimized.
1.16 Whenever imports are made, transfer of design, data and
technology should also be ensured. During the life of the agreement
or a reasonable period to be specified therein, if the weapon system
is upgraded, the foreign manufacturer should also transfer the
upgraded technology without payment of royalty.
1.17 The technology design and other related information
transferred may be passed on to the DRDO/OFs/DPSUs/Private Sector

9
engaged in defence production for further modernisation and
upgradation of the existing technology and development of new
technology. In this way, defence weapons and other equipment can
be constantly upgraded indigenously throughout their service life.
1.18 The Committee further desire that the private sector, which
has grown in its capabilities and resources over the years, should be
actively involved in the development/production/supply of defence
equipment. Instead of large scale dependence on foreign suppliers,
who work under constraints imposed by their respective
Governments, the Committee are of strong view that home-grown
technologies should be developed with coordinated and concerted
efforts of DPSUs, Ordnance Factories, Private Sector and DRDO.
The Committee, therefore, desire that an appropriate defence
production and procurement strategy be chalked out with emphasis
on developing indigenous technologies. The Committee further desire
that sufficient incentives with financial support be given to promote
R&D in both public and private sectors engaged in developing
cutting edge technologies. Similarly, in the case of Transfer of
Technology (T.O.T.) agreements, private sector should also be allowed
to participate in/take benefit of developing new technologies.
1.19 In case of procurement from foreign vendors with the
transfer of technology, the joint ventures may not be restricted to
the OFs/DPSUs only. Private manufacturers with adequate capabilities
should also be considered and encouraged to enter into such joint
ventures. The Committee also feel that joint ventures or collaborations
of the OFs/DPSUs with private entrepreneurs/foreign vendors should
also be encouraged.

10
CHAPTER II
DEFENCE PROCUREMENT PROCEDURE—A BRIEF HISTORY
2.1 Defence equipment is very expensive and requires huge
investments to procure it. It is, therefore, essential that proper
procedures be laid down and strictly adhered to for its procurement
to get value for money. Well formulated procedures help in ensuring
expeditious procurement of the approved equipment in terms of
capabilities sought and time frame prescribed by optimally utilizing
the allocated budgetary resources.
2.2 Emphasizing the need for well formulated procedure for defence
procurement, the Public Accounts Committee, Lok Sabha, in their
187th Report (1989) recommended that Government should draw up
comprehensive guidelines with regard to negotiations and
implementation of defence contracts.
Defence Procurement Procedure 1992
2.3 Based on the above recommendation of PAC, (and Expert
Committee Report of 1986), the Ministry of Defence issued guidelines
for all procurement cases involving an outlay of Rs. 10.0 crore or
more on 28 Feb. 1992. It is commonly referred to as Defence
Procurement Procedure 1992 (DPP-1992). Modifications were
incorporated in it from time to time. DPP-1992 laid down the steps to
be followed for the complete gamut of procurement process. Though
DPP-1992 was a creditable effort as it covered all activities pertaining
to procurement, it suffered from several inadequacies which became
apparent in its implementation over the years. Enumerating the
deficiencies in DPP-1992, the Ministry in a written note stated that:
(i) It did not cater to emergent requirements.
(ii) A major grey area pertained to Transfer of Technology under
‘Buy and Make’ decision.
(iii) Single-stage two bid system was not adequately stressed
upon. Therefore, in a number of cases commercial quotes
were sought from a single vendor after successful completion
of trials.
(iv) It did not provid for an inbuilt review mechanism.

11
(v) A large number of agencies were involved in the process,
yet there was no single monitoring agency.
(vi) After the finalisation of Services Qualitative Requirements,
Defence Research and Development Organisation (DRDO)
was generally given the first option to develop the
equipment. Vetting by DRDO entailed additional time.
(vii) The procedure did not cater for long duration projects ( eg.
Naval Projects).
(viii) There was no dedicated organization meant exclusively for
procurement purposes. Most of the officers held multiple
charges thus dividing their attention and efforts.
2.4 The shortcomings became more apparent during the Kargil
conflict in 1999 when emergent procurements were required to be made.
After the Kargil Conflict, the Govt. constituted a Group of Ministers
(GOM) to go into the entire gamut of national security.
Findings of Group of Ministers on National Security
2.5 The group of Ministers on National Security in their report
submitted in February, 2001 felt that the existing structure for
procurement had led to sub-optimal utilization of funds, long delays
in acquisition and had not been conducive to the modernization of
the Services. They suggested the creation of a separate and dedicated
institutional structure and establishment of Defence Procurement
Organisation. The Report of the Group of Ministers was approved by
the Cabinet Committee on Security (CCS) on 11 May 2001.
Consequently, the Ministry of Defence established a new Defence
Procurement Organization on 11 October 2001. This order also lays
down the broad guidelines for the new defence procurement procedure
promulgated in 2002.
Defence Procurement Procedure 2002
2.6 Defence Procurement Procedure 2002 was promulgated in
December 2002 and made effective from 31st December 2002 and was
applicable for procurements flowing out of ‘Buy’ decision of Defence
Acquisition Council (DAC). This procedure was subsequently amended
in June 2003 to include procurement on ‘Buy and Make’ through
Imported Transfer of Technology (TOT)’ and termed as DPP-2002
(Version June 2003).

12
Acquisition Structure
2.7 The following is the acquisition structure established as a result
of GOM Report.
Defence Procurement Organization
The Defence Procurement Organisation consists of the following:
(a) Defence Acquisition Council
1. It is an overarching structure under Raksha Mantri (RM). It
consisted of Rajya Raksha Mantris, Chief of Army Staff
(COAS), Chief of Naval Staff (CNS), Chief of Air Staff (CAS),
Defence Secretary, Secretary, Defence Production (DP),
Secretary, Research & Development (R&D), Secretary
(Defence Finance), Chief of Integrated Defence Staff (CIDS)
and Special Secretary (Acq).
2. DAC has been tasked to give approval in principle to capital
acquisitions in the Long Term Perspective Plan (LTPP)
covering a 15 year time span at the beginning of a Five
year Plan period. It also approved all capital acquisition
projects and identifying them as ‘Buy’ and ‘Make’ cases.
Monitoring the progress of major projects is also its
responsibility.
3. The decisions of RM based on DAC deliberations flew down
for implementation to Defence Procurement Board, Defence
Production Board and Defence R&D Board.
(b) Defence Procurement Board (DPB)
2.8 (i) It functions under the Defence Secretary and has Secretary
(Defence Production), Secretary (Defence Research &
Development), Secretary (Defence Finance),  Vice Chiefs of
the three Services and Special Secretary (Acquisition) as
members.
(ii) It oversees all activities related to ‘Buy’ and ‘Buy and Make’
decisions of DAC. It is responsible for the coordination,
supervision and monitoring of the acquisition process.
(iii) It has also been tasked to examine proposals from the
Acquisition Wing regarding procurement procedures and
make necessary changes in the procurement process after
obtaining the approval of Raksha Mantri.

13
(c) Defence Production Board
2.9 It functions under Secretary (DP) and overseas all activities
related to the indigenous manufacture under the Department of Defence
Production flowing from the ‘Buy and Make’ and ‘Make’ decisions of
the DAC.
(d) Defence R&D Board
2.10 It is chaired by Secretary (Def. R&D) and is responsible to
progress, monitor and report on all indigenous proposals flowing out
of the ‘Buy and Make’ and ‘Make’ decisions of the DAC.
(e) Acquisition Wing
2.11 The Defence Procurement Board is assisted in its functioning
by an Acquisition Wing in the Department of Defence. All matters
concerning acquisition of capital nature are dealt with by it. It is an
integrated set up with officers from the Department of Defence, Finance
Division and Service Head Quarters.
It is headed by Additional/Special Secretary (Acquisition) and is
assisted by Financial Adviser (Acquisition) who also functioned as the
Integrated Financial Adviser and head the Finance Branch in the
Acquisition Wing.
The Wing consists of four Divisions viz. Land, Maritime, Air Force
and Systems. Each Division has a Joint Secretary designated as
Acquisition Manager, an Addl. Financial Adviser designated as Finance
Manager and a Service Officer of two-star rank designated as Technical
Manager.
Need for changing Defence Procurement Procedure 2002
2.12 With the experience gained in the last three years, Ministry of
Defence realized that there exist some problems in implementation of
DPP 2002 that need to be resolved to further streamline the process of
acquisition. This has been necessitated due to the realization that
following would need to be done:
(a) Compress time frame and delineate clear time frames at
each state of acquisitions to ensure optimal utilization of
capital budget allocation.
(b) Reduce time taken at the acceptance of ‘necessity’ stage.

14
(c) Evolve a system of open tendering for non sensitive security
equipment;
(d) Put in place a nodal mechanism for formulating joint QRs
for equipment of tri-service nature;
(e) Provide guidelines in regard to application of Discounted
Cash Flow (DCF) for evaluating offers with different
payment terms and involving cash flow over a period of
time and Exchange Rate Variation (ERV) in respect of
Defence PSUs in order to make procurement process more
transparent and objective;
(f) Expedite processing of indents placed on Ordnance Factory
Board (OFB) and schemes entrusted to DRDO; and
(g) Include “Off set” in RFP on case to case basis to avail of
direct benefits like technological transfer and exports, etc. &
integrity pact as part of Standard Conditions of Contract.
Defence Procurement Procedure 2005
2.13 The Defence Procurement Procedure 2002 (version June 2003)
needed a review in the light of experience gained over the years and
also to incorporate suggestions received from Central Vigilance
Commission and Comptroller & Auditor General and Ministry of
Finance from time to time to streamline the procedure and to remove
the impediments in the acquisition process. In order to meet the twin
objectives of greater transparency and accountability in all acquisition
process and reduction in acquisition time cycle as also in view of
mandatory requirement of review to DPP 2002 after 2 years, the Govt.
brought forward a new Defence Procurement Procedure 2005. DPP-
2005 has come into effect from 1st July 2005. The salient features of
DPP-2005 are:
1. qualitative requirements have been further broad based to
avoid single vendor situations;
2. provisions have been incorporated to obtain upto 30% direct
offset in acquisition cases of more than Rs. 300 crore. This
is in line with Kelkar Committees recommendation and has
been incorporated to benefit Indian industry.
3. provision for an Integrity Pact has been made in the RFP
for purchases over Rs. 300 crore;

15
4. standard contract document has been made a part of the
RFP soliciting techno commercial offer. This will provide
level playing field to the bidders bringing in addition,
objectivity and transparency in the process;
5. preparation of Joint Services Qualitative Requirements for
common equipment of the three services.
6. evaluation criteria have been made more objective
incorporating some of the suggestions made by the Ministry
of Finance.
7. Broad timeframe for the completion of different procurement
activities has been prescribed for processing procurement
cases to expedite acquisition process.
Defence Procurement Manual-2005
2.14 While the Defence Procurement Procedure addresses
predominantly the procedure for capital acquisition flowing out of
‘Buy’ or ‘Buy or Make’ with TOT option, there was no uniform manual
for Revenue expenditure which accounts nearly 55% of total revenue
expenditure of Government of India. The Government, therefore,
announced Defence Procurement Manual 2005 for revenue procurement.
2.15 The salient features of the Defence Procurement Manual 2005
(Revenue Procurement) are as under:
(i) The Request for Proposals, both for indigenous and foreign
procurement has been made transparent, enumerating short-
listing and award criteria;
(ii) Uniformity has been brought in for the interpretation of
various contracting clauses and issues;
(iii) Broad time frame has been prescribed for each state and
process of procurement so as to cut down delays and bring
in accountability.
(iv) General guidelines for assessing Reasonability of Prices.
Defence Procurement Policy for ‘Make’ category
2.16 The Defence Procurement Policy 2005 caters only to Buy/Buy
and make categories. When asked as to the steps being taken by the
Ministry to evolve an effective and clear-cut policy in ‘Make’ category,
the Ministry in their written reply have stated that:
“the Government is in the process of formulating a separate
procedure for Defence acquisition in respect of ‘Make’ category of
projects.”

16
2.16a. During oral evidence the Defence Secretary further stated
that:
“the Integrated Defence Staff has prepared a draft ‘Make’ Policy
which has been circulated to the services and to other concerned
divisions. After consultations, the ‘Make’ category policy is going
to be set up.”
2.17 The Committee are happy to note that the Government has
promulgated a new Defence Procurement Procedure (DPP)—2005 for
Capital Procurements and Defence Procurement Manual 2005 for
Revenue Procurements by incorporating the suggestions of Central
Vigilance Commission and Comptroller & Auditor General and
Ministry of Finance. The Committee hope that the procedure and
manual will effectively address the shortcomings of the earlier
procedure and make the procurement process more transparent and
faster.
2.18 The Committee note that DPP-2005 caters only to Buy/Buy
& Make categories and the Government is in the process of
formulating a separate procedure for defence acquisition in respect
of ‘Make’ category of projects. The Committee desire that a clear-cut
policy and procedure for the same should be formulated at the
earliest, which should duly involve the private sector to exploit their
capabilities. Efforts should be made to synergise the capabilities of
public and private sectors and DRDO to pave the way for attaining
self-reliance in defence production.
2.19 The Committee note that for the first time the Ministry has
released a separate manual for Revenue Procurement which accounts
for nearly 55% of the total revenue expenditure of the Ministry of
Defence. The Committee feel it will help in cutting down delays in
procurement of day-to-day requirements. The Committee desire that
the manual may be constantly reviewed and updated by incorporating
various suggestions and experience of the Ministry of Defence so
that it may become more effective.
2.20 As the new DPP has become effective only from 1.7.2005,
the Committee do not have the benefit of Government’s experience
in working the new procedure. However, the Committee have made
an indepth study of the new procedure and manual in conjunction
with the earlier procedures and have given their recommendations
in the succeeding paragraphs on some of the important stages
involved in the procurement procedure.

17
Ship Building Procedure
2.21 A specific procedure for Ship building has been included in
DPP-2005 to address the complex issue involved in indigenous design
and construction of warships in Defence Public Sector Shipyards. The
procedure provides as under:
“In accordance with the Defence Procurement Procedure 2005,
Capital Acquisitions have been categorized under three main heads,
namely; ‘Buy’, ‘Buy and Make’ and ‘Make’ decisions. Warship
building is a capital and technology intensive activity that does
not fall into any one of the above categories because elements of
all these are present in the process of ship construction. Hence, it
is necessary to define a separate procedure for acquisition of war-
ships and Coast Guard vessels through indigenous design/
construction. However, procurement of a complete ship from abroad
will continue to be guided by DPP-05. Similarly, minor vessels
such as yard craft, barges, harbour tugs, ferry craft and pontoons
for the Services will also be procured under provisions of DPP-05.
For minor vessels more than one Shipyard may be short-listed.
Cases of nomination of a yard for Coast  Guard ships will also be
approved by the DPB based on the merits of each case.
This procedure will be applicable to acquisition of warships through
indigenous design and construction by Defence Public Sector
shipyards.”
2.22 As regards, the current decommissioning schedule of the
warships of the Navy in their Long  Term Perspective Plan, the
Committee were informed that the Navy has made 15-year long-term
Perspective Plan and 10-year Ship building Plan. In the Perspective
Plan, the Ministry have targeted for 195 ships. The DAC has also
directed the Ministry to ensure to have 140 ships. But based on the
current decommissioning schedule, the force level will come down to
123. This will pick up and come to 132 by the end of the Eleventh
Plan.
2.23 When the Committee enquired about the status of acquisition
of submarines, and the idle submarine building capacity in MDL, the
Defence Secretary during oral evidence stated:
“It is correct to say that the Mazagon Dockyard did not
manufacture submarines after 1994. In fact, it was doing the
repairing and maintenance work of submarine. As far as the
requirement of the Navy is concerned, talks are going on with the

18
French companies. The aim even at that time was that it would be
bought through technology transfer and the submarine will be
built in our submarine manufacturing yard, that is Mazagon
Docks.”
In response to a query about cost escalation due to delay in
finalizing the submarine project, the Defence Secretary stated:
“There was a question of cost escalation because the negotiations
were prolonging. So the Ministry of Defence again negotiated
regarding limiting cost escalation and finally last week the Cabinet
Committee on Security have cleared the submarine projects and
India will manufacture Scorpene class submarine with French
technology and French parts in the Mazagon Docks. So our
Mazagon Dock capability will be restored.”
2.24 The Committee note with concern that with the scheduled
de-commissioning of the ships, the force level will fall to 132 at the
end of Eleventh Plan against DAC’s directive to maintain the force
level of 140 ships. The Committee, therefore, strongly recommend
the Government to take urgent steps to expedite acquisition of ships
by placing sufficient orders with Defence Shipyards so that the
required number of ships may be maintained. The Committee also
desire that sufficient funds may be allocated to Defence Shipyards
to enable them to undertake upgradation/modernization of their
existing infrastructure and produce ships of latest technology, thereby
facilitating the Navy to induct them and to maintain their force
level as per perspective plan.
2.25 The Committee note that there is a shortfall in acquisition
of submarines by the Navy. This is to be viewed in the context that
submarine building facility at MDL has been lying idle for more
than eleven years as no order was given to them. The Committee
have been informed that a decision has now been taken to
manufacture Scorpene class submarine with French technology and
French parts at MDL. Since the acquisition of submarines has been
long delayed, the Committee desire the Ministry to take urgent steps
to upgrade the submarine building facilities at MDL in a time-bound
manner with adequate allocation of funds and induction of technical
manpower so that any further delay in manufacturing of submarines
may be avoided.

19
CHAPTER III
LINKAGE TO ACQUISITION PLANS
3.1 DPP-2005 lays down that proposals for acquisition of capital
assets flow out from the defence procurement planning process. This
planning process will cover the long-term, medium-term and short-
term perspectives as under:
(a) 15 year Long Term Perspective Plan (LTPP)
(b) 5 year Services Capital Acquisition Plan (SCAP)
(c) Annual Acquisition Plan (AAP)
The procedure further provides that:
“Based on the Raksha Mantri’s Operational Directive, Headquarters
Integrated Defence Staff (HQ IDS), in consultation with the Service
Headquarters (SHQs), would formulate 15 years Long Term
Integrated Perspective Plan (LTIPP) for the Defence Forces. The
Five Year Defence Plans for the services would also be formulated,
by HQ IDS, which would include requirements of 5 years Services
Capital Acquisition Plan. The SCAP should indicate the list of
equipment to be acquired, keeping in view operational exigencies
and the overall requirement of funds. The planning process would
be under the overall guidance of the Defence Acquisition Council.
Its decisions as approved by the Raksha Mantri will flow down
for implementation to the Defence Procurement Board (DPB). The
DAC will categorize all schemes as BUY, BUY and MAKE and
MAKE on a five year basis and accord overall Acceptance of
Necessity. The AAP would be a subset of the SCAP and would
also include schemes of value less than Rs. 20 crores.”
3.2 Explaining further, the Ministry in their background note stated,
“Acquisitions have been linked to the Services Long Term
Perspective Plans. Headquarters Integrated Defence  Staff has been
assigned the responsibility of integrating the plans and thereafter
Defence Acquisition Council (DAC) would categorise all schemes
of Services Capital Acquisition Plan (SCAP). If SCAP is not
finalized, Annual Acquisition Plan (AAP) would be approved by
the DPB based on the recommendations of SCAP Higher

20
Categorisation Committee (SCAPHCC). Approval of SCAP and AAP
by DAC/DPB would be construed as Acceptance of Necessity and
only quantity vetting will be done in the MoD. This should help
in reducing the time taken for procurement.”
3.3 As the acquisition process flows from defence procurement
planning the Committee inquired about the status of Long Term
Integrated Perspective Plan and the Tenth Defence Plan of the Ministry.
The Ministry in their reply stated:
“Interaction with Service HQs for formulating the Long Term
Integrated Perspective Plan (LTIPP) commenced in Jan. 02 to cover
the period 2002-2017. On receipt of the Long Term Perspective
Plans (LTPPs) from the three services, an initial LTIPP was
formulated by HQ IDS in Oct. 03 and circulated to the Service
HQs for their comments.
It was observed that LTPPs of the three services are basically based
on the tasks listed in the RM’s Operational Directive 2002,
and focused on individual service requirements to make up the
voids.
Certain important issues like Joint Conventional Edge, capabilities
to be achieved, aspects of commonality of equipment; inter-service
prioritization and indigenisation which have not been adequately
addressed in the initial LTIPP . Secondly since three years had
already elapsed in the 10th Plan, it was felt that a revised LTIPP
be drafted at HQ IDS to focus on the above issues and cover the
Xth, XIth and XIIth plan periods. Thus, LTIPP 2002-2017 was not
presented to the COSC for approval. It may be mentioned that the
draft 10th five year plan was forwarded by IDS HQs to MoD on
12 May 04 and the period upto 2007 has been adequately covered.
A draft Approach paper for LTIPP 2007-2022 has been prepared.
Comments from the Service HQs are being anlaysed at HQ IDS.
Various Study Teams have been formed to deliberate upon these
critical issues which are complex in nature and require an involved
process. The revised LTIPP (2007-2022) on compilation will be
circulated to the service HQs for their comments and then presented
to COSC. On clearance by the service HQs and COSC, it will be
forwarded to the Ministry of Defence for obtaining DAC/CCS
approval.”

21
3.4 During evidence when the Committee enquired about the likely
time by which the integrated defence plan would be finalized, the
Defence Secretary replied:
“even in the earlier meeting, you have expressed the concern and
we have really gone ahead with a much better degree of planning
and this long-term integrated defence plan is underway. Certainly,
this whole exercise is being done by us in consultation with all
Service Headquarters. We are at it. We would be in a much better
position than what was there earlier.”
3.5 The Committee note that acquisition of capital assets flows
out from the defence procurement planning process which covers
15-year long term Perspective Plan, 5-year Service Capital Acquisition
Plan and Annual Acquisition Plan. It is, therefore, imperative that
the above plans are formulated in time and timely approval is given
by Government with firm indication of available funds so that
procurement process progresses smoothly.
3.6 The Committee are constrained to note that there has been
abnormal delay in formulation and approval of LTIPP covering the
period 2002-2017 and since 3 years of the plan have elapsed, the
Ministry has now revised the period of LTIPP to 2007-2022. Even
the 10th Defence Five Year Plan (2002-2007), which is in the fourth
year, has not yet been approved with firm indication of funds till
now and is now an academic exercise only. It shows the casual
approach of the Government in formulation of such an important
plan as also adhocism in decision making, adversely affecting the
modernization plan of the services. The Committee need not
emphasize that in the long term procurements, lead time is required
for creating futuristic forces, making it necessary to have long term
defence planning. The Committee, therefore, recommend that the
Government should urgently finalise the long term Perspective Plan
and also initiate steps for finalization of the 11th Defence Plan so
that there is a clear direction of procurements to be made. The
Committee desire that the exercise be completed in a time-bound
manner preferably within a year. The Committee further desire that
the 11th Plan Approach Paper may be made available to the
Committee at the time of examination of Demand for Grants 2006-
2007.
3.7 The early finalisation of the LTIPP will also help in projecting
the financial requirements to Ministry of Finance (MOF) well in
advance, so as to enable them to plan for the required funds

22
accordingly. This planning will also help the Ministry of Defence
(MOD) in identifying the requirements of the Services and initiating
the procurement process, well in time, thereby reducing the time
lag. This will also help in determining the broad based qualitative
requirements by the services and ensuring that the GSQRs are not
frequently changed and single vendor situations are avoided. The
Ordnance Factories and public and private sectors can also plan their
investments accordingly.

23
CHAPTER IV
FORMULATION OF SERVICE QUALITATIVE REQUIREMENT
4.1 The procurement process starts with the formulation of Service
Qualitative Requirement (SQR) which lays down the user requirements
in a comprehensive manner.
4.2 When asked to explain the procedure followed for laying down
SQR by the user directorate, the Ministry of Defence in a written
reply furnished the following information:
“All acquisitions are generally based on Service Qualitative
Requirements (SQRs), which lay down the users requirements in a
comprehensive, structured and concrete manner. These SQRs are
drafted by the user directorate at Service Headquarters and
circulated to all concerned including Directorate of Research and
Development Organisation, Department of Defence Production,
Directorate General of Quality Assurance, Directorate of
Standardization and the Technical Manager, Acquisition Wing and
any other department, as deemed necessary.”
4.3 When asked as to whether it is not essential that the experts
from OFB and DRDO must be consulted before laying down the SQR,
the Ministry in their written reply stated that:
“The Services Qualitative Requirements (SQRs) when formulated
are circulated to all the agencies including the Defence Public Sector
Undertakings (PSUs) and the Defence Research and Development
Organisation (DRDO) well in time. The comments of these agencies
are duly considered and  SQRs modified accordingly. All these
agencies are represented on the Staff Equipment Policy Committee
which approves the Services Qualitative Requirements.
The new procedure lays down that the SQRs should be broad
based and should result in a multi vendor situation.”
4.4 Comparing this provision will DPP 2002, the Ministry stated
that
“DPP 2002 procedure envisaged approval of SQR of Staff
Equipment Policy Committee (SEPC) after necessary vetting by

24
concerned agency while in the new procedure the provision of
seeking comments of technical managers on SQRs has been added.
Prior to approval of SQRs the SEPC is to assess the likely number
of venders meeting the SQRs. If single vendor situation is likely
then reason for formulation of such SQR has to be recorded.”
4.5 According to the Ministry it will avoid single vendor cases
and ensure formulation of realistic SQRs.
4.6 The Ministry further informed that:
“DPP-2005 provides that SQRs should be broad based and
formulated so as not to restrict the technical choice of equipment.
To ensure standardization of an equipment, being procured by all
the services, the SQR would be prepared by Headquarters
Integrated Defence Staff (IDS). In the new procedure, the procedure
of having desirable parameters has been done away with, since it
has no relevance either in conduct of trials or for staff evaluation.”
4.7 Another important feature of DPP-2005 is that it clearly states
waiver/amendment to parameters of SQR may be accorded by the
SHQ concerned before issue of Request for Proposal (RFP). Thereafter
no waiver of parameters would be granted.
4.8 The Committee note that the new procedure provides that
SQRs should be made broad-based so as not to restrict the technical
choice of equipment and that would help in avoiding single vendor
situation. While appreciating the intention, the Committee would
like to caution that by broadbasing SQRs, the Ministry should not
compromise with the quality of the equipment and the specialized
requirements of the Defence forces.
4.9 The Committee fully endorse the amendment in new
procedure of not granting any waiver to SQR amendment parameters
after issue of RFPs. The Committee feel that it will improve
transparency and would be fair and impartial to the vendors.
4.10 The Committee, however, desire that  SQRs should be laid
down after careful evaluation of the equipment, if already in use,
during the trials and exercises. The Committee feel that for laying
down  SQRs, experts from OFB/DRDO and reputed private
organisations having relevant expertise must be consulted so that
deficiencies in the equipment are identified and technical parameters,
after rectifying the known deficiencies, are correctly laid down for
the procurement of that equipment in future.

25
4.11 Similarly, if the equipment to be procured is not in use, the
service requirements should be clearly identified first by the user
and thereafter SQR may be laid down after consulting experts from
DRDO, OFB and reputed private Organisations having relevant
expertise. This would help in avoiding changes in SQR again and
again.
4.12 The Committee suggest that, in order to avoid single vendor
situations a new methodology be adopted which should comprise
inviting pre-bid meetings of the various manufacturers to discuss
technical specifications of the desired product after floating global
enquiries. Then the respective service headquarters can prepare their
own technical specifications from the above discussion by involving
the technical experts from the user service, DRDO, OFB, DGQA and
reputed private organizations having relevant expertise, before
inviting the manufacturers to submit the technical and financial bids
according to the specifications. This will be helpful in avoiding
manipulation and single vendor situations as many manufacturers
will participate in final biding and accountability will be there. The
Committee would like to emphasize that the system should be
foolproof so that there is no room for accusation of corruption and
illegal transaction.

26
CHAPTER V
OFFSET CLAUSE
5.1 The DPP 2005 contains a new offset provision to leverage the
benefits of large defence purchases to country’s advantage.
It states as under:
“The SCAP Categorisation Committee will also recommend the
inclusion of an offset clause amounting to 30 percent of the
indicative cost in the RFP where the indicative cost of the contract
is Rs. 300 crore or more. The Committee will also suggest the
name of the lead DPSU/OFB which will assist MoD in monitoring
the implementation of the offset contracts during the post
contractual period. The SCAP Categorisation Higher Committee
may consider changes in the offset amount, if felt necessary, while
making recommendation to DAC for approval.”
5.2 Explaining the background of this new provision the
representatives of Ministry of Defence during briefing in this connection
stated:
“Based on the recommendations of the Kelkar Committee plus the
experience of other countries this provision has been included for
the first time that for all projects costing more than Rs. 300 crores,
there will be an obligation on the part of the supplier for a 30%
offset to defence industry or may be to other industries.”
5.3 The Defence Secretary during briefing clarified that it need not
be an investment directly but it can be in various forms that includes
technology. The Committee were informed that most of the countries,
when they go in for the procurement of defence equipment, have this
provision of offset. He stated:
“There are different patterns being followed in the countries. There
are some countries where they have even a legislation for enforcing
the offset provision, where as others are doing it by administrative
orders. Our experience has been mixed. Even the developed
countries are following the offset provisions. If I have to summarise
the experience, I will say that in the case of countries which have
less developed industries, the implementation of offset provision

27
has been somewhat difficult. They do not have the industrial base,
whereas in countries which have a fairly developed infrastructure
of industries, the implementation of the offset procedure has been
comparatively better. As you said, it is a new experience for us.
We will try to do our best. It is only through experience that we
will know what kind of hurdles are going to be there.”
Explaining the benefits of offsets the Defence Secretary stated:
“… We see examples of a number of other countries which have
in the recent past built up their indigenous defence industries, we
find that it has been to a great extent, facilitated by this offset
mechanism. Through the means of transfer of technology and
capacity into the buying country, gradually the capacity of recipient
country is built up and the industry and the know-how within
that country increase. They also become larger and larger players
in the defence production field, not only meeting their own
requirements but they can also enter into export field.”
5.4 The Committee enquired whether the modalities for offset
investments have been chalked out and the fields identified for
investment in India. The Committee also enquired about the monitoring
mechanism to ensure that vendors fulfil their obligation. The Ministry
in the written reply stated:
“The Service Capital Acquisition Plan (SCAP) Categorisation
Committee will recommend the inclusion of an offset clause
amounting to 30% of the indicative cost in the RFP where the
indicative cost of the contract is Rs. 300 crore or more. The
Committee will also suggest the name of the lead DPSU/OFs which
will assist MoD in monitoring the implementation of the offset
contract during the post contractual period. The SCAP
Categorisation Higher Committee may consider changes in the
offset amount, if felt necessary, while making recommendation to
DAC for approval. The technical offer is required to include a
compliance statement to the effect that the vendor will undertake
offset amounting to 30% of the commercial proposal. Failure to
discharge this undertaking at any stage will result in disqualification
of the vendor from further participation.”
5.5 When the Committee enquired whether the Government
propose to extend benefits of the offset clause to the private sector
already engaged in defence production, the Ministry in their written
reply have stated that:
“Initially the offset clause are being absorbed by Indian Public
Sector Undertakings; however in line with the Kelkar Committee’s
Report the private industry would be involved on case to case
basis.”

28
5.6 The Committee note the provision of offset clause which has
been introduced in the new procedure and is being followed in
many countries. The Committee have been informed about the
benefits of offset clause which has helped to build up indigenous
defence industries in some countries. Since the Indian import of
defence equipment is very large, the Committee feel that the
provision should be utilized to ensure the development of indigenous
defence industry. There should be a national policy for utilization
of offset clause for defence procurement. The Committee desire that
efforts should be made to ensure participation of private sector
defence industries and some of the benefits of this clause should be
passed on to them also. The Committee, therefore, strongly
recommend that the modalities for implementation of offset contracts
should be carefully worked out so that foreign technology could be
adequately imbibed by the Indian industrial sector. A Committee of
experts from industry and other relevant fields be constituted which
should examine each offset and suggest as to how maximum
advantage can be derived therefrom and also to monitor
implementation of the offset clause. The Committee would again
like to stress that no royalty should be given for subsequent
upgradation/modifications of the technology by the foreign supplier
during the contract period.
5.7 The Committee also express their apprehension that this
clause will be utilized for trade accounts only. The Committee feel
that maximum benefit should be extracted from this clause. Private
sector alongwith the OFs/DPSUs should be permitted to participate
in the scheme envisaged under offset clause and allowed to enter
into joint ventures with foreign manufacturers for defence production
under technology transfer. The Committee also desire that there
should be a joint public and private sector venture to implement
the benefits of offset clause. This will be helpful in achieving self-
reliance. A specific time frame should be determined by the
Government so that the offset clause can make India self-sufficient
in defence production.

29
CHAPTER VI
SOLICITATION OF OFFERS
Issue of Requests for Proposal
6.1 As regards the issue of RFP , the DPP provides for two bid
system. Where technical and commercial offers are invited together,
commercial offers are opened later on whose technical bids are
qualified.
6.2 In reply to a question from the Committee whether the
procurement procedure prescribed limited or open tendering, the
Ministry stated:
“As per DPP-2002 (Version June 2003) once SQRs were finalized,
the sources of procurement of the weapon systems were ascertained
and short listing of the prospective manufacturers/suppliers carried
out by the SHQ. The short listed vendors were the Original
Equipment Manufacturers (OEMs)/Authorised Vendors/
Government Sponsored export agencies. In DPP-2005 also since
security concerns prevent operational parameters to be made public,
provision for limited tendering has also been provided. However,
for commercially off-the-shelf items not available at DGS&D rate
contract, open tender route would be followed.”
6.3 When the Committee enquired the criteria for selecting vendors
for sending RFP , the Ministry furnished the following information:
“(i) Data Bank is maintained with SHQ and Technical Managers
in Acquisition Wing.
(ii) V endors who inform Service HQ of their capabilities/
collaboration with foreign vendors.
(iii) Identification carried out through Defence Attaches, Military
Journals and Internet etc.
(iv) Information obtained by visiting various Defence Exhibitions
in India.
(v) Information provided by various delegations visiting
International Defence Exhibitions.
(vi) Details of product information and equipment upgrade as
provided by various manufacturers by sending technical
literature and brochures.

30
(vii) Information received from various Fora viz. Indo-US Defence
Cooperation, Indo-UK Defence Cooperation, Indo-Israel
Defence Cooperation etc.”
6.4 The Committee enquired whether MoD register vendors for
defence supplies and how often they update the list, the Ministry in
a written reply stated:
“Ministry of Defence maintains a data bank of prospective vendors
who are the suppliers of defence equipment. This data bank is
continuously updated with the available information from published
journals and other available sources.”
6.5 As regards the role of Defence Attaches in maintaining the
data bank about the defence equipment and supplies the Ministry in
their written replies stated:
“Defence Attaches are normally involved in the initial stages of
the procurement in identification, and also broad performance
evaluation trials where they have the necessary expertise and
wherewithal to conduct them. The Service Headquarters maintain
a link with the OEMs/equipment suppliers abroad through the
respective DAS who keep the Service Headquarters informed about
the new developments in the field of armament in the countries of
their posting.”
6.6 On a specific query of the Committee whether Ministry is
making any conscious efforts for the indigenisation of acquisitions and
whether Request for Proposal is being issued to the private sector, the
Ministry stated as under:
“The aspect of indigenous acquisition is being addressed during
the Services Capital Acquisition Plan Categorization Committee
(SCAPCC) and Services Capital Acquisition Plan Categorization
Higher Committee (SCAPCHC) meetings held to categorise the
Capital Schemes as ‘Buy’, ‘Buy & Make’ and ‘Make’.
Wherever indigenous firms have the capability to supply the
required defence equipment, Request for proposals are also sent to
these firms.
The Government had set up a committee under the chairmanship
of Dr. Vijay L. Kelkar, inter alia  to examine current procurement
procedure and recommend changes required to modify the
acquisition process on the approach based on ‘product strategy’

31
and to suggest modalities for integration of users, Ministry of
Defence and the industry both public and private sector. The
Committee submitted Part-I of the report which is towards
“strengthening self-reliance in defence preparedness”.”
6.7 The report takes into account the increasing capabilities of
Indian industry and growing globalization of defence industry. The
Committee’s proposal focus on the following key issues:
(i) Involvement of country’s best firms in Defence Capability
Building.
(ii) Introduction of offsets policy to bring in Technology and
investment.
(iii) Explore synergies amongst private sector DPSUs, OFs and
DRDO to promote high technology capabilities.
(iv) Cr eate an environment for increasing export of defence
equipment and services.
The recommendations made by the Committee are presently
under examination of the Government.
6.8 When the Committee wanted to know that while selecting the
vendor whether the Ministry emphasize the provision for preferred
supplier who is involved in the successful development of a product,
the Ministry stated:
“The Government of India invites responses to the Request for
Proposal (RFP) only from OEM or Authorised Vendors or
Government Sponsored Export Agencies subject to the condition
that in cases where the same equipment is offered by more than
one of the aforementioned vendors, preference would be given to
the OEM. This would ensure that procurement is carried out from
the firm which has developed the system. However, ‘Make’
procedure is being formulated and this issue would appropriately
be addressed.”
6.9 The Committee have been informed that the Ministry
maintain data bank of prospective vendors who are suppliers of
defence equipment. Defence Attaches posted in various countries
are also involved in the identification of vendors. The committee
are of the view that Defence Attaches should be given a meaningful
role in identifying technology and defence equipment available with
foreign suppliers and they should regularly and adequately apprise

32
the Ministry of the various advancements made and agencies
involved in the development of defence equipment in the country
of their posting. They should also provide data and evaluation of
such an equipment and its tentative cost, etc. The Ministry of Defence
should have sufficient data bank with them based on such
information.
6.10 Over the years private sector has grown in capacity and
capabilities. The Committee are therefore of the view that maximum
possible RFPs should be sent to private sector. The Committee desire
that private sector in India should be given preference over foreign
suppliers and only in situations when there is no public and private
sector company meeting the desired requirements, foreign suppliers
may be considered. As already stated in earlier chapters, the
Committee desire that in case of ‘off-set’ clause provision, the private
sector companies may be given due preference while implementing
that clause.

33
CHAPTER VII
SINGLE VENDOR SITUATION
7.1 In response to a query of the Committee as to whether the
single vendor situation has been analysed and how the Government
propose to deal with such situation, the Ministry in their written reply
stated:
“Single vendor situation has been analysed in great detail in
DPP-2005. To avoid single vendor situation a number of provisions
have been included in DPP-2005 as under:
(i) Prior to approval of SQRs, the Staff Equipment Policy
Committee (SEPC) has to assess the likely number of
vendors meeting the QRs. If a single vendor situation is
likely to arise, then the reasons for the formulation of such
QRs have to be separately recorded.
(ii) If a single vendor situation arises at TEC stage, then a fresh
RFP is to be issued by reformulating the SQRs. There is no
provision for waivers of SQR parameters at TEC stage.
(iii) During Staff Evaluation if no vendor meets SQRs after trials,
then fresh RFP would be issued after reformulation of SQR
parameters.
(iv) Procurement of state of the art equipment on single vendor
basis is to be deliberated by DAC and approval has to be
given depending on the merit of the case.
(v) If only one vendor meets SQRs after trials, then it is not to
be construed as single vendor case.
(vi) Repeat orders are not to be construed as single vendor
cases.”
7.2 Elaborating further, the representative of MoD during deposition
before the Committee stated:
“Some steps have been taken in the new procedure to avoid single-
vendor situation. I would also like to qualify that it is not that
single vendor situation in all cases has a negative connotation.
Suppose we have collaboration transfer of technology arrangement

34
between Bharat Electronics Limited and a foreign partner, and we
are building up capacity for the manufacture of any particular
item in Bharat Electronics Limited, then it is also expected that
future requirements of that type of equipment will be met by
Bharat Electronics Limited. So, Bharat Electronics Limited will
become technically a single vendor but then, after all, it is our
own PSU. Therefore, we want to encourage that kind of
collaboration.”
7.3 The representative of MoD further informed that:—
“Single vendor situation has two effects. It invites criticism because
there is no way of knowing what is the benchmark price. Price
negotiation can be a problem. Secondly, in the existing procedure,
the single vendor situation demands for an additional procedure
which takes time. It says that we have to get the approval of DPB
and then go to RM. So, these approvals take time. In order to
reduce the single vendor situation, we have done two or three
things. Now, what we have stated in the new procedure is that
there may be some equipment which the Government may like to
acquire through single vendor because there is only one person
who is manufacturing it and the strategic requirement demands
that we have to acquire it. In such situation, the matter will be
discussed before the Defence Acquisition Council and a conscious
decision will be taken to go for single vendor.
The second objective is that we should try to frame the SQRs and
try to broad base them so that the situations of single vendor are
minimized.
The third provision that we have introduced is that in response to
RFP , some vendors respond and as a result of technical evaluation,
if it becomes a single vendor, in that case, it will not be processed,
and the SQRs will be reframed and the fresh RFP will be issued.
These are some of the methods by which we have tried to reduce
the single vendor situation. Another thing that we have done is
like giving order to BHEL, the example which the Defence Secretary
has given, or may be giving orders to OFB. In the present
procedure, there was some ambiguity.
Many a time, it was not clear whether RFP needs to be issued or
we should go to them directly. In such cases, we have clarified in
the procedure that they will not be treated as single vendor, and
you can go straight to them without going through the RFP , that
means time is saved.”

35
7.4 When asked how the procurement is decided which involves
major diplomatic and economic consideration, the representative of
the Ministry informed:—
“A provision has been made for procurement due to strategic,
political, economic or technological reasons on single vendor basis
or from a vendor who is not L1. Such decisions would be taken
with the approval of CCS on recommendation of DPB.”
7.5 It has been observed that in many cases a particular weapon
system, after completing its shelf life, has to be replaced and to acquire
it again, the Govt. invariably approaches particular exporting country.
It is further noticed that initially the services try to project a small
requirement and after the identification of the supplier they place a
target order. All these situations may lead to single vendor situation.
While clarifying this point, the representatives of Ministry of Defence,
during oral evidence has stated that:
“Sir, you had also talked of the cases in which the single vendor
situation comes. This has been worrying the Ministry quite a bit.
In fact, the best method of procurement is where the single vendor
situation does not arise. A lot of modifications are also being done
in order to see that the single vendor situation does not arise. For
example, a few months ago, a Committee headed by the Raksha
Mantri with all the Chiefs decided that after the RFP is issued, in
case certain changes in the Qualitative Requirements are made
which require a single vendor situation, then the case would be
closed and again a new RFP would have to be issued. It means
that to that extent it will be a fresh case. So, that is our effort in
seeing that the single vendor situation does not arise.”
7.6 The Committee are happy to note the various steps taken by
the Government to avoid single vendor situation including the
flexibility from case to case based on merit. The Committee further
note that procurement of state of the art equipment on single vendor
basis is to be deliberated by DAC and approval has to be given
depending on merit of the case. The Committee desire that such
cases should be debated by DAC after proper technology scan is
carried out in consultation with the DRDO technical experts and
users to ensure that the same meets the requirements of the user.
The Committee feel that single vendor situation should be applicable
in exceptional circumstance and for exclusive weapon systems/items
produced by single manufacturer after  DAC is satisfied by the
justification that these systems and items are required for operational
exigencies.

36
7.7 The Committee have noted the explanation furnished by the
Ministry about the single vendor situation which can be a public
sector undertaking involved in development of a product under TOT,
etc. The Committee desire that such a situation need not be treated
as a single vendor situation and orders may be directly placed with
that undertaking.

37
CHAPTER VIII
STANDARD CONTRACT CLAUSE
8.1 The DPP 2005 provides for standard contract document which
indicates the general conditions of contract that would be the guideline
for all acquisitions. Explaining the provision, the Defence Secretary,
Acquisition during briefing stated:
“Until now, we did not have a Standard draft Contract document.
Even the CVC has observed that in many cases, the supplier
himself gave the contract document. Since it did not meet our
requirements, there used to be long negotiations on the standard
conditions. After getting it vetted by the Law Ministry, it is part
of the procedure, and this will be known at the time of issue of
RFP . So, those negotiations will be avoided, and it will be more
transparent for the bidders.”
8.2 The Committee appreciate that standard contract clause has
been included in DPP-2005. The Committee are hopeful that this
will make the procedure transparent and curtail delays. The
Committee desire that this should now be strictly enforced.

38
CHAPTER IX
BROAD TIME FRAME FOR PROCUREMENT ACTIVITY
9.1 The DPP-2005 provides for broad time frame for procurement
activities as under:
Sl. Activity Time Cumulative
No. (months) Time
(months)
12 3 4
1. Acceptance of Necessity (AoN) 1 1
2. Request for Proposals (RFP)
(a) Simultaneous vetting by Acquisition 1/2 1
1/2
Manager, Finance Manager and Technical
Manager.
(b) Approved by RFP by Additional Secretary/ 1/2 2
Special Secretary (Acquisition).
(c) Receipt of responses 3 5
3. Technical Evaluation Committee (TEC)
(a) Evaluation of proposals and preparation of 3 8
TEC report
(b) Vetting of report by Technical Manager and 1 9
acceptance by Additional Secretary/
Special Secretary (Acquisition).
4. Trials. Field trials/DGQA/Maintainability 6-12 15-21
trials including receipt of trial report,
preparation and approved of Staff evaluation at
Service HQ.
5. Staff Evaluations. Examination by Technical 1 16-22
Manager and acceptance of Staff Evaluation by
Additional Secretary/Special Secretary
(Acquisition).

39
12 3 4
6. Commercial Negotiation Committee (CNC)
(a) Opening of bids and determination of L1 1 17-23
(b) CNC Negotiations 3-5 20-28
(c) Finalisation of CNC report 1 21-29
(d) Internal Procedure  Audit 1 22-30
(e) Approval of CFA-Mod/Mof/CCS 1-4 23-34
(f) Contract Signing 1 24-45
7. Total Time Taken 24-35 months
(2-3 years
including
trials).
9.2 when pointed out that this time frame would take 2-3 years in
acquisition process, the Secretary, Defence during briefing stated:
“We had internally debated this aspect whether it will mean giving
scope for laxity, even where you can do it within six months and
yet you take it on to two or three years. The idea, was that this
is the outer limit because over the years, our experience shows
that on an average, there is a particular time, which is minimal,
which is required in each stage, but that is the applicable situation
for major equipment. There might be something which is available
off the shelf. You do not have to go through all these processes
and it might be that you just place an order and it will come
within a few weeks, but the other extreme can be that the Army
needs a particular major equipment which has to be introduced
for the first time and then it has to be tried out during winter,
summer, at high altitude, in desert, forest, plain and everywhere
and therefore, it takes time, various seasons. Therefore, this broad
time-frame is only an indicative time-frame to give the outer limit
because even if it involves a major equipment, it should not exceed
that. This is the idea.”
9.3 One of the stages in this broad time-frame is approval of CFA
by Ministry of Finance, Ministry of Defence and Cabinet Committee
on Security. When asked that in case these parameters are exceeded

40
especially by CFA, especially in CNC negotiations, was there any
accountability, the Defence Secretary stated:
“Yes, Sir. Till the matter is within the Ministry of Defence, there
is very much an accountability. There is a DAC headed by Raksha
Mantri which is supposed to review all major projects. There is a
defence Procurement Board which meets every 15 days on fixed
days of the month to review all hold ups, amongst other things.
But once the thing has gone out of the Ministry of Defence, let us
say to the Ministry of Finance, we do not have any control over
it. There are two types of situations where things have to go to
the Finance Ministry. One, those projects which are beyond the
delegated powers of the Raksha Mantri which are to be exercised
in consultation with the Finance Minister and those which are still
higher and which have to go to the Cabinet Committee. Those
have to go to the Ministry of Finance. How long the Ministry of
Finance will take is not under our control. For that, there is no
accountability, I am afraid.”
9.4 The Committee enquired about the accountability in case of
delay in post negotiation situation. The Defence Secretary stated that
there are enough mechanism in the contract and in the negotiations to
deal with it.
9.5 The Committee are of the view that broad time-frame of
2-3 years that has been prescribed for acquisition of defence
equipment is very much on the higher side and there is a need to
curtail the time limit at each level. The Committee are perturbed to
note that though there is an accountability for delay in Ministry of
Defence, there is no accountability on the part of other concerned
Government of India departments, including CNC, CFA or Ministry
of Finance in the matter of adherence to a prescribed time-frame
and as a result, prolonged delays occur in the acquisition of defence
equipment. In the present world scenario, the technology of the
Defence equipment and systems is changing fast. Delay in
procurement will result not only in acquisition of weapon systems
with obsolete technologies, but also cost escalation. Keeping in view
the fact that the defence deals have direct bearing on the defence
preparedness and security of the country, the Government should
lay down a time-frame for disposal of these cases by the Ministry
of Finance and other authorities. This would ensure expeditious
procurement of the approved requirements of the Armed Forces. In
this connection, the Committee desire that a Committee consisting
of representatives of MoD, Ministry of Finance and other concerned

41
authorities be constituted who can take decisions together so as to
expedite decision making process and curtail inordinate delay.
9.6 The Committee note that another reason for delays in
procurement of a major equipment which is to be introduced for
the first time, is that it has to be tried out during winter, summer,
at high altitude, in desert, forest and plains and, therefore it does
take time. The Committee desire that efforts should be made to
reduce the time taken in the trials of the equipment in all the
different situations.
The Committee, also stress that all required trials should be done
in a time bound manner in conformity with the planned schedule.

42
CHAPTER X
INTEGRITY PACT (IP)
10.1 The new DPP-2005 provides that signing of integrity pact
would be considered for purchases over Rs. 300 crore. The Integrity
Pact is a binding agreement between the agency and bidders for specific
contracts in which the agency promises that it will not accept bribes
during the procurement process and bidders promise that they will
not offer bribes. Under the IP , the bidders for specific services or
contracts agree with the procurement agency or office to carry out the
procurement in a specified manner. The essential elements of the IP as
detailed in DPP-2005 are as follows:—
“(a) A pact (contract) between the Government of India (Ministry
of Defence) 9the authority or the “principal”) and those
companies submitting a tender for this specific activity (the
“bidders”);
(b) An undertaking by the principal that its officials will not
demand or accept any bribes, gifts, etc., with appropriate
disciplinary or criminal sanctions in case of violation;
(c) A statement by each bidder that it has not paid, and will
not pay, any bribes;
(d) An undertaking by each bidder to disclose all payments
made in connection with the contract in question to anybody
(including agents and other middlemen as well as family
members, etc., of officials); the disclosure would be made
either at time of tender submission or upon demand of the
principal, especially when a suspicion of a violation by that
bidder emerges;
(e) The explicit acceptance by each bidder that the no-bribery
commitment and the disclosure obligation as well as the
attendant sanctions remain in force for the winning bidder
until the contract has been fully executed;
(f) Undertakings on behalf of a bidding company will be made
“in the name and on behalf of the company’s chief executive
officer”;

43
(g) The following set of sanctions shall be enforced for any
violation by a bidder of its commitments or undertakings:
(i) Denial or loss of contract;
(ii) Forfeiture of the bid security and performance bond;
Liability for damages to the principal and the
competing bidders; and
(iii) Debarment of the violator by the principal for an
appropriate period of time;
(h) Bidders are also advised to have a company code of conduct
(clearly rejecting the use of bribes and other unethical
behaviour) and a compliance program for the
implementation of the code of conduct throughout the
company.”
10.2 During briefing the representatives of Ministry of Defence in
this regard stated:—
“……An enabling provision has been made for signing of an
integrity Pact between the purchaser, and the potential supplier,
that is, the bidder when the RFP is issued. This Integrity Pact is
a new idea which is being introduced. It is being followed in
some of the countries. Basically, we would like to sign an agreement
with all the bidders who would like to bid. The agreement would
be that both the sides would adopt only ethical practices, and no
corrupt practices would be adopted. It would also specify that in
case any of the sides violates the agreement, then what would be
the implications. We are trying to introduce this for the first time.
As I said, in some of the countries, it is already existing.”
10.3 The Committee enquired about the practice followed all over
the world and in India pertaining to commission paid to make
procurements through vendors and incentives offered by various
manufacturers for purchasing their equipments. The Ministry in a note
stated:—
“Although the practice followed all over the world pertaining to
commission offered to make procurement through vendors is not
know, certain countries like United States and some nations of
Europe have adopted several mechanisms to prevent the use of
undue influence in obtaining contracts. For instance, the
Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD)
convention on combating bribery of foreign public officials in

44
international business transactions has been adopted by certain
European Nations. This convention prohibits the use of undue
influence in defence contracts. Similarly, the Transparency
International, an NGO has called for inclusion of integrity pact in
contracts to ensure transparency and prevent undue influence in
defence contracts. In the United States also there are stringent laws
that prohibit the payment of commission/use of undue influence
in obtaining defence contracts.”
10.4 In DPP-2005 standard contract provides for provision relating
to penalty for the use of undue influence, agents/agency commission.
It states:—
“The seller confirms and declares to the buyer that the seller is
the original manufacturer of the stores referred to in this contract
and has not engaged any individual or firm, whether Indian or
foreign whatsoever, to intercede, facilitate or in any way to
recommend to the Government of India or any of its functionaries,
whether officially or unofficially, to the award of the contract to
the Seller; nor has any amount been paid, promised or intended
to be paid to any such individual or firm in respect of any such
intercession, facilitation or recommendation. The Seller agrees that
if it is established at any time to the satisfaction of the Buyer that
the present declaration is in any way incorrect or if at a later
stage it is discovered by the Buyer that the Seller has engaged any
such individual/firm, and paid or intended to pay any amount,
gift, reward, fees, commission or consideration to such person,
party, firm or institution, whether before or after the signing of
this contract, the Seller will be liable to refund that amount to the
Buyer. The Seller will also be debarred from entering into any
supply Contract with the Government of India for a minimum
period of five years. The Buyer will also have a right to consider
cancellation of the Contract either wholly or in part, without any
entitlement or compensation to the Seller who shall in such event
be liable to refund all payments made by the Buyer in terms of
the Contract along with interest at the rate of 2% per annum
above LIBOR rate. The Buyer will also have the right to recover
any such amount from any contracts concluded earlier with the
Government of India.”
10.5 When asked about the rationale behind fixing up the limit of
Rs. 300 crore for “Integrity Pact” the Ministry in their written reply
have stated that:
“The provision of Integrity Pact has been added for the first time.
This is a binding agreement between the buyer and the prospective

45
vendors in which the buyer promises that it will not accept bribes
during the procurement process and bidders promise that they
will not offer bribes. In the beginning, the acceptability of the
provision by the vendors would have to be seen and based on
this, the provisions can be amended in future.”
10.6 During evidence the representatives further elaborated this
point during oral evidence as under:—
“In the Defence Procurement Procedure (DPP) of 2005, for the first
time a clause relating to the ‘integrity pact’ has been introduced.
This is a recommendation which has been made by the
Transparency International and which we had got also as a
suggestion from the Central Vigilance Commission. We have put it
in our Procedure. The figure of Rs. 300 crore is mainly on account
of the fact that in the DPP 2002, which was there earlier, there
used to be a provision for an Eminent Persons’ Group which is to
oversee all the major acquisitions. That was restricted to the cases
above Rs. 300 crore. This is a ballpark kind of a figure. To ensure
that there is complete transparency in the acquisition process—in
the major acquisitions above this which will involve major
vendors—this particular clause has been introduced. For the first
time it has been done. This is to ensure that there is certain amount
of confidence that the whole process is being done in a completely
transparent manner.”
10.7 The Committee note that with a view to preventing
corruption and to bring transparency in defence procurements,
Integrity Pact clause has been introduced in the new procedure for
defence purchases above Rs. 300 crore. In view of allegations of
kickbacks made from time to time, the Committee feel that provision
of Integrity Pact is appreciable in the new procedure. The Committee
are of the view that this will work effectively only when there is
more transparency in such dealings. The Committee hope that with
the introduction of this clause, the people of the country would
have more confidence in the process.
The Committee are, however, unable to understand the rationale
behind signing of Integrity Pact only for purchases above
Rs. 300 crore. Corruption in the purchase of defence equipment
costing less than Rs. 300 crore cannot be ruled out. Therefore, the
Committee desire that the Ministry may amend the provisions of
DPP 2005 to bring all kinds of defence deals upto Rs. 100 crore
under Integrity Pact.

46
CHAPTER XI
APPOINTMENT OF INDIAN AUTHORISED
REPRESENTATIVES OF FOREIGN SUPPLIERS
11.1 The Ministry of Defence issued comprehensive guidelines in
November-December 2001 for appointment of Indian Authorized
Representatives Agents of foreign suppliers. An Individual, a
Partnership, an Association of Persons, Limited Companies, private or
public can be appointed as Authorized Representative/Agents/Sale
Consultants/Adviser of a foreign supplier in accordance with the
guidelines. They are supposed to give certain basic data particularly
about the financial and tax status. The Committee were informed that
nobody has registered himself as an Agent despite the facility offered
by the Government.
11.2 To a further query of the Committee as to why the agents are
not coming forward to get their names registered, the representatives
of the MoD during the briefing stated:—
“I do not think that this kind of analysis has been done. It is not
true that nobody has come forward. During the course of last
three years, we have received some applications. However, as you
said, probably , the procedure and the kind of information we ask
for is so cumbersome, and this is my feeling, that they need to be
comparatively simplified.”
11.3 When asked about a specific question, what would be the
role of these so called defence agents and the areas where they are
allowed, the representatives of the Ministry of Defence during oral
evidence stated that:—
“We had sent a proposal to the Ministry of Law to yet certain
provisions in the Acts and the Contracts that we sign. The first
provision is that there will be no use of undue influence. That
means, nobody can bribe anybody and get a contract. Secondly, if
it is proved that commission has been paid to the agent then a
contract can be cancelled and further, other penalties can be levied
under the Indian Penal Code. Thirdly, we should have the right to
have an access to the books of accounts so that we can go and see
whether actually any commissions has been paid or not.”

47
11.4 The Committee note with concern that despite the guidelines
issued by the Ministry for appointment of authorized Indian
representative agents of foreign suppliers, nobody has registered
himself as an authorized Agent. The Committee are of the view that
representatives of the suppliers in the country can play a useful role
in After Sale Service and in sorting out problems during the
warrantee period, etc. The Committee, therefore, strongly recommend
that the Ministry may analyse the reasons for non-registration of
authorized representatives with the Ministry and take remedial steps
to make the procedure less cumbersome and simple so as to
encourage the authorized representatives to come forward and register
themselves.
The Committee also feel that registration of agents should be
encouraged so that the allegations of kickbacks may be minimized
and these agents may also facilitate better coordination between the
Ministry of Defence and the supplier during trials, etc. This will
also help in reducing the time and cost overruns.
11.5 The Committee further observe that in certain cases a
company authorizes a person to negotiate on its behalf. In that case,
that person becomes a representative of the company for negotiating
with the concerned authorities. The Committee are of the opinion
that to deal with such representatives and ensure transparency in
such cases and check the possibility of any undue influence, the
Ministry must evolve a clear and firm policy for identifying and
accepting a person as a representatives of the company.

48
CHAPTER XII
FIELD EVALUATIONS
12.1 On the query by the Committee regarding the procedure
adopted for holding of trials of new weapons and equipments etc.
and whether any technical experts are associated with the trials, the
Ministry in the written note stated:—
“Field Evaluations (Trials), if required, are required to be conducted
by user services on the basis of Standard Operating Procedure
(SOP). The manufacturer of the short-listed equipment shall be
asked to send the desired number of units of the equipment/
weapon system for field evaluation. Service Headquarters will
formulate the trial directives and will constitute a trial team. The
trial directives specify the fundamental points that need to be
addressed for validating the essential parameters. The Services
Qualitative Requirements of the equipment would be a part of the
trial directives. Representatives of DRDO, quality assurance agency
may also form a part of the field evaluation as on required basis.
The field evaluation is to be conducted in all conditions where the
equipment is required to be deployed. In cases involving integration
of systems and sensitive equipment, a multi-disciplinary Technical
Delegation may be deputed abroad for evaluation and an
empowered committee for negotiation. Where field evaluation is
not feasible, the possibility of conducing evaluation through
computer simulation is to be explored. Field evaluation/computer
simulation may be dispensed with after approval of Defence
Procurement Board on recommendations at appropriate level in
Service Headquarters.”
12.2 On a specific query regarding the system adopted by the
Ministry in evaluation of the present weapons system and whether
evaluation report based on field trials and exercises is referred to OFB
to know how the notified shortcomings can be rectified, the Ministry
replied:—
“There is no automatic involvement of technical experts from
Ordnance Factories in the trial of new equipment and weapon
system undertaken by the Armed Forces. The involvement is need
based and is determined by the Armed Forces.”

49
12.3 The Ministry has further informed that the DPP-2002 did not
specify that SQRs would be part of trial directives. In the new
procedure it has been clarified that SQRs should form part of the trial
directives and parameters not mentioned in RFP should not be
considered for field evaluation. The objective is to ensure transparency
and fairness.
12.4 The Committee note that field evaluation/computer
simulation of a new weapon system is normally done in all
conditions where the equipment is required to be deployed. The
Committee are, however, of the view that though field evaluation/
computer simulation of new equipment is very essential, this should
be completed in a time-bound manner sot hat the procurement
process is completed in the prescribed period.
12.5 The Committee further desire that in the field evaluation of
new equipment, the user and technical experts of Ordnance Factories,
DRDO and reputed private organization having relevant expertise,
should invariably be involved sot hat they may help in proper
evaluation of the equipment particularly in cases involving
integration of different systems and sensitive equipment.
The Committee also desire that a floor level Committee should
be constituted for evaluating the field trials. The Committee should
comprise of the field level service officers, technical experts from
DRDO, OFs/DPSUs and reputed private organization having relevant
expertise and also the manufacturer. This will help in assessing the
quality of equipment more objectively.

50
CHAPTER XIII
FAST TRACK PROCEDURE (FTP)
13.1 With a view to facilitate acquisition of defence equipment in
a shorter time frame, a need was felt to have in place a FTP to ensure
quick procurement during crisis situation. Thus, a FTP was promulgated
in September 2001 after its approval by Cabinet Committee on Security.
Its salient features are:
(i) Need for adoption of FTP must emanate from the Service
Chief. It is routed through the DPB for the consideration of
the RM the requirement should relate to an imminent
operational situation or a crisis without warning.
Procurement process starts only after RM’s approval.
(ii) It is confined to items which are likely to be available within
the laid down time frame of 12 months. Items should
preferably be those which are in service or which have
already been trial-evaluated. In exceptional cases, trial team
may be sent to vendor’s premises for quick evaluation.
(iii) Financial Powers under Fast Track Procedure:
1. RM — Rs. 300 crore
2. RM & FM — Rs. 300 to 400 crore
3. CCS — Above Rs. 400 crore
13.2 The Ministry informed the Committee that in the period
between October 2001 and July 2004, 62 cases were approved under
Fast Track Procedure. An analysis of time taken in the process is as
follows:
Cases Contracts Contracts signed within Deliveries Deliveries Total
approved signed completed partially
completed
06- 7-12 Over 12
months months months
1. Army 50 37 14 11 12 21 13 34
2. Navy 7 7 6 0 1 5 1 6
3. Airforce 5 5 3 0 2 5 0 5
Total 62 49 23 11 15 31 14 45
(79%) (47%) (22%) (31%) (63%) (29%) (92%)

51
13.3 Based on the above information, the Committee wanted to
know whether 31% of the cases approved by Defence Procurement
Board (DPB) under the Fast Track Procedure (FTP), which had taken
more than 12 months to finalise the contract, qualify to be processed
under FTP . The Ministry in their written reply has stated that Fast
Track Procedure (FTP) for procurement of Defence Equipment has been
promulgated for meeting urgent operational requirement on the
recommendations of the Chiefs of the concerned Services. It is true
that in 31% of the cases approved by DPB under FTP it had taken
more than 12 months to conclude the contract. However, the delay in
signing the contracts has occurred due to following reasons:
(i) Substantial time taken in negotiating the contract.
(ii) Decision taken to conduct trial at a later stage.
(iii) Seeking extension of time by the vendor.
(iv) V arifying/confirming the claims and allegations of
competitor about the capability of the vendor to supply the
item.
13.4 Regarding the shortcomings of the fast track procedure,
Defence Secretary during the briefing admitted that:
“The fast track procedure was made with a certain kind of situation
in mind. It is not supposed to be the normal procedure to be
carried out on a day to day basis. It was meant to meet certain
unforeseen eventualities or things which suddenly fell into a
situation which had created a kind of an emergency or when
something was imminent. In such circumstances, we could not
afford to have a long drawn out process. If we need something,
it has to be procured fast. For that kind of thing, fast track
procedure was envisaged. It was supposed to be put into effect
only under certain given situations and the Chief of the Defence
Force concerned, the Army, Navy or Air Force, and the Minister
would have to certify that it is an urgent operational imminent
emergency kind of a requirement. It is only then that the fast
track procedure was to be adopted. Somehow, down the line it
got distorted into situations which were not really falling strictly
into that category. Therefore, we found a number of cases that
were initiated under the label of fast track procedure but were not
really falling into that category. We found that while implementing
them, it took longer than expected and the whole idea of having
a fast track procedure seemed to be defeated in that sense. So, the

52
Raksha Mantri has recently directed us to see how this whole
business of fast track procedure could be made more relevant and
streamlined and made applicable only in required conditions. So,
these things are being reviewed.”
13.5 To the query of the Committee whether there is any limit on
the rate at which purchases can be made in fast track the Secretary
(Defence Finance) stated this has to be seen by price negotiation
committee.
13.6 Under fast track Procedure, the conditionality of starting
approval of RM seems to be time consuming. When asked about the
steps taken by the Ministry to cut down the time frame and about the
guidelines/mechanism available in the new procedure to check that
all the cases are not put, under FTP the Ministry in their written reply
have state that:
“The Fast Track Procedure—2001 is being reviewed. The objective
of this procedure is to ensure expeditious procurement for urgent
operational requirements foreseen as imminent or for a situation
where crisis has emerged without prior warning. The main stress
of the review would be to cut down the time period of procurement
so that the operationally urgent requirements are procured in the
shortest possible time.”
13.7 When asked whether the financial powers stipulated under
Fast Track Procedure are sufficient and whether the same are being
reviewed by the Ministry to enhance the limit, the Ministry in their
written reply furnished to this Committee, have started that:
“The existing  Financial Powers are considered adequate.”
13.8 The Committee note that the fast track procedure
promulgated in December, 2002 to facilitate speedier acquisition of
defence equipment in an emergent situation has completely failed
to meet its objectives. A study of the cases taken up under FTP
revealed that it took more than 12 months to sign the contracts
defeating the very purpose for which it was established i.e. to meet
certain unforeseen eventualities. Actual delivery of the equipment
would have taken some more time. The Committee were informed
that there was mix up in the implementation of the Fast Track
Procedure, and the Government is in the process of reviewing it. As
an efficient Fast Track Procedure can play a vital role in emergent
situations, the Committee recommend that the Ministry should
carefully analyse the shortcomings of FTP and establish a procedure
for emergent purchases which is truly fast track and quick.

53
13.9 The Committee feel that the conditionality of starting
procurement process after the approval of RM only, in itself seems
to be time consuming in an emergent situation where time is of
great essence. The Committee desire that the requirements of
emergent nature after having been certified at the level of
GOC-in-C in Army and equivalent level in other forces and routed
through Chief to Staff should be considered emergent to start the
process. Approval of RM can be taken when the proposal is put up
to him for financial sanction.
13.10 However, to check that every other case is not put under
FTP , the Ministry should lay down norms/guidelines which a
procurement case would have to meet to qualify for Fast Track
Procurement. A certificate to this effect can be furnished by GOC-
in-C approving the case.
13.11 The Committee also desire that the Ministry of Defence
should keep uptodate data-bank of different sources of supply,
equipment/weapons available, their evaluation and costs, etc. based
on the information sent by different Defence Attaches and from
other sources. This data bank should always be kept uptodate. This
would reduce the time lag under Fast Track Procurement as well as
normal procurement.
13.12 The Committee also feel that 12 months time taken under
FTP to sign a contract will negate the very purpose of the procedure
particularly when something is ‘imminent’ or there is an operational
emergency. The Committee feel that there may be a need for separate
procedure under FTP for SOS supplies. The Committee desire that
the Government should examine this aspect also and check how far
present FTP can handle such a situation. The Committee may be
informed of the analysis made.

54
CHAPTER XIV
POST CONTRACT MONITORING
14.1 In response to a query, as to whether there is any mechanism
laid down by the Ministry to check the contracts after they are placed,
if proper procedure was followed, the representatives of MoD during
briefing stated that:
“There are two things. Internally there is a post contract monitoring
which is done at different level depending on the value of the
contract. Secondly, there is the CAG of India who examines as an
outsider. I do not think there is a system where internally we
check.”
14.2 The Committee are concerned to note that there is no
empowered body besides C&AG to monitor and find out whether
the prescribed procedure has been adhered to in letter and spirit in
defence deals. The Committee desire that in addition to C&AG, a
separate empowered Committee should be created to check each and
every defence transaction and fix accountability/responsibility in case
of any deviation from the procedure.
The Committee also desire that the suppliers should also be
made responsible for maintenance of the equipment as is being done
in other Departments.

55
CHAPTER XV
REVENUE PROCUREMENT
15.1 The revenue procurement is for items and equipment including
replacement equipment (functionally similar) assemblies/sub assemblies
and components to maintain and operate already sanctioned assets in
the service, the necessity of which have been established and accepted
by the Govt. For Revenue Procurement, Govt. has delegated financial
powers under revenue head to a number of functionaries in each
department. Procurement involving financial implication beyond
delegated powers is undertaken with the approval of MoD.
15.2 The Defence Procurement Manual 2005 lays down time limit
for procurement and accountability. It states:
“The effect of delay in processing and clearance of various
procurement activities needs no emphasis. The decentralization of
decision-making mechanism and delegation of financial powers are
aimed at facilitating faster decision making and obtaining best
value  for money. However, the delegation of powers also implies
‘authority with accountability’. Every individual in the chain of
the procurement process is accountable for taking action in a
specified time period so that the requirements of the Defence
Departments are met on time. Vetting of necessity and single tender
enquiry/LTE where required must be done by IFA within 4 weeks
to pre-empt any disruption in operational/production/maintenance
requirements.”
A flow chart showing major activities and time frame prescribed
is placed below:
Time Frame from Acquisition [Single Commercial Bids]
12 3
Receipt of Indent
1. Vetting, Registration of Indent and 1 Week
2. Vendor Selection and preparation of TE 1 Week
3. IFA Concurrence, CFA approval and floating 2 Weeks
of LTE/STE
Procurement Action
1. Time Allowed for submission of offers in a 3 Weeks (LTE)
single bid system (Commercial bid only) 4 Weeks (OTE)
6 Weeks (GTE)

56
2. Opening of Commercial offers, preparation of 2 Weeks
CST, Tech Vetting, etc.
3. Proposal for Procurement/Counter Offer/ 2 Weeks
Scheduling of PNC with IFA concurrence, and
CFA approval
4. Brief for PNC, notice of PNC and PNC 4 Weeks
meetings
5. PNC minutes and signature 1 Week
6. IFA concurrence and CFA Approval of 2 Weeks
Purchase Proposal
7. Preparation of SO and Despatch of SO 1 Week
Total 19-22 Weeks
Time Frame from Acquisition [Two Bids]
12 3
Receipt of Indent
1. Vetting, Registration of Indent and 1 Week
2. Vendor Selection and preparation of TE 1 Week
3. IFA Concurrence, CFA approval and floating 2 Weeks
of LTE/STE
Procurement Action
1. Time Allowed for submission of offers in a 3 Weeks (LTE)
Two bid system (Commercial bid and tech 4 Weeks (OTE)
bid) 6 Weeks (GTE)
2. Opening of Tech Bids and Technical 3 Weeks
Evaluation by TEC
3. Opening of Commercial offers 2 Weeks
4. Preparation of CST and Proposal 1 Week
5. Proposal for Procurement/Counter offer/ 2 Weeks
Scheduling of PNC with IFA concurrence,
and CFA approval
6. Brief for PNC, notice for PNC and PNC 4 Weeks
meetings
7. PNC minutes and signature 1 Week
12 3

57
8. IFA concurrence and CFA Approval of 2 Weeks
Purchase Proposal
9. Preparation of SO and Despatch of SO 1 Week
Total 23-26 Weeks
15.3 The Manual specifically lays down that provisions of DPM
will not be applicable in the case of emergent requirements involving
operational and technical necessities in respect of powers to be exercised
by CFAs without IFA concurrence.
15.4 The Committee note that a time frame of 19 to 22 weeks
has been prescribed in DPM for placing orders and for revenue
procurement under single commercial bids and 23 to 26 weeks for
two bids. The Committee feel that the time frame is very much on
the higher side and efforts should be made to curtail the time. The
Committee further desire that a time frame should also be prescribed
for getting delivery of the items of the defence forces and the same
should be strictly adhered to.
15.5 The Committee also recommend that the Ministry of Defence
should make clear distinction between defence equipment and other
items such as telecom hardware, information technology hardware,
office equipment, spare parts, etc. which do not strictly come under
defence equipment. The Committee desire that the Ministry should
make clear distinction between the defence and non-defence items
in order to avoid complexities of procedure followed in procuring
defence equipments. The procurement of these items should be
simplified on the lines of the procedure followed in other Ministries/
Departments. This may be called as civil budget.
15.6 During the study visit of the Standing Committee on Defence
to Jammu, Leh, Srinagar and other forward areas, the Committee
observed that there were delays in supply of consumable and non-
consumable items to the Armed Forces. During the visit of the
Committee to Siachen Area, it was noticed that soldiers were being
issued used items of personal clothing which were not fit for reuse.
The Committee had expressed their concern about the continuous
hardships the soldiers have to face because of the shortage of
essential items like shows, winter boots and winter clothing. The
Committee, therefore, strongly feel that a faster procurement process
must be evolved to ensure that the Armed Forces are not placed in
difficulties because of the lack of timely quality and adequate
supplies.
12 3

58
15.7 The Committee further observed during the study visit that
the Armed Forces posted at Leh procure food and other agro based
items from Delhi and other cities instead of procuring those items
from the local farmers and producers. For the farmers at Leh and
other border areas, Armed Forces are the main consumer of local
supplies. Therefore, the Committee desire that the Ministry of
Defence should evolve a policy to procure consumable items from
the local producers. On the one hand, it will give a boost to the
farming community in the border and high altitude areas and on
the other it will provide fresh food items to the Jawans at a
reasonable cost, by minimizing the cost of transportation, etc. This
will also be helpful in ensuring better integration of the armed
forces with the local population.
N
EW D ELHI; BALASAHEB VIKHE PATIL,
17 November, 2005 Chairman,
26 Kartika, 1927 (Saka) Standing Committee on Defence.

59
MINUTES OF THE EIGHTH SITTING OF THE STANDING
COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE (2004-05)
The Committee sat on Monday, the 13th December 2004 from
1430 hrs. to 1628 hrs. in Committee Room ‘E’, Parliament House
Annexe, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Shri Anand Sharma — Officiating Chairman
M
EMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Thupstan Chhewang
3. Shri Milind Deora
4. Shri Bhupinder Singh Hooda
5. Shri Suresh Kalmadi
6. Dr. C. Krishnan
7. Shri S.D. Mandlik
Rajya Sabha
8. Gen. (Retd.) Shankar Roy Chowdhury
9. Smt. N.P . Durga
10. Shri Janardan Dwivedi
11. Shri Lalit Suri
SECRETARIAT
1. Shri John Joseph — Additional Secretary
2. Shri P .K. Bhandari — Director
3. Smt. Anita Jain — Under Secretary
Representatives of the Ministry of Defence
1. Shri Ajai Vikram Singh, Defence Secretary
2. Ms. Somi Tandon, Secretary (Defence Finance)
3. Shri Shekhar Dutt, Secretary (Defence Production)

60
4. Dr. M. Natarajan, SA to RM
5. Shri S. Banerjee, Additional Secretary (Acquisition)
6. Shri Ranjit Issar, Additional Secretary
7. Smt. Sheela Bheede, FA (Acquisition)
8. Shri P .K. Anand, JS & AM (LS)
9. Dr. Thomas Mathew, JS & AM (MS)
10. Shri Mohapatra, JS & AM (Air)
11. Shri S.N. Misra, FM (LS)
12. Shri Tarsem Lal, FM (MS)
13. Shri S.L. Bunker, FM (Air)
14. Maj. Gen. H.S. Sehgal, TM (LS)
15. Rear Adm. R.N. Kshetrapal, TM (MS)
16. AVM Rajesh Lal, TM (Air)
17. Shri K.K. Kirty, Director (Acq.)
18. Rear Adm. Nirmal Varma, ACNS (P&P)
19. Cmde. A.R. Radhakrishnan, PDNP
2. In the absence of Hon’ble Chairman, Standing Committee on
Defence, Shri Anand Sharma, M.P . and Convenor, Sub-Committee-II
acted as  Chairman for the sitting on 13 December 2004.
3. The Committee then took up the evidence of representatives of
the Ministry of Defence in connection with the examination of
‘Procurement Policy and Procedure’.
4. The  Chairman welcomed the Defence Secretary and his
colleagues to the sitting of the Committee and invited their attention
to the Directions 55 and 58 of the Directions by the Speaker,
Lok Sabha regarding maintaining confidentiality of the deliberations at
the sitting.
5. The Defence Secretary then briefed the Committee on the
‘Procurement Policy and Procedure’ of defence equipments. Thereafter,
presentation was made by Additional Secretary (Acquisition) of the
Ministry on the subject. The representatives of the Ministry also replied
to the queries of the Members regarding delays in acquisition of defence
equipments, non-finalisation of Tenth Defence Plan, feasibility of pre-
audit of defence deals, private sector participation in defence production
and other related topics.

61
6. A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept.
Witnesses then withdrew.
7. The Committee decided that during the session days, minimum
three days notice should be given for a sitting of the Committee and
it should preferably be held after 5 P .M.
The Committee then adjourned.

62
MINUTES OF THE FOURTEENTH SITTING OF THE
STANDING COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE (2004-05)
The Committee sat on Friday, the 4th February 2005 from
1100 hrs. to 1245 hrs. in Committee Room ‘G-074’, Parliament Library
Building, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Shri Balasaheb Vikhe Patil — Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Illiyas Azmi
3. Shri S. Bangarappa
4. Shri Ramesh Jigajinagi
5. Dr. K.S. Manoj
6. Shri Raghuraj Singh Shakya
Rajya Sabha
7. Shri R.K. Anand
8. Dr. Farooq Abdullah
9. Gen. (Retd.) Shankar Roy Chowdhury
10. Smt. N.P . Durga
11. Shri Janardan Dwivedi
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri John Joseph — Additional Secretary
2. Shri P .K. Bhandari — Director
3. Smt. Anita Jain — Under Secretary
Representatives of the Ministry of Defence
1. Shri Ajay Vikram Singh, Defence Secretary
2. Ms. Somi Tandon, Secretary (Defence Finance)
3. Shri Shekhar Dutt, Secretary (Defence Production)

63
4. Shri S. Banerjee, Additional Secretary (Acquisition)
5. Shri Ranjit Issar, Additional Secretary (I)
6. Smt. Sheela Bhide, FA (Acquisition)
7. Vice Admiral Sangram Singh Byce, DCIDS (PP&FD)
8. Lt. Gen. P .P .S. Bhandari, DCOAS (P&S)
9. Shri P .K. Anand, JS & AM (LS)
10. Dr. Thomas Mathew, JS & AM (MS)
11. Shri S.K. Sharma, JS & AM (MS)
12. Shri Gautam Chatterjee, JS (O/N)
13. Shri Alok Perti, JS (S)
14. Shri Tarsem Lal, FM (MS)
15. Shri S.L. Bunker, FM (Air)
16. Dr. A.S. Pillai, Chief Controller R&D (R&M)
17. Maj. Gen. H.S. Sehgal, TM (LS)
18. Rear Adm. R.N. Kshetrapal, TM (MS)
19. AVM Rajesh Lal, TM (Air)
20. Rear Adm. Nirmal Varma, ACNS (P&P)
21. Maj. Gen. Kunal Mukherjee, ADGWE
22. Maj. Gen. Vikram Madan, ADG (EM)
23. Air Mshl. J.S. Gujral, DCAS
24. Cmde. A.R. Radhakrishnan, PDNP
2. At the outset, the Hon’ble Chairman, Standing Committee on
Defence welcomed the representatives of Ministry of Defence and
invited them to further brief the Members of the Committee on the
subject ‘Procurement Policy and Procedure’.
3. Based on the observations during the study visit of the
Committee to Jammu, Leh and Srinagar and other forward areas during
the month of October 2004, the Committee made the following points
pertaining to procurement of defence equipments and other necessary
items and the delays involved in making available timely and adequate
supply of these items to Jawans in Saichen and other high altitude
areas:
(i) Non-availability of adequate clothing and other necessary
equipments for the Jawans;
(ii) Need for revision of norms providing two sets of special
clothes to Jawans;

64
(iii) Clothing and equipment provided to Jawans in India
vis-a-vis Pakistan, China and other countries of the world
where men are deployed at high altitude areas;
(iv) Imports v/s indigenous production of clothing required for
high altitude areas;
(v) Findings of Kelkar Committee’s Report with regard to
induction of private sector into defence production;
(vi) Non-indication of firm allocation for the Tenth Plan leading
to difficulties in privatisation because of absence of
availability of funds and the corrective methods the Ministry
will like to undertake to remove the obstacles;
(vii) Need for long term perspective plan for the defence sector
and availability of matching financial allocations for
modernisation and defence preparedness;
(viii) Non-availability of adequate medical facilities in Army
hospitals in general and high altitude areas in particular;
(ix) The Government directions of 26% Foreign Direct
Investments in defence sector;
(x) Concurrent engineering system in the Ministry of Defence.
Time log between model stage and production stage; and
(xi) Whether the Defence Procurement Board has resulted in
expediting in procurement procedure.
4. The representatives of the Ministry of Defence agreed in principle
to the concern expressed by the Committee on the above mentioned
points and assured the Committee to take corrective measures and
answered the queries put to them.
5. A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept.
Witnesses then withdrew.
The Committee then adjourned.

65
MINUTES OF THE THIRTY SECOND SITTING OF THE
STANDING COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE (2004-05)
The Committee sat on Monday, 20th June, 2005 from 1500 hrs. to
1650 hrs. in Committee Room ‘G-074’, Parliament Library Building,
New Delhi.
PRESENT
Shri Balasaheb Vikhe Patil — Chairman
M
EMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Churchill Alemao
3. Shri Iliyas Azmi
4. Shri A.V . Bellarmin
5. Shri Thupstan Chhewang
6. Smt. Sangeeta Kumari Singh Deo
7. Sh. Milind Deora
8. Shri Ramesh Jigajinagi
9. Dr. C. Krishnan
10. Shri S.D. Mandlik
11.D r. K.S. Manoj
12. Shri Raghuraj Singh Shakya
13. Shri Balashowry Vallabhaneni
14. Ms. Ingrid Mcleod
15. Shri Dharmendra Yadav
Rajya Sabha
16. Shri R.K. Anand
17. Gen. (Retd.) Shankar Roy Chowdhury
18. Shri T.T.V . Dhinakaran
19. Shri Janardan Dwivedi
20. Shri Anand Sharma

66
SECRETARIAT
1. Shri P .D.T. Achary — Secretary
2. Shri M. Rajagopalan Nair — Additional Secretary
3. Shri P .K. Bhandari — Director
4. Smt. Anita Jain — Deputy Secretary
5. Shri D.R. Shekhar — Under Secretary
Representatives of Ministry of Defence
1. Shri Ajay Vikram Singh, Defence Secretary
2. Shri Shekhar Dutt, Secretary (DP)
3. Ms. Somi Tandon, Secretary (Defence Finance)
4. Shri H.C. Gupta, Special Secretary (Acquisition)
5. Dr. M. Natrajan, SA to RM
6. Shri S. Banerjee, AS (DP)
7. Shri Ranjit Issar, Additional Secretary (I)
8. Shri S.C. Narang, CCR & D (R&M)
9. Shri P .K. Jena, Addl. FA
10. Shri P .K. Anand, JS & AM (LS)
11. Shri S.K. Sharma, JS & AM (Air)
12. Dr. Thomas Mathew, JS & AM (M&S)
13. Maj. Gen. H.S. Sehgal, TM (LS)
14. Rear Admiral Nirmal Verma, ACNS (P&P)
15. Maj. Gen. A.K. Mehra, VSM, ADG WE
16. Maj. Gen. Vikram Madan, ADG (EM)
17. AVM K.K. Nohwar, VM, ACAS (Plans)
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Secretary and the
other officers of the Ministry of Defence to the sitting of the Committee
and invited their attention to direction as 58 of the directions by the
Speaker Lok Sabha. The Ministry then made presentation on the subject
‘Defence Procurement Policy and Procedure’. The Committee sought
clarifications on issue like acquisition of equipments during emergency ,
transparency vis a vis secrecy, Defence/non-defence items, process of
indigenisation, common specification & role of India in global market,
transfer of technology, single vendor problem etc. The representative
then answered the queries one by one. On certain issues Ministry
assured the Committee to furnish replies later on.
3. The Chairman thanked the representatives of the Ministry of
Defence for appearing before Committee and expressing free and frank
views.
4. Verbatim record of the proceedings was kept.
The Committee then adjourned.

67
MINUTES OF THE THIRD SITTING OF THE STANDING
COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE (2005-06)
The Committee sat on Monday, the 12 September, 2005 from
1030 hrs. to 1230 hrs. in Committee Room No. 139, Parliament House
Annexe, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Shri Balasaheb Vikhe Patil — Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Iliyas Azmi
3. Shri Suresh Chandel
4. Shri Thupstan Chhewang
5. Shri Ramesh Jigajinagi
6. Dr. C. Krishnan
7. Shri S.D. Mandlik
8. Dr. K.S. Manoj
9. Shri Raghuraj Singh Shakya
10. Shri Mahadeorao Shivankar
11. Shri  Ganesh Prasad Singh
12. Shri Manvendra Singh
13. Shri Balashowry Vallabhaneni
14. Ms. Ingrid Mcleod
Rajya Sabha
15. Shri Janardan Dwivedi
16. Shri Pramod Mahajan
17. Shri Anand Sharma
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri P .K. Grover — Joint Secretary
2. Smt. Anita Jain — Deputy Secretary
3. Shri D.R. Shekhar — Under Secretary
Representatives of Ministry of Defence
1. Shri Shekhar Dutt, Defence Secretary
2. Smt. Sheela Bhide, FA (Acquisition)
3. Shri S. Banerjee, AS (Acq.)

68
4. Shri Ranjit Issar, Addl. Secy. (I)
5. Shri P .K. Anand, JS&AM (LS)
6. Shri S.K. Sharma, JS&AM (Air)
7. Dr. Thomas Mathew, JS&AM (MS)
8. Smt. Rita Menon, JS (SY)
9. Maj. Gen. H.S. Sehgal, TM (LS)
10. Rear Adml. R.K. Dhowan, ACNS (P&P)
11. Maj. Gen. A.K. Mehra, VSM, ADG WE
12. Maj. Gen. Vikram Madan, ADG (EM)
13. AVM K.K. Nohwar, VM, ACAS (Plans)
14. Shri R.K. Chauhan, Dir. (P&C), DRDO
15. Shri C.M. Dhawan, Dir. (MM), DRDO
At the outset Chairman welcomed the members to the sitting of
the Committee and informed them that the representatives of the
Ministry of Defence were present to tender oral evidence on the subject
‘Procurement Policy and Procedure’.
2. The Chairman then welcomed the Defence Secretary and his
colleagues to the sitting of the Committee and invited their attention
to Directions 55 and 58 of the Directions by the Speaker, Lok Sabha
regarding maintaining confidentiality of the deliberations of the sitting.
3. The Committee then took oral evidence of the representatives of
the Ministry of Defence on the subject “Procurement Policy and
Procedure”. Members of the Committee then sought clarifications on
some of the points in the new procurement procedure like ensuring
‘Transfer of Technology’ particularly at the level of sub-systems
components and spares, which could be best produced by medium
and small scale private sector industry or PSUs; how to avoid single
vendor situation, methods adopted to assess and project a realistic
demand in advance and in case of default to ensure accountability of
services in procurement, the issue pertaining to import of defence
equipment and indigenous development, sharing of R&D among PSUs,
the ordnance factories and private sector, long-term planning to make
procurement procedure easy and transparent, perception of Ministry
of Defence on FDI in Defence Sector etc.
4. The representative of the Ministry answered the queries one by
one. On certain issues where information was not available the
Chairman stressed that might be supplied at the earliest.
5. A verbatim record of proceedings has been kept.
The Committee then adjourned.

69
MINUTES OF THE EIGHTH SITTING OF THE STANDING
COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE (2005-06)
The Committee sat on Monday, the 7 November, 2005 from
1500 hrs. to 1540 hrs. in Committee Room ‘G-074’, Parliament Library
Building, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Shri Balasaheb Vikhe Patil — Chairman
M
EMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Churchil Alemao
3. Shri Iliyas Azmi
4. Shri Suresh Chandel
5. Smt. Sangeeta Kumari Singh Deo
6. Shri Ramesh Jigajinagi
7. Shri Suresh Kalmadi
8. Dr. C. Krishnan
9. Shri S.D. Mandlik
10. Dr. K.S. Manoj
11. Shri Raghuraj Singh Shakya
12. Shri Balashowry Vallabhaneni
Rajya Sabha
13. Shri R.K. Anand
14. Smt. N.P . Durga
15. Shri Janardan Dwivedi
16. Shri Pramod Mahajan
17. Shri Lalit Suri
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri S.K. Sharma — Additional Secretary
2. Shri R.C. Ahuja — Joint Secretary
3. Smt. Anita Jain — Deputy Secretary
4. Shri D.R. Shekhar — Under Secretary

70
2. At the outset, Hon’ble Chairman welcomed the Members to the
sitting of the Committee for finalizing the draft Report on ‘Procurement
Policy & Procedure’.
3. Hon’ble Chairman then requested the Members to give their
suggestions/modifications for incorporation in the draft report. Some
Members of the Committee suggested minor changes/modifications.
The Chairman further requested the Members to give their suggestions
in writing, if any, later on for incorporation in the draft report.
4. The Committee then decided to consider and adopt the amended
draft report at the sitting to be held on 17 November, 2005.
The Committee then adjourned.

71
MINUTES OF THE TENTH SITTING OF THE STANDING
COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE (2005-06)
The Committee sat on Thursday, the 17 November, 2005 from
1500 hrs. to 1700 hrs. in Committee Room ‘G-074’, Parliament Library
Building, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Shri Balasaheb Vikhe Patil — Chairman
M
EMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Churchil Alemao
3. Shri Iliyas Azmi
4. Shri A.V . Bellarmin
5. Shri Suresh Chandel
6. Dr. C. Krishnan
7. Dr. K.S. Manoj
8. Shri Raghuraj Singh Shakya
9. Shri Mahadeorao Shiwankar
10. Shri Manvendra Singh
11. Shri Balashowry Vallabhaneni
Rajya Sabha
12. Shri Janardan Dwivedi
13. Shri Pramod Mahajan
14. Shri Anand Sharma
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri R.C. Ahuja — Joint Secretary
2. Smt. Anita Jain — Deputy Secretary
3. Shri D.R. Shekhar — Under Secretary

72
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members to the
sitting of the Committee.
3. The Committee then took up following draft reports for
consideration:
(i) Procurement Policy and Procedure; and
(ii) Defence Ordnance Factories
The Committee after deliberation adopted the draft report on
‘Procurement Policy and Procedure’ with modifications/amendments
suggested by the Members.
4. Due to paucity of time, the Committee decided to postpone the
consideration of the draft report on ‘Defence Ordnance Factories’ to
23.11.2005.
5. The Committee, thereafter, authorized the Chairman to finalize
the draft report in the light of the amendments/suggestions given by
the Members and present the same to both the Houses of Parliament.
The Committee then adjourned.