           
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE 
5 
        (2004-2005) 
 
(FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
MINISTRY OF DEFENCE 
 
 
THE CANTONMENTS BILL, 2003 
 
 
 
 
FIFTH REPORT 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
 
NEW DELHI 
 
 
May, 2005/Vaisakha, 1927 (Saka) 

 
 
 
FIFTH REPORT 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE 
                 (2004-2005) 
 
(FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
     MINISTRY OF DEFENCE 
 
           THE CANTONMENTS BILL, 2003 
 
  
 
 
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 10  May, 2005 
 
Laid in Raiya Sabha on 10  May, 2005 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
 
NEW DELHI 
 
May, 2005/Vaisakha, 1927 (Saka) 
 

CONTENTS 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (2004-05)  
 
INTRODUCTION  
 
REPORT 
 
 INTRODUCTORY  
           
 CHAPTER-I  PRELIMINARY 
       
 CHAPTER-II  DEFINITION AND DELIMITATION OF CANTONMENTS 
 
 CHAPTER-III  CANTONMENT BOARDS 
 
 CHAPTER-IV DUTIES AND DISCRETIONARY FUNCTIONS OF BOARDS 
 
 CHAPTER-V  TAXES AND FEES  
 
 CHAPTER-VI CANTONMENT FUND AND PROPERTY 
 
 CHAPTER-VII CONTRACTS 
   
 CHAPTER-VIII SANITATION AND THE PREVENTION AND  
TREATMENT OF DISEASE 
 
CHAPTER-IX WATER-SUPPLY, DRAINAGE AND SEWAGE COLLECTION 
 
CHAPTER-X  TOWN PLANNING AND CONT ROL OVER BUILDINGS, ETC 
 
CHAPTER-XI MARKETS, SLAUGHTER HOUSES, TRADES  
AND OCCUPATIONS 
 
 CHAPTER-XIII PUBLIC SAFETY AND SU PPRESSION OF NUISANCES 
 
 CHAPTER-XVI POWERS, PROCEDURES, PENALTIES AND APPEALS  
 
 SCHEDULE V OF THE CANTONMENTS BILL, 2003 
 
ANNEXURE 
 
MINUTES OF THE SITTINGS  
 
APPENDIX 
 
  
(ii) 

COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE (2004-2005) 
 
Shri Balasaheb Vikhe Patil   - Chairman    
 
 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri Churchill Alemao 
3. Shri Iliyas Azmi 
4. Shri A.V. Bellarmin 
5. Shri Suresh Chandel 
6. Shri Thupstan Chhewang 
7. Smt. Sangeeta Kumari Singh Deo 
8. Shri Milind Deora 
9. Shri Bhupinder Singh Hooda 
10. Shri Ramesh Jigajinagi 
11. Shri Suresh Kalmadi 
12. Dr. C. Krishnan 
13. Shri S.D. Mandlik 
14. Dr. K.S. Manoj 
15. Shri Raghuraj Singh Shakya 
16. Shri Mahadeorao Shivankar 
17. Shri Ganesh Prasad Singh 
18. Shri Manavendra Singh 
19. Shri Balashowry Vallabhaneni 
20. Ms. Ingrid Mcleod 
21. Shri Dharmendra Yadav 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
22. Shri R.K. Anand 
23. Dr. Farooq Abdullah 
24. Gen. (Retd.) Shankar Roy Chowdhury 
25. Shri T.T.V. Dhinakaran 
26. Smt. N.P. Durga 
27. Shri Janardan Dwivedi 
28. Shri Pramod Mahajan 
29. Shri Mukhtar Abbas Naqvi 
30. Shri Anand Sharma 
31. Shri Lalit Suri 
 
 
 
 
 

 5
SECRETARIAT 
 
  
1. Shri P.D.T. Achary  - Secretary 
 2. Shri M. Rajgopalan Nair  - Additional Secretary 
 3.  Shri P.K. Bhandari  - Director 
4. Smt. Anita Jain  - Deputy Secretary 
5. Shri D.R. Shekhar  - Under Secretary  
 6. Smt. Jyochanamayi Sinha  - Committee Officer 
 7. Shri Rahul Singh   - Senior Executive Assistant 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 6
INTRODUCTION 
 
I, the Chairman, Standing Committee on Defence (2004-05) having been 
authorized by the Committee to submit the Report on thei r behalf, present this Fifth 
report on `The Cantonments Bill, 2003’. 
  
2. The Standing Committee on Defence (2004-05) was constituted on 5 th August, 
2004.  One of the functions of the Standing Committee, as laid down in Rule 331E of 
the Rules of Procedure and Co nduct of Business in Lok Sabha, is to examine such 
Bills pertaining to the concerned Minist ry/Department as are referred to the 
Committee by the Chairman, Rajya Sabha or the Speaker, as the case may be, and 
to make a Report on the same to the House.  
 
3. The Cantonments Bill, 2003 was introduc ed in Rajya Sabha on 22 December 
2003 and was referred to the Standing Co mmittee on Defence by Hon’ble Speaker 
on 2 February 2004.  As the Thirteenth Lok Sabha was dissolved on 6 February 
2004, the Bill could not be examined by t he Standing Committee on Defence.  The 
Bill was re-referred by the Hon’ble Speak er, Lok Sabha to the Standing Committee 
on Defence on 20 August 2004 for examination and report thereon. 
 
4. The Cantonments Bill, 2003 seeks to replace the Cantonments Act, 1924.  The 
existing Act is not geared to meet the economic  and social challenges involved in the 
administration of Cantonments and lacks a pro-active development orientation.   With 
the passage of time, many of the provisions of the Act have outlived their utility.  The 
Parliamentary Standing Committee on Defence (12 th Lok Sabha) had examined the 
issue of Cantonment Boards and Defenc e Lands to bring modern municipal 
management procedure/techniques in Cantonment areas by broadening the ambit of 
activities so that the laws are more m eaningful and relevant to the present day needs 
and aspirations of the people residing in Cant onment.   As the Bill intends to brings 
about major changes in the existing Act, th e Committee decided to invite memoranda 
on the Bill from the organisations/associ ations and general public who may be 
interested in the subject matter of t he Bill.   The Committee received 350 
memoranda/representations from various organizations/associations/individuals on 
various provisions of the Bill. 
 
5. In view of according `deemed municipality’ status to the Board under clause 10 
& 108 of the Bill, for the purpose of Arti cle 243 P(e) of the Constitution.  The 
Committee had sought the views of all the States and UT Governments.  However, 
their response was not encouraging. 
 
    

 7
-2- 
6. The Committee had the briefing of the representatives of the Ministry of 
Defence on the Bill on 15 September 2004 and 8 October 2004 and oral evidence on 
29 April 2005.   Besides this, the Committee also took evidence of concerned officials 
of Cantonment Boards on 9,  10 March 2005 and 13 April 2005.  The Committee also 
sought the opinion of expert0s  in the field of cantonments on 22 November 2004, 15 
December 2004, 11, 12 and 24  January 2005 and on  15 February 2005.   A list of 
such individuals/experts/associations who appeared before the Committee is given in 
Annexure.  
    
7.  The Committee have examined the Bill on the basis of some basic policy 
parameters as enumer ated in the objects and reasons of the Bill i.e. (i) greater 
democratisation; (ii) better financial m anagement; (iii) extension of centrally 
sponsored development schemes; and (iv)  management of defence land and have 
given their recommendations in the report. 
 
8. The draft report was considered and adopted by the Standing Committee on 
Defence (2004-05) at their sitting held on 5 May 2005. 
 
9. The Committee greatly benefited from  the views/suggestions of various 
individuals/associations/experts on various provision of the Bill.  They wish to express 
thanks to all of them who furnished memoranda and appeared before the Committee 
for evidence. 
 
10. The Committee wish to express their thanks to the representatives of the 
Ministry of Defence, State Government officials for appearing before the Committee 
for evidence and for furnishing the valuable material and information in a very short 
span of time which the Committee desired in  connection with the examination of the 
Cantonments Bill, 2003. 
 
 11. For facility of reference and convenience, the observations/ recommendations 
of the Committee have been printed in bold type in the body of the report.  
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI;           BALASAHEB VIKHE PATIL,  
  6 May, 2005                                                             Chairman, 
 16 Vaisakha, 1927 (Saka)                         Standing Committee on Defence 
 

 8
 
REPORT 
 
Introductory 
 
 The Cantonments Bill, 2003 was introduced  in Rajya Sabha on 22 December 
2003 and was referred to the Standing Co mmittee on Defence by Hon’ble Speaker 
on 2 February 2004.  As the Thirteenth Lok Sabha was dissolved on 6 February 
2004, the Bill could not be examined by t he Standing Committee on Defence.  The 
Bill was re-referred by the Hon’ble Speak er, Lok Sabha to the Standing Committee 
on Defence on 20 August 2004 for examination and report. 
 
2. Cantonments are central territories under the constitution where military troops 
are quartered alongwith civi lian population.  There ar e 62 cantonments spread all 
over the country and are pres ently administered under Cantonments Act, 1924.  This 
has been amended 28 times since its enactment.   
 Cantonments basically cater to t he need for quartering of troops with the 
following main features : 
(a) They provided a buffer to keep  a distance between troops and the 
native population; 
 
(b) They ensured availability of civil population nearby to take care of the 
needs of the armed forces for petty services; and 
 
(c) They ensured some minimum civic standards to the civilian population 
in cantonment areas because these standards in turn had a bearing on 
the health and hygiene of the troops. 
 
3. The existing Act is not geared to m eet the economic and so cial challenges 
involved in the administrat ion of Cantonments and lacks a pro-active development 
orientation.   With the passage of time, many of the provisions of the Act have 
outlived their utility.  The Parliam entary Standing Committee on Defence (12 th Lok 
Sabha) had examined the issue of Ca ntonment Boards and Defence Lands and 
made some recommendations.  Accordingly,  the Ministry of Defence has brought 
forward the Cantonments Bill, 2003 to bring modern municipal management 
procedure/techniques in Cant onment areas by broadening t he ambit of activities so 
that the laws are more meaningful and re levant to the present day needs and 
aspirations of the people residing in Cantonment. 
 4. As stated in the statement of obj ects and reasons of the Bill, the new 
legislation has been brought in with a view to  re-enact the existing Act in the context 
of the 74th Amendment and to provide for be tter urban management in Cantonments 
as recommended by the Parliamentar y Standing Committee on Defence (12 th Lok 
Sabha).    The proposed modifications could be categorised as under : 
(i) Greater Democratisation  : The Bill envisages e nhanced representation for 
elected members to make proper bal ance between the elected and nominated 
one.  Reservation of seats in the Cantonment Boards  for women and the 

 9
Scheduled Castes/Scheduled Tribes would al so fall in this category.  In the 
proposed Bill, parity has been brought between the official and elected 
members of the Board and with this, the number of elected members would 
increase.  The enhanced r epresentation for elected members will cater for 
increased civil population in the cantonment areas. 
(ii) Better financial management:    Provisions have been inco rporated in the new 
Bill to streamline financial administr ation, improve fi nancial base and change 
the tax mechanism keeping in vi ew the needs of modern municipal 
administration.  Provisions have also been made for a Cantonment 
Development Fund in which, any sum received from Government or an 
individual or association (by way of gift or deposit) or from centrally sponsored 
schemes, may be credited. 
(iii) Extension of centrally spons ored development schemes : As per the 
recommendations given in the Fifth Report of Parliamentary Standing 
Committee on Defence (12 th Lok Sabha) for extension of centrally sponsored 
development schemes in cantonments for uniform development of States, 
provisions in clause 10 and 108 have be en incorporated in the new Bill for 
enabling the Board to be a `deemed municipality’ for the purpose of Article 243 
P(e) of the Constitution.  This woul d enable the Cantonment Boards to avail 
benefits of centrally sponsored schemes for socio-economic development of 
cantonment areas in line with other municipalities in various States. 
(iv) Management of Defence L ands and their audit :  Over the years, the defence 
land ownership has increased to 17.31 la kh acres out of which about 2 lakh 
acres of such lands are situated wi thin 62 notified cantonments being 
managed under the existing Act.  There is no statute to cover the management 
of about 15 lakh acres of defence lands lying outside the cantonments.  As on 
date, these defence lands are regulated by  executive instructions (not covered 
under any statute) issued by the Centra l Government from time to time 
through Acquisition, Custody, Relinquishm ent, etc. of Milit ary Land in India 
(ACR) Rules, 1944, which are non-statutory in nature. 
5. Statutory provisions have accord ingly been made and a new Chapter on 
management of defence lands has been added in  the Bill.  The provisions contained 
in this Chapter will, inter-alia, enable the Central Government to notify the defence 
lands, consolidate land m anagement policies and records in regard to defence 
lands, carry out land audits to detect abus e if any, non-utilisat ion and sub-optimal 
utilisation of lands. 
6. As the Cantonments Bill , 2003 intends to brings abo ut major changes in the 
Cantonments Act, 1924, the Committee decided to invite memoranda on the Bill from 
the general public who may be interested in the subject matter of  the Bill.  The text of 
the Bill was hoisted at the website www.parliamentofindia.nic.in on internet and the 
advertisement for this purpose was publ ished in leading national and local 
newspapers.  In addition, copies of the Bill were sent to various 
organizations/associations/individuals on demand for eliciting their views and 
suggestions thereon.     
7. In all the Committee received 350 me moranda/representations from various 
organizations/associations/individuals on va rious provisions of the Bill.   The 

 10
Committee also invited some of the experts, who had s ent their views and requested 
to appear before the Committee for oral evidence.  They explained various provisions 
of the Bill which helped the Committee in understanding various aspects of the Bill.    
8. As Clause 10 and 108 of the Bill confer the Board `deemed municipality’ status 
for the purpose of Article 243 P(e) of the Constitution, this would enable the 
Cantonment Board to avail financial a nd other benefits of centrally sponsored 
development schemes from the Central Government as well as from the State 
Governments.  As a result, the State Go vernments intervention is likely in the 
management of Cantonment Board.  Acco rdingly, the Committee had sought the 
views of all the States and UT Government s.   However, their response was not 
encouraging. 
9. One of the major aim of the Bill is gr eater democratisation of the Cantonment 
Board.  The Committee find that though  Bill envisages enhanced representation for 
elected members and reservation of seat s in Cantonment Boar ds for Women and 
Scheduled Castes/Tribes, etc., the Committee for civil area (Clause 47) which consist 
of all elected members, have been given very few powers.   Even the decisions taken 
by this Committee especially for civil areas can be objected to by various other 
members of the Board and can be stalled indefinitel y making its existence 
infructuous.  The Committee further note that even the decisions of the full Board can 
be over-ridden by the very nominated members of the Board who may be privy to 
that decision (Clause 56).  T he committee note that all thes e provisions in the Bill 
have been brought in from the Cantonments Act, 19 24 which was enacted during the 
British Rule with a avid aim of providing a buffer to keep a distance between troops 
and civil population.  The Commi ttee feel that the inclusion of these provisions in the 
present Bill does not in any  way help in greater democr atisation of the Cantonment 
Boards.  Even the Government’s clai m that the Bill env isages enhanced 
representation for elected members to make proper balance betw een the elected and 
nominated one does not hold good as since 1957 one seat of  

 11
nominated member has been ke pt vacant to maintain t he parity under the existing 
Act itself.  
10. The Committee note that the Bill contains basically provisions relating to 
municipal laws. As our Cantonm ents are spread over the length and breadth of the 
country and are situated in different stat es, where different municipal laws are 
prevalent, the Committee feel that ther e is a need to exam ine the provisions 
mentioned in the Bill to provide flexibility in such matters and to identify the provisions 
which can form part of Bye-laws  to be framed under  the Act.    In vi ew of the above, 
the Committee feel that all Cantonments should have a system of proper coordination 
with the adjoining municipalities whose bye-laws etc. c an be examined and adopted 
by the Cantonment Boards.  The Committee, therefore, feel that the Government 
should re-examine the various provisions of this Bill accordingly.   
11. The Committee further note that wide powers have been given under the Bill 
to vary the Constitution of Boards in special circumstan ces (Clause 13).  But the 
Committee find that the s pecial circumstances under which the Boards can be 
varied have not been specifi ed. Nor any time limit has be en laid down within which 
the varied Board must be restored or fr esh elections are he ld thereto.  The 
Committee note that using si milar powers available un der section 14 of the 
Cantonments Act, 1924, the Boards of 61 Cantonments, out of a total of 62 
Cantonments, have been varied  and are functioning without  elected members.  The 
Committee desire that these provisions be amended accordin gly and a maximum 
limit of six months be pre scribed within which the B oard be restored or fresh 
elections are held.  In ex ceptional circumstances, to be specified by the Central 
Government, further extension upto six mont hs at a time for a maximum period of 
one year be given.  
12. The Committee note that under Clause  31, the Central Government have been 
authorised to make rules re gulating elections.    Howe ver, no authority has been 
mentioned which would init iate the process of hold ing elections to various 
Cantonment Boards as and when these ar e due.   The Committee desire that the 
Ministry of Defence should designate one of its officers  as Election Officer who 
would initiate the election process and supervise the co nduct of elections in a free 
and fair manner.  This clause should be amended accordingly. 
13. The Committee have further noted that t here is a multiplicity of authorities in 
various provisions of the Bill (Clauses 52- 53-77 – Sl. Nos. 5,6 and 7 of the Schedule 
V).  These are likely to cause confusion in the smooth functioning of the Board and 
need to be amended su itably.  The Committee desire th at various provisions of the 
Bill may be re-examined acco rdingly.   The Committee al so desire that there is a 
need to clearly define the fi eld of authority and role of  various functionaries like 
GOC-in-C, the Command, the Principal Director, Defence Estates and the 
Committees for Civil area etc. 
14. The Committee note that very wide  powers have been given to some 
functionaries like CEO and no right of appeal has been gi ven against their decision 
in a number of clauses in the Bill.  The Committee desire that a clear cut appellate 
authority should be put in place to prefer an appeal against the decisions of the 
Board, Civil Area Committee or  any functionary of the Bo ard like CEO etc.   The 
Committee feel that CEO should only be a Secretary to the Board and its 

 12
Committees.  He should exerci se powers only `for’ and `o n behalf of’ Board.   While 
Central Government can be the appellat e authority, it can delegate the power 
suitably to facilitate early disposal of the cases. 
15. The Committee note that `deemed muni cipality’ status is proposed to be 
conferred on Cantonment Boar ds under Clauses 10 (2) a nd 108 of the Bill for the 
purposes of Article 243 P(e) of the Constitution.   This would enable the Cantonment 
Boards to avail benefits and advantages  of Centre and State Governments 
Sponsored Schemes for social and econ omic development as are presently 
available to other municipa lities.  The Committee after going through the relevant 
information hold a view that  proper and well in advance  exercise has not been done 
by the Ministry before inco rporating Clause 10(2) in Ch apter-III and Clause 108 of 
Chapter-V in the Bill, relating  to deemed municipalities of the Board for the purpose 
of Article 243P(e) of the Cons titution.  Hence, the Committee feel that this may lead 
to conflict between the Centre and Stat es. There is a need to  consult the State 
Governments, clarifying as to what b enefits are proposed to be transferred to 
Cantonment Boards from Centre and St ate Governments Sponsored Schemes and 
modalities be chalked out and finalised relating thereto.   The Committee desire that 
any agency funding the development works in the cantonment area should not have 
any right to interfere in adm inistrative matters.  The asse ts created by such funding 
shall remain property of Ministry of Def ence/Board.  The Commi ttee further desire 
that the Boards should be empowered to  accept the aid and developmental funds 
from State Governments and NGOs, etc. an d incur expenditure on the respective 
works. 
16. Pertaining to Ch apter 15 of the Bill which deal s with Management  of Defence 
Lands, the Committee are informed that  the ownership of defence land has 
increased to 17.31 lakh acre s out of which approximatel y 2 lakh acres only are 
within the 62 notified Cant onments being managed under the existing Act.   The 
remaining 15.31 lakh acres is outside the purview of Cantonment Board.    In the 
present Bill, a need was felt for consolidation of the existing policies and to provide a 
statutory cover for matters regarding management of all defence lands, their 
protection and audit. 
 The Committee furthe r note that there are about 600 Military St ations which 
are based on Military lands but there are no statutory laws presently to govern their 
use etc. 
17. The Committee also note that presently  civil and military p opulation ratio is 
80:20 in various cantonments whereas land uses  is in the ratio of  20:80.  Which the 
Committee feel is depriving the civil popula tion of their basic  requirements i.e. 
education, health, sanitation, etc.  
 The Committee, therefore, recommend that the Government should consider 
to increase civil area in  various cantonments so that  the above needs of civil 
population do not suffer because of non-availability of sufficient land. 
18. The Committee feel that the nature of the management of Cantonment area 
and administration of Cant onment Board and managem ent of Defence Lands as 
mentioned in Chapter 15 are different.  The Committee hav e carefully examined the 
whole matter afresh and have come to the conclu sion that Chapter XV on 
Management of Defence Lands  should be excluded from  the present Bill and a 

 13
separate Bill should be brought  forward to deal with   management of defence lands 
other than cantonments. That Bi ll can also include administr ation of Military Stations 
which are presently not governed by any  Parliamentary Law.  The Committee, 
therefore, recommend that the Ministry of  Defence should bri ng a new Bill to deal 
with this matter at the earliest.  
19. The Committee have re ceived a number of representations from various 
sources stating that no permission whatsoev er is given by the Board to carry out 
even minor repairs or small additions/alterations in civil/Bungalow areas. This has led 
to avoidable difficulties to the civil populati on in cantonment.  Restriction is greater in 
case of bungalow lands since they are situated in military areas.  This has resulted in 
poor upkeep of the bungalows in this area and most of them  are in dilapidated state.  
The Committee recommend that Government should work out feasibility to club 
bungalow land with civilian areas and al ternatively consider allocating them land 
outside the military area in li eu of their bungalow land.   Th e Committee also feel that 
the Government should examine the feasibil ity of excising all civil areas from the 
Cantonments gradually star ting from Mhow and Ahmednagar Cantonments where 
civil and military areas are clearly demarcated. These c an be merged with adjoining 
municipal areas and handed over to State Governments.   The Committee desire that 
the Government should examin e this problem in all details  and work out a mutually 
satisfying solution to this complex problem.  
20. The Committee further not e that in civil/bungalow areas refusal to give 
permission even to minor additions/alterations coupled with many fold increase in the 
population in these areas, ha s led to serious conge stion and sanitation problems.     
The Committee feel that if Floor Space Index (F.S.I.) is increas ed, it may help in 
providing greater space and ultimately impr ove the sanitation situation in both these 
areas.  The Committee also f eel that past cases of minor additions/alterations in the 
civil/bungalow areas also need sympathetic consideration by the Boards without 
compromising the security aspects of cantonments.  The Committee strongly 
recommend that no defence land should be released for any reason whatsoever 
except as suggested by the Committee above fo r the smooth excision of civil area.  
The Committee desire that suitable provisions should be made in the Bill accordingly. 
 
21. The Committee have examin ed the Bill clause-wise al so.  The observations of 
the Committee are based on t he broad guidelines indicate d above.  These are given 
Chapter-wise and Clause-wise in the succeeding chapters.  The Committee 
recommend that these may be re-examined accordingly.   

 14
CHAPTER I 
PRELIMINARY  
 Chapter I of the Cantonments Bill, 200 3 contains Clause 1 and Clause 2.  
Clause 1 deals with short title, extent and commencement of Cantonment Bill, 2003 
and Clause 2 defines certain words and expressions which have been frequently 
used in various provisions contained in the Bill.  The Committee wi ll now give their 
comments on some of the clauses which are as follows : 
Clause 2 (c) 
 
Clause 2(c) states that “Boundary wall means a wall which abuts on a street and 
which does not exceed two and a half metres in height.”   
 
1.2 Regarding this sub-clause, the P une Cantonment Board in their written 
memorandum submitted to the Committee have stated that “Boundary Walls should 
not be more than 1.5 m, above which there could be fencing.”   
 
1.3 The Committee feel that the question of the height of  the boundary wall is not 
such an important matter whic h should form part of the Act.  The Committee feel that 
this question should be left to be decided by respective Boards and can be one of the 
bye-laws.  The Committee also desire that onc e a decision is taken by the Board, it 
should be given due publicity.  
 
Clause 2(g) 
 
Clause 2(g) define the term “Chief Exec utive Officer means the person appointed 
under this Act, to be the Chief Executive Officer of a cantonment.”  
 
1.4 The Pune Cantonment Board in their written memorandum submitted before 
the Committee has suggested that Chief Executive Officer, by name suggest that he 
heads the Cantonment Board, which this offi cer does not. He only executes orders of 
the Government and the Cantonment Board. 
1.5 The Committee recommend that this term should  remain as Cantonment 
Executive officer only as stated in Canton ments Act, 1924 to avoid ambiguity in the 
minds of the public.  
 
Clause 2(y)  
  
Clause 2(y) define the term “Government in relation to this Act means the Central 
Government.” 
 
 
1.6 The Committee note that the term `Central Government’ has been used at 
various places in the Bill.  The Committee desire that for th e purpose of this Bill, the 
term should be specified to be Ministry of Defence.  
 
Clause 2 (zc) 
 

 15
Clause 2 (zc) states that “inhabitant”, in relation to a cantonment, or local area means 
any person ordinarily residing or carryin g on business or owning or occupying 
immovable property therein, and in case of a dispute means any  person declared by 
the Chief Executive Officer to be an inhabitant.” 
 
1.7 Regarding this clause the Pres ident Cantonment Citizens’ Welfare 
Association, Meerut in his written memorandum as well as during the oral evidence 
has suggested the following for the consideration of the Committee : 
The definition of “inhabitant ” directly hits ordinary ci tizen.  The CEO alone is 
vested with the power to declare status of a citizen as inhabitant of Cantonment 
Area.  But no criteria and procedure is provided to be adopted by the CEO.  The 
power should be conferred on the board with some broad directions of procedures 
to be followed. 
 

 16
1.8 The Committee note that in the existing  Act, the power to dec lare status of a 
citizen as inhabitant lies with District Magistrate who is also the member of the Board.   
The Committee, therefore, feel that this should remain with DM or his nominee who is 
the member of the Board.  The Committee further desire that any person aggrieved 
by any decision in the matter should also be given a right to appeal.      
 
Clause 2 (zl)  
 
Clause 2 (zl) states that “owner” includes any pers on who is receiving or is entitled to 
receive the rent of any bui lding or land whet her on his own account or on behalf of 
himself and others or an agent or trustee, or who would so receive the rent or be 
entitled to receive it if the building or land were let to a tenant.” 
 
1.9 The President, Cantonment Citizens’ welfare Associati on, Meerut, in a written 
memoranda submitted that : 
 
“the definition of owner has been mix ed up.  A person receiving rent for 
another person may be his Attorney or ev en a paid servant.  According to this 
definition even a paid serv ant shall claim ownership rights which shall confuse 
the civilians as well as authorities of the Bo ard, while preparing or maintaining 
property records.  He has suggested that owner and landlord should be 
distinguished.  Owner should include only real owner of the property as 
defined under common civil laws.”     
 
1.10 The Committee feel that th e term `owner’ should hav e the same meaning and 
connotation as in the civil laws followed by the adjoining municipalities.   

 17
CHAPTER-II 
DEFINITION AND DELIMITATION OF CANTONMENTS 
2.1 Chapter-II contains Clauses 3 to 9.   It deals with definit ion and delimitation of 
Cantonment.  In this chapter the Commi ttee will comment upon the Clause 4 and 
Clause 9.    Clause 4 enable the Central Gove rnment to include or exclude any area 
situated in the vicinity of the cantonment  into or from a cantonment.  Clause 9 
enables the Central Government to exclude from the operation of  the Bill whole or 
any part of a Cantonment. 
Clause 4  
(Alteration of limits of Cantonments)  
This clause states that “( 1) The Central Government may after consulting the State 
Government and the Board concerned, by noti fication in the Official Gazette, declare 
its intention to include within the cantonment any local area situated in the vicinity 
thereof or to exclude from the cantonment any local area comprised therein. 
(2) Any inhabitant of a cantonment or local area in respect of which notification has 
been published under sub-section ( 1) may, within six weeks from the date of 
notification, submit in writing to the Central Govern ment through the General Officer 
Commanding-in- Chief, the Command, an obj ection to the notification, and the 
Central Government shall take such objection into consideration. 
(3) On the expiry of six we eks from the date of the notification, the Central 
Government may after considering the obj ections, if any, which have been submitted 
under sub-section ( 2), by notification in the Official  Gazette, include the local area in 
respect of which the notification was published under sub-section ( 1), or any part 
thereof, in the cantonment or, as the ca se may be, exclude such area or any part 
thereof from the cantonment.” 
 
 This enables the Central Government to include or exclude any area situated 
in the vicinity of a Cantonment into or form a cantonment. 
  

 18
2.2 The Committee observe that  the general public are allowed to submit in writing 
to the Central Government through the General Office r Commanding-in-Chief, an 
objection to the notification within six weeks from the date  of its public ation in the 
official gazette.     In most of the cases ordinary ma n has no access to official gazette 
etc.  Therefore, they may not be aware of the said notification and as a result of 
which they can not submit th eir objection to the Centra l Government within that 
stipulated time fram e.  By the time they come to know, the intention of the 
Government to acquire the land, the six weeks time period is  over.    Therefore, the 
Committee strongly feel that in order to facilitate the general public, the notification for 
acquiring land should be published in loca l newspapers and this should be displayed 
in important public places like village Panchayat Office  or Zilla Parishad Office and 
the time fixed for making representation should be suitably enhanced.   
   

 19
Clause 9 
(Limitation of Operation of Act) 
 
Clause 9 states that “the Central Government  may, by notification in the Official 
Gazette, exclude from the operation of any part of this Act the whole or any part of a 
cantonment, or direct that any provision of this Act shall, in the case of any 
cantonment — 
(a) situated within the limits of a metropolitan area; or 
(b) in which the Board is superseded under se ction 60, apply with such modification 
as may be so specified.” 
 
This clause enables the Central Governm ent to exclude from the operation of 
the Bill whole or any part of a cantonment. 
 
2.3 Regarding this clause, ex-Advocate General Army and Pune Cantonment 
Board in their written memo randum submitted to the Committee have opined that the 
Bill proposes to exclude more areas from  the operation of the Cantonment Act.  
Gradually as the population is increasing in most of the cantonments, all the 
cantonments areas will become metropolitan areas and after some period majority of 
the cantonments will be excluded from the operation of the Cantonment Act.    
2.4 The Pune Cantonment Board in their written note also stated that the provision 
under this clause may lead to individual notification of bungal ow area which is 
discriminatory in nature.  Th is provision is at serious violation of the fundamental 
rights under Article 14 of the Constitution.   Therefore, they  have recommended that 
this provision may be deleted. 
  

 20
2.5 The Committee after ex amining the content of the above mentioned clause 
and the suggestions as cited above are of the opinion that the Ministry of Defence 
should suitably modify the provision by specifying the condit ions under which the 
operation of the act may be excluded from whole or any part of the cantonment and 
time limit for such exclusion should also be  specified.  This pr ovision should be so 
framed that it should not violate Article 14 of the Constitution.    

 21
CHAPTER III 
 
CANTONMENT BOARDS 
 
3.1 Chapter-III contains clauses 10 to 61.  The provisions in these clauses deal 
with Cantonment Board, its constitution, terms of office of members, Powers and 
functions of President, Vice President and  Chief Executive Officer, Preparation of 
electoral rolls for cantonments, employee s of the Board, procedure for conducting 
board meetings, validity of proceedings, power of Central Government, GOC-in-C, 
the Director General or the Principal Director to carry out the inspection of the 
Cantonment, Power of President, District  Magistrate and CEO to override the 
decision of the Board and Power of Central Government to review any decision of the 
Board, etc.    The Committee would now discuss some of the important clauses of the 
Chapter. 
 
Clause 10 
(Cantonment Board) 
 
Clause 10 states that  “(1) For every cantonment there shall be a Cantonment Board. 
(2) Every Board shall be deemed to be a municipality for the purposes of clause (e) of 
article 243 P of the Constitution.” 
    
3.2 It has been observed that Municipalities as per the scheme of our constitution 
comes under the State list. On being enquir ed if the `deemed Munici pality’ status to 
the Cantonment Boards would affect t he State Governments in any manner, the 
Ministry of Defence in their written reply have stated that : 
“The intention of declaring a Cantonment Board as `deemed Municipality’ is for 
limited purposes which have been described under Clause 108 of the Bill.  
These are as follows : 
 
A Board shall be deemed to be a municipal committee for the purposes of  
(a) taxation as per the Mu nicipal Taxation Act, 1881, 
(b) receiving grants, 
(c) executing the Central or the St ate Government schemes of social 
welfare, public health, hygiene, sa fety, water supply, sanitation and 
education. 
 
After the proposed enactment, the Cantonments Board shall come under 
the category of `deemed municipal committees’ for the purpose of executing 
the developments and welfare schemes of the Central or State Governments 
in the Cantonments.”   
 
3.3 When asked whether `deem ed municipality’ status ma y lead to interference of 
State Governments in managem ent of Cantonments, the Mi nistry in their written 
reply has stated that : 
 

 22
“Reference to Article 243 p(e) of the Constitution in Clause 110(2) may cause 
problem with regard to possible inte rference of State Governments.  
Therefore, this clause is required to be suitably amended in consultation with 
the Ministry of Law.” 
 
3.4 On a specific enquiry from the Commi ttee whether the State Government were 
consulted in the matter, the Ministry of Defence in their reply stated that : 
“Since the Bill deals with the subject within the Unio n list of the Constitution, 
the State Governments have not been consulted.” 
 
3.5 The Committee find that the provisions of this clause are not very clear as to 
whether the Cantonment Boards will get allo cation of funds from respective State 
Governments or directly from the Central Government out of the State allocations.  
3.6 The Committee feel that in both these conditions  there may be a clash of 
interests between Central Go vernment and the State Governments.  Moreover, the 
State Governments have not been consulted in the matter of allocation of State funds 
to Cantonment Boards as also application of othe r development schemes.  
Therefore, the Committee feel that the provision should be suitably modified in 
consultation with State Governments to remove the ambiguities.  
 
3.7 Clause 10 (i) under claus e 3 of the Bill, the Cent ral Government any place 
after notifying in the Official Gazette, as a Cantonment only then, the Government will 
Constitute Board for that cantonment.  The Committee note that the time period 
within which the Central Government is bound to constitute the Board has not been 
mentioned in the Bill.  If this  clause goes as it is, then the Constitution of the Board 
may be delayed due to bureaucratic delays and ultimately the people living in the 
cantonment area may have to without any representation on the Board.   
 
3.8 The Committee recommend that a time limit within which the board has to be 
constituted should be specified. 

 23
Clause 12 
(Constitution of Cantonment Board) 
Clause 12 states that “( 1) Cantonments shall be divide d into four categories, 
namely:— 
 
(i) Category I Cantonments, in which the population exceeds fifty thousand; 
(ii) Category II Cantonments, in which the population exceeds ten thousand, but does 
not exceed fifty thousand; 
(iii) Category III Cantonments, in which th e population exceeds two thousand five 
hundred, but does not exceed ten thousand; and 
(iv) Category IV Cantonments, in which the population does not exceed two thousand 
five hundred. 
(2) For the purposes of sub-section ( 1), the population shall be calculated in 
accordance with the latest official census , or, if the Central Government, by general 
or special order, so directs, in accordance with a special census taken for the 
purpose. 
(3) In Category I Cantonments, the Board s hall consist of the following members, 
namely:— 
(a) the Officer Commanding the station as ex officio or, if the Central Government so 
directs in respect of any cantonment, such  other military officer as may be nominated 
in his place by the General Officer Commanding-in-Chief, the Command; 
(b) the District Magistrate or an Executive M agistrate not below the rank of Additional 
District Magistrate nominated by him; 
(c) the Chief Executive Officer; 
(d) the Health Officer ex officio; 
(e) the Executive Engineer ex officio; 
(f) three military officers nominated by name by the Officer Commanding the station 
by order in writing; 
(g) eight members elected under this Act. 
 (4) In Category II Cantonments, the Board shall consist of the following members, 
namely:— 
(a) the Officer Commanding the station as ex officio or, if the Central Government so 
directs in respect of any cantonment, such  other military officer as may be nominated 
in his place by the General Officer Commanding-in-Chief, the Command; 
(b) the District Magistrate or an Executive M agistrate not below the rank of Additional 
District Magistrate nominated by him; 
(c) the Chief Executive Officer; 
(d) the Health Officer ex officio; 
(e) the Executive Engineer ex officio; 
(f) two military officers nominated by nam e by the Officer Commanding the station by 
order in writing; 
(g) seven members elected under this Act. 
(5) In Category III Cantonments , the Board shall consist of  the following members, 
namely:— 

 24
(a) the Officer Commanding the station as ex officio or, if the Central Government so 
directs in respect of any cantonment, such other military officer, as may be nominated 
in his place by the General Officer Commanding-in-Chief, the Command; 
(b) the District Magistrate or an Executive Magistrate nominated by him; 
(c) the Chief Executive Officer; 
(d) the Health Officer ex officio; 
(e) the Executive Engineer ex officio; 
(f) one military officer nominated by name by  the Officer Commanding the station by 
order in writing; 
(g) six members elected under this Act. 
(6) In Category IV Cantonments, the Board s hall consist of the following members, 
namely:— 
(a) the Officer Commanding the station ex officio or, if the Central Government so 
directs in respect of any cantonment, such  other military officer as may be nominated 
in his place by the General Officer Commanding-in-Chief, the Command; 
(b) the Chief Executive Officer; 
(c) two members elected under this Act. 
(7) The Officer Commanding the station may, if  he thinks fit, with the sanction of the 
General Officer Commanding-in-Chief, the Command, nominate in place of any 
military officer whom he is empo wered to nominate under clause ( f) of sub-section 
(3), clause (f) of sub-section ( 4) or clause ( f) of sub-section ( 5), any person, whether 
in the service of the Government or not, who is ordinarily resident in the cantonment 
or in the vicinity thereof. 
(8) Every election or nominatio n of a member of a Boar d and every vacancy in the 
elected membership thereof shall be notified by the Central Government in the 
Official Gazette; 
(9) The Member of Parliament and Member of Legislative Assembly representing 
constituencies which comprises wholly or partly the cantonment area, shall be special 
invitees for the meetings of the Board but without a right to vote.” 
  
3.9 The Committee have received vari ous views from Cantonment Citizen 
Associations/Cantonment Boards/individuals on t he provisions of this clause.  It has 
been generally mentioned that in the guise of achieving greater democratisation, 
almost absolute powers are being vest ed in one individual  appointment i.e 
Cantonment Executive Officer being re-designat ed as Chief Executive Officer.  As 
per democratic norms legislature is the s upreme governing body and the executive is 
accountable to the legislature.  By being Member Secretary, the CEO will assume all 
three roles of legislature, executive and j udiciary, which is against the spirit of 
Constitution.    
3.10 The Committee after ca refully examining the sug gestions given by various 
organisations/associations/individuals are al so of the view that CEO should not be 
made the member of the Board. 
3.11 The Committee feel that CEO shoul d act only an Executive to carry out 
legislative instructions of the Board and should be accountable to the Board. 
3.12 The Committee further fu lly endorse the add ition of one new elected member 
to the Cantonment Board.  However, to ensure parity of elected member and the 

 25
nominated member, the Committee recommend that in place of CEO, one 
representative from Director General De fence Estates may be nominated to the 
Board.     
Clause 13 
(Power to vary constitution of Boards in special circumstances) 
 
Clause 13 states that “( 1) Notwithstanding anything contained in section 12, if the 
Central Government is satisfied — 
(a) that by reason of military operations, it is necessary, or 
(b) that, for the administration of the c antonment, it is desirable, to vary the 
constitution of the Board in any cantonment under this section, the Central 
Government may, by notification in the Offi cial Gazette, make a declaration to that 
effect. (2) Upon the making of a decla ration under sub-section ( 1), the Board in the 
cantonment shall consist of the following members, namely — 
(a) the Officer Commanding the station, 
(b) the Chief Executive Officer, and 
(c) one member, not being a person in the service of the Government, nominated 
by the Central Government in consultati on with the General Officer Commanding-in-
Chief, the Command. 
(3) The nomination of a member of a Boar d constituted under this section, and the 
vacancy in the membership thereof shall be notified by the Central Government in the 
Official Gazette. 
(4) The term of office of a Board constitu ted by a declaration under sub-section ( 1) 
shall not ordinarily extend beyond one year: Provided that  the Central Government 
may from time to time, by a like declaration,  extend the term of office of such a Board 
by any period not exceeding one year at a time: 
 
Provided also that the Central Government shall forthwith direct that the term of office 
of such a Board shall cease if, in the opinion of the Central Government, the reasons 
stated in the declaration whereby such Board was constituted or its term of office was 
extended, have ceased to exist. ( 5) When the term of office of a Board constituted 
under this section has expired or ceased, the Board shall be repl aced by the former 
Board which, but for the dec laration under sub-section ( 1) or sub-section ( 4), would 
have continued to hold office, or, if the te rm of office of such former Board has 
expired, by a Board constituted under section 12.” 
 
 
 This clause enables the Central Governm ent to vary the constitution of the 
Board by reason of military operation or  for the proper administration of the 
cantonment and also lays down the compositi on of the Board so varied and its terms 
of office. 
3.13 Most of the representations received on the power to vary constitution of 
Board suggested that in place of CEO, a civil member should be included in the 
varied Board.   Representatives of Resi dents of Mhow during the oral evidence 
suggested that the word satisfied used in the clause is not cl ear and there must be 
criteria for satisfaction of Central Governm ent otherwise Board can be varied or not 

 26
depends solely upon the will of the st ation commander.  The Committee were 
informed that in the present circumstances, nomination of civil members has not been 
done for the last three years.  
 
3.14 In reply to a specific question by the committee as to how many Boards have 
been varied and how these are being run.    The Ministry has stated that : 
 
“At present elections are due in 61 Cant onments and term of 1 cantonment is 
upto June, 2006.  56 Cantonments are bei ng run at present by varied Boards 
constituted under Section 14 of the Cant onments Act, 1924.  In the remaining 
5 Boards, the terms of elected member s have been extended while in 1 case, 
the term of elected members has not yet expired.”  
 

 27
3.15 On the Central Government’s power to  vary the constitution of Boards, the 
Ministry has stated that : 
 
“The Special circumstances for the need to  vary the constitution of the Board 
are contained in Clause 13(1)(a&b) of t he Bill, namely, (a) reasons of military 
operations; and (b) for the administration of the Cantonments.  
 
These special circumstances have not been laid down u nder any rules or 
regulations and it has been left to the Central Government to satisfy itself 
about the circumstances before taking any  decision about varying a Board.  
This clause, however, is not new and a similar section has been there in the 
Cantonments Act, 1924.” 
 
   
3.16 The Committee note the same provis ions, except nomination of CEO in the 
varied board, are available in the Cantonments Act, 1924.    The Committee find that 
using the powers available under this cl ause (Section 14 of the Cantonments Act, 
1924), the Government have varied the Boards of 61 Cantonment out of 62 
Cantonments for a pretty long time.  Th e Committee take a se rious note of the 
misuse of the power by the Government.   The Committee note t hat the powers now 
proposed under this clause ar e similar to the earlier pow ers and are likely to be 
misused.  The Committee, therefore, desir e that the circumstances under which the 
Central Government can use this power mu st be clearly specif ied in the new Act 
itself.  This clause should also specify th e period within which, elections must be held 
to the varied Board. 
 
3.17 Clause 13 (2) (c) of the Bill prov ide that the Central Government would 
nominate one member to the varied Board, not being a per son in the service of the 
Government.  It has been suggested to t he Committee that Vice-President of the 
Board should be made a member of the Board to protect the interests of the civilian 
population.  The Committee agree with the suggestion and desire that this clause 
should be suitably amended accordingly. 

 28
 
Clause 14  
(Term of Office of Members) 
 
Clause 14 states that “  (1) save as otherwise provided in this section, the term of 
office of a member of a Board shall be five years and shall co mmence from the date 
of the notification of his election  or nomination und er sub-section (8) of section 12 or 
from the date on which the vacancy has occurred in which he is elected or 
nominated, whichever date is later: 
 
Provided that the Central Government may, when satisfied that it is necessary in 
order to avoid administrative difficulty, ex tend the term of office of all the elected 
members of a Board by such period not exceeding one year, as it thinks fit: 
Provided further that a member whose term  of office has been so extended, shall 
cease to hold office on the date of the no tification of the election of his successor 
under subsection (8) of section 12. 
(2) The term of office of an ex officio member of a Board shall continue so long as he 
holds the office by virtue of which he is such a member. 
(3) The term of office of a member electe d to fill a casual vacancy shall commence 
from the date of the notification of his el ection, and shall continue so long only as the 
member in whose place he is elected woul d have been entitled to hold office if the 
vacancy had not occurred. 
(4) An outgoing member shall, unless the Central Government otherwise directs, 
continue in office until the election or nomination of his successor is notified under 
subsection (8) of section 12. 
(5) Any outgoing member may, if qualified, be re-elected or re-nominated.” 
 
 
This clause lays down the term of office  of members of the Board and enables 
the Central Government to extend the same in order to avoid adm inistrative difficulty 
for a period not exceeding one year. 
 
3.18 In the written memorandum submitted to the Committee, representatives of 
Mumbai Environment Action Group have stated that : 
 
“Very frequently the Cantonment Boards are left incomplete since the tenure of 
nominated members is short and since the notification in the official gazette 
takes a great deal of time.  Because of the absence of nominated members 
who represent the Army’s interest, t he functioning of the Board is often 
distorted. 
 
It is sought to make a minor modification to this section by substituting 
publication by the command Headquarters for publication in the official 
Gazette”. 
 

 29
3.19 Therefore, he has suggest ed that the revised Section 14 (3) would therefore 
read as under: 
  
“However, the nomination of a member of the Board Constitution under this 
section and every vacancy in the membership there of shall be notified by the 
officer commanding in chief the command in the command order”. 
  
3.20 The Committee note that the three ar my officers nominated by officer 
commanding the station by order in writing, get transferred very frequently as a result 
very frequently the composition of Cantonment Board are left incomplete.  The period 
within which notifica tion should appear has not been mentioned in the Act, and the 
notification in the official gazette takes a great deal of time. 
 Therefore, the Committee endorse the suggestion given above and further 
wish to recommend that the ti me period for notifying in the official gazette may be 
specified in the Bill itself and the officers nominated should be allowed to take part in 
the proceedings of the Board without waiting for Gazette Notification.      
3.21 The Committee recommend that sub-clau ses 3 and 4 of this clause should be 
suitably amended in light of recommendations of  the Committee on clause 12 of the 
Bill. 
 
 
 

 30
Clause 16 
(Vacancies in special cases) 
  
Clause 16 states that  “ (1) If from any caus e at an ordinary election no member is 
elected, or if the elected member is un willing to serve on the Board, the outgoing 
member shall, if qualified and willing to serve, be deemed to have been re-elected: 
Provided that where there are more outgoing members qualified and willing to serve 
than there are vacancies to be filled under this sub-section, the outgoing members so 
deemed to have been re-elected shall, fail ing agreement amongst such members, be 
determined by lot under the supervision of the President of the Board and in such 
manner as he may decide. 
(2) If a person is elected to more than one s eat in a Board, then, unless he resigns all 
but one of the seats within fourteen da ys from the date on which he is declared 
elected, or where the dates on which he is declared elected are different in respect of 
different seats, from the last of such dates, all the seats shall become vacant. 
(3) Vacancies arising in any of the following cases shall be filled by nomination by the 
Central Government after consultation with the General Officer Commanding-in-
Chief, the Command, namely:— 
(a) where at a casual election no member is elected; 
(b) where at an ordinary election no member or an insufficient number of members is 
elected, or an elected member is unwilli ng to serve on the Board and the outgoing 
member is not qualified or is not willing to serve or is  dead or cannot be found within 
a reasonable time; 
(c) where at an election held when a Board is constituted for the first time no member 
or an insufficient number of members is elected or an elected member is unwilling to 
serve on the Board. 
(4) For the purposes of sub-section ( 2) of section 15, a member nominated in 
pursuance of sub-section ( 3) of this section shall where there has been a division of 
the cantonment into wards,  be deemed to have been elected by such ward as the 
Central Government may at the time of  making the nomination or at any time 
thereafter declare. 
(5) The term of office of a member nominated or deemed to have been re-elected 
under this section shall expire at the time  at which it would have expired if he had 
been elected at the ordinary or casual election, as the case may be.” 
 
This clause empower the Central Governm ent to decide about the filling up of 
vacancies arising in special cases.  
 
3.22 Various suggestions were received on this clause state that reviving the 
membership of outgoing members may lead to abuse of law by coercion, criminal 
intimidation and even serious penal offences .    It was, therefore, suggested that 
outgoing member should be specified and inst ead of reservation of seat for outgoing 
member there should be a fresh election.  
 
3.23 The Committee are of the view that  the word outgoing member, has not been 
clearly defined and, therefor e, can lead to the confusio n and also there may be a 

 31
large number of outgoing members, who may be desirous to become members again 
and try to seek favour of President Cantonme nt Board for re-induction in to the Board 
as a Member.  Therefore, the Committee re commend that in case of elected member 
unwilling to serve on the Board, a fresh election shou ld take place immediately to 
avoid misuse of this provision by offering inducements or by giving threats.    
 
Clause 17 
(Oath or affirmation) 
 
Clause 17 states that “( 1) Every person who is by virtue of his office, or who is 
nominated or elected to be, a member of  the Board shall, before taking his seat, 
make and subscribe at a meeting of the Boar d an oath or affirmation of his allegiance 
to the Constitution of India in the following form, namely:—  
 
become 
————— 
“I, A.B., having been elected 
——————— a member of this Board, do 
been nominated 
  
swear in the name of God 
——————————— that I will bear true fa ith and allegiance to the 
solemnly affirm 
Constitution of India as by law establ ished and that I will faithfully discharge 
the duty upon which I am about to enter.” 
 
(2) If any such person fails to make and subscribe the oath or affirmation at first 
meeting held after the date of commencement  of his term of office, the Central 
Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette, declare his seat to be 
vacant: 
Provided that a meeting wher e the member is absent wi th the leave of the Board 
shall not be taken into account.” 
 
This clauses provides for the format of  the oath or affirmation to be taken by 
every person who become the member of the Board by virtue of his office, or being 
nominated or elected to the Board.  
 
3.24 The Committee fail to und erstand the logic behind t he sub-clause 2 of this 
clause.  The Committee also note that in the present Act there is a provision of 
taking/subscribing oath in first two meet ings, the Committee therefore, desire that 
sub-clause (2) of this clause should be deleted. 
 
Clause 18 
(Resignation) 
  

 32
Clause 18 states that “( 1) (a) Any elected member of a Board who wishes to resign 
his office may give his resign ation in writing to the President of the Board who shall 
forward it for orders to the Central Go vernment under intimation to the General 
Officer Commanding-in-Chief, the Command. 
(b) Any nominated member of a Board who wi shes to resign his office may forward 
his resignation in writing th rough the President of the Board to t he General Officer 
Commanding-in- Chief, the Command for orders. 
(2) If the Central Government or the G eneral Officer Commanding-in-Chief, the 
Command, as the case may be, accepts the resignation, such acceptance shall be 
communicated to the Board, and thereupon the seat of the member resigning shall 
become vacant. 
(3) Notwithstanding anything co ntained in sub-section ( 2), the resignation of any 
person elected to more than on e seat in a Board from al l but one of the seats in 
pursuance of sub-section ( 2) of section 16 shall take effect when such resignation is 
received by the President of the Board.” 
 
This clause provides for the method of submission of resignation by nominated 
as well as elected members of the Board and enables the Central Government or the 
General Officer Commanding-in-Chief, the Command to accept the same. 
 
3.25 The Committee feel that  the word `for orders’ may be substi tuted with 
information because the word order can be interpreted positively and negatively.  The 
Committee feel that an elected member wh o is not willing to serve on the Board 
should have a right to resi gn and there shou ld be no need of  any order on the 
resignation. 
 
Clause 20 
(Term of office of Vice-President) 
 
Clause 20 states that “(1) The term of office of a Vice -President shall be five years or 
his residual term of office as a member, whichever is less. 
(2) A Vice-President may resign his office by notice in writing to the President and, on 
the resignation being accepted by the Board, the office shall become vacant. 
(3) A Vice-President may be removed from his office, at a special meeting convened 
for the purpose on a requisition for the same by not less than one-half of the elected 
members of the Board holding office, by a resolution passed by a majority of not less 
than two-thirds of the total number of elected members then holding office and 
attending and no member, other than an elected member, shall have the right to vote 
on the resolution: 
Provided that in case of Category IV cantonments, the Vice-President may be 
removed if a resolution to this effect is passed by the Board.” 
 
 This clause provides for the term of o ffice of Vice-President of a Board and the 
method for his resignation and removal. 
 
3.26 The Committee feel that there is a pos sibility that both the elected members 
may decide to contest the elections for th e post of Vice Presid ent.  In such an 

 33
eventuality the procedure laid down in sub-clause 3 of the a bove clause is difficult to 
follow.  The Committee desire that specific provision to deal with the problem should 
be made clearly. 
 

 34
Clause 21 
(Duties of President) 
 
Clause 21 states that  “(1) It shall be the duty of the President of every Board— 
(a) unless prevented by reasonable cause, to convene and preside at  all meetings of 
the Board and to regulate the conduct of business thereat; 
 (b) to control, direct and supervise the fina ncial and executive ad ministration of the 
Board; 
(c) to perform all the duties and exercise all the powers specifically imposed or 
conferred on the President by or under this Act; and 
(d) subject to any restrictions, limitations  and conditions imposed by this Act, to 
exercise executive power for the purpose of carrying out the provisions of this Act 
and to be directly responsible for the fulfilment of the purposes of this Act; 
(e) in case of gross misconduct during the c ourse of meeting, to suspend a member 
other than a Chief Executive Officer from attending the unconc luded part of the 
meeting of the Board. 
(2) The President may, by order in writing, empower the Vice-President to exercise all 
or any of the powers and duties referred to in clause ( b) of sub-section (1) other than 
any power, duty or function which he is by resolution of the Board expressly forbidden 
to delegate. 
(3) The exercise or discharge of any power s, duties or functions delegated by the 
President under this section shall be subjec t to such restricti ons, limitations and 
conditions, if any, as may be laid down by the President and to the control of, and to 
revision by, the President. 
(4) Every order made under sub-section ( 2) shall forthwith be communicated to the 
Board and to the General Officer Commanding-in-Chief, the Command.” 
 
 
3.27 A few memoranda received suggested that the Military Station Commander 
should continue to be the President of C antonment Board.  He should have a voting 
power which should be exercised whenever the interests of military service demand. 
 
3.28 The Committee observe that under sub-clause 1 (e) of this clause, the 
President has the power to suspend a member other than  a CEO from attending the 
unconcluded part of the meeting of the Board in case of gross misconduct.  The 
Committee strongly feel that barring Member s of the Board except CEO is totally 
discriminatory and undemocratic.  Therefor e, the Committee recommend that if CEO 
is made the Member of the Board as stated in the Clause, he should be treated at par 
with the other members of the Board. 
3.29 The Committee desire that to guard ag ainst the possibility of decision being 
taken in the meeting in an undemocratic wa y, after suspending members from the 
meeting, the Committee feel that no vote on any matter  shall be taken from which 
any member has been suspended. 
3.30 Since the Committee have proposed that  CEO should not be  a member of the 
Board, the word CEO in Sub-Clause 1(e) should be deleted. 

 35
Clause 24 
(Appointment of Chief Executive Officer) 
 
Clause 24 states that “( 1) For every cantonment there shall be a Chief Executive 
Officer appointed by the Central Governm ent or by such person as the Central 
Government may authorise in this behalf: Provided that, in the event of temporary 
absence of the Chief Executive Officer, not exceeding ninety days, the Principal 
Director shall designa te an officer under his jurisdiction  to perform the duties of the 
Chief Executive Officer during such period. 
(2) Not less than one-half of the salary of th e Chief Executive Officer shall be paid by 
the Central Government and the balance fr om the cantonment fund.      ( 3) The Chief 
Executive Officer shall be the Member-Secretary of the Board and of every 
Committee of the Board.” 
 
 This clause empowers the Central Gove rnment to appoint a Chief Executive 
Officer for every cantonment who shall be member-secretary of the Board and of 
every Committee of the Board and makes provision for his salary. 
 
3.31 The suggestions received from various Cantonment Boards and other 
individuals/experts stated that  in the new Bill CEO is a Member Secretary of the 
Board which should not be there as all the th ree functions i.e. Exec utive, Legislative, 
Judiciary should not be vested in one person.   During the oral evidence, a large 
number of non-official witnesses suggested to the Committee that CEO should not be 
a Member Secretary and he should only be a Secretary as is in the present Act.  
 
3.32 The Committee note that Chief Execut ive Officer should be known as 
Cantonment Executive Officer hereafter as he is an employee of the Cantonment 
Board as well as Central Go vernment.  Making CEO as member Secretary of the 
Board as well as member of every committee of the Board means that he will perform 
the functions of the Executive, Legislature an d Judiciary which is against the spirit of 
the Constitution.  Therefore, the Commi ttee recommend that he should not be a 
member of the Board or any of its Committees.  
3.33 As is the position in the existing Ac t, he should only be Secretary of the Board 
and its all Committees.  If this recommendation of the Co mmittee is accepted, the 
strength of the nominated me mbers of the Board will co me down to seven.  The 
Committee, therefore, further recommend that  in order to give better representation 
to Directorate General of Defence Estate s one officer from this service may be 
nominated as a member to Cantonment Board in place of CE O.  In this connection, 
the attention is also invi ted to the recomm endation of the Co mmittee made under 
Clause 12. 
 
Clause 26 
(Special power of the Chief Executive Officer) 
 
Clause 26 states that “(1) The Chief Executive Officer may direct the execution of any 
work or the doing of any act, in public inte rest and in accordance with the provisions 

 36
of this Act and the rules made thereunder, and incur such expendi ture as may be 
necessary in executing such work or doing such act, as the case may be, subject to 
the financial limits which the Board may by resolution determine subject to general 
guidelines issued by the Director General, Defence Estates in this regard. 
(2) The Chief Executive Officer may, in case  of emergency, direct the execution of 
any work or the doing of any act which woul d ordinarily require the sanction of the 
Board and immediate execution or doing of which is in his opinion, necessary for the 
service or safety of the public, and may direct that the expense of executing such 
work or doing such act shall be paid from the cantonment fund: 
Provided that— 
(a) he shall not act under this section withou t the previous sanction of the President 
or, in his absence, of the Vice-President; 
(b) he shall not act under this section in contravention of any order of the Board 
prohibiting the execution of any  particular work or the doi ng of any particular act; and 
(c) he shall report forthwith the action taken under this section and the reasons 
therefor to the Board.” 
 

 37
3.34 Under Clause 26(1), the CEO has been authorised to direct  any execution of 
work and incur expenditure as may be necessa ry subject to financial limit which the 
Board by resolution may deter mine and also subject to gen eral guidelines issued by 
the Director General of Defe nce Estates.  The Committee feel that this provision can 
lead to avoidable duplicity of instructions to be followed by CEO in the financial 
matters.  Therefore, the committee desire that this clause needs suitable modification 
and CEO should function as per the guidelines of the Board.   
Clause 28  
(Qualification of electors) 
 
Clause 28 states that “( 1) Every person who, on such date as may be fixed by the 
Central Government in this behalf by notific ation in the Official Gazette hereinafter in 
this section referred to as “the qualifying date”, is not less than eighteen years of age 
and who has resided in the cantonment fo r a period of not le ss than six months 
immediately preceding the qualifying date shall, if not 
otherwise disqualified, be entitled to be enrolled as an elector. 
Explanation.—When any place is declared a cantonm ent for the first time, or when 
any local area is first included in a cantonment, residence in the place or area 
comprising the cantonment on the aforesai d date shall be deemed to be residence in 
the cantonment for the purposes of this sub-section. 
(2) A person notwithstanding that he is otherwise qualified, shall not be entitled to be 
enrolled as an elector if he on the qualifying date— 
(i) is not a citizen of India, or 
(ii) has been adjudged by a competent court to be of unsound mind, or 
(iii) is an undischarged insolvent, or 
(iv) has been sentenced by a Criminal Court to imprisonment for a term exceeding 
two years for an offence which is declared by  the Central Governm ent to be such as 
to unfit him to become an elector or has bee n sentenced by a Criminal Court for any 
offence under Chapter IXA of the Indian Penal Code: 
Provided that any disqualification incurred by a person under clause ( iv) shall 
terminate on the lapse of three years from the expiry of the sentence or order. 
(3) If any person having been enrolled as an el ector in any electoral roll subsequently 
becomes subject to any of the disqualifications refe rred to in sub-section ( 2), his 
name shall be removed from the electoral roll unless, in the case referred to in clause 
(iv), the disqualification is removed by the Central Government.” 
 

 38
 This clause provides for the powers of  the Central Govern ment in preparation 
of Electoral Rolls for every cantonment, th e periodicity or their publication, and the 
qualifications and dis qualifications of a person to be considered eligible to be an 
elector. 
 
3.35 The Committee feel that  such disqualifications sh ould be basically for the 
candidates who contest the elections and not for the elec tors.  The Committee desire 
that the disqualification of electors prescribed under th is Clause should be the same 
as are being usually prescribed by various municipalities.    
Clause 29 
(Qualification for being a member of the Board) 
 
Clause 29 states that  “( 1) Save as hereinafter provided , every person, not being a 
person holding any office of profit under the Government, whose name is entered on 
the electoral roll of a cantonment shall be qualified for election as a member of the 
Board in that cantonment. 
(2) No person shall be qualified for nominat ion as a member of a Board if he is 
subject to any of the disqualifications specified in sub-section (2) of section 28. 
(3) No person shall be qualified for being c hosen whether by election or nomination 
as, and for being a member of a Board, if he— 
(a) has been dismissed from the service of the Government and is debarred from 
re-employment therein, or is a dismissed employee of a Board; 
(b) is debarred from practising as a legal practitioner by order of any competent 
authority; 
(c) holds any place of profit in the gift or at the disposal of the Board, or is a police 
officer, or is the servant or employer of a member of the Board; or 
(d) is interested in a subsisting contract m ade with, or in work being done for, the 
Board except as a shareholder other than a director in an incorporated company; or 
(e) is an officer or employee, permanent or temporary, of a Board or of any other 
local authority; or 
(f) is a member of any other local authority; or 
(g) has, by the authority referred to in clause ( f) of section 31, been found to have 
been guilty of any of the corrupt prac tices specified in sub-section ( 2) of section 30 
unless a period of five years has elapsed since the date of the decision of the 
authority; or Qualification of electors. 
 (h) fails to pay any arrears of any ki nd due by him otherwise than as an agent, 
receiver, trustee or an executor, to the Boar d within thirty days after the notice in this 
behalf has been served upon him; or 
(i) is disqualified under any other provision of this Act: 
Provided that a person shall not be deemed to hav e any interest in such a contract or 
work as is referred to in clause ( d) by reason only of his having a share or interest 
in— 
(a) any lease or sale or purchase of immo vable property or any agreement for the 
same; or 
(b) any agreement for the loan of money or any security for the payment of money 
only; or 

 39
(c) any newspaper in which any advertisement relating to t he affairs of the Board is 
inserted; or 
(d) the sale to the Board of any articles in which he regularly trades or the purchase 
from the Board of any articles, to a value in either case not exceeding twenty-five 
thousand rupees in the aggregate in any year  during the period of  the contract or 
work.”  
 
This clause provides for the qualific ations and disqualifications for being a 
member of the Board.   
 
3.36 The Committee note that under Clause  29 (3)(b) a legal pr actitioner debarred 
from practising by a compet ent authority has been disqua lified for being chosen as 
the member of the Board. It is not clear as  to why a person belo nging to a particular 
profession has been restrained for being th e Member of Cantonment Board where as 
people belonging to othe r professions i.e. Doctor s, Chartered Accountants and 
Architects who may also have been debarred by the comp etent body have not been 
disqualified.  The Committee feel that either this provision should be deleted or all the 
above mentioned categories of professions may also be included in the provision.  

 40
Clause 37 
(Employees) 
 
Clause 37 states that “( 1) No person who has directly or indirectly by himself or his 
partner any share or interest in a contract with, by or on behalf of a Board, or in any 
employment under, by or on behalf of a Bo ard, otherwise than as an employee of the 
Board, shall become or remain an employee of such Board. 
(2) An employee of a Board who knowingly acquires or continues to have directly or 
indirectly by himself or his partner any share or interest in a contract with, by or on 
behalf of the Board or, in any employme nt under, by or on behalf of, the Board, 
otherwise than as an employ ee of the Board, shall be deemed to have committed an 
offence under section 168 of the Indian Penal Code. 
(3) Nothing in this section shall apply to any share or interest in any contract with, by 
or on behalf of, or employm ent under, by or on behalf of a Board if the same is a 
share in a company contracting with, or em ployed by, or on behalf of, the Board or is 
a share or interest acquired or retained with the permission of the General Officer 
Commanding-in-Chief, the Command in any l ease or sale to, or purchase by the 
Board of land or building or in any agreement for the same. 
(4) Every person applying for employment as an employee of a Board shall, if he is 
related by blood or marriage to any member of the Board or to  any person not being 
a lower grade employee, in receipt of rem uneration from the Boar d, notify the fact 
and the nature of such relationship to the appointing authority before the appointment 
is made, and if he has failed to do so, his appointment shall be invalid but without 
prejudice to the validity of anything previously done by him.” 
  
  This clause lays down the disqualifications of person to be an employee of the 
Board in case he has any pecuniary interest in the activities of the Board. 
 
3.37 The Committee note that under this clause every person seeking employment 
under a Board should notify to the Board, th e fact of his being relation of a Board 
Member failing which his appoi ntment shall be invalid.  Th e Committee feel that such 
a restriction needs to be reviewed as no reasons hav e been mentioned for such a 
restriction.  
 
  

 41
  
Clause 38 
(Cantonment employee to be deemed a public servant) 
 
Clause 38 states that “every officer or em ployee, permanent or temporary of a Board 
shall be deemed to be a public servant within  the meaning of section 21 of the Indian 
Penal Code and clause (c) of section 2 of the Prevention of Corruption Act, 1988.” 
 
3.38 During oral evidence, President, All India Cantonments  Board Employees 
Federation stated that : 
 
“Cantonment Board employees should be  treated at par with the Central 
Government employees. 
 
 Service of employees of Cantonment  Board should be centralized and there 
should be common cadre for them so that  they would be transferred all over 
India.” 
  
3.39  The Committee feel that provis ion to transfer employees from one 
Cantonment Board to another wi ll give them exposure an d enhance their efficiency 
for a better career prospects.    The Committee desire that the Government may 
examine the feasibility of having a common cadre command-wise.  

 42
 
Clause 39 
(Meetings) 
 
Clause 39 states that “(1) Every Board shall meet at least once in a month to transact 
its business on such day as may be fixed by the President and in his absence by the 
Vice-President, and its notice shall be given in such manner as may be provided in 
the regulations made by the Board under this Chapter. 
(2) The President may, whenever he thinks fit, and shall, upon a requisition in writing 
by not less than one-fourth of the members of the Board, convene a special meeting. 
(3) Any meeting may be adjourned until t he next or any subsequent day, and an 
adjourned meeting may be further adjourned in like manner.” 
 
 
This clause provides the elaborate provisions regarding holding Board 
meetings, the business to be transacted at the meetings, the quorum required for the 
meetings, the Presiding Officer and record ing of minutes, the meeting to be public 
and the method of deciding questions at the Board meetings. 
 
3.40 The Committee note that any meeting may be adjourned until the next or the 
subsequent and the adjourned  meeting can be further adjourned.  The Committee 
note that this power of adjourning the meeting again and again can be misused.  The 
Committee, therefore, desire that this po wer to adjourn the meet ing again and again 
should be subject to certain specified conditions. The clause should be amended 
accordingly. 

 43
Clause 43 
(Minutes)  
 
Clause 43 states that  “( 1) The minutes of the proceedi ngs of each meeting shall be 
recorded in a book and shall be signed by the person pres iding over the meeting and 
the Chief Executive Officer, before the close of the meeting and shall, at such times 
and in such place as may be fixed by the Board, be open to inspection free of charge 
by any inhabitant of the cantonment. 
(2) Copies of the minutes shall, as soon as possible after each meeting, be forwarded 
for information to the General Officer Commanding-in-Chief, the Command, the 
District Magistrate and the Defence Estate Officer and in cantonments where Navy or 
Air Force stations are located copies of the minutes shall be forwarded for information 
to the Command Headquarters of the Navy or, as the case may be, the Air Force.” 
  
This clause provides the elaborate provisions regarding recording of minutes.   
 
3.41 The Committee note that copies of t he Minutes of the meeting of the Board are 
to be forwarded to GOC-in-C, the Command and other Officers, however, there is no 
provision of sending the sa me to the other Board mem bers, whether they were 
present in the meeting or not.  The sit uation become more grav e when the elected 
members are not present and an important  decision might have  been taken by the 
Board. Therefore, the Committee strongly recommend that copies of the minutes 
should invariably be circulated to all the members of the Board. However, the 
important decision of the Bo ard pertaining to civil areas  should be duly notified and 
made known to the public at large copies of these orders  can be made available to 
them on demand at a nominal charge. 
 
 

 44
Clause 48 
(Power to make regulations) 
Clause 48 states that “(1) A Board may make regulations consistent with this Act and 
with the rules made there under to provide for all or any of th e following matters, 
namely:— 
(a) the time and place of its meetings; 
(b) the manner in which notice of the meeting shall be given; 
(c) the conduct of proceedings at meetings and the adjournments of meetings; 
(d) the custody of the common seal of the Board and the purposes for which it shall 
be used; and 
(e) the appointment of committees for any purpose and the determination of all 
matters relating to the constitution and procedure of such committees, and the 
delegation to such committees, subject to any conditions which the Board thinks fit to 
impose, of any of the powers or duties of the Board under this Act other than a power 
to make regulations or bye-laws. 
(2) No regulation made under clause (e) of sub-section (1) shall take effect until it has 
been approved by the Central Government. 
(3) No regulation made under th is section shall take effect until it has been published 
in such manner as the Central Government may direct.” 
 
This clause empowers the Board to make , with prior approval of the Central 
Government, regulations (pertaining to th e conduct of meetings ) and appointment of 
Committees. 

 45
3.42 Under Clause 47(1) the Civil Ar ea Committee has to work under the 
restrictions under Sub-Clause 1(e) of clause 48.  The Commi ttee feel that the 
restriction imposed under this clause can make the working of civil area Committee 
infructuous if the unr easonable conditions are put on th eir working by a Board.  The 
Committee feel that Civil Area Committee shou ld be given mo re autonomy and 
provisions of sub-clause 1(e)  of clause 48 should not be applied in their case.  The 
Committee feel that the decision tak en by the Civil Area Committee can be 
considered by the Board and implemented by the CEO.   
      
Clause 51 
(Power of Central Government to require production of documents) 
 
Clause 51 states that “The Central Government or such officer or authority as may be 
authorised by the Central Government in this behalf may at any time require a Board. 
(a) to produce any record, correspondence, plan or other document in its possession 
or under its control; 
(b) to furnish any return, plan, estimate, statement, account or statistics relating to its 
proceedings, duties or works; 
(c) to furnish or obtain and furnish any report.” 
  
 Clause 52 
(Inspection) 
 
Clause 52 states that “the Central Govern ment or the General Officer Commanding-
in-Chief, the Command or the Director G eneral or the Principal Director, may depute 
any person in the service of the Government to inspect or examine any department of 
the office of, or any service or work under taken by, or thing belonging to, a Board, 
and to report thereon, and the Board and its officers and employees shall be bound to 
afford the person so deputed access at all reasonable times to the premises and 
property of the Board and to all reco rds, accounts and other documents the 
inspection of which he may consider necessary to enable him to discharge his 
duties.” 
 
Clause  53 
(Power to call for documents) 
 
Clause 53 states that “ The General Officer Commanding-in-Chief, the Command or 
the Principal Director, may, by order in writing,— 
(a) call for any book or document in the possession or under the control of the Board; 
(b) require the Board to furnish such statements, accounts, reports and copies of 
documents relating to its proceedings, duties or works as he thinks fit.” 
 
Clause 54 
(Power to require execution of work, etc.) 
 
Clause 54 states that if, on receipt of any information or report obtained under section 
51 or section 52 or section 53, the Central Government or the General Officer 

 46
Commanding-in-Chief, the Command or the Director General or the Principal Director 
is of opinion— 
(a) that any duty imposed on a Board by or  under this Act has not been performed or 
has been performed in an imperfect, inefficient or unsuitable manner; or 
(b) that adequate financial provision has not  been made for the performance of any 
such duty, it or he may direct the Board, within such period as it or he thinks fit, to 
make arrangements to its or his satisfaction for the proper performance of the duty, or 
as the case may be, to make financial prov ision to its or his satisfaction for the 
performance of the duty: 
 
Provided that unless in the opinion of the Central Govern ment or the General Officer 
Commanding-in-Chief, the Command or the Director General or the Principal 
Director, as the case may be, the immediate execution of such order is necessary, it 
or he shall, before making any direction under this section, give the Board an 
opportunity of showing cause why such direction should not be made. 
 
Clause 55 
(Power to provide for enforcement of direction under Section 54) 
Clause 55 states that “If, within the period fixed by a direction made under section 54, 
any action the taking of which has been directed under that section has not been duly 
taken, the Central Government or the General Officer Commanding-in-Chief, the 
Command or the Director General, or the Principal Director, as the case may be, may 
make arrangements for the taking of such ac tion, and may direct that all expenses 
connected therewith shall be defrayed out of the cantonment fund.” 
  
 Clauses 51 to 55 empowers the Cent ral Government, t he General Officer 
Commanding-in-Chief, the Command, the Direct or General or the Principal Director 
to require production of documents, carry out  inspections of the cantonments, call for 
documents, require the execution of work  and enforcement of directions by the 
Cantonment Boards.  
3.43 During the oral evidence, ex-Judge, Advocate General Army stated that in 
these clauses they have inducted the Dire ctor General to inspect or examine any 
department or office or any service or work undertaken by a board and to report 
thereon.  He was of the opinion that Direct or General is the advisor of the Central 
Government.  When the word Central Govern ment is already exis ting, there is no 
need to have a Director General. 
 
3.44 The Committee note that Director Gener al/Principal Director or any other 
officer  mentioned in the bi ll are the representatives of the Central Government. 
Therefore, in order to avoi d ambiguity and duplicity, the Committee recommend that 
in all these clauses GOC-in-C, the Comm and or Director General may be given 
powers to inspect the land records or def ence estate of a parti cular Board to whom 
he can issue directions.  

 47
Clause 56 
(Power to override decision of Board)  
 
Clause 56 states that “( 1) If the President dissents fr om any decision of the Board 
which he considers prejudicial  to the health, welfare, discipline or security of the 
Forces in the cantonment, he may, for reasons to be recorded in the minutes, by 
order in writing, direct the suspension of  action thereon for any period not exceeding 
one month and, if he does so, shall forthwith refer the matter to the General Officer 
Commanding-in-Chief, the Command. ( 2) If the District Magi strate considers any 
decision of a Board to be prejudicial to t he public health, safety or convenience, he 
may, after giving notice in writ ing of his intention to the Board, refer the matter to the 
Central Government, and pending the disposal of the reference to the Central 
Government no action shall be taken on the decision. ( 3) If any Magistrate who is a 
member of a Board, being pres ent at a meeting, dissents from any decision which he 
considers prejudicial to the public health, safety or convenience, he may, for reasons 
to be recorded in the minutes and after giving notice in writing of his intention to the 
President, report the matter to the District Magistrate; and the President shall, on 
receipt of such notice, direct the suspensi on of action on the decision for a period 
sufficient to allow of a communication being made to the District Magistrate and of his 
taking proceedings as provided in sub-section (2). 
(4) If the Chief Executive Officer consider s any decision of the Board taken at a 
meeting, to be in contravention of the provisions of this Act, rules, regulations or bye-
laws made there under and the general guidelines issued by the Central Government 
from time to time in this regard, he ma y, for reasons to be recorded in writing and 
after informing the President in this behalf, forthwith refer the matter to the Principal 
Director who shall if cons idered appropriate direct the suspension of action on the 
said decision for a period not exceeding one month. 
(5) The Principal Director shall, for reasons to be recorded in writing on the reference 
made under sub-section ( 4), refer the matter to the General Officer Commanding-in-
Chief, the Command along with recommendati on on whether or not the said decision 
of the Board should be revoked and inform the matter to Director General Defence 
Estates.” 
 
This clause empowers the President, District Magistrate, Magistrate and Chief 
Executive Officer to override the decision of the Board. 
 
3.45 Memorandum received on the clause from the various 
individuals/organisations/ex-Members and Vi ce Presidents of Cantonment Boards 
suggested that overriding power of the board should be with less number of 
authorities instead of with too many authorities as mentioned in the Bill. 
 
3.46 The Committee, after careful examinati on of the facts, feel that power given to 
different functionaries under th is clause to override the deci sion of the Board is likely 
to adversely affect the smoo th functioning of the Cantonment Boards.  The power to 
override the decisions of the Board should only be available to the GOC-in-C, the 

 48
command with the approval of Central Government.  The Committee desire that this 
clause should be amended suitably. 
 
  

 49
CHAPTER IV 
 
DUTIES AND DISCRETIONARY FUNCTIONS OF BOARDS 
 
Chapter IV contains Clause 62 to Clause 65.    The provisions in these clauses deal 
with duties to be performed by a Board as far as the funds at its disposal so permit, 
Discretionary functions of Board and Power of Board to incur expenditure for 
educational, health and other purposes out side the Cantonment in  case the same 
serve the interest of the Cantonment, etc.   
 
Clause 62 
(Duties of Board) 
 
Clause 62 states that  “it shall be the duty of every Board, so far as the funds at its 
disposal permit, to make reasonable provision within the cantonment for— 
(i) lighting streets and other public places; 
(ii) watering streets and other public places; 
(iii) cleansing streets, public places and drains, abating nuisances and removing 
noxious vegetation; 
(iv) regulating offensive, dangerous or obnoxious trades, callings and practices; 
(v) removing , on the ground of public safe ty, health or convenience, undesirable 
obstructions and projections in streets and other public places; 
(vi) securing or removing dangerous buildings and places; 
(vii) acquiring, maintaining, changing and regul ating places for the disposal of the 
dead; 
(viii) constructing, altering and maintaining streets, culverts , bridges, causeways, 
markets, slaughter-houses, latrines, priv ies, urinals, drains, drainage works and 
sewerage works and regulating their use; 
(ix) planting and maintaining trees on roadsides and other public places;  
(x) providing or arranging for a sufficient supply of pure and wholesome water, where 
such supply does not exist, guarding from pollution water used for human 
consumption, and preventing polluted water from being so used; 
(xi) registering births and deaths; 
(xii) preventing and checking spread of dangerous diseases; establishing and 
maintaining a system of public vaccination and inoculation for the said objective; 
(xiii) establishing and maintaining or supporting public hospitals , maternity and child 
welfare centres and dispensaries, and providing public medical relief; 
(xiv) establishing and maintaining or assisting primary schools; 
(xv) rendering assistance in extinguishing fires, and protecting light and property 
when fire occurs; 
(xvi) maintaining and developing the value of property vested in, or  entrusted to, the 
management of the Board; 
(xvii) establishing and maintaining civil defence services; 
(xviii) preparing and implementing town planning schemes; 
(xix) preparing and implementing plans for economic development and social justice; 
(xx) naming and numbering of streets and premises; 

 50
(xxi) according or refusing permission to erect or re-erect building; 
(xxii) organising, promoting or supporting cultural and sports activities; 
(xxiii) fulfilling any other obligat ion imposed upon it by  or under this Act or any other 
law for the time being in force.” 
 
 This clause lays down the duties to be performed by a Board or any 
Committee of a Board. 
4.2 During the study visit of the St anding Committee on Defence to Jammu 
Cantonment and also by oral eviden ces of various representatives of 
Organisations/individuals, the Committee ob served that the there are no proper 
facilities in the school and hospitals meant  for civilian populatio n in Cantonments.  
Therefore, the committee recommend that the Cantonment Board should take the 
responsibility to provide all kind of advanced medical facilities in Cantonment Board 
Hospital and improve the quality of education as  well as infrastructure of the schools.  
The Committee also desire th at responsibility and account ability should  be clearly 
defined under this clause so that ther e may be effective im plementation of the 
functions.     
4.3 The Committee feel that every C antonment Board should also be assigned 
duty to provide secondary education school by establishing schoo ls in addition to 
primary education given under sub-clause 14 of this clause.   The Committee are of 
the opinion that considerin g the financial crunch which various Boards are facing, 
feasibility of granting permission to NGOs to run hospitals and schools in cantonment 
areas be considered. 
4.4 The Committee have received a number  of suggestions that conservation of 
heritage building may be ta ken up by the respective Cantonment Board.   The 
Committee desire that this shou ld be suitably pr ovided under this clause as far as 
possible, conservation of environment should also be taken up by the Board.  
 4.5 The Committee are surprised to no te that celebratin g Independence Day and 
Republic Day and incurring ex penditure thereon under sub- clause 17 of clause 64 
has been categorised as discretionary functions of the Board.  The Committee 
strongly feel that this func tion should be included in th e obligatory duty of the Board 
under this clause. 
Clause 63 
(Power to manage property) 
 
Clause 63 states that “a Board may, subject to any conditions imposed by the Central 
Government, manage any property entrust ed to its management by the Central 
Government on such terms as to the shari ng of rents and profits accruing from such 
property as may be determined by rule made under section 351.” 
 
This clause enables the Boards to manage any property entrusted to its 
management by the Central Government, subject to such terms as may be 
determined under rules to be made by the Central Government under clause 351.  
4.6 Notwithstanding anythi ng contained in this claus e, the Committee recommend 
that the houses, buildings and colonies, constructed by  the Cantonment Boards, out 
of loans granted by the States or Cent ral Government, under various housing 

 51
schemes, to facilitate the pe rsons who do not have their own houses, will continue to 
be governed by the specific provisions of the concerned Housing Schemes. 
  
 

 52
CHAPTER V 
 
TAXES AND FEES 
 
Chapter V contains Clause 66 to Clause 118.     The provisions in these clauses 
empowers board to impose with  the previous sanction of  the Central Government 
various taxes, certain fees and charges, framing of preliminary proposals, preparation 
of assessment list, its revisi on and authentication.   These clauses also include need 
to give a notice of erection of a building, its completion, re-emission of taxes by CEO 
in case a property has remained vacant and  unproductive for certain period of time, 
penalty in cases of evasion of octroi, terminal tax or toll, filing of appeals to District 
Court against the assessment.  This clause also empowers the District Court hearing 
the appeal to decide about the costs of appeal and require its payment to be made 
whether by the Board or t he appellant and also requires the Central Government or 
State Government to pay to the Board annua lly service charges, attachment and sale 
of immovable property, recovery from the person about to leave cantonment and 
power of Central Government to issue directions to the Board.            
 
Clause 66 
(General power of taxation)        
     
Clause 66 states that  “(1) The Board shall, with the pr evious sanction of the Central 
Government, impose the following taxes for the purposes of this Act :— 
(a) property tax; and 
(b) tax on trades, professions callings and employments. 
(2) In addition to the taxes specified in sub-section ( 1) the Board may, for the 
purposes of this Act, impose any tax whic h under any enactment for the time being in 
force may be imposed in any municipality in  the State in which the cantonment is 
situated: 
Provided that the Board shall revise every five years, the rates of taxes imposed 
under sub-sections (1) and (2) : 
Provided further that the B oard shall not abolish any ta x imposed under this section 
or vary it to the Board’s financial disadv antage without the prior sanction of the 
Central Government and the tax mentioned in sub-section ( 2) shall not exceed the 
ceiling prescribed in this behalf by clause (2) of article 276 of the Constitution. 
(3) The taxes specified in sub-sections ( 1) and ( 2) shall be imposed, assessed and 
collected in accordance with the provisions  of this Act, rules and the bye-laws made 
there under. 
(4) Any tax imposed under this section shall take effect from the date of its notification 
in the Official Gazette or where any late r date is specified in this behalf in the 
notification, from such later date.” 
 
Section 60 of the Cantonments Act, 1924 provides that : 
 
”(1) The Board may, with the previous sanction of the [Central Government], 
impose in any cantonment  any tax which, under any  enactment for the time 

 53
being in force, may be imposed in any municipality in the state wherein such 
cantonment is situated. 
(2) Any tax imposed under this section sh all take effect from the date of its 
notification in the Official Gazette [or w here any later date is specified in this 
behalf in the notification, from such later date].” 
 
This clause empowers the Board to impos e with the previous sanction of the 
Central Government, property tax, tax on trades, professions, calling and 
employments and any other tax which may be imposed in any muni cipality in the 
State in which such cantonment is situated. 
5.2 The Committee feel that the matter of levying property tax and other taxes in 
the Cantonment areas needs a flexible regime. If these co nditions are laid down in 
the Act it could become rigid. The Committee feel that the existing provision of the 
Cantonments Act, 1924 should be retained in the presen t Bill.  The Committee desire 
that all efforts should be made to ensure that civil residents of  the cantonment area 
are not subjected to double taxation. 
Clause 67 
(Charging of Fees) 
 
Clause 67 states that “the Board shall, for the purposes of this Act, charge the 
following fees, namely:— 
(a) licence fee on vehicles and animals; 
(b) licence fee on advertisements other than advertisements in newspapers; 
(c) fee relating to maintenance of property records; 
(d) processing fee on buildings payable al ong with application for sanction of the 
building plan; 
(e) licence fee on entry of vehicles; 
(f) betterment fee on the incr ease in land value caused by the execution of any 
development work; and 
(g) such other fee which the Board may by regulation specify: 
 
Provided that the fee charged under clause ( g) of this section shall not be less than 
the cost incurred by the Board for or in co nnection with the specific service to which 
the fee relates.” 
  
 This clause empowers a Board to charge certain fees and charges. 

 54
5.3 The Committee note that under clause 67 (e) there is a provision to charge 
licence fee on entry of vehicles.  All types of vehicles of the residents of cantonment 
are taxed by the regional trans port officer who recovers tax as well as licence fee for 
vehicles.  The Committee fe el that imposing taxes by the Cantonment Board may 
lead to double taxation.  Therefore, t he committee desire that vehicles of the 
residents of the cantonment areas should not be subject to this fee as they may have 
to frequently travel outside the cantonment area. 
   
Clause 76 
( Revision of assessment list) 
 
Clause 76 states that “( 1) The Chief Executive Officer s hall, at the same time, give 
public notice of a date, not less than one m onth thereafter, when he shall proceed to 
consider the valuation and assessments enter ed in the assessment list, and, in all 
cases in which any property is for the fi rst time assessed or the assessment is 
increased shall also give wr itten notice thereof to the owner and to any lessee or 
occupier of the property. 
(2) Any objection to a valuation or assessment shall be made in wr iting to the Chief 
Executive Officer before the dat e fixed in the notice, and shall state in what respect 
the valuation or assessment is disputed, and all objections so made shall be recorded 
in a register to be kept for the purpose by the Chief Executive Officer. 
(3) The objections shall be inquired into and investigated, and the persons making 
them shall be allowed an opportunity of being heard either in person or by authorised 
agent by the Chief Executive Officer.” 
 
 This clause provide for revision of assessment list by the Chief Executive 
Officer. 
5.4 The Committee desire that in additi on to the provision made under clause 76 
of the Bill provision of clause 67 of the Cantonments Act, 1924  should also be 
retained which reads as follows : 
“When the assessment list has been prepar ed, the Executive o fficer shall give 
public notice thereof, and of the place w here the list or a copy thereof may be 
inspected, and every person claiming to  be the owner, lessees or occupier of 
any property included in th e list, and any authorised agent of such person, 
shall be at liberty to  inspect the list and to make extracts there from free of 
charge.” 
   
5.5 The Committee further f eel that the objection re ceived to evaluation or 
assessment should be enquired into or investigated by a Committee consisting of 
both nominated and elected members of t he Board or Civil Area Committee instead 
of conferring this power on CEO.  
 
Clause 77 
(Authentication of assessment list) 
 

 55
Clause 77 states that  “(1) When all objections made  under section 76 have been 
disposed of, and the revision of the va luation and assessment has been completed, 
the assessment list shall be authenticated by the signatures  of the Chief Executive 
Officer and the President Cantonment Board, who shall, certify that except in the 
cases if any, in which amendments hav e been made as shown therein no valid 
objection has been made to the annual rateable value or any other matters entered in 
the said list: 
Provided that whenever the General Officer Commanding -in-Chief or Principal 
Director or Director Command comes to the conclusion that the assessment lists or 
any entries therein have not  been correctly prepared and are prejudicial to the 
interests of the Board or of t he Central Government, they may suo moto re-open the 
said assessment and issue such directions as deemed fit. 
(2) The assessment list so authenticated shall be deposited in the office of the Board, 
and shall there be open, free of  charge, during office hours to all owners lessees and 
occupiers of property comprised therein or the authorised agent s of such persons, 
and a public notice that it is so open shall forthwith be published.” 
 
 
5.6 The Committee feel that the power co nferred on GOC-in-C, Principal Director 
or Director under sub-clause 1 of this cl ause is ambiguous.  This power should be 
available to one officer alone.  
 

 56
Clause 80 
(Preparation of new assessment list) 
 
Clause 80 states that “the Chief Executiv e Officer shall prepare a new assessment 
list at least once in every three years, and fo r this purpose the provisions of sections 
75 to 79 shall apply in like manner as they apply for the purpose of the preparation of 
an assessment list for the first time.” 
 
 
5.7 A number of suggestions received fr om various organisations/individuals 
suggested that assessment list should be pr epared every five years instead of three 
years as provided in the clause. 
 
5.8 In view of the suggestions received  from the non-offici al witnesses, the 
Committee recommend that new assessment list should be prepared every five years 
instead of three years as provided in the clause. 
 
Clause 81 
(Notice of transfer) 
 
Clause 81 states that “( 1) Whenever the title of any person primarily liable for the 
payment of a tax on the annual ra teable value of any building or land to or over such 
building or land is transferr ed, the person whose title is  transferred and the person to 
whom the same is transferred shall, within three months after the execution of the 
instrument of transfer or after its registration, if it is regi stered, or after the transfer is 
effected, if no instrument is  executed, give notice of such transfer to the Chief 
Executive Officer. 
(2) In the event of the death of any person pr imarily liable as aforesaid, the person on 
whom the title of the deceased devolves shall give notice of such devolution to the 
Chief Executive Officer within six months from the death of the deceased.  
(3) The notice to be given under this sect ion shall be in such form as may be 
determined by rules made u nder section 351, and the trans feree or other person on 
whom the title devolves shall, if so required, be bound to produce before the Chief 
Executive Officer any documents evidencing the transfer or devolution. 
(4) Every person who makes a transfer as afor esaid without giving such notice to the 
Chief Executive Officer shall continue liabl e for the payment of all taxes assessed on 
the property transferred until he gives notice or until the transfer has been recorded in 
the registers of the Board, but nothing in this section shall be held to affect the liability 
of the transferee for the payment of the said tax. 
(5) The Chief Executive Officer shall record  every transfer or devolution of title 
notified to him under sub-section ( 1) or sub-section ( 2) in the assessment list and 
other tax registers of the Board. 
(6) Any failure to comply with the pr ovisions contained in sub-sections ( 1) to (3) shall 
be punishable with fine which may extend to ten thousand rupees.” 
 

 57
 This clause provides for the procedure to  be followed in ca ses where the title 
of any person primarily liable for the pay ment of the tax is  transferred whether 
through an instrument or in the event of death, in so far as such transfer related to the 
payment of taxes. 
 
5.9 During the oral evidence, Pres ident, Cantonments Citizens Welfare 
Association, Meerut submitted before t he Committee that mutation is the personal 
matter and there should be no penalty at all and also ther e should be a time limit for 
office to complete the mutation procedure.  
 
5.10 The Committee have noted the suggestions  received in this regard and are of 
the view that amount specif ied under sub-clause 6 is on the higher side.  The 
Committee desire that this amount should be Rs.1,000/- only.  
 
Clause 82 
(Notice of erection of buildings) 
 
Clause 82 states that “( 1) If any building is erected or  re-erected within the meaning 
of section 235, the owner shall give notic e thereof to the Chief Executive Officer 
within thirty days from the date of its completion or occupation, whichever is earlier. 
 (2) Any person failing to give the notice required by sub-section ( 1) shall be 
punishable with fine which may extend to five thousand or ten times the amount of 
the tax payable on the said building, as erected or re-erected, as the case may be, in 
respect of a period of three months, whichever is greater.” 
 
This clause provides for the need to give  a notice of erection of a building, its 
completion and occupation so far as it relates to the assessment and payment of 
taxes. 
5.11 The Committee hope and trust that the conditions underlined in clause 235 are 
similar to the one which are normally laid down by various municipalities. 
 
Clause 90 
(Inspection of imported goods, octroi, terminal tax and toll, etc.) 
  
Clause 90 states that “eve ry person bringing or receiving any goods, vehicles or 
animals within the limits of any cantonment in which octroi or terminal tax or toll is 
leviable shall, when so required by an o fficer duly authorised by the Chief Executive 
Officer in this behalf, so far as may be necessa ry for ascertaining the amount of tax 
chargeable— 
(a) permit that officer to inspect, examine or  weigh such goods, vehicles or animals; 
and 
(b) communicate to that officer any informati on, and exhibit to him any bill, invoice or 
document of a like nature, which such person may possess relating to such goods, 
vehicles or animals.” 
 

 58
This clause enables the Chief Executive Officer or any person authorized by 
him to inspect, examine or weigh any goods, vehicles or animals imported in 
cantonment on which octroi or terminal tax or toll is leviable. 
 
5.12 The Committee feel that there is a need  to specify clearly th e term `Officer’ in 
this clause.  It would be appropriate, if he is an officer of the Cantonment Board.   
 
5.13 The committee also feel th at this definition of the te rm ‘Officer’ should also be 
specified under clause 2 of the Bill.    

 59
Clause 92 
( Lease of octroi, terminal tax or toll) 
 
Clause 92 states that “it shall be lawful for the Chief Executive Officer, with the 
previous sanction of the President Cantonm ent Board to lease the collection of any 
octroi, terminal tax or toll for any period not exceeding one year; and the lessee and 
all persons employed by him in the managem ent and collection of the octroi, terminal 
tax or toll shall, in respect 
thereof,— 
(a) be bound by any orders made by the Chief Executive Officer for their guidance; 
(b) have such powers exercisable by officers  or employees of the Board under this 
Act as the Board may confer upon them; and 
(c) be entitled to the same remedies and be subj ect to the same responsibilities as if 
they were employed by the Board for t he management and collection of the octroi, 
terminal tax or toll, as the case may be:  Provided that no article distrained may be 
sold except under the orders of the Chief Executive Officer.” 
  
 This clause enables the Chief Executive Officer to lease the collection of any 
octroi, terminal tax or toll for any period not exceeding one year, with the previous 
sanction of the President Cantonment Board.   
 
5.14 The Committee note that powe r given to CEO in this clause is against the 
reasons and objects of the bill i.e greater  democratisation, as it keeps aside the 
elected members of the Board from the dec ision making process. Therefore, the 
Committee recommend that this power should remain with the Board.  
  
Clause 93 
(Appeals against assessment) 
 
Clause 93 states that  “(1) An appeal against the assessment or levy of, or against 
the refusal to refund, any tax under this Act shall lie to the District Court. 
(2) If the District Court, on the hearing of an appeal under this section, entertains 
reasonable doubt on any question as to the liab ility to, or the prin ciple of assessment 
of, a tax, the Court may, either on its own motion or on the application of the 
appellant, draw up statement of  the facts of the case a nd the point on which doubt is 
entertained, and refer the statement with it s opinion on the point for the decision of 
the High Court. 
(3) On a reference being made under sub-section ( 2), the subsequent proceedings in 
the case shall be, as nearly as may be, in conformity with the rules relating to 
references to the High Court contained in  order XLVI of the First Schedule to the 
Code of Civil Procedure,1908. 
 
Explanation.— For the purposes of this section and  sections 94, 95,  96, 97 and 102, 
“District Court”, in relation to a cantonment, means the Principal Civil Court of original 
jurisdiction having jurisdiction over the area in which that cantonment is situated, and 
includes such other Civil Court having jurisdiction over that area as the Central 

 60
Government may, by notification in the O fficial Gazette, specify in this behalf, in 
consultation with the High Court having jurisdiction over that area.” 
 
This clause provides for filing of appeals to the District Court against the 
assessment of levy of, or against the refusal to refund of any tax under the Bill. 
   
5.15 In a written memorandum submitted to  the Committee, Kumari  Selja, Minister 
of State for Urban Employment and Poverty Alleviation has stated that: 
 
“Appeal against the assessed Tax or Duty, in the District Courts is very costly 
and there-after the 2 nd opportunity of appeal is possi ble only in the High Court 
which is prohibitively costly and the reli ef may take decades to come by.  As 
such, virtually, the right to appeal is almost denied to the aggrieved party and 
suggested first Appeal against assessed ta x or duty should be allowed in the 
Lower Court (Sub-Judge) instead of District Courts so that award may be 
granted within a reasonable time”. 
  
 
5.16 The Committee feel that administrative mechanism should be  put in place to 
hear the appeal  against the assessment or levy of, or against the refusal to refund, 
any tax under this Act, so that the Cant onment inhabitants shoul d not have to take 
recourse to District Courts which is costlier and time consuming affair.  
 
Clause 98 
(Time and manner of payment of taxes) 
 
Clause 98 states that  “save as otherwise expressly pr ovided under this Act, any tax 
imposed under the provis ions of this Act shall be payab le on such dates and in such 
manner, as the Chief Executive Officer may, by public notice, direct.” 
 

 61
Clause 99 
(Public notice for taxes due) 
   
Clause 99 states that “( 1) When any tax has become due t he Chief Executive Officer 
shall cause a public notice to be issued sp ecifying the tax and the period for which it 
is due for payment. 
(2) The tax shall become due for payment fr om the date of iss ue of public notice 
under sub-section (1) above. 
(3) It shall not be necessary to present a separate bill to the person liable for payment 
thereof unless the tax is assessed for the first time or it is enhanced or modified 
under the provisions of this Act.” 
 
Clauses 98 and 99 enable the Chief Executive Officers to direct, by a notice in 
this regard, the dates and manner in which a tax shall be payable. 
 
5.17 The Committee note that it is provided  in these clauses t hat it shall not be 
necessary to present a separate bill to t he person liable for pa yment of tax thereof 
unless the tax is assessed for the first time. In the subsequent period presentation of 
separate bill to the person is not necessary as a result of which the concerned 
individual may miss the date of payment of tax. 
 
5.18 The Committee further not e that for the il literate population staying in 
cantonments, it would be very  difficult to look  for public notice. Therefore, the 
Committee, recommend that a c opy of the tax notice should  be sent to the assesses 
as well as general notice for payment of tax be published in the local/ regional 
language newspapers. 

 62
Clause 102 
(Interest payable on taxes due) 
 
Clause 102 states that “(1) If a person on whom a notice of demand has been served 
under section 100, does not, within thirty da ys from the service of such notice, pay 
the sum demanded in the notice, he shall be li able to pay by way of interest, in 
addition to the sum and other charges due one per cent, of the sum due for each 
complete month from the date of expiry of the period of thirty days as aforesaid. 
(2) The amount of interest shall be reco verable in the same  manner as moneys 
recoverable by the Board under section 329: 
Provided that— 
(a) where no appeal has been preferred, the Ch ief Executive officer with the previous 
sanction of the Board; and 
(b) in any other case, the District Court hearing the appeal under section 93, may 
remit the whole or any part of the interest payable in respect of any period.” 
 
This clause provides for the recovery of interest in case amount of tax is not 
paid within thirty days of the notice. 
 
5.19 The Committee note that u nder sub-clause 1 of this cl ause the rate of interest 
payable on taxes due has been mentioned to be 1 percent for ea ch complete month 
which effectively comes to 12 percent per annum.  The Commi ttee note that in 
present day economic scenario  of the country interest ra tes are coming down and in 
future these may go up also.  As such the Committ ee feel that the rate of interest 
need not be mentioned in the Act itself and should be left wi th the Board to fix 
depending on prevailing bank rates or the rates charged by the adjoining 
municipalities in such a case.   The Committee desire that this clause may be 
amended accordingly. 
 

 63
Clause 104 
(Disposal of distrained property) 
 
Clause 104 states that “(1) When the property seized is subject to speedy and natural 
decay, or when the expense of keeping it in custody is, when added to the amount to 
be recovered, likely to exceed its value, t he Chief Executive Officer shall give notice 
to the person in whose possession the property wa s at the time of seizure that it will 
be sold at once, and shall sell it accord ingly by public auction unless the amount 
mentioned in the warrant is forthwith paid. 
 (2) If the warrant is not in the meantime suspended by the Chief Executive Officer, or 
discharged, the property seized  shall, after the expiry of the period named in the 
notice served under sub-section (2) of section 103, be sold by public auction by order 
of the Chief Executive Officer. 
(3) The surplus of the sale proceeds, if any, shall forthwith be credited to the 
cantonment fund, and notice of such credit s hall be given at the same time to the 
person whose property has been sold or his legal representative and, if the same is 
claimed by written appl ication to the Chief Ex ecutive Officer within one year from the 
date of the notice, a refund thereof shall be made to such perso n or representative 
and any surplus not claimed within one year as aforesaid shall be the property of the 
Board. 
(4) For every distraint made under this Chapter a fee of such amount, not exceeding 
two hundred rupees, as shall in each case be fixed by the Chief Executive Officer 
shall be charged, and the said fee shall be included in the costs of recovery.” 
 
This clause enables the Chief Executive O fficer to arrange for the disposal of 
distrained property by public auction and credi t the sale proceeds to the cantonment 
funds. 
Clause 105 
(Attachment and sale of immovable property) 
 
Clause 105 states that  “(1) When a warrant is issued for the attachment and sale of 
immovable property, the attachment shal l be made by an order prohibiting the 
defaulter from transferring or charging the property in any way, and all persons from 
taking any benefit from such transfer or charge, and declaring that such property 
would be sold unless the amount of tax due with all costs of recovery is paid in the 
office of the Board within fifteen days from the date of attachment. 
(2) An order under sub-section (1) shall be displayed at some place on or adjacent to 
such property by pasting the same conspicuously and by publishing the same in a 
newspaper having circulation in the area in which the proper ty is situated or by any 
other means or mode as may be consid ered appropriate by the Chief Executive 
Officer. 
(3) Any transfer of or char ge on the property attached or any interest thereon made 
without the written permission of the Chief Executive Officer shall be void as against 
all claims of the Board enforceable under the attachment. 
(4) Where the sum due to the Board with the cost incurred by the Board in the sale of 

 64
the property, including publication of notice in newspaper and a sum equal to five per 
cent of the purchase money for payment to the purchaser is paid by the defaulter, 
before the confirmation of t he sale under sub-section ( 5), the attachment, if any, of 
the immovable property shall be deemed to have been removed. 
(5) After the sale of the property by auction as aforesaid, it s hall be confirmed in 
writing by the Chief Executive Officer who shall put the pers on declared to be the 
purchaser in possession of the same and shall grant him a certificate to the effect that 
he has purchased the property to which the certificate refers. 
(6) The Central Government may make rules for— 
(a) regulating the manner of execution of warrants for the attachment and sale of 
immovable property; 
(b) charging of fees for the attachment and sale of immovable property, to be 
included in the cost of recovery of the tax due; 
(c) summary determination of any claim made by any person other than the person 
liable for the payment of any tax, in respect of any proper ty attached in execution of 
warrant under this section.” 
 
This clause provides for the procedure to  be followed for the attachment and 
sale of immovable property on issue of warrant for the same. 
Clause 106 
(Recovery from a person about to leave cantonment) 
 
Clause 106 states that “( 1) If the Chief Executive Officer has reason to believe that 
any person from whom any sum is due or is about to become due on account of any 
tax is about to move from the cantonment, he may direct the immediate payment by 
such person of the sum so due or about to become due, and cause a notice of 
demand for the same to be served on such person. 
 (2) If, on the service of such notice, such person does not forthwith pay the sum so 
due or about to become due, the amount s hall be leviable by distress and sale of 
movable property or attachment and sale of immovable property in the manner 
hereinbefore provided in this  Chapter, and the warrant of such distress and sale or 
attachment and sale may be issued and executed without any delay.” 
 
This clause empowers the Chief Executive Officer to direct a person, believed 
to the moving out of the cantonment, to pay the taxes immediately after serving a 
notice of demand in this regard. 
 
Clause 107 
(Power to institute suit for recovery) 
 
Clause 107 states that “Instead of proceeding against a defaulter by distress and sale 
of movable property or attachment and sale  of immovable property as hereinbefore 
provided in this Chapter, or after a defaulter has been so proceeded against 
unsuccessfully or with only partial success, any sum due or the balance of any sum 
due, as the case may be, from such defaulter on account of a tax may be recovered 
from him by a suit in any court of competent jurisdiction.” 

 65
 
 This clause provides for the instituti on of a suit for recovery of a tax. 
 
 
5.20 The Committee desire that the prov ision made in sub-clause 3 of clause 104 
should be made applicable in respect of clauses 105, 106 and 107 also. 
 
Clause 108 
(Every board to be a Municipality for certain purposes) 
 
Clause 108 states that “a Board shall be deemed to be a municipal committee for the 
purposes of - 
(a) taxation as per the Municipal Taxation Act, 1881, 
(b) receiving grants, 
(c) executing the Central or t he State Government schemes of social welfare, public 
health, hygiene, safety, water supply, sanitation and education.” 
 
Clause 109 
(Payment to be made to a Board as serv ice charges by the Central Government or 
the State Government) 
 
Clause 109 states that “the Central or th e State Government, as the case may be, 
shall pay to a Board annually service char ges for providing collective municipal 
services or development work in a cantonment where the Central or State 
Government properties are situated as  worked out by the Board based on the 
guidelines issued in this behalf by the Central Government or the State Government.” 
 
 Clauses 108 and 109 provide for every Board to be a Municipality for the 
purposes of Article 243 P (I) of the Consti tution of India and a Municipal Community 
for the purposes of Municipal Taxation Act 1881 (11 of 1881) and requires the Central 
Government or the State Government to pay to the Board annually service charges. 
 
5.21 The Parliamentary Standi ng Committee on Defence (12 th Lok Sabha) made a 
recommendation for extension of centrall y sponsored development schemes in 
cantonments for uniform development of States.  Provisions in clauses 10 and 108 of 
the Bill have therefore been made making every Board a ‘deemed municipality’ for 
the purposes of article 243 P (e) of t he Constitution.  This would enable the 
Cantonment Boards to avail benefits and advantages of centrally sponsored schemes 
for social and economic development as  are presently available to other 
municipalities in various States. 
 
5.22 When asked about the apprehension of in terference of Stat e Government in 
management of cantonments, the Ministry of Defence in the written reply has stated 
that reference to Article 2 43 p(e) of the Constitution  in clause 10(2) may cause 
problem with regard to possible interference of State Government.  Therefore, this 
clause is required to be suitably amended in consultation with the Ministry of Law.  

 66
5.23 During the briefing Defence Secr etary also stressed upon undesirable 
interference of State Government in the management of cantonments- 
 
“Further, the fact should not be for gotten that the Cantonment Board has a 
particular peculiar requirement and the ne ed of ensuring that there is a certain 
discipline, there is a certain hygiene and there is a certain health requirement 
of the troops that we should, I feel, not forget.  Hence, the cantonments are not 
like any other normal municipal bodies.  While they are supposed to discharge 
certain civic service functions, we hav e to keep in mind the fact that the 
primary objective of setting up this kind of a body was to cater to the needs of 
the troops.  So, I think that we would have to keep it in mind and not treat them 
entirely at par with other municipal bodies.” 
  
 
5.24 In this connection when asked about the reaction of the State Governments to 
extension of Central or Stat e Government Welfare Schemes  to the cantonments, the 
Ministry in their written reply has stat ed that State Governments have not yet been 
consulted on this issue.  Since this is only an enabling provis ion, they may be 
consulted at the time of implementation, if required.    
  

 67
5.25 The Committee observed that the Cantonment Board has been proposed to 
be deemed to be a Municipal Committee for the purposes of taxation, receiving 
grants and executing Central or State Government schemes of social welfare, public 
health, hygiene, safety, water supply, sanitations and education.  It has, however, not 
been explained as to how taxes availabl e under the Central and  State Government 
schemes would be availed by a Board in cases where such a scheme stipulates a 
local contribution by the municipal body itself (in case of State Government 
schemes).  This problem may crop up pa rticularly in respect of the deficit 
Cantonment Boards, and, therefore, needs to be considered by the Government. 
 
5.26 The Committee after careful consideration of the above facts are of the view 
that while drafting the bill  the Ministry has not cons ulted the concerned State 
Governments before deciding to  give deemed municipality status, this will lead to 
perpetual ambiguity and conflict betwee n Centre, State and Cantonment Boards.  
Therefore, the Committee desire the Mini stry to consult the State Governments 
before finalising the bill, without postponing the consul tation till the time of 
implementation of the new Act. 
 
5.27 The Committee feel that provisions  made under clause 108 impinge on the 
delicate Center State relations.  The Committee desire that Central Government 
should consult the State Government in the matter of receiving grants from the State 
funds and on the question of  executing the Central Government schemes on social 
welfare and public health etc. before implementing this provision.   
 
5.28 The Committee further des ire that the question of State Government role in 
implementation of various C entral and State schemes should  be specifically outlined 
in this clause to avoid future controversies and conflicts.     
 
Clause 114 
(Composition)  
  
Clause 114 states that “( 1) The Chief Executive Office r may, with the previous 
sanction of the General Commanding Offi cer-in-Chief, the Command, allow any 
person to compound for any tax. 
(2) Every sum due by reason of the com position of a tax under sub-section ( 1) shall 
be recoverable as if it were a tax.” 
 
This clause enables the Chief Executiv e Officer to allow any person to 
compound any tax with the previous sancti on of the General Commanding Officer-in-
Chief, the Command. 
 
Clause 115 
(Irrecoverable debts)  
 

 68
Clause 115 states that “the Chief Execut ive Officer may write off any sum due on 
account of any tax or rate or of the costs of  recovering any tax or rate if such sum is, 
in its opinion, irrecoverable: 
Provided that, where the sum written off in favour of any one person exceeds two 
thousand and five hundred rupees , the sanction of the Pr esident of Cantonment 
Board shall be first obtained.” 
 
This clause enables the Board to write off any sum due on account of any tax, 
up to two thousand five hundred rupees and do so for any sum beyond that with 
previous sanction of the President. 
 
 5.29 The Committee feel that power to co mpound any tax conferred on CEO should 
be available only to the C antonment Board and should be at par with the adjoining 
municipal bodies. 
 
Clause 116 
(Obligation to disclose liability) 
 
Clause 116 states that “( 1) The Chief Executive Officer, may, by written notice, call 
upon any inhabitant of the c antonment to furnish such information as may be 
necessary for the purpose of ascertaining— 
(a) whether such inhabitant is  liable to pay, or has co rrectly paid, any tax imposed 
under this Act; 
(b) at what amount he should be assessed; or 
(c) the annual value of the building or l and which he occupi es and the name and 
address of the owner or lessee thereof. 
(2) If any person, when call ed upon under sub-section ( 1) to furnish information, 
neglects to furnish it within the period specified in this behalf by the Chief Executive 
Officer or furnishes information which is  not true to the best of his knowledge or 
belief, he shall be punishable with fine which may extend to five thousand rupees and 
shall also be liable to be assessed at such amount on account of tax as the Chief 
Executive Officer may deem proper, and the a ssessment so made shall, subject to 
the provisions of this Act, be final.” 
 
This clause enables the Chief Executive Officer to call upon any inhabitant of 
the cantonment to furnish information for the purpose of payment of taxes. 
 
5.30 The Committee feel that provisions of  this clause are very  vague and can be 
misused.  The amount of fine imposed is very high.  The Committee, therefore, desire 
that specific conditions sh ould be laid down under which CEO may act under this 
clause and imposition of fine should have prior approval of the Civil Area Committee. 

 69
Clause 117 
(Immaterial error not to affect liability) 
 
Clause 117 states that “no assessment and no charge or demand  on account of any 
tax or fee shall be impeached or affected by  reason only of any mistake in the name 
of any person liable to pay such tax or fee,  or in the description  of any property or 
thing, or any mistake in the amount of the assessment, char ge or demand, if the 
directions contained in this Act and the rules and bye-laws m ade thereunder have in 
substance and effect been complied with; but any person who sustains any special 
damage by reason of any such mistake shall be entitled to  recover compensation for 
the same by suit in a court of competent jurisdiction.” 
 
Clause 118 
(Distraint not to be invalid by reason of immaterial defect) 
 
Clause 118 states that “no distress levied  or attachment made under this Chapter 
shall be deemed unlawful, nor shall any person maki ng the same be deemed a 
trespasser, on account only of any defect of form in the notice of demand, warrant of 
distress or attachment and sa le or other proceeding relating thereto; nor shall any 
such person be deemed a trespasser ab initio on account of any irregularity 
afterwards committed by him; but any per son who sustains any special damage by 
reason of any such irregularity shall be entitled to recover compensation for the same 
by suit in a court of competent jurisdiction.” 
 
Clauses 117 and 118 provide for the liability of a person for a tax or a distress, 
not to suffer invalidity by reason of an immaterial error in record or defect in the form 
of the notice of demand. 
 
5.31 Under these clauses, it has been provid ed that an individu al who sustain any 
special damage by reason of any such i rregularity shall be entitled to  recover 
compensation for the same by suit in a court of competent  jurisdiction. The 
Committee feel that this woul d lead to avoidable increase in court cases against the 
Board and would cost a lot of time and mo netary efforts on the part of already 
wronged person.  The Committ ee, therefore, recommend that compensation to such 
a person should be made by the Board itself  on examining an ap plication from the 
affected individual without his filing a court case against the Board. 

 70
CHAPTER VI 
 
CANTONMENT FUND AND PROPERTY 
 
Chapter V contains Clause 119 to Clause 125.    The provisions in these clauses 
provides for a Cantonment fund and canton ment development fund to be formed for 
every cantonment and enabling the Board to borrow money from another Board and 
management and control of properties of cert ain nature, etc.  This clause also 
enables the Central Government to procure the acquisition of immovable property 
under the Land Acquisition Act, 1894 (1 of 1894) and to make rules thereon.   
  
Clause 121 
( Power of Board to borrow money) 
Clause 121 states that “a Boar d may from time to time by  a resolution passed in this 
behalf borrow money from another Board any  sum of money which may be required 
for the schemes or projects covered under this Act. “  
 
This clause enables the Board, by resolution passed in this behalf, to borrow 
money from another Board.   
6.2 The Committee note that the power of Board to borro w money from   another 
Board may not serve an y purpose.  The Government informed the Committee that 
the Boards may not be able to raise money from othe r sources like open market 
because of their financial position.  The Co mmittee feel that the same holds good in 
the case of borrowing by one Board from another because no Board would like to 
lend money to a financially weak Board know ing that it cannot recover the money.   
The Board will be able to raise money under this clause only if the Government stand 
guarantee to such a loan.  Therefore, the Committee desire that this matter may be 
re-examined. 
 

 71
CHAPTER VII 
 
CONTRACTS 
 
Chapter VII contains Clause 126 to Clause 129.     The provisions in these clauses 
enables every board to enter into and perf orm any contract necessary for the 
purposes of the Bill and also specifies t he requirement of the sanction of the Board 
for every contract for which budget provision does not exist or which involves a value 
exceeding Rs. 50,000/- and also enables the CEO to sanc tion all other contracts.   
These clauses also provide every contract  of value exceeding Rs. 50,000/- to be in 
writing and signed by two Memb ers of the Board, one of which will be President or 
Vice President.   
 
 
Clause 127 
(Sanction) 
 
Clause 127 states that “(1) Every contract — 
(a) for which budget provision does not exist, or 
(b) which involves a value or amount exc eeding rupees fifty thousand shall require 
the sanction of the Board. 
(2) Every contract other than a contract su ch as is referred to in sub-section ( 1) shall 
be sanctioned by the Chief Executive Officer on behalf of the Board.” 
 
This clause specifies the requirement of  the sanction of the Board for every 
contract for which budget provision does  not exist or which involves a value 
exceeding rupees fifty thousan d and also enables the Chie f Executive Officer to 
sanction all other contracts. 
 
7.2  The Committee desire that provisio n of section 114 (2 ) of the Cantonments 
Act, 1924 should also be ma de applicable mutatis-mutandis under clause127 of the 
Bill which shall read as under : 
“Where an Executive Officer executes a contract on behalf of a Board, under 
sub-section(1), he shall submit a re port of his action and of the reasons 
therefor to the Board at its next meeting.” 
  
 

 72
 
CHAPTER VIII 
 
SANITATION AND THE PREVENTION AND TREATMENT OF DISEASE 
 
Chapter VII contains Clause 130 to Clause 185.     The provisions in these clauses 
specifies the responsibility of various officers in the Cantonment for the purpose of 
sanitation, general duties of health officer to be advisor to  the board in all matters 
relating to sanitation, construction of separate compartments or each sex for all public 
latrines, urinals and conservancy establis hments.  These clauses also require an 
occupier of a building and land to collect and deposit rubbish, etc. and board to 
provide proper public receptacles for the deposit and disposal of rubbish.  
 
 Clause 131 
(General duties of Health Office) 
 
Clause 131 states that  “(1) The Health Officer shall be t he Advisor to the Board in all 
matters relating to sanitation and exercise a general sani tary supervision over the 
cantonment and shall per iodically submit a report along  with his recommendations at 
least once in every month to the Board. 
(2) The Assistant Health Officer shall per form such duties in connection with the 
sanitation of the cantonment as are, subject to the control of t he Board, allotted to 
him by the Health Officer.” 
 
This clause specifies the general duties of  Health Officer to be advisor to the 
Board in all matters relating to sanitation in the cantonment and those of the Assistant 
Health Officer to perform such duties as may be allotted to him by the Health Officer. 
 
8.2 During the study visit of the Committee to some Cantonments like Jammu and 
Srinagar, the Committee found that the conditions of Cantonment Board Hospitals 
were in bad shape.  When t he Cantonment fund is provided to maintain better health 
and hygiene of the people residing in cantonment area, the Committee recommend 
that Health Officer in ch arge of Cantonment Board Ho spital and CE O should be 
made accountable for providing insufficient  medicine/treatment in the hospital of 
cantonment area. 

 73
Clause 156 
(Obligation  concerning infectious contagious or communicable diseases) 
 
Clause 156 states that “subjec t to the provisions of any Act made in this regard and 
the rules and regulations made thereunder, whoever, being in charge of a blood bank 
or any other establishment which collects or supplies blood, plasma, marrow or any 
other substance for transfusion or treatment of patients or for any other medical use, 
fails to take adequate precautions or ex ercise adequate supervision thereby leading 
to or resulting in the supply of infected or contaminated blood, plasma, marrow or any 
other substance, shall be punishable with imprisonment which may extend to five 
years or with fine which may extend to one lakh rupees or with both.” 
 
This clause lays down certain precauti ons to be followed by those running a 
Blood Bank in a cantonment. 
 
Clause 157 
(Special measures in case of outbreak of infectious or epidemic diseases) 
 
Clause 157 states that “( 1) In the event of a cantonment  being visited or threatened 
by an outbreak of any infectious or cont agious disease among the inhabitants thereof 
or of any epidemic disease among any an imals therein, the Officer Commanding the 
Station, if he thinks that the provisions of this Act or of any law for the time being in 
force in the cantonment are insufficient fo r the purpose, may, with the previous 
sanction of the Central Government — 
(a) take such special measures, and 
(b) by public notice, make such temporary regulations to be observed by the public or 
by any class or section of the public, as he thinks necessary to prevent the outbreak 
or the spread of the disease: 
Provided that where in the opinion of the Officer Commanding the Station, immediate 
measures are necessary, he may take action without such sanction as aforesaid and, 
if he does so, shall forthwith report such action to the Central Government. 
(2) Whoever commits a breach of any temporary regulation made under sub-section 
(1) shall be deemed to have committed an o ffence under section 188 of the Indian 
Penal Code, 1860.” 
 
 
This clause enables the Officer Commanding, the Station to take special 
measures in case of outbreak of infectious  or epidemic diseases, with the previous 
sanction of the Central Government. 
 
8.3 The Committee desire that while maki ng rules and regula tions under these 
clauses appellate authority should be prescribed. 
 
Clause 166 
(Penalty for failure to report) 
 

 74
Clause 166 states that “whoever fails to make to the Chief Executive Officer any 
report which he is required to make by section 164 or section 165 shall be punishable 
with fine which may extend to five thousand rupees.” 
 
This clause provides for penalty for failure to report under clause 164 or clause 
165. 
 
8.4 The Committee desire that the amount of fine specif ied under this clause may 
be reduced as this amount is heavy for th e persons belonging to lower strata of the 
society and they may be ignorant of their duty to in form the matter to CEO.  The 
Committee, therefore, suggest that the amount of fine sh ould be reduced to 
Rs.1,000/- only. 
 
Clause 185 
(Conditions of service of safaikaramcharis and others) 
 
Clause 185 states that “(1) No person employed in any se rvice, or being employed in 
connection with the working of any system of public conservancy or sanitation or 
water supply or hospitals or dispensaries or electric supply or public transport 
services or such other essential servic es under a Board in any cantonment area, 
shall, in the absence of any contract, resign without reasonable cause or absent 
himself from duty without proper authority and in case of such resignation or absence 
from duty he shall be punishable with imprisonment which may extend to one month. 
 (2) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, direct that on 
and from such date as may be specified in t he notification, the provisions of this 
section shall apply in the ca se of any specified class of employees employed by a 
Board whose functions intimately concern the public health or safety.” 
    
This clause prohibits any person in the employment of essential services of the 
Board from resigning without reasonable ca use or absent from duty without proper 
authority. 
 
8.5   The Committee note that the se rvice conditions are harsh for the 
sanitary/essential service staff.  The conditions prescrib ed under this clause appears 
to violate the fundamental rights of the employees.   Th erefore, the Committee are of 
the opinion that the living an d working conditions of sanitary staff should be improved 
and particularly the provision regarding restriction on resignation and punishment 
prescribed for the same should be specially brought to the notice of the employees at 
the time of their entering in to the service of the Board.   This clause should be 
amended accordingly.  

 75
CHAPTER IX 
 
WATER-SUPPLY, DRAINAGE AND SEWAGE COLLECTION 
 
Chapter IX contains Clauses 186 to 232.  The provisions in these clauses deals with 
maintenance of water supply, control over sources of public water supply, penalty, 
power of board to lay wires, connections, etc. , power of inspection, power to require 
owner to carry out certain works for satisfactory drainage, etc.    
  
Clause 195 
(Conditions of Universal application) 
 
Clause 195 states that “Notwithstandi ng anything hereinbefore contained or 
contained in any agreement under section 193, the supply of water by a Board to any 
building or land shall be, and shall be dee med to have been granted subject to the 
following conditions, namely:— 
(a) the owner, lessee or occupier of any building or land in or on which water supplied 
by the Board is wasted by reason of the pi pes, drains or other works being out of 
repair shall, if he has knowledge thereof, give notice of the same to such officer as 
the Chief Executive Officer may appoint in this behalf; 
(b) the Chief Executive Officer or any other  officer or employee of the Board 
authorised by him in writing in this behalf ma y enter into or on any premises supplied 
with water by the Board, for the purpose of examining all pipes, taps, works and 
fittings connected with the supply of wate r and of ascertaining whether there is any 
waste or misuse of such water; 
(c) the Chief Executive Officer may, after giving notice in writing, cut off the 
connection between any source  of public water-supply and any building or land to 
which water is supplied for any purpose therefrom, or turn off such supply if— 
(i) the owner or occupier of the building or land neglects to pay the water tax or water 
rate or other charges connected with the water supply within one month from the date 
on which such tax or rate or charge falls due for payment; 
(ii) the occupier refuses to admit the Chie f Executive Officer or other authorised 
officer or employee of the Board into the building or land for the purpose of making 
any examination or inquiry authorised by clause (b) or prevents the making of such 
examination or inquiry; 
(iii) the occupier wilfully or negligently misuses or causes waste of water; 
(iv) the occupier wilfully or negligently injures or damages his meter or any pipe or tap 
conveying water from the water works; 
(v) any pipes, taps, works or fittings connected with the supply of water to the building 
or land are found, on examination by any other officer or employee of the Board 
authorised by the Chief Executive Officer in writing in this behalf, to be out of repair to 
such an extent as to cause waste of water; 
(d) the expense of cutting off the connection or of turning off the water in any case 
referred to in clause (c) shall be paid by the owner or occupier of the building or land; 
(e) no action taken under or in pursuance of clause (c) shall relieve any person from 
any penalty or liability which he may otherwise have incurred.” 

 76
 
 This clause lays down certain conditions of universal application to regulate 
the supply of water in a Cantonment. 
9.2 The Committee received a number of memoranda stating that the water rates 
should not be commcialised for the residents.   During the oral evidence a number of 
non-official witnesses submitted before the Committee that reasonable amount of 
water is not being supplied to the residents in proportionate to the tax paid by them.  
 
9.3 After taking into cons ideration the views of t he various witnesses, the 
Committee recommend that wate r tax on the residents of the Cantonment should be 
at par with the adjoining m unicipal area.  Efforts should  be made to su pply adequate 
water to the residents. 
 
Clause 205 
(Water supply for Domestic consumption) 
 
Clause 205 states that “(1 ) Where it appears to the Chief Executive Officer that any 
dwelling house in the cantonment is without supply of water for domestic 
consumption and that such a su pply can be given from mains which is not more than 
one hundred feet distance from any part of such dwelling house , the Chief Executive 
Officer may by notice require the owner to obtain supply and to execute all such 
works as may be necessary for this purpose. 
(2) It shall not be lawful for the owner of any premises which may be constructed or 
reconstructed, to occupy it or cause or permit it to be occupied until he has obtained 
a certificate from the Chief Ex ecutive Officer that there is provided within, or within a 
reasonable distance of, the house supply of wholesome water as appears to the 
Chief Executive Officer to be sufficient for domestic consumption and use of the 
inmates of the house.” 
 
 This clause enables the Chief Executive officer to require any dwelling-house 
without a proper supply of water for domestic consumption, to obtain such supply. 
 
9.4 The Committee note that under sub-claus e 2 of this clause owner of any 
premises, is not permitted to occupy his house until he has obtained a certificate from 
the CEO that the house is pr ovided within, or within a reasonable distance of the 
house supply of whol esome water.  The Committee feel that this condition is instead 
of helping the residents is harsh and theref ore be deleted.  In  the present day’s 
society everybody like to have water supply in hi s house if it is easily available and 
accessible.  However, if it is not availabl e, he should not be debarred from enjoying 
the benefits of the house constr ucted by him merely becaus e of non-availability of 
water supply. 
Clauses 209 to 232 
 

 77
9.5 On the question of explaining the r easons behind the inclusion of clauses 215 
to 232 in the Bill, the Ministry has replied that : 
“New clauses from 209 to 232 have added in the proposed bill which are 
dealing with sewage, electricity and wate r supply arrangement within the civil 
area of cantonment.  The bulk supply of water and electricity in most of the 
stations is given to Cantonment Boards by either Military Engineering Service 
or Municipal bodies under the State wh ich are further responsible for its 
distribution to the residents in the civil areas.  The charges for these services 
are paid by the Cantonment Boards to  the MES based on bulk supply.  The 
maintenance of electricity, water supply and sewage lines is carried out by the 
MES in many Cantonments.  The Mi nistry of Defence is open to the 
suggestions to delete these Clauses from the Bill and to make separate Rules, 
thereon.” 
  

 78
9.6 The Committee note that basically thes e are the laws dealing with municipal 
matters and are new provisions of the Bi ll.  The Committee feel  that instead of 
incorporating these provisions in the Act it self it would be better if these are included 
in the bye-laws to be fram ed under the Act by various  Boards.  These bye-laws 
should, however, be inconformity with the adjoining municipalities.  
 
Clause  210 
(Construction of and Control of drains and sewage collection and disposal works) 
 
Clause 210 states that “(1) All cantonment drains, all sewage collection and all works, 
materials and things appertaining thereto shall be under the control of the Board. 
(2) The Chief Executive Officer shall main tain and keep in re pair all cantonment 
drains and sewage collection and sewage  disposal works when authorised by the 
Board. 
(3) The Board shall construct as many new drains and sewage collection and sewage 
disposal works as may from time to ti me be necessary for effectual drainage and 
sewage collection.” 
 
 This clause provides spec ial provisions co ncerning drainage  and sewage in 
Cantonment namely their construction and control etc.   
    
9.7 In the written memorandum, submitted to the Committee non-official witness of 
Pune had suggested that a head sub clause may be added to clause 210 stating that 
the Board shall construct the sewage, efflu ent treatment plants fo r treatment of the 
sewage before it is disposed into any river, stream, lake or open land. 
 

 79
9.8 The Committee endorse the suggestion of the witness and strongly feel that to 
contain the environmental pollution in general and water pollution in particular, it must 
be made mandatory for the Boar d, to construct sewage a ffluent treatment plant for 
treatment of sewage, before it  is disposed into any river, stream, lake or open land. 
  
Clause 224 
(Power of owner of premises to place pi pes and drains through land belonging to 
other persons) 
 
Clause 224 states that “ (1) If it appears to the Chief Execut ive Officer that the only or 
most convenient means of water supply to, and drainage of, any premises is by 
placing or carrying any pipe or drains over, under, along or across the immovable 
property of another person, the Chief Execut ive Officer may, by order in writing, 
authorise the owner of the premises to place or carry such pipe or drain over, under, 
along or across such immovable property: 
Provided that before making any such order t he Chief Executive Officer shall give to 
the owner of the immovable property a reasonable opportunity of showing cause 
within such time as may be prescribed by bye-laws made in this behalf as to why the 
order should not be made: 
Provided further that the owner  of the premises shall not acquire any right other than 
a right of user in the property over, under, along or across which any such pipe or 
drain is placed or carried. 
(2) Upon the making of an order, under sub-section (1), the owner of the premises 
may, after giving reasonable  notice of his intention so to do, enter upon the 
immovable property with assistants and wo rkmen at any time between sunrise and 
sunset for the purpose of placing a pipe or drain over, under, along or across such 
immovable property or for the purpose of repairing the same. 
(3) In placing or carrying a pipe or drain under this section, as little damage as 
possible shall be done to the immovable property and the owner of the premises 
shall— 
(a) cause the pipe or drain to be placed or carried with the least practicable delay; 
(b) fill in, re-instate and make good at his own cost and with the least practicable 
delay, any land opened, broken up or remov ed for the purpose of placing or carrying 
such pipe or drain; and 
(c) pay compensation to the owner of th e immovable property and to any other 
person who sustains damage by reason of the placing or carrying of such pipe or 
drain. 
(4) If the owner of the immovable property, over, under, along or across which a pipe 
or drain has been placed or carried under this section whilst such immovable property 
was not built upon, desires to erect any building on such property, the Chief 
Executive Officer, shall, by notice in writ ing, require the owner of the premises to 
close, remove or divert the pipe or drain in such manner as shall be approved by him 
and to fill in, re-instate and make good the immovable property as if the pipe or drain 
had not been placed or carried over, under, along or across the same: 
Provided that no such requisition shall be  made unless in the op inion of the Chief 
Executive Officer it is necessary or expedient for the construction of proposed 

 80
building or the safe enjoyment thereof that  the pipe or drain should be closed, 
removed or diverted.” 
 
9.9 The Committee feel that provision of this  clauses is directly interference in the 
civil rights of the residents hence it should be in conformity wi th the prevailing 
municipal laws. 

 81
CHAPTER X 
 
TOWN PLANNING AND CONTROL OVER BUILDINGS, ETC. 
 
Chapter X contains Clauses 23 3 to 264.  The provisions in  these clauses deals with 
preparation of land use plan, sanction for bu ilding, notice of new building, powers of 
Board under certain sections exercisable by  Chief Executive Officer, power to make 
bye-laws, maintenance of roads, group housing schemes, etc.  
 
Clause 233 
(Preparation of land use plan) 
  
Clause 233 states that “on the commencement of this Act, the Chief Executive Officer 
shall, with the approval of the Board, c ause to be prepared a spatial plan for land use 
in the cantonment which shall include— 
(a) earmarking of zones for residential, inst itutional, commercial and other activities; 
and 
(b) improvement schemes for areas cons idered sub-standard on account of 
narrowness of streets, poor light ing, poor ventilation or irr egular line of buildings in a 
street.” 
 
This clause enable the Chief Executive o fficer, with the approval of the Board 
to cause to be prepared a spatial plan fo r land use in the cantonment earmarking 
zones for residential, institutional, commercial and other activities. 
 
10.2 In a written memorandum, submitted to  the Committee by non- official witness 
has stated that : 
 
“The population in the Cantonment has  crossed many times, but the 
Cantonment laws pertaining to the land administration have not allowed the 
people to repair; renovate or reconstruct their houses (many of which are more 
than 100 years old) thereby either leading  to a state of complete decay or 
giving birth and promoting the illegal ac tivities of unauthorized constructions 
and encroachments which also breeds of corruption”. 

 82
 
Therefore, he suggested that 
 
“In case the provision contained in this clause are to be seriously implemented 
in order to give some relief to t he residents of the Cantonment areas and 
ensure better development and growth of t he Cantonments, it is essential for 
the Government to first consider the en larging of the civil areas by the civil 
area by including what is now actually b ungalow area  in t he notified civil area 
and then bringing about a drastic revision in the rules & regulations governing 
the land tenures (old gr ant or lease) and draconian laws governing building 
activity in the Cantonments”. 
 
10.3 Further the Vice President, Agra C antonment, in his written memorandum has 
suggested that : 
 
“In respect of Civil Area Committee and old grant properties occupied by 
civilians the powers of the Chief Execut ive Officer shall be exercised by the 
Civil Area Committee and General Committee”. 
 
10.4 The plan prepared under this clause s hould be given due publicity so that the 
public at large can prepare the plan to use their land accordingly.  The Committee 
agree with the suggestions received and des ire that power under this clause should 
be exercised by Civil Area Committee. 
  
Clause 234 
(Sanction for building) 
 
Clause 234 states that “no person shall erect or re-erect a building on any land in a 
cantonment— 
(a) in an area, other than the civil area, except with the previous sanction of the 
Board; 
(b) in a civil area, except with the previous sanction of the Chief Executive Officer, nor 
otherwise than in accordance with the provis ions of this Chapter and of the rules and 
bye-laws made under this Act relating to the erection and re-erection of buildings.” 
 
This clause provides for an erection or re-erection of a building to be made 
only with the previous sanction of the Bo ard and of the Chief Executive Officer in 
case it is in a civil area. 
10.5  The Committee feel that  the permission to erect or re-erect the building in a 
civil area should  be with the permissio n of Civil Area Committ ee and not with CEO.  
This clause may be amended accordingly. 
 
10.6 The Committee desire that there is a n eed to re-examine the question of F.S.I. 
in various cantonments which have led to so many rest rictions even on minor 
erection/alteration leading to avoidable difficulties to civil population.  
 

 83
Clause 235 
(Notice of new buildings) 
 
Clause 235 states that “ (1) Whoever intends to erect or re-erect any building in a 
cantonment shall apply for sanction by giving notice in writing of his intention— 
(a) where such erection or re-erection is in an area, other than the civil area, to the 
Board; 
(b) where such erection or re-erection is in a civil area, to the Chief Executive Officer. 
(2) For the purposes of this Act, a person s hall be deemed to erect or re-erect a 
building who— 
(a) makes any material alteration or enlargement of any building; or 
(b) converts into a place for human habitation any building not originally constructed 
for human habitation; or 
(c) converts into more than one place fo r human habitation a building originally 
constructed as one such place; or 
(d) converts two or more places of human habitation into a greater number of such 
places; or 
(e) converts into a stable, cattle-shed or cow-house any building originally 
constructed for human habitation; or 
(f) converts into a dispensary, stall, shops, warehouse, godown, factory or     garage 
any building originally constructed for human habitation; or 
(g) makes any alteration which there is reason to believe is likely to affect prejudicially 
the stability or safety of any building or the condition of any building in respect of 
drainage, sanitation or hygiene; or 
(h) makes any alteration to any building which increases or diminishes the height of, 
or area covered by, or the cubic capacity o f, the building, or which reduces the cubic 
capacity of any room in the building belo w the minimum prescribed by any bye-law 
made under this Act.” 
 
This clause provides for a notice to be gi ven to the Chief Ex ecutive Officer for 
erection or re-erection of a building in a cantonment. 
 
10.7 The Committee note that under this clause any person who wants to erect or 
re-erect any building or want to make any alternation to t he building is supposed to 
apply to the Cantonment B oard by giving a notice.  As the Cantonment Board 
consumes a lot of time in deciding whether to give permission or suggest modification 
in the plan submitted leav ing the applicant waiting end lessly.  Therefore, the 
Committee recommend that the procedure s hould be simplified, less cumbersome 
and a time limit should  be prescribed for taking deci sion on the application and on 
lapse of this time, the permission should be deemed to have been granted. 
10.8 The Committee further de sire that bye laws to be made under  sub-clause 2(h) 
should be similar to one being followed in the adjoining municipalities. 
 
Clause 236 
(Condition of valid notice) 
 

 84
Clause 236 states that “ (1) A person giving the notice r equired by section 235 shall 
specify the purpose for which it is intended to use the building to which such notice 
relates. 
(2) No notice shall be valid  until the information required under sub-section (1) and 
any further information and plans and undert akings which may be required under the 
byelaws made under this Act have been furnished to the satisfaction of the Chief 
Executive Officer, along with the notice.” 
 
This clause requires the specific menti on of the purpose for which a building is 
proposed to be erected in the notice to be given under clause 235. 
 

 85
10.9 The Committee feel that powers conf erred under sub-clause 2 of this clause 
are too wide and likely to be misused.  The required informat ion which a person has 
to furnish while giving notice should be clearly specified in the Bill itself.  
 
Clause 237 
(Powers of Board under certain sections exercisable by Chief Executive Officer) 
  
Clause 237 states that  “the powers, duties and functions of the Board under section 
238, sub-section (1) of section 241, section 243, section 245 and section 248 
excluding the provisions to subsection (1) and the provisio to sub-section (2) of the 
said section 248 shall be exercised or discharged in a civil area by the Chief 
Executive Officer.” 
 
This clause provides for the powers of  Board under certain sections to be 
exercised by the Chief Executive Officer in the civil area in the cantonment. 
  
10.10 Under this clause powers of Board un der certain sections exercisable by Chief 
Executive Officer.  Since, the Civil Area Committee in the Cantonm ent Board, is in a 
better position, to understand  the problems of civilian  population, the Committee, 
therefore, recommend that CEO should exercise these pow ers after due approval of 
the Civil Area Committee. 
  
Clause 239 
(Order of stoppage of  building or works in certain cases and disposal of things 
removed) 
 
Clause 239 states that  “ (1) Where the erection of any bu ilding or execution of any 
work has been commenced or is being carried on without or contrary to the sanction, 
but has not been completed, referred to in section 238 or in contravention of any 
condition subject to which such sanction has been accorded or in contravention of 
any provision of this Act or byelaws m ade thereunder, the Chief Executive Officer 
may in addition to any other action that ma y be taken under this Act, by order require 
the person at whose instance the buildi ng or the work has been commenced or is 
being carried on to stop the same forthwith. 
(2) If an order made by the Chief Exec utive Officer under sub-section (1) directing 
any person to stop the erection of any build ing or execution of any work is not 
complied with, the Chief Executive Officer may require any police officer to remove 
such person and all his assistants and workm en from the premises or to seize any 
construction material, tool, machinery, scaffolding or other things used in the erection 
of any building or execution of any work wi thin such time as may be specified in the 
requisition and such police officer shall comply with the requisition accordingly. 
(3) Any of the things caused or to be seiz ed by the Chief Executive Officer under 
subsection 
(2) shall be disposed of by him in a manner specified in sub-sections (6) and (7). 
(4) After the requisition under sub-section (2) has been complied with the Chief 

 86
Executive Officer may, if he thinks fit, depute by a written order a police officer or an 
officer or an employee of the Board to watc h the premises in order to ensure that the 
erection of the building or the execution of work is not continued. 
(5) Where a police officer or an officer or an employee of the Board has been 
deputed under sub-section (4) to watch the premises, the cost of such deputation 
shall be paid by the person at whose inst ance such erection or execution is being 
continued or to whom notice under sub-section (1) was given and shall be 
recoverable from such person as an arrear of tax under this Act. 
(6) Any of the things caused to be removed by  the Chief Executive Officer under this 
section shall unless the owner thereof turns up to take back such things and pays to 
the Chief Executive Officer charges for removal and storage of such things be 
disposed of by the Chief Executive Officer by public auction or in such other manner 
or within such time as the Chief Executive Officer thinks fit. 
(7) The charges for removal and storage and sale of things sold under sub-section (6) 
shall be paid out of the proceeds of the sale thereof and the balance, if any, shall be 
paid to the owner of the things sold on a claim being made therefor within a period of 
one year from the date of sale and if no su ch claim is made within the said period, 
shall be credited to the cantonment fund.” 
 
This clause enables the Chief Executiv e Officer to order the stoppage of any 
erection of a building or works in case it is found to be contrary to the sanction issued 
under clause 238. 
 

 87
10.11 The Committee feel that  in all such cases there should be a provision for 
preferring an appeal against the order pass ed by the CEO and the time limit should 
also be prescribed after which recourse  to disposal of seized items may be 
undertaken. 
 
Clause 240 
(Power to sanction general scheme for prevention of overcrowding etc.) 
 
Clause 240 states that “the Central Gove rnment may sanction a general scheme of 
erection or re-erection of buildings within  such limits as may be specified in the 
sanction for the prevention of overcrowding or for purpose of sanitation, or in the 
interest of persons residing within those limits or for any other purpose, and may, in 
pursuance of such scheme, impose restrictions on the erection or re-erection of 
buildings within those limits: 
Provided that no such scheme shall be s anctioned by the Central Government, 
unless an opportunity has been given by a publ ic notice to be published locally by the 
Chief Executive Officer requiring persons affected or likely to be affected by the 
proposed scheme, to file their objections or suggestions in the manner specified in 
the notice, within a period of thirty days of the publication of such notice, and the 
Chief Executive Officer shall, after considering such objections and suggestions, if 
any, forward the same along with his reco mmendations for the consideration of the 
Central Government.” 
 
This clause enables the Central Governm ent to sanction a general scheme of 
erection or re-erection of building within  particular limits of a cantonment for the 
prevention of overcrowding and insanitation. 
  
10.12 The Committee feel that this claus e is ambiguous and Central Government 
should act in such matter on ly on advice of GOC-in-C of  the Command.  This clause 
should be suitab ly amended since he is  the authority closest to  the ground realities 
and responsible for all the operational requirements and well being of the troops.  
  
Clause 244 
(Restrictions on use of buildings) 
 
Clause 244 states that “ (1) No person shall, without t he written permission of the 
Board or otherwise than in conformity with the conditions, if any, of such permission,– 
(a) use or permit to be used fo r human habitation any part of a building not originally 
erected or authorised to be us ed for that purpose or not us ed for that purpose before 
any alteration has been made t herein by any work execut ed in accordance with the 
provisions of this Act and the bye-laws made thereunder; 
(b) change or allow the change of the use of any land or building; 
(c) convert or allow the conversion of one kind of tenement into another kind. 
(2) Any person who contravenes the provisions of sub-section (1) shall on conviction 
be punishable with a fine which may extend to one lakh rupees and in the case of 

 88
continuing contravention with an additional fine of  rupees ten thousand for every day 
during which the contravention continues after the date it comes to the notice.” 
 
This clause provides against the use of a building for any purpose other than 
for which it has been sanctioned to be used. 
 
10.13  The Committee received various me moranda/suggestion under this clause.  
During the oral evidence of  non-official witnesses, representatives of Bungalow 
Owners Association, Ambala Cantonment, Bungalow Owners Welfare Association, 
Jallandhar and Ferozepur Bungalow Owner Welfare Association have stated that 
stringent punishment is sought to be given fo r violation of the change of use.  This 
change of use should be confined to obvious  trade and not to simple change of use 
and also the fine is too hefty.  They also suggested that these provisions should be 
repealed altogether.  On the iss ue of erection or re-erecti on of buildings under this 
clause, they suggested that whatever is the decision of Cantonment Board regarding 
erection or re-erection it should be proper ly adjudicated then only the Board should 
order the demolition of a particular building. 
 
10.14 The Committee understand that fine im posed under the clause is on the higher 
side but the Commi ttee feel that to maintain th e very nature of Cantonment Board 
nobody should be allowed to change the character of the pr operty on his own as this 
goes against the very spirit of the provisions of this clause.  Therefore, the Committee 
recommend that the provisions under this cl ause, should be as per the bye-laws in 
adjoining municipalities.  The Committee further desire t hat before imposing any fine 
under this clause individual concerned should be given due noti ce and his reply 
thereto should be considered by the Board.  

 89
Clause 247 
(Illegal erection and re-erection) 
  
Clause 247 states that “whoever begins, cont inues or completes the erection or re-
erection of a building— 
(a) without having given a valid notice as required by sections 235 and 236, or before 
the building has been sanctioned or is deemed to have been sanctioned; or 
(b) without complying with any di rection made under sub-section (1) of section 238; 
or 
(c) when sanction has been refused, or has ceased to be available or has been 
suspended by the General Officer Co mmanding-in-Chief, the Command, under 
clause (b) of sub-section (1) of section 58, shall be puni shable with fine which may 
extend to fifty thousand rupees and the cost of sealing the illegal construction and its 
demolition.” 
 
This clause provides for a penalty in case  of illegal erection and re-erection of 
a building in the cantonment. 
 
Clause 248  
(Power to stop erection or re-erection or to demolish) 
 
Clause 248 states that “(1) The Board may, at any time, by notice in writing, direct the 
owner, lessee or occupier of any land in the cantonment to stop the erection or re-
erection of a building in any case in which the Board considers that such erection or 
re-erection is an offence under section 247 and may, in any such case or in any other 
case in which the Board considers that the erection or re-erection of a building is an 
offence under section 247, within twelve months of the completion of such erection or 
re-erection in like manner, direct the alteration or demolition, as its thinks necessary, 
of the building, or any part thereof, so erected or re-erected:  
Provided that the Board may, instead of r equiring the alteration or demolition of any 
such building or part thereof, accept by way of composition such sum as it thinks 
reasonable: 
Provided further that the Board shall not, without the previous concurrence of the 
General Officer Commanding-in-Chief, the Command, accept any sum by way of 
composition under the foregoing proviso in respect of any building on land which is 
not under the management of the Board. 
(2) A Board shall by notice in writing direct the owner, lessee or o ccupier of any land 
in the cantonment to stop the erection or re-erection of a building in any case in which 
the order under section 238 sanctioning the erection or re-erection has been 
suspended by the General Officer Co mmanding-in-Chief, the Command, under 
clause (b) of sub-section (1) of section 58, and shall in any such case in like manner 
direct the demolition or alte ration, as the case may be, of the building or any part 
thereof so erected or re-erected where the General Officer Commanding-in-Chief, the 
Command, thereafter directs that the order of the Board sanctioning the erection or 
re-erection of the building shall not be carried in to effect or shall be carried into effect 
with modifications specified by him: 

 90
Provided that the Board shall pay to the owner of the building compensation for any 
loss actually incurred by him in consequenc e of the demolition or alteration of any 
building which has been erected or re-erect ed prior to the date on which the order of 
the General Officer Commanding-in-Chief, the Command, has been communicated to 
him.” 
 
This clause enables the Board to direct the owner, lessee or occupier of any 
land in a cantonment to stop erection or re -erection of a building or demolish the 
same in case it is an offence under clause 247. 
 
Clause 249  
(Power to seal unauthorized constructions) 
 
Clause 249 states that “ (1) It shall be lawful for the Chief Executive Officer, at any 
time, before or after making an order of  demolition under sect ion 248 or of the 
stoppage of erection of any building, or ex ecution of any work, to make an order 
directing the sealing of such erection or work or of the premises in which such 
erection or work is being carried on or has been completed at the cost of the offender 
in such manner as may be prescribed by rules for the purpose of carrying out the 
provisions of this Act or for preventing any dispute as to the nature and extent of such 
erection or work. 
(2) Where any erection or work or any prem ises in which any erection or work is 
being carried on, has or, has been sealed, t he Chief Executive Officer may, for the 
purpose of demolishing such erection or work  in accordance with the provisions of 
this Act, order such seal to be removed. 
(3) No person shall remove such seal except,— 
(a) under an order made by the Chief Executive Officer under sub-section (2); or 
(b) under an order of an appellate authority in an appeal made under this Act. 
(4) Any person who contravenes the prov isions contained in sub-section (3) shall be 
punishable with imprisonment which may extend to six months or with fine which may 
extend to twenty thousand rupees, or with both.” 
 
This clause enables the Chief Executive Officer to direct the sealing of a 
premises where unauthorized c onstruction is being carried out and also provides for 
a penalty for contravention of this provision.  
  
10.15 The Committee note that there is a provision of imprison ment of any person 
who contravenes the provisions  contained in sub clause 3 of  this clause may extend 
to six months or with fine which may extend to twenty thousand rupees, or both.    
The power to seal unauthor ised construction and to  impose penalty should be 
available to Cantonment Board only and ther e should be provisio n for preferring an 
appeal against the decision of  the Board.   The Committee desire that there should 
be an appellate authority specified in the clause itself.    

 91
CHAPTER-XI 
 
MARKETS, SLAUGHTER HOUSES, TRADES AND OCCUPATIONS 
 
Chapter-XI contains clauses 265 to 288.  T he provisions of these clauses deals with 
public markets and slaughter-houses, use of public market, prohibition and restriction 
of use of slaughter-houses, power to inspect slaughter-houses, power to vary licence, 
import of cattle and flesh, and power of entry and seizure, etc.  
 
Clause 265 
(Public markets and slaughter-houses) 
 
Clause 265 states that  “ (1) A Board may provide and maintain, either within or 
without the cantonment, public markets and public slaughter-houses, to such number 
as it thinks fit, together with stalls, shops, sheds, pens and other buildings or 
conveniences for the use of persons carrying on trade or business in or frequenting 
such markets or slaughter-houses, and may provide and maintain in any such market 
buildings, places, machines, weights, sca les and measures for the weighment or 
measurement of goods sold therein. 
(2) When such market or slaughter-house is situated beyond cantonment limits, the 
Board shall have the same power for the inspection and proper regulation of the 
same as if it were situated within those limits. 
(3) The Board may at any time, by public no tice, close any public market or public 
slaughter-house or any part thereof. 
(4) Nothing in this section shall be deemed to authorise the establishment of a public 
market or public slaughter-house within th e limits of any area administered by any 
local authority other than the Board, without the permission of such local authority or 
otherwise than on such conditions as such local authority may approve.” 
 
This clause enables the Board to prov ide and maintain public markets and 
slaughter-houses together with stall, shops, sheds, etc., to such number as it may 
think fit. 

 92
11.2 The Committee note that the Cantonm ent Board has been given power to 
inspect and regulate any market or sl aughter house situat ed beyond cantonment 
limit.  This is a very wide power and this power of inspection and regulation should be 
exercised by the Board only where the market or slaught er house is situated on 
Defence land which is beyo nd cantonment limit.   The Committee, recommend that 
this provision may be amend ed accordingly so that the B oard will not interfere in the 
market or slaughter house situated in nearby municipal area.  
 
Clause 266 
(Use of public market) 
 
Clause 266 states that “(1) No person shall, without the general or special permission 
in writing of the Chief Executive Officer, sell or expose for sale any animal or article in 
any public market. 
 (2) Any person contravening the pr ovisions of this section,  and any animal or article 
exposed for sale by such person, may be su mmarily removed from the market by or 
under the orders of the Chief Ex ecutive Officer or any offici al of the Board authorised 
by him in this behalf.” 
 
This clause prohibits any person from se lling or exposing for sale any animal 
or article in a public market. 
 
11.3 The Committee note that for selling of any animal or article in any public 
market, there is a need fo r general or special permission of CEO under sub-clause 1 
of this clause.  The Committee feel that it  is a undue and unreasonable restriction on 
the fundamental rights of the citizen on free trade and o ccupation of an individual.  
The Committee, therefore, desire that this clause may be suitably amended. 
 
Clause 267 
(Power to transfer of public auction, etc.) 
 
Clause 267 states that  “(1) The Board may transfer by pub lic auction, for any period 
not exceeding five years at a time, the ri ght to occupy or use any stall, shop, 
standing, shed or pen in a public market, or public slaughter-house or the right to 
expose goods for sale in a public market or  the right to weigh or  measure goods sold 
therein, or the right to slaughter animals in any public slaughter-house: 
Provided that where the Board is of opinion that such transfer of the aforesaid rights 
by public auction is not considered desirable or expedient, it may, with the previous 
sanction of the General Officer Commanding-in-Chief of t he Command or the 
Principal Director,— 
(a) either levy such stallages, rents or fees as it thinks fit; or 
(b) farm the stallages, rents and fees leviable under clause (a) for any period not 
exceeding one year at a time: 
Provided further that the enjoyment of any such afores aid right by any person for any 
length of time shall never be deemed to create or confer any tenancy right in such 
stall, shop, standing, shed, pen, public market or public slaughter-house. 

 93
(2) The Board may transfer by public auction or otherwise any immovable property 
other than in a public market  or a public slaughter house if such property is capable 
of being put to remunerative use for such period and on such terms and conditions as 
may be approved by the General Officer Commanding in Chief or the Principal 
Director of the Command.” 
 
 
This clause enables the Board to transfer by public auction, the right to occupy 
or use any stall, shop, standing shed, etc., in a public market or public 
slaughterhouse. 
 
11.4 In provisio sub-clause  1 of this clause, the Commi ttee note that powers have 
been conferred on GOC-in-C a nd the Principal Director whic h leads to multiplicity of 
authorities, and may result into conflicting orders.  The Committee feel that this power 
should be available to GOC-in-C only and this clause may be amended accordingly. 
  
  

 94
CHAPTER-XIII 
 
PUBLIC SAFETY AND SUPPRESSION OF NUISANCES 
 
Chapter-XIII contains Clauses 289 to 298.  The provisions of these clauses deals with 
penalty for causing nuisance, registration and control of dogs, traffic rule of the road, 
stacking or collecting inflammable materials, etc. 
 
Clause 289 
(Penalty for causing nuisances) 
 
Clause 289 states that “(1) Whoever – 
(a) in any street or other public place within a cantonment – 
(i) is drunk and disorderly or drunk and incapable of taking care of himself; or 
(ii) uses any threatening, abusive or insulting words, or behaves in a threatening or 
insulting manner with intent to provoke a breach of the peace, or whereby a breach of 
the peace is likely to be occasioned; or 
(iii) eases himself, or willfully or indecently exposes his person; or 
(iv) loiters, or begs importunately, for alms; or 
(v) exposes or exhibits, with the object of exci ting charity, any deformity or disease or 
any offensive sore or wound; or 
(vi) carries meat exposed to public view; or 
(vii) is found gaming, or 
(viii) pickets animals, or collects vehicles; or 
(ix) being engaged in the removal of night-soil or other offensive matter or rubbish, 
willfully or negligently permits any portion thereof to spill or fall, or neglects to sweep 
away or otherwise effectually to remove any portion thereof which may spill or fall in 
such street or place; or 
(x) without proper authority affixes upon any building, monument, post, wall, fence, 
tree or other thing, any bill, notice or other document; or 
(xi) without proper authority defaces or writes upon or otherwise marks any building, 
monument, post, wall, fence, tree or other thing; or 
(xii) without proper authority removes, destroys, defaces or otherwise obliterates any 
notice or other document put up or exhibited under this Act; or 
(xiii) without proper authority displaces, dam ages, or makes any alteration in, or 
otherwise interferes with, the pavement, gutter, storm water- drain, flags or other 
materials of any such street, or any lamp , bracket, direction-post, hydrant or water-
pipe maintained by the Board in any such st reet or public place, or extinguishes a 
public light; or 
(xiv) carries any corpse not decently cover ed or without taking due precautions to 
prevent risk of infection or injury to the public health or annoyance to passers-by or to 
persons dwelling in the neighborhood; or 
(xv) carries night-soil or other offensive matt er or rubbish at any  hour prohibited by 
the Chief Executive Officer by public notice, or in any pattern of vehicle or receptacle 
which has not been approved for the purpose by the Chief Executive Officer, or fails 
to close such vehicle or receptacle when in use; or 

 95
(b) carries night-soil or other offensive matter or rubbish al ong any route in 
contravention of any prohibition made in th is behalf by the Chief Executive Officer by 
public notice; or 
(c) deposits, or causes or permits to be deposited, earth or materials of any 
description, or any offensive matter or rubbish, in any place not intended for the 
purpose in any street or other public pl ace or waste or unoccupied land under the 
management of the Board; or 
(d) having charge of a corpse fails to bury, bur n or otherwise lawfully dispose of the 
same within twenty-four hours after death; or 
(e) makes any grave or buries or burns any corpse in any place not set apart for such 
purpose; or 
(f) keeps or uses, or knowingly permits to be kept or used, any place as a common 
gaming house, or assists in conducting the business of any common gaming house; 
or 
(g) at any time or place at which the same has been prohibited by the Chief Executive 
Officer by public or special notice, beats a drum or tom-tom, or blows a horn or 
trumpet, or beats any utensil, or sounds any brass or other instrument, or plays any 
music; or 
(h) disturbs the public peace or order by si nging, screaming or shouting or by using 
megaphone or loud-speaker; or 
(i) lets loose any animal so as to cause, or  negligently allows an y animal to cause, 
injury, danger, alarm or annoyance to any person; or 
(j) being the occupier of any building, or  land in or upon which an animal dies, 
neglects within three hours of the death of th e animal, or, if the death occurs at night, 
within three hours after sunrise, either – 
(i) to report the occurrence to the Chief Exec utive Officer or to an officer, if any, 
appointed by him in this behalf with a view to securing the removal and disposal of 
the carcass by the public conservancy establishment; or 
(ii) to remove and dispose of the carcass in accordance with any general directions 
given by the Board by public notice or any  special direction given by the Chief 
Executive Officer on receipt of such report as aforesaid; or 
(k) save with the written permission of t he Chief Executive Officer and in such 
manner as he may authorise, stores or uses night-soil, manure, rubbish or any other 
substance emitting an offensive smell; or 
(l) uses or permits to be used as a latrine any place not intended for the purpose; or 
(m) uses or permits to be used without prev ious permission of the Chief Executive 
Officer any premises for any trade involvi ng offensive smell or smoke; shall be 
punishable with fine which may extend to two thousand five hundred rupees. 
(2) Whoever does not take reasonable means to prevent any child under the age of 
twelve years being in his ch arge from easing himself in any street or other public 
place within the cantonment shall be punis hable with fine which may extend to two 
hundred fifty rupees. 
(3) The owner or keeper of any animal found picketed or staying without a keeper in a 
street or other public plac e in a cantonment shall be puni shable with fine which may 
extent to one thousand rupees. 

 96
(4) Any animal found picketed or straying as aforesaid may be removed by any officer 
or employee of the Board to a pound. 
(5) Whoever in a cantonment manufactures, supplies, carries or uses for packaging 
or any other purposes material of non-biodegradable nature including polythene bags 
shall be punished with fine which ma y extend to five thousand rupees or 
imprisonment which may extend to six months.” 
 
This clause elaborately provides for a penalty which may be imposed on any 
person for causing public nuisance in a cantonment. 
 
12.2 The Committee note that under the clau se there are provis ions for imposing 
penalty on residents for spoi ling the area with non-biode gradable products, straying 
of pet animals so as to keep  cantonment free from litter,  etc.  The Committee also 
note that there is fine of tw o hundred and fifty rupees if a child eases himself in the 
cantonment area.  The Committee f eel that without providing proper toilet facilities by 
the Boards, no fine should be imposed. 
12.3 The Committee would like that all the Cantonment Boards  should provide 
necessary facilities for the public on nominal charges. 
12.4 The Committee note that under sub-clause 5 of this clause the punishment of 
imprisonment for violation seems to be too ha rsh.  Therefore, th ey desire that this 
may be deleted. 
 
Clause 302 
(Removal and exclusion from cantonment of disorderly persons) 
 
Clause 302 states that “(1) A Judicial Magistrate of the First Class, having jurisdiction 
in a cantonment, on receiving information that any person residing in or frequenting 
the cantonment– 
(a) is a disorderly person who has been conv icted more than once of gaming or who 
keeps or frequents, a common gaming house,  a disorderly drinking shop or a 
disorderly house of any other description; or 
(b) has been convicted more than once either within the cantonment or elsewhere, of 
an offence punishable under chapter XVII of the Indian Penal Code; or 
(c) has been ordered under chapter VIII of the Code of Crimi nal Procedure, 1973, 
either within the cantonment or elsew here to execute a bond for his good behaviour, 
may record in writing the substance of the information received, and may issue a 
summon to such person requiring him to  appear and show cause why he should not 
be required to remove from the cantonment and be prohibited from re-entering it. 
(2) Every summons issued under sub-section ( 1) shall be accompanied by a copy of 
the record aforesaid and the copy shall be served along with the summons on the 
person against whom the summon is issued.  
(3) The Magistrate shall, when the person so summoned appears before him, 
proceed to inquire in to the truth of the information rece ived and take such further 
evidence as he thinks fit, and if upon such inquiry it appears to him that such person 
is a person of any kind described in sub-section ( 1) and that it is necessary for the 
maintenance of good order in the cantonment  that such person should be required to 

 97
remove therefrom and be prohibited from re -entering the cantonment, the Magistrate 
shall report the matter to the Officer Co mmanding the Station and, if the Officer 
Commanding the Station so agrees shall cause to be served on such person an order 
in writing requiring him to remove from the cantonment wi thin such time as may be 
specified in the order and prohibiting him from re-enter ing it without the permission in 
writing of the Officer Commanding the Station.” 
 
 
This clause enables a Judicial Magistrate of the First Class to issue summons 
for and order the removal and exclusion from the cantonment any disorderly person 
and also prohibit him from re-entering the cantonment. 
 
12.5 The Committee note that  a judicial magistrate has  been given powers to 
remove a person from cantonment and prohibit him to re-enter cantonment under this 
clause.  The Committee feel t hat a judicial authority should not be made subordinate 
to an executive authority as under the present clause. The judicial magistrate as per 
this clause is required to report such a matter to the O fficer Commanding the station 
who shall pass the final order.  As such the Committee ar e of the view that a judicial 
authority cannot be a nd should not be made subordinate to an executive authority.  
Therefore, this clause may be modified accordingly. 

 98
CHAPTER-XVI 
POWERS, PROCEDURES, PENALTIES AND APPEALS 
 
Chapter-XVI contains clauses 310 to 350.  The provisions of these clauses deals with 
power of entry and inspection by member of  a Board, penalty for obstruction, powers 
and duties of police officers, method of giving notices, recovery of money, 
committees of arbitration, general penalty prov isions, limitation for prosecution, suits, 
appeals and revision, etc. 
 
Clause 310 
(Power of entry) 
 
Clause 310 states that “it shall be lawful fo r the President or the Vice-President of a 
Board, or the Chief Executive Officer, or the Health Officer or any person specially 
authorised by the Chief Executive Officer, or the Health Officer or for any other 
person authorised by general or special order of a Board in  this behalf, to enter into 
or upon any building or land with  or without assistants or workmen in order to make 
any inquiry, inspection, measurement, valuation or survey, or to execute any work, 
which is authorised by or under this Act or which it is nec essary to make or execute 
for any of the purposes or in pursuance of any of the provisions of this Act or of any 
rule, bye-law or order made thereunder: 
Provided that nothing in this section sh all be deemed to confer  upon any person any 
power such as is referred to in sectio n 274 or section 283 or to authorise the 
conferment upon any person of any such power.” 
 
This clause authorises the President, Vi ce-President, Chief Executive Officer, 
Health Officer, etc., to enter into or upon any building or land to  make any inquiry, 
inspection, measurement, etc., as may be necessary for the purpose of the Bill. 
 
Clause 311 
(Power of inspection by Member of a Board) 
 
Clause 311 states that “A Board may by sp ecial order authorise or order any member 
to inspect any work or institution construc ted or maintained, in whole or part at the 
expense of the Board, and any register, book accounts or other documents belonging 
to, or in the possession of, the Board.” 
 
This clause enables the Board to authoris e any Member of a Board to inspect 
any work or institution, book, register, etc., maintained by the Board. 
 
Clause 312 
(Power of inspection, etc.) 
 
Clause 312 states that “(1) A Board or the Chief Executive Officer may, by general or 
special order, authorize any person— 

 99
(a) to inspect any drain, privy, latrine, urinal, cesspool, pipe, sewer or channel in or on 
any building or land in the cantonment, and, in his discretion, to cause, the ground to 
be opened for the purpose of preventing or removing any nuisance arising from the 
drain, privy, latrine, urinal, cesspool, pipe, sewer or channel, as the case may be; 
(b) to examine works under construction in the cantonment, to take levels or to 
remove, test, examine, replace or read any meter. 
(2) If, on such inspection, the opening of t he ground is found to be necessary for the 
prevention or removal of a nuisance, the expenses thereby incurred shall be paid by 
the owner or occupier of the land or building,  but if it is found that no nuisance exists 
or but for such opening would have arisen , the ground or portion of any building, 
drain or other work opened, injured or re moved for the purpose of such inspection 
shall be filled in, reinstated, or made good, as the case may be by the Board or the 
Chief Executive Officer.” 
 
This clause enables the Board or the Ch ief Executive Officer to authorize any 
person to inspect any drain, privy, latrine, urinal, etc., with the purpose of prevention 
and removal of any nuisance arising therefrom. 
 
Clause 313 
(Power to enter land adjoining land where work is in progress) 
 
Clause 313 states that “( 1) The Chief Executive Officer of  a cantonment may, with or 
without assistants or workm en, enter on any land within fifty yards of any work 
authorised by or under this Act for the purpo se of depositing thereon any soil, gravel, 
stone or other materials, or  of obtaining access to such work, or for any other 
purpose connected with the carrying on of the same. 
(2) The Chief Executive Officer shall, before entering on any land under sub-section 
(1), give the occupier, or, if there is no occupier, the owner not less than three day’s 
previous notice in writing of his intenti on to make such entry, and shall state the 
purpose thereof, and shall, if so required by the occupier or owner, fence off so much 
of the land as may be required for such purpose. 
(3) The Chief Executive Officer shall, in exercising any power conferred by this 
section, do as little damage as may be, and compensation shall be payable by the 
Board to the owner or occupier of such land, or to both, for any such damage whether 
permanent or temporary.” 
 
This clause enables the Chief Executive Officer of a cantonment to enter on 
any land adjoining the land where an authorised work is in progress. 
 
Clause 314 
(Breaking into premises) 
 
Clause 314 states that “it shall be lawful for any person, authorised by or under this 
Act to make any entry into any place, to open or cause to be opened any door, gate 
or other barrier— 

 100
(a) if he considers the opening thereof necessary for the purpose of such entry; and 
(b) if the owner or occupier is absent, or being present refuses to open such 
door, gate or barrier.” 
 
This clause enables any per son authorised under the Bi ll to break into any 
premises if such entry is considered necessary. 
 
Clause 315 
(Entry to be made in the day time) 
 
Clause 315 states that  “save as otherwise expressly pr ovided in this Act, no entry 
authorised by or under this Act shall be made except bet ween the hours of sunrise 
and sunset.” 
 
This clause restricts any authorised entry to be made in the day time only. 
 
 
Clause 316 
(Owners consent ordinarily to be obtained) 
 
Clause 316 states that “save as otherwise expressly provided in this Act, no building 
or land shall be entered without the consent of the occupier, or if there is no occupier 
of the owner thereof, and no such entry shall be made without  giving the said 
occupier or owner, as the case may be, not  less than four hours, written notice of the 
intention to make such entry: 
Provided that no such notice shall be nece ssary if the place to be inspected is a 
factory or workshop or trade premises or  a place used for carrying on any trade, 
calling or occupation specified in section 277 or a stable for horses or a shed for 
cattle or a latrine, privy or urinal or a work under construction, or for the purpose of 
ascertaining whether any animal intended for human food is slaughtered in that place 
in contravention of this Act or any bye-law made thereunder.” 
  
This clause provides for the obtaining of the owner’s consent for making entry 
under the provisions of the Bill and also for giving four hours notice in such cases. 
 
Clause 317 
(Regard to be had to social and religious usages) 
 
Clause 317 states that “when any place used as a human dwelling is entered under 
this Act, due regard shall be paid to the social and religious customs and usages of 
the occupants of the place entered, and no apartment in the actual occupancy of a 
female shall be entered or broken open unti l she has been informed that she is at 
liberty to withdraw and ev ery reasonable facility has been afforded to her for 
withdrawing.” 
 

 101
This clause provides for the giving of  due regard to the social and religious 
usages of the occupants of the place where entry is made under this Bill. 
 
Clause 318 
(Penalty for obstruction) 
 
Clause 318 states that “Whoever obstructs or molests any person acting on behalf of 
the Board, who is not  a public servant within the m eaning of section 21 of the Indian 
Penal Code or any person wi th whom the Board has lawf ully contracted, in the 
execution of his duty or of anything which he is empowered or required to do by virtue 
or in consequence of any of t he provisions of this Act or  any rule, bye-law or order 
made thereunder, or in fulfilment of his contract, as the case may be, shall be 
punishable with fine which may extend to five thousand rupees.” 
 
This clause provides for a penalty for causing obstruction or molestation to any 
person acting on behalf of the Board, who is not a servant of the Board or has been 
lawfully contracted by the Board. 
13.2 During the oral evidence of the non-offi cial witnesses, the representatives of 
Bungalow owner’s Association, Ambala stated that  
“This is being thoroughly misused.  Instances have come to notice in Ambala 
Cantonment.  It is about power of entry and inspection. 
  

 102
The DEO should specify why he is co ming? What does he want from use 
there?  The vague explanation is that he is coming with his assistants for 
taking measurement.  In any 30 days, he can come.  For 30 days, the ladies 
are in constant fear of  who will come and what will happen.  What is the 
purpose of his coming? They cannot give a notice to the bungalow owners 
three times in a year.  The notice is valid for one month.  In one month, this 
person alongwith so many assistants wi ll come to measure the bungalow.  
Why should they come to measure it? What is the purpos e behind this? We 
live in constant fear.” 
 
 
13.3 Keeping in view, the high probabilit y of misusing the pow er of entering the 
residence of an individual in cantonment area, the Commi ttee desire that the notice 
period as given under this clause may incr ease from 4 hours to  24 hours before 
making such an entry into the residence of  the inhabitants of cantonment area and 
any officer found misu sing the power conferred on hi m under this chapter, should be 
punished.  There should be provision for going in appe al against the orders passed 
under these clauses. 
 
Clause 323 
(Serving of notice, etc.) 
 
Clause 323 states that “( 1) Every notice, order or requisi tion issued under this Act or 
any rule or bye-law made ther eunder shall, save as other wise expressely provided, 
be served or presented— 
(a) by giving or tendering the notice, order or  requisition, or sending it by post, to the 
person for whom it is intended; or 
(b) if such person cannot be found, by affixing  the notice order or requisition on some 
conspicuous part of his last known place of abode or business if within the 
cantonment, or by giving or tendering the notice, order or requisition to some adult 
member or servant or his family, or by c ausing it to be affixed on some conspicuous 
part of the buildings or land, if any, to which it relates. 
(2) When any such notice, order or requisi tion is required or permitted to be served 
upon an owner, lessee or occupier of any building or land, it shall not be necessary to 
name the owner, lessee or occupier therein,  and the service thereof shall, save as 
otherwise expressly 
provided, be effected either— 
(a) by giving or tendering the notice, order or  requisition, or sending it by post, to the 
owner, lessee or occupier, or, if there are more owners, lessees, or occupiers than 
one to any one of them; or 
(b) if no such owner, lessee or occupier can be found, by giving or tendering the 
notice, order or requisition to the authorised agent if any of any such owner, lessee or 
occupier, or to an adult member or servant of the family of any such owner, lessee, 
occupier, or by causing it to be affixed on  some conspicuous part of the building or 
land to which it relates. 

 103
(3) When the person on whom a notice, order or requisition is to be served is a minor, 
service upon his guardian or up on an adult member or servant of his family shall be 
deemed to be service upon the minor.” 
  
 
Clause 324 
(Method of giving notice) 
 
Clause 324 states that “every notice which, by or under this Act, is to be given or 
served as a public notice or as a notice which is not required to be given to any 
individual therein specified shall, save as  otherwise expressly provided, be deemed 
to have been sufficiently given or served if a copy thereof is affixed in such 
conspicuous part of the office of the Board or in such other public place during such 
period, or is published in such local ne ws paper or in such other manner, as the 
Board may direct. 
 
Clauses 323 and 324 lay down various methods of giving and serving a notice, 
order or requisition issued under this Bill. 
 
13.4 Pertaining to these clauses, the Committee have received a number of 
suggestions from various organisations/indiv iduals stating that the notice/order may 
be sent to the person by registered post.   
 
13.5 The Committee note in the sub-clause (a) of clause 323(1) notice/order etc is 
to be sent to the intended person by post and if such person cannot be found, a copy 
of the notice may be affixed on some conspi cuous part of his last known place or by 
giving or tendering the notice to some adult member or  servant or his family member 
or by causing it to be affixed on some part of the building or  land to which it relates.  
The Committee feel th at the notice sent by ordinary post may lost or not 
trackable/traceable and th e communication may not reach him on time.  The 
Committee further feel that if the person is out of stati on for considerable period of 
time and nobody is available to receive the notice, then affixing of the notice on the 
premises may also not serve any purpose.  The Committee apprehend that the notice 
can be damaged due to extrem ity of weather or by some unscruplus persons.  This 
will further lead to endless liti gation.  In order to avoid a ll such practical difficulties, 
the Committee recommend that the notice should be sent to the person by registered 
post with acknowledgement due or through a courier.  
 
Clause 327 
(Liability of occupier to pay in default of owner) 
 
Clause 327 states that “( 1) If any such notice as is re ferred to in section 325 has 
been given to any person in respect of proper ty of which he is the owner, the Board 
or the civil area committee or the Chief Ex ecutive Officer at whose instance such 
notice has been issued may require any occupi er of such property or of any part 
thereof to pay to it or him instead of to the owner any rent payable by him in respect 

 104
of such property, as it falls due, up to  the amount recoverable from the owner under 
section 325: 
Provided that if the occupi er, on application made to hi m by the Board or the civil 
area committee or the Chief Executive Offi cer at whose instance such notice has 
been issued, refuses to truly disclose the amount of his rent or  the name or address 
of the person to whom it is payable the Ch ief Executive Officer may recover from the 
occupier the whole amount recoverable u nder section 325 in the same manner as 
money is recoverable by the Board under section 329. 
(2) Any amount recovered from an occupier instead of from  an owner under sub 
section (1) shall, in the absence of any contra ct between the owner and the occupier 
to the contrary, be deemed to have been paid to the owner.” 
 
This clause enables the board or the civil area committee or the Chief 
Executive Officer to require the occupier of a property to pay any amount recoverable 
from the owner of a property in case of default of the owner to pay the same. 
  
13.6 The Committee recommend that the Bo ard or the Civil Area Committee or the 
CEO should ask the occupier of a property to pay any amount re coverable from the 
owner of a property in case of default of the owner to pay the sa me after giving due 
notice to the owner and where he refused to comply with the notice within a specified 
period. 
Clause 329 
(Method of recovery) 
Clause 329 states that “( 1) Notwithstanding anything else where contained in this Act 
arrears of any tax, and any other money recoverable, including rent on land and 
buildings due or damages and fine due under leas es or licences executed by or in 
favour of a Board or the Defence Estates Officer under this Act or the rules made 
thereunder may be recovered together  with the cost of recovery either by suit or on 
application to a Judicial Magi strate having jurisdiction in  the cantonment or in any 
place where the person from whom such tax,  rent or money is recoverable may for 
the time being be residing, either by the distress and sale of movable property of 
such person, or by the attachment and sale of immovable property of that person, 
which is within the limits of the jurisdiction  of such Judicial Magistrate, or by both 
these methods, and shall, if payable by the owner of any property as such, be a 
charge on the property until paid : 
 
Provided that the tools of artisans, growing crops upto the value of five thousand 
rupees and implements and cattle used for the purposes of agriculture shall be 
exempt from such distress or sale.” 
 
This clause provides for the recovery of any dues under this Bill to be 
recovered with the cost of recovery by su it or application to a Judicial Magistrate 
having jurisdiction in the cantonment. 
 
13.7 The Committee note that this provision of the clause prov ides exemption in 
recovery of certain things and amount fo r confined class.  The Committee desire that 

 105
keeping in view the basic requirement of person and me ans of lively-hood besides 
the available exemptions incl uded and it should be amended  in the line of exemption 
permitted in the municipal area under civil law. 
Clause 332 
(Constitution of the Committee of Arbitration) 
Clause 332 (1) (a) states that “Every Committee of Arbitration shall consist of five 
members, namely:— a Chairm an who shall be a person not in the service of the 
Government or the Board, and who shal l be nominated by t he Officer Commanding 
the Station.” 
 
13.8 The Committee feel that under this clause the Chairman of the Committee of 
Arbitration should be nominated by District Magistrate instead of Officer Commanding 
the Station. 
 
Clause 338 
(General Penalty) 
 
Clause 338 states that “Whoev er, in any case in which a penalty is not expressly 
provided by this Act, fails to comply with any notice, order or r equisition issued under 
any provision thereof, or otherwise contravenes any of the pr ovisions of this Act, shall 
be punishable with fine which may extend to five thousand rupees, and, in the case of 
a continuing failure or contravention, with an additional fine which may extend to five 
hundred rupees for everyday after the during wh ich he has persisted in the failure or 
contravention.” 
 
This clause provides for a general penalty in cases where penalty is not 
expressly provided under this Bill. 
 
13.9 The Committee endorse the sugges tions received from a number of 
organisations/individuals which state that the penalty imposed under this clause is 
too high and therefore, recommend that the penalty may be reduced. 
 

 106
Clause 344 
(Notice to be given of suits) 
 
Clause 344 (3) states that “No suit, su ch as is described in sub-section ( 1), shall, 
unless it is an action for the recovery of immovable property or for a declaration of 
title thereto, be instituted after the expiry  of six months from  the date on which the 
cause of action arises.” 
 
13.10 The Committee recommend that general  provision as pre scribed under civil 
law should be made applicable in this case also. 
Clause 349 
(Finality of Appellate Orders) 
 
Clause 349 states that “Save as otherwise provided in section 348, every order of 
appellate authority shall be final.” 
 
13.11 The Committee hope that this provis ion does not compromise the right of an 
individual to make any appeal to the court of law. 
 
Clause 352 
(Supplemental provisions respecting rules) 
 
Clause 352 ( 4) states that “Every rule made by the Central Government under this 
Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each House of 
Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which may be 
comprised in one session or in two or mo re successive sessions, and if, before the 
expiry of the session immedi ately following the session or the successive sessions 
aforesaid, both Houses  agree in making any modificati on in the rule or both Houses 
agree that the rule should not  be made, the rule shall t hereafter have effect only in 
such modified form or be of no effect, as  the case may be; so, however, that any 
such modification or annulment  shall be without prejudice to  the validity of anything 
previously done under that rule.” 
 
 This clause enables the Central Govern ment to make supplemental provision 
respecting rules.  

 107
Clause 353 
(Power to make bye-laws) 
 
Clause 353 states that “subjec t to the provisions of this  Act and of the rules made 
thereunder a Board may, in addition to any bye-laws which it is empowered to make 
by any other provision of this Act, make bye-laws to provide for all or any of the 
following matters in the cantonment, namely :— 
(1) the registration of births, deaths and marriages, and the taking of a census; 
(2) the enforcement of compulsory vaccination and inoculation and levy of fees where 
such vaccination or inoculation is carried out at the houses of residents; 
(3) the regulation of the collection and recovery of taxes, tolls and fees under this Act 
and the refund of taxes; 
(4) the regulation of any description of tra ffic in the streets and the enforcement of 
measures for the reduction of noise caus ed thereby or the prohibition of any 
description of such traffic; 
(5) the manner in which vehicles standing, driven, led or prope lled in the streets 
between sunset and sunrise shall be lighted; 
(6) the seizure and confiscation of ownerless animals straying within the limits of the 
cantonments and regulation and control of cattle pounds; 
(7) the prevention and extinction of fire; 
(8) the construction of scaffolding for building operations to secure the safety of the 
general public and persons working thereon; 
(9) the regulation in any man ner not specifically provided for in this Act of the 
construction, alteration, maintenance, pres ervation, cleaning and repairs of drains, 
ventilation-shafts, pipes, water-closets, priv ies, latrines, urinals, cesspools and other 
drainage works; 
(10) the regulation or prohibition of the discharge into, or deposit in, drains of sewage, 
polluted water and other offensive or obstructive matter; 
(11) the regulation or prohi bition of the stabling or herding of animals, or of any class 
of animals, so as to prevent danger to public health; 
(12) the proper disposal of corpses, the regulation and managem ent of burial and 
burning places and other places for the dis posal of corpses, and the fees chargeable 
for the use of such places where the same are provided or maintained by 
Government or at the expense of the cantonment fund; 
(13) the permission, regulation or prohibition of the use or occupation of any street or 
place by itinerant vendors or by any person for the sale of articles or the exercise of 
any calling or the setting up of any booth or  stall, and the fees chargeable for such 
use or occupation; 
(14) the regulation and control of encamping grounds, sarais, hotels, dakbangalows, 
lodging-houses, boarding-hous es, buildings let in tenem ents, residential clubs, 
restaurants, eating-houses, cafes, refreshment-rooms, guest houses, holiday resorts, 
cinemas and places of public recreation, entertainment or resort; 
 (15) the regulation of the ventilation, lighting, cleansing, drainage and water supply of 
the buildings used for the manufacture or sale of aerated or other potable waters and 
of butter, milk, sweetmeats and other articles of food or drink for human consumption; 

 108
(16) the matters regarding which conditions  may be imposed by licences granted 
under section 295 or section 277; 
(17) the control and supervision of places where dangerous or offensive trades are 
carried on so as to secure cleanliness therei n or to minimise any injurious, offensive 
or dangerous effects arising or likely to arise therefrom; 
(18) the regulation of the erection of any enclosure, fence, tent, awning or other 
temporary structure of whatsoever material or nature on any land situated within the 
cantonment and the fees chargeable in respect thereof; 
(19) the laying out of streets, and the regu lation and prohibition of the erection of 
buildings without adequate provision being made for the laying out and location of 
streets; 
(20) the form of and the particulars whic h shall be contained  in a development 
scheme or an improvement scheme and the manner in which such scheme shall be 
framed or altered and levy of development charges. 
(21) the regulation of the use of public  parks and gardens and other public places, 
and the protection of avenues, trees, grass and other appurtenance s of streets and 
other public places; 
(22) the regulation of the grazing of ani mals and the fees chargeable in respect 
thereof; 
(23) the fixing and regulation of the use of public bathing and washing places; 
(24) the regulation of the posting of bills and  advertisement, and of the position, size, 
shape or style or name-boards, sign-boards and sign-posts; 
(25) the fixation of a method for the sale of  articles whether by measure, weight, 
piece or any other method; 
(26) the rending necessary of licences within the cantonment for— 
(a) persons working as job porters for the conveyance of goods; 
(b) animals or vehicles let out on hire or used for hawking articles; 
(c) the proprietors of drivers of vehicles, bo ats or other conveyances, or of animals 
kept or plying for hire or used for hawking articles; 
(d) persons impelling or carrying such vehicles or other conveyances; or 
(e) persons practising as nurses, midwives or dais; 
(27) the prescribing of the fee payable for any licence required under clause (26), and 
of the conditions subject to which such licences may be granted, revised, suspended 
or withdrawn; 
(28) the regulation of the charges to be made for the services of such job porters and 
of the hire of such animals, vehicles or  other conveyances, and for the remuneration 
of persons impelling or carry ing such vehicles or conveyances as are referred to in 
clause (26); 
(29) the prescribing of fee payable for any licence except as other wise specifically 
provided in the Act, sanction or for any  written permission granted by the Chief 
Executive Officer; 
(30) the regulation or prohibition, for purpo ses of sanitation or the prevention of 
disease or the promotion of public safety or convenience, of any act which occasions 
or is likely to occasion a nuisance, and for the regulation or prohibition of which no 
provision is made elsewhere by or under this Act; 

 109
(31) the circumstances and the manner in whic h owners of buildings or land in the 
cantonment, who are temporarily absent from, or are not resident in, the cantonment, 
may be required to appoint as their agents, for all or any of the purposes of this Act of 
any rule or bye-law m ade thereunder, persons residing within or near the 
cantonment; 
(32) the prevention of the spread of infecti ous or contagious diseases within the 
cantonment; 
(33) the segregation in, or the removal and exclusion from, the cantonment, or the 
destruction, of animals suffering from or reasonability suspected to be suffering from 
any infectious or contagious disease; 
(34) the supervision, regulation, cons ervation and protection from injury, 
contamination or trespass of source s and means of public water-supply and of 
appliances for the distribution of water whet her within or without the limits of the 
cantonment; 
(35) the manner in which connections with  water-works may be constructed or 
maintained, and the agency which shall or may be employed for such construction 
and maintenance; 
(36) the regulation of all matters and things  relating to the supply and use of water 
including the collection and recovery of charges therefor and the prevention of 
evasion of the same; 
(37) the maintenance of schools, and the furtherance of education generally; 
(38) the regulation of pr ohibition of the cutting or destruction of trees or shrubs, or of 
the making of excavations, or of the remo val of soil of qua rrying, where such 
regulation or prohibition appears to the Board to be not prejudicial to the maintenance 
of ecological balance and to be necessary for the maintenance of a water-supply, the 
preservation of the soil, the prevention of la ndscape or of the formation of ravines or 
torrents, or the protection of land agains t erosion, or against the deposit thereon of 
sand, gravel or stones; 
(39) the rendering necessary of licences for the use of premises within the 
cantonment as stables, kennels, sites or  cow houses or as accommodation for 
sheep, goats or fowls; 
(40) the control of the use in the cantonm ent of mechanical whistles, sirens or 
trumpets; 
(41) the regulation of supply of  copies of official docum ent and prescribing the fee 
payable in respect thereof; 
(42) the regulation of permission for granti ng licence for use of loud-speakers and 
prescribing the fee payable in respect thereof; and 
(43) generally for the regulation of the admini stration of the cantonment under this 
Act.” 
 
This clause enables the Board to make  bye-laws for va rious matters as 
provided in the clauses of this Bill. 
13.12 The Committee desire that  after the Act is notified in  the gazette, the rules and 
bye-laws framed under this Act must be made within a period of one year. 
 
Clause 354 

 110
(Penalty for breach of bye-laws) 
 
Clause 354 states that “( 1) Any bye-laws made by a Board under this Act may 
provide that a contravention 
thereof shall be punishable— 
(a) with fine which may extend to five thousand rupees; or 
(b) with fine which may exte nd to five thousand rupees and, in the case of a 
continuing contravention, wi th an additional fine whic h may extend to five hundred 
rupees for every day during which such cont ravention continues after conviction for 
the first such contravention; or 
(c) with fine which may extend to one hundr ed fifty rupees for every day during which 
the contravention continues after the receip t of a notice from the Board or Chief 
Executive Officer by the person contraveni ng the bye-law requiring such person to 
discontinue such contravention. 
(2) Any such bye-law may also provide that  a person contravening the same shall be 
required to remedy, so far as lies in his power, the damage or mischief, if any, caused 
by such contravention.” 
 
This clause provides for a penalty to be charged for any breach of the bye-
laws made by the Board under this Bill. 
 
13.13 The Committee note that the penalty prescribed under  this clause is too high, 
therefore, it should be reduced. 

 111
SCHEDULE V OF THE CANTONMENTS BILL, 2003 
 
 
Schedule V of the Cantonm ents Bill, 2003 deals with appeals from executive 
orders under different clauses.  The Committee feel that under clauses 137, 138, 
139, 142, 144, 147,  183, 238, 248, 252. 253 and 273 of  the Bill under this schedule, 
there are multiplicity of authority which ma y lead to ambiguity.   The Committee, 
therefore, desire that the provision of appeal under this schedule should be given to 
one authority instead of giving it to three authorities and it should be GOC-in-C.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI;      BALASAHEB VIKHE PATIL, 
5 May, 2005                 C h a i r m a n ,  
15 Vaisakha, 1927 (Saka)       Standing committee on Defence 
  

 112
ANNEXURE  
 
 
LIST OF INDIVIDUALS/EXPERTS/ASSO CIATIONS WHO APPEARED BEFORE 
THE COMMITTEEE 
 
1. Smt. Kiran Choudhary, President, All India Cantonments Board Employees 
Federation 
 
2. Shri O.N. Langroo, General Secret ary, All India Ca ntonments Board 
Employees Federation 
 
3. Shri Satish Kumar, Joint Secretar y, All India Cantonm ents Board Employees 
Federation 
 
4. Shri P.K. Kumaran, Former Di rector General, Defence Estates  
 
 
5. Maj. Gen. Kamal Nayan Misr a, Judge Advocate General Army 
 
6. Dr. Pankaj Mahinderu, Former Vice  President, Cantonment Board, Agra. 
  
7. Shri T. Bhowmik, Cantonment Board, Agra. 
 
8. Dr. B.M.Masani, President, Resident s of Mhow (ROM) Cantonment, M.P.  
 
9. Shri Z. Cowasji, Hon. Secy., Residents of Mhow (ROM) Cantonment, M.P. 
 
10. Ms. Aruna Rodrigues, Member, Resi dents of Mhow (ROM) Cantonment, M.P. 
 
11. Shri Krishan Murti, Ex-Member, C antonment Board, Ka sauli, Himachal 
Pradesh. 
 
12. Shri Mohan Lal Munshi, Social Worker, Kasauli, Himachal Pradesh. 
 
13. Shri Bharat Singh Yadav, Vice President, Babina Cantonment, Jhansi, Uttar 
Pradesh 
 
14. Shri Om Prakash Aggarwal, Ex-Vice President, Babina Cantonment, Jhansi, 
Uttar Pradesh 
 
15. Shri Netraprakash K. Bhog, Advocate, Pune. 
 
16. Shri S.K. Jain, Advocate, Pune. 
 
17. Shri R. Srinivashan, Advocate, Supreme Court, New Delhi. 
  

 113
18. Shri P.R.H. Ansari, President, C antonment Citizens Welfare Association 
(Regd.), Meerut Cantonment. 
 
19. Shri Raj Kumar Agarwal, Presiden t, Bunglow Owner’s Association, Ambala 
Cantonment. 
 
20. Shri S.K. Sood, Bunglow Owner’s  Association,  Ambala Cantonment. 
 
21. Shri P.K. Jain, Secretary, Bunglow Owner’s Association,  Ambala Cantonment. 
 
22. Shri Pradeep Kumar Jain, Bunglo w Owner’s Association,  Ambala 
Cantonment. 
 
23. Col. (Retd.) Gurdip Singh, Bung alow Owner’s Association, Ambala 
Cantonment. 
 
24. Maj. (Retd.) Deepak Chauhan, Bungal ow Owner’s Association, Ambala 
Cantonment 
 
25. Shri Deepak Aggarwal, Bungalow Ow ner’s Association, Ambala Cantonment. 
 
26. Brig. K.S. Dhillon (Retd.), Presiden t, Bungalows Owners, Welfare Association, 
Jallandhar Cantonment. 
 
27. Shri Narinder Sayal, Bungalows Owners, Welfare Association, Jallandhar 
Cantonment. 
 
28. Shri Om Prakash Gupta, Feroz epur Cantonment Bungalow Owners 
Association. 
 
29. Shri Sumeet Gupta, Ferozepur C antonment Bungalow Owners Association. 
 
30. Shri Shyam H.K. Chainani, Honorary Secretary, Bombay Environmental Action 
Group 
 
31. Maj. Gen. (Retd.) V.K. Gupta,  Bombay Environmental Action Group 
 
32. Dr. Pramod Chokse, Ex-Mem ber, Sagar Cantt., Sagar, M.P. 
 
33. Shri Sunil Chokse, Sagar Cantt., Sagar, M.P. 
 
34. Shri Denziel Sequiera, St. Thom as Mount-cum-Pallavaram Cantonment, 
Chennai 
 
35. Shri J. Bopalan, St. Thomas M ount-cum-Pallavaram Cantonment, Chennai 
 

 114
36. Shri R.G. Jaya Kumar, St. Thom as Mount-cum-Pallavaram Cantonment, 
Chennai 
 
37. Shri Anil Kumar Chhabra, Secunderabad Cantonment 
   
38. Shri Rajender Kumar Yadav, Secunderabad Cantonment 
 
39. Shri Tukaram Gangadhar Gadakh, M.P. and residents of Ahmednagar 
Cantonment  
 
40. Shri Suresh Mehjani , Ahmednagar Cantonment 
 
41. Shri Prakash D. Phulari, Ahmednagar Cantonment 
 
42.  Brig. J.S. Kohli, President, Pune Cantonment  
 
43. Brig. V.K. Vadhera, Pr esident, Ahmednagar Cantonment 
 
44. Brig. S.P. Rai, Pr esident, Delhi Cantonment 
 
45. Brig. Deepak Sinha, President, Agra Cantonment  
 
46. Brig. G.S. Malhi, Pres ident, Ambala Cantonment  
 
47. Dr. Anil Aggarwal, Distri ct Magistrate, New Delhi 
 
48. Shri Prabhakar Deshmukh, District Collector, Pune. 
 
49. Shri G. Venkataramani, General Secr etary, Indian Defence Estate Service 
Association 
 
 

 115
 
MINUTES OF THE FIFTH SITTING OF  THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
DEFENCE (2004-05) 
 
 The Committee sat on Wednesday, the 15 th September 2004 from 1100 hrs. to 
1230 hrs. in Committee Room `D’, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
 
PRESENT 
  
 Shri Balasaheb Vikhe Patil - Chairman 
 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
  
2. Shri Iliyas Azmi 
3. Shri S. Bangarappa 
4. Shri Suresh Chandel 
5. Shri Thupstan Chhewang 
6. Smt. Sangeeta Kumari Singh Deo 
7. Shri Bhupinder Singh Hooda 
8. Shri Suresh Kalmadi 
9. Dr. K.S. Manoj 
10. Shri Raghuraj Singh Shakya 
11. Shri Ganesh Prasad Singh 
12. Shri Balashowry Vallabhneni 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
13. Gen. (Retd.) S hankar Roy Chowdhury 
14. Shri T.T.V. Dhinakaran 
15. Smt. N.P. Durga 
16. Shri Pramod Mahajan 
17. Shri Anand Sharma 
18.     Shri Lalit Suri 
  
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri John Joseph  - Additional Secretary 
2. Shri Anand B. Kulkarni - Joint Secretary  
3. Shri P.K. Bhandari  - Director 
4. Smt. Anita Jain  - Under Secretary 
 
 
 
 

 116
 
WITNESSES OF MINISTRY OF DEFENCE 
 
1. Shri Ajai Vikram Singh, Defence Secretary 
2. Shri S.K. Sharma, Joint Secretary (ESW) 
3. Lt. Gen.   V.G. Patankar, QMG, Army Hqrs. 
4. Maj. Gen. N.B. Singh, ADG LWE, Army Hqrs. 
5. Dr. (Smt.) Veena Maitra, DGDE 
6. Shri G. Venkataramani, Addl. DG, Defence Estates 
7. Rear Adm. Nirmal Varm a, ACNS (P&P), Naval Hqrs. 
8. Air Cmde. P.N. Saxena, Principal Director, Air Hqrs. 
9. Shri Anjani Kumar, Dir (W) 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed t he members to the Fifth sitting of the 
Committee.  The Hon’ble Chairman t hen informed the Members that he has 
constituted 3 Sub-Committees for in depth examination of subjects and nominated 
Shri Churchill Alemao, M.P. as Conveno r for the Sub-Committee-I, Shri Anand 
Sharma, M.P. as Convenor for Sub-Commi ttee-II and Shri S. Bangarappa, M.P. as 
Convenor for Sub-Committee-III.   
 
 3. The Committee then discussed the ma tter of tour to be undertaken by the 
Committee and decided to undertake a study  tour to visit forward areas and 
cantonments of Jammu, Leh and Srinagar in  the last week of October 2004 and 
second study tour to the Cantonments and other defence establishments located at 
Mumbai, Pune, Ahmednagar, Karw ar and Bangalore after the winter session of the 
Parliament.    
 
4. Thereafter, the Committee had a briefing by  the representatives of Ministry of 
Defence on `The Cantonments Bill, 2003’.    
 
5. The Chairman welcomed the Defence Secretary and his colleagues to the 
sitting of the Committee and invited their att ention to the Directions 55 and 58 of the 
Directions by the Speaker, Lok Sabha. 
 
6. The Representatives of the Ministry  of Defence, thereafter, briefed the 
Committee on The Cantonments Bill, 2003. Some members of the Committee put 
forth certain queries on the Bill to which the Secretary responded.   However, on 
Management of Defence Lands, Defence Secretar y stated that few provisions of the 
Bill need to be re-drafted as the users,  the three Defence Services were not 
consulted before the final draft of the Bill.  He also sought directions of the Committee 
if there should be separate Acts, one for Cantonments and other for managing the 
remaining part of the defence land. 
 
7. Many Members were of the view t hat vacant position of non-officials in 
Cantonment Boards be filled as per present provisions. 
 

 117
The witnesses then withdrew 
 
8. Some Members were of the view t hat the issue of management of Defence 
Lands could be discussed separately as  the management of Cantonment Board 
properties and the defence lands outside the Cantonments is different from each 
other in a sense that the former is cover ed under the existing Bill whereas there is no 
such legislation for the latter. 
 
9. The Committee then discussed the further action to be taken on the 
`Cantonments Bill’ given the Ministry’s own doubt  on the form of the Bill.  After some 
deliberations, the Committee dec ided to proceed with the exam ination of the Bill as 
such, and recommend suitable amendments to t he Bill so that it may be incorporated 
in the fresh bill that may be introduced in the House.  
 
10. A verbatim record of  the proceedings was kept. 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 

 118
  
MINUTES OF THE SIXTH SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
DEFENCE (2004-2005) 
 
 
 The Committee sat on Friday, the 8 th October 2004 from 1600 hrs. to 1745 hrs. 
in Committee Room `E’, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
 
PRESENT 
  
 Shri Bhupinder Singh H ooda -  In the Chair 
 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
  
2. Shri Iliyas Azmi 
3. Shri A.V. Bellarmin 
4. Shri S. Bangarappa 
5. Shri Ramesh Jigajinagi 
6. Dr. K.S. Manoj 
7. Shri Raghuraj Singh Shakya 
8. Shri Ganesh Prasad Singh 
9. Shri Balashowry Vallabhaneni 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
10. Shri R.K. Anand 
11. Gen. (Retd.) Shankar Roy Chowdhury 
12. Shri T.T.V. Dhinakaran 
13. Smt. N.P. Durga 
14. Shri Janardhan Dwivedi 
  
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri P.K. Bhandari  - Director 
2. Smt. Anita Jain  - Under Secretary 
 
WITNESSES OF THE MINISTRY OF DEFENCE 
 
1. Shri Ajai Vikram Singh, Defence Secretary 
2. Shri Ranjit Issar, Additional Secretary 
3. Shri S.K. Sharma, Joint Secretary (ESW) 
4. Lt. Gen. V.G. Patankar, QMG, Army Hqrs. 
5. Dr. (Smt.) Veena Maitra, DGDE 
6. Shri G. Venkataramani, Addl. DG, Defence Estates 
7. Rear Adm. Nirmal Varm a, ACNS (P&P), Naval Hqrs. 

 119
8. Air Cmde. G.R. Prasad, Principal Director, Air Hqrs. 
 
2. In the absence of Hon’ble Chairm an, Standing Committee on Defence, the 
Committee chose Shri Bhupin der Singh Hooda, M.P. to act as Chairman for the 
sitting under Rule 258 (3) of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in Lok 
Sabha. 
 
3. The Hon’ble Chairman welcomed the representatives of the Ministry of 
Defence to the sitting of the Committee. 
 
4. The representatives of the Ministry  then further briefed the Committee on `The 
Cantonments Bill, 2003’.  The Committee w anted to be apprised of the consultations 
of the Ministry with three Defence Chiefs on the Bill.  The Committee also sought 
clarifications on inclusion of Chapter-15 on Management of defence lands outside the 
Cantonments in the Cantonmen t Bill and whether it coul d be dealt with separately 
either by formulating a new Bill or by wo rking out an Administrative framework.  The 
representatives of the Ministry also answered other queries of the Members.  The 
Committee felt that these two are separ ate issues and need to have two separate 
bills. 
         
             The Witnesses then withdrew 
 
5. A verbatim record of  the proceedings was kept. 
 
    The Committee then adjourned.  
 
 
 

 120
 
 
MINUTES OF THE SEVENTH SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
DEFENCE (2004-05) 
 
 The Committee sat on Monday, the 22 nd November 2004 fr om 1500 hrs. to 
1630 hrs. in Committee Room `G-074’, Parliament Library Building, New Delhi. 
 
PRESENT 
  
 Shri Balasaheb Vikhe Patil - Chairman 
 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
  
2. Shri Churchill Alemao 
3. Shri Iliyas Azmi 
4. Shri Thupstan Chhewang  
5. Shri Bhupinder Singh Hooda 
6. Shri Suresh Kalmadi 
7. Shri Raghuraj Singh Shakya 
8. Shri Ganesh Prasad Singh 
9. Shri Balashowry Vallabhaneni 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
10. Shri R.K. Anand 
11. Shri T.T.V. Dhinakaran 
12. Shri Janardan Dwivedi 
13. Shri Anand Sharma 
14. Shri Lalit Suri 
  
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri John Joseph  - Additional Secretary 
2. Shri P.K. Bhandari  - Director 
3. Smt. Anita Jain  - Under Secretary 
 
WITNESSES   
 
1. Smt. Kiran Choudhary, Presi dent, All India Cantonments Board 
Employees Federation 
 
2. Shri O.N. Langroo, General Secr etary, All India Cantonments Board 
Employees Federation 

 121
 
3. Shri Satish Kumar,  Joint Secr etary, All India Cantonments Board 
Employees Federation 
 
4. Shri P.K. Kumaran, Former Di rector General, Defence Estates  
           
 
2. At the outset, the Hon’ble Chairman welcomed the Members of the Committee 
and invited their observations/suggestions per taining to the problems perceived by 
the Members during the recently conclud ed study visit of the Committee to the 
forward/cantonment areas located in Jammu, Leh and Srinagar from 24 to 31 
October 2004. 
 
3. The Chairman then invited the representat ives of All India Cantonment Board 
Employees Federation to present their views and suggestions  on `The Cantonments 
Bill, 2003’. The represent atives proposed inter-alia  amendments to the provisions 
under Chapter III Page 8 and 9, pertaining to  MPs and MLAs as a Special Invitee; 
Section 31, pertaining to reservation of  wards for SC/ST Women on encroachment 
problems; Section 46, notifying civil areas declaring common cadre for the officers of 
Cantonment Board, control of Class IV em ployees by the Cantonment Boards, which 
were considered  by the Committee.  T he Members then put forward certain queries 
arising out of their suggestions and variou s other aspects of the Cantonments Bill, 
2003 and Defence land which were answered by the representatives.    
 
The Witnesses then withdrew. 
 
4. The Chairman then invited the former Director General (Defence Estates) to 
put his suggestions before the Committee about the aforesaid Bill. The witness 
proposed suggestions on some provisions viz. reservation issue, property tax Clause 
238(4) which deal with power of the Board to  refuse to sanction the erection or re-
erection of any building; encroachment removal; Section 24(2) pertaining to salary of 
Executive Officers of the Cantonment Board, Section 51(a), Clause III on exemption 
of property tax, etc.. Certain queries relevant to the suggestions and other crucial 
issues were then made by the members which were answered by the witness.   
 
The Witness then withdrew. 
 
5. A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept.  
 
 
The Committee then adjourned 
 

 122
MINUTES OF THE TENTH SITTING OF  THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
DEFENCE (2004-2005) ON EVIDENCE BY NON-OFFICIAL WITNESSES ON `THE 
CANTONMENTS BILL, 2003’ 
 
 
 The Committee sat on Tuesday, the 11 th January, 2005 from 1500 hrs. to 1630  
hrs. in Committee No. `B’,  Parliament House Annexe,  New Delhi. 
 
PRESENT 
 
Shri Balasaheb Vikhe Patil-     Chairman 
 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri Churchill Alemao 
3. Shri Iliyas Azmi 
4. Shri A.V. Bellarmin 
5. Shri Ramesh Jigajinagi 
6. Shri Suresh Kalmadi 
7. Dr. C. Krishnan 
8. Shri S.D. Mandlik 
9. Dr. K.S. Manoj 
10. Shri Raghuraj Singh Shakya 
11. Shri Mahadeorao Shivankar 
12. Shri Balashowry Vallabhaneni 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
13. Shri R.K. Anand 
14. Smt. N.P. Durga 
15.  Shri Janardan Dwivedi 
16. Shri Pramod Mahajan 
17. Shri Anand Sharma 
18. Shri Lalit Suri 
 
 
 
SECRETARIAT 
  
  1. Shri  Anand B. Kulkarni  - Joint Secretary 
2. Shri P.k. Bhandari   -  Director 
3. Smt. Anita Jain   - Under Secretary 
 

 123
 
 
 WITNESSES 
 
 
1. Dr. B.M.Masani, President, Resi dents of Mhow (ROM) Cantonment, 
M.P.  
 
2. Shri Z. Cowasji, Hon. Secy., Re sidents of Mhow (ROM) Cantonment, 
M.P. 
 
3. Ms. Aruna Rodrigues,  
 
4. Shri Krishan Murti, Ex-Member, Cant onment Board, Kasauli, Himachal 
Pradesh. 
 
2. At the outset, the Hon’ble Chairman welcomed Dr. B.M. Masani, President, 
Residents of Mhow (ROM), M.P. and his colleagues to present their views and 
suggestions on the ‘Cantonment Bill, 2003’.  They proposed the following  
amendments / suggestions to the provisions of various Sections of the Bill like :- 
 
(a) The witness submitted that Cant onment lands are State lands and not 
Central territories as stated in Objects & Reasons of the Bill.  Therefore, 
State Municipal Laws  should be made applicabl e in the case of 
Cantonments.  
  
(b) Pertaining to Chapter 15 i.e.  Management of Defence Land, they 
suggested that it should be deleted from the Bi ll or should be suitably 
modified.   
 
(c) They suggested that there should be no power to vary the Cantonment 
Board as provided in Claus e 13 of the Bill.  T hey had also objected to 
the word ‘satisfied’ mentioned in the Clause .  
  
(d) In Clause 12 (3)(b) and 12 (4)(b) t he level of Additional District 
Magistrate should be lowered to Sub-Divisional Magistrate.    
 
(e) As regards Clause 56 and 58, they  suggested that once the Board has 
taken a decision, the President shall not overturn it.   
 
(f) Clause 73 which pertains to calc ulation of Annual Rateable Value of 
land is arbitrary.  In calculati on of annual rateable value in a 
Cantonment, the norms of Municipal Act should follow.   
 
(g) Clause 237 and 238 with regard to  classification of lands under the 
Cantonment Bill.  All ci vil held lands should be classified as Class – C 

 124
lands.  It should come under the administration of Cantonment Board 
and not Class – B-3 lands. 
 
(h) Application of Environment Pr otection Act, Forest Act in the 
Cantonment and military lands.  The Members then sought some 
queries arising out of the evidenc e and various other aspects of 
Cantonment Bill, 2003 which were answered by the witnesses.   
 
 The witness then withdrew. 
 
3. The Chairman then invited Shri Krishan Murti, Ex-Member, Cantonment 
Board, Kasauli, Himachal Pradesh to put forth his suggestions before the Committee 
about the aforesaid Bill.  The witness proposed suggestions on some important 
issues like power to vary t he Board under Clause 13, for prov iding extra facilities to 
elected members besides the salaries under Section 23, preparation of new 
Assessment List under Clause 80 of the Bill, Notice of transfer under Clause 81, 
Notice of new buildings under Clause 179 etc.  The Members then sought certain 
clarifications relevant to the suggestions made which were answered by the witness.  
 
  The witness then withdrew. 
 
4. A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept.   
 
   The Committee then adjourned 

 125
 
 
MINUTES OF THE ELEVENTH SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
DEFENCE (2004-2005) ON EVIDENCE BY NON-OFFICIAL WITNESSES ON `THE 
CANTONMENTS BILL, 2003’ 
 
 
 The Committee sat on Tuesday, the 12 th January, 2005 from 1500 hrs. to 1700  
hrs. in Committee No. `B’,  Parliament House Annexe,  New Delhi. 
 
PRESENT 
 
Shri Balasaheb Vikhe Patil-     Chairman 
 
MEMBERS 
            LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri Churchill Alemao 
3. Shri Iliyas Azmi 
4. Shri A.V. Bellarmin 
5. Shri S. Bangarappa  
6. Shri Suresh Chandel 
7. Dr. C. Krishnan 
8. Shri S.D. Mandlik 
9. Shri Mahadeorao Shivankar 
10. Shri Balashowry Vallabhaneni 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
11. Shri R.K. Anand 
12. Dr. Farooq Abdullah 
13. Gen. (Retd.) S hankar Roy Chowdhury  
14. Smt. N.P. Durga 
15. Shri Janardan Dwivedi 
16. Shri Anand Sharma 
17. Shri Lalit Suri 
 
SECRETARIAT 
  
  1. Shri  Anand B. Kulkarni  - Joint Secretary 
2. Shri P.K. Bhandari   -  Director 
3. Smt. Anita Jain   - Under Secretary 
 

 126
 
 
WITNESSES 
 
1. Shri Bharat Singh Yadav, Vice President, Babina Cantonment, Jhansi, 
Uttar Pradesh. 
 
2. Shri Om Prakash Aggarwal, Ex -Vice President, Babina Cantonment, 
Jhansi, Uttar Pradesh 
 
3. Shri Netraprakash K. Bhog, Advocate, Pune. 
 
 
2. At the outset, the Hon’ble Chairman welcomed Shri Bharat Singh Yadav, Vice 
President, Babina Cantonment, Jhansi, Utta r Pradesh and his colleagues to present 
their views and suggestions on the ‘Cantonment Bill, 2003’.  They proposed following  
amendments / suggestions to the provisions of various Sections of the Bill like :- 
 
(a) Need for reconsideration of classi fication of Class I Cantonment on the 
basis of population. 
 
(b) Three Military Officers in a Cantonment Board should not be fixed. 
 
(c) Under Section 20(3), Vice President should be directly elected.  Vice 
President should be one out of se ven elected members in Class I 
Cantonment. 
 
(d) Under Clause 20(3), time frame may be fixed for bringing no confidence 
against Vice President.  
 
(e) CEO, should not be Member of the Board.  He should be only an 
executive to carry out instructions of the Board.  
 
(f) Local MLA/MP to be Member of the Board. 
 
(g) All special powers for imposing ta xes etc. should be given to Board 
instead of CEO. 
 
(h) The service of the employee  of Cantonment Board should be 
centralized and may be made transferable.  
 
(i) Appointment to the post of non-s upervisory post should be done by the 
Board, or by a Special Committee,  with the participation of local 
MLA/MPs not by CEO.  
 
(j) The rules should be relaxed for construction in civil area. 

 127
 
(k) Civil Area should be notified in  Babina and Gwaliar Cantonment.  
 
 The witness then withdrew. 
 
3. The Chairman then invited Shri Netraprakash K. Bhog, Advocate, Pune, 
Maharashtra to put forth his suggestions  before the Committee about the aforesaid 
Bill.  The witness proposed suggestions on the following important issues like :- 
 
(a) Provision in Section 9 may be deleted. 
 
(b) Clause 28(2) regarding disqualificat ion of Board Members.  Similar 
provisions as provided in BPMC Act should be applied.    
 
(c) Clause 12(1) pertaining to increas e in the ward. T here is no need to 
increase the number of wards. 
 
(d) The original 7 Members in the Cantonment Board should be retained.  
 
(e) There should be a provision in the Bill  to make the District Magistrate or 
his representative compulsory to attend the meeting of Cantonment 
Board.  
 
(f) Every vacancy in the elected membership thereof shall be notified in the 
official Gazette and election to that post should be held immediately and 
once a person is nominated he should be allowed to participate. 
 
(g) Under Clause 13, in case of va ried Board, with regard to one nominated 
Member is from the Army and one fr om the civil resident should be 
considered as Member in the varied Board. 
 
(h) Clause 21 – If the Member misc onduct continues for 3 meetings, the 
President should recommend disqualification of Member.  
 
(i) CEO should not be a Member Secretary. 
 
(j) Section 179 – the powers to sancti on the erection or re-erection of any 
building should be vested with Executiv e Officer on behalf of the Board.  
The Board should have the power to revo ke the sanction in case if it is 
found to be illegal. 
 
(k) There should not be sudden hike  in the licence fee and the public 
should be given due notice.  Re sidents should be exempted from 
payment of parking fee. 
 

 128
(l) In case of illegal construction of building, the Bo ard should have the 
power to withhold electricity, water supply and drainage.   
 
(m) Clause 114 regarding compounding of taxes by CEO should be deleted. 
 
(n) In Clause 238, a proviso should be provided that in no circumstances, 
deemed sanctions shall authorise any powerful person to erect or re-
erect any building. 
 
(o) Commercial complexes should not be allowed to come up in 
Cantonment.  
 
(p) The unused land should be preserved for agriculture or horticulture and 
for some other purposes for beautification and land  
 
(q) There should be a provision in t he Bill for punishment for an erring 
officer. 
The witness then withdrew. 
 
4. A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept.   
 
The Committee then adjourned 
 

 129
 
MINUTES OF THE TWELFTH SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
DEFENCE (2004-2005) ON EVIDENCE BY NON-OFFICIAL WITNESSES ON `THE 
CANTONMENTS BILL, 2003’ 
 
 The Committee sat on Monday, the 24 th January, 2005 from 1100 hrs. to 1630  
hrs. in Committee Room  `C’,  Parliament House Annexe,  New Delhi. 
 
PRESENT 
 
Shri Balasaheb Vikhe Patil -     Chairman 
 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri Churchill Alemao 
3. Shri Iliyas Azmi 
4. Shri A.V. Bellarmin 
5. Shri Ramesh Jigajinagi 
6. Shri Suresh Kalmadi 
7. Dr. C. Krishnan 
8. Shri S.D. Mandlik 
9. Dr. K.S. Manoj 
10. Shri Raghuraj Singh Shakya 
11. Shri Mahadeorao Shivankar 
12. Shri Balashowry Vallabhaneni 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
13. Shri R.K. Anand 
14. Smt. N.P. Durga 
15.  Shri Janardan Dwivedi 
16. Shri Pramod Mahajan 
17. Shri Anand Sharma 
18. Shri Lalit Suri 
 
SECRETARIAT 
  
  1. Shri  Anand B. Kulkarni  - Joint Secretary 
2. Shri P.K. Bhandari   -  Director 
3. Smt. Anita Jain   - Under Secretary 
 
 
WITNESSES 
 
 

 130
1. Shri S.K. Jain, Advocate, Pune. 
 
2. Shri R. Srinivashan, Advocate, Supreme Court, New Delhi. 
 
Meerut Cantonment 
 
3. Shri P.R.H. Ansari, President, Cantonment  Citizens Welfare Association (Regd.), 
Meerut Cantonment. 
 
Ambala Cantonment 
 
4. Shri Raj Kumar Agarwal, Presiden t, Bunglow Owner’s Association, Ambala 
Cantonment. 
 
5. Shri S.K. Sood, Bunglow Owner’s  Association,  Ambala Cantonment. 
 
6. Shri S.K. Jain, Bunglow Owner’s Association,  Ambala Cantonment. 
 
7. Shri Pradeep Kumar Jain, Bunglow Ow ner’s Association,  Ambala Cantonment. 
 
8. Col. (Retd.) Gurdip Singh, Bunglow Owner’s Association, Ambala Cantonment. 
 
Jallandhar Cantonment & Ferozepur Cantonment 
 
9. Brig. K.S. Dhillon (Retd.), President, Bungalows Owners, Welfare Association, 
Jallandhar Cantonment. 
 
10. Shri Narinder Sayal, Bungalows Owners, Welfare Association, Jallandhar 
Cantonment. 
 
11. Shri Om Prakash Gupta, Ferozepur Cantonment Bungalow Owners Association. 
 
12. Shri Sumeet Gupta, Ferozepur Cantonment Bungalow Owners Association. 
 
Bombay Environmental Action Group 
 
13. Shri Shyam H.K. Chainan i,  Honorary Secretary, Bo mbay Environmental Action 
Group 
 
14. Maj. Gen. (Retd.) L.K. Gupta  
 
Sagar Cantonment 
 
15. Dr. Pramod Chokse, Ex-Member, Sagar Cantt., Sagar, M.P. 
 
16. Shri Sunil Chokse, Sagar Cantt., Sagar, M.P. 

 131
 
2. At the outset, the Hon’bl e Chairman welcomed Shri S.K. Jain, Advocate to put 
forth his suggestions on `The Cantonments Bill, 2003’.  The witness suggested the 
following points : 
 
(i) Section 56(1) of the Cantonm ents Bill, there should be adequate 
provisions coupled with the cha nge in the Cantonment Account Code 
so that each and every proposal is not  required to be sent to the higher 
authorities once it is passed by the Cantonment Board and there should 
be stipulated time period in the Bill, by which the project should get 
sanctioned.   
 
(ii) The Cantonments that are financially self-sufficient and want to execute 
a project, then the decision of the Cantonment Board should be final. 
 
(iii) There should be proper examin ation and audit of de fence land.  Land 
should be allotted to Defence forces where there is actual requirement 
of defence land.  Howeve r, the lands should not  be allowed to remain 
vacant for hundreds of years.  
 
(iv) The number of elected members as  provided in the present Bill, is 
highly inadequate.   Cantonment Board having a population of above 
50,000 should have a minimum of 15 elected members.  The concerned 
MP or MLA of that area should be made a permanent invitee. 
 
(v) Action should be taken immediat ely to remove slums from the 
Cantonment area and they should be rehabilitated in consultation with 
the local authorities and they should not be allowed to continue in this 
sensitive area. 
 
(vi) There should be provisions for slum  improvements in the Bill at par with 
the Slum Improvement Act in other Municipality areas.  
 
(vii) There is a need for change in the Cantonment Land Administration 
Rules.   
 
(vii) CEO should be a member of the Board as provided in the Cantonment 
Bill, 2003. 
 
The witness then withdrew. 
 
3. The Chairman then invited Shri R. Sr inivashan, Advocate to put forth his 
suggestions before the Committee about the af oresaid Bill. The witness gave some 
suggestions based on Cantonment Act, 1924.   Therefore, the Committee decided 
that he may furnish his suggestions in writing based on Cantonments Bill, 2003. 
 

 132
The witness then withdrew. 
 
4. The Chairman then invited Shri P.R.H.  Ansari, President, Cantonment Citizens 
Welfare Association (Regd.), Meerut Cant onment to put forth his suggestions before 
the Committee about the aforesaid Bill.    The witness suggested the following points 
: 
  
(i) Section 302 & 345 - The order of a judicial authority is being made 
subject to  appeal to the District Magist rate which is an executive authority.  
This authority should vest in a District Judge instead of a District Magistrate. 
 
(ii) Section 348 - which pertains to ap peal from an order made by the Board 
is vague.  It should be specified in the pr ovision of the Bill as to what orders 
are passed and under what section. 
 
(iii) 12(3) CEO should not be a me mber of the Cantonment Board. 
 
(iv) The provision of casting vote by GOC-in-C may go against democracy. 
 
(v) In Section 16 – outgoing member should be specified. 
 
(vi) Section 68 – Instead of evaluati ng present market value by the authority 
themselves, the private Government recognised evaluator should be allowed 
and depreciation allowance should be provided. 
 
(vii) Section 249(3)(b) - An appellate authority should be there to appeal against 
the order of sealing under section 249. 
 
(viii) Section 76 – There should be a separ ate committee for valuation, which is 
proposed to be given to CEO. 
 
(ix) Section 79 – The power to remove name etc. which is exclusively                     
being given to CEO, should be vested in a Committee. 
 
(x) Section 81, Sub-Section (6) - T here should be a time limit for the 
office to complete mutation procedure. 
 
(xi) Section 306 - There should be a provision for compensation and rented 
property should not be included in the definition of defence land. 
  
The witness then withdrew. 
 
5. The Chairman then invited Shri S.K. Sood, President and other Members of 
Bungalow Owner’s Associati on, Ambala to put forth their suggestions before the 
Committee about the aforesaid Bill. The witnesses suggested the following points : 
  

 133
(i) Election of Cantonment Board – El ected Members should be more than the 
nominated members.    
 
(ii) Defence personnel should not be the judge of its own ca use, the defence 
personnel panel should be headed by the District Magistrate. 
 
(iii) Section 247 – Imposition of fine of Rs.50,000/- for illegal construction is too 
heavy. 
 
(iv) Section 309 – Audit Committee shoul d consist of only elected Members. 
 
(v) Section 305 – As there are different categories of defence l and, therefore, all 
these lands may be clearly and unambigu ously defined as classified in the 
proposed Cantonment Bill.   Approval for minor repairing or alterations of the 
structure of the house is generally wi thheld on the ground that ownership, 
mutation or NOC is not there. 
(vi) The plan for minor repairs or alte rations should be sanctioned in a time bound 
manner.  If the plan is not sanctioned with in a specified perio d, then it should 
be taken as deemed to have been sanctioned. 
 
(vii) There should be an index of records and also the right to inspect by the owner.  
 
(viii) Section 44 – All the decisions of t he Cantonment Board affecting  Bungalow 
Owners’ Association should be put on the Notice Board.   
 
(ix) Under Section 67 – It has been made compulsory for the Board to levy certain    
taxes.  In this provision, the word `may’ be put in the place of `shall’. 
 
(x) Section 191 (2) – Reasonable quantit y of water should be supplied in 
proportion to water tax paid. 
 
(xi) Procedures for granting sanction and approval of the plans to be made easier 
and simplified and all the powers giv en to CEO may be entrusted to some 
Board/body. 
 
(xii) Clause 308(2) - DEO should permit inspection of the records and he should 
supply a copy of the same on application and payment of prescribed fees. 
 
(xiii) Clause 244 – A stringent  punishment is sought to be given for violation of the 
change of land use.  So, this change of use should be confined to obnoxious 
trade and not to simple change of use. 
 
(xiv) Change of property use from residentia l to commercial has to be sanctioned 
by the Board.  There must be some specific provision for sanction of change of 
use.  It should either be sanctioned or  treated as unauthorised.  This definition 
should be explicitly mentioned in the Act. 

 134
 
(xv) Section 73 (8) Section 110 of 1924 Act may be incorporated in the existing Bill. 
 
Witness then withdrew. 
 
 
6. The Chairman then invited Brig. (Ret d.) K.S. Dhillon, President, Bungalow 
Owners’ Association, Jall andhar Cantonment, Shri Om Prakash Gupta of Ferozepur 
Bungalow Owners’ Association, Ferozepur  Cantonment and other Members to put 
forth their suggestions before the Committee about the aforesaid Bi ll. The witnesses 
suggested the following points : 
 
(i) Chapter V – Taxes and F ees – Section 66(I) and entir e Section 67 should be 
deleted because Section 66(2) adequately cover all the taxes required for 
Cantonment Board to function as a Municipality.  Otherwise it will amount to 
double taxation.   
 
(ii) Section 68 – Sectio n 366-367 empowers the Canton ment Board to impose a 
number of taxes i.e. trade, profession and employment.   Section 68 which has 
again given vide powers to the Board to  impose taxes between 10% to 30%.  
The taxes should not be in any case more than 10%.  
 
 
(iii) Section 244 – The penalty proposed to be imposed by the Cantonment Board 
for illegal construction building i.e. Rs.10,000/- per day is an excessive 
amount. Therefore, this provision should be repealed altogether.  The 
Cantonment Board while taking decisions regarding erection or re-erection of 
building should conform with the laws fo llowed by the Municipal Corporation of 
the adjoining areas.  
 
(iv) Section 247 – empowers the Cantonment Board to order imprisonment upto 6 
months in connection with illegal erection.  This power is vested in the 
Executive Officer.  This is a draconian law. 
 
(v) Section 345-348 -  Under Section 345 – A resident can file and appeal against 
the order of the Cantonm ent Board.  Under Se ction 348 – The appellate 
authority has been given di scretion either to stay  or not to stay the 
proceedings.  But the authority may stay or may not stay the proceedings and 
till the appeal under section 345 is pending, no court shall entertain the appeal.  
So in case the Appellate Authority re fuse to grant stay the building stands 
demolished.  Therefore, specific time  should be mentioned in the provision to 
stay demolition and until the disposal  of the appeal, action should not be 
taken. 
 
(vi) Section 361 and 362 on admissibility of documents for entry as evidence – 
The Act of 1861 pertaining to law of limitation is there.  It specifically 

 135
prescribed how each and every document is to be proved in the Court of Law.   
Therefore, there is no need of bringing the law of li mitation again under these 
two sections.  Whatever document pr epared by the Board can not be treated 
as authentic because the register is not maintained by the Board right from the 
beginning and therefore it does not have any evidence value.  
 
(vii) Chapter XV - Management of Defence Land – The existing Act is sufficient to 
cover the land situated with in the C antonments.  There should be a separate 
Act for management of Defence lands situated outside the Cantonments.   
 
(viii) The discretionary power vested in the Executive Officer should be diluted and 
more powers should be given to democratic representative on the Board. 
 
(ix) Section 12 – A nominated member from the civil population of the Cantonment 
should be a member of the Cantonment Board. 
 
(x) Section 305 & 306 pertaining to classifi cation of lands – the classification of 
land owned by defence authorities, cent ral government land,  civilian lands 
should be distinctly cat egorised and clarified so that  no loopholes is left and 
the bungalow owners lands illegally occupied by the defence authorities 
should be given back to them. 
 
(xi) Local M.P. and MLA shoul d be given right to vote. 
 
Witness then withdrew. 
 
7. The Chairman then invited Shri Shya m H.K. Chainani, Ho norary Secretary, 
Bombay Environmental Action Group to put forth his suggestions before the 
Committee about the aforesaid Bill. The witness suggested the following points : 
  
(i) Clause 233 –  There is no specific provision for heritage buildings in the 
Cantonment Bill.  The specific provision should be included in the clause. 
 
(ii) Specific provision shou ld be there for design control in heritage buildings like 
NDA, Southern Command. 
 
(iii) Cantonment Act should specify a def inition of development and not only of 
construction. 
 
(iv) According to Supreme Court judgement  on Right to know, all building plans 
should be made available to people for exam ination except in the interest of 
military security. 
 
(v) Section 233 for a Master Plan – This Section seeks to have little control and 
someone may go to Court against it.  Ther efore, this section should be more 
comprehensive. 

 136
 
(vi) There should a provision of a Ma ster Plan, so that when the plan in 
Cantonment is sanctioned, it should not be  contrary to the Master Plan under 
Section 238 (7). 
 
(vii) Section 235 which tal ks of control on erecting and re-erecting a building should 
state control on development. 
 
(viii) Composition of Cantonm ent Board – the existing stat us that is as per the 
Cantonment Act, 1924 should be there del eting the District Magistrate 
because there must be an official parity or majority. 
 
(ix) CEO should not be Member of the Board. 
 
(ix) There should be a parity betw een the Military members and members 
nominated by the GOC-in-C. 
 
(xi) The title Cantonment Executive Offi cer should be used in place of Chief 
 Executive Officer. 
 
(xii) Section 238(6) All the sanction for construction should not be contrary to  the 
 Master Plan and the Building bye-laws. 
 
(xiii) The power to sanction the bye-laws should be vested with GOC-in-C, not  with 
Government of India. 
 
(xiv) 181(4) dealing with lease lands   - Ol d grant land should remain in the control 
of the present administration and not that of Municipality. 
 
(ix) Local MP/MLA should not be the Member of the Board. 
 
(xiv) Section 13 Varied Board – status quo may be maintained. 
 
8. The Chairman then invited Dr. Pram od Chokse, Ex-Member, Sagar Cantt., 
Sagar, M.P. to put forth his suggestions  before the Committee about the aforesaid 
Bill. The witness suggested the following points : 
 
(i) Section 19(1)- The President of the Board should be elected by the 
voters of the Cantonment area.  If not possible, the Vice President should be 
elected by the voters of Cantonment Area. 
 
(ii) Section 80-   The assessment of tax should be done through civil area 
Committee instead of CEO.  
 
(iii) Section 127(2)- This section should be amended as the penalty is too 
high. 

 137
 
(iv) Section 305-309- There should be  a provision under these sections for 
renewal of lease for farmers which was stopped since 1974 and regulation, 
control and management of defence land  should lie with the Cantonment 
Board instead of Defence Estate Officer.  
  
Witness then withdrew. 
 
9. A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept.   
 
The Committee then adjourned. 

 138
 
MINUTES OF THE SIXTEE NTH SITTING OF  THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
DEFENCE (2004-2005) ON EVIDENCE BY NON-OFFICIAL WITNESSES ON `THE 
CANTONMENTS BILL, 2003’ 
 
 The Committee sat on Tuesday, the 15 th  February, 2005 from 1530 hrs. to 
1700  hrs. in Committee Room  `G-074’,  Parliament Library Building,  New Delhi. 
 
PRESENT 
 
Shri Balasaheb Vikhe Patil -     Chairman 
 
 MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri Iliyas Azmi 
3. Shri Ramesh Jigajinagi 
4. Dr. C. Krishnan 
5. Dr. K.S. Manoj 
6. Shri Raghuraj Singh Shakya 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
  7. Gen. (Retd.) Shankar Roy Chowdhury 
  
SECRETARIAT 
    
1. Shri P.K. Bhandari   -  Director 
2. Smt. Anita Jain   - Under Secretary 
 
 WITNESSES 
 
 
St. Thomas Mount-cum-Pallavaram Cantonment, Chennai 
 
1. Denziel Sequiera 
2. Shri J. Bopalan 
3. Shri R.G. Jaya Kumar 
 
Secunderabad Cantonment 
 
4. Shri Anil Kumar Chhabra   
5. Rajender Kumar Yadav 
 
 
 

 139
 
Ahmednagar Cantonment 
 
6. Shri Tukaram Gangadhar Gadakh, M. P. and others from  Maharashtra 
7. Shri Suresh Mehjani 
8. Shri Prakash D. Phulari 
  
 
 
2. At the outset, the Hon’ble Chairman welcomed Denziel Sequiera, Shri J. 
Bopalan and Shri R.G. Jaya Kumar of St. Thomas Mount-cum-Pallavaram 
Cantonment, Chennai to put forth their sug gestions on `The Cantonments Bill, 2003’.  
The witnesses suggested the following points : 
 
(i) Section 12(1) - Cantonments with  above 35,000 population should be 
classified as Class-I Cantonment.  
 
(ii) Local M.P. and MLA should not be members of Cantonment Board. 
 
(iii) Cantonment Board should be classified as `civil areas’. 
 
(iv) Section 239 – Order of stoppage of  building or works in Cantonment. 
The Cantonment Board should follow the rules of Municipality in the 
adjoining areas. 
 
(v) The problem of unauthorised constr uctions should be addressed in a 
proper manner. 
 
(vi) The State Government is ordering for elections within the cantonment 
on April 17.   Elections may be postponed in view of proposed in view of 
proposed new Act. 
 
(vii) The administrative instruction very clearly states that the CEO can order 
the stoppage of construction.  But boundary pillars with the cantonment 
plans are being sanctioned by the adjoining municipalities and no action 
is being taken because the boundary pill ars survey is not being done.  
Therefore, survey should be done at the earliest and budgetary 
provision should be made available for the same. 
 
(viii) St. Thomas Mount Cantonmen t has a population of 35,000-40,000.  
The encroachers are there for over 35 or 40 years but they have not 
been taxed.  They should be regularised or they may be taxed. 
 
(ix) Clause 272 – When liquor shops are auctioned, No Objection 
Certificates are obtained from t he local bodies and a percentage of 
auction is paid.  But in the Cantonm ent, NOC is not taken. Therefore, 

 140
NOC should be taken from the C antonment Board and percentage of 
auction amount should be paid. 
 
(x) Section 76(3) – Objection sha ll be invited and investigated and the 
person making them shall be allo wed an opportunity of being heard 
either in person or othe rwise and it should be done before the Standing 
Assessment Committee. 
 
(xi) So far as the Cantonment De velopment Fund is concerned, CEO 
should not collect money from the public.  
 
Witness then withdrew. 
 
3. The Committee then invited Shri Anil Kumar Chhabra and Rajender Kumar 
Yadav of Secunderabad Cantonment to put forth their suggestions.  They requested 
the Committee to make necessary changes in  the provisions of the Cantonments Bill 
so that they do not have to seek No Ob jection Certificate to have constructions on 
their own bungalow which is a freehold property.   The Committee opined that 
Parliamentary Committee can not consider indi vidual cases.   It has to make policy 
for the whole nation.  
 
Witness then withdrew. 
 
4. The Committee then invited Shri  Tukaram Gangadhar Gadakh, M.P. and 
others from Ahmednagar, Maharashtra to give suggestions on the Cantonments Bill, 
2003.  They suggested the following points : 
 
(i) The FSI should be increased to 1+ 1.  The Cantonmen t Board shall go 
as per the guidelines of nearby municipalities as far as FSI is 
concerned. 
 
(ii) Civil members should be given pow er to regularise small changes or 
constructions. 
 
(iii) Civil area should be separated from  military area and made into a new 
municipality. 
 
(iv) Rate of drinking water charged by  the Cantonment Board should be at 
par with the municipal rates. 
 
(v) In all Cantonments, all the civil areas should be provided with proper 
underground drainage system for better heath and hygiene. 
 
(vi) There should be provision to allow instalment of petrol pump to facilitate 
the inhabitants of Ahmednagar Cantonment.   
 

 141
(vii) In Ahmednagar Cantonment ther e is no provision for secondary 
education.  Therefore, the Cantonment Board should provide that 
facilities for the betterment of  the inhabitants for which State 
Government should pay 50% of the Grants. 
 
  (vi) There should be a transport system in Cantonment. 
 
5. The Members asked certain questions pertaining to the suggestions put forth 
by all the non-official experts and the witnesses then clarif ied those one after 
another.   
 
Witness then withdrew 
 
6. A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept.   
 
 
The Committee then adjourned 
 
….. 

 142
  
 
MINUTES OF THE SEVENTEENTH SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
DEFENCE (2004-05) 
 
The Committee sat on Wednesday, the 9 th March, 2005 from 1600 hrs. to 1700  hrs. 
in Committee Room No ‘139’, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
 
PRESENT 
  
 Gen. (Retd.) Shankar Ro y Chowdhury – In the Chair 
 
  
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
  
2. Shri A.V.Ballarmin 
3. Shri Thupstan Chhewang 
4. Shri S.D.Mandlik 
5. Dr. K.S.Manoj 
6. Shri Ganesh Prasad Singh 
7. Ms. Ingrid Mcleod 
 
 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
8. Smt. N.P. Durga  
9. Shri Lalit Suri 
 
  
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri P.K. Bhandari  - Director 
 
    
WITNESSES 
         
1. Brig. J.S. Kohli, Pr esident,  Pune Cantonment 
 
2. Brig. V.K. Vadhera, President,  Ahmednagar Cantonment. 
 
 
In the absence of Hon’ble Chairman,  Standing Committee on Defence, the 
Committee chose Gen. (Retd.) Shankar Roy Chowdhury, M.P. to act as Chairman for 

 143
the sitting under Rule 258 (3) of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in 
Lok Sabha. 
 
2. At the outset, the Hon’ble Chairman welcomed Brig. J.S.Kohli, President, Pune 
Cantonment Board and Brig. V.K.Vadher a, President, Ahmednagar Cantonment 
Board and invited them to put forth thei r suggestions on the Cantonment Bill, 2003.  
The witnesses had given the following suggestions:- 
 
(a) Chief Executive Officer should not be a Member of the Cantonment Board. 
(b) Nominated military Members should be ex-officio members of the Board. 
(c ) Reservation of Schedule Caste and Schedule Tribes should be there. 
(d) CEO should not be given special powers. 
(e) Clause 56 (4 &5) should be deleted. 
 
3. After hearing the above mentioned s uggestions the Committee then decided to 
first go through the written memoranda submi tted by the witnesses and invite them 
for oral evidence after 15 days. 
 
The witnesses then withdrew. 
 
4. A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept.  
 
         The Committee then adjourned. 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
           

 144
  
MINUTES OF THE EIGHTEENTH SITTING  OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
DEFENCE (2004-05) 
 
 The Committee sat on Thursday, the 10 th March 2005 from 1000 hrs. to 1050 
hrs. in Committee Room `B’, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
 
PRESENT 
    
 Gen. (Retd.) Shankar Ro y Chowdhury – In the Chair 
 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
  
2. Shri Churchill Alemao 
3. Shri Suresh Chandel 
4. Shri Thupstan Chhewang  
5. Smt. Sangeeta Kumari Singh Deo 
6. Dr. C. Krishnan 
7. Dr. K.S. Manoj  
8. Shri Ganesh Prasad Singh 
9. Shri Manvendra Singh 
10. Ms. Ingrid Mcleod 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
11. Smt. N.P. Durga  
12. Shri Janardan Dwivedi 
13. Shri Anand Sharma  
  
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri M. Rajagopalan Nair  - Additional Secretary 
2. Shri P.K. Bhandari  - Director 
3. Smt. Anita Jain  - Under Secretary 
 
WITNESSES   
 
1.   Brig. S.P. Rai, President, Delhi Cantonment 
2.  Brig. Deepak Sinha,  President, Agra Cantonment  
3.   Brig. G.S. Malhi, Pr esident, Ambala Cantonment  
4.  Dr. Anil Aggarwal, Distri ct Magistrate, New Delhi. 
 
 
 
 

 145
 In the absence of Hon’ble Chairm an, Standing Committee on Defence, the 
Committee chose Gen. (Retd.) Shankar Roy Chowdhury, M.P. to act as Chairman for 
the sitting under Rule 258 (3) of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in 
Lok Sabha. 
 
2. At the outset, the Hon’ble Chairman we lcomed Brig. S.P. Rai, President, Delhi 
Cantonment, Brig. Deepak Sinha, Presiden t, Agra Cantonment, Brig. G.S. Malhi, 
President, Ambala Cantonment, Dr. Anil Aggarwal, Distri ct Magistrate, New Delhi 
and requested them to putforth their s uggestions on `The C antonments Bill, 2003’ 
one after another.   The President of  Delhi Cantonment Board submitted 
memorandum on the Bill.  The three repres entatives then raised their problems being 
faced by them in administering the Cant onment Board and put forth the following 
suggestions : 
 
(i) Additional power to CEO would reduce the power of the President of 
Cantonment Board and the system of checks and balances prevailing in the 
Cantonment Board at present would also  suffer.  Therefore, CEO should not 
be given additional power and he should act as an Executive to carry out the 
legislative orders. 
 
(ii) It was expressed that grave lacuna to reduce one military member and in lieu 
of him, placing CEO as a  Member Secretary should be rectified. 
 
(iii) Undemoractic power of CEO to ove rride the decision of the Cantonment Board 
should be suitably modified. 
 
(iv) Concern was expressed regarding de lay in publishing notification in the 
gazette regarding the nomination of t he military member.  Further it was 
suggested that nomination to that effect  should be accepted with the GOC-in-
C. 
 
(v) It was suggested that in Chapter 15 of the Bill dealing with management of 
Defence land should not be part of this Bill. 
 
(vi) It was stressed that maintenance of  the existing Cantonment Board is much 
better than the municipalities.  There would not be need for any major change 
except minor changes because of democratization. 
 
3. Then the Committee decided that the representatives mi ght submit their 
written memoranda to the Committee and t hereafter they may be called for oral 
evidence after a gap of 15 days.   
 
The witnesses then withdrew. 
 
4. A verbatim record of  the proceedings was kept. 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 

 146
 
 
MINUTES OF THE TWENTY SEVENTH SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE 
ON DEFENCE (2005-06) 
 
 
 The Committee sat on Wednesday, the 13 th April, 2005 at 1500 hrs to 1635 
hrs in Committee Room No ‘53’ , Parliament House, New Delhi. 
 
 PRESENT 
 
Shri Balasaheb Vikhe Patil  -      Chairman 
 
 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri Iiiyas Azmi 
3. Shri Thupstan Chhewang 
4. Shri Raghuraj Singh Shakya 
 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
5. Shri R.K. Anand 
6. Shri Lalit Suri 
 
 
               SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri P.K. Bhandari  -  Director 
2. Smt.Anita Jain   -  Deputy Secretary 
3. Shri D.R.Shekhar  -  Under Secretary 
 
 
 
         WITNESSES 
 
1. Shri Prabhakar Deshmukh - District Collector, Pune. 
2. Brig. J.S.Kohli  - Pres ident, Pune CantonmentBoard. 
3.  Brig. V.K.Vadhera  - President, Ahmednagar  Cantonment Board. 
4.  Shri G.Venkataramani -  General Secretary, Indian Defence Estate  
      Service Association 
     
 
 

 147
 
At the outset Hon’ble Chairman welcomed Shri Prabhakar Deshmukh, District 
Collector of Pune and Brig. J.S.Kohli, President Pune Cantonment to this sitting of 
the Committee and requested them to put fo rth their suggestions on the Cantonment 
Bill, 2003.  Brig. J.S.Kohli gave the following suggestions on the Bill:- 
 
“(1) In the definition instead of Chie f Executive Officer the designation of 
Cantonment Executive Officer as m entioned in the 1924 Cantonment 
Act should be maintained. 
 
  (2) Constitution of Cantonment Bill :- The Constitution of Cantonment Board 
should be as follow: 
a. Three Ex-officio member;  
b. Three nominated members; 
c. Seven elected members; 
d. Instead of magistrate, a senior citizen in servic e or civilian from any 
walk of life may be added in his place; 
e. A representative of the District Collector may attend the meeting. 
 
   (3) Nomination of Member:- Nominat ion of Member from Military side by 
the Central Government takes time.  Till such time the Board while 
carrying out their meeting is short of these four nominated members.  
Therefore, four Officer from military side may be made ex officio or may 
be approved by GOC-in-C.  This can be done in faster time thereby 
parity in the board can be mainta ined between nominated and elected 
members.  
  
        (4) Reservation of women,  SC/ST in the Cantonment Board should be 
there. 
 
(5) The present number of elected me mbers i.e seven should be continued. 
 
(6) Chief Executive Officer should not be a member of  the Cantonment 
Board.  He should be a executive to the board only. 
 
(7) Under certain sections power of CEO to carry out execution of work 
without the sanction of the Board in case of emergency should be 
deleted and in case of varied Board, to fill up the vacuum this power 
can be given to a Committee consisting of District Magistrate, President 
and CEO. 
 
(8) In a number of sections the res ponsibility has been shifted from the 
Board to the CEO.  In that ca se individual authority has been given 
importance over a collective authority.  Therefore, these provisions may 
be modified and all the decisions of  the board should be taken in a 
meeting having a quorum of three members.  

 148
 
(9)    Civil area should not be extende d as this will shrink the Cantonment 
area. 
 
(10) When asked about their view po int on development and resources, he 
expressed satisfaction over the provisions in the Bill. 
 
(11) Director General of Defence Estate  is nothing to do with the channel of 
administration of the c antonments.  They should continue to be in the 
advisory capacity only. 
 
   (12) Pertaining to excision of civil area he sug gested that civil area should 
not be separated from cantonment as t here is criss-crossing.  In this 
connection Hon’ble Chairman s uggested that if area cannot be 
separated but the administration of  civil area can be separated for 
smooth management of cantonment as well as civil area. 
 
(13) Pertaining to participation of local MLA and MP in  the Cantonment 
Board without having voting right he has endorsed the provision given 
in the Bill”.  
 
Then Hon’ble Chairman invited Shri Prabhakar Deshmukh to 
give his view points on the Cantonment Bill,2003 and he had suggested 
the following points:- 
 
“(i)   In chapter three in the Constitu tion or Board instead of an Additional 
Collector a  person not below the rank of Deputy Collector should be 
substituted. 
 
 (ii) All the Cantonment s are adjoining  to the Municipal areas and there 
are a number of issues which are co mmon.  Therefore, there has to 
be a representative of the Municipal  Commissioner as a member of 
the Board. 
 
(iii)   The role of Development Aut hority to look after defence area outside 
the  cantonment lands and functi oning of the Cantonment Board have 
to be specified in the new Bill. 
 
(iv)  Pertaining to two separate Acts for Defence Land and Cantonment 
land and  separation of civil area adm inistratively as a separate town 
ship he suggested that the boundaries should not be disturbed but a 
part of that area can be considered for (civil area) town ship”.   
 
     He further clarified certain quarries on some pending cases for 
paying compensation. 
 

 149
3. The Committee after going through so me clauses of the Bill found that 
clause 56 of the Bill provided for over riding the decision of the Board by 
the CEO, President and District Magistrate should be deleted.  Because 
the decision of the Board is a co llective one and no single authority 
should be allowed to over ride it.  
 
The witnesses then withdrew.   
 
4. The Hon’ble Chairman then invi ted Brig. V.K.Vadhera, President 
Ahmednagar Cantonment to submit his view po ints on the Cantonment 
Bill.  The followings were the suggestions submitted by him. 
 
 
“(i)   CEO should not be made as a member secretary. 
 
(ii)  Clause 9 of chapter two should be deleted as exempting any particular 
area of land in the notified civil ar ea or outside would be discriminatory 
and the vested interest may take adv antage of it.  Once the land is 
excised from the cantonment then al l the laws can be applicable to all 
area and not the excised area alone. 
 
(iii)  The number of members of Cantonment Board should be an odd one. 
 
(iv) The time period for filling the vacancies for nominated members from 
military side     should be lessened. 
 
(v)  In clause 21(I) (e), the power of the President to suspend a member 
other then the    CEO to attend t he un-concluded part of the meeting 
for his mis-conduct should be deleted.   It should read including the 
CEO. 
 
(vi) Clause 24(3)-, this provision deals with appointment of CEO.  He 
should not be a  Member of the Board. 
 
(vii) Clause 26 (2)- Pertaining to this  clause he suggested that the CEO 
must exercise the special power by  taking permission from the Board 
in writing and the limit of the financial expenditure should be laid down 
in the Bill. 
 
    (viii) Clause 46- This clause is in di rect conflict with the aims and objects of 
making  sustaining cantonments for the purpose of this forces.  
Therefore, this should be deleted. 
 
     (ix) Clause 56 (3)- The power to override any decision of the Board by the 
CEO  should be deleted. 
 

 150
  (x) Clause 62- Maintaining or assi sting primary school should not be the 
duty of the Board.  This duty should be handed ov er to social 
organisation for maintaining better educational standard. 
 
  (xi)  Pertaining to excision of ci vil area from militar y area he has suggested 
that there is a requirement of buffer zone between these two area. 
 
               (xii) Clause 63- Annual rateable value should be assessed by a professional 
body instead of CEO”. 
 
5. The Committee then welcomed Shri G.Venkataramani, General Secretary, 
Indian Defence Estate Service Associati on to put forth the view points of his 
organisation on  ‘The Cantonments Bill,2003’.  He had suggested the following 
points:- 
(1) Need for Cantonment development authority 
(2) Need for maintaining bette r food standard for the troops 
(3) Need for management of defence land 
 
6. The Chairman and Members made certain  querries on the issues raised by 
the witnesses.  The witnesses then responded by the same. 
 
The witnesses then withdrew.   
 
7. A verbatim record of  the proceedings was kept. 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
 

 151
 
 
MINUTES OF THE  TWENTY EIGHT SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE 
ON DEFENCE (2004-05) 
 
 
 The Committee sat on Friday, the 29 th April, 2005 at 1630 hrs to 1735 in 
Committee Room No. ‘D’, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
 
PRESENT 
   
Shri. Balasaheb Vikhe Patil - Chairman 
 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri A.V. Ballarmin 
3. Shri Milind Deora 
4. Shri Suresh Kalmadi 
5. Shri Raghuraj Singh Shakya 
6. Shri Manvendra Singh 
7. Ms. Ingrid Mcleod 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
8. Shri R.K.Anand 
9. Smt. N.P. Durga 
10. Shri Janardan Dwivedi 
 
 
         SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri P.D.T.Achary  - Secretary 
2. Shri P.K. Bhandari  - Director 
3. Smt. Anita Jain  - Deputy Secretary 
4. Shri D.R.Shekhar  - Under Secretary 
 
Representatives of Ministry of Defence 
 
1. Shri Ajai Vikram Singh, Defence Secretary 
2. Shri P.K.Rastogi, JS(T) & CAO 
3. Smt. Malti Krishna Kumar, DGDE 
4. Shri C.R.Mahapatra, Sr.Addl.DGDE 
5. Shri G.Venkataramani, Addl. DGDE 
6. Shri V.K.Shrivastava, Addl. DGDE 
7. Maj.Gen. N.B.Singh, ADGLWE 

 152
8. Col. Ashok Kumar, Dir Plg (Lands) 
9. Air Cmde. G.R.Prasad,VSM,Adm,PDAFW   
10. Cmde, P.L.Mason, Principal Dir (Works) 
11. Cdr. K.K.Uppal, Jt. Dir (Works) 
 
2. At the outset the Chairman welcomed t he representatives of the Ministry of 
Defence to the sitting of the Committ ee.  The Chairman then informed the 
members that on Cantonment Bill , 2003 Committee had held number of 
sittings with non-official and presidents of various Cantonment Boards.  The 
Committee then took oral evidence of the Ministry of Defence and during 
course of the discussion following points relating to basic policy were raised:- 
 
(i) Some provision instead of democrati sing the Cantonment administration, put 
more restrictions on the civilian population. 
 
(ii) All municipal provisions included in the Act be more appropriately placed 
under bye laws/rules to be framed under the Act. 
 
(iii) No significant role has been assigned to the Committee for civil areas under 
Clause 47. 
 
(iv) There is multiplicity of authorities in va rious clauses of the Bill which is likely to 
create confusion in smooth working of the Board. 
 
(v) Under Clause 13 no period has been sp ecified under which election to the 
varied Board must be held. 
 
(vi) Excessive powers have been given to various functionaries to override 
decision of the Board under Clause 56. 
 
(vii) Wide power of the CEO should be cu rtailed and he may be allowed to exercise 
power for or on behalf of the Board only. 
 
(viii) In the proposed deem ed municipality status to  Cantonment Board where 
states were involved, they were not cons ulted in order to utilise funds from the 
state schemes for the purpose. 
 
(ix) The Committee sought to know the opi nion of the Ministry  on the excising of 
the Civil areas of the C antonment into adjoining  municipal areas and the 
Military land as Military Stations gradually .  The Secretary, Ministry of Defence 
responded positively to this suggestion.  
 
3. The Secretary, Ministry of Defence st ated that they will happy to re-examining 
the proposal regarding change in definition etc. like that of ownership 
 
      The witnesses then withdrew 

 153
 
4. Verbatim record of the proceedings was kept. 
 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 

 154
 
 
MINUTES OF THE  TWENTY   NINTH SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE 
ON DEFENCE (2004-05) 
 
 
 The Committee sat on Thursday, the 5 th May, 2005 at 1800 hrs to 1830 in 
Main Committee Room,  Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
 
PRESENT 
   
Shri. Balasaheb Vikhe Patil - Chairman 
 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri Churchill Alemao 
3. Shri A.V. Bellarmin 
4. Shri Thupstan Chhewang 
5. Shri Milind Deora 
6. Shri C. Krishnan 
7.   Shri S.D.Mandlik 
8.   Dr. K.S. Manoj 
9.   Shri Ganesh Prasad Singh 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
10. Shri R.K.Anand 
11. Smt. N.P. Durga 
12. Shri Janardan Dwivedi  
13. Shri Lalit Suri 
 
         SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri P.D.T.Achary  - Secretary 
2. Shri P.K. Bhandari  - Director 
3. Smt. Anita Jain  - Deputy Secretary 
4. Shri D.R.Shekhar  - Under Secretary 
 
2. The Committee adopted the Draft Repor t on the Cantonments Bill, 2003 with 
minor additions and modifications, as suggested by Members of the 
Committee.  
 
3. The Committee then authorized the Chai rman to finalize the above-mentioned 
Draft Report on the Cantonm ents Bill, 2003 and presen t it to the House on a 
date and time convenient to him.  

 155
 
4. The Chairman thanked the Members fo r their cooperation and giving valuable 
suggestions during the cons ideration of the Cantonm ents Bill, 2003.  Then, 
the Committee also placed on record unanimously appreciated the sincere 
and dedicated efforts put in by the o fficers and staff of the Committee on 
Defence Branch for Drafting Report on the Cantonments Bill, 2003 within a 
very short span of time after conclusion of official evidence of the Ministry 
otherwise it would have been difficult to complete in this Session.  
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
 
 
 
 
s
is i f
r l r t
t
f r
APPENDIX 
 
Bill No. LXXIII of 2003 
THE CANTONMENTS BILL, 2003 
A 
BILL 
to con olidate and amend the law relating to the administration of cantonments with a 
view to impart greater democrat at on, improvement o  their financial base to make 
p ovisions for deve opmental activities, p oper regulation, con rol and management 
of defence lands including extension of cantonment laws to such lands si uated 
throughout the territory o  India and for matters connected therewith o  incidental 
thereto. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-fourth Year of the Republic of India as follows:— 
CHAPTER I 
PRELIMINARY 
1. (1) This Act may be called the Cantonments Act, 2003. 
(2) It extends to the whole of India 
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification 
in the Official Gazette, appoint, and different dates may be appointed for different provisions 
of this Act and any reference in any provision to the commencement of this Act shall be 
construed as a reference to the coming into force of that provision. 
Short title, 
extent and 
commencement. 
TO BE INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA 
AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA 
SERVER1/BILL 2004/RS/148RS\148RS.P65 
2 
2. In this Act, unless there is anything repugnant in the subject or context,— 
(a) “Assistant Health Officer” means the medical officer appointed by the General 
Officer Commanding-in-Chief, the Command, to be the Assistant Health Officer for a 
cantonment; 
(b) “Board” means a Cantonment Board constituted under this Act; 
(c) “boundary wall” means a wall which abuts on a street and which does not 
exceed two and a half metres in height; 
(d) “building” means a house, outhouse, stable, latrine, shed, hut or other roofed 
structure whether of masonry, brick, wood, mud, metal or other material, and any part 
thereof, and includes a well and a wall other than a boundary wall but does not include 
a tent or other portable and temporary shelter; 
(e) “casual election” means an election held to fill a casual vacancy; 

 156
(f) “casual vacancy” means a vacancy occurring otherwise than by efflux of time 
in the office of an elected member of a Board and includes a vacancy in such office, 
arising under sub-section (2) of section 16; 
(g) “Chief Executive Officer” means the person appointed under this Act to be 
the Chief Executive Officer of a cantonment; 
(h) “civil area” means an area declared to be a civil area by the Central Government 
under sub-section (1) of section 46; 
(i) “civil area committee” means a committee appointed under section 47; 
(j) “Command” means one of the Commands into which India is for military 
purposes for the time being divided, and includes any area which the Central 
Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, declare to be a Command for all 
or any of the purposes of this Act; 
(k) “dairy” includes any farm, cattle-shed, milk-store, milk-shop or other place 
from which milk is supplied or in which milk is kept for purposes of sale or is manufactured 
for the sale into butter, ghee, cheese or curds, and, in relation to a dairyman who does 
not occupy any premises for the sale of milk, includes any place in which he keeps the 
vessels used by him for the storage or sale of milk; 
(l) “dairyman” includes the keeper of a cow, buffalo, goat, ass or other animal, 
the milk of which is offered or is intended to be offered for sale for human consumption, 
and any supplier of milk and any occupier of a dairy; 
(m) “dangerous disease” means cholera, leprosy, enteric fever, smallpox, 
tuberculosis, diphtheria, plague, influenza, venereal disease, hepatitis, Acquired 
Immune Deficiency Syndrome and any other epidemic, endemic, infectious or 
communicable disease which the Board may by public notice, declare to be, an 
infectious, contagious or communicable disease for the purposes of this Act; 
(n) “Defence Estates Circle” means one of the circles into which India is, for 
the purposes of defence estates management, for the time being divided, and includes 
any area which the Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, 
declare to be a Defence Estates Circle for all or any of the purposes of this Act; 
(o) “Defence Estates Officer” means the officer appointed by the Central 
Government to perform the duties of the Defence Estates Officer for the purpose of 
this Act and the rules made thereunder; 
(p) “Director General” means an officer of the Indian Defence Estates Service 
(IDES) appointed by the Central Government to perform the duties of the Director 
General, Defence Estates for the purpose of this Act and includes Senior Additional 
Director General and Additional Director General; 
Definitions. 
5 
10 
15 
20 
25 
30 
35 
40 
45 
SERVER1/BILL 2004/RS/148RS\148RS.P65 
3 
(q) “Director” means the officer appointed by the Central Government to perform 
the duties of the Director, Defence Estates, the Command, for the purposes of this Act 
and the rules made thereunder; 
(r) “entitled consumer” means a person in a cantonment who is paid from the 
Defence Service Estimates and is authorised by general or special order of the Central 
Government to receive a supply of water for domestic purposes from the Military 
Engineer Services or the Public Works Department on such terms and conditions as 
may be specified in the order; 
(s) “Executive Engineer” means the officer of the Military Engineer Services of 
that grade, having charge of the military works in a cantonment or where more than one 

 157
such officer has charge of the military works in a cantonment such one of those 
officers as the Officer Commanding the station may designate in this behalf, and 
includes the officer of whatever grade in immediate executive engineering charge of a 
cantonment; 
(t) “factory” means a factory as defined in clause (m) of section 2 of the 
Factories Act, 1948; 
(u) “Forces” means the regular Army, Navy and Air Force or any part of any one 
or more of them; 
(v) “General Officer Commanding-in-Chief, the Command” (GOC-in-C, Command) 
means the Officer Commanding any of the Commands; 
(w) “General Officer Commanding the Area” means the Officer Commanding any 
one of the areas into which India is for military purposes for the time being divided, or 
any sub-area which does not form part of any such area, or any area which the Central 
Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, declare to be an area for all or 
any of the purposes of this Act; 
(x) “Group Housing” means a group of houses for dwelling purposes and may 
comprise all or any of the following : namely, (a) a dwelling unit, (b) open spaces 
intended for recreation and ventilation, (c) roads, paths, sewers, drains, water supply 
and ancillary installations, street lighting and other amenities, (d) convenient shopping 
place, schools, community hall or other amenities for common use; 
(y) “Government” in relation to this Act means the Central Government; 
(z) “Health Officer” means the senior executive medical officer in military employ 
on duty in a cantonment; 
(za) “hospital” includes family welfare centre, child welfare centre, maternity 
centre and health centre; 
(zb) “hut” means any building, no material portion of which above the plinth 
level is constructed of masonry or of squared timber framing or of iron framing; 
(zc) “inhabitant”, in relation to a cantonment, or local area means any person 
ordinarily residing or carrying on business or owning or occupying immovable property 
therein, and in case of a dispute means any person declared by the Chief Executive 
Officer to be an inhabitant; 
(zd) “intoxicating drug” includes a narcotic drug and psychotropic substance as 
defined in the Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic Substances Act, 1985 as modified 
from time to time; 
(ze) “market” includes any place where persons assemble for the sale of, or for 
the purpose of exposing for sales, meat, fish, fruits, vegetables, animals intended for 
human food or any other articles of human food whatsoever, with or without the 
consent of the owner of such place notwithstanding that there may be no common 
63 of 1948. 
45 
SERVER1/BILL 2004/RS/148RS\148RS.P65 
4 
regulation for the concourse of buyers and sellers and whether or not any control is 
exercised over the business of, or the persons frequenting, the market by the owner of 
the place or by any other person, but shall not include a single shop or group of shops 
not being more than six in number and shops within unit lines; 
(zf) “military” includes Air Force, Navy and other defence related establishments; 
(zg) “military officer” means a person who, being an officer within the meaning 
of the Army Act, 1950, the Navy Act, 1957 or the Air Force Act, 1950, is commissioned, 
gazetted or in pay as an officer doing army, naval or air force duty with the army, navy 
or air force, or is an officer doing such duty in any arm, branch or part of any of those 
forces; 
(zh) “nuisance” includes any act, omission, place, animal or thing which causes 
or is likely to cause injury, danger, annoyance or offence to the sense of sight, smell or 
hearing or disturbance to rest or sleep, or which is or may be dangerous to life or 
injurious to health or property; 

 158
(zi) “occupier” includes an owner in occupation of, or otherwise using his own 
land or building; 
(zj) “Officer Commanding the station or Station Commander” means the military 
officer for the time being in command of the forces in a cantonment and if such officer 
is likely to be absent for more than thirty days, the General Officer Commanding-in- 
Chief, the Command may nominate, by an order, another military officer as “Officer 
Commanding the station or Station Commander”; 
(zk) “ordinary election” means an election held to fill a vacancy in the office of 
an elected member of a Board arising by efflux of time; 
(zl) “owner” includes any person who is receiving or is entitled to receive the 
rent of any building or land whether on his own account or on behalf of himself and 
others or an agent or trustee, or who would so receive the rent or be entitled to receive 
it if the building or land were let to a tenant; 
(zm) “party wall” means a wall forming part of a building and used or constructed 
to be used for the support or separation of adjoining buildings belonging to different 
owners, or constructed or adapted to be occupied by different persons; 
(zn) “Principal Director” means the Officer appointed by the Central Government 
to perform the duties of the Principal Director, Defence Estates, the Command for the 
purpose of this Act and the rules made thereunder; 
(zo) “private market” means a market which is not maintained by a Board and 
which is licensed by a Board under the provisions of this Act; 
(zp) “private slaughter-house” means a slaughter-house which is not maintained 
by a Board and which is licensed by a Board under the provisions of this Act; 
(zq) “public market” means a market maintained by a Board; 
(zr) “public place” means any place which is open to the use and enjoyment of 
the public, whether it is actually used or enjoyed by the public or not; 
(zs) “public slaughter-house” means a slaughter-house maintained by a Board; 
(zt) “resident”, in relation to a cantonment, means a person who maintains 
therein a house or a portion of a house which is at all times available for occupation by 
himself or his family even though he may himself reside elsewhere, provided that he 
has not abandoned all intention of again occupying such house either by himself or 
his family; 
46 of 1950. 
62 of 1957. 
45 of 1950. 
SERVER1/BILL 2004/RS/148RS\148RS.P65 
5 
(zu) “regulation” means a regulation made by a Cantonment Board under this 
Act by notification in the Official Gazette; 
(zv) “rule” means a rule made by the Central Government under this Act by 
notification in the Official Gazette; 
(zw) “shed” means a slight or temporary structure for shade or shelter; 
(zx) “slaughter-house” means any place ordinarily used for the slaughter of 
animals for the purpose of selling the flesh thereof for human consumption; 
(zy) “soldier” means any person who is a soldier or sailor or an airman subject to 
the Army Act, 1950, the Navy Act, 1957 or the Air Force Act, 1950, as the case may be, 
and who is not a military officer; 
(zz) “spirituous liquor” means any fermented liquor, any wine, or any alcoholic 
liquid obtained by distillation or the sap of any kind of palm tree, and includes any 
other liquid containing alcohol which the Central Government may, by notification in 
the Official Gazette, declare to be a spirituous liquor for the purposes of this Act; 
(zza) “street” includes any way, road, lane, square, court, alley or passage in a 
cantonment, whether a thoroughfare or not and whether built upon or not, over which 
the public have a right of way and also the road-way or foot-way over any bridge or 
cause way; 
(zzb) “sub-area” means one of the sub-areas into which India is for military 

 159
purposes for the time being divided and includes, for all or any of the purposes of this 
Act, any territory which the Central Government may, by notification in the Official 
Gazette, declare to be a sub-area for such purposes; 
(zzc) “trade or commercial premises” means any premises used or intended to be 
used for carrying on any trade, commerce or industry; 
(zzd) “vehicle” means a wheeled conveyance of any description which is capable 
of being used on a street, and includes a motor-car, motor lorry, motor omnibus, cart, 
locomotive, tram-car, hand-cart, truck, motor-cycle, bicycle, tricycle and rickshaw; 
(zze) “water-works” includes all lakes, tanks, streams, cisterns, springs, pumps, 
wells, reservoirs, aqueducts, water-trucks, sluices mains, pipes, culverts, hydrants, 
stand-pipes, and conduits and all machinery, lands, buildings, bridges and things 
used for, or intended for the purpose of supplying water to a cantonment; and 
(zzf) “year” means the year commencing on the first day of April. 
CHAPTER II 
DEFINITION AND DELIMITATION OF CANTONMENT 
3. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, declare any 
place or places along with boundaries in which any part of the Forces is quartered or which, 
being in the vicinity of any such place or places, is or are required for the service of such 
forces to be a cantonment for the purposes of this Act and of all other enactments for the time 
being in force, and may, by a like notification, declare that any cantonment shall cease to be 
a cantonment. 
(2) The Central Government may, by a like notification, define the limits of any 
cantonment for the aforesaid purposes. 
(3) When any place is declared a cantonment for the first time, the Central Government 
may, until a Board is constituted in accordance with the provisions of this Act, by order make 
any provision which appears necessary to it either for the administration of the cantonment 
or for the constitution of the Board. 
46 of 1950. 
62 of 1957. 
45 of 1950. 
Definition of 
cantonments. 
SERVER1/BILL 2004/RS/148RS\148RS.P65 
6 
(4) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, direct that in 
any place declared a cantonment under sub-section (1) the provisions of any enactment 
relating to local self-government other than this Act shall have effect only to such extent or 
subject to such modifications, or that any authority constituted under any such enactment 
shall exercise authority only to such extent, as may be specified in the notification. 
4. (1) The Central Government may after consulting the State Government and the 
Board concerned, by notification in the Official Gazette, declare its intention to include 
within the cantonment any local area situated in the vicinity thereof or to exclude from the 
cantonment any local area comprised therein. 
(2) Any inhabitant of a cantonment or local area in respect of which notification has 
been published under sub-section (1) may, within six weeks from the date of notification, 
submit in writing to the Central Government through the General Officer Commanding-in- 
Chief, the Command, an objection to the notification, and the Central Government shall take 
such objection into consideration. 
(3) On the expiry of six weeks from the date of the notification, the Central 
Government may after considering the objections, if any, which have been submitted 
under sub-section (2), by notification in the Official Gazette, include the local area in 
respect of which the notification was published under sub-section (1), or any part thereof, 
in the cantonment or, as the case may be, exclude such area or any part thereof from the 
cantonment. 
5. When, by a notification under section 4, any local area is included in a cantonment, 
such area shall thereupon become subject to this Act and to all other enactments for the time 
being in force throughout the cantonment and to all notifications, rules, regulations, byelaws, 

 160
orders and directions issued or made thereunder. 
6. (1) When, by a notification under section 3, any cantonment ceases to be a 
cantonment and the local area comprised therein is immediately placed under the control of 
a local authority, the balance of the cantonment fund and other property vesting in the Board 
shall vest in such local authority, and the liabilities of the Board shall be transferred to such 
local authority. 
(2) When, in like manner, any cantonment ceases to be a cantonment and the local area 
comprised therein is not immediately placed under the control of a local authority, the balance 
of the cantonment fund and other property vesting in the Board shall vest in the Central 
Government, and the liabilities of the Board shall be transferred to that Government. 
7. (1) When, by a notification under section 4, any local area forming part of a 
cantonment ceases to be under the control of a particular Board and is immediately placed 
under the control of some other local authority, such portion of the cantonment fund and 
other property vesting in the Board and such portion of the liabilities of the Board, as the 
Central Government may, by general or special order, direct, shall be transferred to that other 
local authority. 
(2) When, in like manner, any local area forming part of a cantonment ceases to be 
under the control of a particular Board and is not immediately placed under the control of 
some other local authority; such portion of the cantonment fund and other property vesting 
in the Board shall vest in the Central Government, and such portion of the liabilities of the 
Board shall be transferred to that Government, as the Central Government may, by general or 
special order, direct. 
8. Any cantonment fund or portion of a cantonment fund or other property of a Board 
vesting in the Central Government under the provisions of section 6 or section 7 shall be 
applied in the first place to satisfy any liabilities of the Board transferred under such provisions 
to that Government, and in the second place for the benefit of the inhabitants of the local 
area which has ceased to be a cantonment or, as the case may be, part of a cantonment. 
Application 
of funds and 
property 
transferred 
under sections 
6 and 7. 
Disposal of 
cantonment 
fund when area 
ceases to be 
included in a 
cantonment. 
Disposal of 
cantonment 
fund when area 
ceases to be a 
cantonment. 
The effect of 
including area 
in cantonment. 
Alteration 
of limits of 
cantonments. 
SERVER1/BILL 2004/RS/148RS\148RS.P65 
7 
9. The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, exclude from the 
operation of any part of this Act the whole or any part of a cantonment, or direct that any 
provision of this Act shall, in the case of any cantonment — 
(a) situated within the limits of a metropolitan area; or 
(b) in which the Board is superseded under section 60, 
apply with such modification as may be so specified. 
CHAPTER III 

 161
CANTONMENT BOARDS 
Boards 
10. (1) For every cantonment there shall be a Cantonment Board. 
(2) Every Board shall be deemed to be a municipality for the purposes of clause (e) of 
article 243P of the Constitution. 
11. Every Board shall, by the name of the place by reference to which the cantonment 
is known, be a body corporate having perpetual succession and a common seal with power 
to acquire and hold property both movable and immovable and to contract and shall by the 
said name, sue and be sued. 
12. (1) Cantonments shall be divided into four categories, namely:— 
(i) Category I Cantonments, in which the population exceeds fifty thousand; 
(ii) Category II Cantonments, in which the population exceeds ten thousand, 
but does not exceed fifty thousand; 
(iii) Category III Cantonments, in which the population exceeds two thousand 
five hundred, but does not exceed ten thousand; and 
(iv) Category IV Cantonments, in which the population does not exceed two 
thousand five hundred. 
(2) For the purposes of sub-section (1), the population shall be calculated in accordance 
with the latest official census, or, if the Central Government, by general or special order, so 
directs, in accordance with a special census taken for the purpose. 
(3) In Category I Cantonments, the Board shall consist of the following members, 
namely:— 
(a) the Officer Commanding the station as ex officio or, if the Central Government 
so directs in respect of any cantonment, such other military officer as may be nominated 
in his place by the General Officer Commanding-in-Chief, the Command; 
(b) the District Magistrate or an Executive Magistrate not below the rank of 
Additional District Magistrate nominated by him; 
(c) the Chief Executive Officer; 
(d) the Health Officer ex o ficio; f
f
(e) the Executive Engineer ex officio; 
(f) three military officers nominated by name by the Officer Commanding the 
station by order in writing; 
(g) eight members elected under this Act. 
Limitation of 
operation of 
Act. 
Cantonment 
Board. 
Incorporation 
of Cantonment 
Board. 
Constitution of 
Cantonment 
Boards. 
SERVER1/BILL 2004/RS/148RS\148RS.P65 
8 
(4) In Category II Cantonments, the Board shall consist of the following members, 
namely:— 
(a) the Officer Commanding the station as ex officio or, if the Central Government 
so directs in respect of any cantonment, such other military officer as may be nominated 
in his place by the General Officer Commanding-in-Chief, the Command; 
(b) the District Magistrate or an Executive Magistrate not below the rank of 
Additional District Magistrate nominated by him; 
(c) the Chief Executive Officer; 
(d) the Health Officer ex o ficio; 
(e) the Executive Engineer ex officio; 
(f) two military officers nominated by name by the Officer Commanding the 
station by order in writing; 

 162
(g) seven members elected under this Act. 
(5) In Category III Cantonments, the Board shall consist of the following members, 
namely:— 
(a) the Officer Commanding the station as ex officio or, if the Central Government 
so directs in respect of any cantonment, such other military officer, as may be nominated 
in his place by the General Officer Commanding-in-Chief, the Command; 
(b) the District Magistrate or an Executive Magistrate nominated by him; 
(c) the Chief Executive Officer; 
(d) the Health Officer ex o ficio; f
e
(e) the Executive Engineer ex officio; 
(f) one military officer nominated by name by the Officer Commanding the station 
by order in writing; 
(g) six members elected under this Act. 
(6) In Category IV Cantonments, the Board shall consist of the following members, 
namely:— 
(a) the Officer Commanding the station x officio or, if the Central Government 
so directs in respect of any cantonment, such other military officer as may be nominated 
in his place by the General Officer Commanding-in-Chief, the Command; 
(b) the Chief Executive Officer; 
(c) two members elected under this Act. 
(7) The Officer Commanding the station may, if he thinks fit, with the sanction of 
the General Officer Commanding-in-Chief, the Command, nominate in place of any military 
officer whom he is empowered to nominate under clause (f) of sub-section (3), clause (f) 
of sub-section (4) or clause (f) of sub-section (5), any person, whether in the service of 
the Government or not, who is ordinarily resident in the cantonment or in the vicinity 
thereof. 
(8) Every election or nomination of a member of a Board and every vacancy in the 
elected membership thereof shall be notified by the Central Government in the Official 
Gazette; 
(9) The Member of Parliament and Member of Legislative Assembly representing 
constituencies which comprises wholly or partly the cantonment area, shall be special invitees 
for the meetings of the Board but without a right to vote. 
SERVER1/BILL 2004/RS/148RS\148RS.P65 
9 
13. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in section 12, if the Central Government is 
satisfied,— 
(a) that by reason of military operations, it is necessary, or 
(b) that, for the administration of the cantonment, it is desirable, to vary the 
constitution of the Board in any cantonment under this section, the Central Government 
may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make a declaration to that effect. 
(2) Upon the making of a declaration under sub-section (1), the Board in the cantonment 
shall consist of the following members, namely:— 
(a) the Officer Commanding the station, 
(b) the Chief Executive Officer, and 
(c) one member, not being a person in the service of the Government, nominated 
by the Central Government in consultation with the General Officer Commanding-in- 
Chief, the Command. 
(3) The nomination of a member of a Board constituted under this section, and the 
vacancy in the membership thereof shall be notified by the Central Government in the Official 
Gazette. 
(4) The term of office of a Board constituted by a declaration under sub-section (1) 
shall not ordinarily extend beyond one year: 
Provided that the Central Government may from time to time, by a like declaration, 
extend the term of office of such a Board by any period not exceeding one year at a time: 
Provided also that the Central Government shall forthwith direct that the term of office 
of such a Board shall cease if, in the opinion of the Central Government, the reasons stated 

 163
in the declaration whereby such Board was constituted or its term of office was extended, 
have ceased to exist. 
(5) When the term of office of a Board constituted under this section has expired or 
ceased, the Board shall be replaced by the former Board which, but for the declaration under 
sub-section (1) or sub-section (4), would have continued to hold office, or , if the term of 
office of such former Board has expired, by a Board constituted under section 12. 
14. (1) Save as otherwise provided in this section, the term of office of a member of a 
Board shall be five years and shall commence from the date of the notification of his election 
or nomination under sub-section (8) of section 12 or from the date on which the vacancy has 
occurred in which he is elected or nominated, whichever date is later: 
Provided that the Central Government may, when satisfied that it is necessary in order 
to avoid administrative difficulty, extend the term of office of all the elected members of a 
Board by such period not exceeding one year, as it thinks fit: 
Provided further that a member whose term of office has been so extended, shall cease 
to hold office on the date of the notification of the election of his successor under subsection 
(8) of section 12. 
(2) The term of office of an ex officio member of a Board shall continue so long as he 
holds the office by virtue of which he is such a member. 
(3) The term of office of a member elected to fill a casual vacancy shall commence from 
the date of the notification of his election, and shall continue so long only as the member in 
whose place he is elected would have been entitled to hold office if the vacancy had not 
occurred. 
(4) An outgoing member shall, unless the Central Government otherwise directs, 
continue in office until the election or nomination of his successor is notified under subsection 
(8) of section 12. 
(5) Any outgoing member may, if qualified, be re-elected or re-nominated. 
Power to vary 
constitution 
of Boards in 
special 
circumstances. 
Term of office 
of members. 
SERVER1/BILL 2004/RS/148RS\148RS.P65 
10 
15. (1) Vacancies arising by efflux of time in the office of an elected member of a Board 
shall be filled by an ordinary election to be held on such date as the Central Government may, 
by notification in the Official Gazette, direct. 
(2) A casual vacancy shall be filled by a casual election the date of which shall be fixed 
by the Central Government by notification in the Official Gazette, and shall be, as soon as 
may be, after the occurrence of the vacancy: 
Provided that no casual election shall be held to fill a vacancy occurring within six 
months of any date on which the vacancy will occur by efflux of time, but such vacancy shall 
be filled at the next ordinary election. 
16. (1) If from any cause at an ordinary election no member is elected, or if the elected 
member is unwilling to serve on the Board, the outgoing member shall, if qualified and willing 
to serve, be deemed to have been re-elected: 
Provided that where there are more outgoing members qualified and willing to serve 
than there are vacancies to be filled under this sub-section, the outgoing members so deemed 
to have been re-elected shall, failing agreement amongst such members, be determined by lot 
under the supervision of the President of the Board and in such manner as he may decide. 
(2) If a person is elected to more than one seat in a Board, then, unless he resigns all 
but one of the seats within fourteen days from the date on which he is declared elected, or 
where the dates on which he is declared elected are different in respect of different seats, 
from the last of such dates, all the seats shall become vacant. 
(3) Vacancies arising in any of the following cases shall be filled by nomination by the 
Central Government after consultation with the General Officer Commanding-in-Chief, the 

 164
Command, namely:— 
(a) where at a casual election no member is elected; 
(b) where at an ordinary election no member or an insufficient number of members 
is elected, or an elected member is unwilling to serve on the Board and the outgoing 
member is not qualified or is not willing to serve or is dead or cannot be found within 
a reasonable time; 
(c) where at an election held when a Board is constituted for the first time no 
member or an insufficient number of members is elected or an elected member is unwilling 
to serve on the Board. 
(4) For the purposes of sub-section (2) of section 15, a member nominated in pursuance 
of sub-section (3) of this section shall where there has been a division of the cantonment 
into wards, be deemed to have been elected by such ward as the Central Government may at 
the time of making the nomination or at any time thereafter declare. 
(5) The term of office of a member nominated or deemed to have been re-elected under 
this section shall expire at the time at which it would have expired if he had been elected at the 
ordinary or casual election, as the case may be. 
17. (1) Every person who is by virtue of his office, or who is nominated or elected to be, 
a member of the Board shall, before taking his seat, make and subscribe at a meeting of the 
Board an oath or affirmation of his allegiance to the Constitution of India in the following 
form, namely:— 
become 
————— 
“I, A.B., having been elected 
——————— a member of this Board, do 
been nominated 
swear in the name of God 
——————————— that I will bear true faith and allegiance to the Constitution 
solemnly affirm 
of India as by law established and that I will faithfully discharge the duty upon which 
I am about to enter.”. 
Oath or 
affirmation. 
Vacancies in 
special cases. 
Filling of 
vacancies. 
SERVER1/BILL 2004/RS/148RS\148RS.P65 
11 
(2) If any such person fails to make and subscribe the oath or affirmation at first 
meeting held after the date of commencement of his term of office, the Central Government 
shall, by notification in the Official Gazette, declare his seat to be vacant: 
Provided that a meeting where the member is absent with the leave of the Board shall 
not be taken into account. 
18. (1) (a) Any elected member of a Board who wishes to resign his office may give his 
resignation in writing to the President of the Board who shall forward it for orders to the 
Central Government under intimation to the General Officer Commanding-in-Chief, the 
Command. 
(b) Any nominated member of a Board who wishes to resign his office may forward his 
resignation in writing through the President of the Board to the General Officer Commandingin- 
Chief, the Command for orders. 
(2) If the Central Government or the General Officer Commanding-in-Chief, the Command, 
as the case may be, accepts the resignation, such acceptance shall be communicated to the 
Board, and thereupon the seat of the member resigning shall become vacant. 
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (2), the resignation of any 
person elected to more than one seat in a Board from all but one of the seats in pursuance of 
sub-section (2) of section 16 shall take effect when such resignation is received by the 
President of the Board. 

 165
19. (1) The Officer commanding the station if a member of the Board shall be the 
President of the Board: 
Provided that when a military officer holding the office of the President ceases to be 
the Officer commanding the station merely by reason of a temporary absence from the 
station for a period not exceeding thirty consecutive days, he shall not vacate the office of 
President. 
(2) Where the Officer commanding the station is not a member of the Board, the 
military officer nominated in his place under clause (a) of sub-section (3), sub-section (4), 
sub-section (5) or sub-section (6) of section 12 shall be the President of the Board. 
(3) In every Board there shall be a Vice-President elected by the elected members only 
from amongst them in accordance with such procedure as the Central Government may by 
rule prescribe. 
20. (1) The term of office of a Vice-President shall be five years or his residual term of 
office as a member, whichever is less. 
(2) A Vice-President may resign his office by notice in writing to the President and, on 
the resignation being accepted by the Board, the office shall become vacant. 
(3) A Vice-President may be removed from his office, at a special meeting convened for 
the purpose on a requisition for the same by not less than one-half of the elected members of 
the Board holding office, by a resolution passed by a majority of not less than two-thirds of 
the total number of elected members then holding office and attending and no member, other 
than an elected member, shall have the right to vote on the resolution: 
Provided that in case of Category IV cantonments, the Vice-President may be removed 
if a resolution to this effect is passed by the Board. 
21. (1) It shall be the duty of the President of every Board— 
(a) unless prevented by reasonable cause, to convene and preside at all meetings 
of the Board and to regulate the conduct of business thereat; 
Duties of 
President. 
Term of 
office of Vice- 
President. 
President and 
Vice-President. 
Resignation. 
SERVER1/BILL 2004/RS/148RS\148RS.P65 
12 
(b) to control, direct and supervise the financial and executive administration of 
the Board; 
(c) to perform all the duties and exercise all the powers specifically imposed or 
conferred on the President by or under this Act; and 
(d) subject to any restrictions, limitations and conditions imposed by this Act, to 
exercise executive power for the purpose of carrying out the provisions of this Act and to 
be directly responsible for the fulfilment of the purposes of this Act; 
(e) in case of gross misconduct during the course of meeting, to suspend a 
member other than a Chief Executive Officer from attending the unconcluded part of 
the meeting of the Board. 
(2) The President may, by order in writing, empower the Vice-President to exercise all 
or any of the powers and duties referred to in clause (b) of sub-section (1) other than any 
power, duty or function which he is by resolution of the Board expressly forbidden to 
delegate. 
(3) The exercise or discharge of any powers, duties or functions delegated by the 
President under this section shall be subject to such restrictions, limitations and conditions, 
if any, as may be laid down by the President and to the control of, and to revision by, the 
President. 
(4) Every order made under sub-section (2) shall forthwith be communicated to the 
Board and to the General Officer Commanding-in-Chief, the Command. 
22. (1) It shall be the duty of the Vice-President of every Board,— 

 166
(a) in the absence of the President and unless prevented by reasonable cause, to 
preside at meetings of the Board and when so presiding to exercise the authority of the 
President under sub-section (1) of section 21; 
(b) during the incapacity or temporary absence of the President or pending his 
appointment or succession to perform any other duty and exercise any other power of 
the President; and 
(c) to exercise any power and perform any duty of the President which may be 
delegated to him under sub-section (2) of section 21. 
23. The Vice President and each elected member of the Board shall be entitled to 
receive such allowances, as the Central Government may, by rule, prescribe. 
24. (1) For every cantonment there shall be a Chief Executive Officer appointed by the 
Central Government or by such person as the Central Government may authorise in this 
behalf: 
Provided that, in the event of temporary absence of the Chief Executive Officer, not 
exceeding ninety days, the Principal Director shall designate an officer under his jurisdiction 
to perform the duties of the Chief Executive Officer during such period. 
(2) Not less than one-half of the salary of the Chief Executive Officer shall be paid by 
the Central Government and the balance from the cantonment fund. 
(3) The Chief Executive Officer shall be the Member-Secretary of the Board and of 
every Committee of the Board. 
25. (1) Subject to the provisions of clause (c) and clause (d) of sub-section (1) of 
section 21, the Chief Executive Officer shall— 
(a) exercise all the powers and perform all the duties conferred or imposed upon 
him by or under this Act or any other law for the time being in force; 
Duties of Chief 
Executive 
Officer. 
Appointment 
of Chief 
Executive 
Officer. 
Allowances to 
Vice-President 
and members. 
Duties of Vice- 
President. 
SERVER1/BILL 2004/RS/148RS\148RS.P65 
13 
(b) subject to any restrictions, limitations and conditions imposed by this Act, to 
exercise executive power to ensure that the administration of the Board is carried out in 
accordance with provisions of this Act; 
(c) prescribe the duties of, and exercise supervision and control over the acts 
and proceedings of all, officers and employees of the Board; 
(d) be responsible for the custody of all records of the Board; 
(e) arrange for the performance of such duties relative to the proceedings of the 
Board or of any Committee of the Board or of any Committee of Arbitration constituted 
under this Act, as those bodies may respectively impose on him; and 
(f) comply with every requisition of the Board on any matter pertaining to the 
administration of the cantonment. 
26. (1) The Chief Executive Officer may direct the execution of any work or the doing 
of any act, in public interest and in accordance with the provisions of this Act and the rules 
made thereunder, and incur such expenditure as may be necessary in executing such work or 
doing such act, as the case may be, subject to the financial limits which the Board may by 
resolution determine subject to general guidelines issued by the Director General, Defence 
Estates in this regard. 
(2) The Chief Executive Officer may, in case of emergency, direct the execution of any 
work or the doing of any act which would ordinarily require the sanction of the Board and 
immediate execution or doing of which is in his opinion, necessary for the service or safety 

 167
of the public, and may direct that the expense of executing such work or doing such act shall 
be paid from the cantonment fund: 
Provided that— 
(a) he shall not act under this section without the previous sanction of the 
President or, in his absence, of the Vice-President; 
(b) he shall not act under this section in contravention of any order of the Board 
prohibiting the execution of any particular work or the doing of any particular act; and 
(c) he shall report forthwith the action taken under this section and the reasons 
therefor to the Board. 
Elections 
27. (1) The Board or, where a Board is not constituted in any place declared by 
notification under sub-section (1) of section 3 to be a cantonment, the Officer Commanding 
the station, shall prepare and publish an electoral roll showing the names of persons qualified 
to vote at elections to the Board and such roll shall be prepared, revised and finally published 
in such manner and on such date in each year as the Central Government may by rule 
prescribe. 
(2) Every person whose name appears in the final electoral roll shall, so long as the roll 
remains in force, be entitled to vote at an election to the Board, and no other person shall be 
so entitled. 
(3) When a cantonment has been divided into wards, the electoral roll shall be divided 
into separate lists for each ward. 
(4) If a new electoral roll is not published in any year on the date prescribed, the 
Central Government may direct that the old electoral roll shall continue in operation until the 
new roll is published. 
Electoral rolls. 
Special power 
of the Chief 
Executive 
Officer. 
SERVER1/BILL 2004/RS/148RS\148RS.P65 
14 
28. (1) Every person who, on such date as may be fixed by the Central Government in 
this behalf by notification in the Official Gazette hereinafter in this section referred to as “the 
qualifying date”, is not less than eighteen years of age and who has resided in the cantonment 
for a period of not less than six months immediately preceding the qualifying date shall, if not 
otherwise disqualified, be entitled to be enrolled as an elector. 
Explanation.—When any place is declared a cantonment for the first time, or when 
any local area is first included in a cantonment, residence in the place or area comprising the 
cantonment on the aforesaid date shall be deemed to be residence in the cantonment for the 
purposes of this sub-section. 
(2) A person notwithstanding that he is otherwise qualified, shall not be entitled to be 
enrolled as an elector if he on the qualifying date— 
(i) is not a citizen of India, or 
(ii) has been adjudged by a competent court to be of unsound mind, or 
(iii) is an undischarged insolvent, or 
(iv) has been sentenced by a Criminal Court to imprisonment for a term exceeding 
two years for an offence which is declared by the Central Government to be such as to 
unfit him to become an elector or has been sentenced by a Criminal Court for any 
offence under Chapter IXA of the Indian Penal Code: 
Provided that any disqualification incurred by a person under clause (iv) shall terminate 
on the lapse of three years from the expiry of the sentence or order. 
(3) If any person having been enrolled as an elector in any electoral roll subsequently 
becomes subject to any of the disqualifications referred to in sub-section (2), his name shall 
be removed from the electoral roll unless, in the case referred to in clause (iv ), the 
disqualification is removed by the Central Government. 
29. (1) Save as hereinafter provided, every person, not being a person holding any 
office of profit under the Government, whose name is entered on the electoral roll of a 

 168
cantonment shall be qualified for election as a member of the Board in that cantonment. 
(2) No person shall be qualified for nomination as a member of a Board if he is subject 
to any of the disqualifications specified in sub-section (2) of section 28. 
(3) No person shall be qualified for being chosen whether by election or nomination 
as, and for being a member of a Board, if he— 
(a) has been dismissed from the service of the Government and is debarred from 
re-employment therein, or is a dismissed employee of a Board; 
(b) is debarred from practising as a legal practitioner by order of any competent 
authority; 
(c) holds any place of profit in the gift or at the disposal of the Board, or is a 
police officer, or is the servant or employer of a member of the Board; or 
(d) is interested in a subsisting contract made with, or in work being done for, the 
Board except as a shareholder other than a director in an incorporated company; or 
(e) is an officer or employee, permanent or temporary, of a Board or of any other 
local authority; or 
(f) is a member of any other local authority; or 
(g) has, by the authority referred to in clause (f) of section 31, been found to 
have been guilty of any of the corrupt practices specified in sub-section (2) of section 
30 unless a period of five years has elapsed since the date of the decision of the 
authority; or 
Qualification 
of electors. 
Qualification 
for being a 
member of the 
Board. 
45 of 1860. 
SERVER1/BILL 2004/RS/148RS\148RS.P65 
15 
(h) fails to pay any arrears of any kind due by him otherwise than as an agent, 
receiver, trustee or an executor, to the Board within thirty days after the notice in this 
behalf has been served upon him; or 
(i) is disqualified under any other provision of this Act: 
Provided that a person shall not be deemed to have any interest in such a 
contract or work as is referred to in clause (d) by reason only of his having a share or 
interest in— 
(a) any lease or sale or purchase of immovable property or any agreement 
for the same; or 
(b) any agreement for the loan of money or any security for the payment of 
money only; or 
(c) any newspaper in which any advertisement relating to the affairs of the 
Board is inserted; or 
(d) the sale to the Board of any articles in which he regularly trades or the 
purchase from the Board of any articles, to a value in either case not exceeding 
twenty-five thousand rupees in the aggregate in any year during the period of 
the contract or work. 
30. (1) For the purposes of sections 27, 28 and 29, ‘person’ means an individual 
human being. 
(2) The following shall be deemed to be corrupt practices within the meaning of clause 
(g) of sub-section (3) of section 29, namely: — 
(1) “bribery” that is to say— 
(A) any gift, offer or promise by a candidate or his agent or by any other 
person with the consent of a candidate or his agent of any gratification to any 
person whomsoever, with the object, directly or indirectly of inducing— 
(a) a person to stand or not to stand as, or to withdraw or not to 
withdraw from being, a candidate at an election; or 
(b) an elector to vote or refrain from voting at an election, or as a 

 169
reward to— 
(i) a person for having so stood or not stood, or for having 
withdrawn or not having withdrawn his candidature; or 
(ii) an elector for having voted or refrained from voting; 
(B) the receipt of, or agreement to receive, any gratification, whether as a 
motive or a reward— 
(a) by a person for standing or not standing as, or for withdrawing 
or not withdrawing, from being a candidate; or 
(b) by any person whomsoever for himself or any other person for 
voting or refraining from voting, or inducing or attempting to induce any 
elector to vote or refrain from voting, or any candidate to withdraw or not 
to withdraw his candidature. 
Explanation.—For the purposes of this clause, the term “gratification” is not 
restricted to pecuniary gratifications or gratifications estimable in money and it includes 
all forms of entertainment and all forms of employment for reward but it does not 
include the payment of any expenses bona fide incurred at, or for the purpose of, any 
election. 
(2) Undue influence, that is to say, any direct or indirect interference or attempt to 
interfere on the part of the candidate or his agent, or of any other person with the consent of 
the candidate or his agent with the free exercise of any electoral right: 
Interpretation. 
SERVER1/BILL 2004/RS/148RS\148RS.P65 
16 
Provided that— 
(a) without prejudice to the generality of the provisions of this clause any such 
person as is referred to therein who— 
(i) threatens any candidate or any elector, or any person in whom a 
candidate or an elector is interested, with injury of any kind including social 
ostracism and ex-communication or expulsion from any caste or community; 
or 
(ii) induces or attempts to induce a candidate or an elector to believe that 
he, or any person in whom he is interested, will become or will be rendered an 
object of divine displeasure or spiritual censure, shall be deemed to interfere 
with the free exercise of the electoral right of such candidate or elector within the 
meaning of this clause; 
(b) a declaration of public policy, or a promise of public action, or the mere 
exercise of a legal right without intent to interfere with an electoral right shall not be 
deemed to interfere within the meaning of this clause. 
(3) The appeal by a candidate or his agent or by any other person with the consent of 
a candidate or his agent to vote or refrain from voting for any person on the ground of his 
religion, race, caste, community or language or the use of, or appeal to religious symbols or 
the use of, or appeal to, national symbols, such as national flag or the national emblem for the 
furtherance of the prospects of the election of that candidate or for prejudicially affecting the 
election of any candidate. 
(4) The promotion of, or attempt to promote, feelings of enmity or hatred between 
different classes of the citizens of India on grounds of religion, race, caste, community or 
language, by a candidate or his agent or any other person with the consent of a candidate or 
his agent for the furtherance of the prospects of the election of that candidate or for 
prejudicially affecting the election of any candidate. 
(5) The publication by a candidate or his agent or by any other person, with the 
consent of a candidate or his agent, of any statement of fact which is false, and which he 
either believes to be false or does not believe to be true, in relation to the personal 
character or conduct of any candidate, or in relation to the candidature, or withdrawal of 
any candidate, being a statement reasonably calculated to prejudice the prospects of that 
candidate’s election. 
(6) The hiring or procuring, whether on payment or otherwise, of any vehicle or vessel 

 170
by a candidate or his agent or by any other person with the consent of a candidate or his 
agent or the use of such vehicle or vessel for the free conveyance of any elector other than 
the candidate himself, the members of his family or his agent to or from any polling station or 
place fixed for the poll: 
Provided that the hiring of a vehicle or vessel by any elector or by several electors at 
their joint costs for the purpose of conveying him or them to and from any such polling 
station or place fixed for the poll shall not be deemed to be a corrupt practice under this 
clause if the vehicle or vessel so hired is a vehicle or vessel not propelled by mechanical 
power: 
Provided further that the use of any public transport vehicle or vessel or any tramcar 
or railway carriage by any elector at his own cost for the purpose of going to or coming from 
any such polling station or place fixed for the poll shall not be deemed to be a corrupt practice 
under this clause. 
Explanation.—In this clause, the expression “vehicle” means any vehicle used or 
capable of being used for the purpose of road transport, whether propelled by mechanical 
power or otherwise and whether used for drawing other vehicles or otherwise. 
SERVER1/BILL 2004/RS/148RS\148RS.P65 
17 
(7) The obtaining or procuring or abetting or attempting to obtain or procure by a 
candidate or his agent or, by any other person with the consent of a candidate or his agent, 
any assistance other than the giving of vote for the furtherance of the prospects of that 
candidate’s election, from any person in the service of the Government or the Board: 
Provided that where any person, in the service of the Government or the Board in the 
discharge or purported discharge of his official duty, makes any arrangements or provides 
any facilities or does any other act or thing, for, to, or in relation to, any candidate or his agent 
or any other person acting with the consent of the candidate or his agent whether by reason 
of the office held by the candidate or for any other reason, such arrangements, facilities or 
act or thing shall not be deemed to be assistance for the furtherance of the prospects of that 
candidate’s election. 
Explanation.—In this section, the expression “agent” includes any person who is 
held to have acted as an agent in connection with the election with the consent of the 
candidate. 
31. The Central Government may, either generally or specially for any cantonment or 
group of cantonments, after previous publication, make rules consistent with this Act to 
regulate all or any of the following matters for the purpose of the holding of elections under 
this Act, namely:— 
(a) the division of a cantonment into wards; 
(b) the determination of the number of members to be elected by each ward; 
(c) the preparation, revision and final publication of electoral rolls; 
(d) the reservation of wards for election of the Scheduled Castes, the Scheduled 
Tribes and women; 
(e) the registration of electors, the nomination of candidates, the time and manner 
of holding elections and the method by which votes shall be recorded; 
(f) the authority which may be an officer of the State Government by which and 
the manner in which disputes relating to electoral rolls or arising out of elections shall 
be decided, and the powers and duties of such authority and the circumstances in 
which such authority may declare a casual vacancy to have been created or any 
candidate to have been elected; 
(g) the fee to be paid for admission and consideration of any application relating 
to election or election disputes; 
(h) any other matter relating to elections or election disputes in respect of which 
the Central Government is empowered to make rules under this Chapter or in respect of 
which this Act makes no provision or makes insufficient provision and provision is, in 
the opinion of the Central Government, necessary. 
Members 
32. (1) No member of a Board shall vote at a meeting of the Board or of any Committee 

 171
of the Board on any question relating to his own conduct or vote or take part in any discussion 
on any matter, other than a matter affecting generally the inhabitants of the cantonment, 
which affects his own pecuniary interest or the valuation of any property in respect of which 
he is directly or indirectly interested, or of any property of or for which he is a manager or 
agent. 
(2) Where any member of the Board present at the meeting of the Board or any 
committee of the Board believes that the person presiding over such meeting has pecuniary 
or other interest in any matter under discussion and moves a motion to that effect, the person 
so presiding— 
(a) shall not be entitled to vote on such motion, and 
Power to make 
rules 
regulating 
elections. 
Member not to 
vote on matter 
in which he is 
interested. 
SERVER1/BILL 2004/RS/148RS\148RS.P65 
18 
(b) shall, if such motion is carried, absent himself from the meeting during such 
discussion. 
33. Every member of a Board shall be liable for the loss, waste or misapplication of any 
money or other property belonging to, vested in, or entrusted to the management of, the 
Board if such loss, waste or misapplication is a direct consequence of his neglect or misconduct 
while such member; and a suit for compensation for the same may be instituted against him 
either by the Board or by the Central Government. 
34. (1) The Central Government may remove from a Board any member thereof, 
who— 
(a) becomes or is found to have been at the time of his election or nomination 
subject to any of the disqualifications specified in sub-section (2) of section 28 or 
in section 29; or 
(b) has absented himself for more than three consecutive meetings or three 
months (whichever is later) of the Board and is unable to explain such absence to the 
satisfaction of the Board. 
Explanation.—In computing the aforesaid period of three consecutive months, 
no account shall be taken of any period of absence with the leave of the Board; or 
(c) has knowingly contravened the provisions of section 32; or 
(d) being a legal practitioner, acts or appears on behalf of any other person 
against the Board in any legal proceeding or against the Government in any such 
proceeding relating to any matter in which the Board is or has been concerned or acts 
or appears on behalf of any person in any criminal proceeding instituted by or on 
behalf of the Board against such person; or 
(e) has himself done or aided or abetted encroachments and illegal constructions 
on defence land in contravention of the provisions of this Act and the rules and byelaws 
made thereunder. 
(2) The Central Government may remove from a Board any member who, in the opinion 
of the Central Government, has so abused in any manner his position as a member of the 
Board as to render his continuance as a member detrimental to the public interests. 
(3) The General Officer Commanding-in-Chief, the Command may, on receipt of a 
report from the Officer Commanding the station remove from a Board any military officer 
nominated as a member of the Board who is, in the opinion of the Officer Commanding the 
station, unable to discharge his duties as a member of the Board and has failed to resign his 
office. 
(4) No member shall be removed from a Board under sub-section (1) or sub-section (2) 
of this section unless he has been given a reasonable opportunity of showing cause against 
his removal. 

 172
35. (1) A member removed under clause (b) of sub-section (1) or under sub-section (3) 
of section 34 shall, if otherwise qualified, be eligible for re-election or re-nomination. 
(2) A member removed under clause (c) or clause (d) of sub-section (1) of section 34 
shall not be eligible for re-election or nomination for the period during which, but for such 
removal, he would have continued in office. 
(3) A member removed under sub-section (2) of section 34 shall not be eligible for reelection 
or nomination until the expiry of three years from the date of his removal. 
36. Every member of the Board shall be deemed to be a public servant within the 
meaning of section 21 of the Indian Penal Code and clause (c) of section 2 of the Prevention 
of Corruption Act, 1988. 
Liability of 
members. 
Removal of 
members. 
Consequences 
of removal. 
Member of the 
Board to be 
deemed a 
public servant. 
49 of 1988. 
45 of 1860. 
SERVER1/BILL 2004/RS/148RS\148RS.P65 
19 
Employees 
37. (1) No person who has directly or indirectly by himself or his partner any share or 
interest in a contract with, by or on behalf of a Board, or in any employment under, by or on 
behalf of a Board, otherwise than as an employee of the Board, shall become or remain an 
employee of such Board. 
(2) An employee of a Board who knowingly acquires or continues to have directly or 
indirectly by himself or his partner any share or interest in a contract with, by or on behalf of 
the Board or, in any employment under, by or on behalf of, the Board, otherwise than as an 
employee of the Board, shall be deemed to have committed an offence under section 168 of 
the Indian Penal Code. 
(3) Nothing in this section shall apply to any share or interest in any contract with, by 
or on behalf of, or employment under, by or on behalf of a Board if the same is a share in a 
company contracting with, or employed by, or on behalf of, the Board or is a share or interest 
acquired or retained with the permission of the General Officer Commanding-in-Chief, the 
Command in any lease or sale to, or purchase by the Board of land or building or in any 
agreement for the same. 
(4) Every person applying for employment as an employee of a Board shall, if he is 
related by blood or marriage to any member of the Board or to any person not being a lower 
grade employee, in receipt of remuneration from the Board, notify the fact and the nature of 
such relationship to the appointing authority before the appointment is made, and if he has 
failed to do so, his appointment shall be invalid but without prejudice to the validity of 
anything previously done by him. 
38. Every officer or employee, permanent or temporary of a Board shall be deemed to 
be a public servant within the meaning of section 21 of the Indian Penal Code and clause (c) 
of section 2 of the Prevention of Corruption Act, 1988. 
Procedure 
39. (1) Every Board shall meet at least once in a month to transact its business on 
such day as may be fixed by the President and in his absence by the Vice-President, and its 
notice shall be given in such manner as may be provided in the regulations made by the 
Board under this Chapter. 
(2) The President may, whenever he thinks fit, and shall, upon a requisition in writing 
by not less than one-fourth of the members of the Board, convene a special meeting. 
(3) Any meeting may be adjourned until the next or any subsequent day, and an 
adjourned meeting may be further adjourned in like manner. 

 173
40. Subject to any regulation made by the Board under this Chapter, any business may 
be transacted at any meeting: 
Provided that no business relating to the imposition, abolition or modification of any 
tax shall be transacted at a meeting unless notice of the same and of the date fixed therefor 
has been sent to each member not less than seven days before that date. 
41. (1) The quorum necessary for the transaction of business at a meeting of the 
Board shall be one-half of the number of members of the Board holding the office: 
Provided that if the number of members of the Board holding office at a particular time 
is an odd number, the quorum shall be one-half of the number obtained by adding one to the 
number of such members. 
(2) If a quorum is not present, the President or in his absence, the Vice-President or in 
the absence of both, the Member-Secretary shall adjourn the meeting and the business 
which would have been brought before the original meeting if there had been a quorum 
present there at shall be brought before, and may be transacted at, an adjourned meeting, 
whether there is a quorum present or not. 
Disqualification 
of person as an 
employee of 
Board. 
Cantonment 
employee to be 
deemed a 
public servant. 
49 of 1988. 
45 of 1860. 
Meetings. 
Business to be 
transacted. 
Quorum. 
45 of 1860. 
SERVER1/BILL 2004/RS/148RS\148RS.P65 
20 
42. In the absence of— 
(a) both the President and the Vice-President from any meeting of a Board in 
which there is more than one elected member, 
(b) the President from a meeting of a Board constituted under sub-section (6) of 
section 12 or sub-section (2) of section 13, 
the members present shall elect one from among their own members to preside. 
43. (1) The minutes of the proceedings of each meeting shall be recorded in a book 
and shall be signed by the person presiding over the meeting and the Chief Executive 
Officer, before the close of the meeting and shall, at such times and in such place as may 
be fixed by the Board, be open to inspection free of charge by any inhabitant of the 
cantonment. 
(2) Copies of the minutes shall, as soon as possible after each meeting, be forwarded 
for information to the General Officer Commanding-in-Chief, the Command, the District 
Magistrate and the Defence Estate Officer and in cantonments where Navy or Air Force 
stations are located copies of the minutes shall be forwarded for information to the Command 
Headquarters of the Navy or, as the case may be, the Air Force. 
44. Every meeting of a Board shall be open to the public unless in any case the 
person presiding over the meeting, for reasons to be recorded in the minutes, otherwise 
directs. 
45. (1) All questions coming before a meeting shall be decided by the majority of the 
votes of the members present and voting. 
(2) In the case of an equality of votes, the person presiding over the meeting, shall 
have a second or casting vote. 
(3) The dissent of any member from any decision of the Board shall, if the member so 
requests, be entered in the minutes, together with a short statement of the ground for such 
dissent. 

 174
46. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in Official Gazette, declare the 
civil area, in a cantonment, which is inhabited largely by civil population to be the civil area 
for the purposes of this Act. 
(2) The Central Government may in consultation with the Board undertake, as and 
when required and shall undertake after every census, a review of the boundaries of the civil 
area in each cantonment. 
47. (1) Every Board constituted under section 12 in a cantonment shall appoint a 
committee consisting of the elected members of the Board, the Health Officer and the Executive 
Engineer for the administration of the civil area in the cantonment as notified under section 
46 of this Act and may delegate its powers and duties to such committee in the manner 
provided in clause (e) of sub-section (1) of section 48. 
(2) The Vice-President of the Board shall be the Chairman of the committee appointed 
under sub-section (1). 
(3) The powers, duties and functions of the Board under sub-section (1) of section 
137, section 140, section 143, section 147, section 149, section 254, section 262, section 297 
and section 298 shall be exercised or discharged in respect of a civil area by the civil area 
committee: 
Provided that if the Health Officer dissents from any decision arrived at by the committee 
under sub-section (1) of section 137, section 140, section 143, section 147 and section 149 on 
health grounds, the matter may be referred to the Board by the President for 
decision. 
Presiding 
Officer. 
Minutes. 
Meetings to be 
public. 
Method of 
deciding 
questions. 
Civil area. 
Committees for 
civil areas. 
SERVER1/BILL 2004/RS/148RS\148RS.P65 
21 
48. (1) A Board may make regulations consistent with this Act and with the rules made 
thereunder to provide for all or any of the following matters, namely:— 
(a) the time and place of its meetings; 
(b) the manner in which notice of the meeting shall be given; 
(c) the conduct of proceedings at meetings and the adjournments of meetings; 
(d) the custody of the common seal of the Board and the purposes for which it 
shall be used; and 
(e) the appointment of committees for any purpose and the determination of all 
matters relating to the constitution and procedure of such committees, and the 
delegation to such committees, subject to any conditions which the Board thinks fit to 
impose, of any of the powers or duties of the Board under this Act other than a power 
to make regulations or bye-laws. 
(2) No regulation made under clause (e) of sub-section (1) shall take effect until it has 
been approved by the Central Government. 
(3) No regulation made under this section shall take effect until it has been published 
in such manner as the Central Government may direct. 
49. (1) A Board may – 
(a) join with any other local authority— 
(i) in appointing a joint committee for any purpose in which they are 
jointly interested and in appointing a chairman of such committee; 
(ii) in delegation to such committee power to frame terms binding on the 
Board and such other local authority as to the construction and future 
maintenance of any joint work or to exercise any power which might be exercised 
by the Board or by such other local authority; and 

 175
(iii) in making regulations for regulating the proceedings of any such 
committee relating to the purposes for which it has been appointed; or 
(b) with the previous sanction of the General Officer Commanding-in-Chief, the 
Command, and the State Government concerned, enter into an agreement with any 
other local authority regarding the levy of any tax or toll whereby the said tax or toll 
respectively leviable by the Board and by such other local authority may be levied 
together instead of separately within the limits of the area hereafter in this section 
referred to as the aggregate area subject to the control of the Board and such other 
local authority. 
(2) If any difference of opinion arises between any Board and other local authority 
acting together under this section, the decision thereon of the Central Government or of an 
officer appointed by the Central Government in this behalf shall be final. 
(3) When any agreement such as is referred to in clause (b) of sub-section (1) has 
been entered into, then— 
(a) where the agreement relates to octroi or terminal tax or toll, the party to the 
agreement (the Board, or as the case may be, such other local authority) which is 
specified in this behalf in the agreement,— 
(i) shall have the same powers to establish octroi limits and octroi stations 
and places for the collection of octroi, terminal tax and toll within the aggregate 
area as it has within the area ordinarily subject to its control; 
(ii) shall have the same powers of collecting such octroi, terminal tax 
or toll in the aggregate area and the provisions of any enactment in force 
Power to make 
regulations. 
Joint action 
with other local 
authority. 
SERVER1/BILL 2004/RS/148RS\148RS.P65 
22 
relating to the levy of such octroi, terminal tax or toll by it shall apply in the 
same manner as if the aggregate area were comprised within the area ordinarily 
subject to its control; 
(b) the total of the collection of such octroi, tax or toll made in the aggregate area 
and the costs thereby incurred shall be divided between the cantonment fund and the 
fund subject to the control of such other local authority, in such proportion, as may 
have been determined by the agreement. 
50. (1) Every Board shall, as soon as may be after the close of the financial year and 
not later than the date fixed in this behalf by the Central Government, submit to the Central 
Government through the General Officer Commanding-in-Chief, the Command, a report on 
the administration of the cantonment during the preceding financial year, in such form and 
containing such details as the Central Government may direct. 
(2) The comments, if any, of the General Officer Commanding-in-Chief, the Command, 
on such report shall be communicated by him to the Board which shall be allowed a reasonable 
time to furnish a reply thereto, and the comments together with the reply, if any, shall be 
forwarded to the Central Government along with the report. 
Cont ol r
51. The Central Government or such officer or authority as may be authorised by the 
Central Government in this behalf may at any time require a Board. 
(a) to produce any record, correspondence, plan or other document in its 
possession or under its control; 
(b) to furnish any return, plan, estimate, statement, account or statistics relating 
to its proceedings, duties or works; 
(c) to furnish or obtain and furnish any report. 
52. The Central Government or the General Officer Commanding-in-Chief, the Command 
or the Director General or the Principal Director, may depute any person in the service of the 
Government to inspect or examine any department of the office of, or any service or work 
undertaken by, or thing belonging to, a Board, and to report thereon, and the Board and its 

 176
officers and employees shall be bound to afford the person so deputed access at all reasonable 
times to the premises and property of the Board and to all records, accounts and other 
documents the inspection of which he may consider necessary to enable him to discharge 
his duties. 
53. The General Officer Commanding-in-Chief, the Command or the Principal Director, 
may, by order in writing,— 
(a) call for any book or document in the possession or under the control of the 
Board; 
(b) require the Board to furnish such statements, accounts, reports and copies 
of documents relating to its proceedings, duties or works as he thinks fit. 
54. If, on receipt of any information or report obtained under section 51 or section 52 
or section 53, the Central Government or the General Officer Commanding-in-Chief, the 
Command or the Director General or the Principal Director is of opinion— 
(a) that any duty imposed on a Board by or under this Act has not been performed 
or has been performed in an imperfect, inefficient or unsuitable manner; or 
(b) that adequate financial provision has not been made for the performance of 
any such duty, 
it or he may direct the Board, within such period as it or he thinks fit, to make arrangements 
to its or his satisfaction for the proper performance of the duty, or as the case may be, to make 
financial provision to its or his satisfaction for the performance of the duty: 
Report on 
administration. 
Power of 
Central 
Government to 
require 
production of 
documents. 
Inspection. 
Power to call 
for documents. 
Power to 
require 
execution of 
work, etc. 
SERVER1/BILL 2004/RS/148RS\148RS.P65 
23 
Provided that unless in the opinion of the Central Government or the General Officer 
Commanding-in-Chief, the Command or the Director General or the Principal Director, as the 
case may be, the immediate execution of such order is necessary, it or he shall, before making 
any direction under this section, give the Board an opportunity of showing cause why such 
direction should not be made. 
55. If, within the period fixed by a direction made under section 54, any action the 
taking of which has been directed under that section has not been duly taken, the Central 
Government or the General Officer Commanding-in-Chief, the Command or the Director General, 
or the Principal Director, as the case may be, may make arrangements for the taking of such 
action, and may direct that all expenses connected therewith shall be defrayed out of the 
cantonment fund. 
56. (1) If the President dissents from any decision of the Board which he considers 
prejudicial to the health, welfare, discipline or security of the Forces in the cantonment, he 
may, for reasons to be recorded in the minutes, by order in writing, direct the suspension of 
action thereon for any period not exceeding one month and, if he does so, shall forthwith 
refer the matter to the General Officer Commanding-in-Chief, the Command. 
(2) If the District Magistrate considers any decision of a Board to be prejudicial to the 
public health, safety or convenience, he may, after giving notice in writing of his intention to 
the Board, refer the matter to the Central Government, and pending the disposal of the 
reference to the Central Government no action shall be taken on the decision. 
(3) If any Magistrate who is a member of a Board, being present at a meeting, dissents 

 177
from any decision which he considers prejudicial to the public health, safety or convenience, 
he may, for reasons to be recorded in the minutes and after giving notice in writing of his 
intention to the President, report the matter to the District Magistrate; and the President 
shall, on receipt of such notice, direct the suspension of action on the decision for a period 
sufficient to allow of a communication being made to the District Magistrate and of his taking 
proceedings as provided in sub-section (2). 
(4) If the Chief Executive Officer considers any decision of the Board taken at a meeting, 
to be in contravention of the provisions of this Act, rules, regulations or bye-laws made 
thereunder and the general guidelines issued by the Central Government from time to time in 
this regard, he may, for reasons to be recorded in writing and after informing the President in 
this behalf, forthwith refer the matter to the Principal Director who shall if considered 
appropriate direct the suspension of action on the said decision for a period not exceeding 
one month. 
(5) The Principal Director shall, for reasons to be recorded in writing on the reference 
made under sub-section (4), refer the matter to the General Officer Commanding-in-Chief, the 
Command along with recommendation on whether or not the said decision of the Board 
should be revoked and inform the matter to Director General Defence Estates. 
57. The Central Government may, at any time, review any decision or order of the 
Board or the General Officer Commanding-in-Chief, the Command, and pass such orders 
thereon as it may deem fit: 
Provided that where it is proposed to modify a decision or order of the Board reasonable 
opportunity shall be given to the Board to show cause why the decision or order in question 
should not be modified. 
58. (1) The General Officer Commanding-in-Chief, the Command, may at any 
time — 
(a) direct that any matter or any specific proposal other than one which has been 
referred to the Central Government under sub-section (2) of section 56 be considered 
or reconsidered by the Board; or 
Power to 
provide for 
enforcement of 
direction under 
section 54. 
Power to 
override 
decision of 
Board. 
Power of 
Central 
Government to 
review. 
Power of 
General Officer 
Commandingin- 
Chief, the 
Command, on 
reference 
under section 
56 or 
otherwise. 
SERVER1/BILL 2004/RS/148RS\148RS.P65 
24 
(b) direct the suspension, for such period as may be stated in the order, of action 
on any decision of a Board, other than a decision which has been referred to him under 
sub-section (1) of section 56, and thereafter cancel the suspension or after giving the 
Board a reasonable opportunity of showing cause why such direction should not be 
made, direct that the decision shall not be carried into effect or that it shall be carried 
into effect with such modifications as he may specify. 
(2) When any decision of a Board has been referred to him under sub-sections (1) and 

 178
(4) of section 56, the General Officer Commanding-in-Chief, the Command, may, by order in 
writing,— 
(a) cancel the order given by the President directing the suspension of action; 
or 
(b) extend the duration of the order for such period as he thinks fit; or 
(c) after giving the Board a reasonable opportunity of showing cause why such 
direction should not be made, direct that the decision shall not be carried into effect or 
that it shall be carried into effect by the Board with such modifications as he may 
specify. 
59. (1) When any decision of a Board has been referred to the Central Government 
under sub-section (2) of section 56, the Central Government may, after consulting the General 
Officer Commanding-in-Chief, the Command, by order in writing,— 
(a) direct that no action be taken on the decision; or 
(b) direct that the decision be carried into effect either without modification or 
with such modifications as it may specify. 
60. (1) If, in the opinion of the Central Government, any Board is not competent to 
perform or persistently makes default in the performance of the duties imposed on it by or 
under this Act or otherwise by law, or exceeds or abuses its powers, the Central Government 
may by an order published, together with the statement of the reasons therefor, in the Official 
Gazette, declare the Board to be incompetent or in default or to have exceeded or abused its 
powers, as the case may be, and supersede it for such period as may be specified in the order: 
Provided that no Board shall be superseded unless a reasonable opportunity has been 
given to it to show cause against the supersession. 
(2) When a Board is superseded by an order under sub-section (1)— 
(a) all members of the Board shall, on such date as may be specified in the order, 
vacate their offices as such members but without prejudice to their eligibility for election 
or nomination under clause (c); 
(b) during the supersession of the Board, all powers and duties conferred and 
imposed upon the Board by or under this Act shall be exercised and performed by the 
Officer Commanding the station, or by such officer as may be authorised by the 
Central Government, subject to such reservation if any, as the Central Government 
may prescribe in this behalf; and 
(c) before the expiry of the period of supersession elections shall be held and 
nominations made for the purpose of reconstituting the Board. 
Validity of proceedings 
61. (1) No act or proceeding of a Board or of any committee of a Board shall be invalid 
by reason only of the existence of a vacancy in the Board or committee. 
(2) No disqualification or defect in the election, nomination or appointment of a 
person acting as the President or a member of a Board or of any such committee shall 
vitiate any act or proceeding of the Board or committee if the majority of the persons 
Power of 
Central 
Government on 
a reference 
made under 
section 56. 
Supersession 
of Board. 
Validity of 
proceedings, 
etc. 
SERVER1/BILL 2004/RS/148RS\148RS.P65 
25 
present at the time of the act being done or the proceeding being taken were duly qualified 
members thereof. 
(3) Any document or minutes which purport to be the record of the proceedings of a 
Board or any committee of a Board shall, if made and signed substantially in the manner 
prescribed for the making and signing of the record of such proceedings, be presumed to be a 

 179
correct record of the proceedings of a duly convened meeting, held by a duly constituted Board 
or committee, as the case may be, whereof all the members were duly qualified. 
CHAPTER IV 
DUTIES AND DISCRETIONARY FUNCTIONS OF BOARDS 
62. It shall be the duty of every Board, so far as the funds at its disposal permit, to make 
reasonable provision within the cantonment for— 
(i) lighting streets and other public places; 
(ii) watering streets and other public places; 
(iii) cleansing streets, public places and drains, abating nuisances and removing 
noxious vegetation; 
(iv) regulating offensive, dangerous or obnoxious trades, callings and practices; 
(v) removing , on the ground of public safety, health or convenience, 
undesirable obstructions and projections in streets and other public places; 
(vi) securing or removing dangerous buildings and places; 
(vii) acquiring, maintaining, changing and regulating places for the disposal of 
the dead; 
(viii) constructing, altering and maintaining streets, culverts, bridges, causeways, 
markets, slaughter-houses, latrines, privies, urinals, drains, drainage works and 
sewerage works and regulating their use; 
(ix) planting and maintaining trees on roadsides and other public places; 
(x) providing or arranging for a sufficient supply of pure and wholesome water, 
where such supply does not exist, guarding from pollution water used for human 
consumption, and preventing polluted water from being so used; 
(xi) registering births and deaths; 
(xii) preventing and checking spread of dangerous diseases; establishing and 
maintaining a system of public vaccination and inoculation for the said objective; 
(xiii) establishing and maintaining or supporting public hospitals , maternity and 
child welfare centres and dispensaries, and providing public medical relief; 
(xiv) establishing and maintaining or assisting primary schools; 
(xv) rendering assistance in extinguishing fires, and protecting light and property 
when fire occurs; 
(xvi) maintaining and developing the value of property vested in, or entrusted 
to, the management of the Board; 
(xvii) establishing and maintaining civil defence services; 
(xviii) preparing and implementing town planning schemes; 
(xix) preparing and implementing plans for economic development and social 
justice; 
(xx) naming and numbering of streets and premises; 
Duties of 
Board. 
SERVER1/BILL 2004/RS/148RS\148RS.P65 
26 
(xxi) according or refusing permission to erect or re-erect building; 
(xxii) organising, promoting or supporting cultural and sports activities; 
(xxiii) fulfilling any other obligation imposed upon it by or under this Act or any 
other law for the time being in force. 
63. A Board may, subject to any conditions imposed by the Central Government, 
manage any property entrusted to its management by the Central Government on such terms 
as to the sharing of rents and profits accruing from such property as may be determined by 
rule made under section 351. 
64. (1) A Board may, within the cantonment, make provision for— 
(i) laying out in areas, whether previously built upon or not, new streets, and 
acquiring land for that purpose and for the construction of buildings, and compounds 
of buildings, to abut on such streets; 
(ii) constructing, establishing or maintaining public parks, gardens, offices, 
dairies, bathing or washing places, drinking fountains, tanks, wells and other works of 

 180
public utility; 
(iii) reclaiming unhealthy localities; 
(vi) furthering educational objects by measures other than the establishment 
and maintenance of primary schools; 
(v) setting up or supporting higher schools, colleges and vocational, professional 
and special education; 
(vi) constructing, and maintaining works and structures, including rainwater 
harvesting, for providing supply of water for public and private purposes; 
(vii) constituting, maintaining and managing supply and distribution of electricity, 
including by exploiting non-conventional energy sources, to public and private 
premises; 
(viii) taking a census and granting rewards for information which may tend to 
secure the correct registration of vital statistics; 
(ix) making a survey; 
(x) giving relief on the occurrence of local epidemics, floods, famines or other 
natural calamities by the establishment or maintenance of relief work or otherwise; 
(xi) securing or assisting to secure suitable places for the carrying on of any 
offensive dangerous or obnoxious trade, calling or occupation; 
(xii) establishing and maintaining a farm or other place for the disposal of 
sewage; 
(xiii) constructing, subsidising or guaranteeing tramways or other means of 
locomotion, and electric lighting or electric power work; 
(xiv) establishing and maintaining cattle pounds; 
(xv) arranging for civic reception with prior approval of the Officer Commanding 
the Station; 
(xvi) providing housing accommodation for any class of inhabitants; 
(xvii) celebrating Independence Day and Republic Day and incurring expenditure 
thereon; 
(xviii) developing land resources under the management of the Board; 
Power to 
manage 
property. 
Discretionary 
functions of 
Board. 
SERVER1/BILL 2004/RS/148RS\148RS.P65 
27 
(xix) preparing and implementing group housing schemes; 
(xx) establishing and undertaking remunerative projects; 
(xxi) developing small-scale and cottage industries; 
(xxii) developing expertise in different areas of urban governance and local selfgovernment 
to and able to provide consultancy to other Municipal and Development 
Authorities; 
(xxiii) adopting any measure, other than a measure specified in section 62 or in 
the foregoing provisions of this section likely to promote the safety, health or 
convenience of the inhabitants of the cantonment; 
(xxiv) establishing and maintaining or supporting libraries, museums, art galleries, 
botanical or zoological collections; 
(xxv) establishing and maintaining or supporting stadia, gymnasia, akharas and 
places for sports and games; 
(xxvi) establishing theatres and cinemas; 
(xxvii) organising and managing fairs and exhibitions; 
(xxviii) constructing and maintaining:— 
(a) rest-houses; 
(b) poor-houses; 
(c) infirmaries; 
(d) children’s home; 

 181
(e) houses for deaf and dumb and for disabled and handicapped children; 
(f ) shelters for destitute and disabled persons; 
(g) asylums for persons of unsound mind; 
(h) old age homes; 
(i) working women’s hostels; 
(xxix) establishing and managing chemical or bacteriological laboratories for the 
examination or analysis of water, food and drugs for the detection of diseases or 
research connected with the public health or medical relief; 
(xxx) providing relief to destitute and disabled persons; 
(xxxi) establishing and maintaining veterinary hospitals; 
(xxxii) constructing and maintaining warehouses and godowns; 
(xxxiii) constructing and managing garages, sheds and stands for vehicles and 
cattle sheds; 
(xxxiv) constructing and managing community halls and convention halls ; 
(xxxv) holding seminars, workshops, public debates, and similar activities 
particularly on issues and rules and regulations of civic importance. 
(2) A Board may, either within or outside the cantonment, make provision for the 
doing of anything on which expenditure is declared by the Central Government, or by the 
Board with the sanction of the Central Government, to be an appropriate charge on the 
cantonment fund. 
SERVER1/BILL 2004/RS/148RS\148RS.P65 
28 
65. (1) A Board may make provision subject to availability of funds for— 
(i) educational objects in a cantonment; 
(ii) the objectives of public health and medical care; 
(iii) works relating to water-supply, drainage and lighting; 
(iv) the preservation, improvement and upgradation of environment, 
outside the cantonment, if it is satisfied that the interests of the residents of the cantonment 
will be served thereby. 
CHAPTER V 
TAXES AND FEES 
Impo ition o  taxation s f
66. (1) The Board shall, with the previous sanction of the Central Government, 
impose the following taxes for the purposes of this Act :— 
(a) property tax; and 
(b) tax on trades, professions callings and employments. 
(2) In addition to the taxes specified in sub-section (1) the Board may, for the 
purposes of this Act, impose any tax which under any enactment for the time being in force 
may be imposed in any municipality in the State in which the cantonment is situated: 
Provided that the Board shall revise every five years, the rates of taxes imposed under 
sub-sections (1) and (2) : 
Provided further that the Board shall not abolish any tax imposed under this section or 
vary it to the Board’s financial disadvantage without the prior sanction of the Central 
Government and the tax mentioned in sub-section (2) shall not exceed the ceiling prescribed 
in this behalf by clause (2) of article 276 of the Constitution. 
(3) The taxes specified in sub-sections (1) and (2) shall be imposed, assessed and 
collected in accordance with the provisions of this Act, rules and the bye-laws made 
thereunder. 
(4) Any tax imposed under this section shall take effect from the date of its 
notification in the Official Gazette or where any later date is specified in this behalf in the 
notification, from such later date. 
67. The Board shall, for the purposes of this Act, charge the following fees, 
namely:— 
(a) licence fee on vehicles and animals; 
(b) licence fee on advertisements other than advertisements in newspapers; 
(c) fee relating to maintenance of property records; 

 182
(d) processing fee on buildings payable along with application for sanction of 
the building plan; 
(e) licence fee on entry of vehicles; 
(f) betterment fee on the increase in land value caused by the execution of any 
development work; and 
(g) such other fee which the Board may by regulation specify: 
Provided that the fee charged under clause (g) of this section shall not be less than the 
cost incurred by the Board for or in connection with the specific service to which the fee 
relates. 
Power of 
expenditure of 
educational, 
health and 
other purposes 
outside the 
cantonment. 
Charging of 
fees. 
General power 
of taxation. 
SERVER1/BILL 2004/RS/148RS\148RS.P65 
29 
68. Save as otherwise provided in this Act, the property tax shall be levied on lands 
and buildings in the cantonment and shall consist of not less than ten and not more than 
thirty per cent of the annual rateable value of lands and buildings: 
Provided that the Board may, when fixing the rate at which the property tax shall be 
levied during any year, determine that the rate leviable in respect of lands and buildings or 
portions of lands and buildings in which any particular class of trade or business is carried 
on shall be higher than the rate determined in respect of other lands and buildings or portions 
of other lands and buildings by an amount not exceeding one half of the rate so fixed: 
Provided further that the tax may be levied on graduated scale, if the Board so 
determines. 
Explanation.—Where any portion of a land or building is liable to a higher rate of the 
tax such portion shall be deemed to be a separate property for the purpose of municipal 
taxation alone. 
69. When a resolution has been passed by the Board proposing to impose a tax 
under section 66, the Board shall in the manner prescribed in section 324 publish a notice 
specifying— 
(a) the tax which it is proposed to impose; 
(b) the persons or classes of persons to be made liable and the description of the 
property or other taxable thing or circumstance in respect of which they are to be made 
liable; and 
(c) the rate at which the tax is to be levied. 
70. (1) Any inhabitant of the cantonment may, within thirty days from the publication 
of the notice under section 69, submit to the Board an objection in writing to all or any of the 
proposals contained therein and the Board shall take such objection into consideration and 
pass orders thereon by special resolution. 
(2) Unless the Board decides to abandon its proposals contained in the notice 
published under section 69, it shall submit to the Central Government through the General 
Officer Commanding-in-Chief, the Command, all such proposals along with the objections, 
if any, received in connection therewith together with its opinion thereon and any 
modifications proposed in accordance with such opinion and the notice published under 
the said section. 
71. The Central Government may authorise the Board to impose the tax either in the 
original form or, if any objection has been submitted, in that form or any such modified form 
as it thinks fit. 
72. (1) Where the Central Government is of opinion that for securing adequate financial 
provision for the efficient discharge of the duties and functions of a Board it is necessary so 

 183
to do, it may issue directions to the Board requiring it to impose within the cantonment area 
any tax which it is empowered under this Act to impose and which is not already imposed 
within the said area or to enhance any existing tax in such a manner or to such an extent as the 
Central Government considers fit and the Board shall, in accordance with the direction, 
forthwith impose or enhance such tax in accordance with the provisions of this Chapter: 
Provided that— 
(a) no such directions shall be issued without giving the Board and the 
inhabitants of the cantonment area, an opportunity of showing cause why such 
directions should not be issued; 
(b) the Central Government shall take into consideration any objection which 
the Board or any inhabitant of the cantonment area may make against the imposition or 
enhancement of such tax; 
Norms of 
property tax. 
Framing of 
preliminary 
proposals. 
Objections and 
disposal 
thereof. 
Imposition of 
tax. 
Power of 
Central 
Government to 
issue 
directions to 
the Board. 
SERVER1/BILL 2004/RS/148RS\148RS.P65 
30 
(c) it shall not be lawful for the Board to modify or abolish such tax when 
imposed or enhanced without the sanction of the Central Government. 
(2) The Central Government may, at any time, cancel or modify any direction 
issued by it under sub-section (1) with effect from such date as may be specified in the 
direction and on and from the date so specified the imposition or enhancement of such 
tax, shall cease or be modified accordingly. 
73. For the purposes of this Chapter, “annual rateable value” means— 
(a) in the case of hotels, colleges, schools, hospitals, factories and any 
other buildings which the Chief Executive Officer decides to assess under this 
clause, one-twentieth of the sum obtained by adding the estimated present cost 
of erecting the building to the estimated value of the land appertaining thereto; 
and 
(b) in the case of building or land not assessed under clause (a), the gross 
annual rent for which such building exclusive of furniture or machinery therein or 
such land is actually let or, where the building or land is not let or in the opinion 
of the Chief Executive Officer is let for a sum less than its fair letting value, might 
reasonably be expected to let from year to year : 
Provided that, where the annual rateable value of any building is, by reason of 
exceptional circumstances, in the opinion of the President Cantonment Board, excessive 
if calculated in the aforesaid manner, the President Cantonment Board may fix the annual 
rateable value at any less amount which appears to him to be just. 
74. (1) Save as otherwise expressly provided in the notification imposing the tax, 
every tax assessed on the annual rateable value of buildings or lands or of both shall be 
leviable primarily upon the actual occupier of the property upon which the said tax is 
assessed, if he is the owner of the buildings or land or holds them on a building or other 
lease granted by or on behalf of the Government or the Board or on a building lease 
from any person. 
(2) In any other case, the tax shall be primarily leviable as follows, namely :— 

 184
(a) if the property is let, upon the lessor; 
(b) if the property is sub-let, upon the superior lessor; 
(c) if the property is unlet, upon the person in whom the right to let the same 
vests. 
(3) The liability of the several owners of any building which is, or purports to be, 
severally owned in parts or flats or rooms or separate tenements for the payment of 
such tax or any instalment thereof payable during the period of such ownership shall be 
joint and several. 
(4) On failure to recover any sum due on account of such tax from the person 
primarily liable, these may be recovered from the occupier of any part of the buildings 
or lands in respect of which the tax is due such portion of the sum due as bears to the 
whole amount due the same ratio which the rent annually payable by such occupier 
bears to the aggregate amount of rent so payable in respect of the whole of the said 
buildings or lands, or to the aggregate amount of the letting value thereof, if any, stated 
in the authenticated assessment list. 
(5) An occupier who makes any payment for which he is not primarily liable under 
this section shall, in the absence of any contract to the contrary, be entitled to be 
reimbursed by the person primarily liable for the payment, and, if so entitled, may 
deduct the amount so paid from the amount of any rent from time to time becoming due 
from him to such person. 
Definition 
of “annual 
rateable 
value”. 
Incidence of 
taxation. 
SERVER1/BILL 2004/RS/148RS\148RS.P65 
31 
Assessment list 
75. When a tax assessed on the annual rateable value of buildings or lands or both is 
imposed, the Chief Executive Officer shall cause an assessment list of all buildings or lands 
in the cantonment, or of both, as the case may be, to be prepared in such form and in such 
manner as the Central Government may by rule prescribe. 
76. (1) The Chief Executive Officer shall, at the same time, give public notice of a date, 
not less than one month thereafter, when he shall proceed to consider the valuation and 
assessments entered in the assessment list, and, in all cases in which any property is for the 
first time assessed or the assessment is increased shall also give written notice thereof to the 
owner and to any lessee or occupier of the property. 
(2) Any objection to a valuation or assessment shall be made in writing to the Chief 
Executive Officer before the date fixed in the notice, and shall state in what respect the 
valuation or assessment is disputed, and all objections so made shall be recorded in a 
register to be kept for the purpose by the Chief Executive Officer. 
(3) The objections shall be inquired into and investigated, and the persons making 
them shall be allowed an opportunity of being heard either in person or by authorised agent 
by the Chief Executive Officer. 
77. (1) When all objections made under section 76 have been disposed of, and the 
revision of the valuation and assessment has been completed, the assessment list shall be 
authenticated by the signatures of the Chief Executive Officer and the President Cantonment 
Board, who shall, certify that except in the cases if any, in which amendments have been 
made as shown therein no valid objection has been made to the annual rateable value or any 
other matters entered in the said list: 
Provided that whenever the General Officer Commanding-in-Chief or Principal Director 
or Director Command comes to the conclusion that the assessment lists or any entries 
therein have not been correctly prepared and are prejudicial to the interests of the Board or 
of the Central Government, they may suo moto re-open the said assessment and issue such 
directions as deemed fit. 
(2) The assessment list so authenticated shall be deposited in the office of the Board, 

 185
and shall there be open, free of charge, during office hours to all owners lessees and occupiers 
of property comprised therein or the authorised agents of such persons, and a public notice 
that it is so open shall forthwith be published. 
78. Subject to such alterations as may thereafter be made in the assessment list under 
the provisions of this Chapter and to the result of any appeal made thereunder, the entries in 
the assessment list authenticated and deposited as provided in section 77 shall be accepted 
as conclusive evidence— 
(a) for the purposes of assessing any tax imposed under this Act, of the annual 
rateable value or other valuation of all buildings and lands to which such entries 
respectively refer; and 
(b) for the purposes of any tax imposed on buildings or lands, of the amount of 
each such tax leviable thereon during the year to which such list relates. 
79. (1) The Chief Executive Officer may after obtaining the approval of President 
Cantonment Board amend the assessment list at any time— 
(a) by inserting or omitting the name of any person whose name ought to have 
been or ought to be inserted or omitted; or 
(b) by inserting or omitting any property which ought to have been or ought to 
be inserted or omitted; or 
Assessment 
list. 
Revision of 
assessment 
list. 
Authentication 
of assessment 
list. 
Evidential 
value of 
assessment 
list. 
Amendment of 
assessment 
list. 
SERVER1/BILL 2004/RS/148RS\148RS.P65 
32 
(c) by altering the assessment on any property which has been erroneously 
valued or assessed through fraud, accident or mistake whether on the part of 
administration or assessees; or 
(d) by revaluing or re-assessing any property the value of which has been 
increased; or 
(e) in the case of a tax payable by an occupier, by changing the name of the 
occupier: 
Provided that no person shall by reason of any such amendment become liable to pay 
any tax or increase of tax in respect of any period prior to the commencement of the year in 
which the assessment is made. 
(2) Before making any amendment under sub-section (1) the Chief Executive Officer 
shall give to any person affected by the amendment, notice of not less than one month that 
he proposes to make the amendment. 
(3) Any person interested in any such amendment may tender an objection to the Chief 
Executive Officer in writing before the time fixed in the notice, and shall be allowed an 
opportunity of being heard in support of the same in person or by authorised agent. 
80. The Chief Executive Officer shall prepare a new assessment list at least once in 
every three years, and for this purpose the provisions of sections 75 to 79 shall apply in like 
manner as they apply for the purpose of the preparation of an assessment list for the first 
time. 
81. (1) Whenever the title of any person primarily liable for the payment of a tax on the 
annual rateable value of any building or land to or over such building or land is transferred, 
the person whose title is transferred and the person to whom the same is transferred shall, 

 186
within three months after the execution of the instrument of transfer or after its registration, 
if it is registered, or after the transfer is effected, if no instrument is executed, give notice of 
such transfer to the Chief Executive Officer. 
(2) In the event of the death of any person primarily liable as aforesaid, the person on 
whom the title of the deceased devolves shall give notice of such devolution to the Chief 
Executive Officer within six months from the death of the deceased. 
(3) The notice to be given under this section shall be in such form as may be determined 
by rules made under section 351, and the transferee or other person on whom the title 
devolves shall, if so required, be bound to produce before the Chief Executive Officer any 
documents evidencing the transfer or devolution. 
(4) Every person who makes a transfer as aforesaid without giving such notice to the 
Chief Executive Officer shall continue liable for the payment of all taxes assessed on the 
property transferred until he gives notice or until the transfer has been recorded in the 
registers of the Board, but nothing in this section shall be held to affect the liability of the 
transferee for the payment of the said tax. 
(5) The Chief Executive Officer shall record every transfer or devolution of title notified 
to him under sub-section (1) or sub-section (2) in the assessment list and other tax registers 
of the Board. 
(6) Any failure to comply with the provisions contained in sub-sections (1) to (3) shall 
be punishable with fine which may extend to ten thousand rupees. 
82. (1) If any building is erected or re-erected within the meaning of section 235, the 
owner shall give notice thereof to the Chief Executive Officer within thirty days from the date 
of its completion or occupation, whichever is earlier. 
Notice of 
transfers. 
Preparation of 
new 
assessment 
list. 
Notice of 
erection of 
buildings. 
SERVER1/BILL 2004/RS/148RS\148RS.P65 
33 
(2) Any person failing to give the notice required by sub-section (1) shall be punishable 
with fine which may extend to five thousand or ten times the amount of the tax payable on the 
said building, as erected or re-erected, as the case may be, in respect of a period of three 
months, whichever is greater. 
Remission and refund 
83. If any building is wholly or partly demolished or destroyed or otherwise deprived 
of value, the Board may, on the application in writing of the owner or occupier, remit or refund 
such portion of any tax assessed on the annual rateable value thereof as it thinks fit but no 
remission or refund shall take effect in respect of any period commencing more than two 
months before the delivery of such application. 
84. In a cantonment when any building or land has remained vacant and unproductive 
of rent for sixty or more consecutive days the Chief Executive Officer shall remit or refund, as 
the case may be, one-half of such portion of any tax assessed on the annual rateable value 
thereof as may be proportionate to the number of days during which the said building or land 
has remained vacant and unproductive of rent: 
Provided that in any cantonment which the Central Government, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, has declared to be a hill cantonment and in respect of which the Central 
Government by the same or a like notification has declared a portion of the year to be the 
season for the cantonment— 
(a) when any building or land is leased for occupation through the season only, 
but the rent charged is the full annual rent, no remission or refund shall be admissible 
under this section in respect of any time outside the season during which the building 
or land remains vacant; 

 187
(b) when such building or land has remained vacant and unproductive of rent, in 
respect of any time, not being less than sixty consecutive days during which within 
the season, the Chief Executive Officer shall remit or refund one-half of such portion of 
any tax assessed on the annual rateable value thereof as bears to the whole of the tax 
so assessed the same proportion as the number of days during which the building or 
land has remained vacant and unproductive of rent bears to the total length of the 
season. 
85. (1) For the purpose of obtaining a partial remission or refund of tax, the owner of 
a building composed of separate tenements may request the Chief Executive Officer at the 
time of the assessment of the building, to enter in the assessment list, in addition to the 
annual rateable value of the whole building, a note recording in detail the annual rateable 
value of each separate tenement. 
(2) When any tenement, the annual value of which has been thus separately recorded, 
has remained vacant and unproductive of rent for sixty or more consecutive days one half of 
such portion of any tax assessed on the annual rateable value of the whole building shall be 
remitted or refunded as would have been remitted or refunded if the tenement had been 
separately assessed. 
86. No remission or refund under section 84 or section 85 shall be made unless notice 
in writing of the fact that the building, land or tenement has become vacant and unproductive 
of rent, has been given to the Chief Executive Officer and no remission or refund shall take 
effect in respect of any period commencing more than fifteen days before the delivery of 
such notice. 
87. (1) For the purposes of sections 84 and 85 no building, tenement or land shall be 
deemed vacant if maintained as a resort or town or country house or be deemed unproductive 
of rent if let to a tenant who has a continuing right of occupation thereof, whether he is in 
actual occupation or not. 
Demolition, 
etc., buildings. 
Remission of 
tax. 
Power to 
require entry in 
assessment list 
of details of 
buildings. 
Notice to be 
given of the 
circumstances 
in which 
remission or 
refund is 
claimed. 
What 
buildings, etc., 
are to be 
deemed 
vacant. 
SERVER1/BILL 2004/RS/148RS\148RS.P65 
34 
(2) The burden of proving all facts entitling any person to claim relief under section 83 
or section 84 or section 85 shall be upon him. 
88. (1) The owner of any building, tenement or land in respect of which a remission or 
refund of tax has been given under section 84 or section 85 shall give notice of the reoccupation 
of such building tenement or land within fifteen days of such re-occupation. 
(2) Any owner failing to give the notice required by sub-section (1) shall be punishable 
with fine which shall not be less than twice the amount of the tax payable on such building, 
tenement or land in respect of the period during which it has been re-occupied and which 
may extend to two thousand five hundred rupees, or to ten times the amount of the said tax, 
whichever sum is greater. 

 188
Charge on immovable p ope y r rt
89. A tax assessed on the annual rateable value of any building or land shall, subject 
to the prior payment of the land-revenue, if any, due to the Government thereon, be a first 
charge upon the building or land. 
Octroi, terminal tax and toll 
90. Every person bringing or receiving any goods, vehicles or animals within the limits 
of any cantonment in which octroi or terminal tax or toll is leviable shall, when so required by 
an officer duly authorised by the Chief Executive Officer in this behalf, so far as may be 
necessary for ascertaining the amount of tax chargeable— 
(a) permit that officer to inspect, examine or weigh such goods, vehicles or 
animals; and 
(b) communicate to that officer any information, and exhibit to him any bill, 
invoice or document of a like nature, which such person may possess relating to such 
goods, vehicles or animals. 
91. (1) Any person who takes or attempts to take past any octroi station or any other 
place appointed within a cantonment for the collection of octroi, terminal tax or toll any 
goods, vehicles or animals, on account of which octroi, terminal tax or toll is leviable and 
thereby evades, or attempts to evade, the payment of such octroi, terminal tax or toll and any 
person who abets any such evasion or attempt at evasion, shall be punishable with fine 
which may extend either to ten times the value of such octroi, terminal tax or toll, or to two 
thousand five hundred rupees, whichever is greater, and which shall not be less than twice 
the value of such octroi, terminal tax or toll, as the case may be. 
(2) In case of non-payment of any octroi or terminal tax or toll on demand, the officer 
empowered to collect the same may seize any goods, vehicles or animals on which the octroi, 
terminal tax or toll is chargeable or any part or number thereof which is of sufficient value to 
satisfy the demand and shall give a receipt specifying the items seized. 
(3) The Chief Executive Officer, or an officer of the Board authorised by him, after the 
lapse of five days from the seizure, and after the issue of a notice in writing to the person 
in whose possession the goods, vehicles or animals were at the time of seizure, fixing the 
time and place of sale, may cause the property so seized, or so much thereof as may be 
necessary, to be sold by auction to satisfy the demand and meet expenses occasioned by 
the seizure, custody and safe thereof, unless the demand and expenses are in the meantime 
paid: 
Provided that the Chief Executive Officer may, in any case, order that any article of a 
perishable nature which cannot be kept for five days without serious risk of damage, or 
which cannot be kept safe at a cost which, together with the amount of octroi, terminal tax or 
toll, is likely to exceed its value, shall be sold after the lapse of such shorter times as he may, 
having regard to the nature of the article, think proper. 
Notice to be 
given of every 
occupation of 
vacant building 
or house. 
Tax on 
buildings and 
land to be 
a charge 
thereon. 
Inspection of 
imported 
goods, octroi, 
terminal tax 
and toll, etc. 
Power to 
seize etc. 
SERVER1/BILL 2004/RS/148RS\148RS.P65 
35 
(4) If, at any time before the sale has begun, the person whose property has been 
seized tenders to the Chief Executive Officer the amount of all expenses incurred and of the 

 189
octroi, terminal tax or toll, the Chief Executive Officer shall release the property seized. 
(5) The surplus, if any, of the sale -proceeds shall be credited to the cantonment fund, 
and shall, on application made to the Chief Executive Officer within six months after the sale, 
be paid to the person in whose possession the property was at the time of seizure, and, if no 
such application is made, shall become the property of the Board. 
92. It shall be lawful for the Chief Executive Officer, with the previous sanction of 
the President Cantonment Board to lease the collection of any octroi, terminal tax or toll 
for any period not exceeding one year; and the lessee and all persons employed by him 
in the management and collection of the octroi, terminal tax or toll shall, in respect 
thereof,— 
(a) be bound by any orders made by the Chief Executive Officer for their 
guidance; 
(b) have such powers exercisable by officers or employees of the Board under 
this Act as the Board may confer upon them; and 
(c) be entitled to the same remedies and be subject to the same responsibilities 
as if they were employed by the Board for the management and collection of the octroi, 
terminal tax or toll, as the case may be: 
Provided that no article distrained may be sold except under the orders of the Chief 
Executive Officer. 
Appeals 
93. (1) An appeal against the assessment or levy of, or against the refusal to refund, 
any tax under this Act shall lie to the District Court. 
(2) If the District Court, on the hearing of an appeal under this section, entertains 
reasonable doubt on any question as to the liability to, or the principle of assessment of, a 
tax, the Court may, either on its own motion or on the application of the appellant, draw up 
statement of the facts of the case and the point on which doubt is entertained, and refer the 
statement with its opinion on the point for the decision of the High Court. 
(3) On a reference being made under sub-section (2), the subsequent proceedings in 
the case shall be, as nearly as may be, in conformity with the rules relating to references to 
the High Court contained in order XLVI of the First Schedule to the Code of Civil Procedure, 
1908. 
Explanation.— For the purposes of this section and sections 94, 95, 96, 97 and 
102, “District Court”, in relation to a cantonment, means the Principal Civil Court of original 
jurisdiction having jurisdiction over the area in which that cantonment is situated, and 
includes such other Civil Court having jurisdiction over that area as the Central Government 
may, by notification in the Official Gazette, specify in this behalf, in consultation with the 
High Court having jurisdiction over that area. 
94. In every appeal the costs shall be in the discretion of the District Court hearing the 
appeal. 
95. (1) If the Board fails to pay any cost awarded to an appellant within ten days after 
the date of the order for payment thereof, the District Court awarding the costs may order 
the person having the custody of the balance of the cantonment fund to pay the amount. 
(2) Where the appellant fails to pay any costs awarded to the Board within ten days 
after the date of the order for payment thereof, the same shall be recoverable by the Board in 
the same manner as moneys recoverable by the Board under section 329. 
Appeals 
against 
assessment. 
Costs of 
appeal. 
Recovery of 
costs from 
Board. 
5 of 1908. 
Lease of octroi, 
terminal tax or 
toll. 
SERVER1/BILL 2004/RS/148RS\148RS.P65 

 190
36 
96. No appeal shall be heard or determined under this Chapter unless— 
(a) the appeal is, in the case of a tax assessed on the annual rateable value 
of buildings or lands or both, brought within thirty days next after the date of the 
authentication of the assessment list under section 77 (exclusive of the time 
required for obtaining a copy of the relevant entries therein), or, as the case may 
be, within thirty days of the date on which an amendment is finally made under 
section 79 and in the case of any other tax, within thirty days next after the date of 
the receipt of the notice of assessment or of alteration of assessment or, if no 
notice has been given, within thirty days next after the date of the presentation of 
the first bill in respect thereof: 
Provided that an appeal may be admitted after the expiration of the period 
prescribed therefor by this section if the appellant satisfies the District Court before 
whom the appeal is preferred that he had sufficient cause for not preferring it within 
that period; 
(b) the amount including the assessed tax or duty, if any, in dispute in the appeal 
shall be deposited by the appellant every year on or before the due date in the office of 
the Board till the appeal is determined by the District Court. 
97. The order of a District Court confirming, setting aside or modifying an order in 
respect of any valuation or assessment or liability to assessment or taxation shall be final: 
Provided that it shall be lawful for the District Court, upon application or on its own 
motion, to review any order passed by it in appeal if application in this behalf is made within 
three months from the date of the original order. 
Paymen  and recove y of taxes t r
98. Save as otherwise expressly provided under this Act, any tax imposed under the 
provisions of this Act shall be payable on such dates and in such manner, as the Chief 
Executive Officer may, by public notice, direct. 
99. (1) When any tax has become due the Chief Executive Officer shall cause a public 
notice to be issued specifying the tax and the period for which it is due for payment. 
(2) The tax shall become due for payment from the date of issue of public notice under 
sub-section (1) above. 
(3) It shall not be necessary to present a separate bill to the person liable for payment 
thereof unless the tax is assessed for the first time or it is enhanced or modified under the 
provisions of this Act. 
100. (1) If the amount of tax for which public notice has been issued or a bill has 
been presented is not paid within thirty days from the issue of public notice or presentation 
of the bill, as the case may be, the Chief Executive Officer may cause to be served upon the 
person liable for the payment of the same a notice of demand in the form set forth in 
Schedule I. 
(2) For every notice of demand which the Chief Executive Officer causes to be served 
on any person under this section, a fee of such amount, not exceeding two hundred rupees 
as shall in each case be fixed by the Chief Executive Officer, shall be payable by the said 
person and shall be included in the costs of recovery. 
101. (1) If the person liable for the payment of any tax does not, within thirty days 
from the service of the notice of demand, pay the amount due, or show sufficient cause for 
non-payment of the same to the satisfaction of the Chief Executive Officer, such sum, with all 
costs of recovery, may be recovered under a warrant, issued in the form set forth in Schedule 
II, by distress and sale of the movable property or attachment and sale of the immovable 
property of the defaulter: 
Conditions of 
right to appeal. 
Finality of 
appellate 
orders. 
Time and 
manner of 
payment of 

 191
taxes. 
Public notice 
for taxes due. 
Notice of 
demand. 
Recovery of 
tax. 
SERVER1/BILL 2004/RS/148RS\148RS.P65 
37 
Provided that the Chief Executive Officer shall not recover any sum the liability for 
which has been remitted on appeal under this Chapter: 
Provided further that the sale of any immovable property attached under this subsection 
shall not be made save under the orders of the Board. 
(2) Every warrant issued under this section shall be signed by the Chief Executive 
Officer. 
102. (1) If a person on whom a notice of demand has been served under section 100, 
does not, within thirty days from the service of such notice, pay the sum demanded in the 
notice, he shall be liable to pay by way of interest, in addition to the sum and other charges 
due one per cent., of the sum due for each complete month from the date of expiry of the 
period of thirty days as aforesaid. 
(2) The amount of interest shall be recoverable in the same manner as moneys recoverable 
by the Board under section 329: 
Provided that— 
(a) where no appeal has been preferred, the Chief Executive officer with the 
previous sanction of the Board; and 
(b) in any other case, the District Court hearing the appeal under section 93, 
may remit the whole or any part of the interest payable in respect of any period. 
103. (1) It shall be lawful for any official of the Board to whom a warrant issued under 
section 101 is addressed to distrain, wherever it may be found in the cantonment, any 
movable property of or standing timber, growing crops or grass belonging to the person 
therein named as defaulter, subject to the following conditions, exceptions and exemption, 
namely:— 
(a) the following property shall not be distrained— 
(i) the necessary wearing apparel and bedding of the defaulter or of his 
wife or of his children; 
(ii) tools of artisans; 
(iii) books of account; or 
(iv) when the defaulter is an agriculturist, his implements of husbandry, 
seed-grain, and such cattle as may be necessary to enable the defaulter to earn 
his livelihood; 
(b) The distress shall not be excessive, that is to say, the property distrained 
shall be as nearly as possible equal in value to the amount recoverable under the 
warrant, and if any property has been distrained which, in the opinion of the Chief 
Executive Officer, should not have been distrained, it shall forthwith be returned. 
(2) The person charged with the execution of a warrant of distress shall forthwith 
make an inventory of the property which he seizes under such warrant, and shall, at 
the same time, give a written notice in the form in Schedule III to the person in 
possession thereof at the time of seizure that the said property will be sold as therein 
mentioned. 
104. (1) When the property seized is subject to speedy and natural decay, or 
when the expense of keeping it in custody is, when added to the amount to be recovered, 
likely to exceed its value, the Chief Executive Officer shall give notice to the person in 
whose possession the property was at the time of seizure that it will be sold at once, 
and shall sell it accordingly by public auction unless the amount mentioned in the 
warrant is forthwith paid. 
Interest 
payable on 
taxes due. 

 192
Distress. 
Disposal of 
distrained 
property. 
SERVER1/BILL 2004/RS/148RS\148RS.P65 
38 
(2) If the warrant is not in the meantime suspended by the Chief Executive Officer, or 
discharged, the property seized shall, after the expiry of the period named in the notice 
served under sub-section (2) of section 103, be sold by public auction by order of the Chief 
Executive Officer. 
(3) The surplus of the sale proceeds, if any, shall forthwith be credited to the cantonment 
fund, and notice of such credit shall be given at the same time to the person whose property 
has been sold or his legal representative and, if the same is claimed by written application to 
the Chief Executive Officer within one year from the date of the notice, a refund thereof shall 
be made to such person or representative and any surplus not claimed within one year as 
aforesaid shall be the property of the Board. 
(4) For every distraint made under this Chapter a fee of such amount, not exceeding 
two hundred rupees, as shall in each case be fixed by the Chief Executive Officer shall be 
charged, and the said fee shall be included in the costs of recovery. 
105. (1) When a warrant is issued for the attachment and sale of immovable property, 
the attachment shall be made by an order prohibiting the defaulter from transferring or 
charging the property in any way, and all persons from taking any benefit from such transfer 
or charge, and declaring that such property would be sold unless the amount of tax due with 
all costs of recovery is paid in the office of the Board within fifteen days from the date of 
attachment. 
(2) An order under sub-section (1) shall be displayed at some place on or adjacent to 
such property by pasting the same conspicuously and by publishing the same in a newspaper 
having circulation in the area in which the property is situated or by any other means or 
mode as may be considered appropriate by the Chief Executive Officer. 
(3) Any transfer of or charge on the property attached or any interest thereon made 
without the written permission of the Chief Executive Officer shall be void as against all 
claims of the Board enforceable under the attachment. 
(4) Where the sum due to the Board with the cost incurred by the Board in the sale of 
the property, including publication of notice in newspaper and a sum equal to five per cent. 
of the purchase money for payment to the purchaser is paid by the defaulter, before the 
confirmation of the sale under sub-section (5), the attachment, if any, of the immovable 
property shall be deemed to have been removed. 
(5) After the sale of the property by auction as aforesaid, it shall be confirmed in 
writing by the Chief Executive Officer who shall put the person declared to be the purchaser 
in possession of the same and shall grant him a certificate to the effect that he has purchased 
the property to which the certificate refers. 
(6) The Central Government may make rules for— 
(a) regulating the manner of execution of warrants for the attachment and sale of 
immovable property; 
(b) charging of fees for the attachment and sale of immovable property, to be 
included in the cost of recovery of the tax due; 
(c) summary determination of any claim made by any person other than the 
person liable for the payment of any tax, in respect of any property attached in execution 
of warrant under this section. 
106. (1) If the Chief Executive Officer has reason to believe that any person from 
whom any sum is due or is about to become due on account of any tax is about to move from 
the cantonment, he may direct the immediate payment by such person of the sum so due or 
about to become due, and cause a notice of demand for the same to be served on such 
person. 
Attachment 
and sale of 
immovable 

 193
property. 
Recovery from 
a person about 
to leave 
cantonment. 
SERVER1/BILL 2004/RS/148RS\148RS.P65 
39 
(2) If, on the service of such notice, such person does not forthwith pay the sum so 
due or about to become due, the amount shall be leviable by distress and sale of movable 
property or attachment and sale of immovable property in the manner hereinbefore provided 
in this Chapter, and the warrant of such distress and sale or attachment and sale may be 
issued and executed without any delay. 
107. Instead of proceeding against a defaulter by distress and sale of movable property 
or attachment and sale of immovable property as hereinbefore provided in this Chapter, or 
after a defaulter has been so proceeded against unsuccessfully or with only partial success, 
any sum due or the balance of any sum due, as the case may be, from such defaulter on 
account of a tax may be recovered from him by a suit in any court of competent jurisdiction. 
Special p ovisions relating to taxation, etc. r
108. A Board shall be deemed to be a municipal committee for the purposes of— 
(a) taxation as per the Municipal Taxation Act, 1881, 
(b) receiving grants, 
(c ) executing the Central or the State Government schemes of social welfare, 
public health, hygiene, safety, water supply, sanitation and education. 
109. The Central or the State Government, as the case may be, shall pay to a Board 
annually service charges for providing collective municipal services or development work in 
a cantonment where the Central or the State Government properties are situated as worked 
out by the Board based on the guidelines issued in this behalf by the Central Government or 
the State Government. 
110. A Board may make special provisions for the cleansing of any factory, hotel, club 
or group of buildings or lands used for any one purpose and under one management, and 
may fix a special rate and the dates and other conditions for periodical payment thereof, 
which shall be determined by a written agreement with the person liable for payment of the 
conservancy or scavenging tax in respect of such factory, hotel, club or group of buildings 
or lands: 
Provided that, in fixing the amount , proper regard shall be had to the probable cost to 
the Board of the services to be rendered. 
111. (1) When in pursuance of section 110, a Board has fixed a special rate for the 
cleansing of any factory, hotel, club or group of buildings or lands, such premises shall be 
exempted from the payment of conservancy or scavenging tax imposed in the cantonment. 
(2) The following buildings and lands shall be exempt from any property tax other 
than tax imposed to cover the cost of specific services rendered by the Board, namely:— 
(a) places set apart for public worship and either actually so used or used for no 
other purpose and rendering services free of cost without deriving any income 
whatsoever; 
(b) buildings used for educational purposes, public libraries, play grounds and 
dharamshalas which are open to the public and from which no income is derived; 
(c) hospitals and dispensaries maintained wholly by charitable contributions; 
(d) burning and burial grounds, not being the property of the Government or a 
Board, which are controlled under the provisions of this Act; 
(e) buildings or lands vested in a Board; and 
(f) any buildings or lands, or portion of such buildings or lands, which are the 
property of the Government. 
Power to 
institute suit 
for recovery. 
Every Board to 
be a 
Municipality 

 194
for certain 
purposes. 
11 of 1881. 
Payment to be 
made to a 
Board as 
service 
charges by 
Central 
Government 
or State 
Government. 
Power to make 
special 
provision for 
conservancy 
in certain 
cases. 
Exemption in 
case of 
buildings. 
SERVER1/BILL 2004/RS/148RS\148RS.P65 
40 
112. The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, exempt, either 
wholly or in part from the payment of any tax imposed under this Act, any person, or class of 
persons or any property or goods or class of property or goods. 
113. A Board may exempt, for a period not exceeding one year at a time from the 
payment of any tax, or any portion of a tax imposed under this Act, any person who in its 
opinion is by reason of poverty unable to pay the same. 
114. (1) The Chief Executive Officer may, with the previous sanction of the General 
Commanding Officer-in-Chief, the Command, allow any person to compound for any tax. 
(2) Every sum due by reason of the composition of a tax under sub-section (1) shall be 
recoverable as if it were a tax. 
115. The Chief Executive Officer may write off any sum due on account of any tax 
or rate or of the costs of recovering any tax or rate if such sum is, in its opinion, 
irrecoverable: 
Provided that, where the sum written off in favour of any one person exceeds two 
thousand and five hundred rupees, the sanction of the President of Cantonment Board shall 
be first obtained. 
116. (1) The Chief Executive Officer, may, by written notice, call upon any inhabitant 
of the cantonment to furnish such information as may be necessary for the purpose of 
ascertaining— 
(a) whether such inhabitant is liable to pay, or has correctly paid, any tax imposed 
under this Act; 
(b) at what amount he should be assessed; or 
(c) the annual value of the building or land which he occupies and the name and 
address of the owner or lessee thereof. 
(2) If any person, when called upon under sub-section (1) to furnish information, 
neglects to furnish it within the period specified in this behalf by the Chief Executive 
Officer or furnishes information which is not true to the best of his knowledge or belief, 
he shall be punishable with fine which may extend to five thousand rupees and shall 
also be liable to be assessed at such amount on account of tax as the Chief Executive 
Officer may deem proper, and the assessment so made shall, subject to the provisions 
of this Act, be final. 
117. No assessment and no charge or demand on account of any tax or fee shall 
be impeached or affected by reason only of any mistake in the name of any person liable 
to pay such tax or fee, or in the description of any property or thing, or any mistake in 
the amount of the assessment, charge or demand, if the directions contained in this Act 
and the rules and bye-laws made thereunder have in substance and effect been complied 

 195
with; but any person who sustains any special damage by reason of any such mistake 
shall be entitled to recover compensation for the same by suit in a court of competent 
jurisdiction. 
118. No distress levied or attachment made under this Chapter shall be deemed 
unlawful, nor shall any person making the same be deemed a trespasser, on account 
only of any defect of form in the notice of demand, warrant of distress or attachment 
and sale or other proceeding relating thereto; nor shall any such person be deemed a 
trespasser ab initio on account of any irregularity afterwards committed by him; but 
any person who sustains any special damage by reason of any such irregularity shall 
be entitled to recover compensation for the same by suit in a court of competent 
jurisdiction. 
General Power 
of exemption. 
Distraint not to 
be invalid by 
reason of 
immaterial 
defect. 
Immaterial error 
not to affect 
liability. 
Obligation to 
disclose 
liability. 
Irrecoverable 
debts. 
Composition. 
Exemption of 
poor persons. 
SERVER1/BILL 2004/RS/148RS\148RS.P65 
41 
CHAPTER VI 
CANTONMENT FUND AND PROPERTY 
Cantonment fund and cantonment development fund 
119. (1) There shall be formed for every cantonment a cantonment fund and there shall 
be placed to the credit thereof the following sums, namely:— 
(a) the balance if any, of the cantonment fund formed for the cantonment 
under the Cantonments Act, 1924; 
(b) all sums received by or on behalf of the Board. 
(2) There shall also be formed for every cantonment, a cantonment development fund 
and there shall be placed to the credit, thereof the following sums, namely:— 
(i) any sum received from the Central Government or the Government of any 
State by way of contributions, grants, subsidies or by any other way for the 
implementation of any specific scheme or for the execution of any specific project; 
(ii) any sum received by any individual or association of individuals by way of 
gift or deposit; and 
(iii) any sum raised or borrowed under section 121 for the execution of specific 
development projects. 
120. (1) The cantonment fund and the cantonment development fund shall be kept in 
separate accounts which shall be maintained in State Bank of India or any of its subsidiary 
banks or any nationalised bank or any scheduled commercial bank having its branch either 
in the cantonment or in the municipal area adjoining the cantonment. 
Explanation.—In this section,— 
(i) “nationalised bank” means corresponding new bank specified in the First 
Schedule to the Banking Companies (Acquisition and Transfer of Undertakings) 
Act, 1970 or the Banking Companies (Acquisition and Transfer of Undertakings) 
Act, 1980; 
(ii) “State Bank of India” means the State Bank of India constituted under the 
State Bank of India Act, 1955; 

 196
(iii) “subsidiary bank” means a subsidiary bank as defined in the State Bank of 
India (Subsidiary Banks) Act, 1959. 
(2) The Chief Executive Officer may with the previous sanction of the President 
Cantonment Board may invest any portion of cantonment fund or cantonment development 
fund in securities of Central Government or in such securities, including fixed deposits in banks 
in the best interest of the Board and may dispose of such investments or vary them for others 
of a like nature. 
(3) The income resulting from any fixed deposit or from any such securities as is 
referred to in sub-section (2) or from the proceeds of the sale of any such security shall be 
credited to the cantonment fund or, as the case may be, the cantonment development fund. 
(4) Every action taken under sub-sections (2) and (3) may be subsequently brought to 
the next meeting of the Board. 
121. A Board may from time to time by a resolution passed in this behalf borrow money 
from another Board any sum of money which may be required for the schemes or projects 
covered under this Act. 
Cantonment 
fund and 
cantonment 
development 
fund. 2 of 1924. 
Custody of 
Cantonment 
Fund and 
Cantonment 
Development 
Fund. 
Power of Board 
to borrow 
money. 
5 of 1970. 
40 of 1980. 
23 of 1955. 
38 of 1959. 
SERVER1/BILL 2004/RS/148RS\148RS.P65 
42 
Prope ty r
122. Subject to any special reservation made by the Central Government all property 
of the nature hereinafter in this section specified which has been acquired or provided or is 
maintained by a Board shall vest in and belong to that Board, and shall be under its direction, 
management and control, that is to say,— 
(a) all markets, slaughter-houses, manure and night-soil depots, and buildings 
of every description; 
(b) all water-works for the supply, storage or distribution of water for public 
purposes and all bridges, buildings, engines, materials, and things connected therewith 
or appertaining thereto; 
(c) all sewers, drains, culverts and water-courses, and all works, materials and 
things appertaining thereto; 
(d) all dust, dirt, dung, ashes, refuse, animal matter, filth and rubbish of every 
kind, and dead bodies of animals collected by the Board from the streets, houses, 
privies, sewers, cesspools or elsewhere, or deposited in places appointed by the 
Board for such purposes; 
(e) all lamps and lamp-posts and apparatus connected therewith or appertaining 
thereto; 
(f) all lands or other property transferred to the Board by the Central or a State 
Government, or by gift, purchase or otherwise for local public purposes; and 
(g) all streets and the pavements, stones and other materials thereof, and also 
all trees, erections, materials, implements, and things existing on or appertaining to 
streets. 
123. The cantonment fund, cantonment development fund and all property vested in 

 197
a Board shall be applied for the purposes, whether express or implied, for which, by or under 
this Act or any other law for the time being in force, powers are conferred or duties or 
obligations are imposed upon the Board : 
Provided that the Board shall not incur any expenditure for acquiring or renting land 
beyond the limits of the cantonment or for constructing any work beyond such limits 
except— 
(a) with the sanction of the Central Government, and 
(b) on such terms and conditions as the Central Government may impose : 
Provided further that priority shall be given in the order hereinafter set forth to the 
following liabilities and obligations of a Board, that is to say,— 
(a) to the liabilities and obligations arising from a trust legally imposed upon or 
accepted by the Board; 
(b) to the repayment of, and the payment of interest on, any loan incurred 
under the provisions of the Local Authorities Loan Act, 1914 or under the provisions 
of this Act. 
(c) to the payment of establishment charges; 
(d) to the payment of any sum the payment of which is expressly required by the 
provisions of this Act or any rule or bye-law made thereunder. 
124. When there is any hindrance to the permanent or temporary acquisition upon 
payment of any land required by a Board for the purposes of this Act, the Central Government 
may, on the recommendation of the Board, procure the acquisition thereof under the provisions 
of the Land Acquisition Act, 1894, and, on payment by the Board of the compensation 
Property. 
Application 
of cantonment 
fund, cantonment 
development 
fund and 
property. 
Acquisition of 
immovable 
property. 
1 of 1894. 
9 of 1914. 
SERVER1/BILL 2004/RS/148RS\148RS.P65 
43 
Power to make 
rules regarding 
cantonment 
fund, 
cantonment 
develpment 
fund and 
property. 
awarded under that Act and of the charges incurred by the Government in connection with 
the proceedings, the land shall vest in the Board. 
125. The Central Government may make rules consistent with this Act to provide for all 
or any of the following matters, namely:— 
(a) the conditions on which property may be acquired by Boards or on which 
property vested in a Board may be transferred by sale, mortgage, lease, exchange or 
otherwise; and 
(b) any other matter relating to the cantonment fund or cantonment development 
fund or cantonment property, in respect of which no provision or insufficient provision 
is made by or under this Act and provision is, in the opinion of the Central Government 
necessary. 
CHAPTER VII 
CONTRACTS 
126. Subject to the provisions of this Chapter, every Board shall be competent to enter 
into and perform any contract necessary for the purposes of this Act. 

 198
127. (1) Every contract — 
(a) for which budget provision does not exist, or 
(b) which involves a value or amount exceeding rupees fifty thousand shall 
require the sanction of the Board. 
(2) Every contract other than a contract such as is referred to in sub-section (1) shall 
be sanctioned by the Chief Executive Officer on behalf of the Board. 
128. Every contract made by or on behalf of a Board, the value or amount of which 
exceeds fifty thousand rupees, shall be in writing, and every such contract shall, be signed 
by two members, of whom the President or the Vice-President shall be one, and be 
countersigned by the Chief Executive Officer and be sealed with the common seal of the 
Board. 
129. If any contract is executed by or on behalf of a Board, otherwise than in conformity 
with the provisions of this Chapter, it shall not be binding on the Board. 
CHAPTER VIII 
SANITATION AND THE PREVENTION AND TREATMENT OF DISEASE 
Sanitary autho ities r
executed. 
Contracts 
130. The following officers shall, for the purposes of sanitation, have control over, and 
be responsible for maintaining in a sanitary condition, those parts of a cantonment, respectively, 
which are specified in the case of each, that is to say :— 
(a) the Officer Commanding the army in the cantonment—all buildings and 
lands which are occupied or used for army purposes; 
(b) the Officer Commanding the navy in the cantonment—all buildings and 
lands which are occupied or used for naval purposes; 
(c) the Officer Commanding the air force in the cantonment—all buildings and 
lands which are occupied or used for air force purposes; 
(d) the Officer Commanding the station in the cantonment—all buildings and 
lands, occupied or used for any defence purpose, other than those referred to in 
clauses (a), (b) and (c); 
Contracts by 
whom to be 
Sanction. 
Execution of 
contract. 
improperly 
executed not to 
be binding on 
a Board. 
Responsibility 
for sanitation. 
SERVER1/BILL 2004/RS/148RS\148RS.P65 
44 
(e) the head of any civil department or railway administration occupying as 
such any part of the cantonment—all buildings and lands in his charge as head of 
that department or administration; 
(f) the head of any establishment or installation of the Defence Research 
and Development Organisation in the cantonment — buildings and lands which 
are occupied or used for the purposes of the Defence Research and Development 
Organisation in the cantonment; 
(g) the head of a Public Sector Undertaking — the buildings and lands 
belonging to such undertaking in the cantonment; 
(h) the Chief Executive Officer — the buildings and lands in the civil area of 
the cantonment and all other buildings and lands not covered in clauses (a) to (g) 
above. 
131. (1) The Health Officer shall be the Advisor to the Board in all matters 
relating to sanitation and exercise a general sanitary supervision over the cantonment 
and shall periodically submit a report along with his recommendations at least once in 

 199
every month to the Board. 
(2) The Assistant Health Officer shall perform such duties in connection with 
the sanitation of the cantonment as are, subject to the control of the Board, allotted to 
him by the Health Officer. 
Conse vancy and sanit tion r a
132. All public latrines and urinals provided or maintained by a Board shall be so 
constructed as to provide separate compartments for each sex and not to be a nuisance, 
and shall be provided with all necessary conservancy establishments, and shall regularly 
be cleansed and kept in proper order. 
133. (1) It shall be the duty of an occupier of a building or land— 
(a) to make adequate arrangements for the house scavenging of the building 
or land; 
(b) to provide receptacles of the type and in the manner prescribed by the 
Chief Executive Officer for the collection therein of all filth, rubbish and other 
offensive matter from such building or land and to keep such receptacle in good 
condition and repair; 
(c) to cause all filth, rubbish and other offensive matter collected in 
receptacles and to be removed and deposited in the public receptacles, depots or 
places provided or appointed under sub-section (1) of section 135. 
(2) For the purpose of this section and section 134, “house scavenging” means 
the removal of filth, rubbish or other offensive matter from a privy, latrine, urinal, drain, 
cesspool or other common receptacle for such matter. 
134. (1) On the application or with the consent of the occupier of any building or 
land, or, where the occupier of any building or land fails to make arrangements to the 
satisfaction of the Chief Executive Officer for the matters referred to in this section, 
without such consent, and after giving notice in writing to the occupier, the Chief 
Executive Officer may undertake the house scavenging of any building or land in the 
cantonment for such period as he thinks fit on such terms as he may specify in this 
behalf. 
(2) Where the Chief Executive Officer has undertaken the duties referred to in 
this section, all matter removed in the performance of such duties shall be the property 
of the Board. 
Duty of 
occupier to 
collect and 
deposit 
rubbish, etc. 
Power of Board 
to undertake 
private 
conservancy 
arrangement. 
Public latrines, 
urinals and 
conservancy 
establishments. 
General duties 
of Health 
Officer. 
SERVER1/BILL 2004/RS/148RS\148RS.P65 
45 
135. (1) Every Board shall provide or appoint, in proper and convenient situations, 
public receptacles, depots or places for the temporary deposit or disposal of household 
rubbish, offensive matter, carcases of dead animals and sewage. 
(2) The Chief Executive Officer may, by public notice, issue directions as to 
the time at which, the manner in which, and the conditions subject to which, any matter 
referred to in sub-section (1) may be removed along a street or may be deposited or 
otherwise disposed of. 
(3) All matter deposited in receptacles, depots or places provided or appointed 

 200
under this section shall be the property of the Board. 
136. The Chief Executive Officer of any cantonment may, by notice in writing— 
(a) require any person having the control whether as owner, lessee or occupier 
of any land or building in the cantonment— 
(i) to close any cesspool appertaining to the land or building which, in 
the opinion of the Chief Executive Officer, is a nuisance, or 
(ii) to keep in a clean condition, in such manner as may be prescribed 
by notice, any receptacle for filth or sewage accumulating on the land or in 
a building, or 
(iii) to prevent the water of any private latrine, urinal, sink or bathroom 
or any other offensive matter, from soaking, draining or flowing, or being put, 
from the land or building upon any street or other public place, or into any 
water-course or into any drain not intended for the purpose, or 
(iv) to collect and deposit for removal by the conservancy establishment 
of the Board, within such time and in such receptacle or place, as may be 
specified in the notice, any offensive matter or rubbish which such person has 
allowed to accumulate or remain under, in or on such building or land; or 
(b) require any person to desist from making or altering any drain leading into 
a public drain; or 
(c) require any person having the control of a drain in the cantonment to 
cleanse, purify, repair or alter the same, or otherwise put it in good order, within such 
time as may be specified in the notice. 
137. (1) Where any well, tank, cistern, reservoir container, desert cooler or any 
other, receptacle or place in the cantonment where water is stored or accumulated, whether 
within any private enclosure or not, is in such a condition as to create a nuisance or, in 
the opinion of the Health Officer, is or is likely to be a breeding place for mosquitoes, 
the Board may, by notice in writing, require the owner, lessee or occupier thereof within 
such period as may be specified in the notice, to fill up or cover the well, cistern, reservoir 
or receptacle, or to fill up the tank, or to drain off or remove the water, as the case may 
be. 
(2) The Board may from time to time take such measures as are necessary in its 
opinion for prevention of breeding of mosquitoes, insects or any bacterial or viral carriers 
of disease in public places under the control or management of the Board. 
(3) The Board may, if it thinks fit, meet the whole or any portion of the expenses 
incurred in execution of work mentioned in sub-sections (1) and (2) of this section. 
138. The Chief Executive Officer may, by notice in writing, require the owner or 
lessee of any building or land in the cantonment to provide, in such manner as may be 
specified in the notice, any latrine, urinal, cesspool, dust-bin or other receptacle for filth, 
sewage, or rubbish, or any additional latrine, urinal, cesspool or other receptacle as aforesaid, 
which should, in his opinion, be provided for the building or land. 
Deposits and 
disposal of 
rubbish, etc. 
Provision of 
latrines, etc. 
Filling up of 
tank, etc. 
Cesspools, 
receptacles, 
for filth, etc. 
SERVER1/BILL 2004/RS/148RS\148RS.P65 
46 
139. Every person employing, whether on behalf of the Government or otherwise, 
more than ten workmen or labourers, and every person managing or having control of a 
market, school, theatre or other place of public resort, in a cantonment shall give notice of 
the fact to the Chief Executive Officer, and shall provide such latrines and urinals, and shall 
employ such number of sweepers, as the Chief Executive Officer thinks fit, and shall cause 
the latrines and urinals to be kept clean and in proper order : 

 201
Provided that nothing in this section shall apply in the case of a factory to which the 
Factories Act, 1948 applies. 
140. Subject to the provisions of the Employment of Manual Scavenger and 
Construction of Dry Latrine (Prohibition) Act, 1993, the Chief Executive Officer or any 
official of the Board authorised by him may, by notice in writing,— 
(a) require the owner or other person having the control of any private latrine, 
or, urinal in the cantonment not to put the same to public use; or 
(b) where any plan for the construction of private latrines or urinals has been 
approved, and copies thereof may be obtained free of charge on application— 
(i) require any person repairing or constructing any private latrine or 
urinal not to allow the same to be used until it has been inspected by an official 
of the Board authorised by the Chief Executive Officer, or under the direction of 
the Health Officer and approved by him as conforming with such plan; or 
(ii) require any person having control of any private latrine or urinal to 
re-build or alter the same in accordance with such plan; or 
(c) require the owner or other person having the control of any such private 
latrine or urinal which, in the opinion of the Chief Executive Officer, constitutes a 
nuisance, to remove the latrine or urinal; or 
(d) require any person having the control whether as owner, lessee or occupier 
of any land or building in the cantonment— 
(i) to have any latrines provided for the same shut out by a sufficient roof 
and wall or fence from the view of persons passing by or dwelling in the 
neighborhood, or 
(ii) to cleanse in such manner as the Chief Executive Officer may specify 
in the notice any latrine or urinal belonging to the land or building; 
(e) require any person being the owner and having the control of any drain in 
the cantonment to provide, within ten days from the service of the notice, such 
covering as may be specified in the notice. 
141.(1) All solid waste material generated in a cantonment shall be removed by the 
Board and be brought to the compost sites or sanitary land sites or trenching sites earmarked 
by it for the purpose. 
(2) The Board shall also devise schemes for collecting rubbish and garbage from 
each house in the cantonment and may, if considers necessary, associate residents’ welfare 
associations or such other non governmental organisation for this purpose. 
(3) As far as possible the Board shall devise appropriate system to ensure that all 
compostable or bio-degradable waste in the cantonment is recycled and used for generating 
manure, bio-gas or any other form of energy. 
142.(1) Where it appears to a Board that any block of buildings in the cantonment 
is in an unhealthy condition by reason of the manner in which the buildings are crowded 
together, or of the narrowness or closeness of the street, or of the want of proper drainage 
or ventilation, or of the impracticability of cleansing the buildings or other similar cause, it 
may cause the block to be inspected by a committee consisting of— 
Sanitation in 
factories, etc. 
Private latrines. 
Special 
provisions for 
collection of 
rubbish and 
solid waste 
management. 
Removal of 
congested 
buildings. 
63 of 1948. 
46 of 1993. 
SERVER1/BILL 2004/RS/148RS\148RS.P65 
47 

 202
(a) the Health Officer, 
(b) the Civil Surgeon of the district or, if his services are not available, some 
other medical officer in the service of the Government, 
(c) the Executive Engineer or a person deputed by the Executive Engineer in 
this behalf, and 
(d) two non-official members of the Board. 
(2) The committee shall make a report in writing to the Board regarding the sanitary 
condition of the block, and, if it considers that the condition thereof is likely to cause risk of 
disease to the inhabitants of the building or of the neighbourhood or otherwise to endanger 
the public health, it shall clearly indicate on a plan verified by the Executive Engineer or the 
person deputed by him to serve on the committee, the buildings which should in its opinion 
wholly or in part be removed in order to abate the unhealthy condition of the block. 
(3) If, upon receipt of such report, the Board is of opinion that all or any buildings 
indicated should be removed, it may, by notice in writing, require the owners thereof to 
remove them: 
Provided that the Board shall make compensation as it thinks fit to the owners for any 
buildings so removed which have been erected under proper authority: 
Provided further that the Board may if it considers it equitable in the circumstances so 
to do pay to the owners such sum as it thinks fit as compensation for any buildings so 
removed which have not been erected under proper authority. 
(4) For the purposes of this section “buildings” includes enclosure, walls and fences 
appertaining to buildings. 
143. (1) Where it appears to a Board that any building or part of a building in the 
cantonment which is used as a dwelling house is so overcrowded as to endanger the health 
of the inmates thereof, it may, after such inquiry as it thinks fit, by notice in writing require 
the owner or occupier of the building or part thereof, as the case may be, within such time 
not being less than one month as may be specified in the notice, to abate the overcrowding 
of the same by reducing the number of lodgers, tenants, or other inmates to such number as 
may be specified in the notice. 
(2) Any person who fails, without reasonable cause, to comply with a requisition 
made upon him under sub-section (1) shall be punishable with fine which may extend to two 
thousand five hundred rupees, and, in the case of a continuing offence, to an additional 
fine which may extend to two hundred fifty rupees for every day after the first during which 
the failure has continued. 
144. (1) Where any building in a cantonment is so ill-constructed or dilapidated as to 
be, in the opinion of the Board, in an insanitary state, the Board may, by notice in writing, 
require the owner, within such time as may be specified in the notice, to execute such repairs 
or to make such alterations as it thinks necessary for the purpose of removing such defects. 
(2) A copy of every notice issued under sub-section (1) shall be conspicuously 
pasted on the building to which it relates. 
(3) A notice issued under sub-section (1) shall be deemed to have been complied 
with, if the owner of the building to which it relates has, instead of executing the repairs or 
making the alterations directed by the notice, removed the building. 
145. (1) If any building or land, whether tenantable or otherwise, is— 
(i) in an insanitary, filthy or unwholesome state; or 
Power to 
require repair 
or alteration of 
building. 
Power to 
require land or 
building to be 
cleansed. 
Overcrowding 
of dwelling 
houses. 
SERVER1/BILL 2004/RS/148RS\148RS.P65 
48 

 203
(ii) in the opinion of the Chief Executive Officer, a nuisance to persons residing 
in the neighbourhood; or 
(iii) overgrown with prickly-pear or rank and noisome vegetation the Chief 
Executive Officer may, by notice in writing, require the owner, lessee or occupier of 
such building or land to clean, lime-wash internally or externally, clear, or otherwise 
put such building or land in a proper state within such period as may be specified in 
the notice. 
(2) Any person who fails to comply with the notice issued under sub-section (1) shall 
be punishable with fine which may extend to five thousand rupees, and, in the case of a 
continuing offence, with an additional fine which may extend to two hundred fifty rupees 
for each day after the first during which the offence continues. 
146. No owner, occupier, lessee or any other occupant of the premises shall allow or 
cause to be allowed any air pollutant above the standards, laid down under clause 
(g) of sub-section (1) of section 17 of the Air (Prevention and Control of Pollution ) Act 
1981. 
147. If a Board is satisfied that any building or part of a building in the cantonment 
which is intended for or used as a dwelling place is unfit for human habitation, it may 
cause a notice to be pasted on some conspicuous part of the building prohibiting the 
owner or occupier thereof from using the building or room for human habitation, or 
allowing it to be so used, until it has been rendered fit for such use to the satisfaction of 
the Board. 
148. The Chief Executive Officer may, by notice in writing, require the owner, lessee, 
or occupier of any land in the cantonment to clear away and remove any thick or noxious 
vegetation or undergrowth which appears to him to be injurious to health or offensive to 
persons residing in the neighbourhood. 
149. Where, in the opinion of a Board, the cultivation in the cantonment of any 
description of crop or the use therein of any kind of manure or the irrigation of any land 
therein in any specified manner is likely to be injurious to the health of persons dwelling in 
the neighbourhood, the Board may, by public notice, prohibit such cultivation , use or 
irrigation after such date as may be specified in the notice, or may, by a like notice, direct 
that it shall be carried out subject to such conditions as the Board thinks fit : 
Provided that if, when a notice is issued under this section, any land to which it 
relates has been lawfully prepared for cultivation or any crop is sown therein or is standing 
thereon, the Board shall, if it directs that the notice is to take effect on a date earlier than that 
by which the crop would ordinarily be sown or reaped, as the case may be, make 
compensation to all persons interested in the land or crop for the loss, if any, incurred by 
them respectively by reason of compliance with the notice. 
Burial and bu ning grounds r
150. The Chief Executive Officer may, by notice in writing, require the owner or 
person in-charge of any burial or burning ground in the cantonment to supply such 
information as may be specified in the notice concerning the condition, management or 
position of such ground. 
151. (1) No place in a cantonment which has not been used as a burial or burning 
ground before the commencement of this Act shall be so used without the permission in 
writing of the Board. 
(2) Such permission may be granted subject to any conditions which the Board thinks 
fit to impose for the purpose of preventing annoyance to, or danger to the health of, 
persons residing in the neighbourhood. 
Prohibition in 
respect of air 
pollutant. 
Power to order 
disuse of 
house. 
Removal of 
noxious 
vegetation. 

 204
Agriculture 
and Irrigation. 
Power to call 
for information 
regarding 
burial and 
burning 
grounds. 
Permission for 
use of new 
burial or 
burning 
ground. 
14 of 1981. 
SERVER1/BILL 2004/RS/148RS\148RS.P65 
49 
152. (1) Where a Board, after making or causing to be made local inquiry, is of opinion 
that any burial or burning ground in the cantonment has become offensive to, or dangerous 
to the health of, persons living in the neighbourhood, it may,with the previous sanction of 
the Central Government by notice in writing, require the owner or person in charge of such 
ground to close the same from such date as may be specified in the notice. 
(2) Where the Central Government sanctions the issue of any notice under subsection 
(1) it shall declare the conditions on which the burial or burning ground may be reopened, 
and a copy of such declaration shall be annexed to the notice. 
(3) Where the Central Government sanctions the issues of any such notice, it shall 
require a new burial or burning ground to be provided at the expense of the cantonment 
fund, or, if the community concerned is willing to provide a new burial or burning ground, 
the Central Government shall require a grant to be made from the cantonment fund towards 
the cost of the same. 
(4) No corpse shall be buried or burnt in any burial or burning ground in respect of 
which a notice issued under this section is for the time being in force. 
153. The provisions of sections 150, 151 and 152 shall not apply in the case of any 
burial ground which is for the time being managed by or on behalf of the Government. 
154. The Board may, by public notice, prescribe routes in the cantonment by which 
alone corpses may be removed to burial or burning grounds. 
Prevention o  infectious, contagious or communicable diseases f
155. (1) Any person being in charge of, or in attendance, whether as a medical 
practitioner or otherwise, upon any person in a cantonment whom he knows or has reason 
to believe to be suffering from a contagious, communicable or infectious disease, or being 
the owner, lessee or occupier of any building in a cantonment in which he knows that any 
person is so suffering, shall forthwith give information to the Board respecting the existence 
of such disease. 
(2) No person shall— 
(a) knowing that he is suffering from a contagious, communicable or an 
infectious disease, expose other persons to the risk of infection by his presence or 
conduct in any public street or public place; 
(b) having the care of a person whom he knows to be suffering from a contagious, 
communicable or an infectious disease cause or permit that person to expose other 
persons to the risk of infection by his presence or conduct in any such street or place 
as aforesaid; 
(c) place or cause to be placed in a dustbin or other receptacle for the deposit of 
rubbish any matter which he knows or has reason to believe to have been exposed to 
infection from a contagious, communicable or an infectious disease and which has 
not been disinfected properly; 
(d) throw or cause to be thrown into any latrine or urinal any matter which he 
knows or has reason to believe to have been exposed to infection from a contagious, 
communicable or an infectious disease and which has not been disinfected properly. 
(3) Nothing contained in sub-section (1) or sub-section (2) shall apply in the case of 

 205
venereal disease where the person suffering therefrom is under specific and adequate 
medical treatment and is by reason of his habits and conditions of life and residence unlikely 
to spread the disease. 
(4) Whoever— 
(a) fails to give information or gives false information to the Board respecting 
the existence of such disease as is referred to in sub-section (1), or 
Power to 
require closing 
of burial or 
burning 
ground. 
Exemption from 
operation of 
sections 150 to 
152. 
Removal of 
corpses. 
Obligation 
concerning 
infectious, 
contagious or 
communicable 
diseases. 
SERVER1/BILL 2004/RS/148RS\148RS.P65 
50 
(b) contravenes the provisions of sub-section (2), shall be punishable with fine 
which may extend to one thousand rupees: 
Provided that no person shall be punishable for failure to give information if he had 
reasonable cause to believe that the information had already been duly given. 
156. Subject to the provisions of any Act made in this regard and the rules and 
regulations made thereunder, whoever, being in charge of a blood bank or any other 
establishment which collects or supplies blood, plasma, marrow or any other substance for 
transfusion or treatment of patients or for any other medical use, fails to take adequate 
precautions or exercise adequate supervision thereby leading to or resulting in the supply 
of infected or contaminated blood, plasma, marrow or any other substance, shall be 
punishable with imprisonment which may extend to five years or with fine which may extend 
to one lakh rupees or with both. 
157. (1) In the event of a cantonment being visited or threatened by an outbreak of 
any infectious or contagious disease among the inhabitants thereof or of any epidemic 
disease among any animals therein, the Officer Commanding the Station, if he thinks that 
the provisions of this Act or of any law for the time being in force in the cantonment are 
insufficient for the purpose, may, with the previous sanction of the Central 
Government — 
(a) take such special measures, and 
(b) by public notice, make such temporary regulations to be observed by the 
public or by any class or section of the public, as he thinks necessary to prevent the 
outbreak or the spread of the disease: 
Provided that where in the opinion of the Officer Commanding the Station, immediate 
measures are necessary, he may take action without such sanction as aforesaid and, if he 
does so, shall forthwith report such action to the Central Government. 
(2) Whoever commits a breach of any temporary regulation made under sub-section 
(1) shall be deemed to have committed an offence under section 188 of the Indian Penal 
Code, 1860. 
158. Where it is certified to the Chief Executive Officer by a medical practitioner 
that the outbreak or spread of any infectious or contagious disease in the cantonment 
is, in the opinion of such medical practitioner, attributable to the milk supplied by any 
dairyman, the Chief Executive Officer may, by notice in writing, require the dairyman, 
within such time as may be specified in the notice, to furnish him with a full and complete 
list of the names and addresses of all his customers within the cantonment, or to give 

 206
him such information as will enable him to trace the persons to whom the dairyman has 
sold milk. 
159. Where it is certified to the Chief Executive Officer by the Health Officer that it is 
desirable, with a view to prevent the spread of any infectious or contagious disease in the 
cantonment, that the Health Officer should be furnished with a list of the customers of any 
washerman, the Chief Executive Officer may, by notice in writing, require the washerman, 
within a time to be specified in the notice, to furnish the Health Officer with a full and 
complete list of the names and addresses of all owners within the cantonment of clothes 
and other articles which the washerman washes or has washed during the six weeks 
immediately preceding the date of the notice. 
Explanation.—For the purposes of this section, the expression “washerman” shall 
mean an individual, body corporate, association of persons engaged in washing clothes in 
an cantonment. 
Blood bank. 
Special 
meausres in 
case of 
outbreak of 
infectious or 
epidemic 
diseases. 
45 of 1860. 
Power to 
require names 
of dairyman’s 
customers. 
Power to 
require names 
of a 
washerman’s 
customers. 
SERVER1/BILL 2004/RS/148RS\148RS.P65 
51 
160. Where it is certified to the Chief Executive Officer by the Health Officer or a 
doctor in the employment of the Board that there is apprehension of the outbreak or spreading 
of any infectious or contagious or communicable disease in the cantonment because of use 
of contaminated needles, syringes or any other such equipment by a medical practitioner or 
by any paramedical worker, the Chief Executive Officer may, by notice in writing, require the 
medical practitioner or the paramedical worker, within such time as may be specified in the 
notice, to furnish him with a full and complete list of the names and addresses of all his 
customers or patients within the cantonment, or to give him such 
information as will enable him to trace the persons whom the medical practitioner or the 
paramedical worker has attended to or treated in the six weeks preceding the date of issuing 
the notice. 
161. Where, after inspection the Health Officer is of opinion that any infectious, 
contagious or communicable disease is caused or is likely to arise in the cantonment from 
the consumption of the milk supplied from a dairy or from the washing of clothes or other 
articles in any place, or from any process employed by a washerman, or from use of 
contaminated needles, syringes or other such equipment by a medical practitioner or any 
para medical staff, he shall report the matter to the Chief Executive Officer. 
162. Upon receipt of a report submitted by the Health Officer under section 161, the 
Chief Executive Officer may, by notice in writing,— 
(a) prohibit the supply of milk from the dairy until the notice has been withdrawn; 
or 
(b) prohibit the washerman from washing clothes or other articles in any such 
place or by any such process as aforesaid until the notice has been withdrawn or 
unless he uses such place in such manner, or washes by process, as the Chief Executive 
Officer may direct in the notice; or 
(c) prohibit the medical practitioner or the paramedical worker from using any 

 207
such needles, syringes or other such equipment unless the notice is withdrawn or 
rectification as may be required in the notice is carried out. 
163. The Health Officer or a doctor in the employment of the Board may take 
possession of any milk, clothes or other articles which are or have recently been in the 
possession of any dairyman on whom a notice has been served under section 158, or of 
any clothes or other articles which are or have recently been in the possession of any 
washerman, on whom a notice has been served under section 159, or any needles, syringes 
or such other equipment which are or have recently been in the possession of the medical 
practitioner or paramedical worker to whom a notice under section 160 has been issued 
and may subject the same or cause the same to be subjected to such chemical or other 
process as he may think necessary; and the Board shall pay from the cantonment fund all 
the costs of the process and shall also pay to the owner of the milk, clothes or other 
articles such sum as compensation for any loss occasioned by such process as may 
appear to it to be reasonable. 
164. Whoever in a cantonment— 
(a) uses a public conveyance while suffering from an infectious or contagious 
disease, or 
(b) uses a public conveyance for the carriage of a person who is suffering from 
any such disease, or 
(c) uses a public conveyance for the carriage of the corpse of a person who has 
died from any such disease, 
shall be bound to take proper precautions against the communication of the disease to 
other persons using or who may thereafter use the conveyance and to notify such use to 
Power to 
require names 
of patients or 
customers of a 
medical 
practitioner or 
paramedical 
workers. 
Report after 
inspection of 
dairy or 
washerman or 
medical 
practitioner’s 
place of 
business. 
Action on 
report 
submitted by 
Health Officer. 
Examination of 
milk, washed 
clothes or 
needles, 
syringes, etc. 
Contamination 
of public 
conveyance. 
SERVER1/BILL 2004/RS/148RS\148RS.P65 
52 
the owner, driver or person incharge of the conveyance, and further to report without delay 
to the Chief Executive Officer the number of the conveyance and the name of the person so 
notified. 
165. (1) Where any person suffering from, or the corpse of any person who has died 
from, an infectious, communicable or contagious disease has been carried in a public 
conveyance which ordinarily plies in a cantonment, the driver thereof shall forthwith report 
the fact to the Chief Executive Officer who shall forthwith cause the conveyance to be 

 208
disinfected if that has not already been done. 
(2) No such conveyance shall be brought again into use until the Chief Executive 
Officer has granted a certificate stating that it can be used without causing risk of infection. 
166. Whoever fails to make to the Chief Executive Officer any report which he is 
required to make by section 164 or section 165 shall be punishable with fine which may 
extend to five thousand rupees. 
167. Notwithstanding anything contained in any law for the time being in force, no 
owner, driver or person incharge of a public conveyance shall be bound to convey or to 
allow to be conveyed in such conveyance in or in the vicinity of a cantonment any person 
suffering from an infectious or contagious disease or the corpse of any person who has 
died from such disease unless and until such person pays or tenders a sum fixed by the 
Chief Executive Officer from time to time, to cover any loss and expense which would 
ordinarily be incurred in disinfecting the conveyance. 
168. Where a Board is, upon the advice of the Health Officer, of opinion that the 
cleansing and disinfection of any building or part of a building in the cantonment or of 
any articles in any such building or part which are likely to retain infection, or the renewal 
of the flooring of any such building or part of such building, would tend to prevent or 
check the spread of any infectious or contagious disease, the Board may by notice in 
writing, require the owner or occupier to cleanse and disinfect, the said building, part or 
articles, as the case may be, or to renew the said flooring, within such time as may be 
specified in the notice: 
Provided that where, in the opinion of the Board the owner or occupier is from poverty 
or any other cause unable effectually to carry out any such requisition, the Board may, at 
the expense of the cantonment fund, cleanse and disinfect the building, part or articles, or 
as the case may be, renew the flooring. 
169. (1) Where the destruction of any hut or shed in a cantonment is, in the opinion 
of the Board, necessary to prevent the spread of any infectious or contagious disease, the 
Board may, by notice in writing, require the owner to destroy the hut or shed and the 
materials thereof within such time as may be specified in the notice. 
(2) Where the President of a Board is satisfied that the destruction of any hut or shed 
in the cantonment is immediately necessary for the purpose of preventing the spread of any 
infectious or contagious disease, he may order the owner or occupier of the hut or shed to 
destroy the same forthwith, or may himself cause it to be destroyed after giving not less 
than two hours’ notice to the owner or occupier thereof. 
(3) The Board shall pay compensation to the owner of any hut or shed destroyed 
under this section. 
170. The Board shall provide free of charge temporary shelter or house accommodation 
for the members of any family in which an infectious or contagious disease has appeared 
who have been compelled to leave their dwelling by reason of any proceedings taken under 
section 168 or section 169, and who desire such shelter or accommodation as aforesaid to 
be provided for them. 
Disinfection of 
public 
conveyance. 
Penalty for 
failure to 
report. 
Driver of 
conveyance 
not bound to 
carry person 
suffering from 
infectious or 
contagious 
disease. 
Disinfection 
of building or 
articles therein. 
Destruction of 

 209
infectious hut 
or shed. 
Temporary 
shelter for 
inmates of 
disinfected or 
destroyed 
building or 
shed. 
SERVER1/BILL 2004/RS/148RS\148RS.P65 
53 
171. (1) Where in a cantonment any building or part of a building is intended to be let, 
in which any person has, within six weeks immediately preceding, been suffering from an 
infectious or contagious disease, the person letting the building or part shall before doing 
so disinfect the same in such manner as the Chief Executive Officer may, by public or special 
notice, direct, together with all articles therein liable to retain infection. 
(2) For the purposes of this section, the keeper of a hotel, lodging house or sarai 
shall be deemed to let to any person who is admitted as a guest therein that part of the 
building in which such person is permitted to reside. 
172. No person shall, without previous disinfection of the same, give, lend, sell, 
transmit or otherwise dispose of to another person any article or thing which he knows or 
has reason to believe has been exposed to contamination by any infectious or contagious 
disease and is likely to be used in, or taken into, a cantonment. 
173. (1) Every Board shall— 
(a) provide proper places with necessary attendants and apparatus for the 
disinfection of conveyances, clothing, bedding or other articles which have been 
exposed to infection; 
(b) cause conveyances, clothing or other articles brought for disinfection to be 
disinfected either free of charge or on payment of such charges as the Chief Executive 
Officer may fix. 
(2) The Chief Executive Officer may notify places at which articles of clothing, bedding, 
conveyances or other articles which have been exposed to infection shall be washed, 
and, if it does so, no person shall wash any such thing at any place not so notified without 
having previously disinfected such thing. 
(3) The Chief Executive Officer may direct the destruction of any clothing, bedding or 
other article in the cantonment likely to retain infection, and may give such compensation 
as he thinks fit for any article so destroyed. 
174. Whoever, while suffering from, or in circumstances in which he is likely to 
spread, any infectious or contagious disease,— 
(a) makes, carries or offers for sale in a cantonment or takes any part in the 
business of making, carrying or offering for sale therein any article of food or drink or 
any medicine or drug for human consumption, or any article of clothing or bedding for 
personal use or wear, or 
(b) takes any part in the business of the washing or carrying of clothes, 
shall be punishable with fine which may extend to five thousand rupees. 
175. When a cantonment is visited or threatened by an outbreak of any infectious 
or contagious disease, the Chief Executive Officer on behalf of the Board may, by public 
notice, restrict in such manner or prohibit for such period, as may be specified in the 
notice, the sale or preparation of any article of food or drink for human consumption 
specified in the notice or the sale of any flesh of any description of animals so specified. 
176. (1) If the Chief Executive Officer on the advice given by the Health Officer is 
of opinion that the water in any well, tank or other place is likely, if used for drinking, to 
endanger, or cause the spread of, any disease, it may,— 
(a) by public notice, prohibit the removal or use of such water for drinking; 
(b) by notice in writing, require the owner or person having control of such 
well, tank or place to take such steps as may be directed by the notice to prevent the 
public from having access to or using such water; or 
Disinfection 

 210
of building 
before letting 
the same. 
Control over 
wells, tanks, 
etc. 
Disposal of 
infected article 
without 
disinfection. 
Means of 
disinfection. 
Making or selling 
of food, 
etc., or washing 
clothes by infected 
person. 
Power to 
restrict or 
prohibit sale of 
food or drink. 
SERVER1/BILL 2004/RS/148RS\148RS.P65 
54 
(c) take such other steps as it may consider expedient to prevent the outbreak 
or spread of any such disease. 
(2) In the event of a cantonment or any part of a cantonment being visited or 
threatened by an outbreak of any infectious or contagious disease, the Health Officer or 
any person authorised by him in this behalf may, without notice and at any time, inspect and 
disinfect any well, tank or other place from which water is, or is likely to be, taken for the 
purposes of drinking, and may further take such steps as he thinks fit to ensure the purity 
of the water or to prevent the use of the same for drinking purposes. 
177. Where any person has died in a cantonment from any infectious or contagious 
disease, the Chief Executive Officer, may, by notice in writing,— 
(a) require any person having charge of the corpse to convey the same to a 
mortuary, thereafter to be disposed of in accordance with law; or 
(b) prohibit the removal of the corpse from the place where death occurred 
except for the purpose of being buried or burned or of being conveyed to a 
mortuary. 
Hospitals and d spensaries i
)
178. (1) A Board may— 
(a) provide and maintain either within or without the cantonment as many 
hospitals and dispensaries as it thinks fit; or 
(b) make, upon such terms as it thinks fit to impose, a grant-in-aid to any 
hospital or dispensary or veterinary hospital, whether within or without the cantonment, 
not maintained by it. 
(2) Every hospital or dispensary maintained or aided under sub-section (1  shall 
have attached to it a ward or wards for the treatment of persons suffering from infectious or 
contagious diseases. 
(3) The Medical Officer appointed by the Board shall be incharge of every 
Hospital and dispensary maintained or aided under this section and be responsible to the 
Health Officer for medical activities and to the Chief Executive Officer for over all administrative 
activities of the hospital. 
179. (1) Every hospital or dispensary maintained or aided under section 178 shall be 
maintained in accordance with any general or special orders of the Central Government for 
the conduct of hospitals and dispensaries or in accordance with the said orders modified in 
such manner as the Central Government may think fit. 
(2) The Board shall cause every such hospital or dispensary to be provided with all 
requisite drugs, instruments, apparatus, furniture and appliances and with sufficient cots, 
bedding and clothing for in-patients. 

 211
180. At every hospital or dispensary maintained or aided under section 178, the sick 
poor of the cantonment, and other inhabitants of the cantonment suffering from infectious, 
communicable or contagious disease, and, with the sanction of the Board, any other sick 
persons, may receive medical or surgical treatment free of cost, and, if treated as in-patients, 
shall be either dieted gratuitously or, if the medical officer in charge so directs, shall be 
granted subsistence allowance on such scale as the Board may fix. 
181. Any sick person who is ineligible to receive medical or surgical treatment free of 
cost in any hospital or dispensary under section 180 may be admitted for treatment therein 
upon such terms as the Board thinks fit. 
182. (1) If the Health Officer or the Medical Officer incharge of a hospital or dispensary 
maintained or aided under section 178 has reason to believe that any person living in 
the cantonment is suffering from an infectious, communicable or contagious disease, he 
Disposal of infectious 
corpse. 
Maintenance or 
aiding of hospitals 
or dispensaries. 
Medical supplies, 
appliances, 
etc. 
Free patients. 
Paying patients. 
Power to order 
person to 
attend hospital 
or dispensary. 
SERVER1/BILL 2004/RS/148RS\148RS.P65 
55 
may, by notice in writing, call upon such person to attend for examination at any such 
hospital or dispensary at such time as may be specified in the notice and not to quit it 
without the permission of the Medical Officer in charge; and, on the arrival of such person 
at the hospital or dispensary, the medical officer-in-charge thereof may examine him for the 
purpose of satisfying himself whether or not such person is suffering from an infectious, 
communicable or contagious disease: 
Provided that, if, having regard to the nature of the disease or the condition of the 
person suffering therefrom, or the general environment and circumstances of such person, 
the Health Officer or Medical Officer, as the case may be, considers that the attendance of 
such person at a hospital or dispensary is likely to prove unnecessary or inexpedient, he 
shall examine such person at such person’s own residence. 
(2) If any person on examination under sub-section (1), is found to be suffering 
from an infectious or contagious disease, the Health Officer or Medical Officer, as the 
case may be, may cause him to be detained in hospital until he is free from the infection or 
contagion: 
Provided that, if having regard to the nature of the disease or the condition of the 
person suffering therefrom, or the general environment and circumstances of such person, 
he considers that the detention of such person at a hospital or dispensary is unnecessary 
or inexpedient, he shall discharge such person and take such measures or give such directions 
in the matter as he thinks necessary. 
183. (1) If the Health Officer or the Medical Officer in charge of a hospital or dispensary 
maintained or aided under section 178 reports in writing to the Officer Commanding the 
station that any person having received a notice under section 182 has refused or omitted 
to attend at the hospital or dispensary, specified in the notice, or that such person, having 
attended the hospital or dispensary, has quitted it without the permission of such medical 
officer, or that any person has failed to comply with any direction given to him under 
section 182, the Officer Commanding the station may, by order in writing, direct such person 
to be removed from the cantonment within twenty-four hours and not to re-enter it without 
his permission in writing. 
(2) No person who has under sub-section (1  been ordered to be removed from and )

 212
not to re-enter a cantonment shall enter any other cantonment without the written permission 
of the Officer Commanding the station. 
Cont ol of traf ic for hygienic pu poses r f r
s
184. (1) A Board may provide or prescribe suitable routes for the use of persons 
passing through the cantonment— 
(a) on their way to or from fairs or places of pilgrimage or other places of public 
resort; or 
(b) during times when an infectious or contagious disease is prevalent, and 
may, by public notice, require such persons as aforesaid to use such routes and no 
others. 
(2) All routes provided or prescribed under sub-section (1) shall be clearly and 
sufficiently indicated by the Board. 
Special condition  regarding essential services 
185. (1) No person employed in any service, or being employed in connection with 
the working of any system of public conservancy or sanitation or water supply or hospitals 
or dispensaries or electric supply or public transport services or such other essential services 
under a Board in any cantonment area, shall, in the absence of any contract, resign 
without reasonable cause or absent himself from duty without proper authority and in case 
of such resignation or absence from duty he shall be punishable with imprisonment which 
may extend to one month. 
Power to exclude 
from cantonment 
persons 
refusing 
to attend hospital 
or dispensary. 
Routes for 
pilgrims and 
others. 
Conditions of 
service of 
safaikaramcharis 
and others. 
SERVER1/BILL 2004/RS/148RS\148RS.P65 
56 
(2) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, direct that on 
and from such date as may be specified in the notification, the provisions of this section 
shall apply in the case of any specified class of employees employed by a Board whose 
functions intimately concern the public health or safety. 
CHAPTER IX 
WATER-SUPPLY, DRAINAGE AND SEWAGE COLLECTION 
Water-Supply 
186. (1) In every cantonment where a sufficient supply of potable water for domestic 
use does not exist, the Board shall provide or arrange for the provision of such a supply. 
(2) The Board shall, as far as possible, make adequate provision that such supply 
shall be continuous throughout the year, and that the water shall be at all times fit for human 
consumption. 
(3) It shall be the duty of every Board to practise and propagate the scientific methods of 
water harvesting including harvesting of rain water for use and make arrangement for recharging 
the sources of ground water including underground aquifers and to preserve rivers, streams, 
springs and other natural sources of water within and in the vicinity of the cantonment. 
187. In this Chapter, unless the context otherwise requires, the following words and 
expression in relation to water supply shall have the respective meanings given below, 
namely :— 
(1) “communication pipe’’ means :— 
(a) where the premises supplied with water abut on the part of the street 
in which the main is laid, and the service pipe enters those premises otherwise 
than through the outer wall of a building abutting on the street and has a 

 213
stopcock placed in those premises and as near to the boundary of that street as 
is reasonably practicable, so much of the service pipe as lies between the main 
and that stopcock; 
(b) in any other case, so much of the service pipe as lies between the 
main and the boundary of the street in which the main is laid, and includes the 
ferrule at the junction of the service pipe with the main, and also,— 
(i) where the communication pipe ends at in a stopcock, that stopcock, 
and 
(ii) any stopcock fitted on the communication pipe between the 
end thereof and the main. 
(2) “main” means a pipe laid by the Board for the purpose of giving a general 
supply of water as distinct from a supply to individual consumers and includes any 
apparatus used in connection with such a pipe. 
(3) “service pipe” means so much of any pipe for supplying water from a main 
to any premises as is subject to water pressure from that main, or would be so subject 
but for the closing of some tap. 
(4) “supply pipe’’ means so much of any service pipe as is not a communication 
pipe. 
(5) “trunk main” means a main constructed for the purpose of conveying water 
from a source of supply to a filter or reservoir or from one filter or reservoir to another 
filter or reservoir, or for the purpose of conveying water in bulk from one part of the 
limits of supply to another part of those limits, or for the purpose of giving or taking 
a supply of water in bulk. 
(6) “water fittings” includes pipes (other than mains), taps, cocks, valves, 
Maintenance of 
water-supply. 
Terms of 
water-supply. 
SERVER1/BILL 2004/RS/148RS\148RS.P65 
57 
ferrules, meters, cisterns, baths and other similar apparatus used in connection with 
the supply and use of water. 
188. (1) The Board may, when so required,— 
(a) carry out a survey of the existing consumption of and demand for water 
supplies in cantonment and of the water resources in or likely to be made available in 
the cantonment; 
(b) prepare an estimate of the future water supply requirements of the cantonment; 
(c) carryout a survey of the existing quantity of sewage collection; 
(d) formulate proposals as to — 
(i) the existing or future water supply requirements of the cantonment; 
(ii) the existing or future sewage collection requirement in cantonment 
including proposals for the manner in which and the place or places at which 
sewage should be carried, collected and treated. 
(2) If the Board is of the opinion that the works and other properties for the time being 
vested in the Board, are inadequate for the purpose of sufficient supply of water or for the 
purpose of efficient collection of sewage under this Act it may take steps in accordance with 
the provisions of this Act for the construction of additional works, whether within cantonment 
or outside the cantonment with the approval of the Principal Director and for the 
acquisition of additional properties for such works. 
189. (1) The Board may, with the previous sanction of the Central Government, by 
public notice, declare any lake, stream, spring, well, tank, reservoir or other source, whether 
within or without the limits of the cantonment other than a source of water-supply under the 
control and in use of the Military Engineer Services or the Public Works Department from 
which water is or may be made available for the use of the public in the cantonment to be 
source of public water-supply. 
(2) Every such source shall be under the control of the Board and it shall be the duty 
of the Board to preserve and maintain such source. 

 214
190. The Chief Executive Officer may, by notice in writing, require the owner or any 
person having the control of any source of public water-supply which is used for drinking 
purposes— 
(a) to keep the same in good order and to clear it from time to time of silt, refuse 
and decaying vegetation; or 
(b) to protect the same from contamination in such manner as the Chief 
Executive Officer may direct; or 
(c) if the water therein is proved to the satisfaction of the Chief Executive 
Officer to be unfit for drinking purposes, to take such measures as may be specified in 
the notice to prevent the public from having access to or using such water: 
Provided that, in the case of a well, such person as aforesaid may, instead of complying 
with the notice, signify in writing his desire to be relieved of all responsibility for 
the proper maintenance of the well and his readiness to place it under the control and 
supervision of the Board for the use of the public, and, if he does so, he shall not be 
bound to carry out the requisition, and the Board shall undertake the control and supervision 
of the well. 
191. (1) Subject to the guidelines made by the Board in this regard, the Chief 
Executive Officer may permit the owner, lessee or occupier of any building or land to connect 
the building or land with a source of public water-supply by means of communication 
Board to carry 
out survey 
and formulate 
proposals. 
Control over 
sources of 
public watersupply. 
Power to 
require 
maintenance or 
closing of 
private source 
of public 
drinking watersupply. 
Supply of 
water. 
SERVER1/BILL 2004/RS/148RS\148RS.P65 
58 
pipes of such size and description as may be specified for the purpose of obtaining water for 
domestic use. 
(2) The occupier of every building so connected with the water-supply shall be 
entitled to have for domestic use, in return for the water tax, if any, such quantity of water as 
the Chief Executive Officer may determine. 
(3) All water supplied in excess of the quantity to which such supply is limited under 
sub-section (2  and, in a cantonment in which a water tax is not imposed, all water supplied )
under this section, shall be paid for at such rate as the Board may fix keeping in view its 
financial viability. 
(4) The supply of water for domestic use shall not be deemed to include any 
supply for— 
(a) animals or for washing vehicles where such animals or vehicle are kept for 
sale or hire; 
(b) any trade, manufacture or business; 
(c) fountains, swimming baths or any ornamental or mechanical purpose; 
(d) gardens or for purposes of irrigation; 
(e) making or watering roads or paths; or 
(f) building purposes. 
192. If it appears to the Chief Executive Officer that any building or land in the 
cantonment is without a proper supply of potable water, the Chief Executive Officer may, by 
notice in writing, require the owner, lessee or occupier of the building or land to obtain from 

 215
a source of public water-supply such quantity of water, as is, adequate to the requirements 
of the persons usually occupying or employed upon the building or land, and to provide 
communication pipes of the prescribed size and description, and to take all necessary steps 
for the above purposes. 
193. (1) Subject to the guidelines made by the Board in this regard, the Chief Executive 
officer may, by agreement, supply, from any source of public water-supply, the owner, 
lessee or occupier of any building or land in the cantonment with any water for any purpose, 
other than a domestic purpose, on such terms and conditions, consistent with this Act and 
the rules and bye-laws made thereunder, as may be agreed upon between the Chief Executive 
Officer and such owner, lessee or occupier. 
(2) The Chief Executive Officer may withdraw such supply or curtail the quantity 
thereof at any time if it should appear necessary to do so for the purpose of maintaining 
sufficient supply of water for domestic use by inhabitants of the cantonment. 
194. Notwithstanding any obligation imposed on Boards under this Act, a Board 
shall not be liable to any forfeiture, penalty or damages for failure to supply water or for 
curtailing the quantity thereof if the failure or curtailment, as the case may be arises from 
accident or from drought or other unavoidable cause unless, in the case of an agreement for 
the supply of water under section 193, the Board has made express provision for forfeiture, 
penalty or damages in the event of such failure or curtailment. 
195. Notwithstanding anything hereinbefore contained or contained in any agreement 
under section 193, the supply of water by a Board to any building or land shall 
be, and shall be deemed to have been granted subject to the following conditions, 
namely:— 
(a) the owner, lessee or occupier of any building or land in or on which water 
supplied by the Board is wasted by reason of the pipes, drains or other works being 
out of repair shall, if he has knowledge thereof, give notice of the same to such officer 
as the Chief Executive Officer may appoint in this behalf; 
Power to 
require watersupply 
to be 
taken. 
Supply of 
water under 
agreement. 
Board not 
liable for failure 
of supply. 
Conditions of 
universal 
application. 
SERVER1/BILL 2004/RS/148RS\148RS.P65 
59 
(b) the Chief Executive Officer or any other officer or employee of the Board 
authorised by him in writing in this behalf may enter into or on any premises supplied 
with water by the Board, for the purpose of examining all pipes, taps, works and 
fittings connected with the supply of water and of ascertaining whether there is any 
waste or misuse of such water; 
(c) the Chief Executive Officer may, after giving notice in writing, cut off the 
connection between any source of public water-supply and any building or land to 
which water is supplied for any purpose therefrom, or turn off such supply if— 
(i) the owner or occupier of the building or land neglects to pay the 
water tax or water rate or other charges connected with the water supply 
within one month from the date on which such tax or rate or charge falls due 
for payment; 
(ii) the occupier refuses to admit the Chief Executive Officer or other 
authorised officer or employee of the Board into the building or land for the 
purpose of making any examination or inquiry authorised by clause (b) or prevents 
the making of such examination or inquiry; 

 216
(iii) the occupier wilfully or negligently misuses or causes waste of 
water; 
(iv) the occupier wilfully or negligently injures or damages his meter or 
any pipe or tap conveying water from the water works; 
(v) any pipes, taps, works or fittings connected with the supply of water 
to the building or land are found, on examination by any other officer or employee 
of the Board authorised by the Chief Executive Officer in writing in this 
behalf, to be out of repair to such an extent as to cause waste of water; 
(d) the expense of cutting off the connection or of turning off the water in any 
case referred to in clause (c) shall be paid by the owner or occupier of the building or 
land; 
(e) no action taken under or in pursuance of clause (c) shall relieve any person 
from any penalty or liability which he may otherwise have incurred. 
196. A Board may allow any person not residing within the limits of the cantonment to 
take or be supplied with water for any purpose from any source of public water supply on 
such terms as it may prescribe, and may at any time withdraw or curtail such supply. 
197. Whoever— 
(a) uses for other than domestic purposes any water supplied by a Board for 
domestic use; or 
(b) where water is supplied by agreement with a Board for a specified purpose, 
uses that water for any other purposes shall be punishable with fine which may 
extend to two thousand five hundred rupees, and in addition, the Board shall be 
entitled to recover from him the cost of the water misused. 
Water, d ainage and other connect ons r i
198. A Board may carry any cable, wire, pipe, drain, sewer or channel of any kind,— 
(a) for the purpose of carrying out, establishing or maintaining any system of 
water-supply, lighting, drainage, or sewerage, through, across, under or over any 
road or street, or any place laid out or intended as a road or street, or, after giving 
reasonable notice in writing to the owner or occupier, into, through, across, under or 
over any land or building, or up side of any building, situated within the cantonment; 
or 
Supply to 
persons 
outside 
cantonment. 
Penalty. 
Power of Board 
to lay wires, 
connections, 
etc. 
SERVER1/BILL 2004/RS/148RS\148RS.P65 
60 
(b) for the purpose of supplying water or of the introduction or distribution of 
outflow of water or for the removal or outflow of sewage, after giving reasonable notice 
in writing to the owner or occupier, into, through, across, under or over any land or 
building, or up side of any building, situated outside the cantonment and may at all 
times do all acts and things which may be necessary or expedient for repairing or 
maintaining any such cable, wire, pipe, drain, sewer or channel in an effective state for 
the purpose for which the same may be used or is intended to be used : 
Provided that no nuisance shall be caused in excess of what is reasonably necessary 
for the proper execution of the work: 
Provided further that compensation shall be payable to the owner or occupier for any 
damage sustained by him which is directly occasioned by the carrying out of any such operation. 
199. In the event of any cable, wire, pipe, drain, sewer or channel being laid or carried 
above the surface of any land or through, over or up side of any building, such cable, wire, 
pipe, drain sewer or channel shall be so laid or carried as to interfere as little as possible with 
the rights of the owner or occupier to the due enjoyment of such land or building, and 

 217
compensation shall be payable by the Board in respect of any substantial interference with 
the right to any such enjoyment. 
200. No person shall, for any purpose whatsoever, without the permission of the Board 
at any time make or cause to be made any connection or communication with any cable, wire, 
pipe, drain, sewer or channel constructed or maintained by, or vested in, a Board. 
201. The Chief Executive Officer may prescribe the size of the ferrules to be used for 
the supply of gas, if any, and may establish meters or other appliances for the purpose of 
measuring the quantity of any water or gas or testing the quality thereof supplied to any 
premises by the Board. 
202. The ferrules, communication pipes, connections, meters, stand pipes and all 
fittings thereon or connected therewith leading from water mains or from pipes, drains, 
sewers or channels into any house or land, to which water or gas is supplied by a Board, and 
the pipes, fittings, and works inside any such house or within the limits of any such land, 
shall in all cases be installed or executed subject to the inspection and to the satisfaction of 
the Chief Executive Officer. 
203. A Board may fix the charges to be made for the establishment by them or through 
their agency or communications from, and connections with, mains, or pipes for the supply 
of water, or gas, or for meters or other appliances for measuring the quantity, or testing the 
quantity thereof supplied, and may levy such charges accordingly. 
Application of this Chapter to Government water-supplies 
204. (1) Where in any cantonment there is a water-supply (other than a public watersupply 
under the control of the Board) under the control of the Military Engineer Services or the 
Public Works Department, the Officer of the Military Engineer Services or of the Public Works 
Department, as the case may be, in charge of such water-supply (hereafter in this Chapter 
referred to as the Officer) may publish in the cantonment in such manner as he thinks fit a notice 
declaring any lake, stream, spring, well, tank, reservoir or other source, whether within or without 
the limits of the cantonment other than a source of public water-supply and the officer may, for 
the purpose of keeping any such source in good order or of protecting it from contamination or 
from use, require the Board to exercise any power conferred upon it by section 190. 
(2) In the case of any water-supply such as is referred to in sub-section (1), the 
following provisions of this Chapter, namely, the provisions of sections 191, 193, 194, 195, 
197, 198, 199, 200, 201, 202 and 203 shall, as far as may be, be applicable in respect of the 
supply of water to the cantonment, and for the purpose of such application references to 
the Board shall be construed as references to the Officer, and references to the Chief Executive 
Officer or other officer or employee of the Board shall be construed as references to 
such person as may be authorised in this behalf by the Officer. 
Government 
water-supply. 
Power to fix 
rates and 
charges. 
Wires, etc., laid 
above surface 
of ground. 
C o n n e c t i o n 
with main not to 
be made without 
permission. 
Power to prescribe 
ferrules 
and to establish 
meters, etc. 
Power of 
inspection 
SERVER1/BILL 2004/RS/148RS\148RS.P65 
61 
(3) The provisions of section 193 shall be applicable in respect of the supply of water 
by agreement to the Board by the Officer for use for any purpose other than a domestic 
purpose in like manner as they are applicable to such supply to the owner, lessee or occupier 

 218
of any building or land in the cantonment. 
(4) In order to preserve the underground water level, the Board may make regulations 
for the digging or use of bore wells in the cantonment. 
205. (1) Where it appears to the Chief Executive Officer that any dwelling house in 
the cantonment is without supply of water for domestic consumption and that such a 
supply can be given from mains which is not more than one hundred feet distance from 
any part of such dwelling house, the Chief Executive Officer may by notice require the 
owner to obtain supply and to execute all such works as may be necessary for this 
purpose. 
(2) It shall not be lawful for the owner of any premises which may be constructed or 
reconstructed, to occupy it or cause or permit it to be occupied until he has obtained a 
certificate from the Chief Executive Officer that there is provided within, or within a reasonable 
distance of, the house supply of wholesome water as appears to the Chief Executive Officer to 
be sufficient for domestic consumption and use of the inmates of the house. 
206. In any case in which the provisions of section 204 apply and in which the 
Board is not receiving a bulk supply of water under section 207, the water-tax, if any, 
imposed in the cantonment and all other rates arising out of the supply of water which 
may be imposed under the provisions of this Chapter as applied by section 204 shall be 
recovered by the Board, and all monies so recovered, or such proportion thereof as the 
Central Government may in each case determine, shall be paid by the Board to the 
Officer. 
207. (1) Where in any cantonment there is a water-supply such as is referred to in 
sub-section (1  of section 204, the Board may, and so long as the Board is unable to provide )
a water-supply of its own, it shall receive from the Military Engineer Services or the Public 
Works Department, as the case may be, at such point or points as may be agreed upon 
between the Board and the Military Engineer Services or Public Works Department, a supply 
of water adequate to the requirements for domestic use of all persons in the cantonment 
other than entitled consumers. 
(2) Any supply of water received under sub-section (1) shall be a bulk supply, and 
the Board shall make such payments to the Military Engineer Services or Public Works 
Department for all water so received as may be agreed upon between the Board and the 
Military Engineer Services or Public Works Department, or, in default of such agreement, as 
may be determined by the Central Government to be reasonable having regard to the actual 
cost of supplying the water in the cantonment and the rate charge for water in any adjacent 
municipality: 
Provided that, notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, the Board shall not 
charge for the supply to persons in the cantonment of water received by the Board under 
this section a rate calculated to produce more than the sum of the payments made to the 
Military Engineer Services or Public Works Department for water received and the actual 
cost of the supply thereof by the Board to consumers. 
(3) If any dispute arises between the Board and the Military Engineer Service or 
Public Works Department regarding the rate and amount of water adequate to the requirements 
of persons in the cantonment other than entitled consumers, the disputes shall be 
referred to the Central Government whose decision shall be final. 
208. Where under the provisions of sub-section (1) of section 207 a bulk supply of 
water is received by the Board, the Board shall be solely responsible for the supply of water 
to all persons in the cantonment other than entitled consumers; and the provisions of this 
Act shall apply as if such bulk supply were a source of public water-supply under the 
Functions of 
the Board in relation 
to distribution 
of bulk 
supply. 
Supply of 
water from 
Government 
water-supply 

 219
to the Board. 
Recovery of 
charges. 
Water supply 
for domestic 
consumption. 
SERVER1/BILL 2004/RS/148RS\148RS.P65 
62 
control of the Board and as if the communications from and connections with such bulk 
supply for the purpose of supplying water to such persons were a system of water-supply 
established and maintained by the Board. 
209. (1) All public drains, all drains in, alongside or under any public street, except 
those vesting in the Military Engineer Service or any Department of the Central Government 
or a State Government or any autonomous body under the Central Government or a State 
Government and all sewage collection works, whether constructed out of the cantonment 
fund or otherwise and all works, material and things appertaining thereto, which are situated 
in the cantonment shall vest in the Board. 
(2) All public and other drains, which are vested in the Board are hereafter in this Act 
referred to as cantonment drains. 
(3) For the purposes of enlarging, deepening or otherwise repairing or maintaining 
any such drain or sewage collection work so much of the sub-soil appertaining thereto as 
may be necessary for the said purpose shall be deemed also to vest in the Board. 
(4) All drains and ventilation shafts, pipes and all appliances and fittings connected 
with drainage works constructed, erected or set up out of the cantonment fund in or upon 
premises not belonging to the Board whether– 
(a) before or after the commencement of this Act; and 
(b) for the use of the owner or occupier of such premises or not, shall unless 
the Board has otherwise determined, or does at any time otherwise determine, vest 
and be deemed always to have vested in the Board. 
210. (1) All cantonment drains, all sewage collection and all works, materials and 
things appertaining thereto shall be under the control of the Board. 
(2) The Chief Executive Officer shall maintain and keep in repair all cantonment drains 
and sewage collection and sewage disposal works when authorised by the Board. 
(3) The Board shall construct as many new drains and sewage collection and sewage 
disposal works as may from time to time be necessary for effectual drainage and sewage 
collection. 
211. No person shall throw, empty or turn into any cantonment drain or into any drain 
communicating with a cantonment drain – 
(a) any matter likely to injure the drain or to interfere with the free flow of its 
contents, or to affect prejudicially the treatment and disposal of its contents; or 
(b) any chemical, refuse or waste stream, or any liquid of a temperature higher 
than forty-five degrees centigrade, being refuse or stream which, or liquid which 
when so heated is, either alone or in combination with the contents of the drain be 
dangerous, or the cause of a nuisance, or prejudicial to health; or 
(c) any dangerous petroleum. 
Explanation.—In this section, the expression “dangerous petroleum” has the same 
meaning as in the Petroleum Act, 1934. 
212. (1) Subject to such conditions as may be prescribed by bye-laws made in this 
behalf, the owner or occupier of any premises having a private drain, or the owner of any 
private drain within cantonment may apply to the Chief Executive Officer to have his drain 
made to communicate with the cantonment drains and thereby to discharge foul water and 
surface water from those premises or that private drain: 
Provided that nothing in this sub-section shall entitle any person— 
(a) to discharge directly or indirectly into any cantonment drain— 
Special 
provisions 
concerning 
drainage and 

 220
sewage. 
Construction of 
and control of 
drains and sewage 
collection 
and disposal 
works. 
Certain matters 
not to be 
passed into 
cantonments 
drains. 
30 of 1934. 
Application by 
owners and 
occupiers to 
drain into 
cantonment 
drains. 
SERVER1/BILL 2004/RS/148RS\148RS.P65 
63 
(i) any trade effluent from any trade premises except in accordance with 
bye-laws made in this behalf; or 
(ii) any liquid or other matter the discharge of which into cantonment 
drains is prohibited by or under this Act or any other law; or 
(b) where separate cantonment drains are provided for foul water and for surface 
water to discharge directly or indirectly– 
(i) foul water into a drain provided for the surface water; or 
(ii) except with the permission of the Chief Executive Officer, surface 
water into a drain provided for foul water; or 
(c) to have his drains made to communicate directly with a storm-water overflow 
drain. 
(2) Any person desirous of availing himself of the provisions of sub-section (1  )
shall give to the Chief Executive Officer notice of his proposals, and at any time within 
one month after receipt thereof, the Chief Executive Officer may by notice to him refuse 
to permit the communication to be made, if it appears to him that the mode of construction 
or condition of the drain is such that the making of the communication would be 
prejudicial to the drainage system, and for the purpose of examining the mode of construction 
and condition of the drain he may, if necessary, require it to be laid open for 
inspection. 
(3) The Chief Executive Officer may, if he thinks fit, construct such parts of the work 
necessary for having a private drain made to communicate with a cantonment drain, as is in 
or under a public street and in such a case, the expenses incurred by the Chief Executive 
Officer shall be paid by the owner or occupier of the premises, or as the case may be, the 
owner of the private drain and shall be recoverable from the owner or occupier as an arrears 
of tax under this Act. 
213. (1) Where any premises are in the opinion of the Chief Executive Officer, without 
sufficient means of effectual drainage and a cantonment drain or some place approved by 
the Chief Executive Officer for the discharge of filth and other polluted and obnoxious 
matter is situated at a distance of not exceeding thirty metres from any part of the said 
premises, he may, by written notice, require the owner of the said premises– 
(a) to make a drain emptying into such cantonment drain or place; 
(b) to provide and set up all such appliances and fittings as may appear to the 
Chief Executive Officer necessary for the purposes of gathering and receiving the 
filth and other polluted and obnoxious matter from, and conveying the same off, the 
said premises and of effectually flushing such drain and every fixture connected 
therewith; 
(c) to remove any existing drain or other appliance or thing used or intended to 
be used for drainage which is injurious to health; 

 221
(d) to provide a closed drain in substitution of an open drain or to provide such 
other appliance or thing either newly or in substitution of any existing appliance or 
thing or to provide both a close drain and such other appliance or thing in substitution 
of the existing open drain and other appliance or thing, which is or is likely to be 
injurious to health; 
(e) to provide and set up all such appliances and fitting as may appear to the 
Chief Executive Officer to be necessary for the purpose of gathering and receiving 
the waste water from floors and galleries of buildings when they are washed, and 
conveying the same through spouts, by down-take pipes so as to prevent such 
waste water from discharging directly on streets or inside any lower portion of the 
premises; 
Drainage of 
undrained premises. 
SERVER1/BILL 2004/RS/148RS\148RS.P65 
64 
(f) to carry out any work to improve or re-model an existing drain which is 
inadequate, insufficient or faulty. 
(2) Where in any case not provided for in sub-section (1  any premises are, in the )
opinion of the Chief Executive Officer, without sufficient means of effectual drainage, he 
may, by written notice, require the owner of the premises— 
(a) to construct a drain up to a point to be prescribed in such notice but not at 
a distance or more than thirty meters from any part of the premises; or 
(b) to construct a closed cesspool or soakage pit and drain or drains emptying 
into such cesspool or soakage pit. 
(3) Any requisition for the construction of any drain under sub-section (2) may 
contain any of the details specified in sub-section (1). 
214. (1) It shall not be lawful to erect or to re-erect any premises in a cantonment or to 
occupy any such premises unless– 
(a) a drain be constructed of such size, materials and description, at such level 
and with such fall as shall appear to the Chief Executive Officer to be necessary for the 
effectual drainage of such premises; 
(b) there have been provided and set up on such premises such appliances and 
fittings as may appear to the Chief Executive Officer to be necessary for the purposes 
of gathering or receiving the filth and other polluted and obnoxious matter from, and 
conveying the same off, the said premises and of effectually flushing the drain of the 
said premises and every fixture connected therewith. 
(2) The drain so constructed shall empty into a cantonment drain situated at a distance 
of not exceeding thirty meters from the premises; but if no cantonment drain is situated 
within that distance then such drain shall empty into a cesspool situated within that 
distance to be specified by the Chief Executive Officer for the purpose. 
215. (1) If it appears to the Chief Executive Officer that any group or block of 
premises may be drained more economically or advantageously in combination than separately, 
and a cantonment drain of sufficient size already exists or is about to be constructed 
within thirty metres of any part of that group or block of premises, the Chief 
Executive Officer may cause that group or block of premises to be drained by a combined 
operation. 
(2) The expenses incurred in carrying out any work under sub-section (1) in respect 
of any group or block of premises shall be paid by the owners of such premises in such 
proportions as the Chief Executive Officer may determine and shall be recoverable from 
them as an arrears of tax under this Act. 
(3) Not less than fifteen days before any such work is commenced, the Chief 
Executive Officer shall give to each such owner– 
(a) written notice of the nature of the proposed work; and 
(b) an estimate of the expenses to be incurred in respect thereof and of the 
proportion of such expenses payable by him. 
(4) The Chief Executive Officer may require the owners of such groups or block or 

 222
premises to maintain the work executed under this section. 
216. Where a drain connecting any premises with a cantonment drain is sufficient 
for the effectual drainage of such premises and is otherwise unobjectionable but is not 
in the opinion of the Chief Executive Officer, adapted to the general system of drainage 
in the cantonment, he may, by written notice addressed to the owner of the premises, 
direct– 
New premises 
not to be 
erected without 
drains. 
Power to drain 
group or block 
of premises by 
combined 
operations. 
Power to 
close or limit 
the use of 
private drains 
in certain 
cases. 
SERVER1/BILL 2004/RS/148RS\148RS.P65 
65 
(a) that such drain be closed, discontinued or destroyed and that any work 
necessary for that purpose be done; or 
(b) that such drain shall, from such date as may be specified in the notice in this 
behalf, be used for filth and polluted water only or for rain water and unpolluted subsoil 
water only: 
Provided that– 
(i) no drain may be closed, discontinued or destroyed by the Chief 
Executive Officer under clause (a) except on condition of his providing another 
drain equally effectual for the drainage of the premises and communicating with 
any cantonment drain which he thinks fit; and 
(ii) the expenses of the construction of any drain so provided by the 
Board and of any work done under clause (a) may be paid out of the cantonment 
fund. 
217. (1) Where the Chief Executive Officer either on receipt of an application from the 
owner of any premises or otherwise is of the opinion that the only, or the most convenient 
means of effectual drainage of the premises into a cantonment drain is through a drain 
belonging to another person, the Chief Executive Officer may by notice in writing require 
the owner of such a drain to show cause within a period specified in the notice as to why an 
order under this section should not be made. 
(2) Where no cause is shown within the specified period or the cause shown appears 
to the Chief Executive Officer invalid or insufficient, the Chief Executive Officer may by 
order in writing either authorise the owner of the premises to use the drain or declare him to 
be a joint owner thereof. 
(3) An order made under sub-section (2) may contain directions as to– 
(a) the payment of rent or compensation by the owner of the premises; 
(b) the construction of a drain for the premises for the purpose of connecting it 
with the aforesaid drain; 
(c) the entry upon the land in which the aforesaid drain is situate with assistants 
and workmen at all reasonable hours; 
(d) the respective responsibilities of the parties for maintaining, repairing, flushing, 
cleaning and emptying the aforesaid drain. 
218. Wherever it is provided in this Chapter that steps shall or may be taken for 
the effectual drainage of any premises, it shall be competent to the Chief Executive 
Officer to require that there shall be one drain for filth and polluted water and an entirely 
distinct drain for rain water and unpolluted sub-soil water or both rain water and 

 223
unpolluted sub-soil water, each emptying into separate cantonment drains or other 
suitable places. 
219. For the purpose of efficient drainage of any premises, the Chief Executive Officer 
may, by notice in writing,– 
(a) require any courtyard, alley or passage between two or more buildings to be 
paved by the owner or owners of such buildings with such materials and in such 
manner as may be approved by the Chief Executive Officer; and 
(b) require such paving to be kept in proper repair. 
220. The Chief Executive Officer may cause any or all of the cantonment drains to 
empty into, and all sewage to be collected of at, such place or places as he considers 
suitable: 
Use of drain 
by a person 
other than 
the owner. 
Sewage and 
rain water drains 
to be distinct. 
Power to 
require owner 
to carry out 
certain works 
for satisfactory 
drainage. 
Appointment 
of places for the 
emptying of 
drains and collection 
of sewage. 
SERVER1/BILL 2004/RS/148RS\148RS.P65 
66 
Provided that no place which has not been before the commencement of this Act used 
for any of the purposes specified in this section shall, after such commencement be used 
therefor without the approval of the Board: 
Provided further that on and after such date as may be appointed by the Central 
Government in this behalf no sewage shall be discharged into any water course until it has 
been so treated as not to affect prejudicially the purity and quality of the water into which 
it is discharged. 
Miscellaneous 
221. Without the written permission of the Chief Executive Officer, no person shall, 
for any purpose whatsoever, at any time make or cause to be made any connection or 
communicate with any drain referred to in section 210 or any water works, constructed or 
maintained by, or vested in, the Board. 
222. 1)(a) No railway works shall be constructed on any cantonment drain or any (
water works constructed or maintained by, or vested in the Board, without the approval of 
the Central Government. 
(b) If any railway works are constructed on any drains or water works as aforesaid 
without the written permission of the Central Government, the Chief Executive Officer may 
remove or otherwise deal with the same as he thinks fit. 
(2)(a) No private street shall be constructed and no building, wall, fence or other 
structure shall be erected on any cantonment drain or on any water works constructed or 
maintained by, or vested in, the Board without the approval of the Board. 
(b) If any private street is constructed or any building, wall, fence or structure erected 
on any drain or water works as aforesaid without the written permission of the Board, the 
Chief Executive Officer may remove or otherwise deal with the same as he may think fit. 
(3) The expenses incurred by the Chief Executive Officer in doing so shall be paid by 
the owner of the private street or of the building, fence wall or other structure or, as the case 
may be, by the railway administration or the person offending and shall be recoverable as an 
arrears of tax under this Act. 

 224
223. (1) The Chief Executive Officer may place and maintain aqueducts, conduits 
and lines of mains or pipes or drains over, under, along or across any immovable property 
whether within or without the local limits of the cantonment without acquiring the same, 
and may at any time for the purpose of examining, repairing, altering or removing any 
aqueducts, conduits or lines of mains or pipes or drains, enter on any property over, 
under, along or across which the aqueducts, conduits or lines of mains or pipes, or drains 
have been placed: 
Provided that the Board shall not acquire any right other than a right of user in the 
property over, under, along or across which any aqueduct, conduit or line of mains or pipes, 
or drain is placed. 
(2) The power conferred under sub-section (1) shall not be exercisable in respect of 
any property vested in the Union or under the control or management of the Central Government 
or railway administration or vested in any local authority save with the permission 
of the Central Government or railway administration or the local authority, as the case may 
be, and in accordance with any bye-laws made in this behalf: 
Provided that the Chief Executive Officer may, without such permission, repair, renew, 
or amend any existing works of which the character or position is not to be altered if such 
repair, renewal or amendment is urgently necessary in order to maintain without interruption 
the supply of water, drainage or collection of sewage or is such that delay would be dangerous 
to health, human life or property. 
Connection 
with water 
works and 
drains not to 
be made 
without 
permission. 
Buildings, 
railways and 
private streets 
not to be 
erected or 
constructed 
over drains or 
water works 
without 
permission. 
Rights of user 
of property 
for aqueducts, 
lines, etc. 
SERVER1/BILL 2004/RS/148RS\148RS.P65 
67 
(3) In exercise of the powers conferred upon him by this section, the Chief Executive 
Officer shall cause as little damage and inconvenience as may be possible, and shall make 
full compensation for any damage or inconvenience caused by him. 
224. (1) If it appears to the Chief Executive Officer that the only or most convenient 
means of water supply to, and drainage of, any premises is by placing or carrying any pipe 
or drains over, under, along or across the immovable property of another person, the Chief 
Executive Officer may, by order in writing, authorise the owner of the premises to place or 
carry such pipe or drain over, under, along or across such immovable property: 
Provided that before making any such order the Chief Executive Officer shall give to 
the owner of the immovable property a reasonable opportunity of showing cause within 
such time as may be prescribed by bye-laws made in this behalf as to why the order should 
not be made: 
Provided further that the owner of the premises shall not acquire any right other than 
a right of user in the property over, under, along or across which any such pipe or drain is 
placed or carried. 
(2) Upon the making of an order, under sub-section (1), the owner of the premises 

 225
may, after giving reasonable notice of his intention so to do, enter upon the immovable 
property with assistants and workmen at any time between sunrise and sunset for the 
purpose of placing a pipe or drain over, under, along or across such immovable property or 
for the purpose of repairing the same. 
(3) In placing or carrying a pipe or drain under this section, as little damage as 
possible shall be done to the immovable property and the owner of the premises shall— 
(a) cause the pipe or drain to be placed or carried with the least practicable 
delay; 
(b) fill in, re-instate and make good at his own cost and with the least practicable 
delay, any land opened, broken up or removed for the purpose of placing or 
carrying such pipe or drain; and 
(c) pay compensation to the owner of the immovable property and to any other 
person who sustains damage by reason of the placing or carrying of such pipe or 
drain. 
(4) If the owner of the immovable property, over, under, along or across which a pipe 
or drain has been placed or carried under this section whilst such immovable property was 
not built upon, desires to erect any building on such property, the Chief Executive Officer, 
shall, by notice in writing, require the owner of the premises to close, remove or divert the 
pipe or drain in such manner as shall be approved by him and to fill in, re-instate and make 
good the immovable property as if the pipe or drain had not been placed or carried over, 
under, along or across the same: 
Provided that no such requisition shall be made unless in the opinion of the Chief 
Executive Officer it is necessary or expedient for the construction of proposed building or 
the safe enjoyment thereof that the pipe or drain should be closed, removed or diverted. 
225. If the Board places or carries any pipe or drain or does any other work connected 
with the water supply or drainage across any railway line, it may, with the sanction of the 
Central Government and at the cost of the cantonment fund, require the railway administration 
to raise or lower the level thereof. 
226. (1) When under the provisions of this Chapter, any person may be required or is 
liable to execute any work, the Chief Executive Officer may, in accordance with the provisions 
of this Act and of any bye-laws made in this behalf, cause such work to be executed after 
giving such person an opportunity of executing the same within such time as may be 
specified by him for this purpose. 
Power of 
owner of premises 
to place 
pipes and 
drains through 
land belonging 
to other 
persons. 
Power to 
require railway 
level, etc., to 
be raised or 
lowered. 
Power to 
execute work 
after giving 
notice to the 
person liable. 
SERVER1/BILL 2004/RS/148RS\148RS.P65 
68 
(2) The expenses incurred or likely to be incurred by the Chief Executive Officer in the 
execution of any such work shall be payable by the said person and the expenses incurred 
by the Chief Executive Officer in connection with the maintenance of such work or the 
enjoyment of amenities and conveniences rendered possible by such work shall be payable 
by the person or persons enjoying such amenities and conveniences. 
(3) The expenses referred to in sub-section (2) shall be recoverable from the person 

 226
or persons liable therefor as an arrears of tax under this Act. 
227. For the purpose of ventilating any drain or cesspool, whether vested in the 
Board or not, the Chief Executive Officer may, in accordance with bye-laws made in this 
behalf, erect upon any premises or affix to the outside of any building or to any tree any 
such shaft or pipe as may appear to him to be necessary. 
228. (1) Where it appears to the Chief Executive Officer that there are reasonable 
grounds for believing that a private drain or cesspool is in such condition as to be prejudicial 
to health or a nuisance or that a private drain communicating directly or indirectly with 
a cantonment drain is so defective as to admit sub-soil water, he may examine its condition, 
and for that purpose may apply any test, other than a test by water under pressure, and if he 
deems it necessary, open the ground. 
(2) If on examination the drain or cesspool is found to be in proper condition, the 
Chief Executive Officer shall, as soon as possible, re-instate any ground which has been 
opened by him and make good any damage done by him. 
229. (1) The Board shall deliver in bulk all the sewage to, the authority prescribed by 
the Central Government or the State Government, subject to such charges for the delivery of 
sewage of the area of cantonment as may be determined by means of an agreement entered 
into between that other authority and the Board. 
(2) The agreement mentioned in sub-section (1) shall provide also for a stipulation 
therein that in case of any dispute about the payments to be made to that other authority by 
the Board, the matter shall be referred to the Central Government whose decision thereon 
shall be final and binding on both parties. 
230. The Central Government may, for reason to be recorded, direct that any specified 
work, repair, renewal or replacement which is to be undertaken by or for the Board under this 
Chapter, shall be carried out on behalf of the Board by the Central Government and the 
Board shall pay the charges therefor at the rates and subject to the terms for the time being 
applicable in the case of works constructed by that Government on behalf of a local authority. 
231. (1) No person other than a licensed plumber shall execute any work described in 
this Chapter and no person shall permit any such work to be executed except by a licensed 
plumber: 
Provided that if, in the opinion of the Chief Executive Officer, the work is of a trivial 
nature, he may grant permission in writing for the execution of such work by a person other 
than a licensed plumber. 
(2) Every person who employs a licensed plumber to execute any work shall, when so 
required, furnish to the Chief Executive Officer the name of such plumber. 
(3) When any work is executed except in accordance with the provisions of subsection 
(1), such work shall be liable to be dismantled at the discretion of the Chief Executive 
Officer without prejudice to the right of the Board to prosecute under this Act the 
person at whose instance such work has been executed. 
(4) The Board may make bye-laws for the guidance of licensed plumbers and a 
copy of all such bye-laws shall be attached to every licence granted to a plumber by the 
Board. 
Power to affix 
shafts, etc., for 
ventilation of 
drain or cesspool. 
Power to 
examine and 
test drains, 
etc., believed 
to be defective. 
Bulk delivery 
of sewage by 
the Board. 
Employment of 
Government 
agencies for 
repair, etc. 

 227
Works to be 
done by 
licensed 
plumber. 
SERVER1/BILL 2004/RS/148RS\148RS.P65 
69 
(5) The Board may, from time to time, prescribe the charges to be paid to licensed 
plumber for any work done by them under or for any of the purposes of this Chapter. 
(6) No licensed plumber shall, for any work referred to in sub-section (5), demand or 
receive more than the charges prescribed therefor, under that sub-section. 
(7) The Board shall make bye-laws providing for– 
(a) the exercise of adequate control on all licensed plumbers; 
(b) the inspection of all works carried out by them; and 
(c) the hearing and disposal of complaints made by the owners or occupiers of 
premises with regard to the quality of work done, material used, delay in execution of 
work, and the charges made, by a licensed plumber. 
(8) No licensed plumber shall contravene any of the bye-laws made under this section 
or execute carelessly or negligently any work under this Act or make use of bad materials, 
appliances or fittings. 
(9) If any licensed plumber contravenes sub-section (8), his licence may be suspended 
or cancelled whether he is prosecuted under this Act or not. 
232. (1) No person shall– 
(a) wilfully obstruct any person acting under the authority of the Board, or the 
Chief Executive Officer, in setting out the lines of any works or pull up or remove any 
pillar, post or stake fixed in the ground for the purpose of setting out lines of such 
work, or deface or destroy any works made for the same purpose; or 
(b) wilfully or negligently break, injure, turn on, open, close, shut off or otherwise 
interfere with any lock, cock, valve, pipe, meter or other work or apparatus belonging 
to the Board; or 
(c) unlawfully obstruct the flow of or flush, draw off, or divert, or take water 
from any water work belonging to the Board; or 
(d) unlawfully obstruct the flow of or flush, draw off, or divert, or take sewage 
from any sewage work belonging to the Board or break or damage any electrical 
transmission line maintained by the Board; or 
(e) obstruct any officer or other employee of the Board in the discharge of his 
duties under this Chapter or refuse or wilfully neglect to furnish him with the means 
necessary for the making of any entry, inspection, examination or inquiry thereunder 
in relation to any water or sewage work; or 
(f) bathe in, at or upon any water work or wash or throw or cause to enter 
therein any animal, or throw any rubbish, dirt or filth into any water work or wash or 
clean therein any cloth, wool or leather or the skin of any animal, or cause the water of 
any sink, or drain or any steam-engine or boiler or any polluted water to turn or be 
brought into any water work, or do any other act whereby the water in any water work 
is fouled or likely to be fouled. 
(2) Nothing in clause (b) of sub-section (1) shall apply to a consumer closing the 
stopcock fixed on the service pipe supplying water to his premises so long as he has 
obtained the consent of any other consumer whose supply will be affected thereby. 
CHAPTER X 
TOWN PLANNING AND CONTROL OVER BUILDINGS, ETC. 
233. On the commencement of this Act, the Chief Executive Officer shall, with the 
approval of the Board, cause to be prepared a spatial plan for land use in the cantonment 
which shall include— 
Prohibition of 
certain acts. 
Preparation of 
land use plan. 
SERVER1/BILL 2004/RS/148RS\148RS.P65 

 228
70 
(a) earmarking of zones for residential, institutional, commercial and other 
activities; and 
(b) improvement schemes for areas considered sub-standard on account of 
narrowness of streets, poor lighting, poor ventilation or irregular line of buildings in 
a street. 
234. No person shall erect or re-erect a building on any land in a cantonment— 
(a) in an area, other than the civil area, except with the previous sanction of the 
Board; 
(b) in a civil area, except with the previous sanction of the Chief Executive 
Officer, 
nor otherwise than in accordance with the provisions of this Chapter and of the rules and 
bye-laws made under this Act relating to the erection and re-erection of buildings. 
235. (1) Whoever intends to erect or re-erect any building in a cantonment shall 
apply for sanction by giving notice in writing of his intention— 
(a) where such erection or re-erection is in an area, other than the civil area, to 
the Board; 
(b) where such erection or re-erection is in a civil area, to the Chief Executive 
Officer. 
(2) For the purposes of this Act, a person shall be deemed to erect or re-erect a 
building who— 
(a) makes any material alteration or enlargement of any building; or 
(b) converts into a place for human habitation any building not originally 
constructed for human habitation; or 
(c) converts into more than one place for human habitation a building originally 
constructed as one such place; or 
(d) converts two or more places of human habitation into a greater number of 
such places; or 
(e) converts into a stable, cattle-shed or cow-house any building originally 
constructed for human habitation; or 
(f) converts into a dispensary, stall, shops, warehouse, godown, factory or 
garage any building originally constructed for human habitation; or 
(g) makes any alteration which there is reason to believe is likely to affect 
prejudicially the stability or safety of any building or the condition of any building in 
respect of drainage, sanitation or hygiene; or 
(h) makes any alteration to any building which increases or diminishes the 
height of, or area covered by, or the cubic capacity of, the building, or which reduces 
the cubic capacity of any room in the building below the minimum prescribed by any 
bye-law made under this Act. 
236. (1) A person giving the notice required by section 235 shall specify the purpose 
for which it is intended to use the building to which such notice relates. 
(2) No notice shall be valid until the information required under sub-section (1) and 
any further information and plans and undertakings which may be required under the byelaws 
made under this Act have been furnished to the satisfaction of the Chief Executive 
Officer, along with the notice. 
Sanction for 
building. 
Notice of new 
buildings. 
Conditions of 
valid notice. 
SERVER1/BILL 2004/RS/148RS\148RS.P65 
71 
237. The powers, duties and functions of the Board under section 238, sub-section 
(1) of section 241, section 243, section 245 and section 248 excluding the provisions to subsection 
(1) and the provisio to sub-section (2) of the said section 248 shall be exercised or 
discharged in a civil area by the Chief Executive Officer. 

 229
238. (1) The Board may either refuse to sanction the erection or re-erection, as the 
case may be, of the building, or may sanction it either absolutely or subject to such directions 
as it thinks fit to make in writing in respect of all or any of the following matters, 
namely:— 
(a) the free passage or way to be left in front of the building; 
(b) the space to be left about the building to secure free circulation of air and 
facilitate scavenging and the prevention of fire; 
(c) the ventilation of the building, the minimum cubic area of the rooms and the 
number of height of the storeys of which the building may consist; 
(d) the provison and position of drains, latrines, urinals, cesspools or other 
receptacles for filth; 
(e) the level and width of the foundation, the level of the lowest floor and the 
stability of the structure; 
(f) the line of frontage with neighbouring buildings if the building abuts on a 
street; 
(g) the means to be provided for egress from the building in case of fire; 
(h) the materials and method of construction to be used for external and party 
walls for rooms, floors, fire-places and chimenys; 
(i) the height and slope of the roof above the uppermost floor upon which 
human beings are to live or cooking operations are to be carried on; and 
(j) any other matter affecting the ventilation and sanitation of the buildings, and 
the person erecting or re-erecting the building shall obey all such written directions in 
every particular. 
(2) The Board may refuse to sanction the erection or re-erection of any building on 
any grounds sufficient in the opinion of the Board affecting the particular building: 
Provided that the Board shall refuse to accord sanction the erection or re-erection of 
any building if such erection or re-erection is not in conformity with any general scheme 
sanctioned under section 240. 
(3) The Board, before sanctioning the erection or re-erection of a building on land 
which is under the management of the Defence Estates Officer, shall refer the application to 
the Defence Estates Officer for ascertaining whether there is any objection on the part of the 
Government to such erection or re-erection; and the Defence Estates Officer shall return the 
application together with his report thereon to the Board within thirty days after it has been 
received by him. 
(4) The Board may refuse to sanction the erection or re-erection of any building— 
(a) when the land on which it is proposed to erect or re-erect the building is held 
on a lease from the Government, if the erection or re-erection constitutes a breach of 
the terms of the lease; or 
(b) when the land on which it is proposed to erect or re-erect the building is 
entrusted to the management of the Board by the Government if the erection or re- 
Powers of 
Board under 
certain 
sections 
exercisable by 
Chief 
Executive 
officer. 
Power of Board 
to sanction or 
refuse. 
SERVER1/BILL 2004/RS/148RS\148RS.P65 
72 
erection constitutes a breach of the terms of the entrustment of management or contravenes 
any of the instructions issued by the Government regarding the 
management of the land by the Board; or 
(c) when the land on which it is proposed to erect or re-erect the building is not 
held on a lease from the Government, if the right to build on such land is in dispute 

 230
between the person applying for sanction and the Government. 
(5) If the Board decides to refuse to sanction the erection or re-erection of the building, 
it shall communicate in writing the reasons for such refusal to the person by whom 
notice was given. 
(6) Where the Board neglects or omits, for one month after the receipt of a valid 
notice, to make and to deliver to the person who has given the notice any order of any 
nature specified in this section, and such person thereafter by a written communication sent 
by registered post to the Board calls the attention of the Board to the neglect or omission, 
then, if such neglect or omission continues for a further period of fifteen days from the date 
of such communication the Board shall be deemed to have given sanction to the erection or 
re-erection, as the case may be: 
Provided that in any case to which the provisions of sub-section (3) apply, the period 
of one month herein specified shall be reckoned from the date on which the Board has 
received the report referred to in that sub-section. 
239. (1) Where the erection of any building or execution of any work has been 
commenced or is being carried on without or contrary to the sanction, but has not been 
completed, referred to in section 238 or in contravention of any condition subject to which 
such sanction has been accorded or in contravention of any provision of this Act or byelaws 
made thereunder, the Chief Executive Officer may in addition to any other action that 
may be taken under this Act, by order require the person at whose instance the building or 
the work has been commenced or is being carried on to stop the same forthwith. 
(2) If an order made by the Chief Executive Officer under sub-section (1) directing 
any person to stop the erection of any building or execution of any work is not complied 
with, the Chief Executive Officer may require any police officer to remove such person and 
all his assistants and workmen from the premises or to seize any construction material, tool, 
machinery, scaffolding or other things used in the erection of any building or execution of 
any work within such time as may be specified in the requisition and such police officer shall 
comply with the requisition accordingly. 
(3) Any of the things caused or to be seized by the Chief Executive Officer under subsection 
(2) shall be disposed of by him in a manner specified in sub-sections (6) and (7). 
(4) After the requisition under sub-section (2) has been complied with the Chief 
Executive Officer may, if he thinks fit, depute by a written order a police officer or an officer 
or an employee of the Board to watch the premises in order to ensure that the erection of the 
building or the execution of work is not continued. 
(5) Where a police officer or an officer or an employee of the Board has been deputed 
under sub-section (4) to watch the premises, the cost of such deputation shall be paid by 
the person at whose instance such erection or execution is being continued or to whom 
notice under sub-section (1) was given and shall be recoverable from such person as an 
arrear of tax under this Act. 
(6) Any of the things caused to be removed by the Chief Executive Officer under this 
section shall unless the owner thereof turns up to take back such things and pays to the 
Chief Executive Officer charges for removal and storage of such things be disposed of by 
the Chief Executive Officer by public auction or in such other manner or within such time as 
the Chief Executive Officer thinks fit. 
Order of 
stoppage of 
building or 
works in 
certain cases 
and disposal of 
things 
removed. 
SERVER1/BILL 2004/RS/148RS\148RS.P65 
73 
(7) The charges for removal and storage and sale of things sold under sub-section (6) 
shall be paid out of the proceeds of the sale thereof and the balance, if any, shall be paid to 
the owner of the things sold on a claim being made therefor within a period of one year from 

 231
the date of sale and if no such claim is made within the said period, shall be credited to the 
cantonment fund. 
240. The Central Government may sanction a general scheme of erection or re-erection 
of buildings within such limits as may be specified in the sanction for the prevention of 
overcrowding or for purpose of sanitation, or in the interest of persons residing within 
those limits or for any other purpose, and may, in pursuance of such scheme, impose 
restrictions on the erection or re-erection of buildings within those limits: 
Provided that no such scheme shall be sanctioned by the Central Government, unless 
an opportunity has been given by a public notice to be published locally by the Chief 
Executive Officer requiring persons affected or likely to be affected by the proposed scheme, 
to file their objections or suggestions in the manner specified in the notice, within a period 
of thirty days of the publication of such notice, and the Chief Executive Officer shall, after 
considering such objections and suggestions, if any, forward the same along with his 
recommendations for the consideration of the Central Government. 
241. (1) No compensation shall be claimable by any person for any damage or loss 
which he may sustain in consequence of the refusal of the Board of sanction to the erection 
of any building or in respect of any direction issued by it under sub-section (1) of section 
238. 
(2) The Board shall make compensation to the owner of any building for any actual 
damage or loss sustained by him in consequence of the prohibition of the re-erection of any 
building or of its requiring any land belonging to him to be added to the street: 
Provided that the Board shall not be liable to make any compensation in respect of the 
prohibition of the re-erection of any building which for a period of three years or more 
immediately preceding such refusal has not been in existence or has been unfit for human 
habitation. 
242. Every person to whom sanction for the erection or re-erection of any building 
in any area in a cantonment has been given under section 237 or section 238 by 
the Chief Executive Officer or, as the case may be, by the Board shall, within thirty 
days after completion of the erection or re-erection of the building give a notice of 
completion in writing to the Chief Executive Officer or the Board, as the case may be, 
and the Chief Executive Officer or the Board shall on receipt of such notice cause the 
building to be inspected in order to ensure that the building has been completed in 
accordance with the sanction given by the Chief Executive Officer or the Board, as 
the case may be. 
243. Every sanction for the erection or re-erection of building given or deemed to 
have been given as hereinbefore provided shall be available for two years from the date on 
which it is given, and, if the building so sanctioned is not begun by the person who has 
obtained the sanction or some one lawfully claiming under him within that period, it shall 
not thereafter be begun unless the Chief Executive Officer, on application made therefor has 
allowed an extension of that period. 
244. (1) No person shall, without the written permission of the Board or otherwise 
than in conformity with the conditions, if any, of such permission,– 
(a) use or permit to be used for human habitation any part of a building not 
originally erected or authorised to be used for that purpose or not used for that 
purpose before any alteration has been made therein by any work executed in accordance 
with the provisions of this Act and the bye-laws made thereunder; 
(b) change or allow the change of the use of any land or building; 
Power to 
sanction 
general 
scheme for 
prevention of 
overcrowding, 
etc. 
Compensation. 
Completion 
notice. 
Lapse of 

 232
sanction. 
Restrictions 
on use of 
buildings. 
SERVER1/BILL 2004/RS/148RS\148RS.P65 
74 
Power to stop 
erection or reerection 
or to 
demolish. 
(c) convert or allow the conversion of one kind of tenement into another kind. 
(2) Any person who contravenes the provisions of sub-section (1) shall on conviction 
be punishable with a fine which may extend to one lakh repees and in the case of 
continuing contravention with an additional fine of rupees ten thousand for every day 
during which the contravention continues after the date it comes to the notice. 
245. A Board, when sanctioning the erection or re-erection of a building as hereinbefore 
provided, shall specify a reasonable period after the work has commenced within which the 
erection or re-erection is to be completed, and, if the erection or re-erection is not completed 
within the period so fixed, it shall not be continued thereafter without fresh sanction obtained 
in the manner hereinbefore provided, unless the Board on application made therefor has 
allowed an extension of that period: 
Provided that not more than two such extensions, each for not more than one year, 
shall be allowed in any case. 
246. The Chief Executive Officer shall on receipt of the notice under section 242 of 
this Act cause the building to be inspected either by himself or by the officer authorised by 
him in his behalf in order to ensure that the building has been completed in accordance with 
the sanction given and issue completion certificate provided that the person seeking the 
completion certificate shall assist the Chief Executive Officer in inspection of such building: 
Provided that the building shall not be occupied for habitation unless a certificate is 
issued by the Chief Executive Officer or an officer authorised by him in this behalf: 
Provided further that if the Chief Executive Officer fails within a period of thirty days 
after the receipt of the notice of completion, to communicate his refusal to issue such 
certificate, such certificate shall be deemed to have been granted. 
247. Whoever begins, continues or completes the erection or re-erection of a 
building— 
(a) without having given a valid notice as required by sections 235 and 236, or 
before the building has been sanctioned or is deemed to have been sanctioned; or 
(b) without complying with any direction made under sub-section (1) o f 
section 238; or 
(c) when sanction has been refused, or has ceased to be available or has been 
suspended by the General Officer Commanding-in-Chief, the Command, under clause 
(b) of sub-section (1) of section 58, 
shall be punishable with fine which may extend to fifty thousand rupees and the cost of 
sealing the illegal construction and its demolition. 
248. (1) The Board may, at any time, by notice in writing, direct the owner, lessee or 
occupier of any land in the cantonment to stop the erection or re-erection of a building in 
any case in which the Board considers that such erection or re-erection is an offence under 
section 247 and may, in any such case or in any other case in which the Board considers that 
the erection or re-erection of a building is an offence under section 247, within twelve 
months of the completion of such erection or re-erection in like manner, direct the alteration 
or demolition, as its thinks necessary, of the building, or any part thereof, so erected or reerected: 
Provided that the Board may, instead of requiring the alteration or demolition of any 
such building or part thereof, accept by way of composition such sum as it thinks reasonable: 
Provided further that the Board shall not, without the previous concurrence of the 
General Officer Commanding-in-Chief, the Command, accept any sum by way of composition 
Illegal erection 
and re-erection. 
Completion 

 233
certificate. 
Period for 
completion of 
building. 
SERVER1/BILL 2004/RS/148RS\148RS.P65 
75 
under the foregoing proviso in respect of any building on land which is not under the 
management of the Board. 
(2) A Board shall by notice in writing direct the owner, lessee or occupier of any land 
in the cantonment to stop the erection or re-erection of a building in any case in which the 
order under section 238 sanctioning the erection or re-erection has been suspended by the 
General Officer Commanding-in-Chief, the Command, under clause (b) of sub-section (1) of 
section 58, and shall in any such case in like manner direct the demolition or alteration, as 
the case may be, of the building or any part thereof so erected or re-erected where the 
General Officer Commanding-in-Chief, the Command, thereafter directs that the order of the 
Board sanctioning the erection or re-erection of the building shall not be carried into effect 
or shall be carried into effect with modifications specified by him: 
Provided that the Board shall pay to the owner of the building compensation for 
any loss actually incurred by him in consequence of the demolition or alteration of 
any building which has been erected or re-erected prior to the date on which the order 
of the General Officer Commanding-in-Chief, the Command, has been communicated 
to him. 
249. (1) It shall be lawful for the Chief Executive Officer, at any time, before or after 
making an order of demolition under section 248 or of the stoppage of erection of any 
building, or execution of any work, to make an order directing the sealing of such erection or 
work or of the premises in which such erection or work is being carried on or has been 
completed at the cost of the offender in such manner as may be prescribed by rules for the 
purpose of carrying out the provisions of this Act or for preventing any dispute as to the 
nature and extent of such erection or work. 
(2) Where any erection or work or any premises in which any erection or work is being 
carried on, has or, has been sealed, the Chief Executive Officer may, for the purpose of 
demolishing such erection or work in accordance with the provisions of this Act, order such 
seal to be removed. 
(3) No person shall remove such seal except,— 
(a) under an order made by the Chief Executive Officer under sub-section (2); 
or 
(b) under an order of an appellate authority in an appeal made under this Act. 
(4) Any person who contravenes the provisions contained in sub-section (3) shall 
be punishable with imprisonment which may extend to six months or with fine which may 
extend to twenty thousand rupees, or with both. 
250. (1) After the commencement of this Act, no court shall entertain any suit, 
application or other proceedings in respect of any order or notice unless an appeal under 
section 345 is preferred and the same is disposed of by the appellate authority under subsection 
(3) of section 348 of this Act. 
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), every suit, application or 
other proceedings pending in any court immediately before the commencement of this Act 
shall continue to be dealt with and disposed of by that court as if the said section has not 
been brought into force. 
251. A Board may make bye-laws prescribing– 
(a) the manner in which notice of the intention to erect or re-erect a building in 
the cantonment shall be given to the Board or, as the case may be, the Chief Executive 
Officer and the information and plans to be furnished with the notice; 
(b) the manner in which and the form in which a notice of completion of erection 
or re-erection of any building in the cantonment shall be given to the Board or, as the 
Power to seal 
unauthorised 
constructions. 

 234
Courts not to 
entertain 
proceedings in 
certain cases. 
Power to 
make byelaws. 
SERVER1/BILL 2004/RS/148RS\148RS.P65 
76 
case may be, the Chief Executive Officer and the information and plans to be furnished 
with the notice; 
(c) the type or description of buildings which may or may not, and the purpose 
for which a building may or may not, be erected or re-erected in the cantonment or any 
part thereof; 
(d) the minimum cubic capacity of any room or rooms in a building which is to 
be erected or re-erected; 
(e) the fees payable on provision by the Board of plans or specifications 
of the type of buildings which may be erected in the cantonment or any part 
thereof; 
(f) the circumstances in which mosque, temple or church or other sacred building 
may be erected or re-erected; and 
(g) with reference to the erection or re-erection of buildings, or of any class of 
buildings, or any of the following matters, namely:— 
(i) the line of frontage where the building abuts on a street; 
(ii) the space to be left about the building to secure free circulation of air 
and facilities for scavenging and for the prevention of fire; 
(iii) the materials and method of construction to be used for external and 
party walls, roofs and floors; 
(iv) the position, the materials and the method of construction of staircases, 
fire places, chimneys, drains, latrines, privies, urinals and cess-pools; 
(v) height and slope of the roof above the uppermost floor upon which 
human beings are to live or cooking operations are to be carried on; 
(vi) the level and width of the foundation, the level of the lowest floor, 
the stability of the structure and the protection of building from dampness 
arising from sub-soil; 
(vii) the number and height of the storeys of which the building may 
consist; 
(viii) the means to be provided for egress from the building in case of 
fire; 
(ix) the safeguarding of wells from pollution; or 
(x) the materials and method of construction to be used for godowns 
intended for the storage of foodgrains in excess of eighteen quintals in order to 
render them rat proof. 
252. (1) No person shall, except with the permission of the Chief Executive Officer, 
erect or set up any wall, fence, nail, post, step, booth or other structure whether fixed or 
movable or whether of a permanent or temporary nature, or any fixture in or upon any street 
so as to form an obstruction to, or an encroachment upon, or a projection over, or to occupy 
any portion of such street, channel, drain, well or tank. 
(2) The Chief Executive Officer may, by notice in writing, require the owner or 
occupier of any such building to alter or remove any such projection or encroachment as 
aforesaid: 
Provided that in the case of any projection or encroachment lawfully in existence at 
the commencement of this Act, the Chief Executive Officer shall make compensation for any 
damage caused by the removal or alteration. 
(3) The Chief Executive Officer may, by order in writing, give permission to the 
Prohibition of 
structures or 
fixtures which 
cause 

 235
obstruction in 
streets. 
SERVER1/BILL 2004/RS/148RS\148RS.P65 
77 
owners or occupiers of buildings in any particular street to put up open verandahs, 
balconies or rooms projecting from any upper storey thereof to an extent beyond the line 
of the plinth or basement wall at such height from the level ground or street as may be 
specified in the order. 
253. The Chief Executive Officer may, by notice in writing require any person who 
has, without his permission in writing, newly erected or re-erected any structure over any 
public sewer, drain, culvert, water-course or water-pipe in the cantonment to pull down or 
otherwise deal with the same as he thinks fit. 
254. (1) The Chief Executive Officer may, by notice in writing, require the owner or 
lessee of any building or land in any street, at his own expense and in such manner as he 
thinks fit, to put up and keep in good condition, proper troughs and pipes for receiving and 
carrying rain water from the building or land and for discharging the same or to establish 
and maintain any other connection or communication between such buildings or land and a 
drain or sewer or a water harvesting structure or facility. 
(2) For the purpose of efficiently draining any building or land in the cantonment, the 
Chief Executive Officer may, by notice in writing, require the owner or lessee of the building 
or land— 
(a) to pave, with such materials and in such manner as he thinks fit, any courtyard, 
alley or passage between two or more buildings, or 
(b) to keep any such paving in proper repair; or 
(c) to make such arrangements as may be specified by the Board under byelaws 
to deliver rain water from roof top to the water harvesting facility created or 
arranged by the Board. 
255. The Chief Executive Officer may attach to the outside of any building, or to any 
tree in the cantonment, brackets for lamps or any accessories for non-conventional sources 
of energy in such manner as not to occasion injury thereto or inconvenience. 
256. (1) All roads in the civil area of a cantonment shall be maintained by the Board. 
(2) All roads outside the civil area as have been vested in the Board shall also be 
maintained by the Board. 
Streets 
257. (1) The Chief Executive Officer may, by order in writing, permit the temporary 
occupation of any street, or of any land vested in the Board, for the purpose of depositing 
any building materials or making any temporary excavation therein or erection thereon, 
subject to such conditions as the Board may prescribe for the safety or convenience of the 
public, and may charge a fee for such permission and may in his discretion withdraw such 
permission. 
(2) Where any article or thing is placed on any street or land under the management 
of the Board or the Defence Estates Officer so as to form an obstruction thereto or any 
encroachment thereon, the Chief Executive Officer or, as the case may be, the Defence 
Estates Officer, may cause such article or thing to be removed and recover from the person 
who placed such article or thing the expenses incurred in that behalf in the same manner as 
moneys recoverable by the Board under section 329 and may also, if such person fails to 
offer satisfactory explanation, order the confiscation of such article or thing. 
258. (1) A Board may open any street for public use. 
(2) A Board shall not permanently close any street without the prior permission of the 
General Officer Commanding in Chief, or the Principal Director: 
Unauthorised 
buildings over 
drains, etc. 
Drainage and 
sewer 
connections. 
Power to 
attach 

 236
brackets for 
lamps and 
other 
accessories. 
Maintenance 
of Roads. 
Temporary 
occupation of 
street, land, 
etc. 
Closing and 
opening of 
streets. 
SERVER1/BILL 2004/RS/148RS\148RS.P65 
78 
Provided that no such street shall be closed for reasons other than the security 
reasons and without giving a public notice inviting objections and suggestions from the 
general public. 
(3) The Chief Executive Officer may, by public notice, temporarily close any street or 
any part of a street for repair or for the purpose of carrying out any work connected with 
drainage, water-supply or lighting or any other work which he is by or under this Act 
required or permitted to carry out: 
Provided that where, owing to any works or repairs or from any other cause, the 
condition of any street or of any water-works, drain, culvert or premises vested in the Board, 
is such as to be likely to cause danger to the public, the Board shall — 
(a) take all reasonable means for the protection of the adjacent buildings and 
land and provide reasonable means of access thereto; 
(b) cause sufficient barriers or fences to be erected for the security of life and 
property and cause such barriers or fences to be sufficiently lighted from sunset to 
sunrise. 
259. (1)A Board may determine the name or number by which any area, street or 
public place in the cantonment shall be known, may cause name or number to be affixed on 
any building in the cantonment in such place as it thinks fit and may also cause a number to 
be affixed to any such building. 
(2)Whoever destroys, pulls down, defaces or alters any such name or number or puts 
up any name or number differing from that put up by the order of the Board shall be 
punishable with fine which may extend to one thousand rupees. 
(3)When a name or number has been affixed to any building under sub-section (1), 
the owner of the building shall maintain the name or number in order, and shall replace it if 
removed or defaced, and if he fails to do so the Chief Executive Officer may by notice in 
writing require him to replace it. 
260. A Board, may in accordance with the bye-laws framed for the purpose, allow the 
Group Housing Schemes for construction of houses. 
261. (1) No boundary wall, hedge or fence of any material or description shall be 
erected in a cantonment without the permission in writing of the Chief Executive Officer. 
(2) The Chief Executive Officer may, by notice in writing, require the owner or lessee 
of any land in the cantonment — 
(a) to remove from the land any boundary wall, hedge or fence which is in his 
opinion unsuitable, unsightly or otherwise objectionable; or 
(b) to construct on the land sufficient boundary walls, hedges or fences of 
such material, description or dimensions as may be specified in the notice; or 
(c) to maintain the boundary walls, hedges or fences of such lands in good 
order: 
Provided that in the case of any such boundary wall, hedge or fence which was 
erected with the consent or under the orders of the Chief Executive Officer or which was in 
existence at the commencement of this Act, the Board shall make compensation for any 
damage caused by the removal thereof. 
(3) The Chief Executive Officer may, by notice in writing, require the owner, lessee or 

 237
occupier of any such land to cut or trim any hedge on the land in such manner and within 
such time as may be specified in the notice. 
Names of 
streets and 
numbers of 
buildings. 
Group Housing 
Schemes. 
Boundary 
walls, hedges 
and fences. 
SERVER1/BILL 2004/RS/148RS\148RS.P65 
79 
262. (1) Where, in the opinion of a Board, the felling of any tree of mature growth 
standing in a private enclosure in the cantonment is necessary for any reason, the Board 
may, by notice in writing, require the owner, lessee or occupier of the land to fell the tree 
within such time as may be specified in the notice. 
(2) A Board may— 
(a) cause to be lopped or trimmed any tree standing on land in the cantonment 
which belongs to the Government; or 
(b) by public notice require all owners, lessees or occupiers of land in the 
cantonment, or by notice in writing require the owner, lessee or occupier of any such 
land, to lop or trim, in such manner as may be specified in the notice, all or any trees 
standing on such land or to remove any dead trees from such land. 
263. Whoever, without the permission in writing of the Chief Executive Officer, digs 
up the surface of any open space in the cantonment, which is not private property, shall be 
punishable with fine which may extend to two thousand five hundred rupees, and, in the 
case of a continuing offence, with an additional fine which may extend to five hundred 
rupees for every day after the first during which the offence continues. 
264. (1) If, in the opinion of the Chief Executive Officer, the working of a quarry in the 
cantonment, or the removal of stone earth or other material from the soil in any place in the 
cantonment, is dangerous to persons residing in or frequenting the neighbourhood or such 
quarry or place, or creates, or is likely to create, a nuisance, the Chief Executive Officer may, 
by notice in writing, prohibit the owner, lessee or occupier of such quarry or place or the 
person responsible for such working or removal, from continuing or permitting the working 
of such quarry or the moving of such material, or require him to take such steps in the matter 
as he may direct for the purpose of preventing danger or abating the nuisance arising or 
likely to arise therefrom. 
(2) If, in any case referred to in sub-section (1), the Chief Executive Officer is of 
opinion that such a course is necessary in order to prevent imminent danger, he may, by 
order in writing, require a proper hoarding or fence to be put up for the protection of 
passers-by. 
CHAPTER XI 
MARKETS, SLAUGHTER-HOUSES, TRADES AND OCCUPATIONS 
265. (1) A Board may provide and maintain, either within or without the cantonment, 
public markets and public slaughter-houses, to such number as it thinks fit, together with 
stalls, shops, sheds, pens and other buildings or conveniences for the use of persons 
carrying on trade or business in or frequenting such markets or slaughter-houses, and may 
provide and maintain in any such market buildings, places, machines, weights, scales and 
measures for the weighment or measurement of goods sold therein. 
(2) When such market or slaughter-house is situated beyond cantonment limits, the 
Board shall have the same power for the inspection and proper regulation of the same as if 
it were situated within those limits. 
(3) The Board may at any time, by public notice, close any public market or public 
slaughter-house or any part thereof. 
(4) Nothing in this section shall be deemed to authorise the establishment of a public 
market or public slaughter-house within the limits of any area administered by any local 

 238
authority other than the Board, without the permission of such local authority or otherwise 
than on such conditions as such local authority may approve. 
266. (1) No person shall, without the general or special permission in writing of 
the Chief Executive Officer, sell or expose for sale any animal or article in any public 
market. 
Felling, 
lopping and 
trimming of 
trees. 
Digging of 
public land. 
Improper use 
of land. 
Public markets 
and slaughterhouses. 
Use of public 
market. 
SERVER1/BILL 2004/RS/148RS\148RS.P65 
80 
Power to transfer 
by public 
auction, etc. 
Private markets 
and slaughterhouses. 
Stallages, 
rents, etc., to 
be published. 
(2) Any person contravening the provisions of this section, and any animal or article 
exposed for sale by such person, may be summarily removed from the market by or under 
the orders of the Chief Executive Officer or any official of the Board authorised by him in this 
behalf. 
267. (1) The Board may transfer by public auction, for any period not exceeding five 
years at a time, the right to occupy or use any stall, shop, standing, shed or pen in a public 
market, or public slaughter-house or the right to expose goods for sale in a public market or 
the right to weigh or measure goods sold therein, or the right to slaughter animals in any 
public slaughter-house: 
Provided that where the Board is of opinion that such transfer of the aforesaid 
rights by public auction is not considered desirable or expedient, it may, with the previous 
sanction of the General Officer Commanding-in-Chief of the Command or the Principal 
Director,— 
(a) either levy such stallages, rents or fees as it thinks fit; or 
(b) farm the stallages, rents and fees leviable under clause (a) for any period 
not exceeding one year at a time: 
Provided further that the enjoyment of any such aforesaid right by any person for any 
length of time shall never be deemed to create or confer any tenancy right in such stall, 
shop, standing, shed, pen, public market or public slaughter-house. 
(2) The Board may transfer by public auction or otherwise any immovable property 
other than in a public market or a public slaughter house if such property is capable of being 
put to remunerative use for such period and on such terms and conditions as may be 
approved by the General Officer Commanding in Chief or the Principal Director of the 
Command. 
268. A copy of the table of stallages, rents and fees, if any, leviable in any public 
market or public slaughter-house, and of the bye-laws made under this Act for the purpose 
of regulating the use of such market or slaughter-house, printed in English language or in 
such other language or languages as the Board may direct, shall be affixed in some conspicuous 
place in the market or slaughter-house. 
269. (1) No place in a cantonment other than a public market shall be used as a market, 
and no place in a cantonment other than a public slaughter-house shall be used as a slaughter- 
house, unless such place has been licensed as a market or slaughter-house, as the case 

 239
may be, by the Board : 
Provided that nothing in this sub-section shall apply in the case of slaughter-house 
established and maintained by the Central Government or the State Government, as the case 
may be. 
(2) Nothing in sub-section (1) shall be deemed — 
(a) to restrict the slaughter of any animal in any place on the occasion of any 
festival or ceremony, subject to such conditions as to prior or subsequent notice as 
the Chief Executive Officer with the previous sanction of the District Magistrate may, 
by public or special notice, impose in this behalf; or 
(b) to prevent the Chief Executive Officer, with the sanction of the Board, from 
setting apart places for the slaughter of animals in accordance with religious custom. 
(3)Whoever omits to comply with any condition imposed by the Chief Executive 
Officer under clause (a) of sub-section (2) shall be punishable with fine which may extend 
to five thousand rupees and, in the case of continuing offence, with an additional fine which 
may extend to one thousand rupees for every day after the first during which the offence is 
continued. 
SERVER1/BILL 2004/RS/148RS\148RS.P65 
81 
270. (1) A Board may charge such fees as it thinks fit to impose for the grant of a 
licence to any person to open a private market or private slaughter-house in the cantonment, 
and may grant such licence subject to such conditions, consistent with this Act and 
any bye-laws made thereunder, as it thinks fit to impose. 
(2) The Board may refuse to grant any such licence without giving reasons for such 
refusal. 
271. (1) Any person who keeps open for public use any market or slaughter-house in 
respect of which a licence is required by or under this Act, without obtaining licence therefor, 
or while the licence therefor is suspended, or after the same has been cancelled, shall be 
punishable with fine which may extend to five thousand rupees and, in the case of a continuing 
offence, with an additional fine which may extend to five hundred rupees for every 
day after the first during which the offence is continued. 
(2)When a licence to open a private market or private slaughter-house is granted or 
refused or is suspended or cancelled, the Board shall cause a notice of the grant, refusal, 
suspension or cancellation to be pasted in English or such language or languages as it 
thinks necessary in some conspicuous place by or near the entrance to the place to which 
the notice relates. 
272. Whoever, knowing that any market or slaughter-house has been opened to the 
public without a licence having been obtained therefor when such licence is required by or 
under this Act, or that the licence granted therefor is for the time being suspended or that it 
has been cancelled, sells or exposes for sale any article in such market, or slaughters any 
animals in such slaughter-house, shall be punishable with fine which may extend to five 
thousand rupees and, in the case of a continuing offence, with an additional fine which may 
extend to five hundred rupees for every day after the first during which the offence is 
continued. 
273. (1) Where, in the opinion of the Chief Executive Officer, it is necessary on 
sanitary grounds so to do, he may, by public notice, prohibit for such period not exceeding 
one month, as may be specified in the notice, or for such further period not exceeding 
one month, as he may specify by a like notice, the use of any private slaughter-house 
specified in the notice, or the slaughter therein of any animal of any description so specified. 
(2) A copy of every notice issued under sub-section (1) shall be conspicuously 
pasted in the slaughter-house to which it relates. 
274. (1) Any official of a Board, authorised by order in writing in this behalf by the 
Chief Executive Officer or the Health Officer, may, if he has reason to believe that any animal 
has been, is being, or is about to be slaughtered in any place in contravention of the 
provisions of this Chapter, enter into and inspect any such place at any time, whether by 
day or by night. 
(2) Every such order shall specify the place to be entered and the locality in which the 

 240
same is situated and the period, which shall not exceed seven days for which the order is to 
remain in force. 
275. A Board may, by order, regulate all or any of the following matters, namely :— 
(a) the days on, and the hours during, which any private market or private 
slaughter-house may be kept open for use; 
(b) the regulation of the design, ventilation and drainage of such market or 
slaughter-houses, and the material to be used in the construction thereof; 
(c) the keeping of such markets and slaughter-houses and lands and buildings 
appertaining thereto in a clean and sanitary condition, the removal of filth and refuse 
therefrom, and the supply therein of pure water and of a sufficient number of latrines 
and urinals for the use of persons using or frequenting the same; 
Conditions of 
grant of 
licence for 
private market 
or slaughterhouse. 
Penalty for 
keeping market 
or slaughterhouse 
open 
without licence, 
etc. 
Penalty for 
using 
unlicensed 
market or 
slaughterhouse. 
Prohibition 
and restriction 
of use of 
slaughterhouse. 
Power to 
inspect 
slaughterhouses. 
Power to 
regulate 
certain 
activities. 
SERVER1/BILL 2004/RS/148RS\148RS.P65 
82 
(d) the manner in which animals shall be stalled at a slaughter-house; 
(e) the manner in which animals may be slaughtered; 
(f) the disposal or destruction of animals offered for slaughter which are, from 
disease or any other cause, unfit for human consumption; 
(g) the destruction of carcasses which from disease or any other cause are 
found after slaughter to be unfit for human consumption; and 
(h) any other matter with respect to the regulation of such markets and 
slaughter-houses. 
T ades and occupation  r s
276. (1) A Board may provide suitable places for the exercise by washermen of their 
calling, and may require payment of such fees for the use thereof as it thinks fit. 
(2) Where the Board has provided such places as aforesaid it may, by public notice, 
prohibit the washing of clothes by washermen at any other place in the cantonment: 
Provided that such prohibition shall not be deemed to apply to the washing by a 
washerman of his own clothes or of the clothes of any other person who is an occupier of 
the place at which they are washed. 
(3) Whoever contravenes any prohibition contained in a notice issued under subsection 
(2) shall be punishable with fine which may extend to five hundred rupees. 
277. (1) No person of any of the following classes, namely:— 
(a) butchers and vendors of poultry, game or fish; 

 241
(b) persons keeping pigs for profit, and dealers in the flesh of pigs which have 
been slaughtered within or without cantonment; 
(c) persons keeping milch cattle or milch goats for profit; 
(d) persons keeping for profit any animals other than pigs, milch cattle or milch 
goats; 
(e) dairymen, buttermen and makers and vendors of ghee; 
(f) makers of bread, biscuits or cake and vendors of bread, biscuits or cake made 
within or without cantonment; 
(g) vendors of fruits or vegetables; 
(h) manufacturers of aerated or other potable waters or of ice or ice-cream, and 
vendors of the same; 
(i) vendors of any medicines, drugs or articles of food or drink for human 
consumption (other than the flesh of pigs, milk, butter, bread, biscuits, cake, fruit, 
vegetables, aerated or other potable waters or ice or ice-cream) which are of a perishable 
nature; 
(j) vendors of spirituous liquor; 
(k) vendors of water to be used for drinking purposes; 
(l) washermen; 
(m) dealers in hay, straw, wood, charcoal or other inflammable material; 
(n) dealers in fire-works, kerosene oil, petroleum or any other inflammable oil or 
spirit; 
(o) tanners and dyers; 
(p) persons carrying on any trade or occupation from which offensive or unwholesome 
smells arise; 
Licences 
required for 
carrying on of 
certain 
occupations. 
Provision of 
washing places. 
SERVER1/BILL 2004/RS/148RS\148RS.P65 
83 
(q) vendors of wheat, rice and other grain or of flour; 
(r) makers and vendors of sugar or sweetmeats; 
behalf, 
(s) barbers and keepers of shaving saloons; 
(t) any other person carrying on such other trade, calling or occupation as 
the Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, specify in this 
shall carry on his trade, calling or occupation in any part of a cantonment unless he has 
applied for and obtained a licence in this behalf from the Board. 
(2) A licence granted under sub-section (1) shall be valid until the end of the year in 
which it is issued and the grant of such licence shall not be withheld by the Board unless it 
has reason to believe that the business which it is intended to establish or maintain would 
be offensive or dangerous to the public or that the premises in which the business is 
intended to be established or maintained are unfit or unsuitable for the purpose. 
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1),— 
(a) no person who was, at the commencement of this Act, carrying on his trade, 
calling or occupation in any part of a cantonment shall be bound to apply for a licence 
for carrying on such trade or occupation in that part until he has received from the 
Board not less than three month’s notice in writing of his obligation to do so, and if 
the Board refuses to grant him a licence, it shall pay compensation for any loss 
incurred by reason of such refusal; 
(b) no person shall be required to take out a licence for the sale or storage 
of petroleum or for the sale or possession for sale of poisons or white arsenic in 
any case in which he is required to take out a licence for such sale, storage, or 
possession for sale by or under the Petroleum Act, 1934 , or the Poisons Act, 

 242
1919. 
(4) The Board may charge for the grant of licences, under this section such reasonable 
fees, as it may fix keeping in view the fees levied in this regard in a municipality in the 
State wherein such cantonment is situated. 
278. If the Chief Executive Officer is of opinion that any eating house, lodging house, 
hotel, boarding house, tea shop, coffee house, café, restaurant, refreshment room or other 
place where public is admitted for repose or for consumption of any food or drink or where 
food is sold or prepared for sale or any theatre, cinema hall, circus, dancing hall or similar 
other place of public resort, recreation or amusement is kept open without a license or 
otherwise than in conformity with the terms of a license granted in respect thereof, he may 
stop the use of any such premises for any such purpose for a specified period by such 
means as he may consider necessary. 
279. A licence granted to any person under section 277 shall specify the part of the 
cantonment in which the licensee may carry on his trade, calling or occupation, and may 
regulate the hours and manner of transport within the cantonment of any specified articles 
intended for human consumption, and may contain any other conditions which the Board 
thinks fit to impose in accordance with bye-laws made under this Act. 
General provisions 
280. If the Board is satisfied that any place used under a licence granted under this 
Chapter is a nuisance or is likely to be dangerous to life, health or property, the Board may, 
by notice in writing, require the owner, lessee or occupier thereof to discontinue the use of 
such place or to effect such alternations, additions, or improvements as will, in the opinion 
of the Board, render it no longer a nuisance or dangerous. 
Power to stop 
use of 
premises used 
in contravention 
of 
licences. 
Conditions 
which may be 
attached to 
licences. 
Power to vary 
licence. 
30 of 1934. 
12 of 1919. 
SERVER1/BILL 2004/RS/148RS\148RS.P65 
84 
281. Whoever carries any trade, calling or occupation for which a licence is required 
without obtaining a licence therefor or while the licence therefor is suspended or after the 
same has been cancelled, and whoever, after receiving a notice under section 280, uses or 
allows to be used any building or place in contravention thereof, shall be punishable with 
fine which may extend to five thousand rupees and, in the case of a continuing offence, with 
an additional fine which may extend to five hundred rupees for every day after the first 
during which the offence is continued. 
282. Whoever feeds or allows to be fed on filthy or deleterious substances any 
animal, which is kept for the purpose of supplying milk to, or which is intended to be used 
as food for, the inhabitants of a cantonment or allows it to graze in any place in which 
grazing has, for sanitary reasons, been prohibited by public notice by the Board shall be 
punishable with fine which may extend to one thousand rupees. 
Entry, inspection and seizu e r
283. (1) The President or the Vice-President, the Chief Executive Officer, the Health 
Officer, the Assistant Health Officer, or any other official of a Board authorised by it in 
writing in this behalf— 
(a) may at any time enter into any market, building, shop, stall or other place in 
the cantonment for the purpose of inspecting, and may inspect, any animal, article or 
thing intended for human food or drink or for medicine, whether exposed or hawked 

 243
about for sale or deposited in or brought to any place for the purpose of sale, or of 
preparation for sale, or any utensil or vessel for preparing, manufacturing or containing 
any such article, or thing, and may enter into and inspect any place used as a slaughterhouse 
and may examine any animal or article therein; 
(b) may seize any such animal, article or thing which appears to him to be 
diseased, or unwholesome or unfit for human food or drink or medicine, as the case 
may be, or to be adulterated or to be not what it is represented to be, or any such 
utensil or vessel which is of such a kind or in such a state as to render any article 
prepared, manufactured or contained therein unwholesome or unfit for human food, 
drink or medicine, as the case may be. 
(2) Any article seized under sub-section (1) which is of a perishable nature may, 
under the orders of the Health Officer or the Assistant Health Officer, forthwith be destroyed 
if, in his opinion, it is diseased, unwholesome or unfit for human food, drink or 
medicine, as the case may be. 
(3) Every animal, article, utensil, vessel or other thing seized under sub-section (1) 
shall, if it is not destroyed under sub-section (2), be taken before a Magistrate who shall 
give orders as to its disposal. 
(4) The owner or person in possession, at the time of seizure under sub-section (1), 
of any animal or carcass which is diseased or of any article or thing which is unwholesome 
or unfit for human food, drink or medicine, as the case may be, or is adulterated or is not 
what it is represented to be, or of any utensil or vessel which is of such kind or in such state 
as is described in clause (b) of sub-section (1), shall be punishable with fine which may 
extend to five thousand rupees, and the animal, article, utensil, vessel or other thing shall be 
liable to be forfeited to the Board or to be destroyed or to be so disposed of as to prevent it 
being exposed for sale or used for the preparation of food, drink or medicine, as the case 
may be. 
Explanation I.—If any such article, having been exposed or stored in, or brought to, 
any place mentioned in sub-section (1) for sale as ghee, contains any substance not exclusively 
derived from milk, it shall be deemed, for the purposes of this section, to be an article 
which is not what it is represented to be. 
Explanation II.—Meat subjected to the process of blowing shall be deemed to be 
unfit for human food. 
Carrying on 
trade, etc., 
without licence 
or in contravention 
of 
section 280. 
Feeding animals 
on dirt, etc. 
Powers of entry 
and seizure. 
SERVER1/BILL 2004/RS/148RS\148RS.P65 
85 
Explanation II .—The article of food or drink shall not be deemed to be other than I
what it is represented to be merely by reason of the fact that there has been added to it some 
substance not injurious to health: 
Provided that — 
(a) such substance has been added to the article because the same is required 
for the preparation or production thereof as an article of commerce in a state fit for 
carriage or consumption and not fraudulently to increase the bulk, weight or measure 
of the food or drink or conceal the inferior quality thereof; or 
(b) in the process of production, preparation or conveyance of such article of 
food or drink, the extraneous substance has unavoidably become intermixed therewith; 
or 
(c) the owner or person in possession of the article has given sufficient notice 
by means of a label distinctly and legibly written or printed thereon or therewith, or by 
other means of a public description, that such substance has been added; or 

 244
(d) such owner or person has purchased the article with a written warranty that 
it was of a certain nature, substance and quality and had no reason to believe that it 
was not of such nature, substance and quality, and has exposed it or hawked it about 
or brought it for sale in the same state and by the same description as that in and by 
which he purchased it. 
Import of cattle and flesh 
284. (1) No person shall, without the permission in writing of the Chief Executive 
Officer, bring into a cantonment any animal intended for human consumption, or the flesh of 
any animal slaughtered outside the cantonment otherwise than in a slaughter-house 
maintained by the Central Government or the State Government or the Board: 
Provided that the Chief Executive Officer shall not grant such permission unless he 
has considered the recommendation of the Health Officer made in this behalf. 
(2) Any animal or flesh brought into a cantonment in contravention of sub-section 
(1) may be seized by the Chief Executive Officer or by any official of the Board and sold or 
otherwise disposed of as the President of the Board may direct, and, if it is sold, the saleproceeds 
may be credited to the cantonment fund. 
(3) Whoever contravenes the provisions of sub-section (1) shall be punishable with 
fine which may extend to two thousand five hundred rupees. 
(4) Nothing in this section shall be deemed to apply to cured or preserved meat or 
to animals driven or meat carried through a cantonment for consumption outside thereof, 
or to meat brought into a cantonment by any person for his immediate domestic 
consumption: 
Provided that the Board may, by public notice, direct that the provisions of this 
section shall apply to cured or preserved meat of any specified description or brought from 
any specified place. 
CHAPTER XII 
SPIRITUOUS LIQUORS AND INTOXICATING DRUGS 
285. If within a cantonment, or within such limits adjoining a cantonment as the 
Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, define, any person not 
subject to Army, Navy or Air Force law, or any person subject to Army, Navy or Air Force 
law, otherwise than as a military officer or a soldier knowingly barters, sells or supplies, or 
offers or attempts to barter, sell or supply, any spirituous liquor or intoxicating drug to or for 
the use of any soldier or soldier’s wife or minor child without the written permission of the 
Officer Commanding the station, or of some person authorised by the Officer Commanding 
Import of cattle 
and flesh. 
Unauthorised 
sale of 
spirituous 
liquor or 
intoxicating 
drug. 
SERVER1/BILL 2004/RS/148RS\148RS.P65 
86 
the station, to grant such permission, he shall be punishable with fine which may extend to 
five thousand rupees, or with imprisonment for a term which may extend to six months, or 
with both. 
286. If within a cantonment, or within any limits defined under section 285 – 
(a) any person subject to, Army, Navy or Air Force law, otherwise than as a 
military officer or a soldier; or 
(b) the wife or servant of any such person or of a soldier, 
has in his or her possession, except on behalf of the Central Government or for the 
private use of a military officer, more than one quart of any spirituous liquor, other 
than fermented malt-liquor, without the written permission of the Officer Commanding 
the station or of some person authorised by the Officer Commanding the station, to 
grant such permission, he or she shall be punishable, in the case of a first offence, 
with fine which may extend to two thousand five hundred rupees, and, in the case of 

 245
a subsequent offence, with imprisonment for a term which may extend to three months, 
or with fine which may extend to five thousand rupees. 
287. (1) Any police officer or excise officer may, without an order from a Judicial 
Magistrate, and without a warrant, arrest any person whom he finds committing an offence 
under section 285 or section 286, and may seize and detain any spirituous liquor or intoxicating 
drug in respect of which such an offence has been committed and any vessels or coverings 
in which the liquor or drug is contained. 
(2) Where a person accused of an offence under section 285 has been previously 
convicted of an offence under that section, an officer in charge of a police station may, with 
the written permission of a Judicial Magistrate seize and detain any spirituous liquor or 
intoxicating drug within the cantonment or within any limits defined under that section 
which, at the time of the alleged, commission of the subsequent offence, belonged to, or 
was in the possession of, such person. 
(3) The court convicting a person of an offence under section 285 or section 286 may 
order the confiscation of the whole or any part of anything seized under sub-section (1) or 
sub-section (2). 
(4) Subject to the provisions of Chapter XXXIV of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 
1973, anything, seized under sub-section (1  or sub-section (2) and not confiscated under )
)sub-section (3  shall be restored to the person from whom it was taken. 
288. The foregoing provisions of this Chapter shall not apply to the sale or supply 
of any article in good faith for medicinal purposes by a medical practitioner, chemist or 
druggist authorised in this behalf by a general or special order of the Officer Commanding 
the station. 
CHAPTER XIII 
PUBLIC SAFETY AND SUPPRESSION OF NUISANCES 
General Nuisances 
289. (1) Whoever – 
(a) in any street or other public place within a cantonment – 
(i) is drunk and disorderly or drunk and incapable of taking care of himself; 
or 
(ii) uses any threatening, abusive or insulting words, or behaves in a 
threatening or insulting manner with intent to provoke a breach of the peace, or 
whereby a breach of the peace is likely to be occasioned; or 
(iii) eases himself, or willfully or indecently exposes his person; or 
Unauthorised 
possession of 
spirituous 
liquor. 
Arrest of 
persons and 
seizure and 
confiscation of 
things for 
offences 
against the two 
last foregoing 
sections. 
Saving of 
articles sold or 
supplied for 
medicinal 
purposes. 
Penalty for 
causing 
nuisances. 
2 of 1974. 
SERVER1/BILL 2004/RS/148RS\148RS.P65 
87 
(iv) loiters, or begs importunately, for alms; or 

 246
(v) exposes or exhibits, with the object of exciting charity, any deformity 
or disease or any offensive sore or wound; or 
(vi) carries meat exposed to public view; or 
(vii) is found gaming, or 
(viii) pickets animals, or collects vehicles; or 
(ix) being engaged in the removal of night-soil or other offensive matter 
or rubbish, willfully or negligently permits any portion thereof to spill or fall, or 
neglects to sweep away or otherwise effectually to remove any portion thereof 
which may spill or fall in such street or place; or 
(x) without proper authority affixes upon any building, monument, post, 
wall, fence, tree or other thing, any bill, notice or other document; or 
(xi) without proper authority defaces or writes upon or otherwise marks 
any building, monument, post, wall, fence, tree or other thing; or 
(xii) without proper authority removes, destroys, defaces or otherwise 
obliterates any notice or other document put up or exhibited under this Act; 
or 
(xiii) without proper authority displaces, damages, or makes any alteration 
in, or otherwise interferes with, the pavement, gutter, storm water- drain, flags or 
other materials of any such street, or any lamp, bracket, direction-post, hydrant 
or water-pipe maintained by the Board in any such street or public place, or 
extinguishes a public light; or 
(xiv) carries any corpse not decently covered or without taking due 
precautions to prevent risk of infection or injury to the public health or annoyance 
to passers-by or to persons dwelling in the neighbourhood; or 
(xv) carries night-soil or other offensive matter or rubbish at any hour 
prohibited by the Chief Executive Officer by public notice, or in any pattern of 
vehicle or receptacle which has not been approved for the purpose by the Chief 
Executive Officer, or fails to close such vehicle or receptacle when in use; or 
(b) carries night-soil or other offensive matter or rubbish along any route in 
contravention of any prohibition made in this behalf by the Chief Executive Officer by 
public notice; or 
(c) deposits, or causes or permits to be deposited, earth or materials of any 
description, or any offensive matter or rubbish, in any place not intended for the 
purpose in any street or other public place or waste or unoccupied land under the 
management of the Board; or 
(d) having charge of a corpse fails to bury, burn or otherwise lawfully dispose 
of the same within twenty-four hours after death; or 
(e) makes any grave or buries or burns any corpse in any place not set apart for 
such purpose; or 
(f) keeps or uses, or knowingly permits to be kept or used, any place as a 
common gaming house, or assists in conducting the business of any common gaming 
house; or 
(g) at any time or place at which the same has been prohibited by the Chief 
Executive Officer by public or special notice, beats a drum or tomtom, or blows a horn 
or trumpet, or beats any utensil, or sounds any brass or other instrument, or plays any 
music; or 
SERVER1/BILL 2004/RS/148RS\148RS.P65 
88 
(h) disturbs the public peace or order by singing, screaming or shouting or by 
using megaphone or loud-speaker; or 
(i) lets loose any animal so as to cause, or negligently allows any animal to 
cause, injury, danger, alarm or annoyance to any person; or 
(j) being the occupier of any building, or land in or upon which an animal dies, 
neglects within three hours of the death of the animal, or, if the death occurs at night, 
within three hours after sunrise, either – 
(i) to report the occurrence to the Chief Executive Officer or to an officer, 

 247
if any, appointed by him in this behalf with a view to securing the removal and 
disposal of the carcass by the public conservancy establishment; or 
(ii) to remove and dispose of the carcass in accordance with any general 
directions given by the Board by public notice or any special direction given by 
the Chief Executive Officer on receipt of such report as aforesaid; or 
(k) save with the written permission of the Chief Executive Officer and in such 
manner as he may authorise, stores or uses night-soil, manure, rubbish or any other 
substance emitting an offensive smell; or 
(l) uses or permits to be used as a latrine any place not intended for the purpose; 
or 
(m) uses or permits to be used without previous permission of the Chief Executive 
Officer any premises for any trade involving offensive smell or smoke; 
shall be punishable with fine which may extend to two thousand five hundred rupees. 
(2) Whoever does not take reasonable means to prevent any child under the age of 
twelve years being in his charge from easing himself in any street or other public place 
within the cantonment shall be punishable with fine which may extend to two hundred fifty 
rupees. 
(3) The owner or keeper of any animal found picketed or staying without a keeper in 
a street or other public place in a cantonment shall be punishable with fine which may extent 
to one thousand rupees. 
(4) Any animal found picketed or straying as aforesaid may be removed by any officer 
or employee of the Board to a pound. 
(5) Whoever in a cantonment manufactures, supplies, carries or uses for packaging or 
any other purposes material of non-biodegradable nature including polythene bags shall be 
punished with fine which may extend to five thousand rupees or imprisonment which may 
extend to six months. 
Dogs 
290. (1) A Board may make bye-laws to provide for the registration of all dogs kept 
within the cantonment. 
(2) Such bye-laws shall – 
(a) require the registration, by any officer authorised in this behalf of all dogs 
kept in the cantonment; 
(b) require that every registered dog shall wear a collar to which shall be attached 
a metal token to be issued by the registration authority, and fix the fee payable for the 
issue thereof; 
(c) require that any dog which has not been registered or which is not wearing 
such token shall, if found in any public place, be detained at a place set apart for the 
purpose; and 
Registration 
and control of 
dogs. 
SERVER1/BILL 2004/RS/148RS\148RS.P65 
89 
(d) fix the fee which shall be charged for such detention and provide that any 
such dog shall be liable to be destroyed or otherwise disposed of unless it is claimed 
and the fee in respect thereof is paid within one week, and may provide for such other 
matters as the Board thinks fit. 
(3) The Chief Executive Officer may – 
(a) cause to be destroyed, or to be confined for such period as he may direct, 
any dog or other animal which is, or is reasonably suspected to be, suffering from 
rabies, or which has been bitten by any dog or other animal suffering or suspected to 
be suffering from rabies; 
(b) by public notice direct that, after such date as may be specified in the 
notice, dogs which are without collars or without marks distinguishing them as 
private property and are found straying on the streets or beyond the enclosures of 
the houses of their owners, if any, may be destroyed, and cause them to be destroyed 

 248
accordingly. 
(4) No damages shall be payable in respect of any dog or other animal destroyed or 
otherwise disposed of under this section. 
(5) Whoever, being the owner or person in charge of any dog, neglects to restrain it so 
that it shall not be at large in any street without being muzzled and without being secured by 
a chain lead in any case in which – 
(a) he knows that the dog is likely to annoy or intimidate any person; or 
(b) the Board has, by public notice during the prevalence of rabies, directed 
that dogs shall not be at large without muzzles and chain leads, 
shall be punishable with fine which may extend to one thousand rupees. 
(6) Whoever in a cantonment— 
(a) allows any ferocious dog which belongs to him or is in his charge to be at 
large without being muzzled; or 
(b) sets on or urges any dog or other animal to attack, worry or intimidate any 
person, or 
(c) knowing or having reason to believe that any dog or animal belonging to 
him or in his charge has been bitten by an animal suffering or reasonably suspected 
to be suffering from rabies, neglects to give immediate information of the fact to the 
Chief Executive Officer or gives information which is false, 
shall be punishable with fine which may extend to two thousand rupees. 
Traffic 
291. Whoever in driving, leading or propelling a vehicle along a street fails, except in 
a case of actual necessity,— 
(a) to keep to the left when passing a vehicle coming from the opposite direction; 
or 
(b) to keep to the right when passing a vehicle going in the same direction as 
himself, 
shall be punishable with fine which may extend to five hundred rupees. 
Prevention of fire, etc. 
292. (1) The Chief Executive Officer may, by public notice, direct that within such 
limits in the cantonment as may be specified in the notice, the roofs and external walls of 
huts or other buildings shall not, without the permission in writing of the Chief Executive 
Officer be made or renewed of grass, mats, leaves or other inflammable materials, and may, 
Use of inflammable 
materials 
for building 
purposes. 
Traffic Rule of 
the road. 
SERVER1/BILL 2004/RS/148RS\148RS.P65 
90 
by notice in writing, require any person who has disobeyed any such direction as aforesaid 
to remove or alter the roofs or walls so made or renewed. 
(2) The Chief Executive Officer may, by notice in writing, require the owner of any 
building in the cantonment which has an external roof or wall made of any such material as 
aforesaid to remove such roof or wall within such time as may be specified in the notice, 
notwithstanding that a public notice under sub-section (1  has not been issued or that such )
roof or wall was made with the consent of the Chief Executive Officer or before the issue of 
such public notice: 
Provided that in the case of any such roof or wall in existence before the issue of such 
a public notice or made with the consent of the Chief Executive Officer, it shall make 
compensation, not exceeding the original cost of constructing the roof or wall, for any 
damage caused by the removal. 
293. A Board may, by a public notice, prohibit in any case where such prohibition 
appears to it to be necessary for the prevention of danger to life or property, the stacking or 
collecting of wood, dry grass, straw or other inflammable materials, or the placing of mats or 
thatched huts or the lighting of fires in any place in the cantonment, or within any limits 

 249
therein, which may be specified in the notice: 
Provided that Chief Executive Officer may, in case of imminent danger to public life or 
property, enforce such prohibition in consultation with the President or the Vice-President 
in the absence of the President. 
294. No person shall set a naked light on or near any building in any street or other 
public place in a cantonment in such manner as to cause danger of fire: 
Provided that nothing in this section shall be deemed to prohibit the use of 
lights for purpose of illumination on the occasion of a festival or public or private 
entertainment. 
295. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law relating to sanctioning 
of cinematograph films for exhibition, no exhibition of pictures or other optical effects by 
means of a cinematograph or other like apparatus for the purpose of which inflammable films 
are used, and no public dramatic performance, pantomime, circus, carnival, exhibition, dance 
or other similar show for public recreation or amusement, shall be given in any cantonment 
elsewhere than in premises for which a licence has been granted by the Chief Executive 
Officer under this section. 
(2) If the owner of a cinematograph or other apparatus uses the apparatus or allows 
it to be used, or if any person takes any part in any public dramatic performance, pantomime, 
circus, carnival, exhibition, dance or other similar show for public recreation or amusement, 
in contravention of the provisions of this section, or if the occupier of any premises 
allows them to be used in contravention of the provisions of this section or of any 
condition of any licence granted under this section, he shall be punishable with fine 
which may extend to five thousand rupees, and, in the case of continuing offence, with an 
additional fine which may extend to two thousand rupees for each day after the first 
during which the offence continues. 
(3) Nothing in this section shall be deemed to prohibit the giving of any exhibition or 
any dramatic performance, pantomime, circus, carnival, exhibition, dance or other similar 
show for public recreation or amusement, in any theatre or institute which is the property of 
Government where the exhibition, performance, pantomime, circus, carnival, exhibition, dance 
or other similar show for public recreation or amusement, is held with the permission and 
under the control of the military authorities. 
296. Whoever in a cantonment discharges any fire-arm or lets off fire-works or fireballoons, 
or detonates or engages in any game or carries on works such as quarries, 
blasts, timber cutting or building operation in such manner as to cause or to be likely to 
Regulation of 
cinematographic 
and 
dramatic 
performance. 
Discharging 
fire-works, firearms, 
etc. 
Stacking or 
collecting 
inflammable 
materials. 
Care of naked 
lights. 
SERVER1/BILL 2004/RS/148RS\148RS.P65 
91 
cause danger to persons passing by or dwelling or working in the neighbourhood or risk 
of injury to property shall be liable to fine which may extend to two thousand five hundred 
rupees. 
297. Where in a cantonment any building, or wall, or anything affixed thereto, or any 
well, tank, reservoir, pool, depression, or excavation, or any bank or tree, is in the opinion of 
the Chief Executive Officer, in a ruinous state or for want of sufficient repairs, protection or 
enclosure, a nuisance or dangerous to persons passing by or dwelling or working in the 
neighbourhood, the Chief Executive Officer, by notice in writing may, require the owner, or 

 250
part-owner or person claiming to be the owner or part-owner thereof, or, failing any of them, 
the occupier, thereof, to remove the same or may require him to repair, or to protect or to 
enclose, the same in such manner as he thinks necessary; and, if the danger is, in the 
opinion of the Chief Executive Officer, imminent, he shall forthwith take such steps as he 
thinks necessary to avert the same. 
298. The Chief Executive Officer may, by notice in writing, require the owner or 
part-owner, or person claiming to be the owner or part-owner, of any building or land in 
the cantonment, or the lessee or the person claiming to be the lessee of any such land, 
which, by reason of disuse or disputed ownership or other cause, has remained 
unoccupied and has become the resort of idle and disorderly persons or of persons who 
have no ostensible means of subsistence or cannot give a satisfactory account of 
themselves, or is used for gaming or immoral purposes, or otherwise occasions or is 
likely to occasion a nuisance, to secure and enclose the same within such time as may be 
specified in the notice. 
CHAPTER XIV 
REMOVAL AND EXCLUSION FROM CANTONMENT AND SUPPRESSION OF SEXUAL IMMORALITY 
299. The Officer Commanding the Station or the Board may, on receiving information 
that any building in the cantonment is used as a brothel or for purposes of prostitution, by 
order in writing setting forth the substance of information received, summon the owner, 
lessee, tenant or occupier of the building to appear before him or the Board as the case may 
be either in person or by an authorised agent, and, if the Officer Commanding the Station or 
the Board, is then satisfied as to the truth of the information, may, by order in writing, direct 
the owner, lessee, tenant or occupier, as the case may be, to discontinue such use of the 
building within such period as may be specified in the order. 
300. (1) Whoever in a cantonment loiters for the purpose of prostitution or importunes 
any person to the commission of sexual immorality, shall be punishable with imprisonment 
which may extend to three months, or with fine which may extend to five thousand rupees 
and in case of subsequent offence shall be punishable with imprisonment which may extend 
to one year. 
(2) No prosecution for an offence under this section shall be instituted except on 
the complaint of the person importuned, or of a military officer in whose presence the 
offence was committed, or of a member of the Military, Naval or Air Force Police, being 
employed in the cantonment and authorised in this behalf by the Officer Commanding 
the Station, in whose presence the offence was committed, or of a Police Officer not 
below the rank of Assistant Sub-Inspector, who is deployed in the cantonment and 
authorised in this behalf by the Officer Commanding the Station with the concurrence 
of District Magistrate. 
301. If the Officer Commanding the Station or the Board is, after such inquiry as he or 
it thinks necessary, satisfied that any person residing in or frequenting the cantonment is a 
prostitute or has been convicted of an offence, under section 300, or of the abetment of such 
an offence he or, as the case may be, the Board may cause to be served on such person an 
order in writing requiring such person to remove from the cantonment within such time as 
may be specified in the order, and prohibiting such person from re-entering it without the 
permission in writing of the Officer Commanding the Station or the Board. 
Power to require 
buildings, 
wells, etc. to be 
rendered safe. 
Enclosure of 
wasteland 
used for 
improper 
purposes. 
Power to 
remove 
Brothels and 
Prostitutes. 
Penalty for 

 251
loitering and 
importuning 
for purposes 
of prostitution. 
Removal of 
persons from 
cantonment. 
SERVER1/BILL 2004/RS/148RS\148RS.P65 
92 
302. (1) A Judicial Magistrate of the First Class, having jurisdiction in a cantonment, 
on receiving information that any person residing in or frequenting the cantonment– 
(a) is a disorderly person who has been convicted more than once of gaming or 
who keeps or frequents, a common gaming house, a disorderly drinking shop or a 
disorderly house of any other description; or 
(b) has been convicted more than once either within the cantonment or elsewhere, 
of an offence punishable under chapter XVII of the Indian Penal Code; or 
(c) has been ordered under chapter VIII of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 
1973, either within the cantonment or elsewhere to execute a bond for his good 
behaviour, 
may record in writing the substance of the information received, and may issue a summon to 
such person requiring him to appear and show cause why he should not be required to 
remove from the cantonment and be prohibited from re-entering it. 
(2) Every summons issued under sub-section (1) shall be accompanied by a copy of 
the record aforesaid and the copy shall be served along with the summons on the person 
against whom the summon is issued. 
(3) The Magistrate shall, when the person so summoned appears before him, 
proceed to inquire in to the truth of the information received and take such further 
evidence as he thinks fit, and if upon such inquiry it appears to him that such person is 
a person of any kind described in sub-section (1) and that it is necessary for the 
maintenance of good order in the cantonment that such person should be required to 
remove therefrom and be prohibited from re-entering the cantonment, the Magistrate 
shall report the matter to the Officer Commanding the Station and, if the Officer 
Commanding the Station so agrees shall cause to be served on such person an order in 
writing requiring him to remove from the cantonment within such time as may be specified 
in the order and prohibiting him from re-entering it without the permission in writing of 
the Officer Commanding the Station. 
303. (1) If any person in a cantonment causes or attempts to cause or does any act 
which he knows is likely to cause disloyalty; disaffection or breach of discipline amongst 
any portion of the forces or is a person who, the Officer Commanding the Station has reason 
to believe, is likely to do any such act, the Officer Commanding the Station may make an 
order in writing setting forth the reasons for making of the same and requiring such person 
to remove from the cantonment within such time as may be specified in the order and 
prohibiting him from re-entering it without the permission in writing of the Officer Commanding 
the Station: 
Provided that no order shall be made under this section against any person unless he 
has had a reasonable opportunity of being informed of the grounds on which it is proposed 
to make the order and of showing cause why the order should not be made. 
(2) Every order made under sub-section (1) shall be sent to the Superintendent of 
Police of the District, who shall cause a copy thereof to be served on the person concerned. 
(3) Upon the making of any order under sub-section (1), the Officer Commanding the 
Station shall forth with send a copy of the same to the Central Government. 
(4) The Central Government may of its own motion and shall on application made to it 
in this behalf within one month of the date of the order by the person against whom the order 
has been made, call upon the District Magistrate to make after such inquiry as the Central 
Government may prescribe a report regarding the justice of the order and the necessity 
therefore: 
Provided that at every such inquiry the person against whom the order has been 

 252
made shall be given an opportunity of being heard in his own defence. 
Removal and 
exclusion from 
cantonment of 
disorderly 
persons. 
45 of 1860. 
2 of 1974. 
Removal and 
exclusion 
from 
cantonment 
of seditious 
persons. 
SERVER1/BILL 2004/RS/148RS\148RS.P65 
93 
(5) The Central Government may, at any time after the receipt of the copy of an order 
sent under sub-section (3) or where a report has been called for under sub-section (4) on 
receipt of that report, if it is of opinion that the order shall be varied or rescinded, make such 
orders thereon as it thinks fit. 
(6) Any person who has been excluded from a cantonment by an order made under this 
section may, at any time after the expiry of one month from the date thereof, apply to the 
General Officer Commanding-in-Chief, the Command for the rescission of the same and, on 
such application being made, the said Officer may, after making such inquiry, if any, as he 
thinks necessary, either reject the application or rescind the order. 
304. Whoever – 
(a) fails to comply with an order issued under this Chapter within the period 
specified therein or whilst an order prohibiting him from re-entering a cantonment 
without permission is in force, re-enters the cantonment without such permission; or 
(b) knowing that any person has, under this Chapter been required to remove 
from the cantonment and has not obtained the requisite permission to re-enter it, 
harbours or conceals such person in the cantonment, 
shall be punishable with fine which may extend to five thousand rupees and in case of 
continuing offence with an additional fine which may extend to five hundred rupees for 
every day after the first during which he has persisted in the offence. 
CHAPTER XV 
MANAGEMENT OF DEFENCE LANDS 
305. (1) The Central Government may make suitable provisions for the regulation, 
control and management of any defence land situated throughout the territory of 
India. 
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing powers, the Central Government 
may after previous publication, make rules to provide for all or any of the following matters, 
namely :— 
(a) classification of land including the defence land situated, inside or outside 
cantonments; 
(b) the regulation, control and management of such lands inside or outside the 
cantonment; 
(c) the manner in which, and the conditions subject to which any permission to 
occupy the defence land belonging to the Central Government in a cantonment shall 
be granted; 
(d) the manner in which, and the conditions subject to which any permission to 
occupy the defence land belonging to the Central Government outside a cantonment 
shall be granted; and 
(e) any other matter which is required to be, or may be, prescribed. 
306. The Central Government may, by notification, apply with or without modifications 
all or any of the provisions of this Act to any defence land situated throughout the territory 
of India. 
Explanation.–For the purposes of this Act, “defence land” means— 

 253
(i) any land including the lands, within and outside the cantonment, which have 
been vested in terms of articles 294 and 295 of the Constitution for defence or acquired 
or hired or requisitioned or acquired by any other means by the Central Government 
for the purposes of defence and other related purposes; and 
Penalty. 
Application of 
Act to Defence 
Lands. 
Management 
of Defence 
Lands. 
SERVER1/BILL 2004/RS/148RS\148RS.P65 
94 
(ii) any defence land, which might have been occupied by any individual or 
organisation, under a lease or any other dispensation whether in force presently or 
not, shall continue to be the defence land irrespective of the period for which these 
had been occupied and of the fact that they have not reverted back to the Central 
Government after the efflux of time. 
307. The Central Government may vest any defence land, whether inside or outside a 
cantonment, in a Board for such purposes and under such terms and conditions as may be 
prescribed. 
308. (1) The Defence Estates Officer shall be the agent of the Central Government in 
matters relating to management, control and development of defence land inside or outside 
the cantonments. 
(2) the duties of the Defence Estates Officer shall include,— 
(a) preparation, maintenance and updation of records of all lands situated inside 
or outside a cantonment; 
(b) carrying out such other duties and responsibilities as may be entrusted to 
him under this Act or rules made thereunder; 
(c) advising the concerned military authorities, within his defence estates circle 
on all land matters; 
(d) periodic inspection of defence lands within his defence estates circle, with 
regard to the usage of the said lands and submission of a preliminary report to the 
concerned local military authority and a final report to the Central Government, through 
the Principal Director and Director General Defence Estates incorporating therein views 
of the local military authorities based on such inspection: 
Provided that in respect of the civil area in a cantonment, as declared under section 46 
of the Act and other lands vested in the management of the Board, his responsibilities shall 
be limited to the maintenance of the land records. 
(3) subject to the rules made in this regard, the authority to whom the custody, control 
and use of defence land is given shall be the authority responsible for prevention, detection 
and removal of encroachment or any other misuse of the defence land placed under its 
custody. 
309. All defence lands, within or outside a cantonment shall be audited by the Defence 
Estates Officer in a manner and the periodicity that may be prescribed under the rules: 
Provided that the Central Government or the Director General may additionally authorise 
any officer of the Defence Estates Organisation to carry out a special audit of Defence Land 
anywhere in the country. 
CHAPTER XVI 
POWERS, PROCEDURES, PENALTIES AND APPEALS 
Entry and inspection 
310. It shall be lawful for the President or the Vice-President of a Board, or the Chief 
Executive Officer, or the Health Officer or any person specially authorised by the Chief 
Executive Officer, or the Health Officer or for any other person authorised by general or 
special order of a Board in this behalf, to enter into or upon any building or land with or 
without assistants or workmen in order to make any inquiry, inspection, measurement, 
valuation or survey, or to execute any work, which is authorised by or under this Act or 

 254
which it is necessary to make or execute for any of the purposes or in pursuance of any of the 
provisions of this Act or of any rule, bye-law or order made thereunder: 
Vesting of 
land in a 
board. 
Role of 
Defence 
Estates Officer 
and Local 
Military 
Authorities. 
Land audit. 
Powers of 
entry. 
SERVER1/BILL 2004/RS/148RS\148RS.P65 
95 
Provided that nothing in this section shall be deemed to confer upon any person any 
power such as is referred to in section 274 or section 283 or to authorise the conferment upon 
any person of any such power. 
311. A Board may by special order authorise or order any member to inspect any work or 
institution constructed or maintained, in whole or part at the expense of the Board, and any 
register, book accounts or other documents belonging to, or in the possession of, the Board. 
312. (1) A Board or the Chief Executive Officer may, by general or special order, authorise 
any person— 
(a) to inspect any drain, privy, latrine, urinal, cesspool, pipe, sewer or channel in or 
on any building or land in the cantonment, and, in his discretion, to cause, the ground to 
be opened for the purpose of preventing or removing any nuisance arising from the 
drain, privy, latrine, urinal, cesspool, pipe, sewer or channel, as the case may be; 
(b) to examine works under construction in the cantonment, to take levels or to 
remove, test, examine, replace or read any meter. 
(2) If, on such inspection, the opening of the ground is found to be necessary for the 
prevention or removal of a nuisance, the expenses thereby incurred shall be paid by the 
owner or occupier of the land or building, but if it is found that no nuisance exists or but for 
such opening would have arisen, the ground or portion of any building, drain or other work 
opened, injured or removed for the purpose of such inspection shall be filled in, reinstated, 
or made good, as the case may be by the Board or the Chief Executive Officer. 
313. (1) The Chief Executive Officer of a cantonment may, with or without assistants or 
workmen, enter on any land within fifty yards of any work authorised by or under this Act for 
the purpose of depositing thereon any soil, gravel, stone or other materials, or of obtaining 
access to such work, or for any other purpose connected with the carrying on of the same. 
(2) The Chief Executive Officer shall, before entering on any land under sub-section 
(1), give the occupier, or, if there is no occupier, the owner not less than three day’s previous 
notice in writing of his intention to make such entry, and shall state the purpose thereof, and 
shall, if so required by the occupier or owner, fence off so much of the land as may be 
required for such purpose. 
(3) The Chief Executive Officer shall, in exercising any power conferred by this section, 
do as little damage as may be, and compensation shall be payable by the Board to the owner or 
occupier of such land, or to both, for any such damage whether permanent or temporary. 
314. It shall be lawful for any person, authorised by or under this Act to make any 
entry into any place, to open or cause to be opened any door, gate or other barrier— 
(a) if he considers the opening thereof necessary for the purpose of such entry; 
and 
(b) if the owner or occupier is absent, or being present refuses to open such 
door, gate or barrier. 
315. Save as otherwise expressly provided in this Act, no entry authorised by or under 
this Act shall be made except between the hours of sunrise and sunset. 
316. Save as otherwise expressly provided in this Act, no building or land shall be 
entered without the consent of the occupier, or if there is no occupier of the owner thereof, 

 255
and no such entry shall be made without giving the said occupier or owner, as the case may 
be, not less than four hours, written notice of the intention to make such entry: 
Provided that no such notice shall be necessary if the place to be inspected is a 
factory or workshop or trade premises or a place used for carrying on any trade, calling or 
occupation specified in section 277 or a stable for horses or a shed for cattle or a latrine, 
privy or urinal or a work under construction, or for the purpose of ascertaining whether any 
animal intended for human food is slaughtered in that place in contravention of this Act or 
any bye-law made thereunder. 
Power of 
inspection by 
Member of a 
Board. 
Power of 
inspection, 
etc. 
Power to enter 
land, adjoining 
land where 
work is in 
progress. 
Breaking into 
premises. 
Entry to be 
made in the day 
time. 
Owner’s consent 
ordinarily 
to be obtained. 
SERVER1/BILL 2004/RS/148RS\148RS.P65 
96 
317. When any place used as a human dwelling is entered under this Act, due regard 
shall be paid to the social and religious customs and usages of the occupants of the place 
entered, and no apartment in the actual occupancy of a female shall be entered or broken 
open until she has been informed that she is at liberty to withdraw and every reasonable 
facility has been afforded to her for withdrawing. 
318. Whoever obstructs or molests any person acting on behalf of the Board, who 
is not a public servant within the meaning of section 21 of the Indian Penal Code or any 
person with whom the Board has lawfully contracted, in the execution of his duty or of 
anything which he is empowered or required to do by virtue or in consequence of any of 
the provisions of this Act or any rule, bye-law or order made thereunder, or in fulfilment of 
his contract, as the case may be, shall be punishable with fine which may extend to five 
thousand rupees 
Powers and duties of police officers 
319. Any member of the police force employed in a cantonment may, without a warrant, 
arrest any person committing in his view a breach of any of the provisions of this Act which 
are specified in Schedule IV : 
Provided that— 
(a) in the case of a breach of any such provisions as is specified in Part B of 
Schedule IV, no person shall be so arrested who consents to give his name and 
address, unless there is reasonable ground for doubting the accuracy of the name or 
address so given, the burden of proof of which shall lie on the arresting officer, and 
no person so arrested shall be detained after his name and address have been 
ascertained; and 
(b) no person shall be so arrested for an offence under section 300 except — 
(i) at the request of the person importuned, or of a military officer in whose 
presence the offence was committed; or 
(ii) by or at the request of a member of the Military, Naval or Air Force 
Police, who is employed in the cantonment and authorised in this behalf by the 
Officer Commanding the Station, and in whose presence the offence was 

 256
committed or by or at the request of any police officer not below the rank of 
assistant sub-inspector who is deployed in the cantonment and authorised in 
this behalf by the Officer Commanding the station. 
320. It shall be the duty of all police officers to give immediate information to the Board 
of the commission of, or attempt to commit any offence against the provisions of this Act or 
of any rule or bye-law made thereunder, and to assist all cantonment officers and employees 
in the exercise of their lawful authority. 
Notices 
321. Where any notice, order or requisition made under this Act or any other rule or 
bye-law made thereunder requires anything to be done for the doing of which no time is fixed 
in this Act or in the rule or bye-law, the notice, order or requisition shall specify a reasonable 
time for doing the same. 
322. (1) Every notice, order or requisition issued by a Board under this Act or any rule 
or bye-law made thereunder shall be signed— 
(a) either by the President of the Board or by the Chief Executive Officer; or 
(b) by the members of any committee especially authorised by the Board in this 
behalf. 
(2) Whenever under this Act or any rule or bye-law made thereunder the doing of, or 
the omission to do, any thing or the validity of anything depends upon the approval, sanction, 
Regard to be 
had to social 
and religious 
usages. 
45 of 1860. 
Penalty for 
obstruction. 
Arrest without 
warrant. 
Duties of 
Police Officers. 
Notices to fix 
reasonable time. 
Authentication 
and validity of 
notices issued 
by Board. 
SERVER1/BILL 2004/RS/148RS\148RS.P65 
97 
consent, concurrence, declaration, opinion or satisfaction of the Board, a written document 
signed by any officer or member specified in sub-section (1) purporting to convey or setforth 
such approval, sanction, consent, concurrence, declaration, opinion or satisfaction 
shall be sufficient evidence thereof. 
(3) Every license, written permission, notice, bill summons or other document which is 
required by this Act or any rule or bye-law made thereunder to bear the signature of the 
President, Vice President or the Chief Executive Officer, or of any such member of any 
committee as has been specially authorised by the Board in this behalf shall be deemed to be 
properly signed if it bears facsimile of the signature of any such officer or member, as the case 
may be, stamped thereon. 
323. (1) Every notice, order or requisition issued under this Act or any rule or bye-law 
made thereunder shall, save as otherwise expressely provided, be served or presented— 
(a) by giving or tendering the notice, order or requisition, or sending it by post, 
to the person for whom it is intended; or 
(b) if such person cannot be found, by affixing the notice order or requisition on 
some conspicuous part of his last known place of abode or business if within the 
cantonment, or by giving or tendering the notice, order or requisition to some adult 
member or servant or his family, or by causing it to be affixed on some conspicuous 
part of the buildings or land, if any, to which it relates. 
(2) When any such notice, order or requisition is required or permitted to be served 
upon an owner, lessee or occupier of any building or land, it shall not be necessary to name 

 257
the owner, lessee or occupier therein, and the service thereof shall, save as otherwise expressly 
provided, be effected either— 
(a) by giving or tendering the notice, order or requisition, or sending it by post, 
to the owner, lessee or occupier, or, if there are more owners, lessees, or occupiers than 
one to any one of them; or 
(b) if no such owner, lessee or occupier can be found, by giving or tendering the 
notice, order or requisition to the authorised agent if any of any such owner, lessee or 
occupier, or to an adult member or servant of the family of any such owner, lessee, 
occupier, or by causing it to be affixed on some conspicuous part of the building or 
land to which it relates. 
(3) When the person on whom a notice, order or requisition is to be served is a minor, 
service upon his guardian or upon an adult member or servant of his family shall be deemed 
to be service upon the minor. 
324. Every notice which, by or under this Act, is to be given or served as a public 
notice or as a notice which is not required to be given to any individual therein specified 
shall, save as otherwise expressly provided, be deemed to have been sufficiently given or 
served if a copy thereof is affixed in such conspicuous part of the office of the Board or in 
such other public place during such period, or is published in such local news paper or in 
such other manner, as the Board may direct. 
325. In the event of non-compliance with the terms of any notice, order or requisition 
issued to any person under this Act or any rule or bye-law made thereunder, requiring such 
person to execute any work or to do any act, it shall be lawful for the Board, or the civil area 
committee or the Chief Executive Officer at whose instance the notice, order or requisition 
has been issued whether or not the person in default is liable to punishment for such default 
or has been prosecuted or sentenced to any punishment therefor, after giving notice in 
writing to such person, to take such action or such steps as may be necessary for the 
completion of the act or work required to be done or executed by him, and all the expenses 
incurred on such account shall be recoverable by the Chief Executive Officer on demand, and 
if not paid within ten days after such demand, shall be recoverable in the same manner as 
moneys recoverable by the Board under section 329: 
Service of 
notice, etc. 
Method of 
giving notice. 
Powers of 
Board in case 
of non– 
compliance 
with notice, 
etc. 
SERVER1/BILL 2004/RS/148RS\148RS.P65 
98 
Provided that where the action or step relates to the demolition of any erection or re– 
erection under section 248 or the removal of any projection or encroachment under section 
252 the Board or the civil area committee or the Chief Executive Officer may request any 
police officer to render such assistance as considered necessary for the lawful exercise of 
any power in this regard and it shall be the duty of such police officer to render forthwith 
such assistance on such requisition. 
326. If the owner of any property in respect of which a notice as is referred to in section 
325 has been given is prevented by the occupier from complying with the such notice, the 
Board or civil area committee or the Chief Executive Officer at whose instance such notice 
has been given, may, by order, require the said occupier to permit the owner within eight days 
from the date of service of such notice to take all such actions as may be necessary to comply 
with the said notice and such owner shall, for the period during which he is prevented as 
aforesaid, be exempt from any fine or penalty to which he might otherwise have become liable 
by reason of non-compliance with such notice. 
Recovery o  Money f
327. (1) If any such notice as is referred to in section 325 has been given to any person 

 258
in respect of property of which he is the owner, the Board or the civil area committee or the 
Chief Executive Officer at whose instance such notice has been issued may require any 
occupier of such property or of any part thereof to pay to it or him instead of to the owner any 
rent payable by him in respect of such property, as it falls due, up to the amount recoverable 
from the owner under section 325: 
Provided that if the occupier, on application made to him by the Board or the civil area 
committee or the Chief Executive Officer at whose instance such notice has been issued, 
refuses to truly disclose the amount of his rent or the name or address of the person to whom 
it is payable the Chief Executive Officer may recover from the occupier the whole amount 
recoverable under section 325 in the same manner as money is recoverable by the Board 
under section 329. 
(2) Any amount recovered from an occupier instead of from an owner under sub 
section (1) shall, in the absence of any contract between the owner and the occupier to the 
contrary, be deemed to have been paid to the owner. 
328. (1) Where any person, by reason of his receiving the rent of immovable property 
as an agent or trustee, or of his being as an agent or trustee the person who would receive the 
rent if the property were let to a tenant, would under this Act be bound to discharge any 
obligation imposed on the owner of the property for the discharge of which money is required, 
he shall not be bound to discharge the obligation unless he has or but for his own improper 
act or default might have had funds in his hands belonging to the owner sufficient for the 
purpose. 
(2) The burden of proving any fact entitling an agent or trustee to relief under subsection 
(1) shall lie upon him. 
(3) Where any agent or trustee has claimed and established his right to relief under this 
section, the Board may, by notice in writing, require him to apply to the discharge of such 
obligation as aforesaid the first monies which may come to his hands on behalf, or for the 
use, of the owner and on failure to comply with the notice, he shall be deemed to be personally 
liable to discharge the obligation. 
329. (1) Notwithstanding anything elsewhere contained in this Act arrears of any tax, 
and any other money recoverable, including rent on land and buildings due or damages and 
fine due under leases or licences executed by or in favour of a Board or the Defence Estates 
Officer under this Act or the rules made thereunder may be recovered together with the cost 
of recovery either by suit or on application to a Judicial Magistrate having jurisdiction in the 
cantonment or in any place where the person from whom such tax, rent or money is recoverable 
may for the time being be residing, either by the distress and sale of movable property of 
Occupier not to 
obstruct owner 
when 
complying with 
notice. 
Liability of 
occupier to 
pay in default 
of owner. 
Relief to 
Agents and 
Trustees. 
Method of 
recovery. 
SERVER1/BILL 2004/RS/148RS\148RS.P65 
99 
such person, or by the attachment and sale of immovable property of that person, which is 
within the limits of the jurisdiction of such Judicial Magistrate, or by both these methods, 
and shall, if payable by the owner of any property as such, be a charge on the property until 
paid : 
Provided that the tools of artisans, growing crops upto the value of five thousand 
rupees and implements and cattle used for the purposes of agriculture shall be exempt from 
such distress or sale. 

 259
(2) An application to a Judicial Magistrate under sub-section (1) shall be in writing 
and shall be signed by the President or Vice-President of the Board or by the Chief 
Executive Officer or the Defence Estates Officer or the Officer Commanding the Station 
or any other officer authorised by any of these officers, but shall not require to be 
personally presented. 
(3) Upon receiving the application, the Judicial Magistrate referred to in sub-section 
(1) may take action for the recovery of the amount of tax, rent or money from the person 
specified in the application as if such amount were a fine recoverable under a sentence 
passed by him and the provisions of section 421 and 422 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 
1973, shall, so far as may be, apply to the recovery of such amount: 
Provided that the recovery of no such amount shall be made by the arrest or detention 
in prison of the said person. 
Committees o  A bitration f r
330. In the event of any disagreement as to the liability of a Board to pay any 
compensation under this Act, or as to the amount of any compensation so payable, the 
person claiming such compensation may apply to the Board shall for the reference of the 
matter to a Committee of Arbitration, and the Board shall forthwith proceed to convene a 
Committee of Arbitration to determine the matter in dispute. 
331. When a Committee of Arbitration is to be convened, the Board shall cause a 
public notice to be published stating the matter to be determined, and shall forthwith send 
copies of the order to the District Magistrate, and to the other party concerned, and shall, as 
soon as may be, nominate such members of the Committee as it is entitled to nominate under 
section 332 , and by notice in writing call upon the other persons who are entitled to nominate 
a member or members of the Committee to nominate such member or members in accordance 
with provisions of that section. 
332. (1) Every Committee of Arbitration shall consist of five members, namely:— 
(a) a Chairman who shall be a person not in the service of the Government or the 
Board, and who shall be nominated by the Officer Commanding the Station; 
(b) two persons nominated by the Board; 
(c) two persons nominated by the other party concerned. 
(2) If the Board or the other party concerned or the Officer Commanding the Station 
fails within seven days of the date of issue of the notice referred to in section 331 to make 
any nomination which it or he is entitled to make or if any member who has been so 
nominated neglects or refuses to act and the Board or other person by whom such member 
was nominated fails to nominate another member in his place with in seven days from the 
date on which it or he may be called upon to do so by the District Magistrate, the District 
Magistrate shall forthwith appoint a member or members, as the case may be, to fill the 
vacancy or vacancies. 
333. (1) No person who has a direct interest in the matter under reference, or whose 
services are not immediately available for the purposes of the Committee shall be nominated 
a member of the Committee of Arbitration. 
(2) If, in the opinion of the District Magistrate any person who has been nominated 
has a direct interest in the matter under reference or is otherwise disqualified for nomination 
or if the services of any such person are not immediately available as aforesaid and if the 
2 of 1974. 
Application for 
a Committee of 
Arbitration. 
Procedure for 
convening 
Committee of 
Arbitration. 
Constitution of 
the Committee 
of Arbitration. 
No person to 
be nominated 
who has direct 

 260
interest or 
whose 
services are 
not immediately 
available. 
SERVER1/BILL 2004/RS/148RS\148RS.P65 
100 
Board or the other person by whom any such person was nominated fails to nominate 
another member within seven days from the date on which it or he may be called upon to do 
so by the District Magistrate, such failure shall be deemed to constitute a failure to make a 
nomination within the meaning of section 332. 
334. (1) When a Committee of Arbitration has been duly constituted, the Board shall, 
by notice in writing inform each of the members of the fact, and the Committee shall meet as 
soon as may be thereafter. 
(2) The Chairman of the Committee shall fix the time and place of the meetings and shall 
have power to adjourn any meeting from time to time as may be necessary. 
(3) The Committee shall receive and record evidence, and shall have power to administer 
oaths to witnesses, and on requisition in writing signed by the Chairman of the Committee, 
the District Magistrate shall issue the necessary processes for the attendance of witnesses 
and the production of documents required by the Committee and may, enforce the said 
processes as if they were processes for attendance or production before himself. 
335. (1) The decisions of every Committee of Arbitration shall be in accordance with 
the majority of votes taken at a meeting at which the Chairman and at least three of the other 
members are present. 
(2) If there is not a majority of votes in favour of any proposed decision, the opinion 
of the Chairman shall prevail. 
(3) The decision of a Committee of Arbitration shall be final and shall not be questioned 
in any court. 
Prosecutions 
336. Save as otherwise expressly provided in this Act, no court shall proceed to the 
trial of any offence made punishable by or under this Act, other than an offence specified in 
Schedule IV, except on the complaint of or upon information received from the Board concerned 
or a person authorised by the Board by a general or special order in this behalf. 
337. (1) The Chief Executive Officer or any person authorised by him, by general or 
special order in this behalf, may, either before or after the institution of the proceedings, 
compound an offence, made punishable by or under this Act other than an offence under 
Chapter XIV : 
Provided that no offence shall be compoundable which is committed by failure to 
comply with a notice, order or requisition issued by or on behalf of the Chief Executive 
Officer, unless and until the same has been complied with in so far as compliance is possible. 
(2) Where an offence has been compounded, the offender, if in custody, shall be 
discharged and no further proceedings shall be taken against him in respect of the offence so 
compounded. 
General Penalty Provision  s
338. Whoever, in any case in which a penalty is not expressly provided by this Act, 
fails to comply with any notice, order or requisition issued under any provision thereof, or 
otherwise contravenes any of the provisions of this Act, shall be punishable with fine which 
may extend to five thousand rupees, and, in the case of a continuing failure or contravention, 
with an additional fine which may extend to five hundred rupees for everyday after the 
during which he has persisted in the failure or contravention. 
339. (1) Where an offence under this Act has been committed by a company, every 
person who, at the time the offence was committed, was in charge of, and was responsible to 
the company for the conduct of the business of the company, as well as the company, shall 
be deemed to be guilty of the offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and 
punished accordingly: 
Meetings and 
powers of 

 261
Committee of 
Arbitration. 
Decisions of 
Committee of 
Arbitration. 
Prosecutions. 
Composition of 
offence. 
General 
penalty. 
Offences by 
companies. 
SERVER1/BILL 2004/RS/148RS\148RS.P65 
101 
Provided that nothing contained in this sub-section shall render any such person 
liable to any punishment, if he proves that the offence was committed without his knowledge 
or that he exercised all due diligence to prevent the commission of such offence. 
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1) where an offence under 
this Act has been committed by a company and it is proved that the offence has been 
committed with the consent or connivance of, or is attributable to any neglect on the part of, 
any director, manager, secretary or other officer of the company, such director, manager, 
secretary or other officer shall be deemed to be guilty of that offence and shall be liable to be 
proceeded against punished accordingly. 
Explanation.—For the purposes of this section,— 
(a) “company” means any body corporate and includes a firm or other association 
of individuals; and 
(b) “director”, in relation to a firm, means a partner in the firm. 
340. Where any person to whom a licence or written permission has been granted 
under this Act or any agent or servant of such person commits a breach of any of the 
conditions thereof, or of any bye-law made under this Act for the purpose of regulating the 
manner or circumstances in, or the conditions subject to, which anything permitted by such 
licence or written permission is to be or may be done, or where the Board or the civil area 
committee, as the case may be, is satisfied that such licence or written permission has been 
secured by the holder through misrepresentation or fraud, the Board or the civil area committee, 
as the case may be, may, without prejudice to any other penalty which may have been 
incurred under this Act, by order in writing, cancel the licence or written permission or 
suspend it for such period as it thinks fit : 
Provided that no such order shall be made unless an opportunity has been given to the 
holder of the licence or written permission to show cause why it should not be made. 
341. Where any person has incurred a penalty by reason of having caused any 
damage to the property of a Board, he shall be liable to make good such damage, and the 
amount payable in respect of the damage shall, in case of dispute, be determined by the 
Judicial Magistrate by whom the person incurring such penalty is convicted, and, on nonpayment 
of such amount on demand, the same shall be recovered either by the distress 
and sale of the movable property of such person, or by the attachment and sale of the 
immovable property of that person, or by both these methods and the Judicial Magistrate 
shall recover the amount in accordance with the provisions of sections 421 and 422 of the 
Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 as if it were a fine recoverable under a sentence passed 
by him. 
Limitation 
342. No court shall try any person for an offence made punishable by or under this 
Act, after the expiry of six months from the date of the commission of the offence, unless 
complaint in respect of the offence has been made to a Judicial Magistrate within the six 
months aforesaid. 
Suits 
343. No suit or prosecution shall be entertained in any court against a Board or against 
the Chief Executive Officer, the Officer Commanding a station, Defence Estates Officer, Principal 
Director, General Officer Commanding in Chief, the Command, Director General Defence 

 262
Estates, or against any member of a Board, or against any officer or employee of a Board, for 
anything which is in good faith done or intended to be done, under this Act or any rule or 
bye-law made thereunder. 
344. (1) No suit shall be instituted against any Board or against any member of a 
Board, or against any officer or employee of a Board, in respect of any act done, or purporting 
to have been done, in pursuance of this Act or of any rule or bye-law made thereunder, until 
Cancellation or 
suspension of 
licences, etc. 
Recovery of 
amount payable 
in respect 
of damage to 
cantonment 
property. 
Limitation for 
prosecution. 
Protection of 
action of 
Board etc. 
Notice to be 
given of suits. 
2 of 1974. 
SERVER1/BILL 2004/RS/148RS\148RS.P65 
102 
the expiration of two months after notice in writing has been left at the office of the Board, 
and, in the case of such member, officer or employee, unless notice in writing has also been 
delivered to him or left at his office or place of abode, and unless such notice states explicitly 
the cause of action, the nature of the relief sought, the amount of compensation claimed, and 
the name and place of abode of the intending plaintiff, and unless the plaint contains a 
statement that such notice has been so delivered or left. 
(2) If the Board or member, officer or employee has, before the suit is instituted, 
tendered sufficient amounts to the plaintiff, the plaintiff shall not recover any sum in excess 
of the amount so tendered, and shall also pay all costs incurred by the defendant after such 
tender. 
(3) No suit, such as is described in sub-section (1), shall, unless it is an action for the 
recovery of immovable property or for a declaration of title thereto, be instituted after the 
expiry of six months from the date on which the cause of action arises. 
(4) Nothing in sub-section (1) shall be deemed to apply to a suit in which the only relief 
claimed is an injunction of which the object would be defeated by the giving of the notice or 
the postponement of the institution of the suit or proceeding. 
Appeals and Revision 
345. (1) Any person aggrieved by any order described in the third column of Schedule 
V may appeal to the appellate authority specified in that behalf in the fourth column of the 
said Schedule. 
(2) No such appeal shall be admitted if it is made after the expiry of the period specified 
in that behalf in the fifth column of the said Schedule. 
(3) The period specified as aforesaid shall be computed in accordance with the 
provisions of the Limitation Act, 1963, with respect to the computation of periods of limitation 
thereunder. 
346. (1) Every appeal under section 345 shall be made by petition in writing accompanied 
by a copy of the order appealed against. 
(2) Any such petition may be presented to the authority which made the order 
against which the appeal is made, and that authority shall be bound to forward it to the 
appellate authority, and may attach thereto any report which it may desire to make by way 
of explanation. 
347. On the admission of an appeal from an order, other than an order contained in a 
notice issued under section 144, section 183, section 238, section 273 or section 302, where 
the appellate authority so directs, all proceedings to enforce the order and all prosecutions 

 263
for any contravention thereof shall be held in abeyance pending the decision of the appeal, 
and, if the order is set aside on appeal, disobedience thereto shall not be deemed to be an 
offence. 
348. (1) Where an appeal from an order made by the Board has been disposed of by 
the District Magistrate, either party to the proceedings may within thirty days from the date 
thereof, apply through the General Officer Commanding-in-Chief, the Command to the Central 
Government, or to such authority as the Central Government may appoint in this behalf for 
revision of the decision. 
(2) The provisions of this Chapter with respect to appeals shall apply as far as may be 
to the applications for revision made under this section. 
(3) The appellate authority shall make endeavours to dispose of the appeal made 
under section 345 of this Act within a period of ninety days. 
349. Save as otherwise provided in section 348, every order of appellate authority 
shall be final. 
Appeals from 
executive 
orders. 
Petition of 
Appeal. 
Suspension of 
Action 
Pending 
Appeal. 
Revision. 
Finality of the 
Appellate 
Orders. 
36 of 1963 
SERVER1/BILL 2004/RS/148RS\148RS.P65 
103 
350. No appeal shall be decided under this Chapter unless the appellant has been heard, 
or has had a reasonable opportunity of being heard in person or through a legal practitioner. 
CHAPTER XVII 
RULES AND BYE-LAWS 
351. (1) The Central Government may, after previous publication, make rules to carry 
out the purposes and objects of this Act. 
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such 
rules may provide for all or any of the following matters, namely :— 
(a) the manner in which, and the authority to which, application for permission 
to occupy land belonging to the Government in a cantonment is to be made; 
(b) the authority by which such permission may be granted and the conditions 
to be annexed to the grant of any such permission; 
(c) the allotment to a Board of a share of the rents and profits accruing from 
property entrusted to its management under the provisions of section 63; 
(d) the appointment, promotion, transfer, tenure of office, salaries and allowances, 
provident funds, pensions, gratuities, leave of absence, discipline and other condition 
of service of employees of Boards; 
(e) the circumstances in which security shall be demanded from employees of 
Boards and the amount and nature of such security; 
(f) the keeping of accounts by Boards and the manner in which, such accounts 
shall be audited and published; 
(g) the definition of the persons by whom, and the manner in which, money may 
be paid out of a cantonment fund or cantonment development fund; 
(h) the preparation of estimates of income and expenditure by Boards and the 
definition of the persons by whom, and the conditions subject to which, such estimates 
may be sanctioned; 
(i) the regulation of the procedure of Committees of Arbitration; 
(j) the prescribing of registers, statements and forms to be used and maintained 

 264
by any authority for the purposes of this Act; 
(k) the grant of leave to the members of the Board; 
(l) the form of notice required to be sent under this Act and the manner of their 
service; and 
(m) any other matter which is required to be, or may be prescribed. 
352.. (1) A rule under section 351 may be made either generally for all cantonments or 
defence estates for the whole or any part of any one or more cantonments or defence estates. 
(2) The power to make rules under clause (c) of sub-section (2) of section 351 shall 
include power to give retrospective effect from a date not earlier than the date of 
commencement of the Cantonments Act, 2003, to the rules or any of them but no retrospective 
effect shall be given to any rule so as to prejudicially affect the interests of any person to 
whom such rule may be applicable : 
Provided that where any rule has to be given retrospective operation, the reasons 
therefor and the effect of giving such retrospective operation shall be published along with 
the draft of the rules when such draft is published for eliciting public opinion under subsection 
(1) of section 351. 
(3) All rules made under this Act shall be published in the Official Gazette and in such 
other manner, if any, as the Central Government may direct and, on such publication, shall 
have effect as if enacted in this Act. 
Right of 
appellant to be 
heard. 
Power to make 
rules. 
Supplemental 
provisions respecting 
rules. 
SERVER1/BILL 2004/RS/148RS\148RS.P65 
104 
(4) Every rule made by the Central Government under this Act shall be laid, as soon as 
may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total 
period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive 
sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the 
successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or 
both Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only 
in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such 
modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously 
done under that rule. 
353. Subject to the provisions of this Act and of the rules made thereunder a Board 
may, in addition to any bye-laws which it is empowered to make by any other provision of 
this Act, make bye-laws to provide for all or any of the following matters in the cantonment, 
namely :— 
(1) the registration of births, deaths and marriages, and the taking of a census; 
(2) the enforcement of compulsory vaccination and inoculation and levy of fees 
where such vaccination or inoculation is carried out at the houses of residents; 
(3) the regulation of the collection and recovery of taxes, tolls and fees under 
this Act and the refund of taxes; 
(4) the regulation of any description of traffic in the streets and the enforcement 
of measures for the reduction of noise caused thereby or the prohibition of any 
description of such traffic; 
(5) the manner in which vehicles standing, driven, led or propelled in the streets 
between sunset and sunrise shall be lighted; 
(6) the seizure and confiscation of ownerless animals straying within the limits 
of the cantonments and regulation and control of cattle pounds; 
(7) the prevention and extinction of fire; 
(8) the construction of scaffolding for building operations to secure the safety 
of the general public and persons working thereon; 

 265
(9) the regulation in any manner not specifically provided for in this Act of the 
construction, alteration, maintenance, preservation, cleaning and repairs of drains, 
ventilation-shafts, pipes, water-closets, privies, latrines, urinals, cesspools and other 
drainage works; 
(10) the regulation or prohibition of the discharge into, or deposit in, drains of 
sewage, polluted water and other offensive or obstructive matter; 
(11) the regulation or prohibition of the stabling or herding of animals, or of any 
class of animals, so as to prevent danger to public health; 
(12) the proper disposal of corpses, the regulation and management of burial 
and burning places and other places for the disposal of corpses, and the fees chargeable 
for the use of such places where the same are provided or maintained by Government 
or at the expense of the cantonment fund; 
(13) the permission, regulation or prohibition of the use or occupation of any 
street or place by itinerant vendors or by any person for the sale of articles or the 
exercise of any calling or the setting up of any booth or stall, and the fees chargeable 
for such use or occupation; 
(14) the regulation and control of encamping grounds, sarais, hotels, dakbangalows, 
lodging-houses, boarding-houses, buildings let in tenements, residential 
clubs, restaurants, eating-houses, cafes, refreshment-rooms, guest houses, holiday 
resorts, cinemas and places of public recreation, entertainment or resort; 
Power to make 
bye-laws. 
SERVER1/BILL 2004/RS/148RS\148RS.P65 
105 
(15) the regulation of the ventilation, lighting, cleansing, drainage and watersupply 
of the buildings used for the manufacture or sale of aerated or other potable 
waters and of butter, milk, sweetmeats and other articles of food or drink for human 
consumption; 
(16) the matters regarding which conditions may be imposed by licences granted 
under section 295 or section 277; 
(17) the control and supervision of places where dangerous or offensive trades 
are carried on so as to secure cleanliness therein or to minimise any injurious, offensive 
or dangerous effects arising or likely to arise therefrom; 
(18) the regulation of the erection of any enclosure, fence, tent, awning or other 
temporary structure of whatsoever material or nature on any land situated within the 
cantonment and the fees chargeable in respect thereof; 
(19) the laying out of streets, and the regulation and prohibition of the erection 
of buildings without adequate provision being made for the laying out and location of 
streets; 
(20) the form of and the particulars which shall be contained in a development 
scheme or an improvement scheme and the manner in which such scheme shall be 
framed or altered and levy of development charges. 
(21) the regulation of the use of public parks and gardens and other public 
places, and the protection of avenues, trees, grass and other appurtenances of streets 
and other public places; 
(22) the regulation of the grazing of animals and the fees chargeable in respect 
thereof; 
(23) the fixing and regulation of the use of public bathing and washing places; 
(24) the regulation of the posting of bills and advertisment, and of the position, 
size, shape or style or name-boards, sign-boards and sign-posts; 
(25) the fixation of a method for the sale of articles whether by measure, weight, 
piece or any other method; 
(26) the rending necessary of licences within the cantonment for— 
(a) persons working as job porters for the conveyance of goods; 
(b) animals or vehicles let out on hire or used for hawking articles; 
(c) the proprietors of drivers of vehicles, boats or other conveyances, or 

 266
of animals kept or plying for hire or used for hawking articles; 
(d) persons impelling or carrying such vehicles or other conveyances; or 
(e) persons practising as nurses, midwives or dais; 
(27) the prescribing of the fee payable for any licence required under clause (26), 
and of the conditions subject to which such licences may be granted, revised, 
suspended or withdrawn; 
(28) the regulation of the charges to be made for the services of such job porters 
and of the hire of such animals, vehicles or other conveyances, and for the remuneration 
of persons impelling or carrying such vehicles or conveyances as are referred to in 
clause (26); 
(29) the prescribing of fee payable for any licence except as otherwise specifically 
provided in the Act, sanction or for any written permission granted by the Chief 
Executive Officer; 
SERVER1/BILL 2004/RS/148RS\148RS.P65 
106 
(30) the regulation or prohibition, for purposes of sanitation or the prevention of 
disease or the promotion of public safety or convenience, of any act which occasions 
or is likely to occasion a nuisance, and for the regulation or prohibition of which no 
provision is made elsewhere by or under this Act; 
(31) the circumstances and the manner in which owners of buildings or land in 
the cantonment, who are temporarily absent from, or are not resident in, the 
cantonment, may be required to appoint as their agents, for all or any of the purposes 
of this Act of any rule or bye-law made thereunder, persons residing within or near 
the cantonment; 
(32) the prevention of the spread of infectious or contagious diseases within 
the cantonment; 
(33) the segregation in, or the removal and exclusion from, the cantonment, or 
the destruction, of animals suffering from or reasonability suspected to be suffering 
from any infectious or contagious disease; 
(34) the supervision, regulation, conservation and protection from injury, 
contamination or trespass of sources and means of public water-supply and of 
appliances for the distribution of water whether within or without the limits of the 
cantonment; 
(35) the manner in which connections with water-works may be constructed or 
maintained, and the agency which shall or may be employed for such construction and 
maintenance; 
(36) the regulation of all matters and things relating to the supply and use of 
water including the collection and recovery of charges therefor and the prevention of 
evasion of the same; 
(37) the maintenance of schools, and the furtherance of education generally; 
(38) the regulation of prohibition of the cutting or destruction of trees or shrubs, 
or of the making of excavations, or of the removal of soil of quarrying, where such 
regulation or prohibition appears to the Board to be not prejudicial to the maintenance 
of ecological balance and to be necessary for the maintenance of a water-supply, the 
preservation of the soil, the prevention of landscape or of the formation of ravines or 
torrents, or the protection of land against erosion, or against the deposit thereon of 
sand, gravel or stones; 
(39) the rendering necessary of licences for the use of premises within the 
cantonment as stables, kennels, sites or cowhouses or as accommodation for sheep, 
goats or fowls; 
(40) the control of the use in the cantonment of mechanical whistles, sirens or 
trumpets; 
(41) the regulation of supply of copies of official document and prescribing the 
fee payable in respect thereof; 
(42) the regulation of permission for granting licence for use of loud-speakers 
and prescribing the fee payable in respect thereof; and 

 267
(43) generally for the regulation of the administration of the cantonment under 
this Act. 
354. (1) Any bye-laws made by a Board under this Act may provide that a contravention 
thereof shall be punishable— 
(a) with fine which may extend to five thousand rupees; or 
(b) with fine which may extend to five thousand rupees and, in the case of a 
continuing contravention, with an additional fine which may extend to five hundred 
Penalty for 
breach of byelaws. 
SERVER1/BILL 2004/RS/148RS\148RS.P65 
107 
rupees for every day during which such contravention continues after conviction for 
the first such contravention; or 
(c) with fine which may extend to one hundred fifty rupees for every day during 
which the contravention continues after the receipt of a notice from the Board or Chief 
Executive Officer by the person contravening the bye-law requiring such person to 
discontinue such contravention. 
(2) Any such bye-law may also provide that a person contravening the same shall be 
required to remedy, so far as lies in his power, the damage or mischief, if any, caused by such 
contravention. 
355. (1) Any power to make bye-laws conferred by this Act is conferred subject to the 
conditions of bye-laws being made after previous publication and of their not taking effect 
until they have been approved and confirmed by the Central Government and published in 
the Official Gazette. 
(2) The Central Government in confirming a bye-law may make any change therein 
which appears to it to be necessary. 
(3) The Central Government may, after previous publication of its intention, cancel any 
bye-law which it has confirmed, and thereupon the bye-law shall cease to have effect. 
(4) Every bye-law and Regulation made under this Act and every order made under 
sub-section (3) shall be laid as soon as may be after it is made, before each House of 
Parliament while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in 
one session or in two or more successive sessions and if, before the expiry of the session 
immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses 
agree in making any modification in the bye-law and Regulation, or order or both Houses 
agree that the bye-law and Regulation, or order should not be made, the bye-law and 
Regulation, or order shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no 
effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall be 
without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that bye-law and 
Regulation or order. 
356. (1) A copy of all rules and bye-laws made under this Act shall be kept at the office 
of the Board and shall, during office hours, be open free of charge to inspection by any 
inhabitant of the cantonment. 
(2) Copies of all such rules and bye-laws shall be kept at the office of the Board and 
shall be sold to the public at cost price singly, or in collection at the option of the purchaser. 
CHAPTER XVIII 
SUPPLEMENTAL PROVISIONS 
357. The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, and subject 
to any conditions as to compensation or otherwise which thinks fit to impose, extend to any 
area beyond a cantonment and in the vicinity thereof, with or without restriction or modification, 
any of the provisions of Chapters VIII to XVI or of any rule or bye-law made under this Act 
for the cantonment which relates to the subject-matter of any of those Chapters, and every 
enactment, rule or bye-laws so extended shall thereupon apply to that area as if the area were 
included in the cantonment. 
358. (1)The Board may, by a resolution passed in this behalf, delegate to the President, 
Vice–President, Chief Executive Officer or Health Officer, subject to such conditions, if any, 
as may be specified in the resolution, all or any of its functions under clause (b) of subsection 

 268
(5) of section 290, section 168, section 170, section 175, section 167, section 263 and 
section 264. 
(2) The civil area committee may, by passing a similar resolution, delegate subject to 
such conditions, if any, as may be specified in such resolution, all or any of its functions to 
the Vice–President, Chief Executive Officer or Health Officer. 
Supplemental 
provisions 
regarding byelaws 
and 
regulations. 
Rules and byelaws 
to be 
available for 
inspection and 
purchase. 
Extension of 
certain 
provisions of 
the Act and 
rules to place 
beyond 
cantonments. 
Power to 
delegate 
functions to 
the President, 
etc. 
SERVER1/BILL 2004/RS/148RS\148RS.P65 
108 
359. (1) Paragraphs 2 and 3 of section 54, and section 59, 107 and 123 of the Transfer 
of Property Act, 1882, with respect to the transfer of property by registered instrument, shall, 
on and from the commencement of this Act, extend to every cantonment. 
(2) The Registrar or Sub-Registrar of the district or sub-district formed for the purposes 
of the Registration Act, 1908, in which any cantonment is situated, shall, when any document 
relating to immovable property within the cantonment is registered, send information of the 
registration forthwith to the Chief Executive Officer and the Defence Estates Officer and 
such other authority as the Central Government may prescribe in this behalf. 
360. No notice, order, requisition, licence, permission in writing or other such document 
issued under this Act shall be invalid merely by reason of any defect of form. 
361. A copy of any receipt, application, plan, notice, order or other document or of any 
entry in a register, in the possession of a Board shall, if duly certified by the legal keeper 
thereof or other person authorised by the Chief Executive Officer in this behalf, be admissible 
in evidence of the existence of the document or entry, and shall be admitted as evidence of 
the matters and transactions therein recorded in every case where, and to the same extent to 
which, the original documents or entry would, if produced, have been admissible to prove 
such matters. 
362. No officer or employee of a Board shall, in any legal proceeding to which the 
Board is not party, be required to produce any register or document the contents of 
which can be proved under section 361 by a certified copy, or to appear as a witness to 
prove any matter or transaction recorded therein save by order of the court made for 
special cause. 
363. For the purposes of the Government Buildings Act, 1899, cantonments and Boards 
shall be deemed to be municipalities and municipal authorities respectively and the references 
to the State Government in section 4 of that Act shall be construed as references to the 
Central Government. 
364. (1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the Central 
Government may, by order published in the Official Gazette, make such provisions not 
inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, as appear to it to be necessary for removing the 
difficulty: 

 269
Provided that no such order shall be made after the expiry of a period of two years from 
the date of commencement of this Act. 
(2) Every order made under sub-section (1) shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is 
made, before each House of Parliament. 
365. (1) The Cantonments Act, 1924 is hereby repealed. 
(2) Notwithstanding the repeal of the cantonments Act, 1924,— 
(a) any appointment, notification, order, scheme, rule, form, notice or bye-law 
made or issued, and any licence or permission granted under the said Act shall, in so 
far as it is not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act continue in force and be 
deemed to have been made, issued or granted, under the provisions of this Act, unless 
and until it is superseded by any appointment, notification, order, scheme, rule, form, 
notice or bye-law made or issued or any licence or permission granted under the said 
provisions; 
(b) all debts, obligations and liabilities incurred, all contracts entered into and all 
matters and things engaged to be done by, with or for the Board shall be deemed to 
have been incurred, entered into or engaged to be done by, with or for the Board 
constituted under this Act; 
(c) all budget estimates, assessments, valuations, measurements or divisions 
Registration. 
4 of 1882. 
16 of 1908. 
Validity of notices 
and other 
documents. 
Admissibility 
of document 
or entry as 
evidence. 
Evidence by 
officer or 
employee of 
the Board. 
Power to 
remove 
difficulties. 
Application of 
Act 4 of 1899. 
Repeals and 
savings. 
2 of 1924. 
2 of 1924. 
SERVER1/BILL 2004/RS/148RS\148RS.P65 
109 
made by the Board shall in so far as they are not inconsistent with the provisions of 
this Act, continue in force and be deemed to have been made under the provisions of 
this Act unless and until they are superseded by any budget estimate, assessment, 
valuation, measurement or division made by the Board constituted under the said 
provisions; 
(d) all properties, movable and immovable and all interests of whatsoever nature 
and kind therein, vested in the Board shall with all rights of whatsoever description, 
use, enjoyed or possessed by the said Board vest in the Board constituted under this 
Act; 
(e) all rates, taxes, fees, rents and other sums of money due to the Board shall be 
deemed to be due to the Board constituted under this Act; 
(f) all rates, taxes, fees, rents, fares and other charges shall, until and unless they 
are varied by the Board constituted under this Act, continue to be levied at the same 
rate at which they were being levied by the Board immediately before the 
commencement of this Act; 
(g) all suits, prosecutions and other legal proceedings instituted or which might 

 270
have been instituted by or against the Board may be continued or instituted by or 
against the Board constituted under this Act. 
SCHEDULE I 
(see section 100) 
NOTICE OF DEMAND 
To 
residing at 
Taking notice that the Board demands from....................................the sum of .................... 
due from ...................................on account of ......................................(here describe the property, 
occupation, circumstance or thing in respect of which the sum is payable) leviable under 
......................................... for the period of ........................................................ Commencing on 
the ........................................... day of ...............................20............, and ending on the 
.........................day of ........................20......................, and that if, within thirty days from the 
service of this notice, the said sum is not paid to the a Board at.................................. or 
sufficient cause for non-payment is not shown to the satisfaction of the Chief Executive 
Officer, warrant of distress/attachment* will be issued for the recovery of the same with 
costs. 
Dated this.......................................day of ......................20......................... 
(Signed) 
Chief Executive Officer, 
Cantonment. 
[*Strike out whichever is not applicable.] 
110 
111 
SERVER 1/BILL 2004/RS:\148RS\148RS1.P65 
SCHEDULE II 
(see section 101) 
FORM OF DEMAND 
(Here insert the name of the officer charged with the execution of warrant) 
Whereas A.B. of ................... has not paid, and has not shown satisfactory cause for 
the non-payment of, the sum of ................... due on account of..................*............... for the 
period of.......................commencing on the day of................20........ and ending with the 
.......................... day of which sum is leviable under....................... 
And whereas thirty days have elapsed since the service on him of notice of demand for 
the same. 
This is to command you to [distraint/attach#] subject to the provisions of the Cantonments 
Act, 2003, the[movable/immovable#] property of the said A.B. to the amount of the 
said sum of Rs....................; and forthwith to certify to me, together with this warrant, all 
particulars of the property [seized/attached #] by you thereunder. 
Dated this .......................day of ...........................20....................... 
(Signed) 
Chief Executive Officer, 
Cantonment 
*Here describe the liability. 
# Strike out whichever is not applicable. 
111 
SCHEDULE III 
(see section 103) 
FORM OF INVENTORY OF PROPERTY DISTRAINED AND NOTICE OF SALE 
To, 
residing at .......................................................................... 
Take notice that I have this day seized the property specified in the inventory annexed 
hereto, for the value of.................due for the liability * mentioned in the margin for 
the period commencing with......................day of ..................20................ and ending with 
the ............................day of....................20................, together with Rs............. due for service 
of notice of demand, and that, unless within seven days from the date of the service of 

 271
this notice you pay to the Board the said amount, together with the costs of recovery, the 
said property will be sold by public auction. 
Dated this ............................................day of ..................................20............... 
(Signature of officer executing the warrant.) 
INVENTORY 
(Here state particulars of property seized). 
*Here describe the liability. 
112 
SCHEDULE IV 
(see section 319) 
CASES IN WHICH POLICE MAY ARREST WITHOUT WARRANT 
PART A 
Section Subject 
174 Making or selling of food, etc., or washing of clothes, by infected 
person. 
289 (1) (a) (i) Drunkenness, etc. 
PART B 
183(1) Remaining in, or re-entering, cantonment after notice of 
expulsion for failure to attend hospital or dispensary. 
259 Destroying, etc., name of street or number affixed to building. 
282 Feeding animal on filth, etc. 
289(1)(a)(ii) Using threatening or abusive words, etc. 
289(1)(a)(iii) Indecent exposure of person, etc. 
289(1)(a)(iv) Begging. 
289(1)(a)(v) Exposing deformity, etc. 
289(1)(a)(vii) Gaming. 
289(1)(a)(xii) Destroying notice, etc. 
289(1)(a)(xiii) Displaces, damages, alters, pavements, gutter, stormwater drain. 
289(1)(f) Keeping common gaming-house, etc. 
289(1)(g) Beating drum, etc. 
289(1)(h) Singing, etc., so as to disturb public peace or order. 
290(6) Setting loose, or setting on, ferocious dog. 
296 Discharging fire-arms, etc., so as to cause danger. 
300 Loitering or importuning for sexual immorality. 
304(a) Remaining in, or returning to, a cantonment after notice of 
expulsion. 
113 
SCHEDULE V 
(see section 345) 
APPEALS FROM EXECUTIVE ORDERS 
S. Section Executive Appellate Time allowed for 
No. Order Authority appeal 
1 2 3 4 5 
1 137 Notice to fill up well, tank, General Officer Commanding- Thirty days from service of 
etc., or to drain off or in-Chief, the Command or notice. 
remove water. Principal Director or Director 
or other authority authorised 
in this behalf by the Central 
Government. 
2 138 Notice requiring the owner Board Fifteen days from sevice of 
to provide latrine, urinal, notice. 
cesspool dust-bin or other 
receptacle. 
3 139 Notice requiring provision Board Fifteen days from sevice of 
of sanitary facilities in notice. 
market, school, theatre or 
other place of public resort. 
4 142 Notice for removal of General Officer Commanding- Thirty days from service of 
congested building in-Chief, the Command or notice. 

 272
Principal Director or Director 
or other authority authorised 
in this behalf by the Central 
Government. 
5 144 Notice requiring a building General Officer Commanding- Thirty days from service of 
to be repaired or altered so in-Chief, the Command or notice 
as to remove sanitary Principal Director or Director 
defects. or other authority authorised 
in this behalf by the Central 
Government. 
6 147 Notice prohibiting owner or General Officer Commanding- Twenty-one days from 
occupier to use a building in-Chief, the Command or service of notice. 
or part of a building for Principal Director or Director 
human habitation. or other authority authorised 
in this behalf by the Central 
Government. 
7 183 Order directing a person to General Officer Commanding- Thirty days from service of 
remove from the Cantonment in-Chief, the Command or notice. 
and prohibiting him from re- Principal Director or Director 
entering it without permission. or other authority authorised in 
this behalf by the Central 
Government. 
8 190 Notice requiring maintenanceBoard Fifteen days from sevice of 
or closing of private source notice. 
of public drinking watersupply. 
9 192 Notice requiring the owner, Board Fifteen days from sevice of 
lessee or occupier of a notice. 
building or land to obtain 
water from a source of public 
water supply. 
10 195 Notice for cutting off the Board Fifteen days from sevice of 
connection between any notice. 
source of public watersupply 
and any building 
or land to which water is 
supplied 
114 
115 
SERVER 1/BILL 2004/RS:\148RS\148RS1.P65 
11 238 (a) Refusal to sanction the Board Thirty days from 
erection or reerection service of 
of a building in a civil communication. 
area 
(b) Refusal to sanction the General Officer Commanding- Thirty days from 
erection or reerection in-Chief, the Command, or service of 
of a building in a Canton- Principal Director or Director communication. 
ment (Other than a civil or other authority authorised 
area). in this behalf by the Central 
Government. 
12 248 (a) Notice to stop erection Board or any member Thirty days from 
or reerection of, or to authorised by the Board. service of 
alter or demolish, a building notice. 
in a civil area. 
(b) Notice to stop erection or General Officer Commanding- Thirty days from 
reerection of, or to alter or in-Chief, the Command, or service of 
demolish, a building in a Principal Director or Director notice. 
Cantonment (Other than a or other authority authorised 
civil area.) in this behalf by the Central 
Government. 
13 252 Notice requiring the owner or General Officer Commanding- Thirty days from 
the occupier to alter or remove in-Chief, the Command, or service of 
any projection or encroachment. Principal Director or Director notice. 
or other authority authorised 
in this behalf by the Central 
Government. 

 273
14 253 Notice to pull down or otherwise General Officer Commanding- Thirty days from 
deal with a building newly in-Chief, the Command, or service of 
erected or re-built without Principal Director or Director notice. 
permission over a sewer, drain, or other authority authorised 
culvert, water course or water- in this behalf by the Central 
pipe. Government. 
15 273 Notice prohibiting or restricting General Officer Commanding- Twenty one days 
the use of a slaughter-house. in-Chief, the Command, or from service of 
Principal Director or Director notice. 
or other authority authorised 
in this behalf by the Central 
Government. 
16 297 Notice to remove, repair, Board Thirty days from 
protect, or enclose a service of notice. 
building, wall or anything 
affixed thereto, or well, 
tank, reservoir, pool, 
depression or excavation. 
17 302 Notice directing disorderly District Magistrate Thirty days from 
person to remove from service of notice. 
cantonment and prohibiting 
him from re-entering it 
without permission. 
1 2 3 4 5 
116 
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
The Cantonments Act, 1924 (2 of 1924) makes provisions relating to the 
administration of cantonments. As cantonments are Central territories under the 
Constitution, the civic bodies functioning in these areas are not covered under State 
municipal laws. 
2. In view of the present day, aspirations and needs of the people residing in 
cantonment areas and in order to bring in modern municipal management procedures/ 
techniques in such areas, it is proposed to enact a new legislation by replacing the 
Cantonments Act, 1924 to provide for – (i) greater democratisation; (ii) reservation 
of seats in Cantonment Boards for women and the Scheduled Castes/Scheduled Tribes; 
(iii) better financial management; (iv) extension of centrally sponsored development 
schemes to such areas; (v) management of defence lands and their audit, etc. 
3. The new legislation has been modified with a view to re-enact the existing 
Act in the context of Seventy-fourth Constitutional Amendment and to provide for 
better urban management in cantonments as recommended by the Standing Committee 
of Parliament on Defence and the Action Taken Note of the Government on their 
recommendations. Broadly, the proposed modifications could be categorised as 
under :— 
(i) Greater Democratisation : The Bill envisages enhanced representation 
for elected members to make proper balance between the elected and nominated 
one. Reservation of seats in the Cantonment Boards for women and the Scheduled 
Castes/Scheduled Tribes would also fall in this category. In the proposed Bill, 
parity has been brought between the official and elected members of the Board 
and with this, the number of elected members would increase. The enhanced 
representation for elected members will cater for increased civil population in the 
cantonment areas. 
(ii) Land Management : Over the years, the defence land ownership has 
increased to 17.31 lakh acres out of which about 2 lakh acres of such lands are 
situated within 62 notified cantonments being managed under the existing Act. 
There is no statute to cover the management of about 15 lakh acres of defence 
lands lying outside the cantonments. As on date, these defence lands are regulated 
by executive instructions (not covered under any statute) issued by the Central 
Government from time to time through Acquisition, Custody, Relinquishment, 
etc. of Military Lands in India (ACR) Rules, 1944, which are non-statutory in 

 274
nature. 
The Management of Cantonment Board properties and the defence lands outside the 
cantonments is different from each other in a sense that the former is covered under 
the existing Act and the Cantonment Property Rules, 1925 made thereunder, whereas, 
there is no such legislation or rules for the latter. The Standing Committee of 
Parliament (12th Lok Sabha) recommended that provisions may be made in the 
Cantonments Act itself regarding management of defence lands, their records, 
consolidation of earlier policies and land audit. 
Statutory provisions have accordingly been made and a new Chapter on 
management of defence lands has been added in the Bill. The provisions contained in 
this Chapter will, inter alia, enable the Central Government to notify the defence lands, 
consolidate land management policies and records in regard to defence lands, carry 
out land audits to detect abuse if any, non-utilisation and sub-optimal utilisation of 
lands. 
117 
SERVER 1/BILL 2004/RS:\148RS\148RS1.P65 
The Standing Committee of Parliament has also recommended making legal 
provisions to tackle encroachments on defence lands situated all over the country. 
Accordingly, the problem of encroachments is now proposed to be tackled through the 
provisions contained in clauses 239, 248, 249, 253 and 257 of the proposed Bill. This 
would be in addition to the powers available to the Government under the Public Premises 
(Eviction of Unauthorised Occupants) Act, 1971. 
(iii) Development impetus : In addition, provisions have been made which 
would give necessary impetus to development activities. To keep pace with 
recent developments, provisions have also been made for developmental and 
welfare activities like town-planning, old age homes, houses for disabled and 
destitutes, working women hostels, rain water harvesting, non-conventional 
energy and other miscellaneous developmental activities which are important 
to sustain the environment and taking steps for social development. 
(iv) Resource Generation : Provisions have been incorporated in the 
new Bill to streamline financial administration, improve finance base and change 
the tax mechanism keeping in view the needs of modern municipal administration. 
Provisions have also been made for a Cantonment Development Fund in which, 
any sum received from Government or an individual or association (by way of 
gift or deposit) or from centrally sponsored schemes, may be credited. 
The Standing Committee of Parliament (12th Lok Sabha) had also made a 
recommendation for extension of centrally sponsored development schemes in 
cantonments for uniform development of States. Provisions in clauses 10 and 108 of 
the Bill have therefore been made making every Board a ‘deemed municipality’ for 
the purposes of article 243P(e) of the Constitution. This would enable the Cantonment 
Boards to avail benefits and advantages of centrally sponsored schemes for social 
and economic development as are presently available to other municipalities in various 
States. 
Under article 285 of the Constitution, the properties of Central Government 
are exempted from all taxes imposed by local authorities in the States. Representations 
were received that for the services rendered by the local bodies and the financial 
implications involved, some payment in the form of service charges may be made to 
them. Consequently, the Central Government issued certain executive orders making 
provision for payment of service charges to local bodies since 1954. 
There is no specific statutory provision to give legal backing to the said decision/ 
orders made by the Government in this regard from time to time. It is, therefore, 
proposed to make a provision in the Bill for payments to be made to the Cantonment 
Boards for service charges by the Central and the State Governments, after ascertaining 
the same. 
4.The Bill seeks to achieve the above objectives. 
NEW DELHI; GEORGE FERNANDES. 

 275
The 17th Decembe , 2003. r
 
Notes on Clauses 
Clause 1.—This clause provides for short title, extent and commencement. 
Clause 2.—This clause defines certain words and expressions which have been 
frequently used in various provisions contained in the Bill. 
Clause 3.—This clause enables the Central Government to declare any place or places 
in which any part of the Armed Forces is quartered or which may be required for the service 
of such forces to be a cantonment and to make provisions for its administration. 
Clauses 4 and 5.—These clauses enable the Central Government to include or exclude 
any area situated in the vicinity of a cantonment into or from a cantonment, and clause 5 
deals with the effect of including any area in cantonment. 
Clauses 6, 7 and 8.—These clauses provide for the disposal and application of 
cantonment funds when whole of a cantonment or a part thereof ceases to be a cantonment. 
Clause 9.—This clause enables the Central Government to exclude from the operation 
of the Bill whole or any part of a cantonment. 
Clauses 10, 11 and 12.—These clauses provide for the incorporation and constitution 
of Cantonment Board for every cantonment, describe the categories of cantonments and 
the composition of their respective Boards, depending upon with population of the 
cantonment. 
Clause 13.—This clause enables the Central Government to vary the constitution of 
the Board by reason of military operation or for the proper administration of the cantonment 
and also lays down the composition of the Board so varied and its terms of office. 
Clause 14.—This clause lays down the term of office of members of the Board and 
enables the Central Government to extend the same in order to avoid administrative difficulty 
for a period not exceeding one year. 
Clauses 15 and 16.—These clauses empower the Central Government to decide about 
the filling of vacancies arising in the Board in certain cases. 
Clause 17.—This clause provides for the format of the oath of affirmation to be taken 
by every person who become the member of the Board by virtue of his office, or being 
nominated or elected to the Board. 
Clause 18.—This clause provides for the method of submission of resignation by 
nominated as well as elected members of the Board and enables the Central Government or 
the General Officer Commanding-in-Chief, the Command to accept the same. 
Clause 19.—This clause provides for the requirement and method of appointment of a 
President and a Vice-President for the Cantonment Boards. 
Clause 20.—This clause provides for the term of office of Vice-President of a Board 
and the method for his resignation and removal. 
Clauses 21 and 22.—These clauses describe the duties of President and Vice-President 
of a Cantonment Board. 
Clause 23.—This clause provides for allowances to the Vice-President and the elected 
members of the Board, as may be prescribed. 
Clause 24.—This clause empowers the Central Government to appoint a Chief Executive 
Officer for every cantonment who shall be a member-secretary of the Board and of every 
Committee of the Board and makes provision for his salary. 
118 
119 
SERVER 1/BILL 2004/RS:\148RS\148RS1.P65
Clauses 25 and 26.—These clauses describe the duties and special powers of the 
Chief Executive Officer. 
Clauses 27 and 28.—These clauses provide for the powers of the Central Government 
in preparation of Electoral Rolls for every cantonment, the periodicity or their publication, 
and the qualifications and disqualifications of a person to be considered eligible to be an 
elector. 
Clause 29.—This clause provides for the qualifications and disqualifications for being 
a member of the Board. 
Clause 30.—This clause provides interpretation of certain terms and conditions used 

 276
in clauses 27, 28 and 29. 
Clause 31.—This clause empowers the Central Government to make rules to regulate 
all or some matters for the purpose of holding elections for any cantonment or group of 
cantonments. 
Clause 32.—This clause prohibits a member of the Board from voting at a meeting of 
the Board or of any Committee of the Board on any question relating to his own conduct or 
matter which relates his own pecuniary interest. 
Clause 33.—This clause imposes on a member of the Board a liability for any loss, 
waste or misapplication of any money or property of the Board, caused due to his neglect or 
misconduct. 
Clauses 34 and 35.—These clauses enable the Central Government to remove from 
a Board any member for being disqualified for membership or for absenting at three 
consecutive meetings of the Board without sufficient reasons and consequences of any 
such removal. 
Clause 36.—This clause enables a member of the Board to be a deemed public 
servant. 
Clause 37.—This clause lays down the disqualifications of person to be an employee 
of the Board in case he has any pecuniary interest in the activities of the Board. 
Clause 38.—This clause enables every officer or employee of the Board to be a deemed 
public servant. 
Clauses 39 to 45.—These clauses provide the elaborate provisions regarding holding 
Board meetings, the business to be transacted at the meetings, the quorum required for the 
meetings, the Presiding Officer and recording of minutes, the meeting to be public and the 
method of deciding questions at the Board meetings. 
Clauses 46 and 47.—These clauses enable the Central Government to declare an area 
in every cantonment as civil area and revision of its boundaries in consultation with a Board, 
and also provide for separate Committees for the notified civil area exercising the powers, 
duties and functions of the Board in certain areas of civil administration. 
Clause 48.—This clause empowers the Board to make, with prior approval of the 
Central Government, regulations (pertaining to the conduct of meetings) and appointment of 
Committees. 
Clause 49.—This clause empowers the Board to take joint action with other local 
authority in matters of common interest and also empowers the Central Government to 
decide in case of any difference of opinion between the Board and such other local 
authority. 
Clause 50.—This clause enables the Central Government to require every Board to 
submit a report on its administration during the preceding financial year. 
120 
SERVER 1/BILL 2004/RS:\148RS\148RS1.P65 
Clauses 51 to 55.—These clauses empowers the Central Government, the General 
Officer Commanding-in-Chief, the Command, the Director General or the Principal Director to 
require production of documents, carry out inspections of the cantonments, call for 
documents, require the execution of works and enforcement of directions by the Cantonment 
Boards. 
Clause 56.—This clause empowers the President, District Magistrate, Magistrate and 
Chief Executive Officer to override the decision of the Board in certain cases. 
Clause 57.—This clause empowers the Central Government of review any decision of 
the Board. 
Clause 58.—This clause empowers the General Officer Commanding-in-Chief, 
the Command to direct for reconsideration and suspension of a decision of the Board 
or to modify or set aside after giving the Board an opportunity of showing cause for 
the same. 
Clause 59.—This clause empowers the Central Government, after consulting the General 
Officer Commanding-in-Chief the command to modify or set aside a decision of the Board. 
Clause 60.—This clause empowers the Central Government for supersession of a 
Board in case it makes defaults in performance of its duties or exceeds or abuses its powers. 

 277
It also provides for the composition of the Board, so superseded. 
Clause 61.—This clause provides for the validity of proceedings of a Board or of any 
Committee of a Board. 
Clause 62.—This clause lays down the duties to be performed by a Board as far as the 
funds at its disposal so permit. 
Clause 63.—This clause enables the Boards to manage any property entrusted to its 
management by the Central Government, subject to such terms as may be determined under 
rules to be made by the Central Government under clause 351. 
Clause 64.—This clause provides for the discretionary functions that may be performed 
by the Board with the expenditure on the same to be declared as appropriate charge on the 
cantonment fund with the sanction of the Central Government. 
Clause 65.—This clause enables the Board to incur expenditure for educational, health 
and other purposes outside the cantonment in case the same serve the interests of the 
residents of the cantonment. 
Clause 66.—This clause empowers the Board to impose with the previous sanction of 
the Central Government, property tax, tax on trades, professions, calling and employments, 
and any other tax which may be imposed in any municipality in the State in which such 
cantonment is situated. 
Clause 67.—This clause empowers a Board to charge certain fees and charges. 
Clauses 68 to 72.—These clauses make elaborate provisions pertaining to the norms 
of property tax, framing of preliminary proposals for imposition of a tax under clause 66, 
procedure for invitation of objections to the Board’s proposal and the disposal thereof, final 
imposition of a tax and the power of the Central Government to issue directions to a Board to 
impose a particular tax. 
Clause 73.—This clause defines the term “annual rateable value” as used in the Bill 
in respect of various types of properties in a cantonment for the purpose of assessment of 
tax. 
Clause 74.—This clause provides for the incidence of taxation on whom the taxes 
would be primarily leviable. 
121 
SERVER 1/BILL 2004/RS:\148RS\148RS1.P65 
Clauses 75 to 80.—These clauses provide for the elaborate provisions regarding 
preparation of assessment list and its revision by the Chief Executive Officer, authentication 
of the assessment list by the Chief Executive Officer and the President Cantonment Board, 
evidential value of the assessment list, its amendment and preparation of view assessment 
list once in every three year. 
Clause 81.—This clause provides for the procedure to be followed in cases where 
the title of any person primarily liable for the payment of a tax is transferred whether 
through an instrument or in the event of death, in so far as such transfer relates to the 
payment of taxes. 
Clause 82.—This clause provides for the need to give a notice of erection of a building, 
its completion and occupation so far as it relates to the assessment and payment of taxes. 
Clause 83.—This clause empowers the Board to remit or refund a portion of tax in case 
of wholly or partly demolition or destruction of a building to which the tax relates. 
Clause 84.—This clause provides for the remission of taxes by the Chief Executive 
Officer in case a property has remained vacant and unproductive rent for a certain period of 
time. 
Clause 85.—This clause enables the Chief Executive Officer to make entry in assessment 
list of the details of buildings for the purpose of partial remission or refund of a tax in case a 
building is composed of separate tenements. 
Clause 86.—This clause requires the submission of a notice to the Chief Executive 
Officer regarding a building, land or tenement having remained vacant and unproductive of 
rent for the purpose of claiming remission or refund of tax. 
Clause 87.—This clause makes provision as to which building, tenement or land shall 
be deemed to be vacant and unproductive of rent. 
Clause 88.—This clause requires the owner of any building, tenement or land in 

 278
respect of which remission or refund of tax has been claimed, to give notice of its reoccupation 
and also provides for the penalty in case such notice is not given. 
Clause 89.—This clause provides that a tax on any building or land shall be a first 
charge thereon. 
Clause 90.—This clause enables the Chief Executive Officer or any person authorised 
by him to inspect, examine or weigh any goods, vehicles or animals imported in cantonment 
on which octroi or terminal tax or toll is leviable. 
Clause 91.—This clause lays down a penalty that may be imposed in cases of evasion 
of octroi, terminal tax or toll. 
Clause 92.—This clause enables the Chief Executive Officer to lease the collection of 
any octroi, terminal tax or toll for any period not exceeding one year, with the previous 
sanction of the President, Cantonment Board. 
Clause 93.—This clause provides for filing of appeals to the District Court against the 
assessment or levy of, or against the refusal to refund of any tax under the Bill. 
Clauses 94 and 95.—These clauses empower the District Court hearing the appeal to 
decide about the costs of appeal and require its payment to be made whether by the Board or 
the appellant. 
Clause 96.—This clause lays down the limitation of time and deposit of the disputed 
amount in the Board for filing an appeal in the case of any tax. 
Clause 97.—This clause provides that order of a District Court in the appeals so filed 
shall be final. 
122 
SERVER 1/BILL 2004/RS:\148RS\148RS1.P65 
Clauses 98 and 99.—These clauses enable the Chief Executive Officer to direct, by a 
notice in this regard, the dates and manner in which a tax shall be payable. 
Clause 100.—This clause enables the Chief Executive Officer to cause a notice of 
demand served (with a fee for the same) in case amount of tax is not paid within thirty days 
of the presentation of bill/issue of public notice in this regard. 
Clause 101.—This clause empowers the Chief Executive Officer to issue a warrant and 
recover the amount of tax by distress and sale of the movable property or attachment and 
sale of immovable property of the defaulter. 
Clause 102.—This clause provides for the recovery of interest in case amount of tax is 
not paid within thirty days of the notice. 
Clause 103.—This clause enables an official of the Board, so authorised, to distrain 
any movable property or standing timber, growing crops or grass belonging to the defaulter, 
subject to certain conditions. 
Clause 104.—This clause enables the Chief Executive Officer to arrange for the disposal 
of distrained property by public auction and credit the sale proceeds to the cantonment 
funds. 
Clause 105.—This clause provides for the procedure to be followed for the attachment 
and sale of immovable property on issue of warrant for the same. 
Clause 106.—This clause empowers the Chief Executive Officer to direct a person, 
believed to the moving out of the cantonment, to pay the taxes immediately after serving a 
notice of demand in this regard. 
Clause 107.—This clause provides for the institution of a suit for recovery of a tax. 
Clause 108.—This clause provides for every Board to be Municipality for the purposes 
of articles 243P(e) of the Constitution of India and a Municipal Committee for the purposes 
of the Municipal Taxation Act, 1881 (11 of 1881). 
Clause 109.—This clause requires the Central Government or the State Government to 
pay to the Board annually service charges. 
Clause 110.—This clause enables the Board to make special provisions for conservancy 
services in certain cases on the payment of the conservancy charges through a written 
agreement. 
Clause 111.—This clause provides for exemption from payment of conservancy tax in 
case of buildings covered under the conservancy agreement under clause 110. 
Clause 112.—This clause empowers the Central Government to exempt, by notification 

 279
in the Official Gazette, any person or class of persons or any property or goods from the 
payment of any tax. 
Clause 113.—This clause empowers the Board to exempt, for a period not exceeding 
one year at a time, any person, on reasons of poverty from the payment of any tax or a part 
thereof. 
Clause 114.—This clause enables the Chief Executive Officer to allow any person to 
compound any tax with the previous sanction of the General Commanding Officer-in-Chief, 
the Command. 
Clause 115.—This clause enables the Board to write off any sum due on account of 
any tax, up to two thousand five hundred rupees and do so for any sum beyond that with 
previous sanction of the President. 
Clause 116.—This clause enables the Chief Executive Officer to call upon any inhabitant 
of the cantonment to furnish information for the purpose of payment of taxes. 
123 
SERVER 1/BILL 2004/RS:\148RS\148RS1.P65 
Clauses 117 and 118.—These clauses provide for the liability of a person for a tax or a 
distress, not to suffer invalidity by reason of an immaterial error in record or defect in the form 
of the notice of demand. 
Clause 119.—This clause provides for a cantonment fund and a cantonment 
development fund to be formed for every cantonment and the nature of sums to be credited 
to the said funds. 
Clause 120.—This clause provides that the cantonment fund and the cantonment 
development fund shall be kept in separate accounts in State Bank of India or a nationalised 
bank or scheduled commercial bank. 
Clause 121.—This clause enables the Board, by a resolution passed in this behalf, to 
borrow money from another Board. 
Clause 122.—This clause provides for properties of certain nature, acquired or provided 
or managed by a Board to vest in and belong to the Board and be under its direction, 
management and control. 
Clause 123.—This clause provides that all property vested in a Board shall be applied 
only for the purposes, duties or obligations imposed upon the Board. 
Clause 124.—This clause enables that Central Government to procure the acquisition 
of immovable property under the Land Acquisition Act, 1894 (1 of 1894), as may be required 
by a Board for the purposes of the Bill. 
Clause 125.—This clause enables the Central Government to make rules on conditions 
on which a property may be acquired by a Board and on the matters relating to cantonment 
fund or cantonment development fund or cantonment property. 
Clause 126.—This clause enables every Board to enter into and perform any contract 
necessary for the purposes of the Bill. 
Clause 127.—This clause specifies the requirement of the sanction of the Board for 
every contract for which budget provision does not exist or which involves a value exceeding 
rupees fifty thousand and also enables the Chief Executive Officer to sanction all other 
contracts. 
Clause 128.—This clause provides for every contract of value exceeding fifty thousand 
rupees to be in writing and signed by two members of the Board, one of which will be 
President or Vice-president. 
Clause 129.—This clause provides for the contracts improperly executed not to be 
binding on a Board. 
Clause 130.—This clause specifies the responsibility of various officers in the 
cantonment for the purposes of sanitation and control over sanitation in various parts of the 
cantonment. 
Clause 131.—This clause specifies the general duties of Health Officer to be advisor 
to the Board in all matters relating to sanitation in the cantonment and those of the Assistant 
Health Officer to perform such duties as may be allotted to him by the Health Officer. 
Clause 132.—This clause provides for all public latrines, urinals and conservancy 
establishments to provide separate compartments for each sex and not to be a nuisance. 

 280
Clause 133.—This clause requires an occupier of a building or land to collect and 
deposit rubbish, etc. by way of house scavenging, provision of receptacles, etc. 
Clause 134.—This clause enables a Board to undertake private conservancy 
arrangement where the occupier of any building or land fails to do so to the satisfaction of 
the Chief Executive Officer. 
124 
SERVER 1/BILL 2004/RS:\148RS\148RS1.P65 
 
Clause 135.—This clause requires the Board to provide proper public receptacles, 
etc., for the deposit and disposal of rubbish, etc., and also enables the Chief Executive 
Officer to issue directions in this regard. 
Clauses 136 to 138.—These clauses enable the Chief Executive Officer to require any 
person having control of any land or building, to close any cesspools, receptacles, for filth, 
etc., or keep them in clean condition; fill up or cover any well, cistern, reservoir or receptacle 
which is or is likely to be a breeding place for mosquitoes; and provide a latrine, urinal, etc., 
for the building or land. 
Clause 139.—This clause requires every person employing more than ten workmen or 
having control of a market, school, theatre in a cantonment to provide latrines and urinals 
and sweepers as may be thought fit by the Chief Executive Officer. 
Clause 140.—This clause enables the Chief Executive Officer or any official of the 
Board to require the owner of any private latrine or urinal in the cantonment, not to put the 
same to public use. 
Clause 141.—This clause provides special provisions for collection of rubbish and 
solid waste management by the Board. 
Clause 142.—This clause enables the Board to require the removal of buildings which 
may be in unhealthy condition or congested, after inspection by a committee. 
Clause 143.—This clause enables the Board to require the owner or occupier of a 
building to reduce overcrowding of dwelling-houses in case the same is considered to be a 
danger to the health of the inmates. 
Clause 144.—This clause enables the Board to require the owner of a building to 
execute repairs or alteration of a building if it is ill-constructed or dilapidated or in a insanitary 
state. 
Clause 145.—This clause enables the Chief Executive Officer to require the owner, 
lessee or occupier of any land or building to be clean and keep the same in a good state. 
Clause 146.—This clause requires an owner, occupier or lessee of a premises not to 
cause any air pollution. 
Clause 147.—This clause enables the Board to order disuse of a building if it is 
considered to be unfit for human habitation. 
Clause 148.—This clause enables the Chief Executive Officer to require the removal of 
noxious vegetation from any land in the cantonment. 
Clause 149.—This clause enables the Board to impose conditions on the cultivation 
of any crop in a cantonment as may be considered injurious to the health of persons dwelling 
in the neighbourhood. 
Clause 150.—This clause enables the Chief Executive Officer to call for information 
regarding burial and burning grounds from any person who may be incharge of such grounds. 
Clause 151.—This clause prohibits the use of any place as a burial or burning ground 
without permission in writing of the Board. 
Clause 152.— This clause enables the Board to require closing of burial or burning 
ground in a cantonment in case it has become offensive or dangerous to the health of 
persons living in the neighbourhood. 
Clause 153.—This clause provides for exemption from operation of clauses 150 to 152 
in case of any burial ground managed by or on behalf of the Government. 
Clause 154.—This clause enables the Board to prescribe routes for the removal of 
corpses to burial or building grounds. 
125 
SERVER 1/BILL 2004/RS:\148RS\148RS1.P65
Clause 155.—This clause requires every medical practitioner or any other person to be 

 281
obliged to give information to the Board concerning infectious, contagious or communicable 
diseases in a cantonment and imposes certain conditions on the person suffering from these 
diseases. 
Clause 156.—This clause lays down certain precautions to be followed by those 
running a Blood Bank in a cantonment. 
Clause 157.—This clause enables the Officer Commanding, the Station to take special 
measures in case of outbreak of infectious or epidemic diseases, with the previous sanction 
of the Central Government. 
Clauses 158 to 160.—These clauses enable the Chief Executive Officer to require 
names of customers of a dairyman, a washerman and a medical practitioner in case the 
outbreak of any infectious diseases which is attributable to the milk supplied, clothes washed 
or needles or syringes used by them. 
Clauses 161 to 163.—These clauses provide for report after inspection of a dairy or 
washerman or medical practitioner’s place of business by the Health Officer and action 
thereon including taking possession of milk, clothes, needles or syringes for examination. 
Clauses 164 and 165.—These clauses require any person using a public conveyance 
while suffering from the infectious disease or for carriage of any such person to report the 
same to the Chief Executive Officer, who will forthwith cause the same to be disinfected. 
Clause 166.—This clause provides for penalty for failure to report under clause 164 or 
clause 165. 
Clause 167.—This clause provides that driver of any conveyance shall not be bound 
to carry person suffering from infectious or contagious diseases. 
Clause 168.—This clause enables the Board to require, by notice, the disinfection of 
any building or articles therein in a cantonment to prevent or check the spread of infectious 
disease. 
Clause 169.—This clause enables the Board or President to require the destruction of 
any infectious hut or shed in a cantonment to prevent the spread of any infectious disease 
and shall pay the compensation to the owner. 
Clause 170.—This clause requires the Board to provide temporary shelter for inmates 
of infected or destroyed building or shed. 
Clause 171.—This clause enables the Chief Executive Officer to require the disinfection 
of any building before letting the same, in case any person suffering from infectious disease 
has been living therein. 
Clause 172.—This clause prohibits every person from disposing of any infected article 
without disinfection of the same. 
Clause 173.—This clause makes it obligatory for the Board to provide proper place 
and means of disinfection. 
Clause 174.—This clause lays down a penalty for the making or selling of food, etc., or 
washing of clothes by infected person in a cantonment. 
Clause 175.—This clause enables the Chief Executive Officer to restrict or prohibit, by 
a public notice, the sale of certain food or drink when a cantonment is visited or threatened 
by an outbreak of any infectious disease. 
Clause 176.—This clause enables the Chief Executive Officer on the advice by the 
Health Officer to exercise control over wells, tanks, etc., if the use of their water is likely to 
endanger or cause the spread of any disease. 
126 
SERVER 1/BILL 2004/RS:\148RS\148RS1.P65 
Clause 177.—This clause enables the Chief Executive Officer to exercise control over 
the disposal of infectious corpse in a cantonment. 
Clause 178.—This clause provides that the Board may provide, maintain and aid as 
many hospitals or dispensaries in a cantonment as it thinks fit and Medical Officer appointed 
by the Board shall be in-charge of every hospital and dispensary and be responsible for the 
medical activities to the Health Officer and the Chief Executive Officer. 
Clause 179.—This clause requires the Board to run a hospital or dispensary in 
accordance with orders of the Central Government and also make provision of drugs, 
instruments, apparatus, furniture and appliances and cots, etc. 

 282
Clause 180.—This clause provides for free treatment for poor patients or those suffering 
from infectious disease and other sick persons with the sanction of the Board in every 
hospital and dispensary of the Board. 
Clause 181.—This clause enables the Board to levy fees or charges from a patient who 
is ineligible for free treatment. 
Clauses 182 and 183.—These clauses enable the Health Officer or the Medical Officer 
in-charge of a hospital or dispensary to order a person believed to be suffering from infectious 
disease to attend for examination any hospital or dispensary by a notice in this regard and to 
direct a person refusing to comply with such notice to be removed from the cantonment. 
Clause 184.—This clause enables the Board to prescribe suitable routes for pilgrims 
passing through a cantonment. 
Clause 185.—This clause prohibits any person in the employment of essential services 
of the Board from resigning without reasonable cause or absent from duty without proper 
authority. 
Clauses 186 to 188.—These clauses require the Board to provide or arrange for the 
provision of supply of pure water and carry out surveys and formulate proposals in this 
regard. 
Clause 189.—This clause enables the Board, with previous sanction of the Central 
Government, to exercise control over sources of public water supply in a cantonment other 
than the sources which may be under the control of Military Engineer Service or Public 
Works Department. 
Clause 190.—This clause enables the Chief Executive Officer to exercise control over 
and require the maintenance or closing of any private source of public drinking water supply 
in a cantonment. 
Clause 191.—This clause enables the Chief Executive Officer subject to guidelines 
made by the Board, to permit the owner, lessee or occupier of any building or land to connect 
it with the source of public water supply. 
Clauses 192 and 193.—These clauses enable the Chief Executive Officer to require the 
owner, lessee or occupier of a building or land to obtain water supply from a source of public 
water supply and supply water under an agreement subject to guidelines made by the Board 
in this regard. 
Clause 194.—This clause provides for the Board not to be liable for any failure of 
supply of water or curtailment in its quantity due to accident, drought or other unavoidable 
cause. 
Clause 195.—This clause lays down certain conditions of universal application to 
regulate the supply of water in a cantonment. 
Clause 196.—This clause empowers the Board to supply, withdraw or curtail any 
supply of water to persons living outside the cantonment. 
127 
SERVER 1/BILL 2004/RS:\148RS\148RS1.P65 
Clause 197.—This clause provides for a penalty which may be levied on a person who 
uses water for a purpose other than for which the water is supplied. 
Clauses 198 and 199.—These clauses enable the Board to lay wires, connections, 
etc., for the purpose lighting or of a water supply system, etc., and pay compensation to 
any owner or occupier of building or land if such laying of wires, etc., causes any substantial 
interference to him. 
Clause 200.—This clause prohibits the taking of any connection from the main without 
permission of the Board. 
Clauses 201 and 202.—These clauses enable the Chief Executive Officer to prescribe 
the size of ferrules and to establish meters, etc., for gas or water supply in a cantonment and 
require the laying of the same to his satisfaction. 
Clause 203.—This clause enables the Board to fix rates and charges for laying of 
mains, pipes, etc. 
Clause 204.—This clause provides for the application of the foregoing clauses to 
Government supply of water in a cantonment. 
Clause 205.—This clause enables the Chief Executive Officer to require any dwellinghouse 

 283
without a proper supply of water for domestic consumption, to obtain such supply. 
Clause 206.—This clause enables the Board to recover charges for the supply of 
water. 
Clauses 207 and 208.—These clauses enable the Board to receive a bulk supply of 
water from Government water supply in a cantonment where it does not have its own source 
of water supply and pay charges for the same and functions of the Board in relation to 
distribution of bulk supply. 
Clauses 209 to 232.—These clauses provide special provisions concerning drainage 
and sewage in a cantonment, namely, their construction and control, sewage disposal, certain 
matters not to be passed into cantonment drains, connection of private drains into cantonment 
drains, nor premises to be constructed without drains, appointment of places for emptying of 
drains; building, railways and private streets not to be constructed over drains or water 
works, etc. 
Clause 233.—This clause enable the Chief Executive officer, with the approval of the 
Board to cause to be prepared a spatial plan for land use in the cantonment earmarking zones 
for residential, institutional, commercial and other activities. 
Clause 234.—This clause provides for an erection or re-erection of a building to be 
made only with the previous sanction of the Board and of the Chief Executive Officer in case 
it is in a civil area. 
Clause 235.—This clause provides for a notice to be given to the Chief Executive 
Officer for erection or re-erection of a building in a cantonment. 
Clause 236.—This clause requires the specific mention of the purpose for which a 
building is proposed to be erected in the notice to be given under clause 235. 
Clause 237.—This clause provides for the powers of Board under certain sections to 
be exercised by the Chief Executive Officer in the civil area in the cantonment. 
Clause 238.—This clause enables the Board to refuse or sanction (either absolutely or 
with certain directions) the erection or re-erection of a building. 
Clause 239.—This clause enables the Chief Executive Officer to order the stoppage of 
any erection of a building or works in case it is found to be contrary to the sanction issued 
under clause 238. 
128 
SERVER 1/BILL 2004/RS:\148RS\148RS1.P65 
Clause 240.—This clause enables the Central Government to sanction a general scheme 
of erection or re-erection of building within particular limits of a cantonment for the prevention 
of overcrowding and insanitation. 
Clause 241.—This clause provides for protection to a Board against payment of any 
compensation in case any person sustains any damage in consequence of the refusal of the 
Board to sanction the erection of any building. 
Clause 242.—This clause requires the person to whom sanction for erection or reerection 
has been given to deliver a notice regarding its completion and obtain a completion 
certificate from the Chief Executive Officer. 
Clause 243.—This clause provides for the validity of the sanction of erection or 
re-erection for a period of two years unless it is extended by the Chief Executive Officer on 
application in this regard. 
Clause 244.—This clause provides against the use of a building for any purpose other 
than for which it has been sanctioned to be used. 
Clause 245.—This clause provides for the laying down of a period within which the 
erection or re-erection of a building shall be commenced and completed. 
Clause 246.—This clause requires the giving of a notice for the completion of erection 
or re-erection of a building within thirty days. 
Clause 247.—This clause provides for a penalty in case of illegal erection and reerection 
of a building in the cantonment. 
Clause 248.—This clause enables the Board to direct the owner, lessee or occupier of 
any land in a cantonment to stop erection or re-erection of a building or demolish the same in 
case it is an offence under clause 247. 
Clause 249.—This clause enables the Chief Executive Officer to direct the sealing of a 

 284
premises where unauthorised construction is being carried out and also provides for a 
penalty for contravention of this provision. 
Clause 250.—This clause bars the Courts from entertaining any proceedings in respect 
of any order or notice for which provision of appeal exists and has not been exhausted. 
Clause 251.—This clause enables the Board to make bye-laws pertaining to various 
procedures to be followed in connection with erection or re-erection of buildings in a 
cantonment. 
Clause 252.—This clause provides for prohibition of structures or fixtures, which may 
cause obstruction in streets in the cantonment and also enables the Chief Executive Officer 
to remove the same. It also enables the Chief Executive Officer to permit the putting of 
verandas, balconies, etc., in certain cases. 
Clause 253.—This clause enables the Chief Executive Officer to pull down or otherwise 
deal with the same any unauthorised buildings over drains, culverts water course, waterpipe, 
etc., or otherwise deal with the same. 
Clause 254.—This clause enables the Chief Executive Officer to require the owner or 
lessee of a building or land to put up and keep in good condition, proper troughs and pipes, 
etc. 
Clause 255.—This clause enables the Chief Executive Officer to attach brackets for 
lamps and other accessories to the outside of any building. 
Clause 256.—This clause provides that all roads in civil area and those outside the 
civil area as may be vested in the Board and shall be maintained by the Board. 
129 
SERVER 1/BILL 2004/RS:\148RS\148RS1.P65 
Clause 257.—This clause enables the Chief Executive Officer to permit temporary 
occupation of any street or land for the purpose of depositing building material, etc., subject 
to conditions prescribed by the Board and payment of fee. 
Clause 258.—This clause enables the Board to open any street for public use. It also 
enables the Board to close a street permanently, with sanction of the General Officer 
Commanding-in-Chief the Command or Principal Director. 
Clause 259.—This clause enables the Board to determine the names of streets and 
numbers of buildings in a cantonment. 
Clause 260.—This clause enables the Board to permit Group Housing Schemes in a 
cantonment in accordance with special bye-laws framed for the purpose. 
Clause 261.—This clause enables the Chief Executive Officer to permit to remove or 
the erection of any boundary wall, hedges or fences in a cantonment or to remove the same 
if found unsightly or otherwise objectionable. 
Clause 262.—This clause enables the Board to require the owner, lessee or occupier of 
any land in the cantonment to fell, lop and trim trees wherever the same is necessary for any 
reason. 
Clause 263.—This clause provides for the imposition of a penalty in case of digging of 
public land without the permission of the Chief Executive Officer. 
Clause 264.—This clause enables the Chief Executive Officer to prohibit the owner, 
lessee or occupier of any quarry from continuing the work for the purpose of preventing 
danger or abating nuisance likely to be caused thereby. 
Clause 265.—This clause enables the Board to provide and maintain public markets 
and slaughter-houses together with stall, shops, sheds, etc., to such number as it may think 
fit. 
Clause 266.—This clause prohibits any person from selling or exposing for sale any 
animal or article in a public market. 
Clause 267.—This clause enables the Board to transfer by public auction, the right to 
occupy or use any stall, shop, standing shed, etc., in a public market or public slaughterhouse. 
Clause 268.—This clause requires the Board to publish a table of stallages, rents, and 
fees leviable in a public market for regulating the use of such market. 
Clause 269.—This clause provides that no place other than public market in a 
cantonment shall be used as a market unless licenced by the Board. 
Clauses 270 to 274.—These clauses enable the Board or Chief Executive Officer to 

 285
grant licence for private market or slaughter-house, to impose penalty for keeping market or 
slaughter-house without licence or for using unlicenced market or slaughter-house, lays 
down prohibition and restrictions on the use of slaughter-house and power to inspect 
slaughter-house etc. 
Clause 275.—This clause empowers the Board by order to regulate the matters relating 
to days and working hours, for the opening of the public market or public slaughter-house, 
their design and sanitation, etc. 
Clause 276.—This clause enables the Board to make provision of suitable places for 
washermen, its fee and lays a penalty for the contravention of such provisions. 
130 
 
Clause 277.—This clause provides for the issue of yearly licences for carrying on of 
certain occupations in a cantonment and enables the Board to issue such licences on the 
charge of a fee. 
SERVER 1/BILL 2004/RS:\148RS\148RS1.P65
Clause 278.—This clause enables the Chief Executive Officer to stop the use of certain 
places as eating house, lodging house, hotel, etc., run in contravention of the term of a 
licence granted in this regard. 
Clause 279.—This clause lays down certain conditions which may be attached to 
licences issued under clause 277. 
Clause 280.—This clause enables the Board to vary a licence in case of place used 
under the licence is nuisance or is likely to be dangerous to life, health and property. 
Clause 281.—This clause provides for a penalty for carrying on trade, etc., without 
licence or in contravention of clause 280. 
Clause 282.—This clause provides for a penalty for feeding of animals kept for the 
purpose of supplying milk on filthy, deleterious substances. 
Clause 283.—This clause enables the President, Vice-president, the Chief Executive 
Officer, the Health Officer, the Assistant Health Officer or any official of the Board so authorised 
to enter into any market, building, shop, stall or other places in the cantonment for inspection 
and seizure. 
Clause 284.—This clause prohibits the import of cattle and flesh in a cantonment 
slaughtered outside the cantonment, without written permission of the Chief Executive Officer 
to be issued on the recommendation of the Health Officer. 
Clause 285.—This clause provides for a penalty on the unauthorised sale of spirituous 
liquor or intoxicating drug by any person not a military person or a soldier in a cantonment or 
within such limits adjoining a cantonment as may be notified by the Central Government in 
the Official Gazette. 
Clause 286.—This clause provides for a penalty on the unauthorised possession of 
spirituous liquor by any person subject to Army, Navy or Air Force, otherwise than as a 
military officer or a soldier or the wife or servant of any such person or of a soldier in a 
cantonment. 
Clause 287.—This clause enables a Police Officer to arrest any person and seizure and 
confiscation of things for offence against the two last foregoing clauses without an order 
from a Judicial Magistrate. 
Clause 288.—This clause exempts the application of the provisions of clauses 285 to 
287 on articles sold or supplied for medicinal purposes. 
Clause 289.—This clause elaborately provides for a penalty which may be imposed on 
any person for causing public nuisance in a cantonment. 
Clause 290.—This clause enables the Board to make bye-laws for the registration and 
control of dogs in a cantonment. 
Clause 291.—This clause provides for a penalty for violation of the traffic rules of the 
road in a cantonment. 
Clause 292.—This clause enables the Chief Executive Officer to direct, by a public 
notice, that the roofs and external walls of huts and other building shall not be made of any 
inflammable materials without his permission. 
Clause 293.—This clause enables the Board to prohibit, by a public notice, the stacking 
or collection of wood, dry grass or other inflammable materials in a cantonment. 

 286
Clause 294.—This clause prohibits the setting of naked light in a street or public place 
in such a manner as to cause danger of fire. 
Clause 295.—This clause prohibits the exhibition of cinematographic and dramatic 
performances in the cantonment or elsewhere than in premises for which a licence has been 
granted by the Chief Executive Officer under this clause and penalty for such contravention. 
131 
SERVER 1/BILL 2004/RS:\148RS\148RS1.P65 
 
Clause 296.—This clause provides for a penalty to be imposed on whoever discharges 
fire-works, etc., which are likely to cause danger to passers by or dwellers in a locality. 
Clause 297.—This clause enables the Chief Executive Officer to require buildings, 
wells, etc., in a cantonment to remove in case the same cause a nuisance or are dangerous to 
the passersby or dwellers in a locality. 
Clause 298.—This clause enables the Chief Executive Officer to secure and enclose 
the waste land in a cantonment used for improper purposes. 
Clause 299.—This clause empowers the Officer Commanding the Station or the Board 
to discontinue the use of a building as a brothel or for purposes of prostitution. 
Clause 300.—This clause provides for a penalty for loiters for the purpose of prostitution 
or importunes any person to the commission of sexual immorality. 
Clause 301.—This clause enables the Officer Commanding the Station or the Board to 
require a person residing in or frequenting the cantonment and believed to be a prostitute, or 
has been convicted of an offence, to be removed from the cantonment. 
Clause 302.—This clause enables a Judicial Magistrate of the First Class to issue 
summons for and order the removal and exclusion from the cantonment any disorderly 
person and also prohibit him from re-entering the cantonment. 
Clause 303.—This clause enables the Officer Commanding the Station to require removal 
and exclusion from the cantonment any seditious person who is likely to cause disloyality, 
disaffection or breach of discipline among any portion of the forces. 
Clause 304.—This clause provides for the imposition of a penalty on any person who 
fails to comply with an order prohibiting him from re-entering a cantonment or harbours any 
such person who has been ordered to be removed from the cantonment. 
Clause 305.—This clause provides for the Central Government to make rules for the 
classification of defence lands in or outside a cantonment and their management. 
Clause 306.—This clause provides for the defence lands to include all lands, within 
and outside a cantonment, which have been inherited, acquired, hired, requisitioned or 
obtained by any other means by the Central Government for the purposes of defence and 
other related purposes. 
Clause 307.—This clause enables the Central Government to vest any defence 
land, inside or outside a cantonment in a Board for specific purposes and under specific 
terms. 
Clause 308.—This clause provides for the role of Defence Estates Officer as the agent 
of the Central Government, in the management and development of defence lands and also 
describes his duties in this regard. 
Clause 309.—This clause provides for the audit of all defence lands, within or outside 
the cantonment to be audited by the Defence Estates Officer, in the prescribed manner. 
Clause 310.—This clause authorises the President, Vice-President, Chief Executive 
Officer, Health Officer, etc., to enter into or upon any building or land to make any inquiry, 
inspection, measurement, etc., as may be necessary for the purpose of the Bill. 
Clause 311.—This clause enables the Board to authorise any Member of a Board to 
inspect any work or institution, book, register, etc., maintained by the Board. 
Clause 312.—This clause enables the Board or the Chief Executive Officer to authorise 
any person to inspect any drain, privy, latrine, urinal, etc., with the purpose of prevention 
and removal of any nuisance arising therefrom. 
132 
SERVER 1/BILL 2004/RS:\148RS\148RS1.P65
Clause 313.—This clause enables the Chief Executive Officer of a cantonment to enter 
on any land adjoining the land where an authorised work is in progress. 

 287
Clause 314.—This clause enables any person authorised under the Bill to break into 
any premises if such entry is considered necessary. 
Clause 315.—This clause restricts any authorised entry to be made in the day time 
only. 
Clause 316.—This clause provides for the obtaining of the owner’s consent for making 
entry under the provisions of the Bill and also for giving four hours notice in such cases. 
Clause 317.—This clause provides for the giving of due regard to the social and 
religious usages of the occupants of the place where entry is made under this Bill. 
Clause 318.—This clause provides for a penalty for causing obstruction or molestation 
to any person acting on behalf of the Board, who is not a servant of the Board or has been 
lawfully contracted by the Board. 
Clause 319.—This clause enables any member of the police force to arrest without a 
warrant, any person committing a breach of any provision of this Bill under Schedule IV. 
Clause 320.—This clause requires all police officers to provide information to the 
Board about any attempt to commit any offence against the provisions of this Bill and also 
provide assistance to cantonment officers and servants in the exercise of their lawful authority. 
Clause 321.—This clause provides to specify a reasonable time in a notice, requisitions 
or order made under this Bill. 
Clause 322.—This clause provides for every notice, order or requisition issued by a 
Board under this Bill to be signed by the President of the Board or the Chief Executive Officer 
or the members of any committee especially authorised by the Board in this behalf. 
Clauses 323 and 324.—These clauses lay down various methods of giving and serving 
a notice, order or requisition issued under this Bill. 
Clause 325.—This clause enables the Board or the civil area committee or the Chief 
Executive Officer to take such action or steps as may be necessary for the non-compliance of 
the notices issued under this Bill. 
Clause 326.—This clause enables the Board or the civil area committee or the Chief 
Executive Officer to issue notice to a person who obstructs the entry on a premises and to 
allow the same within eight days of the notice. 
Clause 327.—This clause enables the board or the civil area committee or the Chief 
Executive Officer to require the occupier of a property to pay any amount recoverable from 
the owner of a property in case of default of the owner to pay the same. 
Clause 328.—This clause enables a relief to the agent and trustee of a property not be 
liable to pay any sums due from the property if he does not have in his hand funds belonging 
to the owner sufficient for the purpose. 
Clause 329.—This clause provides for the recovery of any dues under this Bill to be 
recovered with the cost of recovery by suit or application to a Judicial Magistrate having 
jurisdiction in the cantonment. 
Clauses 330 to 335.—These clauses require the Board to convene a Committee of 
Arbitration to determine a matter in dispute in the event of disagreement as to the liability of 
a Board to pay any compensation under this Bill and lays down the procedure for convening 
the Committee of Arbitration and the constitution of such Committee of Arbitrations its 
meetings and powers and decisions. 
133 
SERVER 1/BILL 2004/RS:\148RS\148RS1.P65 
Clause 336.—This clause makes provision for adoption of procedure for 
prosecutions. 
Clause 337.—This clause enables the Chief Executive Officer to compound an offence 
made punishable under this Bill other than an offence under Chapter XIV. 
Clause 338.—This clause provides for a general penalty in cases where penalty is not 
expressly provided under this Bill. 
Clause 339.—This clause provides for the responsibility of every person being incharge 
of or responsible to a company, to be deemed to be guilty where an offence under this Bill has 
been committed by a company. 
Clause 340.—This clause enables the Board or the civil area committee, to cancel a 
licence or written permission or suspend it for such period as it thinks fit in case a licensee 

 288
commits a breach of any condition of the licence. 
Clause 341.—This clause provides for the recovery of amount payable in respect of 
damage to a cantonment property, which in case of dispute, shall be determined by a Judicial 
Magistrate by whom the person incurring such penalty is being convicted. 
Clause 342.—This clause lays down limitations for prosecution of any person made 
punishable by or under this Bill. 
Clause 343.—This clause provides protection to the Board and other Officers involved 
in the administration of the cantonments from being prosecuted in any Court for anything 
done in good faith. 
Clause 344.—This clause provides for a notice to be given if a suit is to be instituted 
against any Board, or against any member of a Board or an officer or employee of the Board 
in respect of any act done in pursuance of this Bill. 
Clause 345.—This clause provides for filing of appeals from executive orders as 
described in Schedule V. 
Clause 346.—This clause provides for the appeal to be filed by petition in writing to be 
presented to the authority which made the order against which the appeal is made, who shall 
be bound to forward it to the appellate authority. 
Clause 347.—This clause provides for the suspension of all proceedings to enforce an 
order if an appeal has been admitted against the same. 
Clause 348.—This clause provides for the filing of a revision of decision before the 
Central Government by either party after an appeal from an order made by the Board has been 
disposed of by the District Magistrate. 
Clause 349.—This clause provides for the order of the appellate authority to be final, 
save as otherwise provided in clause 348. 
Clause 350.—This clause provides for the right of every appellant to be heard in 
person or through a legal practitioner before an appeal is decided. 
Clauses 351 and 352.—These clauses enable the Central Government after previous 
publication, to make rules to carry out the purposes and objects of this Bill, either generally 
for all cantonments or defence estates for the whole or any part of any one or more cantonments 
or Defence Estates. 
Clause 353.—This clause enables the Board to make bye-laws for various matters as 
provided in the clauses of this Bill. 
Clause 354.—This clause provides for a penalty to be charged for any breach of the 
bye-laws made by the Board under this Bill. 
134 
SERVER 1/BILL 2004/RS:\148RS\148RS1.P65 
Clause 355.—This clause provides certain supplementary provisions regarding making 
of bye-laws to be effective only after their publication in the Official Gazette on approval by 
the Central Government. 
Clause 356.—This clause provided for all the Rules and Bye-laws made under this Bill 
to be kept at the office of the Board and be available for inspection and purchase by any 
inhabitant of the cantonment. 
Clause 357.—This clause enables the Central Government to extend to any area beyond 
a cantonment, by notification in Official Gazette certain provisions of this Bill and Rules 
made thereunder. 
Clause 358.—This clause enables the Board, by a resolution passed in this behalf, to 
delegate certain functions to the President, Vice-President, Chief Executive Officer or Health 
Officer to delegate all or any of its functions to the Vice-President, Chief Executive Officer or 
Health Officer. 
Clause 359.—This clause provides for the application of certain provisions of the 
Transfer of Property Act, 1882 regarding transfer of property by registered instrument to 
every cantonment. 
Clause 360.—This clause provides for no notice, order, requisition, etc., issued under 
this Bill to be invalid merely by reason of any defect of form. 
Clause 361.—This clause provides for the admissibility of documents or entry as 
evidence in case the same is duly certified by the keeper of record or any person authorised 

 289
by the Chief Executive Officer. 
Clause 362.—This clause provides that no officer or employee of a Board shall, in any 
legal proceeding to which the Board is not party, be required to produce any register or 
document the contents of which can be proved under clause 361 by a certified copy, or to 
appear as a witness to prove any matter or transaction recorded therein save by order of the 
court made for special cause. 
Clause 363.—This clause provides that for the purpose of the Government Building 
Act, 1899, cantonment and Boards shall be deemed to be municipalities and municipal 
authorities respectively and the references to the State Government in section 4 of that Act 
shall be construed as references to Central Government. 
Clause 364.—This clause empowers the Central Government to remove difficulty by 
order published in the Official Gazette. 
Clause 365.—This clause repeals the Cantonment Act, 1924 and provides that all 
actions taken or re-taken under the said Act, as long as they do not contravene the provisions 
of this Bill, shall be construed to have been taken under this Bill. 
MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 
The Cantonments Bill, 2003 empowers the Central Government to make rules for the 
purposes of the Bill in clauses 31, 125, 305 and 351. 
Clause 31 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for — 
(a) the division of a cantonment into wards, 
(b) the determination of the number of members to be elected in each 
ward, 
(c) the preparation, revision and final publication of electoral rolls, 
(d) the reservation of wards for election of the Scheduled Castes, Scheduled 
Tribes and women, 
(e) the registration of electors, the nomination of candidates, the time and 
manner of holding elections and method by which votes shall be recorded, and 
(f) the authority, fees and the manner to decide election disputes. 
Clause 125 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules 
governing conditions on which property may be acquired by the Cantonment 
Board or property vested in Board may be transferred by sale, mortgage, lease, 
exchange or otherwise. 
This clause also empowers the Central Government to make rules for matter 
relating to the Cantonment Fund or the Cantonment Development Fund or Cantonment 
property. 
Clause 305 empowers the Central Government to make rules for classification of 
lands including the defence lands situated, inside or outside cantonment; regulation, 
control, management of such lands; and the manner in which and conditions subject 
to which any permission to occupy the defence lands be granted. 
Clause 351 of the Bill empowers the Central Government in general to make 
rules for carrying out the purposes and objects of the Act including— 
(a) the manner in which, and the authority to which, application for 
permission to occupy land belonging to the Government in a cantonment is to 
be made; 
(b) the authority by which such permission may be granted and the 
conditions to be annexed to the grant of any such permission; 
(c) the allotment to a Board of a share of the rents and profits accruing 
from property entrusted to its management under the provisions of clause 63; 
(d) the appointment, promotion, transfer, tenure of office, salaries and 
allowances, provident funds, pensions, gratuities, leave of absence, discipline 
and other condition of service of employees of Boards; 
(e) the circumstances in which security shall be demanded from 
employees of Boards and the amount and nature of such security; 
(f) the keeping of accounts by Boards and the manner in which, such 
accounts shall be audited and published; 
(g) the manner in which, money may be paid out of a cantonment fund or 

 290
cantonment development fund; 
135 
136 
SERVER 1/BILL 2004/RS:\148RS\148RS1.P65 
 
(h) the preparation of estimates of income and expenditure by Boards and 
the conditions subject to which such estimates may be sanctioned; 
(i) the regulation of the procedure of Committees of Arbitration; 
(j) the prescribing of registers, statements and forms to be used and 
maintained by any authority for the purposes of this Bill; 
(k) the grant of leave to the members of the Board; 
(l) the form of notice required to be sent under this Bill and the manner of 
their service; and 
(m) any other matter which is required to be, or may be prescribed. 
2. The Cantonments Bill also empowers the Cantonment Boards to make regulations 
and bye-laws in clauses 48, 204, 231, 251, 290 and 353. 
Clause 48 of the Bill empowers the Board to make regulations consistent with 
the Bill and rules made thereunder for time, place, manner for conduct of business 
during Board’s meeting and its sub committee’s meetings. 
Sub-clause (4) of clause 204 of the Bill empowers the Board to make 
regulations for the digging or use of bore wells in the cantonments. 
Sub-clauses (4) and (7) of clause 231 of the Bill empowers the Board to make 
bye-laws for guidance of licensed plumbers, to exercise adequate control on all 
licensed plumbers, inspection of all work carried out by them and hearing and disposal 
of complaints made by owners or occupiers with regard to quality of work, material 
used and delay in execution of work. 
Clause 251 of the Bill empowers the Board to make building bye-laws subject 
to provisions of the Bill. 
Clause 290 of the Bill empowers the Board to make bye-laws for registration and 
control of dogs. 
Clause 353 of the Bill empowers the Board, to make bye-laws, subject to the 
provisions of this Bill and the rules made thereunder by the Central Government, to 
provide for all or any of the following matters in the cantonment, namely :— 
(1) the registration of births, deaths and marriages, and the taking of a 
census; 
(2) the enforcement of compulsory vaccination and inoculation and levy 
of fees where such vaccination or innoculation is carried out at the houses of 
residents; 
(3) the regulation of the collection and recovery of taxes, tolls and fees 
under this Bill and the refund of taxes; 
(4) the regulation of any description of traffic in the streets and the 
enforcement of measures for the reduction of noise caused thereby or the 
prohibition of any description of such traffic. 
(5) the manner in which vehicles standing, driven, led or propelled in the 
streets between sunset and sunrise shall be lighted; 
(6) the seizure and confiscation of ownerless animals straying within 
the limits of the cantonments and regulation and control of cattle pounds; 
(7) the prevention and extinction of fire; 
(8) the construction of scaffolding for building operations to secure the 
safety of the general public and persons working thereon; 
137 
SERVER 1/BILL 2004/RS:\148RS\148RS1.P65
(9) the regulation in any manner provided for in this Bill of the construction, 
alteration, maintenance, preservation, cleaning and repairs of drains, ventilationshafts, 
pipes, water-closets, privies, latrines, urinals, cesspools and other drainage 
works; 
(10) the regulation or prohibition of the discharge into, or deposit in, 

 291
drains of sewage, polluted water and other offensive or obstructive matter; 
(11) the regulation or prohibition of the stabling or herding of animals, 
or of any class of animals, so as to prevent danger to public health; 
(12) the disposal of corpses, the regulation and management of burial 
and burning places and other places for the disposal of corpses, and the fees 
chargeable for the use of such places where the same are provided or maintained 
by Government or at the expense of the cantonment fund; 
(13) the permission, regulation or prohibition of the use or occupation 
of any street or place by itinerant vendors or by any person for the sale of 
articles or the exercise of any calling or the setting up of any booth or stall, 
and the fees chargeable for such use or occupation; 
(14) the regulation and control of encamping grounds, sarais, hotels, 
dak-bungalows, lodging-houses, boarding-houses, buildings let in tenements, 
residential clubs, restaurants, eating-houses, cafes, refreshment-rooms, guest 
houses, holiday resorts, cinemas and places of public recreation, entertainment 
or resorts; 
(15) the regulation of the ventilation, lighting, cleansing, drainage and 
water-supply of the buildings used for the manufacture or sale of aerated or 
other potable waters and of butter, milk, sweetmeats and other articles of food 
or drink for human consumption; 
(16) the matters regarding which conditions may be imposed by licences 
granted under clause 295 or clause 277; 
(17) the control and supervision of places where dangerous or offensive 
trades are carried on so as to secure cleanliness therein or to minimise any 
injurious, offensive or dangerous effects arising or likely to arise therefrom; 
(18) the regulation of the erection of any enclosure, fence, tent, awning 
or other temporary structure of whatsoever material or nature on any land 
situated within the cantonment and the fees chargeable in respect thereof; 
(19) the laying out of streets, and the regulation and prohibition of the 
erection of buildings without adequate provision being made for the laying out 
and location of streets; 
(20) the form of and the particulars which shall be contained in a 
development scheme or an improvement scheme and the manner in which such 
scheme shall be framed or altered and levy of development charges. 
(21) the regulation of the use of public parks and gardens and other public 
places, and the protection of avenues, trees, grass and other appurtenances of 
streets and other public places; 
(22) the regulation of the grazing of animals and the fees chargeable in 
respect thereof; 
(23) the fixing and regulation of the use of public bathing and washing 
places; 
(24) the regulation of the posting of bills and advertisement, and of the 
position, size, shape or style or name-boards, sign-boards and sign-posts; 
138 
SERVER 1/BILL 2004/RS:\148RS\148RS1.P65 
(25) the fixation of a method for the sale of articles whether by measure, 
weight, piece or any other method; 
(26) the rendering necessary of licences within the cantonment— 
(a) for persons working as job porters for the conveyance of goods; 
(b) for animals or vehicles let out on hire or used for hawking 
articles; 
(c) for the proprietors of drivers of vehicles, boats or other 
conveyances, or of animals kept or plying for hire or used for hawking 
articles; 
(d) for persons impelling or carrying such vehicles or other 
conveyances; or 

 292
(e) for persons practising as nurses, midwives or dais; 
(27) the prescribing of the fee payable for any licence required under 
clause (26), and of the conditions subject to which such licences may be 
granted, revised, suspended or withdrawn; 
(28) the regulation of the charges to be made for the services of such 
job porters and of the hire of such animals, vehicles or other conveyances, and 
for the remuneration of persons impelling or carrying such vehicles or 
conveyances as are referred to in clause (26); 
(29) the prescribing of fee payable for any licence except as otherwise 
specifically provided in the Bill, sanction or for any written permission granted 
by the Chief Executive Officer; 
(30) the regulation or prohibition, for purposes of sanitation or the 
prevention of disease or the promotion of public safety or convenience, of 
any act which occasions or is likely to occasion a nuisance, and for the 
regulation or prohibition of which no provision is made elsewhere by or 
under this Bill; 
(31) the circumstances and the manner in which owners of buildings or 
land in the cantonment, who are temporarily absent from, or are not resident 
in, the cantonment, may be required to appoint as their agents, for all or any of 
the purposes of this Bill or any rule or bye-law made thereunder, persons 
residing within or near the cantonment; 
(32) the prevention of the spread of infectious or contagious diseases 
within the cantonment; 
(33) the segregation in, or the removal and exclusion from, the 
cantonment, or the destruction, of animals suffering from or reasonably 
suspected to be suffering from any infectious or contagious disease; 
(34) the supervision, regulation, conservation and protection from injury, 
contamination or trespass of sources and means of public water-supply and of 
appliances for the distribution of water whether within or without the limits of 
the cantonment; 
(35) the manner in which connections with water-works may be 
constructed or maintained, and the agency which shall or may be employed for 
such construction and maintenance; 
(36) the regulation of all matters and things relating to the supply and 
use of water including the collection and recovery of charges thereof and the 
prevention of evasion of the same; 
139 
SERVER 1/BILL 2004/RS:\148RS\148RS1.P65 
(37) the maintenance of schools, and the furtherance of education 
generally; 
(38) the regulation of prohibition of the cutting or destruction of trees or 
shrubs, or of excavations, or of removal of soil or quarrying; where such regulation 
or prohibition appears to the Board to be not prejudicial to the maintenance of 
ecological balance and to be necessary for the maintenance of a water-supply, 
the preservation of the soil, the prevention of landslide or of the formation of 
ravines or torrents, or the protection of land against erosion, or against the 
deposit thereon of sand, gravel or stones; 
(39) the rendering necessary of licences for the use of premises within the 
cantonment as stables, kennels, sites or cow-houses or as accommodation for 
sheep, goats or fowls; 
(40) the control of the use in the cantonment of mechanical whistles, 
sirens or trumpets; 
(41) the regulation of supply of copies of official documents and 
prescribing the fee payable in respect thereof; 
(42) the regulation of permission for granting licence for use of loudspeakers 
and prescribing the fee payable in respect thereof; and 

 293
(43) generally for the regulation of the administration of the cantonment 
under this Bill. 
3. Sub-clause (1) of clause 364 of the Bill confers power upon the Central 
Government to make, by notification in the Official Gazette, such provisions not 
inconsistent with the provisions of the proposed legislation as may appear to be necessary 
for removing the difficulty of implementing the new law. However, no such order shall be 
made after the expiry of two years from the date of commencement of the proposed 
legislation. Every order made under this clause shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is 
made, before each House of Parliament. 
4. The matters in respect of which rules, regulations, bye-laws and notifications or 
orders may be made or issued are generally matters of procedure and administrative detail 
and it is not practicable to provide for them in the Bill itself. The delegation of legislative 
power is, therefore, of a normal character. 
RAJYA SABHA 
———— 
A 
BILL 
to consolidate and amend the law relating to the administration of cantonments with a 
view to impart greater democratisation, improvement of their financial base to make 
provisions for developmental activities, proper regulation, control and 
management of defence lands including extension of cantonment laws to 
such lands situated throughout the territory of India and for matters 
connected therewith or incidental thereto. 
———— 
(Shri Geo ge Fernandes, M nister o  Defence ) r i f
MGIPMRND—148RS—02.07.2004. 
THE CANTONMENTS BILL, 2003 
———— 
ARRANGEMENT OF CLAUSES 
———— 
CHAPTER I 
PRELIMINARY 
CLAUSES 
1. Short title, extent and Commencement. 
2. Definitions. 
CHAPTER II 
DEFINITION AND DELIMITATION OF CANTONMENTS 
3. Definition of cantonments. 
4. Alteration of limits of Cantonments. 
5. The effect of including area in cantonment. 
6. Disposal of cantonment fund when area ceases to be a cantonment. 
7. Disposal of cantonment fund when area ceases to be included in a cantonment. 
8. Application of funds and property transferred under sections 6 and 7. 
9. Limitations of operation of Act. 
CHAPTER III 
CANTONMENT BOARDS 
Boards 
10. Cantonment Board. 
11. Incorporation of Cantonment Board. 
12. Constitution of Cantonment Boards. 
13. Power to vary constitution of Boards in special circumstances. 
14. Term of office of members. 
15. Filling of vacancies. 
16. Vacancies in special cases. 
17. Oath or affirmation. 
18. Resignation. 

 294
19. President and Vice President. 
20. Term of office of Vice President. 
21. Duties of President. 
22. Duties of Vice President. 
23. Allowances to Vice President and Members. 
24. Appointment of Chief Executive Officer. 
25. Duties of Chief Executive Officer. 
26. Special power of Chief Executive Officer. 
REPRINT 
AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA ON 
THE 22ND DECEMBER, 2003 
(i) 
Bill No. LXXIII of 2003 
SERVER 1/BILL 2004/RS:\148RS\148RS1.P65 
r
Elections 
27. Electoral rolls. 
28. Qualification of electors. 
29. Qualification for being a member of the Board. 
30. Interpretation. 
31. Power to make rules regulating elections. 
Members 
32. Members not to vote on matter in which he is interested. 
33. Liability of members. 
34. Removal of members. 
35. Consequences of removal. 
36. Member of the Board to be deemed a public servant. 
Employees 
37. Disqualification of person as an employee of Board. 
38. Cantonment employee to be deemed a public servant. 
Procedure 
39. Meetings. 
40. Business to be transacted. 
41. Quorum. 
42. Presiding Officer. 
43. Minutes. 
44. Meetings to be public. 
45. Method of deciding questions. 
46. Civil Area. 
47. Committees for civil areas. 
48. Power to make regulations. 
49. Joint action with other local authority. 
50. Report on administration. 
Cont ol 
51. Power of Central Government to require production of documents. 
52. Inspection. 
53. Power to call for documents. 
54. Power to require execution of work, etc. 
55. Power to provide for enforcement of direction under section 54. 
56. Power to override decision of Board. 
57. Power of Central Government to review. 
58. Power of General Officer Commanding-in-Chief, the Command, on reference 
under section 56 or otherwise. 
59. Power of Central Government on a reference made under section 56. 
60. Supersession of Board. 
CLAUSES 
(ii) 

 295
SERVER 1/BILL 2004/RS:\148RS\148RS1.P65 
s f
r rt
t r
Validity of proceedings 
61. Validity of proceedings, etc. 
CHAPTER IV 
DUTIES AND DISCRETIONARY FUNCTIONS OF BOARDS 
62. Duties of Board. 
63. Power to manage property. 
64. Discretionary functions of Board. 
65. Power of expenditure for educational, health and other purposes outside the 
cantonment. 
CHAPTER V 
TAXES AND FEES 
Impo ition o  Taxation 
66. General power of taxation. 
67. Charging of fees. 
68. Norms of Property Tax. 
69. Framing of preliminary proposals. 
70. Objections and disposal thereof. 
71. Imposition of tax. 
72. Power of Central Government to issue directions to the Board. 
73. Definition of “annual rateable value”. 
74. Incidence of taxation. 
Assessment list 
75. Assessment list. 
76. Revision of assessment list. 
77. Authentication of assessment list. 
78. Evidential value of assessment list. 
79. Amendment of assessment list. 
80. Preparation of new assessment list. 
81. Notice of transfers. 
82. Notice of erection of buildings. 
Remission and refund 
83. Demolition, etc., of buildings. 
84. Remission of tax. 
85. Power to require entry in assessment list of details of buildings. 
86. Notice to be given of the circumstances in which remission or refund is claimed. 
87. What buildings, etc., are to be deemed vacant. 
88. Notice to be given of every occupation of vacant building or house. 
CLAUSES 
(iii) 
Charge on immovable p ope y 
89. Tax on buildings and land to be a charge thereon. 
Octroi, terminal tax and toll 
90. Inspection of imported goods, octroi, terminal tax and toll, etc. 
91. Power to seize, etc. 
92. Lease of octroi, terminal tax or toll. 
Appeals 
93. Appeals against assessment. 
94. Costs of appeal. 
95. Recovery of costs from Board. 
96. Conditions of right to appeal. 
97. Finality of appellate orders. 
Paymen  and recove y of taxes 
98. Time and manner of payment of taxes. 
99. Public notice for taxes due. 
100. Notice of demand. 

 296
101. Recovery of tax. 
102. Interest payable on taxes due. 
103. Distress. 
104. Disposal of distrained property. 
105. Attachment and sale of immovable property. 
106. Recovery from a person about to leave cantonment. 
107. Power to institute suit for recovery. 
Special p ovisions relating to taxation, etc. r
r
r
r t
108. Every Board to be a municipality for certain purposes. 
109. Payment to be made to a Board as service charges by Central Government or State 
Government. 
110. Power to make special provision for conservancy in certain cases. 
111. Exemption in case of buildings. 
112. General power of exemption. 
113. Exemption of poor persons. 
114. Composition. 
115. Irrecoverable debts. 
116. Obligation to disclose liability. 
117. Immaterial error not to affect liability. 
118. Distraint not to be invalid by reason of immaterial defect. 
CHAPTER VI 
CANTONMENT FUND AND PROPERTY 
Cantonment Fund and Cantonment Development Fund 
119. Cantonment fund. 
120. Custody of Cantonment Fund and Cantonment Development Fund. 
121. Power of Board to borrow money. 
CLAUSES 
(iv) 
Prope ty 
122. Property. 
123. Application of cantonment fund, cantonment development fund and property. 
124. Acquisition of immovable property. 
125. Power to make rules regarding cantonment fund, cantonment development fund 
and property. 
CHAPTER VII 
CONTRACTS 
126. Contracts by whom to be executed. 
127. Sanction. 
128. Execution of contract. 
129. Contracts improperly executed not to be binding on a Board. 
CHAPTER VIII 
SANITATION AND THE PREVENTION AND TREATMENT OF DISEASE 
Sanitary autho ities 
130. Responsibility for sanitation. 
131. General duties of Health Officer. 
Conse vancy and Sani ation 
132. Public latrines, urinals and conservancy establishments. 
133. Duty of occupier to collect and deposit rubbish, etc. 
134. Power of Board to undertake private conservancy arrangement. 
135. Deposits and disposal of rubbish, etc. 
136. Cesspools, receptacles, for filth, etc. 
137. Filling up of tank, etc. 
138. Provision of latrines, etc. 
139. Sanitation in factories, etc. 
140. Private latrines. 
141. Special provisions for collection of rubbish and solid waste management. 

 297
142. Removal of congested buildings. 
143. Overcrowding of dwelling houses. 
144. Power to require repair or alteration of building. 
145. Power to require land or building to be cleansed. 
146. Prohibition in respect of air pollutant. 
147. Power to order disuse of house. 
148. Removal of noxious vegetation. 
149. Agriculture and irrigation. 
Burial and bu ning grounds r
f
i
r f r
s
150. Power to call for information regarding burial and burning grounds. 
151. Permission for use of new burial or burning ground. 
152. Power to require closing of burial or burning ground. 
153. Exemption from operation of sections 150 to 152. 
154. Removal of corpses. 
CLAUSES 
(v) 
Prevention o  infectious, contagious or communicable diseases 
155. Obligation concerning infectious contagious or communicable diseases. 
156. Blood Bank. 
157. Special measures in case of outbreak of infectious or epidemic diseases. 
158. Power to require names of dairyman’s customers. 
159. Power to require names of a washerman’s customers. 
160. Power to require names of patients or customers of a medical practitioner or 
paramedical workers. 
161. Report after inspection of Dairy or Washerman or medical practitioner’s place of 
business. 
162. Action on report submitted by Health Officer. 
163. Examination of milk, washed clothes or needles, syringes, etc. 
164. Contamination of public conveyance. 
165. Disinfection of public conveyance. 
166. Penalty for failure to report. 
167. Driver of conveyance not bound to carry person suffering from infectious or 
contagious disease. 
168. Disinfection of buildings or articles therein. 
169. Destruction of infectious hut or shed 
170. Temporary shelter for inmates of disinfected or destroyed building or shed. 
171. Disinfection of building before letting the same. 
172. Disposal of infected article without disinfection. 
173. Means of disinfection. 
174. Making or selling of food, etc., or washing clothes by infected person. 
175. Power to restrict or prohibit sale of food or drink. 
176. Control over wells, tanks, etc. 
177. Disposal of infectious corpse. 
Hospitals and d spensaries 
178. Maintenance or aiding of hospitals or dispensaries. 
179. Medical supplies, appliances, etc. 
180. Free patients. 
181. Paying patients. 
182. Power to order person to attend hospital or dispensary. 
183. Power to exclude from cantonment persons refusing to attend hospital or 
dispensary. 
Cont ol of traf ic for hygienic pu poses 
184. Routes for pilgrims and others. 
Special condition  regarding essential services 
185. Conditions of service of Safaikaramcharis and others. 
CLAUSES 

 298
(vi) 
CHAPTER IX 
WATER-SUPPLY, DRAINAGE AND SEWAGE COLLECTION 
Water Supply 
186. Maintenance of water-supply. 
187. Terms of Water-Supply. 
188. Board to carry out survey and formulate proposals. 
189. Control over sources of public water-supply. 
190. Power to require maintenance or closing of private source of public drinking 
water-supply. 
191. Supply of water. 
192. Power to require water-supply to be taken. 
193. Supply of water under agreement. 
194. Board not liable for failure of supply. 
195. Conditions of universal application. 
196. Supply to persons outside cantonment. 
197. Penalty. 
Water, d ainage and other connect ons r i
198. Power of Board to lay wires, connections, etc. 
199. Wires, etc., laid above surface of ground. 
200. Connection with main not to be made without permission. 
201. Power to prescribe ferrules and to establish meters, etc. 
202. Power of inspection. 
203. Power to fix rates and charges. 
Application of this Chapter to Government water supplies 
204. Government water-supply. 
205. Water supply for domestic consumption. 
206. Recovery of charges. 
207. Supply of water from Government water-supply to the Board. 
208. Functions of the Board in relation to distribution of bulk supply. 
209. Special provisions concerning drainage and sewage. 
210. Construction of and Control of drains and sewage collection and disposal works. 
211. Certain matters not to be passed into cantonment drains. 
212. Application by owners and occupiers to drain into cantonment drains. 
213. Drainage of undrained premises. 
214. New premises not to be erected without drains. 
215. Power to drain group or block of premises by combined operations. 
216. Power to close or limit the use of private drains in certain cases. 
217. Use of drain by a person other than the owner. 
218. Sewage and rain water drains to be distinct. 
219. Power to require owner to carry out certain works for satisfactory drainage. 
220. Appointment of places for the emptying of drains and collection of sewage. 
CLAUSES 
(vii) 
Miscellaneous 
221. Connection with water works and drains not to be made without permission. 
222. Buildings, railways and private streets not to be erected or constructed over 
drains or water works without permission. 
223. Rights of user of property for aqueducts, lines, etc. 
224. Power of owner of premises to place pipes and drains through land belonging to 
other persons. 
225. Power to require railway level, etc. to be raised or lowered. 
226. Power to execute work after giving notice to the person liable. 
227. Power to affix shafts, etc., for ventilation of drain or cesspool. 
228. Power to examine and test drains, etc., believed to be defective. 
229. Bulk delivery of sewage by the Board. 

 299
230. Employment of Government agencies for repair, etc. 
231. Work to be done by licensed plumber. 
232. Prohibition of certain acts. 
CHAPTER X 
TOWN PLANNING AND CONTROL OVER BUILDINGS, ETC. 
233. Preparation of land use plan. 
234. Sanction for building. 
235. Notice of new buildings. 
236. Conditions of valid notice 
237. Powers of Board under certain sections exercisable by Chief Executive Officer. 
238. Power of Board to sanction or refuse. 
239. Order of stoppage of building or works in certain cases and disposal of things 
removed. 
240. Power to sanction general scheme for prevention of overcrowding, etc. 
241. Compensation. 
242. Completion notice. 
243. Lapse of sanction. 
244. Restrictions on use of buildings. 
245. Period for completion of building. 
246. Completion Certificate. 
247. Illegal erection and re-erection. 
248. Power to stop erection or re-erection or to demolish. 
249. Power to seal unauthorised constructions. 
250. Courts not to entertain proceedings in certain cases. 
251. Power to make bye-laws. 
252. Prohibition of structures or fixtures which cause obstruction in streets. 
253. Unauthorised buildings over drains, etc. 
254. Drainage and sewer connections. 
255. Power to attach brackets for lamps and other accessories. 
256. Maintenance of Roads. 
CLAUSES 
(viii) 
Streets 
257. Temporary occupation of street, land, etc. 
258. Closing and opening of streets. 
259. Names of streets and numbers of buildings. 
260. Group Housing Schemes 
261. Boundary walls, hedges and fences. 
262. Felling, lopping and trimming of trees. 
263. Digging of public land. 
264. Improper use of land. 
CHAPTER XI 
MARKETS, SLAUGHTER-HOUSES, TRADES AND OCCUPATIONS 
265. Public markets and slaughter-houses. 
266. Use of public market. 
267. Power to transfer by public auction, etc. 
268. Stallages, rents, etc., to be published. 
269. Private markets and slaughter-houses. 
270. Conditions of grant of licence for private market or slaughter-house. 
271. Penalty for keeping market or slaughter-house open without licence, etc. 
272. Penalty for using unlicensed market or slaughter-house. 
273. Prohibition and restriction of use of slaughter-house. 
274. Power to inspect slaughter-houses. 
275. Power to regulate certain activities. 
T ades and occupation  r s
276. Provision of washing places. 

 300
277. Licences required for carrying on of certain occupations. 
278. Power to stop use of premises used in contravention of licenses. 
279. Conditions which may be attached to licences. 
General provisions 
280. Power to vary licence. 
281. Carrying on trade, etc., without licence or in contravention of section 280. 
282. Feeding animals on dirt, etc. 
Entry, inspection and seizu e r
283. Powers of entry and seizure. 
Import of cattle and flesh. 
284. Import of cattle and flesh. 
CLAUSES 
(ix) 
CHAPTER XII 
SPIRITUOUS LIQUORS AND INTOXICATING DRUGS 
285. Unauthorised sale of spirituous liquor or intoxicating drug. 
286. Unauthorised possession of spirituous liquor. 
287. Arrest of persons and seizure and confiscation of things for offences against the 
two last foregoing sections. 
288. Saving of articles sold or supplied for medicinal purposes. 
CHAPTER XIII 
PUBLIC SAFETY AND SUPPRESSION OF NUISANCES 
General Nuisances 
289. Penalty for causing nuisances 
Dogs 
290. Registration and control of dogs 
Traffic 
291. Traffic Rule of the road. 
Prevention of fire, etc. 
292. Use of inflammable materials for building purposes. 
293. Stacking or collecting inflammable materials. 
294. Care of naked lights. 
295. Regulation of cinematographic and dramatic performance. 
296. Discharging fire-works, fire-arms, etc. 
297. Power to require buildings, wells, etc., to be rendered safe. 
298. Enclosure of wasteland used for improper purposes. 
CHAPTER XIV 
REMOVAL AND EXCLUSION FROM CANTONMENT AND SUPPRESSION OF SEXUAL IMMORALITY 
299. Power to remove Brothels and Prostitutes. 
300. Penalty for loitering and importuning for purposes of prostitution. 
301. Removal of persons from cantonment. 
302. Removal and exclusion from cantonment of disorderly persons. 
303. Removal and exclusion from cantonment of seditious persons. 
304. Penalty. 
CHAPTER XV 
MANAGEMENT OF DEFENCE LANDS 
305. Management of Defence Lands. 
306. Application of Act to Defence Lands. 
307. Vesting of land in a Board. 
308. Role of Defence Estates Officer and local Military Authorities. 
309. Land audit. 
CLAUSES 
(x) 
CHAPTER XVI 
POWERS, PROCEDURES, PENALTIES AND APPEALS 
Entry and inspection 

 301
310. Power of entry 
311. Power of inspection by Member of a Board 
312. Power of inspection, etc. 
313. Power to enter land adjoining land where work is in progress. 
314. Breaking into premises 
315. Entry to be made in the day time. 
316. Owners consent ordinarily to be obtained. 
317. Regard to be had to social and religious usages. 
318. Penalty for obstruction. 
Powers and duties of Police Officers 
319. Arrest without warrant. 
320. Duties of Police Officers. 
Notices 
321. Notices to fix reasonable time. 
322. Authentication and validity of notices issued by Board. 
323. Service of notice, etc. 
324. Method of giving notice. 
325. Powers of Board in case of non-compliance with notice, etc. 
326. Occupier not to obstruct owner when complying with notice. 
Recovery o  Money f
f r
s
327. Liability of occupier to pay in default of owner. 
328. Relief to Agents and Trustees. 
329. Method of recovery. 
Committees o  A bitration 
330. Application for a Committee of Arbitration. 
331. Procedure for convening Committee of Arbitration. 
332. Constitution of the Committee of Arbitration. 
333. No person to be nominated who has direct interest or whose services are not 
immediately available. 
334. Meetings and powers of Committee of Arbitration. 
335. Decisions of Committee of Arbitration. 
Prosecutions 
336. Prosecutions. 
337. Composition of offence. 
General Penality Provision  
338. General penality. 
339. Offences by companies. 
340. Cancellation or suspension of licenses, etc. 
341. Recovery of amount payable in respect of damage to cantonment property. 
CLAUSES 
(xi) 
Limitation 
342. Limitation for prosecution. 
Suits 
343. Protection of Action of the Board etc. 
344. Notice to be given of suits. 
Appeals and Revision 
345. Appeals from executive orders. 
346. Petition of Appeal. 
347. Suspension of Action Pending Appeal. 
348. Revision. 
349. Finality of the Appellate Orders. 
350. Right of appellant to be heard. 
CHAPTER XVII 
RULES AND BYE-LAWS 
351. Power to make rules. 

 302
352. Supplemental provisions respecting rules. 
353. Power to make bye-laws. 
354. Penalty for breach of bye-laws. 
355. Supplemental provisions regarding bye-laws and regulations. 
356. Rules and bye-laws to be available for inspection and purchase. 
CHAPTER XVIII 
SUPPLEMENTAL PROVISIONS 
357. Extension of certain provisions of the Act and rules to place beyond cantonments. 
358. Power to delegate functions to the President, etc. 
359. Registration. 
360. Validity of notices and other documents. 
361. Admissibility of documents or entry as evidence. 
362. Evidence by officer or employee of the Board. 
363. Application of Act 4 of 1899. 
364. Power to remove difficulties. 
365. Repeal and savings. 
SCHEDULE I. 
SCHEDULE II. 
SCHEDULE III. 
SCHEDULE IV. 
SCHEDULE V. 
CLAUSES 
(xii) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
     

 303
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 