4
STANDING COMMITTEE
ON DEFENCE
(2004-05)
FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA
MINISTRY OF DEFENCE
[Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations contained in
the 20th Report of the Committee (Thirteenth Lok Sabha) on
‘Welfare of Servicemen and Ex-Servicemen’]
FOURTH REPORT
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
April, 2005/Vaisakha, 1927 (Saka)


LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
April, 2005/Vaisakha, 1927 (Saka)
FOURTH REPORT
STANDING COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE
(2004-05)
(FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA)
MINISTRY OF DEFENCE
[Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations contained in
the 20th Report of the Committee (Thirteenth Lok Sabha) on
‘Welfare of Servicemen and Ex-Servicemen’]
Presented to Lok Sabha on 26.4.2005
Laid  in  Rajya Sabha  on 26.4.2005


C.O.D. No. 65
Price : Rs. 40.00
© 2005 BY LOK S ABHA S ECRETARIAT
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of
Business in Lok Sabha (Eleventh Edition) and Printed by Jainco Art India,
New Delhi-110 005.

CONTENTS
PAGES
COMPOSITION OF THE C OMMITTEE (2004-05) ............................................ (iii)
INTRODUCTION .............................................................................................. (v)
CHAPTER I Report ............................................................................. 1
CHAPTER II Recommendations/Observations which have been
accepted by the Government ................................... 28
CHAPTER III Recommendations/Observations which the
Committee do not desire to pursue in view
of Government‘s replies ............................................. 48
C
HAPTER IV Recommendations/Observations in respect of
which replies of Government have not been
accepted by the Committee ...................................... 55
C
HAPTER V Recommendations/Observations in respect of
which final replies of Government are still
awaited ........................................................................... 68
Minutes of the Sitting ............................................................................ 73
Annexures .................................................................................................. 82
A
PPENDIX
Analysis  of  Action   Taken  by  Government  on  the
Recommendations contained in the  Twentieth  Report  of
the Standing Committee on Defence (Thirteenth Lok Sabha)
on ‘Welfare of Servicemen and Ex-Servicemen’....................... 92

COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE
ON DEFENCE (2004-05)
Shri Balasaheb Vikhe Patil— Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Churchill Alemao
3. Shri Iliyas Azmi
4. Shri A.V . Bellarmin
5. Shri Suresh Chandel
6. Shri Thupstan Chhewang
7. Smt. Sangeeta Kumari Singh Deo
8. Shri Milind Deora
9. Shri Bhupinder Singh Hooda
10. Shri Ramesh Jigajinagi
11. Shri Suresh Kalmadi
12. Dr. C. Krishnan
13. Ms. Ingrid Mcleod
14. Shri S.D. Mandlik
15. Dr. K.S. Manoj
16. Shri Raghuraj Singh Shakya
17. Shri Mahadeorao Shivankar
18. Shri Ganesh Prasad Singh
19. Shri Manvendra Singh
20. Shri Balashowry Vallabhaneni
21. Shri Dharmendra Yadav
Rajya Sabha
22. Shri R.K. Anand
23. Dr. Farooq Abdullah
24. Gen. (Retd.) Shankar Roy Chowdhury
(iii)

(iv)
25. Shri T.T.V . Dhinakaran
26. Smt. N.P . Durga
27. Shri Janardan Dwivedi
28. Shri Pramod Mahajan
29. Shri Mukhtar Abbas Naqvi
30. Shri Anand Sharma
31. Shri Lalit Suri
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri P .D.T. Achary — Secretary
2. Shri M. Rajagopalan Nair — Additional Secretary
3. Shri P .K. Bhandari — Director
4. Smt. Anita Jain — Deputy Secretary
5. Shri D.R. Shekhar — Under Secretary
6. Shri Nilendu Kumar — Senior Executive Assistant

(v)
INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairman, Standing Committee on Defence (2004-05) having
been authorised by the Committee to submit the Report on their behalf,
present this Fourth Report on Action Taken by the Government on the
recommendations contained in the Twentieth Report of the Committee
(Thirteenth Lok Sabha) on the ‘Welfare of Servicemen and
Ex-Servicemen’.
2. The Twentieth Report was presented to Lok Sabha and laid on
the Table of Rajya Sabha on 19 August, 2003. The Government
furnished their replies indicating action taken on the recommendations
contained in the Report on 31 August, 2004 and 19 November, 2004.
To have further clarification on the action taken replies, the Sub-
Committee of Standing Committee on Defence on Action Taken Reports
took evidence of representatives of Ministries of Defence, Finance &
Law & Justice (Department of Legal Affairs) on 13 January, 2005. The
full Committee, then took further evidence of representatives of
Directorate General, Resettlement (Ministry of Defence), Deptt. Of
Personnel, Public Grievances & Pension. Deptt. Of Economic Affairs &
Deptt. of Expenditure (Ministry of Finance), Deptt. of Legal Affairs
(Ministry of Law & Justice) on 15 February, 2005. The Committee found
that the DG (Resettlement) was very indifferent to the issues of ex-
servicemen, particularly on (1) Reservation for wards of ex-servicemen
(2) Training for ex-servicemen (3) Re-employment in Defence PSUs/
Ordnance Factories and other Defence Establishments.
3. The Committee wish to express their thanks to officers of above
mentioned Deptts./Ministries for appearing before the Committee for
evidence and for furnishing information desired in connection with
examination of Action Taken Replies.
4. An analysis of action taken by the Government on
recommendations contained in the Twentieth Report of the Standing
Committee on Defence (Thirteenth Lok Sabha) is given in Appendix.
5. For facility of reference and convenience, the observations/
recommendations of the Committee have been printed in thick in the
body of the Reports.
N
EW D ELHI; BALASAHEB VIKHE PATIL,
21 April, 2005 Chairman,
1 Vaisakha, 1927 (Saka) Standing Committee on Defence.

CHAPTER I
REPORT
The Report of the Standing Committee on Defence deals with action
taken by the Government on the recommendations/observations
contained in their Twentieth Report (Thirteenth Lok Sabha) on the
‘Welfare of Servicemen and Ex-Servicemen’ which was presented to
Lok Sabha and laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha on 19 August, 2003.
2. In the Twentieth Report (Thirteenth Lok Sabha), the Committee
had made 52 observations/recommendations on the following subjects:
Sl.No. Para No. Subject
 1. 5.6 and 7 Restructuring of officers’ cadre
 2. 10 and 11 Insurance Benefits to Servicemen
 3. 14 and 15 Reservation System for the wards of Servicemen
 4. 21 to 25 Grant of Leave to and Redressal of Grievances
of the Servicemen
 5. 37 to 40 Resettlement and Welfare of Ex-Servicemen
 6. 53 to 58 Re-employment in Government Jobs
 7. 63 to 66 Self-employment
 8. 74 to 76 Other Welfare Schemes
 9. 82 and 83 Conditions of War Widows
10. 97 to 102 Pensionary Benefits admissible to the Armed
Forces Personnel and their families
11.1 14 and 115 Disability Pension
12. 122 and 123 Family Pensions
13. 128 Welfare Associations
14. 142 to 151 Medical Facilities to Servicemen and
Ex-Servicemen

2
3. Action Taken Notes have been received from the Government
in respect of all the recommendations/observations contained in the
Report. The Sub-Committee of the Standing Committee on Defence on
Action Taken Reports took oral evidence of representatives of Ministry
of Defence, Finance and Law, Justice & Legal Affairs on 13 January,
2005 for clarification of certain points in Action Taken Replies of the
Government. Then the full Committee took evidence of the
representatives of Directorate General, Resettlement (Ministry of
Defence), Department of Personnel & Training (Ministry of Personnel,
Public Grievances and Pensions), Department of Economic Affairs and
Department of Expenditure (Ministry of Finance), Department of Legal
Affairs (Ministry of Law & Justice) on 15th February, 2005 to have
further clarifications on the reservation and resettlement issues of
Ex-Servicemen. Action taken Notes have been categorised as follows:
(i) Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted
by Government:
Para Nos. 37, 40, 53, 54, 58, 63, 64, 66, 74, 75, 82, 83, 128,
142 to 147
(ii) Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do
not desire to pursue in view of Government’s replies:
Para Nos. 10, 11, 55, 76, 97, 98, 114, 115, 148 to 151
(iii) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies
of Government have not been accepted by the Committee:
Para Nos. 7, 14, 15, 21, 22, 23, 38, 39, 57, 99 to 102
(iv) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which final
replies of Government are still awaited:
Para Nos. 5, 6, 24, 25, 56, 65, 122, 123
4. The Committee will now deal with the action taken by the
Government on some of their recommendations as contained in
Chapter-I of this Report.
WELFARE OF SERVICEMEN
Restructuring of Officers Cadre
Recommendation (Para Nos. 5, 6)
5. The Committee appreciated the need for a youthful profile of
defence forces at the junior and middle levels as they were closely
involved in direct combat but felt that non-upgradation of ranks, lack

3
of adequate promotional avenues and the consequent problems of
enlarged base with fewer posts at the top causing constricted career
progression had thus resulted in an undesirable situation of not so
young commanding officers. The Committee felt that this had inevitably
led to decline in interest and motivation among youth/new entrants
towards Defence services.
6. The Committee, therefore, recommended that the short-term as
well as long-term measures as suggested by the A.V . Singh Committee
constituted for the re-structuring of officers’ cadre should be examined
expeditiously. The Committee desired the Ministry to take steps, in
consultation with the Department of Personnel and Training and other
departments, to explore transfer/deputation/lateral induction of defence
personnel to other non-Defence Departments/Ministries as in the case
of civilian officers being transferred/deputed to Defence Departments.
7. The Ministry of Defence (MoD) has, in their action taken reply,
stated that the Report of AV Singh Committee on service related aspects
like release of vacancies of the rank of Colonel, making the Short
Service Commission more attractive and making available focused study
programmes and opportunities to middle level officers to assist them
in securing suitable careers outside service as (a) Additional deputation
vacancies and lateral absorption (b) Detailing of officers on Multi-
disciplinary courses/studies (c) self improvement programme (d)
Industrial attachment and (e) Entrance in Civil Services. Examination
by relaxation of suitable age and course paper, have been accepted in
principle. Concrete proposals in this regard are being worked out by
Army HQrs., where required, for taking up with other Departments.
8. As for other recommendations relating to (i) upgradation of
various ranks (ii) Time based promotion to Lieutenant Colonel rank
(iii) Reduction in service for substantive promotions to the ranks of
Captain and Major and (iv) Introduction of Colonel (Time Scale),
detailed statements of case in respect of these recommendations are
being prepared in consultation with Army HQrs.
9. in regard to status of implementation of AV Singh Committee’s
report, the Ministry has further stated in their written note:
“... recommendation relating to time based promotion to non-select
ranks and upgradation of 750 posts of Lieutenant Colonels to
Colonels in a phased manner with 400 posts to stand upgraded in
the first year i.e. 2004 and 350 posts to be upgraded in the second
year i.e. 2005, has been undertaken.............”

4
10. The Ministry has further informed that recommendations of
the A.V . Singh Committee relating to making Short Service Commission
cadre more attractive. Additional deputational vacancies and lateral
absorption, detailiting of officers on multi-disciplinary course studies
etc. have been taken up with the concerned Departments/Ministries
for consideration.
Comments of the Committee
11. The Committee are pleased to note that the Ministry has
initiated concerted efforts on a positive note to implement the
recommendations of the A.V . Singh Committee and in line with this
time-based promotion to non-select ranks and upgradation of 750 of
Lieutenant Colonels to Colonels has already been brought into effect.
The Committee feel that there is a need to provide better scales
and other facilities to servicemen so that the best talent can be
attracted to join the three services. Similarly, their retiremnet benefit
should also be reviewed to take care of their post-retirement needs.
12. The Committee, however, desire to be apprised of the
stipulated time-frame within which the Ministry would come out
with concrete plans to implement other recommendations of the A.V .
Singh Committee. The Committee feel that though there is a need
to introduce additional promotional avenues at the middle and higher
levels, yet the opening up of such avenues should not be at the cost
of curtailing the posts at the induction level i.e. the posts of
Lieutenants/Captains which form the core of our fighting forces.
RESERV ATION SYSTEM FOR THE WARDS OF SERVICEMEN
Recommendation (Para Nos. 14 and 15)
12a. The Committee noted that the benefits of reservation in
professional institutions had practically not reached the wards/
dependents of serving Defence personnel and that of Ex-Servicemen if
they were not in the list of gallantry award winners for the reason
that as per the criteria fixed by the Kendriya Sainik Board for allotment
of reserved seats the requests for admissions received from them were
put on the last priority. The Committee were also surprised to note
that many of the State Governments had not still made any provision
of reservation for wards/dependents of the Defence personnel.

5
13. The Committee, therefore, recommended that the Ministry
should at once take up with such State Governments to make suitable
provisions for reservation of seats in professional institutions for the
wards of the Defence personnel. The Committee would also asked the
Ministry to thoroughly review the existing levels of reservations and
explore the possibilities of increasing the same.
14. The Ministry of Defence (MoD) has, in their action taken reply,
stated that the Ministry of Defence have recommended the following
order of preference to give the benefits of reservation in professional
institutions:
(i) Widows/wards of Defence personnel killed in action;
(ii) Wards of serving personnel and Ex-Servicemen disabled in
action;
(iii) W idow/Wards of Defense perennial who died while in
service with death attribute to military service;
(iv) Wards of Defence personnel disabled in peace time with
disability attributable to military service;
(v) Wards of Ex-servicemen personnel and serving personnel in
receipt of Gallantry awards;
(vi) Wards of Ex-Servicemen; and
(vii) Wards of serving personnel.
Since the number of vacancies available as per current reservation
is limited, the benefit of reservation does not reach the categories
mentioned to wards the end of the preference list. Certain institutions
do not provide reservation under Defence quota as per the
recommended order of preference. As a result the benefit of reservation
is not availabel to wards/dependents of serving defence personnel
and Ex-Servicemen.
Ministry of Defence have been insisting on increasing the
reservation quota available under Defence category and, in pursuance
of this, Ministry of Human Resource Development were requested on
7th November 2000 and 29th August 2003 to instruct all Central
Universities, Autonomous bodies, professional and non-professional
institutes including IITs and IIMs to consider providing 5% reservation
to the wards of Defence personnel and Ex-serviceman and the seats

6
reserved for them should be allotted strictly in accordance with the
priorities of 7 categories of defence personnel. Letters addressed to
Ministry of Human Resource Development are annexed as
Annexures I and II .
Some of the State Governments at their level also provide
reservation in various streams in professional institutes for the wards/
dependents of defence personnel. State-wise percentage of reservation
for dependents of ESM in professional colleges in given in
Annexure III .
The subject matter has also been discussed with the State
Government officials in the KSB meetings held from time to time.
15. The Ministry of Defence (MoD) has further stated that the
State Governments were requested to make suitable provisions for
reservation of seats in professional institutions for the wards of Defence
personnel vide MoD letter dated 3rd June 1994. MoD have also
requested HRD Ministry on 17th November 2000 and 29th August
2003 to instruct the State autonomous bodies, professional and non-
professional institutes including IITs and IIMs to make suitable
provisions for reservation of seats in professional institutions for the
wards of Defence personnel.
16. In a subsequent written note to the Committee regarding follow
up action taken with Ministry of HRD, the Ministry stated:
“In response to the letters addressed by the Ministry of Defence,
HRD Ministry had taken up the matter with educational
institutions. Some institutions have made provisions for reservation
of seats for the wards of Defence personnel and ex-servicemen.
Available reservation for dependents of Ex-servicemen in
professional colleges in States is given in the statement enclosed
(Annexure-IV).”
17. During the oral evidence, the representatives of the Ministry in
this connection informed the Committee that the Army is taking some
steps by setting up their own professional colleges which are meant
only for the wards of Ex-Servicemen and serving people. The
professional colleges that are being set up are almost across the entire
spectrum of professional education like medical, dental, nursing,
engineering, management, computer application, law, hotel
management, fashion technology etc.

7
Comments of the Committee
18. The Committee welcome the move of the Government to set
up professional institutions meant only for wards of Ex-Servicemen
and serving Defence personnel. The Committee hope this would, to
some extent, meet the requirements of Defence personnel. However,
in view of large number of Ex-Servicemen and serving personnel
there will still be a need for increase in reservation quota in various
professional institutions so that the benefits of reservation reach
towards last priorities in the order of preference. Since education is
a concurrent subject, the Committee, therefore, recommend that
Government of India should issue specific directions to the State
Governments and Central Universities and institutions to provide
necessary reservations for the wards of Ex-Servicemen.
GRANT OF LEAVE TO AND REDRESSAL OF GRIEVANCES OF THE
SERVICEMEN
Recommendation (Para No. 21 to 23)
19. The Committee had been informed that there was liberal
treatment with the serving Defence personnel as compared to civilian
employees so far as the types and days of leave available to them
were concerned. The Committee felt that this was rather desirable
despite the depletion in available strength and other implications in
sanctioning the leave, keeping in view the strenuous environment and
stressful conditions under which they performed their duties.
20. The Committee noted that a provision of annual leave of only
30 days had been made for Recruit Boys whereas Officers and JCOs
availed 60 days of leave in a year and Furlough leave was available
only for Officers. The Committee also noted that on the one hand
practical difficulties were being faced in sanctioning of leave due to
exigencies of deployment of troops, leading to accumulation of leave,
on the other hand, the personnel were being denied benefit of
encashment due to ceiling of 300 days on accumulated leave.
21. The Committee, therefore, recommended that suitable measures
should be taken to minimise the difficulties being faced by the Defence
personnel in getting their leave sanctioned. At the same time, the
discrepancies in kinds of leave provisioned for Officers, JCOs and
Recruit Boys should be rectified. The Committee further recommended
that the ceilling of 300 days for leave encashment should be removed
as part of compensatory measure so as to encourage service personnel

8
to encash the accumulated leave to maintain availability of sufficient
manpower for deployment.
22. The Ministry of Defence (MoD) has, in their action taken reply,
stated that the leave is normally sanctioned unless operational
commitments demand otherwise, in which case personnel are allowed
to carry forward their leave to subsequent years as a special case.
Action is being taken to remove discrepancies in kinds of leave
provisioned for Officers, JCOs and Recruit Boys.
23. In a subsequent clarification as sought by the Committee, the
Ministry have stated that the Defence personnel are entitled to
60 days annual leave unlike the civilian employees, who have only
30 days of earned leave in a calendar year. The Cardinal principle
which governs the grant of this higher quantum of leave to the armed
forces personnel has relation to their duties being more strenuous than
those of the civilians. As such, they are expected to require longer
leave for recuperation and for maintaining a healthy and youthful
profile. Therefore, the annual leave of the Defence personnel has
historically been non-accumulative. However, in deference to the
persistent demand from the Service HQrs. For the facility of
accumulation and encashment of annual leave, on the analogy of the
civilians, approval of the Cabinet Committee on Political Affairs (CCPA)
was taken in 1983 to allow accumulation of annual leave to the extent
of 30 days in a calendar year, subject to a maximum of 180 days,
which was the prevailing ceiling for civilians for the purpose of
encashment at the time of retirement.
Subsequently, the maximum ceiling for encashment of leave in
respect of Service personnel was enhanced to 240 days in the wake of
the implementation of the IV CPC recommendations. The present ceiling
of 300 days has been fixed following implementation of the V CPC
recommendations in para 160.10 of its Report.
It has also been pointed out by the Ministry that the maximum
ceiling of leave encashment for Defence personnel has always been at
part with that of the civilian employees in whose case also, the
maximum ceiling is 300 days presently as per the V CPC
recommendations.
Hence, enhancement of the present ceiling would disturb the parity
with that of the civilian employees having considerable implications.

9
This matter would require detailed examination by the Department of
Personnel & Training (DOP&T). which is the nodal Ministry for this
subject.
Comments of the Committee
24. The Committee are pleased to note that efforts have been
initiated by the Government to remove discrepancies in the types of
leave provisioned for Officers, JCOs and Recruit Boys. The
Committee, however, are not inclined to concur with the contention
of Government that enhancement of present ceiling of encashment
of 300 days would disturb the parity with civilian employees. The
service condition of Defence personnel are entirely different from
that of civil side. The Defence personnel are involved in multifarious
activities like they were called for the relief operations in T sunami
disaster, in low intensity conflicts in some States etc. As such there
is always a need for availability of sufficient manpower for
deployment of the forces in various exigencies. The Committee,
therefore, reiterate the urgent need of removing 300 days’ ceiling for
leave encashment so that the Defence personnel are not tempted to
proceed on leave for the reason that any addition to that number
would go waste. The Committee strongly feel that case of Defence
Forces should be dealt with separately from Civil Service.
WELFARE OF EX-SERVICEMEN
Setting up of National Commission of Ex-Servicemen
Recommendation (Para No. 38)
25. The Committee felt that the rehabilitation of Ex-Servicemen
with due dignity and honour necessarily required a National
perspective and vision. The multifaceted plethora of problems of
Ex-Servicemen needed to be addressed by the entire society including
the Governmental agencies of Center and States and not the existing
set up in the Ministry of Defence alone. The Committee, therefore,
recommended that a statutory National Commission on Ex-Servicemen
on the lines of National Commission for SC/ST/Minorities should be
set up urgently. The Commission shall submit its report to the
Parliament every year. The Commission shall in addition to the other
functions, also monitor DGR, Rajya Sainik Boards and Zila Sainik
Boards.
26. The Ministry of Defence, in their Action Taken Reply, has stated
that the High Level Committee on problems of Ex-Servicemen,

10
constituted under the Chairmanship of Shri K.P . Singh Deo, the then
Raksha Rajya Mantri, had recommended in 1984 for the setting up of
an Ex-Servicemen Resettlement. Commission similar to Scheduled
Caste/Scheduled Tribe Commissions. This recommendation and the
following inter-linked recommendations made by the Committee were
examined in depth in consolation with the Department of Legal Affairs:—
(a) Enactment of National Ex-Servicemen Resettlement Act.
(b) Constitution of a Parliamentary Committee for overseeing
the implementation of various schemes and facilities for
Ex-Servicemen.
27. The DOP&T and the Ministry of Finance were also consulted
in the matter. Subsequently, on the basis of the advice received from
the Department of Legal Affairs/DOP&T, it was felt that above
recommendations involve the question whether Ex-Servicemen should
have statutory reservation even in the matter of allotment of
infrastructure for self-employment which lies within the purview of
the States and that quantum of reservation in favour of the
Ex-Servicemen, whether under the proposed Central or State Acts
would need to be determined keeping in view the local conditions in
each State, and in particular to the percentage of Ex-Servicemen in the
States total population. It was felt that it would appear to be difficult
to achieve a uniform consensus throughout the country on this matter
as local perceptions as well as local infrastructure are bound to differ.
For the same reasons, the percentage of reservation in job opportunities
under the Model Bill for the States is also likely to vary from State to
State and that an additional factor involved in dealing with this issue
is the limitation on the overall reservation at 50% of recruitment as
per the ruling of the Courts. In view of the above a decision was
taken at the highest level not to accept the above recommendations,
including the recommendation for providing Commission/
Commissioner for Ex-Servicemen.
28. The recommendation concerning setting up of an Ex-Serviceman
resettlement Commission was again considered by an Inter-Ministerial
Committee set up in 1992 to deal with remainder problems of
Ex-Servicemen. This Committee had also not agreed to the proposal,
as as there are already Sainik Board Organisation in the State/UTs
and the DGR at the center to oversee the implementation of reservation
policy and the interest of Ex-Servicemen. Details of Central/State

11
organisations looking after the welfare of Ex-Servicemen are given
below:—
Central Level
(a) Directorate General Resettlement. The Directorate General
Resettlement (DGR) under the Ministry of Defence has been set up to
look after all matters connected with Resettlement and Welfare of
Ex-Servicemen (including officers), their widows and dependents.
(b) The DGR has a Zonal Resettlement Directorate co-located with
each of the five Army Commands Headquarters. These Directorates
are the Zonal representatives of the DGR and are responsible for
looking after the resettlement and welfare of Ex-Servicemen in their
respective Zones.
(c) Kendriya Sainik Board (KSB).  Kendriya Sainik Board is the
apex body at the Centre which provides policy guidelines or
resettlement and welfare matters affecting Ex-Servicemen and families
serving and deceased personnel. The Board with the Raksha Mantri as
President has 45 members including 13 Chief Ministers, 7 Ministers of
State from Central and State Governments, the Service Chiefs and
other members. The Kendriya Sainik Board co-ordinates the work of
Departments of Sainik Welfare in States/UTs and provides budgetary
support to the extent of 50 percent for their establishment and
maintenance costs.
State Level. At the State level, Rajya Sainik Boards have been set
up in the 32 States/UTs in the country to provide policy guidelines to
the Departments of Sainik Welfare and Zila Sainik Welfare Offices.
District Level.  The Zila Sainik Welfare Offices provide grassroots
resettlement and welfare services to Ex-Servicemen, widows, dependants
and families left behind by soldiers serving in field areas. These offices
are created in Zilas where the population of Ex-Servicemen, their
dependants and families of serving soldiers is over 7500.
29. The functioning of the Zila Boards is monitored by the
respective Rajya Sainik Board. In turn five Zonal Resettlement
Directorates oversee the functioning of the Rajya Sainik Boards.
Kendriya Sainik Board and Directorate General Resettlement monitor
the overall functioning of the Rajya Sainik Boards.

12
30. The above proposal was reconsidered again in the year 2000
on a recommendation made by the Committee on Government
Assurances that the Government may constitute a permanent
Commission for Ex-Servicemen as in the case of Backward Commission
etc. so that it will regulate, monitor and recommend. However, it was
felt that there is already a plethora of bodies, both at the State level
and the Central level, looking after the welfare of Ex-servicemen and
therefore, there is no need to add one more organisation to the existing
organisations looking after the welfare of Ex-Servicemen. In this
connection, it is also stated that the main constraints in extending the
desired welfare and resettlement benefits by the Central/State
Governments to the Ex-Servicemen/dependents of deceased Defence
services, are lack of adequate financial resources, shrinking of job
opportunities in Central/State Governments, increase in the population
of Ex-Servicemen by about 55,000 annually, un-employment in general
and not the lack of the organizational set up to oversee these aspects.
As such it was not considered desirable to constitute a National
Commission for rehabilitation of Ex-Servicemen.
31. The proposal has been re-examined and it has been decided
that in view of the position mentioned above, there is no need to
constitute a statutory National Commission on Ex- Servicemen on the
lines of National Commission for SC/ST/Minorities.
Comments of the Committee
32. The Committee are not convinced with the reply of the
Ministry of Defence that the constitution of National Commission
on Ex-Servicemen would be mere addition to the existing set-up
within the Ministry tasked to look after welfare of Ex-Servicemen.
The Committee also note that the existing structure of organisations
for the purpose lacks accountability in their functioning and thus
welfare issues not being addressed in earnest manner. The
Committee, therefore, strongly reiterate their earlier demand that
setting up of ‘National Commission on Ex-Servicemen’, with statutory
rights to fix responsibility on different Sainik Boards and State
Governments in regard to rehabilitation of Ex-Servicemen, should
be taken up in expeditious manner by the Ministry of Defence. The
Commission shall also be liable to present annual report on the
subject to the Parliament every year.
RESETTLEMENT OF EX-SERVICEMEN
Recommendation (Para Nos. 39)
33. The Committee recommended that keeping the changing
economic and social environment in view the DGR, Rajya Sainik Boards

13
and Zila Sainik Boards should be thoroughly modernised and re-
structured with statutory powers as the consultancy and management
agencies for generating self-employment projects for ex-servicemen on
a large scale. For this purpose, the required expertise in management,
financial, banking insurance and marketing consultancy should be
inducted at all levels. DGR should also be entrusted with all
responsibility for coordinating various training activities and
programmes and should be re-designated as Directorate-General of
Resettlement & Training.
34. The Committee under ‘Restructuring of Officers cadre’ at
para 7 of the original report also desired the Ministry to formalise a
Consultative Machinery to achievely involve the retired high rank
Defence personnel for consultations to obtain their suggestions on
regular basis so as to derive full benefits of their was experience in
Defence arena.
35. The Ministry of Defence (MoD), in their action taken reply, has
stated that Directorate General of Resettlement is an Inter-Service
Organisation which functions under Ministry of Defence and is vested
with responsibility of training and resettlement of ex-servicemen,
disabled soldier, war widows and their dependents.
Rehabilitation and Welfare of ex-servicemen, widows, disabled
personnel boarded out from services, their dependents is the joint
responsibility of Government at the Centre, States and Union Territories.
For this purpose the Sainik Board Organisation exists. There are
32 Rajya Sainik Boards and 335 Zila Sainik Boards in the country. In
order to strengthen the Sainik Board Organisation in the country, the
Ministry of Defence provides 50% of the expenditure on the
establishment and maintenance of Rajya and Zila Sainik Boards. The
functionaries of RSBs and ZSBs are however, State/UTs employees
and the Boards are generally functioning as independent Department
of Sainik welfare in States/UTs. To standardise these organisations
within the country, the High Level Committee under Shri K.P . Singh
Deo and the Committee on Standardisation of Sainik Board
Organisation had made their recommendations which have been
adopted in most States. However, there are certain weaknesses in the
system such as that the Directors and Deputy Directors in most of
RSBs and Directors of ZSBs are not manned by ex-service personnel
which need to be rectified.
Empowerment of DGR, RSBs and ZSBs with statutory power for
engaging the consultancy and management agencies for generating

14
self-employment projects for ex-servicemen is not possible unless the
subject of ESM welfare is including in the Concurrent List of the
Constitution. However, the State Governments could consider
constitution of ESM Corporations with statutory backing for generating
self-employment projects for ESM on a large scale.
Presently, there are no specialised experts available in the fields of
management, financial, banking, insurance and marketing consultancy
in DGR, RSBs and ZSBs. In the States, Consultative and Advisory
Committees could be formed with autonomy by including experts from
the Banking, Insurance and marketing sector.
Directorate General Resettlement already coordinates training
programme and activities for both officers as well as Personnel Below
Officers Ranks and thus there is no requirement of changing the existing
nomenclature of the organisation.
36. In a further written reply to a question on the performance of
Sainik Boards, the Ministry further stated that most of the States have
initiated schemes for the ex-servicemen welfare which take into account
the local requirement and conditions. In States like Maharashtra,
Tamil Nadu, Kerala, Himachal Pradesh, Punjab and Uttar Pradesh.
ex-servicemen Corporations have been formed and run by the ESM
community.
Rajya Sainik Boards are running 262 sainik rest houses in different
States for use by ESM and their dependents. During the last five
years, 28 sainik rest houses have been constructed by Rajya Sainik
Boards with financial assistance from Central Government.
Rajya Sainik Boards are extending help in holding ex-servicemen
rallies in various States to disseminate information on various schemes
of Central and State Governments. In such rallies, ex-servicemen are
informed about self-employment schemes Prime Minister’s Rozgar Yojna
and about opportunities extended by private sector companies.
It is worth mentioning that private sector companies and NGO
participation has increased in the last five years. and ex-servicemen
are getting dealerships from companies like Hero Honda, Kinetic
Engineering etc.
With the active participation of Rajya Sainik Boards and Zila Sainik
Boards there has been a remarkable increase in collection of

15
Armed Forces Flag Day Fund through involvement of schools, NCC,
corporate houses etc.
Rajya Sainik Boards have been interacting with the respective State
administrations to fulfil the job quota in State Government and
reservation of seats in educational institutions. Some of the States have
shown positive results of such persuasion.
Rajya Sainik Boards/Zila Sainik Boards have been facing certain
constraints which require to be addressed by the respective State
Governments. Some of these are listed below:—
(i) Many ESM do not come forward to register in the Zila
Sainik Board.
(ii) These Boards are having inadequate infrastructural support
e.g. office building transport, telephone, fax etc.
(iii) Annual meetings of Rajya Sainik Board are not held
regularly.
(iv) Some boards do not have the required staff. The State
Governments are not providing adequate attention for filling
up vacancies.
37. The Ministry of Defence (MoD), in reply to the recommendation
of the Committee regarding involvement of retired defence personnel
for consultations has further stated that the recommendations of the
Committee set up for the purpose, have been accepted in principle
and a case has been taken up with Ministry of Finance/Department of
Personnel and Training (DoP&T) for engaging retired officers as
consultants. They have been requested to consider granting dispensation
to Ministry of Defence (MoD) in respect of the following:
(i) removal of the restriction of employment of only two
consultants from the pool of retired officers of the level of
JS & above in MoD an its attached/subordinate offices.
(ii) The authority to fill up upto 50% of the total number of
consultants who could be employed from the pool of
retired/retiring officers directly by MoD. In case the number
of consultants exceeds 50% approval of DoPT would be
sought on a case to case basis.

16
(iii) Extension of the period of engagement of consultants from
the stipulated period of 6 months, to 6 months extendable
to one year or upto the age of 62 years. whichever is earlier.
38. During the oral evidence the defence Secretary informed the
Committee that a separate Department had been created by the
Government headed by Additional Secretary to exclusively deal with
the problems of ex-servicemen including pension, welfare and
rehabilitation.
In further evidence before the Committee, the representative of
Ministry of Defence submitted that Rajya Sainik Boards and Zila Sainik
Boards which primarily constitute the executive arm of DGR have
over the years got diluted. There are certain guidelines which have
been laid down that they should be staffed by ex-servicemen but many
States have basically employed civilian officers, Bureaucrats, policemen,
financial advisers etc. to staff these boards.
As regards the training programmes for Officers, ex-servicemen
and Personnel Below Officers Rank and how the DGR has been
coordinating them, the representative informed that there are
400 courses for JCOs and other ranks of ex-servicemen and those who
are about to retire.
He further informed that no Government training centers are
involved in giving training to ex-servicemen and they outsource the
training to private agencies.
As regards the recognition of these courses by various certifying
bodies, the representative informed that these are short courses ranging
from one week to 15 days or 3 months and not many of them are
recognised by the Council like AICTE or any other University. Only
MDI, Gurgaon and IIM. Lucknow are recognised.
Comments of the Committee
39. The Committee are happy to note that a separate Department
has been created in the Ministry of Defence to exclusively deal with
problems of ex-servicemen. The Committee hope that the new
Department will be able to address the needs of ex-servicemen
effectively. The Committee are, however, concerned to note that Rajya
Sainik Boards and Zila Sainik Boards have been facing certain
constraints in their working like inadequate infrastructure support,

17
vacancies in the Boards etc. which are to be addressed by respective
State Governments. In this connection, the Committee have been
informed that Central Government provides 50 per cent of the
establishment expenditure of the Rajya Sainik Boards and Zila Sainik
Boards and the rest is borne by the concerned State Governments.
As most of the State Governments are facing resource constraints,
and thus unable to provide their share, the welfare and rehabilitation
programmes are suffering. Therefore, the Committee recommend that
since it is the primary responsibility of Central Government to look
after the welfare and rehabilitation of ex-servicemen, the Ministry
should consider to enhance the share of Central Government in
funding for their welfare. The Committee further desire that in
addition to other welfare measures being in place, the Government
should also encourage the creation of Self Help Groups (SHGs) so
that the problems of ex-servicemen are addressed at the grass-root
level. The newly created department for ex-servicemen should chalk
out a scheme in this regard as also examine the possibility of
engaging various specialised experts to help rehabilitation of ex-
servicemen. The State Governments may be asked to appoint
consultative and advisory Committees consisting of experts from
various fields.
The Committee are unhappy to note that State are not following
the guidelines laid down by DGR that Rajya Sainik Board and Zila
Sainik Board should be staffed by ex-servicemen and have employed
civilian officers etc. to manage then thereby diluting the role of ex-
servicemen in managing their own affairs. The Committee desire
that the Ministry should take up the matter with State Government
regarding appointment of ex-servicemen to the various posts in Rajya
Sainik Boards and Zila Sainik Boards so that the multifarious
problems of the ex-servicemen can be addressed in right perspective
as also to utilise their vast experience in formulation of different
programmes and policies for their welfare and also pursue the matter
of State share for the better functioning of RSBs & ZSBs.
The Committee are constrained to note that Ministry of Defence
has not opened any training centers for ex-servicemen and they only
outsource the training to private agencies. The Committee further
note that most of the courses which are of too short duration and of
very casual nature are not recognised by AICTE or any other
University. The Committee feel that because of unsuitability of these
courses the retiring defence personnel/ex-servicemen are not keen
on taking these training course. The Committee are of strong view

18
that the Government should invest in opening training centers on
their own for ex-servicemen which are recognised to impart them
skilled training so as to facilitate them to find employment. The
Committee desire that Government should play a proactive role in
improving skilled training to ex-servicemen keeping in view the
anticipated re-employment opportunities in the public/private sector,
The Committee further desire that the full cost of various courses
should be borne by the Government so that the course duly
recognised by AICTE/University are available to the servicemen/ex-
servicemen.
The Committee also note that in consonance with their
recommendations to involve the services and vast experiences of
retired defence personnel in multifaceted defence matters, the
Ministry has taken up the case with the Ministry of Finance/
Department of Personnel and Training (DoP&T). The Committee
desire the Ministry to chalk out the strategy by which their services
could be utilised in the best possible way in the national interests
and furnish progress report on the matter to the Committee from
time to time.
The Committee also observe that DGR did not have full
information about the number of ex-servicemen who were imparted
training and also the number of ex-servicemen who were employed
in various Defence establishments. The Committee, therefore, desire
that DGR should maintain the proper data as per charter given to
him and ensure that maximum ex-servicemen are re-employed in
various Defence organisations. The Committee feel that this
organization looked static and the Ministry should make efforts to
make it more dynamic.
RE-EMPLOYMENT IN GOVERNMENT JOBS
Recommendation (Para No. 57)
40. The Committee noted that the trained, motivated and
disciplined manpower released from active service every year at a
very young age could be a boon for industries in the public, private
and cooperative sectors. As they had worked as a unit all these years.
they could work in coordination with each other which could result in
enhanced level of productivity. The Committee recommended that the
Ministry should enter into a dialogue with public sector undertaking
including banks, railways, airlines, insurance, private sector,
cooperatives, autonomous bodies  e.g. Sports Authority of India and
the organisations like Confederation of India Industries (CII), Federation

19
of Indian Chamber of Commerce and Industries (FICCI). Associated
chambers of Commerce & Industry of India (ASSOCHAM), PHD
Chamber of Commerce and Industry (PHDCCI) etc. and chalk out the
plan of action for re-employment of ex-servicemen befitting their
rightful dues and dignity.
41. The Ministry of Defence (MoD) has, in their action taken reply,
stated that DoP&T has issued instructions for providing reservation in
Group C and D posts for ex-servicemen in Central Government jobs.
These instructions are also applicable to public sector undertakings
and banks; railways, etc.
The Ministry of Defence further stated that Directorate General
Resettlement (DGR) is having constant liaison with Public Sector
Undertakings like HAL, BHEL and BEL etc. for providing them quality
manpower of ex-servicemen on contractual and permanent basis. They
have also requested Indian Railways to engage ex-servicemen security
agencies sponsored by them for the security of passenger bogies. They
also approached Oil & Natural Gas Commission and Indian Oil
Corporation for re-employment of ex-servicemen.
In order to explore employment opportunities for ex-servicemen
in Private Sector, DGR is already organising Seminars. During 2003-04
such Seminars were conducted with Confederation of Indian Industry
and Chamber of Commerce & Industries at Kochi, Pune, Hyderabad,
Indore and New Delhi. Besides, DGR also had direct interaction with
the leading business houses like Reliance Industries, Larsen & Toubro
Ltd., Aditya Birla Group, Mahindra & Mahindra Ltd., Taj Group of
Hotets, Kirloskar Brothers etc.
During evidence the Committee enquired about the number of
persons absorbed by PSUs, the representative informed that out of
60,000 retired last year, 19,000 people have been placed out of which
11,717 personnel have been placed through security agencies working
with Public Sector Undertakings.
The representative, however, admitted that Public Sector
Undertakings and Banks are not adhering to instruction of DoPT for
providing reservation in Group C&D Posts for ex-servicemen.
Asked about the legality of instructions, the Secretary, Public Sector
Enterprises informed that the instructions of administrative nature, its
sustainability requires strength of law.

20
The Committee enquired about the monitoring being done to see
that instructions for providing reservations in Group C&D posts for
ex-servicemen in Government are implemented, the Secretary DoPT
stated that the mechanism should be in Ministry of Defence.
42. During the oral evidence, the representative of Ministry of
Defence submitted before the Committee that there is overall reservation
limit of 50 per cent laid down as per ruling of Supreme Court and
after reservation made for OBCs, SCs & STs which works out to
49.5 per cent, only 0.5 per cent is left for ex-servicemen.
However, as a matter of clarification, Secretary, DoPT in this
connection stated:
“There is some misconception about the 50 per cent limit of
reservation. It is a vertical reservation concept which the Supreme
Court introduced in the Indira Sawhney case. It really enjoins that
there should be 10 per cent reservation in Group ‘C’ and
20 per cent reservation in Group ‘D’ for the ex-servicemen in all
the categories across that board—SC, ST, OBC and the General
Category. So to say that this 50 per cent limits the reservation for
the ex-servicemen is not wholly correct because they can get the
10 per cent reservation/20 per cent reservation in Group ‘C’ and
‘D’ categories within these categories as such. So, the 50 per cent
is not a limit which applies to ex-servicemen”.
Comments of the Committee
43. The Committee are surprised to note that out of approximately
60,000 defence personnel retiring every year, merely 30 per cent are
absorbed in Government jobs and public Sector Undertakings despite
the fact that DoP&T has exclusively issued instructions to ensure
reservations for ex-servicemen in Group ‘C’ and ‘D’ posts. The
Committee note the efforts of DGR in regard to their placement and
feel that the outcome of these efforts was unsatisfactory. The
Committee feel that there is need to improve the working of this
organization and monitor it closely.
The Committee, therefore, recommend the Ministry of Defence
to urgently evolve a monitoring mechanism so as to coordinate with
Public/Private Sector Undertakings, Banks etc. for placement of retired
defence personnel as per their eligibility and suitability and strictly
oversee that the DoP&T instructions in this regard are implemented
in letter and spirit. The Committee further recommend that the

21
Ministry, besides constantly exploring their appropriate placement
in other offices, should earnestly strive to insure their absorption in
their own offices and Defence PSUs across the Country. In this
connection, the Ministry should also take up the matter with the
Ministry of Law so as to provide for reservation in various categories
of jobs in Ministry of Defence and its Undertakings. Suitable training
should be provided to PBOR so that they take advantage of these
reservations. The Committee would like to know the action taken
by the Government in this matter within 6 months of the presentation
of this report.
The Committee also note with serious concern the misconception
ceiling of 50 per cent vertical reservation to deferent strata of the
society as laid down by the Supreme Court. The Committee note
that it enjoins 10 per cent reservation in Group ‘C’ posts and 20 per
cent in Group ‘D’ posts in Government jobs to all the ex-servicemen.
The Committee, therefore, recommend that the Ministry should take
up this issue with DoP&T and the Ministry of Law to ensure the
benefit of reservation in various categories of posts so as to
accommodate and address the re-employment matters of ex-
servicemen in justifiable perspective.
ONE RANK ONE PENSION
Recommendation (Para No. 99)
44. The Committee had been recommending for grant of ‘One
Rank One Pension to the armed forces personnel time and again. The
Committee observed that successive Governments and Pay
Commissions had made improvements in the pension structure keeping
in view the cost of living index. This had accentuated the disparity of
pensionary benefits between pensioners of the same rank. The older
pensioners who had become infirm in ability and capability and
burdened with a larger social obligation received pension calculated at
the rate of pay at the time of their retirement in 1950s or 1960s or
1970s, which was quite paltry and the Dearness Relief quite
inconsequential in today’s context of inflation and shrinking purchasing
value of money. The nation must repay its debt to those defenders of
the motherland with gratitude and humility. We should, instead of,
looking for precedents in this regard, create precedents for the others
to emulate. Any amount paid in this regard would be small token of
our gratitude to them. The Committee, therefore, once again reiterated
their earlier recommendation for providing ‘One Rank One Pension’
to the armed forces personnel.

22
45. The Ministry, in their action taken reply, have stated that the
demand of ‘One Rank One Pension’ has been persistently raised by
the Oraganisations of ex-servicemen at different fora in the past. It
was considered but not recommended by the Fourth and the Fifth
Central Pay Commissions. The Inter-Ministerial Committee, set up by
the Department of Pensions & Pensioners’ Welfare (DP&PW)
deliberated upon this issue and submitted its report to the Government
on 24.09.2004. This Committee did not favour grant of ‘One Rank One
Pension’ keeping in view the administrative, financial and legal
implications as well as its likely repercussions on the civil side.
However to further liberalise the pensionary benefits of Personnel
Below Officer Rank (PBOR), the Committee recommended grant of
modified parity based on maximum of the pay in the revised scales
introduced with effect from 01.01.1996.
46. In written reply to a further clarification on the Administrative,
Financial and Legal implications arising out of the implementation of
‘One Rank One Pension’ for the ex-servicemen, the Ministry of Defence
furnished the following information:—
A. Administrative Implications
The issue of ‘One Rank One Pension’ has been considered in the
past by successive Central Pay Commissions and high level Committees.
The Fourth Pay Commission stated that the amount of pension undergo
changes as and when pay scales are revised and any attempt to equalise
pension with reference to the revised scales of pay would amount to
retrospective application of pay scales. A high level Empowered
Committee Chaired by the then Defence Minister Shri Sharad Pawar
also recommended one time increase and not total parity. The Fifth
Central Pay Commission did not agree stating that the additional
benefit is given either due to upgradation of recruitment qualifications
or change in job contents etc. The benefit accrued on this account
need not necessarily be passed on to the pensioners. Inter-Ministerial
Committee observed that the job contents over the years have
undergone a qualitatively upward change and the present remuneration
has to match the increase in skill. Therefore, it would not be financially
or administratively pragmatic to accept the concept of ‘One Rank One
Pension.’ In the case of Indian Ex-Services League and others wherein
the petitioners had contended that all retirees who held the same rank
irrespective of their date of retirement must be given the same amount
of pension. This contention was rejected by the Constitution Bench of
Hon’ble Supreme Court.

23
Acceptance of concept of ‘One Rank One Pension’ would have
administrative implications as it will mean total parity between the
past and present retirees with future increase in pension to be
automatically applicable to the past pensioners, leading to an open
ended commitment on part of the Government which may adversely
affect the planning and budgeting process of the Government, the
liability for the pensionary benefits remaining uncertain. Besides, the
implementation of the concept itself would be gigantic task for about
21 lakh pensioners with addition of about 55,000 numbers every year
involving manual matching of the past and present rates of pension
by about 35,000 pension disbursement agencies comprising of Public
Section Banks’ branches, Defence Pension Disbursement Offices,
Treasuries, Pay and Account Offices and Post Offices. Such an exercise
would be involved with each and every increase/revision of pensionary
benefits.
B. Legal Implications
Hon’ble Supreme Court in the case of D.S. Nakara Vs UOI has
declared that all pensioners governed by 1972 Rules and Army Pension
Regulation shall be entitled to pension as computed under the
liberalised pension scheme from a specified date irrespective of date
of retirement. In view of this Judgement the Concept of ‘One Rank
One Pension’ cannot be confined to a class/category of pensioners.
Once accepted for Ex-Servicemen, the civilians may raise similar
demands and if not accepted, may move Court of Law on the above
analogy as well as on the principle of law of equity.
The Inter-Ministerial Committee has noted that acceptance of ‘One
Rank One Pension’ may be legally difficult. The Constitution Bench
amongst others has not agreed inter-alia to the concept of ‘One Rank
One Pension’ filed by All India Service Pensioners’ Association.
C. Financial Implications
The total financial implication for granting ‘One Rank One Pension’
to the Ex-Servicemen is estimated to be Rs. 600 crores per annum as
on 1.4.2004. The liability will further increase every six months with
the enhancement of dearness relief. For payment of arrears for the
period from 1.1.96 to 31.3.2004, the additional liability would be to the
tune of Rs. 4000 crores approximately. This liability would further
increase after merger of 50% dearness relief as dearness pension w.e.f.
1.4.2004.

24
D. Probable implications on civil side
Acceptance of the concept of ‘One Rank One Pension’ is bound to
give rise to similar demand being raised by the civilian pensioners
numbering more than 40 lakhs. If extended to them, the additional
financial liability will be enormous. For working out the probable
financial implication on civil side, various Ministries/Departments will
have to be consulted as the Pension Sanctioning Authority is
decentralized to the respective Head of the Office. Fifth Central Pay
Commission had recommended uniformity between the civilians and
Armed Forces pensioners in granting full parity between pre and post
1.1.86 pensioners and modified parity between pre and post 1.1.96
pensioners. The Inter-Ministerial Committee felt that an appropriate
solution of the problem has to be based on factors of capability of the
exchequer, the justness of demand and wider implication of scalability.
47. The Defence Secretary further informed the Committee during
the evidence than Government has formed a Group of Ministers (GoM)
headed by Raksha Mantri look into the issue of ‘One Rank One
Pension’. The terms of Reference of GoM reads as:
“It has been decided with the approval of the Prime Minister to
constitute a Group of Ministers to consider the issues relating to
grant of ‘One Rank One Pension’ to the Members of the Armed
Forces retiring with the same length of service irrespective of their
date of retirement.”
Comments of the Committee
48. The Committee are disappointed at the report of the Inter-
Ministerial Committee constituted to examine the feasibility of
application of the long-pending demand of ‘One Rank One Pension’
for the Ex-Servicemen. The Committee do not concur with the
findings of the Inter-Ministerial Committee that bringing into force
of the proposal would entail numerous administrative, financial and
legal implications as well as wide repercussions on the civil side.
The Committee, however, note that Group of Ministers (GoM)
has been formed to look into this contentious issue. The Committee
desire that the strong feelings of the Committee in this regard should
be conveyed to the Group of Ministers (GoM) for their consideration.
The Committee feel that a High Level Empowered Committee should
be constituted to go into the whole matter including representatives
from all the interested parties.

25
PENSIONARY BENEFITS ADMISSIBLE TO THE ARMED FORCES
PERSONNEL AND THEIR FAMILIES
Recommendation (Para Nos. 100 to 102)
49. The Committee noted that the 33 years conditionality for grant
of full pension was a cardinal principle of pension which was uniformly
applicable to all the categories of civil and armed forces pensioners.
The armed forces personnel were granted the benefit of weightage of
3-9 years (3 years in the case of General and 9 years for Captains) for
the Commissioned Officers and 5 years in the case of Personnel Below
Officers Ranks (PBORs) for calculation of their pensions. The Committee
were dismayed to learn that the discrepancies existed as regards
weightage given to the different categories of service personnel as
more weightage was given to Commissioned Officers who already
had a longer length of service than the Jawans who served for only
about 17 years but were given only 5 years weightage. The Committee,
therefore, recommended that the weightage given to various categories
of retired Defence service personnel should be reviewed so as to give
full benefit to the lower ranks of service personnel who retired early
and suffered the most on account of this 33 years conditionality.
50. The Committee felt that uniform conditions for grant of
pensions to civilians and Armed Forces personnel did not appear to
be logical as only a very small percentage of Defence service personnel
retired after 33 years service whereas the civilians completed generally
33 years service before retirement. For example, if a Jawan’s salary
today is Rs. 3,950/-, he should get a pension of Rs. 1,975, if the
conditionality of 33 years was not there. He, however, got only
Rs. 1,275 as explained by an expert before the Committee.
51. The Committee, therefore, also recommended that the condition
of 33 years of qualifying service to get full pension at 50 per cent of
the last pay drawn for the last 10 months should be reviewed in
respect of armed forces personnel who served in adverse conditions
and inhospitable environment for almost their entire career and, for
no fault of theirs, they retired comparably at a young age in the
interest of the Nation.
52. The Ministry of Defence (MoD) has, in their action taken reply,
stated that the based on the recommendations of the Expert Body
(Central Pay Commission) after taking into account all relevant factors
is uniformly applicable to the Defence and civil pensioners being a
cardinal and integral principle for computation of pension. In order to
compensate the Personnel Below Officers Rank (PBOR) for their

26
truncated career, their pension is computed based on maximum pay
of the rank and group held by them at the time of their discharge
from service instead of actual pay as is done in the case of officials
on the civil side. In addition, a weightage of 5 years in the case of
personnel below officer rank is also given which is not available to
the civilians. Therefore, the Inter-Ministerial Committee has, after
considering all relevant factors, opined that no interference is called
for with regard to 33 years conditionality to earn full pension. They
have also not recommended any change in the existing weightage
available to the Commissioned Officers and Personnel Below Officer
Rank. The report of the Committee has been accepted by Ministry of
Defence.
53. The Ministry of Defence in reply to another related question
from the Committee, stated that the Fifth Central Pay Commission, to
whom the Armed Forces had suggested doing away with linkage of
retiring pension with 33 years of service were of the view that the
rational behind linkage of 33 years was that both civilian and service
personnel who have rendered less service should be given equal
treatment. For shorter terms of employment, compensation has been
provided separately in terms of weightage i.e. 5 years for Personnel
Below Officers Rank and 3 to 9 years in the case of Commissioned
Officers, computation of pension of personnel below officer rank at
the maximum of the pay scale of the rank and group held at the time
of retirement and reckonable pay which also includes the element of
rank pay in the case of Commissioned Officers and highest classification
allowance in the case of personnel below officer rank. This approach
has been viewed as reasonable and recommended for continuance by
the Commission, 33 years conditionality is a cardinal principle for
grant of pensionary awards. The Armed Forces personnel also enjoy
certain other benefits which are not available to their civilian counter-
parts like subsidised canteen facilities, pre retirement vocational training,
reservation for re-employment, liberalised schemes for rehabilitation,
reservation of seats for their wards in educational institutions etc. In
the case of Commissioned Officers, there is actually no depression in
pension due to the weightage element who serve till their compulsory
age of retirement. With the increase in retirement age by two years,
the length of qualifying service has increased for each rank to that
extent. Considering all related aspects including repercussion on the
civil side and taking into account the fact that neither the successive
Central Pay Commissions nor the Raksha mantri’s Committee
recommended any change in the 33 years conditionality, the Inter-

27
Ministerial Committee was of the opinion that no interference is called
for with regard to the 33 years conditionality to earn full pension.
Comments of the Committee
54. The Committee are not convinced with the reply of the
Government with regard to 33 years conditionality to earn full
pension by Personnel Below Officer Rank (PBOR). The condition of
maximum pensionary benefits on 33 years service in the civil side
is quite understandable as bulk of the civil employees render more
than that period of service. This limit has been imposed to restrict
the benefits because a large number of employees can put in as
much as 40 years of service. But in case of armed forces personnel
especially PBOR, no one can put in 33 years of service, in their case
the Government have taken a conscious decision to retire them at a
certain age upto which they are considered physically fit to be a
part of the fighting forces and that period should be the limit for
them to earn full pension. Hence, to put a condition of 33 years of
service for them to earn full pension would be a great injustice and
against the principle of natural justice. However, if this condition of
33 years’ service is suitably amended, the calculation of pension can
be rationalised on the pattern followed for civil side.
The Committee, therefore, stress that, keeping in view altogether
different job requirements of defence forces whether in times of
peace or war, the service condition of defence personnel as also
benefits related thereto can never be justifiably equated with that of
civilian employees and thus their case should be examined separately,
independent of civilian employees, so that the welfare issues of
defence personnel are addressed in proper perspective. In this
connection, the Committee would also like that Group of Ministers
(GoM), constituted to examine the issue of ‘One Rank One Pension’,
be assigned to look into the matter of 33 years’ conditionality in
conjunction with the examination of ‘One Rank One Pension’, as
the two issues are inter-related. These views of this Committee may
also be brought to the notice of the Group of Ministers.

CHAPTER II
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN
ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT
Recommendation (Sl. No. 5, Para No. 37)
The Committee note that the Directorate General of Resettlement
(DGR) was set up to deal with growing needs of the Ex-Servicemen
for proper settlement and welfare. Since independence there has been
phenomenal increase in the number of Ex-Servicemen who generally
need assistance to lead a happy and healthy life. Unfortunately, the
DGR has been unable to cope up with the increasing requirements of
ever growing Ex-Servicemen population, since they do not have
adequate financial and management expertise within the organisation.
Reply of the Government
An Army Officer of the rank of Major General heads Directorate
General Resettlement (DGR). He is assisted by five Directors viz.
Director (Employment), Director (Self-employment), Director (Training),
Director (Publicity) and Director (Statistics & Records). Besides, the
DGR has a Zonal Resettlement Directorate co-located with each of the
five Army Commands Headquarters. These Directorates are the Zonal
representatives of the DGR and are responsible for looking after the
resettlement and welfare of ex-Servicemen in their respective Zones.
These is also Kendriya Sainik Board at the Centre for providing
policy guidelines on resettlement and welfare matters affecting Ex-
Servicemen and families of serving and deceased personnel. The
Kendriya Sainik Board under the guidance and supervision of DGR,
coordinates the work of Departments of Sainik Welfare in States/UTs.
However, there is a need to upgrade and improve the functional
and management expertise within the organisation in view of the
increasing number of ex-Servicemen population every year.
[Ministry of Defence OM No. H-11013/19/2003/D (Parl.)
dated 27.8.2004]
28

29
Recommendation (Sl. No. 5, Para No. 40)
The Committee note that the Personnel Below Officers Ranks
(PBORs) are given many training options like vocational training at
various training institutes at diversified places, i.e. 4,000 seats are
reserved in ITI training institutes, On-the-job Training (OJT) at 27 Public
Sector Undertakings (PSUs) spread all over India, training for the
servicemen who could not avail of the opportunity while in Service.
Similarly, all Officers also have training avenues in the field of security,
tourism, materials management, Entrepreneurship Development,
Management of Agro Based Industries etc. The Committee note that
the number of personnel imparted training during the past five years
is hovering around 10,000 while the number of service persons retired/
released every year is about 60,000. The Committee express its
displeasure that hardly a fraction of retiring Servicemen and Ex-
Servicemen are imparted training and therefore, strongly recommend
that the Ministry of Defence to take immediate steps to substantially
increase the training facilities at various centres in a time bound
manner, so that all interested Ex-Servicemen can avail of the training
courses of their preference for getting re-employment nearer their home.
Reply of the Government
It is not due to lack of training facilities that only a fraction of
retiring soldiers and ex-servicemen are able to avail of training
opportunities. Capacity of courses are increased based on response of
the volunteers. There are no infrastructure facilities required to be
established by Ministry of Defence. Resettlement courses are being
organized in Govt., Semi Government and Private institutes in
diversified fields spread all over the country. These facilities include
Industrial Training Institutes, Public Sector Undertakings and private
Institutes.
The response to resettlement courses is dependant on so many
factors such as the voluntary nature of resettlement training. Retiring
soldiers have the option to attend or not to attend resettlement training
and cannot be detailed by Ministry of Defence. The response to the
courses is also dependant upon the operational situation and
administrative commitments of the service. During OPERATION
PARAKRAM, December 01 to December 02 resettlement courses had
to be cancelled due to non-availability of participants. Similarly, for
the period April to September, 2003 the Air Force had been allotted

30
1087 vacancies under the Vocational Training scheme. However, due
to other commitments, Air Force was able to utilize 205 of these slots.
[Ministry of Defence OM No. H-11013/19/2003/D (Parl.)
dated 27.8.2004]
Recommendation (Sl. No. 6, Para No. 53)
The Committee note that in the vacancies reserved for Ex-
Servicemen there is no system of carry forward of unutilised vacancies
to subsequent years. This coupled with other reasons viz. preference
for getting jobs nearer to home towns, non-preference for Para Military
Forces, non-fulfilment of relaxed standards, popularity of jobs in
security agencies and self-employed schemes etc. has resulted in
alarming underutilisation of vacancies reserved for Ex-Servicemen
during the past several years.
Reply of the Government
The Committee has noted the position indicated by the Government
in regard to underutilisation of vacancies reserved for ex-Servicemen
and has made observation/recommendation in subsequent Paras 55-57
for improving the existing situation for providing re-employment to
ex-Servicemen.
[Ministry of Defence OM No. H-11013/19/2003/D (Parl.)
dated 27.8.2004]
Recommendation (Sl. No. 6, Para No. 54)
The Committee also note that in the category of Group “C” percent
of utilisation of vacancies has declined from 34% in 1998 to 12% in
the year 2000. In other categories also utilisation of vacancies for Ex-
Servicemen has been grossly unsatisfactory.
Reply of the Government
The Committee has noted the position indicated by the Government
in regard to underutilisation of vacancies reserved for ex-Servicemen
and has made observation/recommendation in subsequent Paras 55-57
for improving the existing situation for providing re-employment to
ex-Servicemen.
[Ministry of Defence OM No. H-11013/19/2003/D (Parl.)
dated 27.8.2004]

31
Recommendation (Sl. No. 6, Para No. 58)
The technical trade and certificate acquired by the service personnel
by virtue of their training and experience is not given due recognition
and weightage in the civil side. The Committee, therefore, strongly
recommend that the certificate of training/job experience should be
recognized and considered equivalent in the similar trade in the civil
sector if required in consultation with Ministry of Labour.
Reply of the Government
Ministry of Labour publishes a Directory of Equation Service Trades
with Civil Trades and Guide to Registration of Defence Services
Applicants for Employment. The Directory equates Army, Navy and
Air Force services trades with equivalent civil trades. The Directory is
updated from time to time and action has been initiated for revision
of the Directory published in 1986.
All the Personnel Below Officer Rank (PBOR) on retirement are
issued with trade equivalency certificate to facilitate their registration
for employment in civil. All Employment Exchanges are required to
register retired defence personnel for employment based on their trade
equation certificate. Similarly, all Ministries/Government Departments
and Public Sector Undertakings are expected to recognise the trade
equation certificate while considering retired defence personnel for
employment.
[Ministry of Defence OM No. H-11013/19/2003/D (Parl.)
dated 27.8.2004]
Recommendation (Sl. No. 7, Para No. 63)
The Committee note that most of the Ex-Servicemen after their
release from service seek jobs near their homes. Keeping this in view,
Government have framed several schemes for encouraging Ex-
Servicemen to undertake self-employment ventures and provided
financial support to them by way of loans.
Reply of the Government
The Committee has noted the factual position indicated by the
Government. No action on the part of the Government.
[Ministry of Defence OM No. H-11013/19/2003/D (Parl.)
dated 27.8.2004]

32
Recommendation (Sl. No. 7, Para No. 64)
The Committee, however, note that the response to the schemes
by the Ex-Servicemen is very poor because lack of facilitation and
adequate support in marketing their produce and services. The
Committee, therefore, feel that a support mechanism is required for
the Ex-Servicemen opting for self-employment scheme to facilitate
coordination among various agencies for setting up their ventures,
ensuring availability of tax benefits and to help market products
particularly to Defence services.
Reply of the Government
In pursuance of the above recommendation, Director General
Resettlement (DGR) has worked out a scheme to impart training to
those retiring/retired army personnel who would like to undertake
enterprises/occupations/professions etc. for which they have aptitude
and ability. The proposed training programme will educate army
personnel on the issues like source of funds, funds to be contributed
by them and to be raised from the bank/financial institutions/other
agencies, return on their investment, various parameters to be
considered to know the viability of enterprise, knowledge about Govt./
Non-Government agencies who render help for contribution in
resettlement and setting up of enterprises.
The above training courses will be arranged by the DGR through
Punjab National Bank, which has 10 operating colleges/centres. All
these 10 operating colleges can arrange one training programme each
every month. The duration of the training programmes will be for
2-4 days depending upon the target group and the content to be
covered. DGR will include the above training course for serving defence
personnel from the next training year.
[Ministry of Defence OM No. H-11013/19/2003/D (Parl.)
dated 27.8.2004]
Recommendation (Sl. No. 7, Para No. 66)
The Committee also recommend that Ex-Servicemen should be
encouraged to set up Cooperative Societies and these should be
provided all possible concessions from Central as well as State
Governments on a priority basis so that ex-servicemen can be
rehabilitated properly.

33
Reply of the Government
The Directorate General Resettlement in collaboration with National
Bank of Agriculture & Rural Development (NABARD), Small Industries
Development Bank of India (SIDBI) and Khadi & Village Industries
Commission (KVIC) has sponsored the major Self Employment Schemes
namely SEMFEX-II (From Arms to Farm), SEMFEX-III (Sena Se
Gramodyog) and National Equity Fund (Sena se Laghudyog).
Ex-Servicemen entrepreneurs are encouraged to from Co-operative
Societies under these Schemes to undertake agricultural, industrial and
service sector activities. Provisions have been made to provide
concessions to ex-Servicemen borrowers under these Schemes. Similarly,
State level concessions are also available to ex-Servicemen forming
Co-operative Societies.
[Ministry of Defence O.M. No. H-11013/19/2003/D (Parl.)
dated 27.8.2004]
Recommendation (Sl. No. 8, Para No. 74)
The Committee note that only Army Welfare Housing Organization
(AWHO) and Air Force Naval Housing Board (AFNHB) are constructing
houses for the serving and the retired personnel on self finance as
no-profit-no-loss basis. The Committee further note that Delhi
Development Authority have announced a scheme. “Vijay Vir Awas
Yojana” for the widows/ NOK/dependents of the soldiers killed or
permanently disabled and boarded out in OP Vijay (Kargil or other
operations, on or after 1 May 1999 and under this scheme 414 houses
were available for allotment.
Reply of the Government
Factual statement: No action on the part of the government.
[Ministry of Defence O.M. No. H-11013/19/2003/D (Parl.)
dated 27.8.2004]
Recommendation (Sl. No. 8, Para No. 75)
The Committee desire that Ministry to take up with other State
Governments to formulate residential schemes on the line of “Vijayee
Veer Awas Yojana” of the Delhi Development Authority for
Ex-servicemen. The Committee recommend that Defence personnel

34
should be treated as a special category and the Ministry should explore
with financial and banking institutions to provide housing loans a
very low rate of interest with minimum documentation to the
servicemen and ex-servicemen.
Reply of the Government
The State Governments, have been requested for reservation of
House site/plots in favour of ex-servicemen vide Raksha Mantri’s D.O.
letters No. RM/745-F/92, dated 14.2.1992, No. RM/1745-F/A/92, dated
30-03-1992, hon’ble Prime Minister’s letter dated November 01,1995
and Raksha Mantri’s letter dated October 11,1996. Certain States have
provided this concession. A copy of the brochure of “Vijayee Veer
Awas Yojana” stated above, has been sent to all Chief Secretaries of
State Governments on 25-02-2004 with the request to formulate similar
schemes. Likewise; Secretary, Ministry of Finance has also been
requested vide letter dated 25-02-2004 to provide housing loans at low
rate of interest at minimum documentation to service and ex-servicemen
(Copies enclosed).
[Ministry of Defence O.M. No. H-11013/19/2003/D (Parl.)
dated 27.8.2004]

MULAYAM SINGH YADA V Defence Minister
Govt. of India
New Delhi-110011
11 October 1996
Dear Shri
As you are know, that the XXIV meeting of the Kendriya Sainik
Board was held on 24th August 1996 at Delhi. In this meeting, the
Chief Ministers/Ministers of State Govts. and the Central Govt. Chief
of three Services and Senior officers of State & Central Govt. took part
in the deliberations regarding various problems of ex-Servicemen.
2. It was emphasized in the meeting that it is very essential in the
present circumstances that we should give proper respect to our valiant
soldiers and of our Front liners so that there moral remains high and
the young people get encouraged to join Defence Forces. A proposal
in this regard was that, on special occasion a public reception be given
to honour our valued soldiers and special programmes on them be
conducted in educational institutions. In addition, it may also be
ensured that effective welfare schemes are formulated for the Defence
Service personnel, ex-Servicemen and their families so that they may
feel that the whole nation is there to look after them and their families
and they be vigilant on the borders of the country.
3. All present in the meeting were unanimous on the suggestion
that Central Govt. should prepare a package ‘Common Minimum
Programme’ for solving the problems of ex-Servicemen and all the
State Govt./Union Territories should implement it. In this regard, I
would like to say that the problems of ex-Servicemen are discussed in
the annual meetings of Kendriya Sainik Board and Secretaries, Rajya
Sainik Boards held from time to time and to implement the decisions
taken therein, minutes of meetings and detailed letters are sent to
State Govts. But no concrete steps have been taken on most of them
by the State Govts. so far. I am also enclosing a list of important
points alongwith the letter. I request you to kindly ensure an early
action on these points.
4. In the meeting, while discussing the subject of reservation of
vacancies in State Govt. and Public Sector Undertakings for the
resettlement of ex-Servicemen, it was highlighted that though provisions
35

36
of reservation are there, but the same is not being followed up fully,
with the result the ex-Servicemen do not get full benefit of reservation
policy. It was also emphasized in the meeting that whatever vacancies
exist for the ex-Servicemen, only Ex-Servicemen should be recruited
against such vacancies and to ensure its compliance ‘an Ex-Servicemen
Reservation Monitoring Cell’ be established. On the basis of decision
taken during the meeting I request you for immediate establishment
of a ‘Reservation Monitoring Cell’ in your State so that maximum ex-
Servicemen could get re-employment in their own State.
5. In addition to the above I would like to draw your attention to
an important issue which is related to providing assistance to the
Second World War veterans. For a long time, the ex-Servicemen have
been demanding that keeping in view the pitiable condition of these
war veterans, monthly assistance may be provided to them. The Central
Govt. had approved an inter-Departmental Committee to look into
their demands. On the basis of recommendations made by this
committee, I request the State Govts. to grant minimum assistance of
Rs. 300/-per month to those veterans who now are in the age group
of 70 to 80 years.
I not only hope but also have full confidence that you will take
an early action an the above recommendations and in the points
mentioned in the list attached and will also let us know about the
action taken thereon.
With thanks and best wishes.
Yours
Sd/-
(Mulayam Singh Yadav)
11 October 1996
To
Governors/Lt. Governors/
Chief Ministers of all States

PRIME MINISTER
New Delhi
November 1, 1995
Dear Shri
As you are aware, majority of the Defence service personnel retire
between 35 and 47 years of age, as we need to keep the Armed Forces
young and fighting fit. Every year approximately 55,000 personnel so
retire from the three Services. Even while in service, as they serve
mostly in Field and non-Field areas far away from their homes, they
are not able to attend to their social and family responsibilities. Due
to the changing socio-economic conditions in the country, like the
breaking down of the joint family system etc. these ex-Servicemen
need support and assistance from the Government for their resettlement
and welfare. The Governments both at the Centre and in the States/
Union Territories have, in fact, already taken a number of support
measures in this regard.
However, as most of the ex-Servicemen take up residence in the
State Union Territory to which they belong, frequently in rural areas
their rehabilitation can be achieved best by the concerned State
Government/Union Territory Administration. The programmes and
various schemes for rehabilitation of ex-Servicemen introduced by the
Kendriya Sainik Board (KSB), the apex body at the Centre, have by
and large been accepted and implemented by the State/Union
Territories. Nevertheless, some of the schemes launched and the
proposals recommended by the KSB or otherwise taken by Ministry of
Defence in the past are yet to be implemented on the desired lines by
certain State Governments/Union Territory Administrations. I am
enclosing a list of such issues requiring your personnel attention.
I believe that action with promptitude and sympathy on these
issues and their regular and periodical review at your level will have
a salutary effect in resolution of the problems of ex-Servicemen. I shall
be grateful if you could share with us the results of this review at the
earliest preferably by the end of November, 1995
With regards,
Your sincerely,
Sd/
(P .V . Narasimha Rao)
To
Chief Ministers of the All States
and the Lt. Governors of the Union Territories
37

SHARAD PAWAR MINISTER OF DEFENCE
GOVT. OF INDIA
DO No. RM/1745-F/A/92 March 30, 1992
Recognising the valuable service rendered to the country by
ex-Servicemen, Government attaches the utmost importance to their
welfare and rehabilitation. While a lot has been done for their
resettlement much more remains. Two areas where time bound action
is required are: (i) allotment of land to ex-Servicemen, at or near their
native places, to enable their resettlement after retirement, and
(ii) preferential treatment to the children of ex-Servicemen in admission
to educational institutions, particularly in medical/engineering colleges.
Ex-Servicemen, who have renamed away from their homes for most
of their service careers, cannot satisfy the domicialiary restrictions.
Consequently, they are virtually State less.
2. I shall greatly appreciate your kind personal interest and early
response.
Your sincerely,
Sd/-
(Sharad Pawar)
Chief Ministers/Governors
of all States.
38

D.O. No. RM/745-F/92 14 February, 1992
Dear Shri
One of the priority requirements of Servicemen, on retirement, is
to have their own residential accommodation, at an affordable price.
However, the majority of them are unable to acquire houses durning
their service due to non-exposure to various housing schemes launched
by the State Governments, Co-operative Housing Societies and private
agencies.
The aforesaid problem has been engaging Government’s attention
for quite some time now. After analysis, it has been observed that the
housing requirements of ex-Servicemen can best be met by promoting
housing colonies for them at places where they have large
concentrations or where they wish to settle down. On this basis, it is
found that 62 cities/districts (other than the metropolitan cities) have
sizable population of ex-Servicemen. The identified stations, located in
your States are shown in the enclosed statement. I request you to
identify suitable pockets of land at these stations and allocate them at
concessional rates for the construction of dwelling units either by
ex-Service personnel themselves or through their Co-operative Housing
Societies or Army Welfare Housing Organisation/Air Force/Naval
Housing Boards.
I shall be grateful for your very early response in the matter.
With warm regards.
Yours sincerely,
Sd/-
(Sharad Pawar)
Encl. As above
39

P. K. Mishra
Tel. No.: 23011775
D.O. No. 6(67)/2001/SCOD/II/D(Res) 25th February, 2004
The Standing Committee on Defence (Thirteenth Lok Sabha) have
made certain observations/recommendations in the Twentieth Report
with regard to housing problems of servicemen and ex-servicemen. I
am reproducing the extract of para 75 of the Report for your kind
information:
“The Committee desire the Ministry to take up with other State
Governments to formulate residential schemes on the line of ‘Vijay
Vir Awas Yojana’ of the Delhi Development Authority for
Ex-servicemen. The Committee recommend that Defence personnel
should be treated as a special category and the Ministry should
explore with financial and banking institutions to provide housing
loans on a very low rate of interest with minimum documentation
to the Servicemen and Ex-servicemen.”
2. As desired by the Standing Committee of Lok Sabha, your
Government may consider to formulate special housing schemes for
the benefit of servicemen and ex-servicemen. In this context, the
Committee has taken note of the ‘Vijayee Vir Awas Yojana’ formulated
by DDA for ex-servicemen. I am enclosing a copy of this Scheme for
your perusal.
3. The Standing Committee has recommended that defence
personnel should be treated as a special category for this purpose. It
is, therefore, suggested that the State Governments may consider the
need for formulating special housing schemes for the ex-servicemen
and servicemen.
4. I shall be grateful if action taken by your Government in this
regard is intimated to us.
Yours sincerely,
Sd/-
(P . K. MISHRA)
All Chief Secretaries
State Governments
(As per list attached)
40

41
Recommendation (Sl. No. 9, Para No. 82)
The Committee note that the Ministry have programmes for the
welfare of widows of Ex-servicemen. However, there is a large number
of widows in far-flung areas who are not aware about their rights and
welfare schemes available to them. The widows of soldiers who have
given their lives fighting for their motherland should be honoured
and the welfare schemes should be delivered at their doorstep. The
Committee, therefore, recommend that the Ministry should again
impress upon the State Governments to keep the widows and Ex-
servicemen well informed about various welfare measures through
Rajya Sainik Board, District Collectors, Zila Sainik Board as well as
NICNET, electronic and print media.
Reply of the Government
All efforts are being made to make the ESM, Widows and War
Widows aware of the various schemes formulated by the Central and
State Governments for their welfare. At the level of Director General
Resettlement (DGR) and Kendriya Sainik Board (KSB) a number of
Newsletters, pamphlets and revised Guide Book-2003 have been
published at periodic intervals and distributed at the Zila Sainik Board
level. Even the ESM and widows who visit KSB are distributed this
publicity material free of cost. The publicity of the schemes can be
gauged from the fact that the number of ESM/families applying for
financial assistances in the last few years has increased manifold.
The Ministry of Defence have also from time to time been
addressing the State Governments regarding welfare measures of
widows and ex-servicemen. A letter has been addressed by Additional
Secretary, Ministry of Defence to Chief Secretaries/Administrators of
all State Governments/UTs on 22nd August 2003 requesting them to
appoint District Collector, Deputy Commissioner as nodal designated
officer at the district level to monitor and oversee the functioning of
the Zila Sainik Welfare Offices for resolving the various issues.
[Ministry of Defence OM No. H-11013/19/2003/D (Parl.)
dated 27.8.04]
Recommendation (Sl.No. 9, Para No. 83)
The Committee also recommended that the activities of the Zila
Sainik Boards should be monitored on a regular basis and the Board
should furnish periodical report to the Ministry regarding the benefits
actually reaching Ex-servicemen/widows/dependents.

42
Reply of the Government
Secretaries, Rajya Sainik Boards are expected to carry out
inspections of all the Zila Sainik Boards within their jurisdiction at
least once a year. Brief reports of the inspections carried out by the
Secretaries, Rajya Sainik Boards are forwarded to Secretary, KSB with
a copy to the Ministry. The reports highlight both the achievements
and the deficiencies of the Zila Sainik Boards.
Secretary, Kendriya Sainik Board (KSB) is the inspecting officer of
the Departments of Sainik Welfare in the States. These Departments of
Sainik Welfare are visited by the inspecting officers once in a year
generally at the time of their State Board meetings where their
functioning is monitored. Notes on various problem areas are also
shared with these departments of Sainik Welfare.
The Departments of Sainik Welfare of the State are required to
submit a Pink Return every six month in which all important
information related to the functioning of their organisation is provided
to KSB. The information is collated at the level of KSB and grew areas
are brought to the notice of these Departments in which their
performance is noted. The Zila Sainik Welfare Offices can also be
inspected by DGR or KSB on as required basis.
The Zila Sainik Welfare offices are inspected by Directors,
Department of Sainik Welfare and also by the Directors Resettlement
Zone at least once a year. The Zila Sainik Welfare Offices submit a
green Return once a year in which their performance is depicted. It is,
however, felt that the State Governments should strengthen the
organisation at the district and state level and provide necessary
manpower and wherewithal.
[Ministry of Defence OM No. H-11013/19/2003/D (Parl.)
dated 27.8.04]
Recommendation (Sl.No. 13, Para No. 128)
The Committee note that the organisations such as the Indian Ex-
Services League (IESL), Air Force Association, Air Force Wives Welfare
Association, Army Wives Welfare Association and Naval Wives Welfare
Association have been working for the welfare of Ex-servicemen,
widows and their families. Those organisations also give scholarships
to the meritorious children, take care of mother and children through

43
family health and hygiene programmes, assist in settlement of family
cases, especially family pension cases. The Committee hope that the
Government will continue to give financial aid to these organisations
and help them to serve ex-servicemen and their families in a better
way and also see the proper utilization of the grants/aids provided to
these organisations for the purpose of which the same are given.
Reply of the Government
Army Wives Welfare Association, Air Force Wives Welfare
Association and Naval Wives Welfare Association are not getting any
financial assistance from the Government. However, they are getting
support from the welfare funds of the respective Services. Asha Schools
are being run under AWWA at various military stations in the country
for special children (Mentally and physically handicapped children)
and are getting grants in aid on an annual basis from the Ministry of
Social Justice and Empowerment. In addition grants are being provided
by Formation Headquarters to make these schools self sustainable.
The Indian Ex-services League and Air Force Association are the
two recognized Ex-servicemen associations. The guidelines issued by
Government for recognition of ex-servicemen association contain a
provision that recognition would not entitle an association for any
kind of financial or other assistance from the Government.
[Ministry of Defence OM No. H-11013/19/2003/D (Parl.)
dated 27.8.04]
Recommendation (Sl. No. 14, Para No. 142)
The Committee note that despite vast number of personnel of
defence services as well as Ex-servicemen settled in and hailing from
different parts of the country there are only 127 Service Hospitals to
provide treatment to them and only 22 private hospitals are recognized
to provide specialized medical facilities.
Reply of the Government
It may be mentioned that 129 service hospital and 25 private
hospitals recognized by DGAFMS scattered all over the country are
providing medical facilities to personnel of defence services. In field
areas, the comprehensive medical care is being provided to the troops
by field medical units.

44
In addition, the Ex-Servicemen Contributory Health Scheme (ECHS)
has come into effect from 01 April 2003 to provide comprehensive
medical care to Ex-Servicemen pensioners and their dependents through
a network of 227 ECHS Polyclinics including 123 in Non Military
Stations and empanelment of Private Hospitals and Diagnostic Centres.
[Ministry of Defence OM No. H-11013/19/2003/D (Parl.)
dated 27.8.04]
Recommendation (Sl. No. 14, Para No. 143)
The Committee feel that medical requirements of Servicemen and
Ex-servicemen are massive but very poorly addressed and their
grievances get compounded considering the fact that there are only
127 service hospitals and 22 recognized private hospitals for specialized
treatment for more than 20 lakh Ex-servicemen and their dependents
and about 11 lakh serving personnel excluding their family members.
The Committee, therefore, desire that the Ministry of Defence should
ensure immediate improvement and balanced expansion in the services/
facilities being provided by the service medical hospitals located in
different parts of the country and also prepare suitable plans for
increasing the number of such hospitals in a time bound manner. The
Ministry as an interim measure may consider other options, viz. mobile
clinics, polyclinics and attachment with other Government hospitals,
increasing the number of private recognized hospitals to ensure that
Ex-servicemen and their families/dependents are not deprived of even
basic and emergent medical facilities.
Reply of the Government
The number of ex-servicemen pensioners is approximately 16.9
lakhs. Ex-servicemen Contributory Health Scheme has come into effect
from 1st April 2003 for catering to the Medicare needs of Ex-servicemen
pensioners and their dependent family members. 227 polyclinics are
proposed to be set up over 5 years under the scheme  i.e. augmented
armed forces clinics in 104 military stations and New armed forces
polyclinics in 123 non military stations covering the entire country.
These polyclinics will be linked to service hospitals as well as civil
Government and private hospitals and diagnostic centres. All stations
with Ex-servicemen population of 2500 or more will be covered under

45
the scheme. For the stations where Ex-servicemen population is less
than 2500, the dependency on the nearest new armed forces polyclinics
or augmented armed forces clinics will be provided. The Government
have approved the list of 431 CGHS empanelled hospitals and
55 Railway empanelled hospitals for better medical treatment to Ex-
servicemen pensioners and their dependent family members.
[Ministry of Defence OM No. H-11013/19/2003/D (Parl.)
dated 27.8.04]
Recommendation (Sl. No. 14, Para No. 144)
The Committee note that the Government had introduced a Group
Insurance Medical Benefit Scheme on 1st April 1991 for Army and Air
Force Ex-servicemen. One time lump sum term premium is charged
from them to provide specified financial assistance to cover the cost of
specialized treatment of the Ex-servicemen and their spouses in the
authorized hospitals. Navy has not launched any such scheme for
their Ex-servicemen.
Reply of the Government
The Committee has noted the factual position indicated by the
Government.
[Ministry of Defence OM No. H-11013/19/2003/D (Parl.)
dated 27.8.04]
Recommendation (Sl. No. 14, Para No. 145)
The Committee further note that the Ministry have approved an
Ex-servicemen Contributory Health Scheme (ECHS) on 30 December
2002 and this scheme has been introduced from 1st April 2003 on the
pattern of Central Government Health Scheme (CGHS) and the Ex-
servicemen will have to pay the charges to avail of the benefits of the
new scheme (ECHS) at par with the CGHS rates.
Reply of the Government
The Committee has noted the factual position indicated by the
Government. No action on the part of the Government.
[Ministry of Defence OM No. H-11013/19/2003/D (Parl.)
dated 27.8.04]

46
Recommendation (Sl. No. 14, Para No. 146)
The Committee note that the benefits of the new scheme will be
available only in those districts where registered Ex-servicemen
population is more than 2500. The Committee feel that most of the
Ex-servicemen may hesitate in joining this scheme because Ex-
servicemen of Army and Air Force who had opted for Group insurance
Medical Benefit Scheme and had already paid charges again to avail
the medical facility under the ECHS. The Committee feel that it would
hardly reduce the patient load in the Military hospitals.
Reply of the Government
The benefits of the new scheme will also be available to those
stations where Ex-servicemen pensioner population is less than 2500,
the dependency on the nearest ECHS polyclinic in military/non military
stations will be provided.
The charges paid for Army Group Insurance Fund (AGIF) and Air
Force Group Insurance Scheme (AFGIS) will be refunded to their
members in accordance with rules framed by these organisations, as
these Schemes will terminate 2006 and 2005 respectively. However, the
Ex-servicemen who had opted for Group Insurance Medical Benefit
Scheme would have to pay the charges for becoming a number of
ECHS. Since treatment under ECHS can be availed not only through
Service Hospitals but also through empanelled civil hospitals/nursing
homes/diagnostics centres, as per the patient’s choice, it will lead to
reduction in load on Service Hospitals. Furthermore, in Military
Stations, the ECHS Polyclinics are being co-located with Service
Hospitals, in order to reduce the outdoor patient load.
[Ministry of Defence OM No. H-11013/19/2003/D (Parl.)
dated 27.8.04]
Recommendation (Sl. No. 14, Para No. 147)
The Committee, therefore, recommend that the Government should
not charge again for getting benefits under the ECHS from those Ex-
serviceman who have already paid the premium for their respective
Group Insurance Medical Benefit Schemes for availing medical facilities.
Similarly, the widows of Ex-servicemen should also be covered under
ECHS and as a gesture of our gratitude to the martyrs they should be
exempted from the payment of the premium.

47
Reply of the Government
Charges paid for AGIF/AFGIS will be refunded to their members
as these schemes will terminate in 2006 and 2005 respectively. Widows
of Ex-servicemen drawing pension have also been made eligible for
ECHS on payment of contribution. War widows have been exempted
from payment of contribution under ECHS. Further, it is mentioned
that AGIS/AFGIS are private schemes of the Army and Air Force and
are not controlled by Govt. As such they have no connection with
ECHS, which is a much more elaborate scheme, covering all diseases.
[Ministry of Defence OM No. H-11013/19/2003/D (Parl.)
dated 27.8.04]

CHAPTER III
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE
COMMITTEE DO NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE IN
VIEW OF GOVERNMENT’S REPLIES
Recommendation (Sl. No. 2, Para Nos. 10 & 11)
The Committee also note that there is a Contributory Group
Insurance Scheme for the Army and the Air Force personnel to provide
cover in case of disability or death of the personnel. This insurance
cover is extended after retirement with pension for a period of
15 years or till the age of 70 years, whichever is earlier, on payment
of nominal one time lumpsum premium. However, there is no similar
scheme available for the personnel of Indian Navy.
The Committee are of the view that the insurance cover for only
15 years after the retirement of Defence personnel is discriminatory as
most of the JCOs/ORs and Jawans retire at a young age and, therefore,
recommend that the insurance cover should be available to all
categories of Defence personnel till the death irrespective of their ranks.
The Committee also recommend that a similar insurance scheme should
be formulated and implemented for the personnel of Indian Navy as
well at the earliest in a time-bound manner.
Reply of the Government
The post retirement insurance scheme of Army Group Insurance
Fund Called “Extended Insurance Scheme” provides for insurance cover
for 20 years after retirement or 72 years of age whichever is earlier.
Similarly, the Post Retirement Insurance Cover Scheme of Air Force
Group Insurance Society for retired Air Force personnel provides for
initial 15 years 100% cover or 70 years of age whichever is earlier and
beyond 15 years 50% cover upto the age of 70 years. The Indian Navy
is also having the Post Retirement Death Insurance Extended Scheme
for Naval pensioners which provides for insurance cover for 15 years
after retirement or 70 years of age whichever is earlier. The said
schemes provide for the insurance cover by charging one time non
refundable premium.
48

49
2. The suggestion of the Standing Committee on Defence that the
insurance cover should be available to all categories of Defence service
personnel till death has been considered by the Government. In case
extended insurance cover is extended upto death for all members after
retirement, then members will have to pay a very heavy one time
premium which will be beyond the paying capacity of many of the
Personnel Below Officer Rank (PBORs) and in a group insurance
concept the scheme has to be made compulsory for all and there
cannot be provision of option. In case the extended cover is to be
extended to Defence service personnel till death then the scheme will
have to be subsidized/supported by the Government and the financial
implication thereof would be around Rs. 235 crores per annum for an
insurance cover of Rs. 3 lakhs and 1.5 lakhs for approximately 2300
Officers and 57000 PRORs respectively retiring from Defence Services
every year. In view of this, the necessity of providing insurance cover
for whole life has not been considered financially viable by the
Government.
[Ministry of Defence OM No. H-11013/19/2003/D (Parl.)
dated 27.8.04]
Recommendation (Sl. No. 6, Para No. 55)
The performance of Central Government and Ministries/
Departments under it has been particularly pathetic, as only 4 Ex-
Servicemen were provided employment in 2001. The Ordnance Factories
which are directly under the Ministry of Defence have not filled up
even a single vacancy of Ex-servicemen in the last five years. Similarly,
no employment has been provided to Ex-Servicemen in Central Para
Military Forces in 2001.
Reply of the Government
Poor intake of Ex-servicemen in Government jobs is mainly
attributable to (i) shrinking job opportunities in Government with the
downsizing of the establishment and (ii) lack of effective reservation
for the Ex-servicemen in Government jobs because of the 50% restriction
imposed on total reservation to be provided to various sections of the
society. The reservation made for SC, ST, OBC works out to be 49.5%.
As such the reservation provided to Ex-servicemen is of horizontal
nature as against the vertical reservation provided to SC/ST/OBC.
Under horizontal reservation there is no roster system or carry forward
of un-utilised vacancies.

50
Position in regard to re-employment provided to Ex-servicemen
by the Ordnance Factories and Central Para Military Forces has been
checked up form them. 42 Ex-servicemen had been recruited against
direct recruitment quota during the last five years in 21 Ordnance
Factories. Feedback received from the Central Para Military Forces
shows that the Ex-servicemen after their retirement from the Army are
not keen to join a Force where the service conditions are even more
hard and challenging.
In November 2003, Central Industrial force had notified 1104
vacancies exclusively reserved for Ex-servicemen but the response from
Ex-servicemen was reported to be not satisfactory. Similarly, Indo-
Tibetan Border Force could get only 6 vacancies filled up in 2003
against 13 vacancies reserved for Ex-servicemen. No direct recruitment
is carried out by National Security Guards. They had however, recruited
53 Ex-servicemen in technical posts in pursuance of one time permission
granted by Ministry of Home Affairs during 2001.
[Ministry of Defence OM No. H-11013/19/2003/D (Parl.)
dated 27.8.04]
Recommendation (Sl. No. 8, Para No. 76)
The Committee would also like the Ministry to provide not only
the necessary encouragement but also moral and material support to
the Army Welfare Housing Organization (AWHO) and Air Force Naval
Housing Board (AFNHB) and other housing organizations to construct
houses for the serving and retiring personnel.
Reply of the Government
The Army Welfare Housing Organization (AWHO) and Air Force
Naval Housing Board (AFNBH) are autonomous bodies constructing
houses on no-profit-no-loss basis. Therefore, funds from the budgetary
provision can not be diverted to these housing organizations.
[Ministry of Defence OM No. H-11013/19/2003/D (Parl.)
dated 27.8.04]
Recommendation (Sl. No. 10, Para Nos. 97 & 98)
The Committee observe that there are two major demands of the
Armed Forces personnel with regard to pensions:
(a) pension may be granted on the principle of ‘One Rank One
Pension’; and

51
(b) the condition of 33 years of service for drawing the full
pension be removed.
The Committee note that the Ministry of Personnel, Public
Grievances and Pension had constituted an Inter-Ministerial Committee
to examine the demand of ‘One Rank One Pension’. The Committee
would like the Inter-Ministerial Committee to complete its task speedily.
Reply of the Government
The Inter-Ministerial Committee in its last meeting held on
24th September, 2004 has finalised and submitted its report to the
Government. A copy of the report has been received in this Ministry
on 27.09.2004. The report has been accepted by Ministry of Defence.
[Ministry of Defence OM No. H-11013/19/2003/D (Parl.)
dated 27.8.04]
Recommendation (Sl. No. 11, Para Nos. 114 & 115)
114. The Committee note that the armed forces personnel many a
time get disabled in the process of conflict with other nations and also
during national security duties as also during peace time while on
training or performing day-to-day activities.
115. The Committee note that the disability pension for the
servicemen which is about Rs. 2,600 per month for the commissioned
officer and Rs. 1,550 for the Jawan, who are disabled in the line of
duty is very less to sustain the livelihood of the injured Jawan/Officer
and his family. In cases where there is 100% disability the poor Jawan’s
standard of living slumps towards the meagre sustenance level. Had
he remained in service he would have been eligible for accommodation,
rations and other facilities available to the serving personnel. In absence
of these benefits inability to take up any job due to disability, the
Jawan becomes a burden on his own family. The Committee feel that
the disability pension, especially in cases of 100 percent disability, needs
to be revised in the case of Armed Forces personnel. The Committee,
therefore, recommend that some formulae in the case of disability
pension should be worked out so as to provide pension-cum-disability
pension equal to last pay drawn to the 100% disabled service personnel
as in the case of family pensioners where the widow is granted
liberalized family pension equal to the reckonable emoluments last
drawn by the deceased. The same should also be worked out suitably
in the cases where disability is above 50 percent.

52
Reply of the Government
The recommendation of the Committee has been examined.
Considering the need for keeping the distinction between those disabled
on account of war injury and those disabled in the normal course, it
has not been found feasible to accept the recommendation of the
Committee.
[Ministry of Defence OM No. H-11013/19/2003/D (Parl.)
dated 27.8.04]
Recommendation (Sl. No. 14, Para No. 148)
The Committee note that the Government have proposed to create
or augment medical facilities at 104 existing military hospitals out of
127 hospitals and 123 Polyclinics/Medical Inspection Rooms will be
constructed over a period of next 5 years for providing fresh medical
facilities at non-military stations in the district head quarters. The
Committee express their concern about the construction cost of
polyclinics/medical inspection Centres, i.e. Rs. 600 per sq. ft. on the
basis of MES rates. These rates are almost double as compared to the
PWD rates prevailing in various States.
Reply of the Government
The standard cost of construction has been worked out by
E-in-C’s Branch as per existing norms/scales relevant to other MES
constructions for the three services. The average plinth area rate of a
polyclinic as per the MES and CPWD schedules works out to
Rs. 555 per sq. ft. and Rs. 744 per sq. ft. respectively. However,
considering the All India Nature of ECHS, local conditions at various
Stations, and the need to establish a modern infrastructure, it was
decided to project requirement of construction cost as Rs. 600/Sq. ft.
The cost takes into account the construction of Polyclinic building
with tiled flooring, glass pivotal aluminium door at the entrance and
flush door and polywindows. The cost of external services viz electricity,
water and sewage, drainage, roads, boundary wall and gates etc. have
not been taken into accounts as the same will depend upon site to
site. GOI/MOD has approved construction through MES.
[Ministry of Defence OM No. H-11013/19/2003/D (Parl.)
dated 27.8.04]

53
Recommendation (Sl. No. 14, Para No. 149)
The Committee recommend that the construction of these
polyclinics/MI Centres should be expedited and their cost be kept at
the minimum.
Reply of the Government
Government orders on procedure for construction of ECHS
polyclinics have already been issued. The construction of ECHS
polyclinics will be done according to Defence Works procedure 1986
as amended from time to time. The allocation of Capital Budget for
construction over a five years period has been done on an annual
basis.
[Ministry of Defence OM No. H-11013/19/2003/D (Parl.)
dated 27.8.04]
Recommendation (Sl. No. 14, Para No. 150)
The Committee strongly recommend that the Government should
recognize all civil hospitals in every district on India as a referral
hospital for ex-servicemen under the ECHS card holders and adopt
the same pattern at par with the CGHS for the benefit of those ex-
servicemen who are residing in far flung areas of the country so that
they can also avail this facility at the nearest block/district level not
as yet covered by ECHS.
Reply of the Government
The procedure for empanelment of hospitals/Nursing Homes/
Diagnostic Centres under the ECHS has been finalized. The
empanelment will be carried out as per Qualitative Requirement (QR)
and stringent standards laid down, to ensure that only those hospitals
providing quality services are recognized. The scope of ECHS is much
more diverse and polyclinics are proposed in many far flung areas of
the country. The facilities under ECHS covers all diseases, for all
members and their dependent family members. The empanelment of
Hospitals/Nursing Homes/Diagnostic Centres shall be carried out to
meet the aspirations of ex-service pensioners (who are mostly rural
based) residing all over the country, as opposed to CGHS which is
town based and restricted to only 24 cities.
[Ministry of Defence OM No. H-11013/19/2003/D (Parl.)
dated 27.8.04]

54
Recommendation (Sl. No. 14, Para No. 151)
The Committee also recommend that the Ministry should
immediately take necessary measures to enable the ex-servicemen to
claim their medical bills from the concerned MI centres/Military
hospitals and not from the Headquarters at Delhi involving a
cumbersome procedure.
Reply of the Government
Payment for medical bills for treatment/diagnostic tests of ECHS
beneficiaries carried out at empanelled hospitals/nursing homes/
diagnostic centres will be paid directly by the scheme and not by the
members. Hence ECHS members do not have to pay for treatment
from their scarce resources except under certain emergent/unavoidable
specific conditions for which reimbursements will be permitted.
[Ministry of Defence OM No. H-11013/19/2003/D (Parl.)
dated 27.8.04]

CHAPTER IV
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH
REPLIES OF GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY
THE COMMITTEE
Recommendation (Sl. No. 1, Para No. 7)
The Committee also desire the Ministry to formalize a Consultative
Machinery to actively involve the retired high rank Defence personnel
for consultations to obtain their suggestions on regular basis so as to
derive full benefits of their vast experience in Defence arena.
Reply of the Government
The recommendations of the Committee set up for the purpose,
have been accepted in principle and a case has been taken up with
Ministry of Finance/Department of Personnel and Training (DoP&T)
for engaging retired officers as consultants. They have been requested
to consider granting dispensation to Ministry of Defence (MoD) in
respect of the following:—
(i) removal of the restriction of employment of only two
consultants from the pool of retired officers of the level of
JS & above in MoD and its attached/subordinate offices.
(ii) The authority to fill up upto 50% of the total number of
consultants who could be employed from the pool of
retired/retiring officers directly by MoD. In case the number
of consultants exceeds 50% approval of DoPT would be
sought on a case to case basis.
(iii) Extension of the period of engagement of consultants from
the stipulated period of 6 months, to 6 months extendable
to one year or upto the age of 62 years, whichever is earlier.
Comments of the Committee
(Please See Para 39 of Chapter-I)
55

56
Recommendation (Sl. No. 3, Para No. 14)
The Committee note that the benefits of reservation in professional
institutions have practically not reached the wards/dependents of
serving defence personnel and that of Ex-servicemen if they are not in
the list of gallantry award winners for the reason that as per the
criteria fixed by the Kendriya Sainik Board for allotment of reserved
seats the requests for admissions received from them are put on the
last priority. The Committee are also surprised to note that many of
the State Governments have not still made any provision of reservation
for wards/dependents of the Defence personnel.
Reply of the Government
Ministry of Defence have recommended the following order of
preference to give the benefits of reservation in professional institutions:
(i) Widows/wards of defence personnel killed in action
(ii) Wards of serving personnel and ex-servicemen disabled in
action
(iii) Widows/Wards of defence personnel who died while in
service with death attributable to military service
(iv) Wards of defence personnel disabled in peace time with
disability attributable to military service
(v) Wards of ex-servicemen personnel and serving personnel in
receipt of Gallantry awards
(vi) Wards of ex-servicemen
(vii) Wards of serving personnel
Since the number of vacancies available as per current reservation
is limited, the benefit of reservation does not reach the categories
mentioned towards the end of the preference list. Certain institutions
do not provide reservation under Defence quota as per the
recommended order of preference. As a result the benefit of reservation
is not available to wards/dependents of serving defence personnel
and Ex-servicemen.
Ministry of Defence have been insisting on increasing the
reservation quota available under Defence category and, in pursuance
of this, Ministry of Human Resource Development were requested on

57
7th Nov. 2000 and 29th August 2003 to instruct all Central Universities,
Autonomous bodies, professional and non professional institutes
including IITs and IIMs to consider providing 5% reservation to the
wards of defence personnel and ex-servicemen and the seats reserved
for them should be allotted strictly in accordance with the priorities of
7 categories of defence personnel. Letters addressed to Ministry of
Human Resource Development are annexed as Annexure A1 and A2.
Some of the State Governments at their level also provide
reservation in various streams in professional institutes for the wards/
dependents of defence personnel. State wise percentage of reservation
for dependents of ESM in professional colleges is given in Annexure B.
The subject matter has also been discussed with the State
Government officials in the KSB meetings held from time to time.
[Ministry of Defence OM No. H-11013/19/2003/D (Parl.)
dated 27.8.04]
Comments of the Committee
(Please See Para 18 of Chapter-I of the Report)
Recommendation (Sl. No. 3, Para No. 15)
The Committee, therefore, recommend that the Ministry should at
once take up with such State Governments to make suitable provisions
for reservation of seats in professional institutions for the wards of the
defence personnel. The Committee would also like the Ministry to
thoroughly review the existing levels of reservations and explore the
possibilities of increasing the same.
Reply of the Government
The State Governments were requested to make suitable provisions
for reservation of seats in professional institutions for the wards of
defence personnel vide MoD letter dated 3rd June 1994. MoD have
also requested HRD Ministry on 17th Nov. 2000 and 29th August 2003
to instruct the state autonomous bodies, professional and non
professional institutes including IITs and IIMs to make suitable
provisions for reservation of seats in provisional institutions for the
wards of defence personnel.
[Ministry of Defence OM No. H-11013/19/2003/D (Parl.)
dated 27.8.04]

58
Comments of the Committee
(Please See Para 18 of Chapter-I)
Recommendation (Sl. No. 4, Para No. 21 to 23)
The Committee have been informed that there is liberal treatment
with the serving Defence personnel as compared to civilian employees
so far as the types and days of leave available to them are concerned.
The Committee feel that this is rather desirable despite the depletion
in available strength and other implications in sanctioning the leave,
keeping in view the strenuous environment and stressful conditions
under which they perform their duties.
The Committee note that a provision of annual leave of only 30
days has been made for Recruit Boys whereas Officers and JCOs avail
60 days of leave in a year and Furlough leave is available only for
Officers. The Committee also note that on the one hand practical
difficulties are being faced in sanctioning of leave due to exigencies of
deployment of troops, leading to accumulation of leave, on the other
hand, the personnel are being denied benefit of encashment due to
ceiling of 300 days on accumulated leave.
The Committee, therefore, recommend that suitable measures should
be taken to minimize the difficulties being faced by the Defence
personnel in getting their leave sanctioned. At the same time, the
discrepancies in kinds of leave provisioned for Officers, JCOs and
Recruit Boys should be rectified. The Committee further recommend
that the ceiling of 300 days for leave encashment should be removed
as part of compensatory measure so as to encourage service personnel
to encash the accumulated leave to maintain availability of sufficient
manpower for deployment.
Reply of the Government
Leave is normally sanctioned unless operational commitments
demand otherwise, in which case personnel are allowed to carry
forward their leave to subsequent years as a special case. Action is
being taken to remove discrepancies in kinds of leave provisioned for
Officers, JCOs and Recruit Boys.
[Ministry of Defence OM No. H-11013/19/2003/D (Parl.)
dated 27.8.04]

59
Comments of the Committee
(Please See Para 24 of Chapter-I)
Recommendation (Sl. No. 5, Para No. 38)
The Committee feel that the rehabilitation of Ex-Servicemen with
due dignity and honour necessarily require a National perspective and
vision. The multifaceted plethora of problems of Ex-Servicemen needs
to be addressed by the entire society including the Governmental
agencies of Centre and States and not the existing set up in the Ministry
of Defence alone. The Committee, therefore, recommend that a statutory
National Commission on Ex-Servicemen on the lines of National
Commission for SC/ST/Minorities should be set up urgently. The
Commission shall submit its report to the Parliament every year. The
Commission shall in addition to the other functions, also monitor DGR,
Rajya Sainik Boards and Zila Sainik Boards.
Reply of the Government
The High Level Committee on problems of ex-Servicemen
constituted under the chairmanship of Shri K.P . Singh Deo, the then
Raksha Rajya Mantri, had recommended in 1984 for the setting up of
an ex-Servicemen Resettlement Commission similar to Scheduled Caste/
Scheduled Tribe Commissions. This recommendation and the following
inter-linked recommendations made by the Committee were examined
in depth in consultation with the Department of Legal Affairs:
(a) Enactment of National Ex-Servicemen Resettlement Act.
(b) Constitution of a Parliamentary Committee for over seeing
the implementation of various schemes and facilities for ex-
Servicemen.
2. The DoP&T and the Ministry of Finance were also consulted in
the matter. Subsequently, on the basis of the advice received from the
Department of Legal Affairs/DoP&T, it was felt that above
recommendations involve the question whether ex-Servicemen should
have statutory reservation even in the matter of allotment of
infrastructure for self-employment which lies within the purview of
the States and that quantum of reservation in favour of the ex-
Servicemen, whether under the proposed Central or State Acts would
need to be determined keeping in view the local conditions in each

60
State, and in particular to the percentage of ex-Servicemen in the States
total population. It was felt that it would appear to be difficult to
achieve a uniform consensus throughout the country on this matter as
local perceptions as well as local infrastructure are bound to differ.
For the same reasons, the percentage of reservation in job opportunities
under the Model Bill for the States is also likely to vary from State to
State and that an additional factor involved in dealing with this issue
is the limitation on the overall reservation at 50% of recruitment as
per the ruling of the Courts. In view of the above a decision was
taken at the highest level not to accept the above recommendations,
including the recommendation for providing Commission/
Commissioner for ex-Servicemen.
3. The recommendation concerning setting up of an ex-Servicemen
resettlement Commission was again considered by an Inter-Ministerial
Committee set up in 1992 to deal with remainder problems of ex-
Servicemen. This Committee had also not agreed to the proposal, as
there are already Sainik Board organisations in the State/UTs and the
DGR at the Centre to oversee the implementation of reservation policy
and the interest of ex-Servicemen. Details or Central/State organisations
looking after the welfare of ex-Servicemen are given below:
Central Level
(a) Directorate General Resettlement. The Directorate General
Resettlement (DGR) under the Ministry of Defence has been set up to
look after all matters connected with Resettlement and Welfare of Ex-
Servicemen (including officers), their widows and dependents.
(b) The DGR has a Zonal Resettlement Directorate co-located with
each of the five Army Commands Headquarters. These Directorates
are the Zonal representatives of the DGR and are responsible for
looking after the resettlement and welfare of ex-Servicemen in these
respective Zones.
(c) Kendriya Sainik Board (KSB). Kendriya Sainik Board is the
apex body at the Centre which provides policy guidelines on
resettlement and welfare matters affecting Ex-Serviceman and families
of serving and deceased personnel. The Board with the Raksha Mantri
as President has 45 members including 13 Chief Ministers, 7 Ministers
of State from Central and State Governments, the Service Chiefs and
other members. The Kendriya Sainik board co-ordinates the work of

61
Departments of Sainik Welfare in States/UTs and provides budgetary
support to the extent of 50 percent for their establishment and
maintenance costs.
State Level. At the State level, Rajya Sainik Boards have been set
up in the 32 States/UTs in the country to provide policy guidelines to
the Departments of Sainik Welfare and Zila Sainik Welfare Offices.
District Level. The Zila Sainik Welfare Offices provide grassroots
resettlement and welfare services to Ex-Servicemen, widows dependents
and families left behind by soldiers serving in field areas. These offices
are created in Zilas where the population of Ex-Servicemen, their
dependants and families of serving soldiers is over 7500.
4. The functioning of the Zila Sainik Boards is monitored by the
respective Rajya Sainik Board. In turn five Zonal Resettlement
Directorates oversee the functioning of the Rajya Sainik Boards.
Kendriya Sainik Board and Directorate General Resettlement monitor
the overall functioning of the Rajya Sainik Boards.
5. The above proposal was reconsidered again in the year 2000 on
a recommendation made by the Committee on Government Assurances
that the Government may constitute a permanent Commission for ex-
Servicemen as in the case of Backward Commission etc. so that it will
regulate, monitor and recommend. However, it was felt that there is
already a plethora of bodies, both as the State level and the Central
level, looking after the welfare of ex-servicemen and therefore, there is
no need to add one more organisation to the existing organisations
looking after the welfare of ex-Servicemen. In this connection, it is
also stated that the main constraints in extending the desired welfare
and resettlement benefits by the Central/State Governments to the ex-
Servicemen/dependents of deceased Defence services, are lack of
adequate financial resources, shrinking of job opportunities in Central/
State Governments, increase in the population of ex-Servicemen by
about 55,000 annually, un-employment in general and not the lack of
the organizational set up to oversee these aspects. As such, it was not
considered desirable to constitute a National Commission for
Rehabilitation of ex-Servicemen.
6. The proposal has been re-examined and it has been decided
that in view of the position mentioned above, there is no need to

62
constitute a statutory National Commission on Ex-Servicemen on the
lines of National Commission for SC/ST/Minorities.
[Ministry of Defence OM No. H-11013/19/2003/D (Parl.)
dated 27.8.04]
Comments of the Committee
(Please See Para 32 of Chapter-I)
Recommendation (Sl. No. 5, Para No. 39)
The Committee also recommend that keeping the changing
economic and social environment in view the DGR, Rajya Sainik Boards
and Zila Sainik Boards should be thoroughly modernized and re-
structured with statutory powers as the consultancy and management
agencies for generating self employment projects for ex-servicemen on
a large scale. For this purpose, the required expertise in management,
financial, banking, insurance and marketing consultancy should be
inducted at all levels. DGR should also be entrusted with all
responsibility for coordinating various training activities and
programmes and should be re-designated as Directorate-General of
Resettlement and Training.
Reply of the Government
Directorate General of Resettlement is an Inter-Service Organisation
which functions under Ministry of Defence and as vested with
responsibility of training and resettlement of ex-servicemen, disabled
soldier, war widows and their dependents.
Rehabilitation and Welfare of Ex-servicemen, widows, disabled
personnel boarded out from services, their dependents is the joint
responsibility of Government at the Centre, States and Union Territories.
For this purpose the Sainik Board Organisation exists. There are 32
Rajya Sainik Boards and 335 Zila Sainik Boards in the country . In
order to strengthen the Sainik Board Organisation in the country, the
Ministry of Defence provides 50% of the expenditure on the
establishment and maintenance of Rajya and Zila Sainik Boards. The
functionaries of RSBs and ZSBs are however, State/UTs employees
and the Boards are generally functioning as an independent Department
of Sainik welfare in States/UTs. To standardize these organisations
within the country, the High Level Committee under Shri K.P . Singh Deo

63
and the Committee on Standardization of Sainik Board Organisation
had made their recommendations which have been adopted in most
states. However there are certain weaknesses in the system such as
that the Directors and Deputy Directors in most of RSBs and Directors
of ZSBs are not manned by ex-service personnel which need to be
rectified.
Empowerment of DGR, RSBs and ZSBs with statutory power for
engaging the consultancy and management agencies for generating
self employment projects for ex-servicemen is not possible unless the
subject of ESM welfare is included in the Concurrent List of the
Constitution. However, the state Governments could consider
Constitution of ESM Corporations with statutory backing for generating
self-employment projects for ESM on a large scale.
Presently there are no specialized experts available in the fields of
management, financial, banking, insurance and marketing consultancy
in DGR, RSBs and ZSBs. In the States, Consultative and Advisory
Committees could be formed with autonomy by including experts from
the Banking, Insurance and marketing sector.
Directorate General Resettlement already coordinates training
programme and activities for both officers as well as Personnel Below
Officers Ranks and thus there is no requirement of changing the existing
nomenclature of the Organisation.
[Ministry of Defence OM No. H-11013/19/2003/D (Parl.)
dated 27.8.04]
Comments of the Committee
(Please See Para 39 of Chapter-I)
Recommendation (Sl. No. 6, Para No. 57)
The Committee note that the trained, motivated and disciplined
manpower released from active service every year at a very young
age can be a boon for industries in the Public, Private and Co-operative
Sector. As they have worked as a unit all these years, they can work
in coordination with each other which can result in enhanced level of
productivity. The Committee recommend that the Ministry should enter
into a dialogue with Public Sector undertakings including banks,
railways, airlines and insurance, Private Sector, Cooperatives

64
autonomous bodies e.g. Sports authority of India and the organisations
like Confederation of Indian Industries (CII), Federation of Indian
Chamber of Commerce and Industries (FICCI), Associated Chambers
of Commerce & Industry of India (ASSOCHAM), P .H.D. Chamber of
Commerce and Industry (PHDCCI), etc. and chalk out the plan of
action for re-employment of Ex-servicemen befitting their rightful dues
and dignity in Private sector.
Reply of the Government
DoP&T has issued instructions for providing reservation in Group
C and D posts for ex-servicemen in Central Government jobs. These
instructions are also applicable to public sector undertakings and banks,
railways etc.
2. As recommended by the Committee. Directorate General
Resettlement (DGR) is having constant liaison with Public Sector
Undertakings like HAL, BHEL and BEL etc. for providing them quality
manpower of ex-servicemen on contractual and permanent basis. They
have also requested Indian Railways to engage ex-servicemen security
agencies sponsored by them for the security of passenger boogies.
They also approached Oil & Natural Gas Commission and Indian Oil
Corporation for re-employment of ex-servicemen.
3. In order to explore employment opportunities for ex-servicemen
in Private Sector, DGR is already organising Seminars. During 2003-04
such Seminars were conducted with Confederation of Indian Industry
and Chamber of Commerce & Industries at Kochi, Pune, Hyderabad,
Indore and New Delhi. Besides, DGR also had direct interaction with
the leading business houses like Reliance Industries, Larsen & Toubro
Ltd., Aditya Birla Group, Mahindra & Mahindra Ltd., Taj Group of
Hotels, Kirloskar Brothers etc.
[Ministry of Defence OM No. H-11013/19/2003/D (Parl.)
dated 27.8.04]
Comments of the Committee
(Please See Para 48 of Chapter-I)
Recommendation (Sl. No. 10, Para No. 99)
The Committee have been recommending for grant of ‘One Rank
One Pension’ to the armed forces personnel time and again.

65
The Committee observe that successive Governments and Pay
Commissions have made improvements in the pension structure
keeping in view the cost of living index. This has accentuated the
disparity of pensionary benefits between pensioners of the same rank.
The older pensioners who have become infirm in ability and capability
and burdened with a larger social obligation received pension calculated
at the rate of pay at the time of their retirement in 1950s or 1960s or
1970s, which is quite paltry and the Dearness Relief quite
inconsequential in today’s context of inflation and shrinking purchasing
value of money. The nation must repay its debt to those defendants
of the motherland with gratitude and humility. We should, instead of,
looking for precedents an this regard, create precedents for the others
to emulate. Any amount paid in this regard would be small token of
our gratitude to them. The Committee, therefore, once again reiterate
their earlier recommendation for providing ‘One Rank One Pension’
to the armed forces personnel.
Reply of the Government
The demand for One Rank One Pension has been persistently raised
by the Organisations of Ex-Servicemen at different fora in the past. It
was considered but not recommended by the Fourth and the Fifth
Central Pay Commissions. The Inter-Ministerial Committee set up by
the Department of Pensions & Pensioners’ Welfare (DP&PW) deliberated
upon this issue and submitted its report to the Government on
24.09.2004. This Committee did not favour grant of ‘One Rank One
pension’ keeping in view the administrative, financial and legal
implications as well; as its likely repercussions on the civil side.
However, to further liberalise the pensionary benefits of Personnel
Below Officer Rank (PBOR), the Committee recommended grant of
modified parity based on maximum of the pay in the revised scales
introduced with effect from 01.01.1996.
[Ministry of Defence OM No. H-11013/19/2003/D (Parl.)
dated 27.8.04]
Comments of the Committee
(Please See Para 48 of Chapter-I)
Recommendation (Sl. No. 10, Para No. 100)
The Committee note that the 33 years conditionality for grant of
full pension is a cardinal principle of pension which is uniformly

66
applicable to all the categories of civil and armed forces pensioners.
The armed forces personnel are granted the benefit or weightage of 3-
9 years (3 years in the case of Generals and 9 years for Captains) for
the Commissioned Officers and 5 years in the case of personnel Below
Officers Ranks (PBORs) for calculation of their pensions. The Committee
are dismayed to learn that the discrepancies exist as regards weightage
given to the different categories of service personnel as more weightage
is given to Commissioned Officers who already have a longer length
of service then the Jawans who serve for only about 17 years but are
given only 5 years weightage. The Committee, therefore, recommend
that the weightage given to various categories of retired Defence service
personnel should be reviewed so as to give full benefit to the lower
ranks of service personnel who retire early and suffer the most on
account of this 33 years conditionality.
Reply of the Government
The condition of 33 years of qualifying service to earn full pension,
which was introduced based on the recommendations of the Expert
Body (Central Pay Commission) after taking into account all relevant
factors is uniformally applicable to the Defence and civil pensioners
being a cardinal and integral principle for computation of pension. In
order to compensate the Personnel Below Officer Rank (PBOR) for
their truncated career, their pension is computed based on maximum
pay of the rank and group held by them at the time of their discharge
from service instead of actual pay as is done in the case of officials
on the civil side. In addition, a weightage of 5 years in the case of
personnel below officer rank is also given which is not available to
the civilians. Therefore, the Inter-Ministerial Committee has, after
considering all relevant factors, opined that no interference is called
for with regard to 33 years conditionality to earn full pension. They
have also not recommended any change in the existing weightage
available to the Commissioned Officers and Personnel Below officer
Rank. The report of the Committee has been accepted by Ministry of
Defence.
[Ministry of Defence OM No. H-11013/19/2003/D (Parl.)
dated 27.8.04]
Comments of the Committee
(Please See Para 54 of Chapter-I)

67
Recommendation (Sl. No. 10, Para No. 101 & 102)
The Committee feel that uniform conditions for grant of pensions
to civilians and Armed Forces personnel does not appear to be logical
as only a very small percentage of Defence service personnel retire
after 33 years service whereas the civilians complete generally 33 years
service before retirement. For example, if a Jawan’s salary today is Rs.
3,950/-, he should get a pension of Rs. 1,975, if the conditionality of
33 years is not there He, however, gets only Rs. 1,275 as explained by
an expert before the Committee.
Paragraph No. 102
The Committee, therefore, also recommend that the condition of
33 years of qualifying service to get full pension at 50 percent of the
last pay drawn for the last 10 months should be reviewed in respect
of armed forces personnel who serve in adverse conditions and in
hospitable environment for almost their entire career and, for no fault
of theirs, they retire comparably at a young age in the interest of the
Nation.
Reply of the Government
The condition of 33 years of qualifying service to earn full pension,
which was introduced based on the recommendations of the Expert
Body (Central Pay Commission) after taking into account all relevant
factors is uniformally applicable to the Defence and civil pensioners
being a cardinal and integral principle for computation of pension. In
order to compensate the Personnel Below Officer Rank (PBOR) for
their truncated career, their pension is computed based on maximum
pay of the rank and group held by them at the time of their discharge
from service. In addition., a weightage of five years in the case of
PBOR and 3 to 9 years (depending upon rank) to the Commissioned
Officers is also given which is not available to the civilians. Therefore,
the inter-Ministerial Committee has, after considering all relevant
factors. opined that no interference is called for with regard to 33
years conditionality to earn full pension. The report of the Committee
has been accepted by Ministry of Defence.
[Ministry of Defence OM No. H-11013/19/2003/D (Parl.)
dated 27.8.04]
Comments of the Committee
(Please See Para 54 of Chapter-I)

CHAPTER V
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH
FINAL REPLIES OF GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED
Recommendation (Sl. No. 1, Para No. 5 & 6)
The Committee appreciate the need for a youthful profile of defence
forces at the junior and middle level as they are closely involved in
direct combat but feel that non-upgradation of ranks, lack of adequate
promotional avenues and the consequent problems of enlarged base
with fewer posts at the top causing constricted career progression have
thus resulted in an undesirable situation of not so young commanding
officers. The Committee feel that this has inevitably led to decline in
interest and motivation among youth/new entrants towards Defence
services.
The Committee, therefore, recommend that the short term as well
as long-term measures as suggested by the A.V . Singh Committee
constituted for the re-structuring of officers’ cadre should be examined
expeditiously. The Committee desire the Ministry to take steps in
consultation with the Department of Personnel and Training and other
departments, to explore transfer/deputation/lateral induction of defence
personnel to other non-Defence Departments/Ministries as in the case
of civilian officers being transferred/deputed to Defence Departments.
Reply of the Government
The recommendations contained in the Report of A.V . Singh
Committee on service related aspects like release of vacancies of the
Rank of Colonel, making the Short Service Commission more attractive
and making available focused study programmes and opportunities to
middle level officers to assist them in securing suitable careers outside
service as (a) Additional deputation vacancies and lateral absorption
(b) Detailing of officers on Multidisciplinary courses/studies (c) Self
improvement programme (d) Industrial attachment and (e) Entrance
in Civil Service Examination by relaxation of suitable age and course
paper have been accepted in principle. Concrete proposals in this regard
are being worked out by Army Hqrs. where required for taking up
with other Departments.
68

69
As for other recommendations relating to (i) upgradation of various
ranks (ii) Time-based promotion to Lieutenant Colonel rank
(iii) Reduction in service for substantive promotions to the ranks of
Captain and Major and (iv) Introduction of Colonel (time scale), detailed
statements of case in respect of these recommendations are being
prepared in consultation with Army Hqrs.
Comments of the Committee
(Please See Para 11 of Chapter-I of the Report)
Recommendation (Sl. No. 4, Para No. 24 & 25)
The Committee observe that the Service Headquarters are the sole
authority on the grievances reported by the Service personnel. In recent
years many Defence personnel have been taking recourse to the
Judiciary after summary disposal of their cases by the Military Court.
In many countries, viz., France, Germany Russia, Sweden, and United
Kingdom, a Court of appeal exists for redressal, if grievances persist
after the judgement by Service Headquarters.
The Committee, therefore, recommend that a Special Court of
Appeal, headed by a retired judge of the Supreme Court, independent
of the Service Headquarters, should be constituted for the redressal of
grievances of the Service personnel where the aggrieved personnel
may appeal within 90 days against the Judgment of the Military Courts.
The judgement of the Special Court of Appeal can be reviewed only
by the Supreme Court of India.
Reply of the Government
As recommended in 169th Report of the Law Commission, a
proposal for setting up of an Armed Forces Tribunal for adjucating
service matters and appeals arising out of the verdicts of Court martials
is under active consideration of the Government. The modalities are
being worked out in consultation with Ministry of Law, Ministry of
Finance and Department of Personnel and Training.
[Ministry of Defence OM No. H-11013/19/2003/D (Parl.)
dated 27.8.04]
Recommendation (Sl. No. 6, Para No. 36)
The Committee are extremely constrained to observe the all round
failure of the Government to provide employment to Ex-Servicemen

70
and, therefore, recommend that the entire gamut of issues may be
looked into in depth by constituting a study group as to ensure
corrective measures in shortest possible time. The Committee also desire
that the Ministry should immediately take steps to formulate a National
Policy for resettlement of Ex-Servicemen on the basis of the report of
the proposed study group.
Reply of the Government
It has not been possible to provide employment to all the
ex-Servicemen who have registered themselves for employment
assistance because of (i) shrinking job opportunities in civil with the
downsizing of the establishment and (ii) lack of effective reservation
for the ex-Servicemen in Government jobs because of the 50% restriction
imposed on total reservation to be provided to various Sections of the
society. The reservation made for, SC, ST, OBC works out to 49.5%. As
such the reservation provided to ex-Servicemen in of horizontal nature
as against the vertical reservation provided to SC/ST/OBC. Under
horizontal reservation there is no roster system or carry forward of
un-utilised vacancies.
In view of the difficulties mentioned above, Directorate General
Resettlement has been organising seminars/workshops with the
representative of Corporate Sector to find job opportunities for
ex-Servicemen in Private Sector. Ex-Servicemen are also being
encouraged to take up self-employment ventures. Besides, a Working
Group was set up under the Chairmanship of Adjutant General for
working out modalities of lateral transfer of defence personnel into
Central Para Military Forces (CPMFs). Draft Report of the Working
Group is under consideration of Ministry of Home Affairs. As such
another Study Group as recommended by the Standing Committee on
Defence may not be of much help in finding new employment
opportunities for ex-Servicemen.
The issue concerning formulation of a National Policy for
resettlement of ex-Servicemen has already be gone into by a Committee
constituted under the Chairmanship of Raksha Mantri to evolve a
National Policy for the welfare of Jawans and ex-Servicemen. The
Committee observed that ex-Servicemen require a second career as
they are young and active and their responsibilities are at the peak
when they are compulsorily retired and hence it becomes a national
obligation to resettle and rehabilitate them. The Committee further

71
observed that there has been significant improvement in pensionary
benefits such as stepping up of fitment weightage from 20% to 40% in
the pension calculation formula revision of rates of disability/war injury
pension/special family pension/liberalised family pension etc. and that
Ex-Servicemen contributory health scheme has been announced for
providing better medical facilities to ex-servicemen and their
dependents. The Committee recommended that the State Governments
should uniformly provide ex-gratia to the family of every soldier killed
in action, employment to one member of the family, free education to
wards of deceased defence personnel etc. Copies of the report have
been forwarded to State Governments for necessary action.
[Ministry of Defence OM No. H-11013/19/2003/D (Parl.)
dated 27.8.04]
Recommendation (Sl. No. 7, Para No. 65)
The Committee are constrained to observe that though a high
power Committee had, in 1984 recommended for setting up of an
ex-Servicemen Financial Corporation as well as an ex-Servicemen
Industrial Corporation, there has been no progress in this area vital
for ex-servicemen. The Committee, therefore, recommend that the
Ministry should again examine the matter in consultation with State
Governments and other agencies and ensure setting up of these
corporations. The ex-Servicemen should also be provided loans by the
banks at a lower rate of interest on par with other special sections of
the society, and their projects should be treated as priority sector.
Reply of the Government
The proposal to set up Financial Corporation and Industrial
Development Corporations had been examined in the past at the level
of Finance Minister. It was felt that there are adequate number of
agencies at the Centre, State and District levels for the welfare and
resettlement of ex-Servicemen and their dependents, and that a
Corporation of this type would not add substantially to the present
set-up and may in some cases make the States less enthusiastic than
they are present in regard to welfare of ex-Servicemen. The proposal
was therefore, not agreed to. However, in pursuance of the
recommendation made by the Committee, an approach paper on the
subject is being prepared by the Directorate General Resettlement for
reconsideration of the matter in consultation with the Ministry of
Finance etc.
[Ministry of Defence OM No. H-11013/19/2003/D (Parl.)
dated 27.8.04]

72
Recommendation (Sl. No. 12, Para No. 122 and 123)
122. The Committee appreciate the efforts made by the Government
in the past for giving pensions to the widows/families of Servicemen
killed in action/in service.
123. The Committee desire that further efforts should be made by
the Government to look into the grievances of the widows who may
remarry due to personal security and various other social reasons and
ensure that they get some amount to support themselves, earn respect
and adjust themselves in the new families. There should not be any
discrimination/anomaly in respect of grant of pensionary benefits to
the widows who got married prior to or after 1.1.1996. The Committee
also desire the Ministry to make provision for suitable financial
assistance, from out of the pensionary benefits, to the parents of the
deceased Defence personnel.
Reply of the Government
The matter regarding removal of discrimination/anomaly in respect
to grant of pensionary benefits to the widows who got married prior
to and after 1.1.1996 is under consideration in consultation with
concerned agencies.
As regards the recommendation of the Committee to make
provision for suitable financial assistance, from out of the pensionary
benefits, to the parents of the deceased Defence personnel, the matter
requires detailed examination and the same is separately under
consideration in consultation with various agencies concerned.
N
EW D ELHI; BALASAHEB VIKHE PATIL,
19 March, 2005 Chairman,
28 Phalguna, 1926 (Saka) Standing Committee on Defence.

MINUTES OF THE FIRST SITTING OF SUB-COMMITTEE-III OF
THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE (2004-05)
The Committee sat on Monday, the 20 December 2004 from
1800 hrs. to 1830 hrs. in Room No. ‘139’, Parliament House Annexe,
New Delhi.
PRESENT
Shri Balasaheb Vikhe Patil— Chairman
Shri S. Bangarappa— Convenor
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
3. Shri Churchill Alemao–Convenor, Sub-Committee–I
4. Shri Manvendra Singh
SECRETARIAT
1. Shri P .K. Bhandari — Director
2. Smt. Anita Jain — Under Secretary
At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members to the first
sitting of Sub-Committee-III of the Standing Committee on Defence
(2004-05). The Sub-Committee then took up for consideration of the
draft Report (14th Lok Sabha) on action taken by the Government on
the recommendations contained in Twentieth Report of the Committee
(13th Lok Sabha) on the subject, ‘Welfare of Servicemen and
Ex-Servicemen’.
2. The Sub-Committee decided to call for evidence of the
representatives of Ministries of Defence, Finance and Law & Company
Affairs for seeking clarifications on some of the Action Taken Replies
furnished by Government on the recommendations of the Report before
finalising the draft Action Taken Report.
The Committee then adjourned.
73

MINUTES OF THE SECOND SITTING OF THE SUB-COMMITTEE-III
OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE (2004-2005) ON
ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON ‘WELFARE
OF SERVICEMEN AND EX-SERVICEMEN’
The Committee sat on Thursday, the 13 January, 2005 from
1100 hrs. to 1230 hrs. in Committee Room No. ‘D’, Parliament House
Annexe, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Shri Balasaheb Vikhe Patil— Chairman
Shri S. Bangarappa— Convenor
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
3. Shri Churchill Alemao
4. Shri Raghuraj Singh Shakya
SECRETARIAT
1. Shri Anand B. Kulkarni — Joint Secretary
2. Shri P .K. Bhandari — Director
3. Smt. Anita Jain — Under Secretary
LIST OF WITNESSES OF THE MINISTRY OF DEFENCE/
FINANCE/DEPTT. OF PENSIONS & PENSIONERS’
WELFARE AND DEPARTMENT OF LEGAL AFFAIRS
Sl.No.           Name & Designation
1. Shri Ajai Vikram Singh, Defence Secretary
2. Ms. Somi Tandon, Secretary (Defence Finance)
3. Dr. (Ms.) Rekha Bhargava, Additional Secretary (B)
4. Shri Harcharanjit Singh, Joint Secretary (Pen)/MoD
5. Dr. Santokh Singh, JS & LA/MOL
74

75
6. Shri Manoj Joshi, OSD/MoF
7. Shri Ranjan Chatterjee, JS(E)/MoD
8. Shri Shashi Kant Sharma, JS(ESW)/MoD
9. Lt. Gen. M.G. Girish, VSM, DG DC & W
10. Maj. Gen. K.P .D. Samantha, ADG PS
11. Maj. Gen. K.S. Sindhu, VSM, DGR
12. Air Cmde, K.K. Dwivedi, VM, Secretary KSB
13. Brig. A.K. Gulati, DDG (PS)
14. Shri M.P . Singh, Director (PP)
15. Shri Sunil Mathur, CDA(Pen)
16. Ms. Anuradha Mitra, Director (Pay)
17. Smt. Chandralekha Mukherjee, Director(AG)
18. Shri Harbans Singh, Director (Pen)/MoD
19. Smt. Rita Khorana, Director (Res)/MoD
20. Shri P .J. Mathew, Deputy Secretary (Pen-C)/MoD
2. At the outset, Hon’ble Chairman welcomed the representatives
of the Ministry of Defence/Finance/Deptt. of Pensions & Pensioners’
Welfare and Deptt. of Legal Affairs. The Chairman then sought
clarifications from them on certain issues arising out of the Action
Taken Replies to the recommendations contained in the 20th Report of
the Committee (13th Lok Sabha) on ‘Welfare of Servicemen and
Ex-Servicemen’, as furnished by the Ministry. The representatives
responded to the queries as raised by the Chairman and Members of
the Sub-Committee.
3. A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept.
The Committee then adjourned.

MINUTES OF THE THIRD SITTING OF THE SUB-COMMITTEE-III
OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE (2004-2005) ON
ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON ‘WELFARE OF
SERVICEMEN AND EX-SERVICEMEN’
The Committee sat on Tuesday, the 25 January, 2005 from
1100 hrs. to 1114 hrs. in Committee Room No. ‘139’, Parliament House
Annexe, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Shri S. Bangarappa— Convenor
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Churchill Alemao
3. Shri Ramesh Jigajinagi
SECRETARIAT
1. Shri P .K. Bhandari — Director
2. Smt. Anita Jain — Under Secretary
2. At the outset, Hon’ble Convenor welcomed the members of the
Sub-Committee-III of the Standing Committee on Defence. The Sub-
Committee then took up consideration of the Draft Report (14th Lok
Sabha) on action taken by the Government on the recommendations
contained in Twentieth Report of the Committee (13th Lok Sabha) on
the subject, ‘Welfare of Servicemen and Ex-Servicemen’.
3. The Sub-Committee, however, decided to call for evidence the
representatives of Department of Personnel & Training (DoP&T) to
seek clarifications on some issues of administrative nature arising out
of the Action Taken Replies furnished by the Ministry of Defence on
the recommendations contained in the Report before finalisation of the
draft ATR on the subject.
The Committee then adjourned.
76

MINUTES OF  THE FIFTEENTH SITTING OF THE STANDING
COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE (2004-2005) ON EVIDENCE ON
ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE REPORT
OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE ON
‘WELFARE OF SERVICEMEN AND EX-SERVICEMEN’
The Committee met on Tuesday, the 15 February, 2005 from
1100 hrs. to 1200 hrs. in Committee Room No. ‘G-074’, Parliament
Library Building, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Shri Balasaheb Vikhe Patil— Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Iliyas Azmi
3. Shri Suresh Chandel
4. Shri Thupstan Chhewang
5. Shri Milind Deora
6. Shri Ramesh Jigajinagi
7. Dr. C. Krishnan
8. Dr. K.S. Manoj
Rajya Sabha
9. Dr. Farooq Abdullah
10. Gen. (Retd.) Shankar Roy Chowdhury
11. Shri Janardan Dwivedi
12. Shri Pramod Mahajan
13. Shri Anand Sharma
14. Shri Lalit Suri
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri Anand B. Kulkarni – Joint Secretary
2. Shri P .K. Bhandari – Director
3. Smt. Anita Jain – Under Secretary
77

78
WITNESSES
MINISTRY OF DEFENCE (DIRECTORATE GENERAL
RESETTLEMENT)
1. Maj. Gen. K.S. Sindhu, VSM–DGR
2. Air Cmde. K.K. Dwivedi, VM, Secretary KSB
3. Lt. Col. V .S. Yadav, SO to DGR
MINISTRY OF FINANCE (DEPARTMENT OF
ECONOMIC AFFAIRS)
4. Shri G.C. Chaturvedi, Joint Secretary
5. Shri R.K. Sharma, Deputy Secretary
6. Shri N.P . Topno, DGM (HRDD), RBI
7. Shri V . Ramachandran, Vice President, IBA
MINISTRY OF FINANCE (DEPTT. OF EXPENDITURE)
8. Shri Anurag Goel, Additional Secretary
9. Smt. Sushma Nath, Joint Secretary
MINISTRY OF INDUSTRY & PUBLIC ENTERPRISES
(DEPTT. OF PUBLIC ENTERPRISES)
10. Shri Priyadarshi Thakur, Secretary
11. Shri K.D. Tripathi, Joint Secretary
12. Shri G.S. Bothyal, Director
13. Shri M.M. Gupta, Dy. Director
MINISTRY OF LAW AND JUSTICE (DEPARTMENT
OF LEGAL AFFAIRS)
14. Shri D.P . Sharma, Additional Secretary
15. Dr. Santokh Singh, Additional L.A.
MINISTRY OF PERSONNEL, PUBLIC GRIEVANCES & PENSIONS
(DEPTT. OF PERSONNEL & TRAINING)
16. Shri A.N. Tiwari, Secretary

79
2. At the outset, Hon’ble Chairman welcomed the representatives
of Directorate General of Resettlement (Ministry of Defence), Deptt. of
Economic Affairs (Ministry of Finance), Deptt. of Public Enterprises
(Ministry of Industry and Public Enterprises), Deptt. of Legal Affairs
(Ministry of Law and Justice) and Deptt. of Personnel & Training
(Ministry of Personnel, Public Grievances & Pensions) and apprised
them about the purpose of the sitting. The Chairman, then, requested
the representatives to help the Committee in clarifying some of the
contentious issues arising out of the Action Taken Replies furnished
by the Ministry of Defence on 20th Report of the Committee (13th
Lok Sabha) on ‘Welfare of Servicemen and Ex-Servicemen’ e.g. (i) one
rank one pension; (ii) Conditionality of 33 years service for giving full
pensionary benefit to retiring personnel; (iii) Constitution of National
Commission for Ex-Servicemen on the lines of SC/ST; (iv) How far
restructuring of Directorate General of Resettlement, Rajya Sainik Board
and Zila Sainik Board with statutory powers can be helpful in
addressing the resettlement issue of Ex-Servicemen; (v) Making available
suitable jobs to Ex-Servicemen in Public Sector Undertakings;
(vi) Providing relaxation in qualifications for various Services to Ex-
Servicemen; and (vii) Possibilities for providing 100% financial
assistance from the Central Government to Sainik Boards. The
representatives answered the queries put forth by the Hon’ble Members.
The witness then withdrew.
4. A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept.
The Committee then adjourned.

MINUTES OF THE NINETEENTH SITTING OF THE STANDING
COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE (2004-05)
The Committee sat on Saturday, the 19 March, 2005 from 1600 hrs.
to 1730 hrs. in Committee Room No. ‘C’, Parliament House Annexe,
New Delhi.
PRESENT
Shri Balasaheb Vikhe Patil— In the Chair
M
EMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Churhill Alemao
3. Shri Iliyas Azmi
4. Shri A.V . Bellarmin
5. Shri Milind Deora
6. Dr. C. Krishnan
7. Dr. K.S. Manoj
8. Shri Manvendra Singh
Rajya Sabha
9. Smt. N.P . Durga
10. Shri Janardan Dwivedi
11. Shri Anand Sharma
SECRETARIAT
1. Shri P .D.T. Achary – Secretary
2. Shri P .K. Bhandari – Director
3. Smt. Anita Jain – Deputy Secretary
4. Shri D.R. Shekhar – Under Secretary
80

81
2. At the outset, Chairman welcomed the Members to the sitting
of the Committee. The Committee then considered the Draft Action
Taken Report on the recommendations contained in First Report of the
Committee (14th Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants of the Ministry
of Defence for the year 2004-05. The Committee thereafter took up the
Draft Action Taken Report on the recommendations contained in the
Twentieth Report (13th Lok Sabha) on ‘Welfare of Servicemen and Ex-
Servicemen’.
3. The Members suggested certain additions/modifications/
amendments for incorporating in the two draft Reports. The draft
Reports with some modifications were then adopted by the Committee.
4. The Committee authorized the Chairman to finalise the Reports
in the light of further Discussions and consequential changes for their
presentation to Parliament.
The Committee then adjourned.

ANNEXURE I
MINISTER OF DEFENCE
INDIA
D.O. No. 12 (73)/US (WE)/2000/D (Res)/7833-F/RM 17 November, 2000
The issue of reservation of seats for widows/wives/wards of
Armed Forces Personnel killed/disabled in action in professional and
non-professional courses in universities and autonomous Institutes run
by Central/State Governments has all along been pursued during
various meetings of Kendriya Sainik Board. As a result, majority of
Central/State universities and professional institutes have made
provision for reservation for wives/widows/wards of Defence
personnel and ex-servicemen.
It has, however, been observed that while providing reservations,
these universities/institutes do not adhere to the under mentioned
prioritization prescribed by Ministry of Defence for reservation of seats
under Defence category resulting in non-utilisation or under-utilisation
of the reserved seats.
(i) Widows/wards of Defence personnel killed in action.
(ii) Wards of serving personnel and ex-servicemen disabled in
action.
(iii) Widows/Wards of Defence personnel who died in peace
time with death attributable to military service.
(iv) Wards of Defence personnel disabled in peace time with
disability attributable to military service.
(v) Wards of ex-servicemen and serving personnel who are in
receipt of Gallantry Awards.
(vi) Wards of ex-servicemen.
(vii) Wards of serving personnel.
I shall be grateful if you kindly advise to all Central universities,
autonomous bodies, professional and non-professional institutes
82

83
including IITs and IIMs to consider providing minimum 5% reservation
to the wards of Defence personnel and ex-servicemen and the seats
reserved for them should be allotted strictly in accordance with the
priorities of seven categories of Defence personnel as indicated above.
With regards,
Yours sincerely,
Sd/-
George Fernandes
Shri Murli Manohar Joshi
Minister for Human Resource Development
Shastri Bhavan
New Delhi

ANNEXURE II
D.O. No. 12 (73)/US (WE)/00/3688-F/RM 29th August 2003
As a follow up to my DO letter dated 17.11.2001, I would once
again like to bring to your notice the issue of full utilization of
reservation of seats for the widows/wards of armed forces personnel
killed/disabled in action or during peace time in Central/State
Universities/Autonomous professional/non-professional institutions
under the purview of your Ministry.
It has been observed that while providing reservations, these
universities/institutions do not cover all the categories prescribed by
this Ministry for reservation of seats under Defence category resulting,
in non-utilization or under utilization of the reserved seats.
(i) Widows/Wards of Defence personnel killed in action.
(ii) Wards of serving personnel and ex-servicemen disabled in
action.
(iii) Widows/Wards of Defence personnel who died in peace
time with death attributable to military service.
(iv) Wards of Defence personnel disabled in peace time with
disability attributable to military service.
(v) Wards of ex-servicemen personnel and serving personnel
who are in receipt of Gallantry awards.
(vi) Wards of ex-servicemen.
(vii) Wards of serving personnel.
I would like to request for your personal intervention and ensure
that these universities/institutions follow the guidelines laid down vide
MoD DO letter NO. 3547/AS (R)/94 dated 3rd June 1994 (copy
enclosed), which clearly lays down 7 priorities instead of the 4 priorities
being presently followed up. The re-introduction of the last three
84

85
priorities will ensure maximum utilization of the reserved seats and
resolve the long standing request of the ex-servicemen/serving armed
forces personnel.
With regards,
Yours sincerely,
Sd/-
George Fernandes
Murli Manohar Joshi
Minister of Human Resource Development
Shastri Bhavan
New Delhi.

86
ANNEXURE III
RESERVATIONS FOR DEPENDENTS OF ESM IN PROFESSIONAL COLLEGES
Sl. STATE/UT MBBS ENGR AGRI POLYTECH ITI LLB MSc., MA, B.Ed. NURSING
No. RSB Code M.Com.,
MBA, LLM etc.
% Seats % Seats % Seats % Seats % Seats % Seats % Seats % Seats % Seats
12 3 4 56 7 89 1 0 1 1 1 2 1 3 1 41 51 6 1 7 1 81 9 2 0
1. Andhra Pradesh 1 – 2 – 2 – 2 - 3 – 1-2 – 1-2 –3–1 –
2. Arunachal Pradesh 0 0 0 0 000000 0000000 0
3. Assam – 3 – 2 000200 000000– 0
4. Bihar 0 0 – 1 –1–1–1 –1–1–20 0
5. Chhattisgarh 3 – 5 – 3–5––5 ––––2–– –
6. Delhi – 0 – 7 005–5– 5–5–5–5 –
7. Goa 1 116001––1 0000001 1

87
12 3 4 56 7 89 1 0 1 1 1 2 1 3 1 41 51 6 1 7 1 81 9 2 0
 8. Gujarat 0 0 1 – 001––1 –100–20 0
 9. Haryana 1 – 1 – 1–1–1 -1 – 1 - 1 – 1–
10. Himachal Pradesh – 2 – 1 0 2 10 – 15 – 00001–1 –
11. Jammu and Kashmir 3 – 3 – 3–3–3– 3–3–3–3 –
12. Jharkhand 0 0 0 0 000000 0000000 0
13. Karnataka – 1 – 1 2.5 – 2.5 – 2.5 – 0000– 1 51 4
21
9
14. Kerala– 9–2 –2– 16 15 – –100–2– 1
15. Madhya Pradesh 3 – 5 – 2 – 5 - – 5 00002–– 2 0
16. Maharashtra 5 5 5 5 555555 5500000 0
17. Manipur – 1 – 1 –1–1–2 0000000 0
18. Meghalaya 0 0 0 0 000000 0000000 0
19. Mizoram 0 0 0 0 000000 0000000 0
20. Nagaland 0 0 0 0 000000 0000000 0

88
12 3 4 56 7 89 1 0 1 1 1 2 1 3 1 41 51 6 1 7 1 81 9 2 0
21. Orissa 3 – 2 – 002–2– 1–1–1–0 0
22. Punjab 2 – 2 – 4 - 4 - 5 – 2 – 2 - 2 – 2 –
23. Rajasthan – 3 – 2 005–5– 00005–0 0
1
0
24. Sikkim 0 0 0 0 000000 0000000 0
25. Tamil Nadu – 6 – 8 – 7 – 81 - 5 5100– 2 31 6 0
10 0
7
26. Tripura – 1 - 2 - 1 2 – 2 – 00002–0 0
27. Uttaranchal 2 – 2 – 2 - 5 - 8 – 0000000 0
28. Uttar Pradesh 1 – 2 – 005–8– 0000000 0
29. West Bengal 0 0 7 – 000000 0000000 0
30. * Andaman and – – – – –––––– ––––––– –
Nicobar UT
31. Chandigarh UT 5 – 5 – 005–5– –25–5–5 –
32. Pondicherry UT 1 – 1 – 1–1–1– 1–1–1–1 –
Note: (*) or (–) Information/Latest information not available.

89
ANNEXURE IV
STATE-WISE RESERVATION OF SEATS FOR WARDS OF DEFENCE PERSONNEL AND EX-SERVICEMEN IN
VARIOUS PROFESSIONAL AND NON-PROFESSIONAL INSTITUTES
Sl. STATE/UT MBBS ENGR AGRI POLYTECH ITI LLB MSc., MA, B.Ed NURSING
No. RSB Code M.Com.,
MBA, LLM etc.
% Seats % Seats % Seats % Seats % Seats % Seats % Seats % Seats % Seats
12 3 4 56 7 89 1 0 1 1 1 2 1 3 1 41 51 6 1 7 1 81 9 2 0
1. Andhra Pradesh 1 – 2 – 2–2–3– 1 - 2 – 1 - 2 –3–1 –
2. Arunachal Pradesh 0 0 0 0 000000 0000000 0
3. Assam – 3 – 2 000200 0000000 0
4. Bihar 0 0 – 1 –1–1–1 –1–1–20 0
5. Chhattisgarh 3 – 5 – 3–5––5– – – - 2 – – -
6. Delhi – 20 – 47 005–5– 5–5–5–5 –
7. Goa 1 116001––1 0000001 1

90
 12 3 4 56 7 89 1 0 1 1 1 2 1 3 1 41 51 6 1 7 1 81 9 2 0
 8. Gujarat 0 0 1 – 001–– 1 0– 1 0 00–20 0
 9. Haryana 1 – 1 – 1–1–1– 1–1–1–1 –
10. Himachal Pradesh – 2 – 1 0 2 10 – 15 – 0000 1 5– 1 5 –
11. Jammu and Kashmir 3 – 3 – 3–3–3– 3–3–3–3 –
12. Jharkhand 0 0 0 0 000000 0000000 0
13. Karnataka – 12 – 119 2.5 – 2.5 – 2.5 – 0000– 1 51 4
14. Kerala– 9– 25 –2– 16 15 – –100–2– 1
15. Madhya Pradesh 3 – 5 – 2–5––5 00002–– 2 0
16. Maharashtra 5 5 5 5 555555 5500000 0
17. Manipur – 1 – 1 –1–1–2 0000000 0
18. Meghalaya 0 0 0 0 000000 0000000 0
19. Mizoram 0 0 0 0 000000 0000000 0
20. Nagaland 0 0 0 0 000000 0000000 0

91
12 3 4 56 7 89 1 0 1 1 1 2 1 3 1 41 51 6 1 7 1 81 9 2 0
21. Orrisa 3 – 2 – 002–2– 1–1–1–0 0
22. Punjab 2 – 2 – 4 – 4 - 5 – 2–2–2–2 –
23. Rajasthan – 3 – 210 005–5– 00005–– 0
24. Sikkim 0 0 0 0 000000 0000000 0
25. Tamil Nadu – 6 – 81 – 7 – 81 – 5 5 107 0 0 – 23 10 60
26. Tripura – 1 – 2 –12–2– 00002–0 0
27. Uttaranchal 2 – 2 – 2–5–8– 0000000 0
28. Uttar Pradesh 1 – 2 – 005–8– 0000000 0
29. West Bengal 0 0 7 – 000000 0000000 0
30. Andaman & Nicobar UT 0 0 0 0 000000 0000000 0
31. Chandigargh 5 – 5 – 005–5– –25–5–5 –
32. Pondicherry 1 – 1 – 1–1–1– 1–1–1–1 –

APPENDIX
ANALYSIS OF THE ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT
ON THE RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE 20TH
REPORT OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE
(THIRTEENTH LOK SABHA) ON ‘WELFARE OF
SERVICEMEN & EX-SERVICEMEN’
Percentage
of Total
(i) Total number of recommendations 52 –
(ii) Recommendations/Observations which 19 36%
have been accepted by Government
(vide recommendations at Para No. 37,
40, 53, 54, 58, 63, 64, 66, 74, 75, 82, 83,
128, 142, 143, 144, 145, 146, 147.
(iii) Recommendations/Observations which the 12 23%
Committee do not desire to pursue in
view of Government’s replies
Para No. 10 & 11, 55, 76, 97 & 98 114 &
115, 148, 149, 150, 151.
(iv) Recommendations/Observations in respect 13 25%
of which Government’s replies have not
been accepted by the Committee
(vide recommendations at Para No. 7, 14,
15, 21 to 23, 38, 39, 57, 99, 100, 101& 102
(v) Recommendations/Observations in respect 8 15%
of which final replies of Government are
still awaited
Para No. 5 & 6, 24 & 25, 56, 65, 122 to 123.
92