 
 
  
      STANDING COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE 
36
(2008-2009) 
 
(FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
MINISTRY OF DEFENCE 
 
 
 
STATUS OF IMPLEMENTATION OF UNIFIED COMMAND FOR 
ARMED FORCES 
 
 
 
Thirty Sixth Report 
 
 
  
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
 
February, 2009/Phalguna, 1930 (Saka) 

  
THIRTY SIXTH REPORT 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE 
(2008-2009) 
 
(FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
MINISTRY OF DEFENCE 
 
 
 
 
STATUS OF IMPLEMENTATION OF UNIFIED COMMAND FOR 
ARMED FORCES 
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 24.02.2009 
 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 24.02.2009 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
 
February, 2009/ Phalguna, 1930 (Saka) 
 

  
 
C.O.D.  NO.  110 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Price :  Rs. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
© 2009 BY LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 

  
(i) 
 
CONTENTS 
 
 
 Pages
Composition of the Committee (2008-09) ……… (ii) 
Introduction ……… (iv) 
 
PART-I  
BACKGROUND ANALYSIS 
 
 Pages
Status of Implementation of Unified Command 
 
…… 1 
Introduction 
 
…… 1 
Headquarters Integrated Defence Staff (HQ IDS) …… 2 
 
Jointness within the Services 
 
…… 
 
3 
 
Achievements of HQ IDS 
 
…… 
 
3 
 
Implementation of the Unified Command 
 
…… 
 
5 
 
Chiefs of Staff Committee (COSC) 
 
…… 
 
8 
 
Post of Chief of Defence Staff (CDS) 
 
…… 
 
9 
 
Restructuring the Ministry of Defence 
 
…… 
 
14 
 
Deficiency of Staff in HQ IDS and HQ ANC 
 
…… 
 
14 
 
Indian National Defence University (INDU) 
 
…… 
 
16 
 
Linkages between the DRDO and the HQ IDS 
 
…… 
 
16 
 
PART-II  
 
 Pages
Recommendations/Observations of the Committee  ……… 18 
 
Appendices    Minutes of the Sittings of the Committee 
     held on 29.12. 2008, 13.1.2009, 27.1.2009, 
     4.2.2009  and 20.02.2009 
 ……… 28 

  
(ii) 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE (2008-09)    
  Shri Balasaheb Vikhe Patil   - Chairman     
 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
2. Shri Vijay Bahuguna 
*3. Shri S. Bangarappa 
4. Shri Milind Murli Deora 
5. Shri Santosh Gangwar 
6. Shri Jigajinagi Ramesh Chandappa 
7. Shri Suresh Kalmadi 
8. Shri C. Kuppusami 
9. Dr. K.S. Manoj 
10. Ms. Ingrid Mcleod 
11. Shri Asaduddin Owaisi 
12. Shri Adhalrao Shivaji Patil 
13. Shri Shrinivas Patil 
14. Shri Raju Rana 
**15. Dr. H.T. Sangliana 
16. Shri Arjun Charan Sethi 
17. Prof. Mahadeorao Shiwankar 
18. Shri Manavendra Singh 
19. Shri Balashowry Vallabhaneni 
20. Shri Rajesh Verma 
21. Shri Anil Shukla Warsi 
 
                               RAJYA SABHA 
22. Shri A. Elavarasan 
 ***23. Dr. Farooq Abdullah 
24. Shri Jai Parkash Aggarwal 
****25. Shri  Abu Asim Azmi 
26. Smt. Shobhana Bhartia  
27. Shri R.K. Dhawan 
28. Shri K.B. Shanappa 
29. Shri Arun Shourie 
30. Smt. Viplove Thakur 
31. Shri M.V. Mysura Reddy 
32. Shri Munquad Ali 
_____________________________________________________________________ 
*  Ceased to be a member of this Committee due to his resignation from Lok Sabha 
w.e.f. 12.02.2009 
**    Consequent upon his disqualification from Lok Sabha w.e.f. 3.10.2008.  
***   Ceased to be a member of this Committee due to his retirement from Rajya Sabha 
w.e.f. 29.11.2008. 
****   Ceased to be a member of this Committee due to his retirement from Rajya Sabha 
w.e.f. 25.11.2008. 

  
(iii) 
 
 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
  
1. Shri Devender Singh - Joint Secretary 
2. Shri Rajeev Sharma  - Director 
3. Shri D.R. Shekhar  - Deputy Secretary 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

  
(iv) 
 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
I, the Chairman, Standing Committee on Defence (2008-09) having been 
authorised by the Committee to submit the Report on their behalf, present this Thirty-
sixth Report on the subject ‘Status of Implementation of Unified Command for Armed 
Forces’.  
 
2. The Committee selected the above subject for examination during the year 
2008-09. The Committee during their examinat ion of the subject, took evidence of 
the representatives of the Ministry of Defence on 29 December, 2008 and 04 
February, 2009 and also heard the views of General (Retd.) V N Sharma, PVSM, Lt. 
Gen. (Retd.) A.M. Vohra, PVSM, SM and Lt. Gen. (Retd.) G.S. Rawat, PVSM, AVSM 
on 13.01.2009 and Air Chief Marshal (Retd.) O. P. Mehra, PVSM, Admiral (Retd.) 
Sushil Kumar, PVSM, UYSM, AVSM, NM and Air Marshal (Retd.) B. N. Gokhale, 
PVSM, AVSM, VM on 27 January, 2009 for an in-depth analysis of the subject.  
 
3. Based on the written information furnished by the Ministry of Defence on the 
subject; memoranda submitted by ex-servicemen and experts; briefing/oral evidence 
tendered by the representatives of the Ministry and non-official witnesses; and the 
observations made by the members of the Committee, the Committee finalised and 
adopted the draft Report at their sitting held on the 20 February, 2009. 
 
4. In this Report, the Committee have observed that the modern day warfare 
techniques require synergised and joint efforts on the part of different wings of the 
armed forces and the time is now ripe when the traditional structures of the Armed 
Forces have to be reorganized, integrated and geared up to meet the threat of 
growing asymmetric challenges having serious security implications for the nation.   
 
5. Taking note of the fact that consi derable time has elapsed since the Kargil 
Review Committee and Group of Ministers (GoM) submitted their reports, the 
Committee have observed that the required level of interface between the Ministry of 
Defence and the Armed Forces Headquarters is still missing. The Committee have 
accordingly, recommended that the staffing pattern in the Ministry of Defence be 
suitably changed, 
 
6. In the light of the fact that the Chairman of the Chiefs of Staff Committee 
(COSC) has no command and control authority over the Services other than his 
own, the Committee have expressed their surprise whether such a system will prove 
efficacious enough to ensure quick response and coordinated action in emergent 
situations.    Considering the fact that the key to success in modern day warfare 
operations is the ability of the different wings of the Armed Forces to integrate their 
efforts under a single command without any loss of time, the Committee have opined 
that the creation of an additional post of Ch ief of Defence Staff (CDS) to act as 
Chairman of the COSC is essential to ensure optimum level of jointness among the 
different wings of the Armed Forces and to provide single-point military advice to the 
Government. The Committee, have also recommended that till such time the post of 
CDS is created, the Government may take steps to give appropriate authority to the 
Chairman COSC in the present set up to command and control the resources of the 
Defence Services whenever the situation so demands. 
 

  
(v) 
 
7. The Committee have also observed that the view that the country today faces 
entirely new dimensions of security threats and challenges, the Committee have 
therefore, urged upon the Ministry to cont inuously devise appropriate strategies to 
keep pace with the innovations being made in conventional and unconventional 
modes of warfare. The Committee hav e accordingly, recommended that the 
Government should constitute a high powered expert committee to reorganise, 
reform and restructure the Armed Forces with a view to implementing the 
recommendations made on the subject matter both by the GoM in its report 
submitted in 2001 and the Standing Committee on Defence in their earlier as well as 
this Report. 
 
8. The Committee wish to express their thanks to the representatives of the 
Ministry of Defence and other non-official witnesses for appearing before them for 
tendering oral evidence and for furnishing the material and information on  the 
subject matter in a very short span of time. For facility of reference and convenience, 
the observations/ recommendations of the Committee have been printed in thick 
type in the body of the Report. 
 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI:                                                             BALASAHEB VIKHE PATIL, 
23 February, 2009           C h a i r m a n ,  
04  Phalguna, 1930 (Saka)           Standing Committee on Defence . 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

  
PART I 
 
STATUS OF IMPLEMENTATION OF UNIFIED COMMAND 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
1.1 In the wake of the Kargil c onflict, a committee headed by Shri K. 
Subramanyam, commonly known as Kargil Review Committee (KRC), was 
appointed by the Government in July 1999,  to review the events leading to 
Pakistan aggression in the Kargil district of Jammu & Kashmir and to recommend 
such measures as are considered nece ssary to safeguard National Security 
against such armed intrusions. The KRC report was submitted on 15 December 
1999 and an unclassified version of the report with security-based deletions was 
tabled in both Houses of the Parliament on 28 February 2000. 
 
1.2 Following the submission of the K RC Report, the Government set up a 
Group of Ministers (GoM) on 17 April 2000 to review the National Security 
System in its entirety and in particular, to consider the recommendations of the 
KRC and formulate specific proposals for implementation. The GoM finalise its 
report on reforming the National Security  System and submitted it to the 
Government in February 2001. 
 
1.3 The Kargil Review Committee had obser ved that there was serious lack of 
synergy amongst the three Services of Armed Forces. Apart from that, there was 
also lack of coordination between the Armed Forces  and Civil authorities. The 
lack of sharing of intelligence inputs between the three Services and Civil 
Intelligence agencies had further aggravated the situation. The Kargil Review 
Committee also had high expectations from  the Government, Parliament and 
Public opinion to determine country security – Intelligence Development Shield to 
meet the challenges of 21st century.  
1 

  
2 
1.4 The report was considered by C abinet Committee on Security (CCS), 
which, in May 2001, approved the Go M report and recommendations except 
those pertaining to institut ion of CDS on which it was decided that Government 
would take a view after consulting va rious political parties. As partial 
implementation of GOM recommendations, Headquarters Integrated Defence 
Staff (HQ IDS) under the Chief of Integrat ed Staff to the Chairman Chief of Staff 
Committee (CISC) was set up on 01 Oct 2001 as an interim measure till CDS 
was nominated. The decision to appoint  CDS was kept pending for political 
resolution. 
 
1.5 The Standing Committee on Defence selected for examination and report 
the subject ‘Review of Implementation Status of Gr oup of Ministers (GoMs) 
Report on Reforming national Security Syst em-in pursuance of the Kargil review 
Committee-A Special Reference to Managem ent of Defence’ during the year 
2006-07.  The Committee in their Twent y-Second Report had reiterated their 
earlier recommendation for creation of the post of Chief of Defence Staff (CDS) 
in view of the observation of GoM that the functioning of the Chief of Staff 
Committee had revealed serious weaknesses in its ability to provided single point 
military advise to the Government.  
 
 
Headquarters Integrated Defence Staff (HQ IDS) 
 
1.6 According to the Background Note furnished by the Ministry of Defence, 
Headquarters Integrated Defence Staff (HQ IDS) was created on 01 October, 
2001 as a sequel to the decision by t he Group of Ministers based on Kargil 
Committee report (KRC).  The staff of HQ IDS is provided from three Services, 
DoD, MEA, DRDO and Armed Forces HQ (A FHQ) Civil Services.  The Chief of 
Integrated Defence Staff to Chairman COSC (CISC) is functioning as staff in the 
advisory mode to the Chairman CO SC. Andaman and Nicobar Command (HQ 
ANC) and Strategic Forces Command were set up as India’s first Integrated 
Commands.  These symbolize how jointne ss needs to be fostered, and how this 
concept should be applied to other Tri-Service Commands when raised. 

  
3 
1.7 The Integrated Defence Staff co mprises of Service Officers, Civilian 
Officers and Scientists and are allocated duties/roles and functions based on 
responsibilities of Integrat ed Defence Staff. The roles and functions of Chief of 
Integrated Defence Staff include super vising the coordination of long range 
plans, five year plans and annual budgetary proposals for the three Services and 
formulating joint doctrine in consultati on with Services HQrs for the optimal 
employment of all militar y capabilities in all stra tegic and joint operations. 
Appointment of two star and above officers  for the Integrated Defence Staff is 
done on turnover/rotational basis from amongst the three Services. 
 
Jointness within the Services 
 
1.8 According to the Background Note furnished by the Ministry of Defence, 
the primary objective of the HQ IDS is as under: 
“One of the primary objectives of HQ IDS is to promote jointness within the 
services. Jointness is aimed at obt aining optimal operational and cost 
effectiveness in the current and envisaged future geopolitical environment.  
It will also enable the services to  operate seamlessly with common 
understanding of missions and joint strat egies to accomplish them.  This 
would entail brining about transforma tion and reforms within the armed 
forces.” 
 
Achievements of HQ IDS 
 
 
1.9 As per the Background No te of the Ministry of Defence, HQ IDS and the 
Ministry of Defence have achieved a number  of milestones within a short span in 
promoting the concept of jo intness within the Services.  Most of the issues 
common to the services are being dealt with by joint committees involving senior 
representatives of the Services and is an ongoing process. 

  
4 
1.10 According to the Ministry of Defenc e, the achievements of the HQ IDS is 
as under: 
“Defence Planning Process: The Defence Planning Process is being 
strengthened as part of the follow up to the Group of Ministers’ report on 
Security. Draft National Security Strategy and the Defence Planning Guidelines 
have been prepared and are under process of finalization.  The Defence 
Capability Strategy and the Defence Capability Plan are under preparation. 
Joint Doctrines; Joint Doctrine for Defence Forces, Joint Amphibious 
Warfare Doctrine and Joint Special Forces Doctrine have already been released. 
The Joint Psychological Operations Doctrine, Joint Sub-conventional Warfare 
Doctrine, Joint Space Doctrine and Doctrine on Joint Maritime Operations are in 
process of being prepared. 
Defence Space Vision (DSV) 2020 : Space is the new frontier and applications 
positioned in this domain affect was fighting capabilities of all the three Serviced. 
The DSV 2020 document has been evolved and it has been decided that space 
should be treated as a tri service asset.  An Integrated Space Cell has been 
established to co-ordinate space issues and formulate a Draft Joint Space 
Doctrine. 
Long Term Integrated Perspective Plan (LTIPP): LTIPP is formulated by HQ 
IDS based on the Long Term Perspective Plans (LTPPs) received from the three 
Services with the objective to integrated important issues like the Joint 
Conventional Edge, capabilities to be achieved, aspects of commonality of 
equipment; inter-Service prioritization and Indigenisation. 
Integration between DRDO and Services : HQ IDS has tried to bring about 
synergy in the 11 th Plans of DRDO and the three Services.  HQ IDS is 
responsible for producing the Long Term Integrated Perspective Plans for the 
armed forces and also preparing the Annual acquisition Plan which becomes the 
basis for defence procurement. 
Defence Procurement Procedure : The Defence Procurem ent Procedure (DPP) is 
clearly the best example of inter agency and tri service jointness as implemented by 
the Ministry of Defence.  HQ ID S has been given an enhanced role in the 
procurement process vide DPP.  Its ca tegorization Committ ees now examine and 
make recommendations to DAC on seven i ssues i.e. Acceptance of Necessity, 
Quantity, Categorization,  Single Vendor Clearance, Nomination of Production 
Agency, TOT, Offsets and Trials.  In the “M ake” procedure, IDS is required to carry 
out feasibility studies for projects to be offered to private sector. 
Joint Intelligence Assessments: With the establishment of the Defence Intelligence 
Agency, integration of service inte lligence agencies and a common assessment of 
strategic intelligence inputs are now available to defence planners. 
Joint Committees:  A number of joint Committee have been instituted to further 
improve jointness in decision making, operations perspecti ve planning, force 
development, intelligence, doctrine, trai ning, logistics, personnel management, and 
communications and information warfare. 
Joint Exercises: A number of joint exercises with other countries have been 
conducted by Headquarter IDS. AMPHEX 07 was a major tri service exercise 
undertaken to validate the Joint Amphi bious Doctrine. A UN Peace Support 
Operations Exercise (UNPSO) involving officers from the Armed Forces of 13 
countries was conducted at  College of Defence Managem ent under the aegis of HQ 
IDS in May 2008. 

  
5 
 
Joint Training: HQ IDS has carried out a review of the Tri Service 
Institutions and brought about changes in their training curriculum to bring in 
aspects enhancing jointness within the services, Committees have been set up 
with the focus to enhance jointmanship through joint Armed Forces Training 
Institutes (AFTI). 
Think Tank Organisation: A Centre for Joint Warfare Studies (CENJOWS) 
has been established in 2007; with Raksha Mantri as the Patron-in-Chief. The 
main objectives of CENJOWs, which functions under HQ IDS are, conduct of 
studies & research work in Joint War-fighting, organisation of orientation 
courses/capsules for various Ministries/ Agencies (including procurement 
agencies) connected with HQ IDS/Service and promotion of Jointmanship 
amongst Services, Ministries and Intelligence Agencies involved in National 
Security. CENJOWS focuses on Jointmanship amongst Services, Ministries and 
Intelligence Agencies connected with National Security, to conduct studies and 
research work in Joint War-fare vis-à-vis Centre for Air Power Studies (CAPS), 
Centre for Land Warfare Studies and National Maritime Foundation which are 
service specific ‘Think Tanks’ focusing on specialized aspects of land, sea and 
air warfare. 
An Indian National Defence University (INDU)  is being set up to increase 
jointness in strategic thinking, joint resources management, besides educating 
civilian officials at the JS/Director level, on strategic aspects. 
Disaster Management HQ IDS is responsible to ensure a coordinated 
response for all disaster relief both within and outside the country. This integrates 
the efforts of the Services and other allied agencies at crucial junctures of 
disaster management thus bringing timely succor to the affected populace. 
Ministry of Defence has constituted Defence Crisis Management Group (DCMG) 
to deal with disasters and other crisis on the directions of the National Crisis 
Management Committee.” 
 
Implementation of the Unified Command 
 
1.11 When asked about the status of im plementation of the Unified Command, 
the representatives of the Ministry of Defence stated as under: 
“This Unified Command, at the apex level, we still don’t have and we also don’t 
have a Chief of Defence Staff and perhaps much jointness flows from that 
concept. We still don’t have that yet. I think the Committee is well aware of the 
progress made or the lack of progress. In fact, all political parties have been 
written to on this matter and the Government felt that this kind of a decision 
needed a political consensus across the board rather than being taken by the 
Government on its own. There does not seem to be a consensus at this point. 
We have had some responses, but, I think, the issue remains fluid and open at 
the moment. 
 As far as the other unified structures are concerned, these are handled by 
CISC…. In the joint structures, one unified command is the Andaman and 
Nicobar Command, which is rotationally held by each of the three Services. At 
present the Commander-in-Chief of the Andaman and Nicobar Command is from 
the Indian Navy. There are other joint organisations, which are extremely 
important. One of them is the National Defence Academy at Kadakvasla. Then,  

  
6 
 
there is the Defence Services Staff College at Wellingdon and there is also the 
Strategic Forces Command, which is also held rotationally by each of the three 
Services.  
So, these are basically the joint structures within the Ministry of Defence, as far 
as I am aware.  Of course, there is NDC which is also held rotationally.  On the 
administrative side, I have said that there are two Commands.  The IDS is the 
staff organisation essentially at Headquarters.  The Operational Commands are 
the Andaman & Nicobar Commands and Strategic Forces Command”. 
  
1.12 When asked whether the three se rvices have worked together in 
operational times, the representatives of the Ministry of Defence stated as under: 
“Well, Sir, it has not always worked well.  We cannot pretend that it has.  One 
has only to see the war history than even the accounts of Kargil conflict that as 
related by the main actors themselves that they did not act with great synergies 
in all cases.  These are matters of public domain, I do not think I am revealing 
any secrets. 
The position, in fact, is that there is much better integration certainly with 
MoD now and we do have a single file system that their files come to us straight, 
they are put up to for a decision at whatever level it is required.  So, that 
integration, in fact, works quite well.  We hardly have separately files on any 
issue.  Almost everything that we deal with originates from the Services HQs.” 
 
1.13 When inquired about the syst em of writing of the A CR of the staff at HQ 
ANC, a representative of the Ministry of Defence stated as under:  
“I call the systems of ACRs. Whosever’s ACR is to be initiated, there is a graded 
level above him, and normally in the Services, you have three levels of reporting 
– one initiation, one review and one next review; so is it in the Joint Commands, 
Andaman and Nicobar included, where at the appropriate level the ACR is 
initiated irrespective of the Service of the officer reported upon and irrespective of 
the Service of the assessor. It is reviewed by the next level again irrespective of 
which Service and it goes on. It is a totally inter-Service method of reporting and 
review. The same applies for Headquarters, IDS. In fact, it applies for all joint 
structures as they exist today.” 
 
1.14 When asked about the me chanism put in place in case of differences 
between the services in the IDS, a repr esentative of the Ministry of Defence 
stated as under: 
“Sir, we have five Committees dealing with operations, maintenance, 
administration, acquisition and training issues, which are tri-services; and which 
are at the middle-level, which means at the Air Vice Marshal level and lower. 
They meet regularly and the inter-service issues are discussed threadbare. The 
decisions / recommendations are then passed through them up the ladder. They 
reach the Chairman, COSC, and on his recommendation the issue is further 
discussed at the Chairman, Chiefs of Staff Committee meetings where the 
decision is taken between the three Services and issues resolved amicably. This 
is the method that we are following.” 

  
7 
 
1.15 The representative of the Ministry  of Defence stated further as under: 
 
“I think the whole concept of an in tegrated defence staff has come into 
being after the Kargil. It is one of the lessons that was learnt from the 
Kargil. I believe that it has fostered jo intness to a great extent. One of the 
lessons has been that though there has  been a Chairman of Chiefs of 
Staff Committee, this Office has in fact become more potent after the 
Kargil and it is serviced by  the IDS. It goes into a much larger number of 
issues than in the past.” 
  
1.16 The Committee pointed out the contradi ction in the Ministry’s stand that 
the present system of Unifi ed Command is working well in  the light of the action 
taken replies of the Ministry on the Tw enty-ninth Report on the DFG (2008-09), 
where the Ministry had st ated that `Component Commander s take instructions 
from the joint staff of HQ ANC and execute the given task as only they are 
competent to carry out the Service specif ic operations and it is not advisable to 
allow outside interference in their specia lized fields/service’. Responding to the 
point raised by the Committee, a representat ive of the Ministry of Defence stated 
as under:  
“He has got the powers to execute w hatever he has been directed to do. 
Whatever orders are given, he has to  execute, but the instruments of 
execution are under Component Commanders which are Service-
specific.” 
 
1.17 When asked about the pendency of dispute between Army and Navy in 
HQ ANC over the transfer of land, the repr esentatives of the Mi nistry of Defence 
stated as under: 
“The land issues remain Service-s pecific, but I will readily acknowledge 
that on this issue…Let me complete , Sir. On this issue, there is 
inadequate synergy between the Services . I do believe that there should 
be greater cooperation and synergy bet ween the Services regarding land. 
Andaman and Nicobar’s is not the only case. We have several other cases 
where the Services are extremely re luctant to adjust to each other’s 
demands. I cannot offer a ready solution for this really, but I am sure it is 
something that will be addressed at the highest levels.” 
  
 
 

  
8 
1.18 Referring to the background note furnis hed by the Ministry on the subject 
that an integrated headquarter would be merely cosmetic in the absence of 
posting of Department of Defence cadre officers at Service Headquarters and for 
participation in policy formulation, the Committee enquired about the difficulty 
being experienced in allowing them to par ticipate in policy-making issues. In 
reply, the representative of the Ministry of Defence stated as under: 
 
“We do not really feel the need frankly.” 
 
Chiefs of Staff Committee (COSC) 
  
1.19 When inquired about the effectiveness of the Chief of Staff Committee, a 
non-official witness stated as under: 
“The three Chiefs are operational commanders of their respective 
Services.  The Chairman of the Ch iefs of Staff Committee is only a 
coordinator and he does not coordi nate operations.  He is only a 
coordinator for most tasks which are administrative and that also by a 
democratic process of agreement.  He  has absolutely no operational, 
command and control authority, no logist ics or any other assets at his 
disposal.  As the Chairman of the Chie fs of Staff Committee, I used to just 
sit with my other colleagues, we used to discuss and come to an 
agreement, but most of the times, we disagreed and that is how we 
functioned. The Chairman, COSC is only a figurehead “Chairman.” 
  
1.20 When asked about the power of the Chairman of the Chief of the Staff 
Committee (COSC), the non-official witness stated as under: 
“Nothing. I would say quite categorically, nothing. I have been the 
Chairman of the three Services for tw o years. It is lip service. You are 
holding the post as a figurehead with no command resources. …. The 
present IDS which is in place has no resources for command and control.  
It is just a coordinating organisation with no operational resources and no 
command authority. 
 The CDS in America, England, France and Germany are 
operational command and cont rol authorities.  We in India do not have 
such a set up and that is why the operational control during 26/11 was 
chaotic.  No body really knew w ho was controlling the operation at 
Mumbai or whether it was being controlled from Delhi or Mumbai.”
 

  
9 
 
Post of Chief of Defence Staff (CDS) 
 
1.21 The Ministry of Defence while mentioning the observation of the GoM 
report to review National Security System  that the COSC has  not been effective 
in fulfilling its mandate and it needs to be strengthened by the addition of a CDS, 
have themselves admitted in their revised Background Note that the jointness 
flows from the very concept of CDS. A bout the creation of the post of the CDS, 
they stated in their Background Note that the Government felt that this decision 
needed a political consensus across the board rather than being taken by the 
Government on its own. All political par ties have been written to on this matter 
and there have been certain responses. T he consultation process is underway 
and decision will be taken after the same is completed. 
 
1.22 While recommending for the creati on of the post of CDS, the GoM had 
made the following observations: 
“(a) Creation of a CDS would ensure provision of single point military advice 
to the civil political executive. Before presenting his advice, the CDS will consult 
the Service Chiefs and will inform Government of the range of military advice and 
opinion with respect to the subject in hand. 
(b) Under the existing system, each Service tends to advance its own 
capability without regard for inter-Service and even intra-Service prioritization. 
Accordingly, one of the most vital tasks that the CDS would be expected to 
perform is to facilitate efficiency and effectiveness in the planning/budgeting 
process to ensure the optimal and efficient use of available resources.  
(c) The capabilities of the Armed Forces can be enhanced significantly, if 
rather than operating as three individual units, they operate with a high degree of 
“jointness” and in close tandem with one another in the conduct of various tasks, 
including training…..Creation of a CDS would promote greater “jointness” in the 
Armed Forces.” 
 
 
1.23 When asked about the qualifications of an officer to be appointed as the 
CDS, a non-official witness stated as under: 
“I have suggested in my Memorandum that the Chief of Defence Staff 
should be of equal rank with that of the three other Service Chiefs, but he 
will be the first among equals since he will be the permanent Chairman of 
the Committee.” 
 

  
10 
1.24 On the qualification for the CDS, another non-official witness stated as 
under: 
“I do not think that he should be a retired person. About the Chief of the 
Defence Staff, once the appointment is created, the Government will make 
up their mind, who the next Chief of the Defence Staff should be. The 
primary contenders would be the three Chiefs.  But it need not be 
restricted to that.  The Governmen t, in their wisdom, from the serving 
officers selected the Chief of the Defence Staff. From the practical point of 
view, it would be better if it is one of the three Chiefs because then, he has 
the experience of commanding a particular service and it will be better 
fitted to head the team and become t he superior officer of the three 
Chiefs.” 
  
1.25 On being asked whether the CDS s hould not be of rank above the three 
Chiefs of the services, the non-official witness clarified as under: 
“No.  I said, he should be the same man.  He should have the same basic 
pay, the same rank, four-star General , first amongst equals.  That is, do 
not give him too much power and authority….. 
  
1.26 He further stated as under: 
 
“Basically, the Chief of the Army or the Chief of the Navy or the Chief of the Air 
Force is the Chief of his service.  Therefore, he feels that he has to look after the 
interest of his service, and they cannot possibly come to a sensible, workable 
decision unless there is a person of the top of them. And, that person on the top 
has to be the Chief of the Defence Staff. The Chief of Defence Staff will then be 
responsible to the Government, and the three Chiefs should be responsible to 
him.  He has the executive authority and his directions cannot be ignored by the 
three Chiefs.”   
  
1.27 When asked whether the CDS w ould not be favorably pre-disposed 
towards the service be belonged to, the non-official witness stated as under: 
“The point here is, as we have seen in America, Britain and in other nations, the 
man who holds this appointment, he rise s above himself. You know everybody 
grows inside an appointment. When he has the confidence of the Raksha Mantri, 
the Cabinet, the Prime Minister and the nation, he has to live up to that. 
Therefore, in the selection of this man, we have to select a man who has got a 
clear character and conduct and he has a clear aspect of knowledge and has 
proven so during his service on being correct in the legal aspects and subjected 
himself to the Constitution and the Indian Penal Code. This is the sort of man we 
have to select and we see over the years because a man who reaches this 
position would have had about 42 years of service and in 42 years of service, 
with every year reporting being done, it is very clearly indicated whether he has 
the other tendencies moral and character wise. So, if you have a man like this, 
he will grow into that position and other nations have done that. 

  
11 
 
 Secondly, the man who is the Chief of the Integrated Defence Staff, the 
person who is going to be his Personal Staff Officer need not necessarily from 
the same service because that is a rotational appointment. If, for instance, the 
Chief of Defence Staff is from the Navy, the Personal Staff Officer could be from 
the Army or from the Air Force and so on and so there will be a mixed staff. All 
the planning has to be done combined by an integrated staff. 
 Thirdly, the other three Chiefs are not going to keep their mouth shut if 
this person is doing something funny. They can also go to the Prime Minister and 
talk about it.”               
 
1.28 On being asked about the reasons for the opposition to the creation of the 
post of CDS, non-official witness stated as under: 
“I think, initially the opposition was from within the three Chiefs 
themselves. The reason for this was, initially, when I was there 18 years 
ago, my colleagues in the Navy and the Air Force, we were very good 
friends and we all accepted the need fo r this and we told …..the Rajya 
Raksha Mantri at that time that this is necessary. 
 Subsequently, over the years, I th ink, from about 1995-96, none of 
the three Chiefs wanted to lose co mmand of his own service and get this 
appointment because the Government, at that time, was thinking that they 
would take one of the Chiefs and elevat e him to this rank because of his 
experience. But since, at that ti me, there was no Integrated Andaman and 
Nicobar Islands Command, there was no Integrated Strategic Forces 
Command and there was no Integrated Defence Staff, none of these 
gentlemen were prepared to become ju st a Chairman of the Committee 
with no personal control over his ow n service and, therefore, they 
disagreed.” 
  
1.29 Another non-official witness stated the reason for the opposition to the 
post of CDS within Services as under: 
 
“There is a reason for it. Like all arms of the Government or all 
organizations, even the Armed Forces have their individual subcultures. 
We have our individual autonomy and our identity. I am a Naval Officer. I 
was born and bred as a Naval Officer for 45 years. I fought my battles as a 
Naval Officer and I would like to remain in Navy. But in this day and age, 
unless we unify, integrate and formu late a doctrine of integrated 
operations, we will always be behind the adversaries. In a sense, we need 
a fundamental doctrine, wh ich is operationally com patible with integrated 
operations. We have to ensure networking and that is the key. That is 
what unification is all about.”   

  
12 
1.30 He further stated that: 
 
“As far as the Army and Navy are concerned, they accept the integration of the 
command. But the Air Force had a different view point throughout. They said that 
they are a different breed of human beings and they said: ‘We have to fly above 
all of you people and we would not like one of your commanders to tell us what to 
do.’ We had explained to many Air Force Chiefs that you yourself may be the 
Chief of Defence Staff and we will have to accept what you say, but it is the 
combined group of four people, they have to come to a consensus in any case 
and once you reach that position you will be thinking of others also. But 
somehow the Air Force had some objection to this because of their highly 
technical service, which they felt that the Army and the Navy were not competent 
to understand. But it has not happened like that anywhere in the world where this 
appointment has been instituted. So, I think, it is the lack of a majority that 
prevented it from doing this. In our country, as we progress and more and more 
power comes, this may happen. 
But then who does this Commander report to?  So, if he has to report to 
Army Headquarters or Navy Headquarters or Air Force Headquarters, it is not 
correct because he is an integrated commander with all three Services under 
him.”  
  
 1.31 On the scope and ambit of the power s of the CDS, the non-official witness 
stated as under; 
 
“As I tried to indicate earlier, first is the operational command in war and 
peace of the integrated command, which are inter-Service Commands.  I 
mentioned the Andaman & Nicobar Command, the Strategic Forces 
Command, which handles the nuclear weapons and any further command 
that may come up.  The Space Command is likely to come up.  Then you may 
have a special command coming up for exterior operations, expeditionary 
operations across the sea or across the land borders.  He should command 
that man and that person who runs that command for exterior operations 
would have to be an integrated forces  commander with an integrated staff.  
So, that is the operational side. 
 As far as the decision making for administration of the three Services 
is concerned, the working out of the Defence budget in cooperation, of 
course, with the Ministry of Defence (Finance) and the working out of inter-
service matters should be also handled by this man because he is going to be 
the first amongst equals of the Chiefs of Staff Committee where consensus is 
difficult sometimes.  So, he will produce the consensus.   
 Then, he will be a single point reference and Military Advisor to the 
Cabinet and to the RM.  That means, if there is a particular Service who does 
not agree with a certain line of ideas on finances or organisation or whatever, 
he will make up his mind as to what should be done and he can take that 
particular Service’s Chief with him to the RM or anybody else to decide the 
issue once and for all.  So, at the moment because there are three 
commanders, in any joint operation, there is dichotomy of command.” 

  
13  
1.32 He further stated as under: 
 
  “Also, integration of logistics is a point that came to my mind.  At the moment, 
we spend a lot of money in this country supplying fuel to the Army, Navy and Air 
Force separately, ammunition chains, fuel chains, transport chains.  We can 
integrate this logistical business because after all except for aircraft which take a 
certain type of aviation turbine fuel, all other fuels are the same, whether it is for 
tanks or whether it is for normal trucks or whether it is for generators and 
similarly the ordnance stores are very similar. There may be an integrated 
command of logistics.  There should be an integrated command of logistics, 
which Britain has already done.  It should be under the Chief of Defence Staff.” 
 
1.33 Another non-official witness, while hi ghlighting the necessity of CDS, also 
brought out the weakness of the COSC as under: 
“The primary task of the Armed Forces is the security of the country, and for any 
aggression that might be created against the country, the three Services have to 
coordinate their activities and jointly produce their mite to beat the aggression.  
For this coordination, it is essential that the Government should deal with one 
person.  It cannot deal with the three Services separately.  The three Services, in 
most tasks, have to combine their Forces and coordinate their activities, and this 
coordination can at best be done by somebody above the three Chiefs, and there 
should be the Chief of Defence Staff.  Presently, the system that we are following 
is that we have the Chairman, Chief of Staff Committee, and the Chairman is the 
Chief who became the Chief earlier than the other two.  His term may extend to 
three months or a year, and it varies.  He has no executive authority. If he makes 
a proposal, the other Chief can easily say, “No, it does not suit me.”  
 
1.34 Another non-official witness explai ned the role and function of CDS as 
under: 
 
“The Chief of Defence Staff is a separate post.  He is the fourth commander.  He 
is not one of the Army, the Navy or the Air Force.  The Navy Chief, the Army 
Chief and the Air Chief remain where they are and the CDS is the fourth person.  
He is the over all operational commander.  He has nothing to do with any single 
service.  In fact, what happens if I explai n the system please to you, the CDS is 
allocated resources from the other three Services.  He has his own command.  
Therefore, any “joint operation” is conducted by the CDS not by the individual 
services.  Perhaps you are aware that operation ‘Enduring Freedom’  the US war 
on Afghanistan and Iraq attack by the American Forces was conducted by the 
CDS of the US Armed Forces and not by individual services.  Each service 
(Army/Navy/Air Force) provides resources to the Joint Chief (CDS) who 
coordinates the operations.” 

  
14 
Restructuring the Ministry of Defence 
 
1.35 Under the heading ‘Problems with the existing set-up’, the GoM had inter-
alia observed:  
“There is a marked difference in the per ception of civil and military officials 
regarding their respective roles and functions. There has also been, on 
occasions a visible lack of synchr onisation among and between the three 
departments in the MoD, including t he relevant elements of Defence 
Finance. The concept of ‘attached offices’ (now ‘Integrated Headquarters’)  
as applied to Services Headquarters; problems of inter-se relativities, 
multiple duplicated and complex proc edures governing the exercise of 
administrative and financial power; and t he concept of ‘advice’ to the 
Minister, have all contributed to probl ems in the management  of Defence. 
This situation requires to be rectifi ed, to promote improved understanding 
and efficient functioning of the Ministry.” 
  
1.36 The Ministry of Defence in thei r first background note on the subject had 
stated as under:- 
“Renaming of Army and Naval Headquarte rs as Integrated Headquarters 
is merely cosmetic, in the absence of  posting of DoD cadre officers to 
Service Headquarters and vice vers a, for participation in policy 
formulation.” 
 
 
Deficiency of Staff in HQ IDS and HQ ANC 
 
1.37 The Ministry of Defence have in their background note al so admitted that 
posts of officers from MEA, DRDO  and Intelligence agencies to appointments 
created in unified organisations have not been carried out so far.  In spite of 
Headquarter IDS and Headquarter ANC being established in 2001, the civilian 
support staff is largely deficient (in case of ANC approximately 90 %). 
 
1.38 When pointed out that ther e is 90 per cent deficiency of staff in HQ ANC, 
the representatives of the Ministry of Defence stated as under: 
“I am not sure of the exact shortage.  There is  shortage only in Andaman 
and Nicobar. This probably is a shortage there in all Departments because 
nobody wants to go there. To fill pos ts in Andaman and Nicobar, generally 
there is difficulty.” 

  
15 
1.39 When inquired, whether the Ministry have thought of giving incentive to 
encourage people to take up jobs in A ndaman and Nicobar, the representatives 
of the Ministry of Defence stated as under: 
“People do get incentive. I think this  has been a perennial problem both in 
the North East and in the Andamans t hat it is hard to  get people to go 
there.” 
 
 1.40 The representative of t he Ministry of Defence also  admitted that there is a 
need to give due weightage when one offers fo r serving in difficult areas while 
considering for his promotion. However a representative of the Ministry stated as 
under: 
“Sir, in actual practice it really does not exist.  It is becaus e, what is there 
is advisory only that: "Yes, you have worked in North East.  It would be 
taken into due considerati on."  That is advisory in nature.  Sometimes it 
does tend to help.  “   
1.41 In their subsequent note, the Minist ry furnished the following reports on 
the present status of deficiency of civilian support staff in HQ ANC: 
“Status of Civilian Staff at HQ ANC 
(i) Group ‘A’ Senior Staff Officer (Civili an)- One post. (Vacant – to be 
filled on deputation, RRs not yet framed. DOP&T are yet to issue 
the revised guidelines for framing Recruitment Rules in view of 
implementation of revised pay scales of VI CPC). 
(ii) Other Group ‘B ’, ‘C’ and ‘D’ posts-114  : The civilian Group ‘B’, ‘C’ 
and ‘D’ posts as per the PE are r equired to be filled up three 
Services in the ratio of 1:1:1. Out of 114, at pres ent there are only 
07 posted (03 from Nay and 04 from  Air Force). Army has not 
provided any staff. The Services HQs had expressed inability to fill 
up the posts and have desired that since the civilian staff cannot be 
transferred to A&N Island without their willingness, the Service HQ 
have suggested for direct recruitment by empowering the HQ ANC. 
Proposal for delegation of power s of appointing authority to 
DCIDS (DOT), HQ IDS in respec t of Group ‘B’ and Commander in 
Chief, Andaman Nicobar Command (CI NCAN) in respect of Group 
‘C’ and ‘D’ posts is under process for approval of DOP&T. Once 
the powers are delegated by notification of the DOP&T. Once the 
powers are delegated by notification of the DOP&T, further action 
will be initiated to amend the PE, to include appointing of civilian 
staff through direct recruitment, frame the Recruitment Rules and 
then physically fill up the posts.” 
 

  
16 
 
Indian National Defence University (INDU) 
 
1.42 When asked about the st atus of the establishm ent of national Defence 
University, the representatives of the Ministry of Defence stated as under: 
“Land has been finally identified for this in Haryana, in Rewari District, on 
one of the National Highways close to Delhi. A Cabinet Note has been 
prepared and is pending approval. We are also setting up a Committee of 
Experts to decide on what the co mponents of this National Defence 
University should be. So, we are now  awaiting Cabinet clearance for the 
proposal for the land as well as setting it up. So, I think that we have made 
much progress now. I think it will take about three years to set it up. We 
hope to get Cabinet approval within a month or so. “ 
 
Linkages between the DRDO and the HQ IDS 
 
1.43 When asked about the linkage betw een the DRDO and the IDS in physical 
terms, the representative of the DRDO stated as under: 
“We have basically exchanged document s of long-term integrated plan 
which was evolved by each of the th ree Services - Air Force, Army and 
Navy. Their request was that our pr ogramme should largely merge with 
them. Obviously, the system projects  are essentially mission-oriented 
projects for the users. So, that is one area where we  have had a number 
of discussions between our Chief C ontrollers aided by the Technical 
Directorates and in some specific cases presentations by the laboratory, 
for example radars. For example, we developed this 3D Central 
Acquisition Radar as part of the Akas h Project. The Air Force found its 
usefulness for the air defence ro le. So, there were discussions 
coordinated by IDS for use in the Air Force as well as for use by the Army. 
Finally this helped us to reshape cert ain additional requirements in terms 
of processing in that radar. Actual  orders have now been placed for that 
radar. I am just giving you one example.” 
 
1.44. When enquired, whether the Ministry of Defence have taken any steps to 
ensure that the training at  the higher command level is  conducted jointly for all 
the services as being done in the NDA, the Ministry of Defence furnished in their 
written reply as under: 
“A number of institutions in the three Services impart joint training to the 
senior level Service officers.  The det ails of such institutions and training 
imparted is given below:- 
 

  
17 
 
(a) Combined Operational Review and Evaluation Programme. The 
Combined Operational Review and Evaluation Programme is a final development 
programme for Maj Gen equivalents and above from the three Services, which 
focuses on Regional and National Security issues with a view to bring in more 
synergy, both at operational and strategic level within the Armed Forces; 
between Ministry of Defence and other ministries: and between the corporate 
sector and other National Security organs.  The programme is being conducted 
annually by the three Services in rotation. A total of 18-20 officers participate in 
this programme. 
(b) National Defence College. It is a premier training institution under the 
MoD.  The College conducts a one-year course for 100 senior officers of the rank 
of Brig and equivalent of all the three Services of the Armed Forces of India, 
Foreign Defence Forces and Jt Secy/Director level officers from the Indian Civil 
Services. 
(c) Higher Defence Management Course. The Higher Defence 
Management Course is conducted at the College of Defence Management which 
is the leading center of excellence in management thought which trains 99 select 
senor officers (rank of Cols and Brigs and equivalent) from the three services and 
Para Military Forces including Ministry of Defence in evolving, refining and 
honing management skills that facilitate efficient resource management.  
Senior Officers Study Period : The senior officers study period is conducted 
annually over a period of 12 working days, with 25 officers of the three services 
(Air Commodore and equivalent).  The main aim of the study period is to provide 
senior officers of the three Services a forum to discuss and exchange ideas and 
update their knowledge on the latest tactics, concepts and procedures.  The 
objectives of the course are as follows: 
a) To provide an opportunity to senior level officers of the three 
Services to be acquainted with the philosophy of Air Operations. 
b) To broaden their outlook and perception of the happening within 
the region and globally. 
c) To put across their views on current issues of national importance. 
d) To interact with media. 
 
Higher Command Courses : These courses are conducted for selected officers 
of the rank of Col and Equivalent of all the three Services to train selected 
officers for Command and Staff appointments.  These courses are held at Army 
War College Mhow, College of Naval Warfare, Karanja and College of Air 
Warfare, Secunderbad.  Apart from officers of all the three Services attending 
Courses at each of these institutes, there is also a combined capsule held for the 
participants of all these institutes, and the Higher Defence Management Course, 
which is held annually at Army War College, Mhow. This capsule is called 
JOCAP (Jt Capsule). 
Seminar: Periodic Seminars conducted by various professional training 
institutions and think tanks like CENJOWS, CLAWS, CAPS and USI.” 

  
18 
 
PART II 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE 
 
Need for promoting Jointness within the Services 
 
 
1. Apart from a conventional war threat, the fast changing security 
environment has been posing serious challenges before India in the form 
of internal situation of externally envisaged proxy war scenario, growing 
menace of cross border terrorism and advancement in technology of 
nuclear weapons and missiles particular ly during the last two decades.  
Undoubtedly, the modern day warfare techniques require synergised and 
joint efforts on the part of different wings of the armed forces and the time 
is now ripe when the traditional stru ctures of the Armed Forces have to be 
reorganized, integrated and geared up to meet the threat of growing 
asymmetric challenges having serious secu rity implications for the nation. 
The Committee’s examination of the s ubject matter and their interaction 
with the experts having experience of serving the Armed Forces at the 
highest level has however, revealed th at while certain steps have been 
taken to promote the concept of jointness within the Services, it is still at a 
nascent stage in the country.   The Co mmittee have dealt with some of the 
important aspects related to the subj ect in the succeeding paragraphs of 
the Report. 

  
19 
 
Restructuring the Ministry of Defence 
 
 
 
2. The Kargil Review Committee (KRC), constituted by the Government 
after the Kargil war had observed in paragraph 14.19 of its report that 
“India is perhaps the only major democracy where the Armed Forces 
Headquarters are outside the apex governmental structure”.  They had also 
observed that  “higher decisions on equipment,  force levels and strategy 
are not collegiate but command-oriented . The Prime Minister and Defence 
Minister do not have the benefit of the views and expertise of the Army 
Commanders and their equivalents in the Navy and Air Force so that higher 
level defence management deci sion are more consensual and 
broadbased”. The KRC had also expressed the view that: “Most opposition 
to change comes from inadequate knowledge of the national security 
decision-making process elsewhere in the world and a reluctance to 
change the status quo…....  In fact, locating the services Headquarters in 
the Government will further enhance civilian supremacy ”. It was in this 
context that the KRC had recommended that that the entire gamut of 
national security management and ap ex decision-making and the structure 
and interface between the Ministry of Defence and the Armed Forces 
Headquarters be comprehensively studied and reorganized.  Even the 
Group of Ministers’ (GoM) in paragr aph 6.4 of its report on `Reforming 
National Security System’ had pointed out that the “concept of “attached  

  
20 
offices” as applied to Services Hea dquarters; problems of inter-se 
relativities; multiple duplicated and complex procedures governing the 
exercise of administrative and financial powers; and the concept of `advice’ 
to the Minister, have all contributed to problems in the management of 
Defence.  This situation requires to be  rectified, to promote improved 
understanding and efficient functioning of the Ministry.” 
Although considerable time has elapsed since the KRC and GoM 
submitted their reports, the Committee regret to observe that the required 
level of interface between the Minist ry of Defence and the Armed Forces 
Headquarters is still missing as is evident from the candid admission of the 
Ministry that renaming of Army and Naval Headquarters as Integrated 
Headquarters is merely “cosmetic”. The Committee, therefore, strongly 
recommend that the staffing pattern in th e Ministry of Defence be suitably 
changed to appoint the Armed Forces personnel of requisite expertise at 
the level of Joint Secretary and/or Additional Secretary so that the Armed 
Forces Headquarters may be intrinsica lly involved in national security 
management and apex decision making processes.  Needless to say that 
such a system would not only provid e an effective interface between the 
MOD and the different Services but w ill also go a long way in promoting 
and synchronizing jointness among the Services Headquarters. 

  
21 
 
Chief of Defence Staff 
 
3. The Committee have been informed that the Chiefs of the Staff 
Committee (COSC) is a forum for the three Service Chiefs to discuss matter 
having a bearing on the activities of the Services and also to advise the 
Ministry.  The position of the Chairman of the COSC presently devolves on 
a longest serving Chief of Staff and consequently rotates amongst three 
Services. In the light of  the fact that the Chairman of the COSC has no 
command and control authority over th e Services other than his own, the 
Committee are unable to comprehend whether such a system will prove 
efficacious enough to ensure quick r esponse and coordinated action in 
emergent situations.    Consideri ng the fact that the key to success in 
modern day warfare operations is the ability of the different wings of the 
Armed Forces to integrate their e fforts under a single command without 
any loss of time, the Committee are of the considered view that the creation 
of an additional post of Chief of Defe nce Staff (CDS) to act as Chairman of 
the COSC is essential to ensure optimum level of jointness among the 
different wings of the Armed Forces a nd to provide single-point military 
advice to the Government.  During th eir examination, the Committee have 
been given to understand that the post of CDS presently exists in 67 
countries including France, Germany, UK and USA and the system has 
proved its efficacy in those countries.   The Committee, therefore, desire 
that the Government should pay serious attention towards this aspect by  

  
22 
evolving consensus on this issue and taking timely and appropriate steps 
to revise the composition of the COSC by creating a post of CDS to act as 
Chairman of COSC.  The incumbent so selected for the post may be a four-
star officer drawn from the Services in rotation and be appointed for a 
tenure of not less than two years. The duties and responsibilities to be 
entrusted to the CDS may be decided by the Government keeping in view 
the objectivity and independence required for the purpose.   
 The Committee are of the firm view th at till such time the post of CDS 
is created, the Government may take step s to give appropriate authority  to 
the Chairman COSC in the present set up to command and control the 
resources of the Defence Services whenever the situation  so demands. 
 
 
Common Law for the Defence Services 
 
4. The Committee note that the Integrated Defence Staff (IDS) was created 
in October, 2001 as a sequel to the decision by the Group of Ministers based 
on KRC.  HQ IDS is presently functioning as staff in the advisory mode to the 
Chairman, COSC and is headed by Chief of Integrated Defence Staff (CISC). 
Considering the fact that one of the primary objectives of HQ IDS is to entail 
bringing about transformation and reforms within the armed forces, the 
Committee desire that the HQ IDS should also be entrusted with the task of 
reviewing the existing Acts applicable to the personnel serving in Army, Navy 
and Air Force with a view to enacting a common law for defence services 
personnel taking into account the present day requirements and the need for 
promoting the concept of jointness within the Services.  

  
23 
Joint training for the Services Personnel 
5. The Committee understand that there are certain areas at the 
operational and strategic level within  the armed forces which are common 
to two or more services.   The Committee, therefore, recommend that these 
areas be identified at the earliest so th at duplication of efforts and wasteful 
expenditure due to overlapping is avoided. The Committee also 
recommend that the Ministry of Defe nce should review their present policy 
of imparting joint training to the senior level officers in the Defence 
Services with a view to introducing modern day performance management 
processes aimed at fostering the spirit  of jointness among them and also 
to prepare them to assume greater responsibilities in the current and 
envisaged environment of jointness within the Services. 
 
Foreign Training to Service Personnel 
 
6. In the light of the fact that a number of countries such as France, 
Germany, U.K and USA have adopted th e structure of jointness in their 
armed forces, the Committee desire that the Government should examine 
the feasibility of seeking cooperation from such countries for imparting 
training to senior level armed forces officers willing to serve in their 
respective Services for at least two years after the training. The Committee 
feel that such a training with focused  attention on the concept of jointness 
will go a long way in establishing the re quisite level of synergy among the 
Armed Forces.  

  
24 
Joint Intelligence 
7. The events in the past includi ng Kargil intrusion and terrorists’ 
attack in Mumbai on 26 November, 2008 have brought out the instances of 
lack of coordination among different  intelligence gathering agencies 
including those of military intelligence resulting in loss of precious lives of 
defence services and police force pers onnel as well as those of civilians. 
While expressing their grave concern o ver the prevailing situation,  the 
Committee  strongly recommend that  the Government should take 
immediate steps to constitute a fe deral central intelligence agency 
covering under its umbrella even the  tri-service intelligence gathering 
network.  
 
Cross Attachments 
 
8. The Committee feel th at cross attachment of officers in operational 
and planning wings of different Serv ices at command level and above will 
help the officers in not only understa nding the capabilities and limitations 
of different wings of the armed forces but also provide them an opportunity 
to gainfully utilize their experience in promoting jointmanship among the 
forces. The Committee, therefore, urge  upon the Ministry to devise suitable 
strategies in this regard.  

  
25 
Incentives 
9. In order to bring about synergy and to strengthen the jointness in the 
structure of the armed forces in a more effective manner, the Committee 
desire that the officers who have attended joint training programmes 
and/or rendered services in the cr oss attachments should be given 
incentives in the form of due weightage at the time of promotions and 
postings.  
 
 
Jointness between Navy and Coast Guard 
 
10. Events in the recent past h ave highlighted lack of coordination 
between Navy and Coast Guard resulting in national catastrophe.  The 
Committee strongly believe that it is high time that the Government 
reviewed this issue in its entirety a nd initiated appropriate steps to put in 
place an effective mechanism for establishing better coordination and 
jointness between Navy and Coast Guard in the paramount interest of the 
national security.   
 
  
Deficiency of Staff at HQ  ANC 
 
11. The Committee  find it rather strange that even after eight years of its 
creation, HQANC continues to be deficient of civilian support staff with just 
seven officials in place as against the authorized strength of 115 posts.  
The Committee have been informed that  the proposal for delegation of 
powers to appoint civilian staff in HQANC through direct recruitment is still  

  
26 
under process for approval of Departme nt of Personnel & Training.  While 
expressing their displeasure over lack of concrete steps to make good the 
deficiency of staff in a timely ma nner, the Committee hope that concerted 
efforts would atleast now be made to  fill up the vacancies expeditiously so 
as to ensure that HQANC functions in an efficient manner. 
 
 
Setting up of Indian National Defence University  
  
12. The Committee note that the Gr oup of Ministers in its report on 
`Reforming the National Security System’ had recommended for setting up 
of a National Defence University to undertake long term defence and 
strategic studies.  The Committee are however, distressed to find that the 
Ministry are still awaiting Cabinet cl earance for the proposal for the land 
needed for setting up of the proposed university and it would take another 
three years to establish it.  The Commi ttee deplore such inordinate delay 
on a matter so vital for fostering th e necessary jointmanship in the Armed 
Forces and they desire the Ministry to take immediate steps to establish 
the Indian National Defence University without any further loss of time.  
The Committee would also like to be a pprised of the precise steps taken in 
this regard. 

  
27 
Need for setting up a High Powered Expert Committee  
 
13. The Committee strongly feel that the country today faces entirely 
new dimensions of security threats and challenges in the changing global 
scenario and there is an imperati ve need to continuously devise 
appropriate strategies to keep pace wi th the innovations being made in 
conventional and unconventional modes of  warfare. In the light of the 
evidence tendered by the representatives of the Ministry of Defence and 
after hearing the views of the exper ts having experience of serving the 
armed forces at the highest level, the Committee strongly recommend that 
the Government should constitute a high powered expert committee to 
reorganise, reform and restructure the Armed Forces with a view to 
implementing the recommendations made on the subject matter both by 
the GoM in its report submitted in 2001 and the Standing Committee on 
Defence in their earlier as well as this  Report. The Committee would like to 
be apprised of the steps taken by the Government in this regard. 
  
 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi;           BALASAHEB VIKHE PATIL, 
20  February, 2009                   Chairman, 
01  Phalguna, 1930 (Saka)  Standing Committee on Defence  
 

  
28 
 
MINUTES OF THE FOURTEENTH SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE 
ON DEFENCE (2008-09) 
 
 The Committee sat on Monday, the 29 th December 2008 from 1500 to 
1550 hrs. in Committee Room `E’, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
Shri Balasaheb Vikhe Patil  -      Chairman 
 
MEMBERS 
 
LOK SABHA 
2. Shri Santosh Gangwar 
3. Dr. K.S. Manoj 
4. Shri Arjun Charan Sethi 
5. Shri Manavendra Singh 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
6. Shri Jai Parkash Aggarwal 
7. Smt. Shobhana Bhartia 
8. Shri R.K. Dhawan 
9. Shri M.V. Mysura Reddy 
10. Shri K. B. Shanappa 
11. Smt. Viplove Thakur 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri Rajeev Sharma           -  Director 
  2. Shri D.R. Shekhar              -  Deputy Secretary 
3. Smt. J.M. Sinha                  -  Under Secretary  
 
REPRESENTATIVES OF THE MINISTRY OF DEFENCE 
 
1. Shri Vijay Singh  - Defence Secretary 
2. Shri R.K. Mathur  - Addl. Secy(M) 
3. Lt. Gen NS Brar  - DCIDS (PP&FD) 
4. Vice Adml. DK Joshi - DCNS 
5. Air Mshl. S. Mukerji  - AOP 
6. Shri Bimal Julka  - JS (G/Air) 
7. Shri Binoy Kumar  - JS (O/N) 
8. Shri Mukesh Kumar Sinha - Director (Budget) 
9. Shri F.K. Pande  - Deputy Secretary  

  
29 
2. At the outset, the Chairman welc omed the representatives of the 
Ministry of Defence to the sitting of t he Committee and drew their attention to the 
Direction 58 of the Directions by the Speaker, Lok Sabha. The Chairman then 
requested the representatives of the Ministry of Def ence to brief the Committee 
on the subject `Status of implementation of Unified Command for Armed Forces’.  
 
3. The representatives of the Minist ry of Defence, then, briefed the 
Committee on various issues pertaining to the subject viz., present status of 
CDS, structure and functions of Unified Command such as headquarter 
Integrated Defence Staff (IDS) and Tr i-Service Command like the Andaman and 
Nicobar Command (ANC) etc.  The Committ ee also sought clarifications on 
issues pertaining to improving join tness in decision making, operations, 
intelligence, training, combating terrorism, finalisation of LTIPP and evolution of 
joint service doctrine. The Committee also  desired to know the effectiveness of 
headquarter IDS & ANC with   the defici ency of civilian staff in both the 
commands and in the absence of posting of DoD Cadre Officers in the Integrated 
Headquarters. 
 
4. The representatives of the Ministry  responded to the issues raised by the 
members.  As regards, the points on whic h the representatives could not readily 
respond, the committee desired them to furnish written information at the earliest. 
 
5. The copy of verbatim record of the proceedings has been kept.  
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
 
 
 

  
30 
 
MINUTES OF THE SIXTEENTH SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE 
ON DEFENCE (2008- 09) 
 
 The Committee sat on Monday, the 13 th January, 2009 from 1100 to 1230 
hrs. in Committee Room `D’, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
 
          PRESENT 
Smt. Viplove Thakur  -      Chairperson 
 
MEMBERS   
          LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri Vijay Bahuguna 
3. Shri Milind Murli Deora 
4. Shri Santosh Gangwar 
5. Shri Jigajinagi Ramesh Chandappa 
6. Dr. K.S. Manoj 
7. Shri Arjun Charan Sethi 
 
        RAJYA SABHA 
8. Shri Jai Parkash Aggarwal 
9. Smt. Shobhana Bhartia 
10. Shri M.V. Mysura Reddy 
11. Shri K. B. Shanappa 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri Rajeev Sharma           -  Director 
2. Shri D.R. Shekhar              -  Deputy Secretary 
3. Smt. J.M. Sinha                  -  Under Secretary  
 
 
NON-OFFICIAL WITNESSES 
 
1. General (Retd.) V N Sharma, PVSM  
2. Lt. Gen. (Retd.) A.M. Vohra, PVSM, SM 
3. Lt. Gen. (Retd.) G.S. Rawat, PVSM,AVSM 
  

  
31 
2. In the absence of Hon’ble Chairman,  the Committee chose Smt. Viplove 
Thakur, M.P. and the member  of the Committee to act as Chairperson of the 
Committee under Rule 258 (3) of the Rules and Procedure and Conduct of 
Business in Lok Sabha. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed General (Retd.) 
V N Sharma to the sitting of the Co mmittee and requested him to brief the 
Committee on the subjects ‘Status of implementation of Unified Command for 
Armed Forces’ ‘Outsourcing of certain acti vities in Armed Forces’ and ‘Impact of 
Frequent Deployment of Armed Forces  on secondary duties/ miscellaneous 
work’ and also drew his attention to the Direction 58 of Directions by the 
Speaker, Lok Sabha. Gen. (Retd.) V.N. Sharma, then briefed the Committee on 
the aforesaid subjects.  
 
3. As regards to the Post of Chief of Defence Staff (CDS) for the Armed, 
Forces Gen. (Retd.) Sharma expressed hi s opinion in favour of appointment of 
CDS. He also cited the difficulties being faced by the Government in taking quick 
decision in the absence of a Unified Command under CDS. He supported setting 
up of CDS with adequate check and balance system as was prevailing in the 
democratic countries like USA, UK. He  also emphasised the need for setting up 
of new commands such as Space Comm and, Special Command for Exterior 
Operations in view of changing global security scenario.  
 
4. On the issue of deployment of the Armed Forces personnel on secondary 
duties, Gen. (Retd.) Sharma stated that Armed Forces should be deployed in 
anti-insurgency operations taking place in border areas and Line of Control 
(LoC). At the same time he stressed on the need for  modernisation of Central 
Paramilitary Forces and State Police Forc es so that they could handle  hand 
insurgency problems prevailing in different parts of the country. 
 
Witness then withdrew. 

  
32 
5. The Committee then invited two other non-official experts Lt. Gen. (Retd.) 
A.M. Vohra and Lt. Gen. (R etd.) G.S. Rawat  to express their views on the 
aforementioned subjects. Both the wit nesses agreed to the need for having CDS 
and vesting executive power with the post. They also concurred  with the opinion 
of Gen. (Retd.) Sharma that CDS should be a single point reference to the 
Government of India on the matters pertaining to external security of the nation. 
 
6. The experts also responded to the queries raised by the members.   
Witnesses then withdrew. 
 
7. A copy of verbatim record of the proceedings has been kept.  
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
 

  
33 
 
MINUTES OF THE SEVENTEENTH SITTING OF THE STANDING 
COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE (2008- 09) 
 
 The Committee sat on Monday, the 27 th January, 2009 from 1100 to 1245 
hrs. in Committee Room `D’, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
 
             PRESENT 
Shri Balasaheb Vikhe Patil  -      Chairman 
 
MEMBERS 
            
          LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri Vijay Bahuguna 
3. Shri S. Bangarappa 
4. Shri Santosh Gangwar 
5. Shri Jigajinagi Ramesh Chandappa 
6. Dr. K.S. Manoj 
7. Shri Asaduddin Owaisi 
8. Shri Arjun Charan Sethi 
 
         RAJYA SABHA 
 
9. Shri Jai Parkash Aggarwal 
10. Shri R.K. Dhawan 
11. Shri A. Elavarasan 
12. Shri M.V. Mysura Reddy 
13. Shri K. B. Shanappa 
14. Smt. Viplove Thakur 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri Devender Singh - Joint Secretary 
2. Shri Rajeev Sharma           -  Director 
3. Smt. J.M. Sinha                  -  Under Secretary  
 
NON-OFFICIAL WITNESSES 
 
1. Air Chief Marshal (Retd.) O. P. Mehra, PVSM    
2. Admiral (Retd.) Sushil Kumar, PVSM, UYSM, AVSM, NM   
3. Air Marshal (Retd.) B. N. Gokhale, PVSM, AVSM,  VM   
 

  
34 
2. At the outset, the Chairman welc omed Air Chief Marshal (Retd.) O.P. 
Mehra to the sitting of the Committee and requested him to brief the Committee 
on the subjects ‘Status of implementation of Unified Command for Armed 
Forces’, ‘Outsourcing of certain activities in Armed Forces’ and ‘Impact of 
Frequent Deployment of Armed Forces  on secondary duties/ miscellaneous 
work’ and also drew their attention to the Direction 58 of Directions by the 
Speaker, Lok Sabha. Air Chief Marshal (Retd.) then briefed the Committee on 
the aforesaid subjects. On the issue of creation of the post of Chief of Defence 
Staff  (CDS) he was of the opinion that  the system in vogue was adequate and it 
improved the earlier deficiencies and a CDS equivalent was already in place, in 
the form of the Chairman of the Chief of  Staff Committee (COSC).  Further, in 
case of differences of opinion, the political leadership should play a major role.  
He also stressed upon the necessity of  improving upon the decision making 
process in the Government as well as the need of articulati on of the Threat 
Perception by the political leadership.  As regards the subject `Outsourcing of 
certain activities in Armed Forces’, he stated that the Defence PSUs should be 
granted autonomous status by the Gove rnment.  On the issue of frequent 
deployment of Armed Forces on secondary dut ies,  he was of t he view that it 
adversely affected the Forces and this should be done only in exceptional 
circumstances.  He stressed upon the need of strengthening the paramilitary 
Force.  
 
 Witness then withdrew 
 
3. The Committee then invited Admira l (Retd.) Sushil Kumar and requested 
him to brief the Committee on the aforementioned subjects.  He stressed on the 
necessity of the Unified Command and sy nergy among the three Services in 
order to avoid duplication of resources.  On the issue of resistance to the 
integration of the three Services he opined t hat it was similar story the world over 
but certain countries adopted the policy of integration of the services gradually. 
He advocated for the creation of CDS. On  the issue of outs ourcing of certain 
activities, he opined that DRDO should be involved in only very selected and high 
value strategic missions. Further, on t he frequent deployment of Armed Forces 
on secondary duties and it was  he was of  the view that they should not be 
diverted for normal secondary duties and it was advisable to bring them in case 
of major tragedies or national calamities.  
  
Witness then withdrew. 
 
 

  
35 
4. The Committee then invited Air Marshal (Retd.) B.N. Gokhale  and 
requested him to brief the Committee on the aforementioned subjects. Air 
Marshal (Retd.) Gokhale then expressed his views on the subjects. He stated 
that the existing system was working we ll and it should continue with its own 
pace and that creation of CDS would be prem ature at this point of time. On the 
issue of outsourcing of certain activities, he stated that the core activities should 
be identified and retained, whereas non-co re activities could be outsourced. 
About the frequent deployment of the Armed Forces,  he was of the view that 
they should not be deployed for matters pertaining to internal security. 
 Witness then withdrew.  
 
5. The experts also responded to the queries raised by the members.   
 
6. A copy of verbatim record of the proceedings has been kept.  
 
The Committee then adjourned. 

  
36 
MINUTES OF THE EIGHTEENTH SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE 
ON DEFENCE (2008-09) 
 
 The Committee sat on Wednesday, the 4 th  February 2009 from 1100 to 
1215 hrs. in Committee Room `B’, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
 
PRESENT 
Shri Balasaheb Vikhe Patil  -      Chairman 
 
MEMBERS 
 
LOK SABHA 
2. Shri Santosh Gangwar 
3. Dr. K.S. Manoj 
4. Shri Asaduddin Owaisi 
5. Shri Arjun Charan Sethi 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
6. Shri Jai Parkash Aggarwal 
7. Shri R.K. Dhawan 
8. Shri K. B. Shanappa 
9. Smt. Viplove Thakur 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri Devender Singh - Joint Secretary 
2. Shri Rajeev Sharma           -  Director 
3. Shri D.R. Shekhar              -  Deputy Secretary 
4. Smt. J.M. Sinha                  -  Under Secretary  
 
REPRESENTATIVES OF THE MINISTRY OF DEFENCE 
 
1. Shri Vijay Singh  - Defence Secretary 
2. Shri M. Natarajan  - SA to RM 
3. Shri S.M. Acharya  - Secretary (ESW) 
4. Smt. H.K. Pannu  - FA(DS) 
5. Smt. Neelam Nath  - Spl. Secretary (N) 
6. Shri S.K. Sharma  - DG (Acquisition) 
7. Shri Shekhar Agarwal  - FA (Acquisition) 
8. Shri R.K. Mathur  - Addl. Secy(M) 
9. Shri Bimal Julka  - JS (G/Air) 
10. Shri Sanjeeva Kumar  - JS (ESW) 
11. Shri Ajay Tirkey  - JS (E) 
12. Shri S.N. Misra  - JS(Aero) 
13. Shri Amit Cowshish  - Addl. FA(A) 
14. Shri V. Somasundaran - JS (OF) 
15. Shri T Ramachandru  - JS(S) 
16. Shri Mukesh Kumar Sinha - Dir. (Fin/Bud). 

  
37 
ARMED FORCES HEADQUATERS 
  1. Air Mshl S.C. Mukul   - CISC 
  2. Lt. Gen N. Thamburaj  - VCOAS 
  3. Vice Adml Raman P Suthan - VCNS 
  4. Air Mshl T.S. Randhawa  - DG(I&S) 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the representatives of the Ministry 
of Defence to the sitting of the Commi ttee and drew their attention to the 
Direction 58 of the Directions by the Speaker, Lok Sabha. The Chairman then 
requested the representatives of the Ministry of Def ence to brief the Committee 
on the subjects `Status of implementation of Unified Command for Armed Forces’ 
and Action Taken Replies on the observa tions/ recommendations contained in 
the 29 th Report of the Committee on ‘Demands for Grants of the Ministry of 
Defence for the year 2008-09’.  
 
3. The representatives of the Ministry  of Defence then briefed the Committee 
first on various issues pertaining to t he subject `Status of implementation of 
Unified Command for Armed Forces’ viz., Mechanism to sort out differences 
among the services, provision of Joint Trai ning at all levels in the armed forces, 
vertical & horizontal aspects of integration as identified by the HQ  IDS, status of 
Indian National Defence University (I NDU) and the linkages between the DRDO 
and HQ IDS, etc.  
 
4. The Committee then took the oral ev idence of the repres entatives of the 
Ministry of Defence on Action Ta ken Replies on the observations/ 
recommendations contained in the 29 th Report of the Committee on ‘Demands 
for Grants of the Ministry for the year 2008-09’. The Ministry of Defence briefed 
the Committee on status of tr ial and supply of Arjun Tanks, findings of the Rama 
Rao Committee on the working of DRDO, present status of Eleventh Plan, 
liberalized leave policy, self-certification of  firms and issue pertaining to the light-
weight systems for soldiers, etc.   
 
5. The representatives of the Ministry  then responded to the issues raised by 
the members.  As regards, the points on which the representatives could not 
readily respond, the committee desired them to furnish written information at the 
earliest. 
 
6. The copy of verbatim record of the proceedings has been kept.  
 
The Committee then adjourned. 

  
38 
 
MINUTES OF THE NINETEENTH SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE 
ON DEFENCE (2008- 09) 
 
 The Committee sat on Friday, the 20 th February 2009 from 1000 to     
1025 hrs. in Committee Room `C’, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
 
PRESENT 
 
Shri Balasaheb Vikhe Patil  -      Chairman 
 
MEMBERS 
 
LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri Milind Murli Deora 
3. Shri Santosh Gangwar 
4. Shri Jigajinagi Ramesh Chandappa 
5. Shri Suresh Kalmadi 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
6. Shri Jai Parkash Aggarwal 
7. Shri R.K. Dhawan  
8. Shri A. Elavarasan 
9. Shri M.V. Mysura Reddy 
10. Smt. Viplove Thakur 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1.  Shri Devender Singh - Joint Secretary  
2. Shri Rajeev Sharma  - Director 
3. Shri D.R. Shekhar  - Deputy Secretary 
4. Smt. J.M. Sinha  - Under Secretary 
 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcom ed the Members to the sitting of the 
Committee.  The Committee, thereafter, took up for consideration the following 
draft reports: 
 
(i) Action taken by the Government on the 
 recommendations/observations contained in the Twenty-Ninth 
 Report of the Committee on Demands for Grants of the Ministry of 
 Defence for the year 2008-09; and 
(ii) Status of implementation of Unified Command for Armed Forces. 
 
3. The Committee adopted both the afor esaid draft reports without any 
modification. 
 
4. The Committee then authorized the Chairman to make verbal and 
consequential changes, if any, in the r eports and present the same to the 
Parliament. 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 