30 STANDING COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE
(2008-2009)
(FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA)
MINISTRY OF DEFENCE
STATUS OF MARRIED ACCOMMODATION IN DEFENCE AND
 ALLIED SERVICES
THIRTIETH REPORT
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
October, 2008/Asvina, 1930 (Saka)

2
THIRTIETH REPORT
STANDING COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE
(2008-2009)
(FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA)
MINISTRY OF DEFENCE
STATUS OF MARRIED ACCOMMODATION IN DEFENCE AND
ALLIED SERVICES
Presented to Lok Sabha on 20.10.2008.
Laid in Raiya Sabha on 21.10.2008
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
October, 2008/Asvina, 1930 (Saka)

3
C.O.D. No. 96
Price: Rs.
© 2008 By LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT

4
CONTENTS
Pages
Composition of the Committee (2008-09) ……… (ii)
Introduction ……… (iv)
PART-I
BACKGROUND ANALYSIS
Chapter-I Status of Married Accommodation in Defence
Services
Availability of Married Accommodation for Defence
Service Personnel
……… 1
Deficiency of married accommodation ……… 2
Married Accommodation Project ……… 3
Chapter-II Implementation of MAP
Phase-I of MAP ……… 6
Phase-II of MAP ……… 10
Use of latest technology ……… 13
Provision for other facilities ……… 14
Chapter-III Implementing Agency
Role of organisation of Directorate General of
Married Accommodation Project (DG MAP)
……… 16
Monitoring Mechanism for MAP ……… 18
Maintenance of buildings constructed under MAP ……… 20
Chapter-IV Other issues
Common Accommodation Pool for three Services ……… 22
Transit Accommodation ……… 23
Chapter-V Status of Married Accommodation in Allied Services
Married Accommodation for Coast Guard ……… 24
Married Accommodation for Border Roads
Organisation
……… 25
PART-II
Recommendations/Observations of the Committee  ……… 28
Annexure  ……… 41
List of Abbreviations ««« 44
Appendices Minutes of the sittings of the Committee held on
29.4.2008, 2.6.2008 and 3.10.2008
««« 45

5
(ii)
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE (2008-09)
Shri Balasaheb Vikhe Patil   - Chairman
MEMBERS
LOK SABHA
2. Shri Vijay Bahuguna
3. Shri S. Bangarappa
4. Shri Milind Murli Deora
5. Shri Santosh Gangwar
6. Shri Jigajinagi Ramesh Chandappa
7. Shri Suresh Kalmadi
8. Shri C. Kuppusami
9. Dr. K.S. Manoj
10. Ms. Ingrid Mcleod
11. Shri Asaduddin Owaisi
12. Shri Adhalrao Shivaji Patil
13. Shri Shrinivas Patil
14. Shri Raju Rana
15. Shri Arjun Charan Sethi
16. Prof. Mahadeorao Shiwankar
17. Shri Manavendra Singh
18. Shri Balashowry Vallabhaneni
19. Shri Rajesh Verma
20. Shri Anil Shukla Warsi
RAJYA SABHA
21. Shri A. Elavarasan
22. Dr. Farooq Abdullah
23. Shri Jai Parkash Aggarwal
24. Shri Abu Asim Azmi
25. Smt. Shobhana Bhartia
26. Shri R.K. Dhawan
27. Shri K.B. Shanappa
28. Shri Arun Shourie
29. Smt. Viplove Thakur
30. Shri M.V. Mysura Reddy

6
(iii)
SECRETARIAT
1. Shri A. Louis Martin  - Joint Secretary
2. Shri Rajeev Sharma  - Director
3. Smt. Jyochnamayi Sinha - Under Secretary

7
INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairman of the Standing Committee on Defence (2008-09) having
been authorised by the Committee to submit the Report on their behalf, present
this Thirtieth Report on the subject  ‘Status of Married Accommodation in
Defence and Allied Services’.
2. The Committee selected the above subject for examination during the
year 2007-08.  As the examination of the subject remained inconclusive, it was
re-selected by the Standing Committee on Defence for examination during the
year 2008-09.
3.  The Committee during their examination of the subject, took evidence of
the representatives of the Ministry of Defence on 29 April and 2 June, 2008.  The
Committee undertook an on-the-spot study visit to   Chennai during February,
2008 and also local visit to some of the Married Accommodation Project sites in
Delhi on 27 May, 2008 for an in-depth analysis of the subject matter.
4.  Based on the background note; written replies to the list of points
furnished by the Ministry of Defence on the subject; briefing/oral evidence
tendered by the representatives of the Ministry; and the observations made by
the members of the Committee during their study visits to some of the Married
Accommodation Project (MAP) sites in Chennai and Delhi, the Committee
finalised and adopted the draft report at their sitting held on 3 October, 2008.
5. The Committee have expressed their concern over the delay in execution
of the Married Accommodation Project and stressed on the need for prescribing
firm dates for completion of all the phases of MAP. They have also emphasized
that project execution be decentralized to command level to complete the works
in a time bound manner, to consider engaging specialized consultants/agencies
in order to ensure timely completion of the project and recommended use of
latest technology in construction.
(iv)

8
6. The Committee wish to express their thanks to the representatives of the
Ministry of Defence for appearing before the Committee for evidence and for
furnishing information which the Committee desired in connection with the
examination of this subject.
7. For facility of reference and convenience, the observations/
recommendations of the Committee contained in Para II have been printed in
thick type in the body of the report.
NEW DELHI;               BALASAHEB VIKHE PATIL,
17 October, 2008                                     Chairman,
25 Asvina, 1930 (Saka)                  Standing Committee on Defence
(v)

9
PART-I
BACKGROUND ANALYSIS
CHAPTER-I
STATUS OF MARRIED ACCOMMODATION IN DEFENCE SERVICES
Availability of Married Accommodation for Defence Service Personnel
1.1 According to the Ministry of Defence, the Government stand committed to
provide married accommodation for Defence service personnel. As per Scales of
Accommodation for Defence Services 1983, the following percentages have
been laid down as a general guide for planning married accommodation for
officers and other ranks in the Armed Forces:-
Army
 (a) Officers
  (i) Major & above   - 100 %
  (ii) Captains    - 80 %
  (iii) Lieutenant & below   - 33.33%
 (b) Junior Commissioned Officers (JCOs) - 100 %
 (c) Other Ranks     - 35 %
Air Force
 (i) Squadron  Leader and above  - 100 %
 (ii) Flight Lieutenant    - 60 % (for non-flying Stn.)
 (iii) Flight Lieutenant    - 70 % (for flying Stn.)
 (iv) Flying Officer     - 50 % (for non-flying Stn.)
 (v) Flying Officer     - 25 % (for flying Stn.)
(vi) Master Warrant Officer (MWO) /
Warrant Officer    -100 %
 (vii) Junior Warrant Officer (JWO)  -  75 %
 (viii) Non-Commissioned Officer (NCOs) -  50 %
 (ix) Aircraftmen     -  35 %
 (x) Non Combatants Enrolled (NcsE)  -100 %
Navy
 (i) Lieutenant Commander and above - 100 %
 (ii) Lieutenant (Including SD list)  -  83 %
 (iii) Sub Lieutenant (including SD list)  -  63 %
(iv) Master Command Petty Officers(MCPOs)
and Command Petty Officers(CPOs) - 100 %
 (v) Petty Officers(POs)    - 50 %
 (vi) Leading, Able and Ordinary Seamen - 35 %

10
The Ministry of Defence also stated that the aforesaid “percentages are
fixed on the basis of age profile, marital status and employment of unit”.
1.2 The following tables shows the extent of existing satisfaction level in
respect of availability of married accommodation to officers and other ranks in the
three services and the availability and shortfall of married accommodation in
terms of dwelling units in the three Defence Services:-
Service Percentage of
satisfaction level
No. of units available
including temporary and
hired accommodation
Shortfall
Army around 45 per cent 1,86,754 2,42,605
Navy around 72 per cent 20,304 7,870
Air Force around 67 per cent 66,051 32,055
Deficiency of married accommodation
1.3 The Committee have been informed that the deficiency of married
accommodation projected by the three Defence Services in the year 2001 was as
given under:
Service Deficiency
Army 2,42,605
Navy 6,332
Air Force 32,055
Total 2,80,992
1.4 The details of category wise projections of the deficiency of married
accommodation in the three Defence Services in 2001 are as follows:-
Category Army Navy Air Force
Officers    10,507    538    3,346
JCOs    33,954     --      -
Other Ranks 1,98,144     -      -
PBORs       -    -  18,810
Non Combatants Enrolled       -    -    5,285
Defence Services Corps       -    -    4,614
Sailors       -  5,794    -
Total 2,42,605 6,332  32,055

11
1.5 An analysis of the aforesaid figures reveals that the percentage of
deficiency in the case of other ranks to the total deficiency stood at 82 in Army,
92 in Navy and 59 in Air Force.
Married Accommodation Project
1.6 In order to enhance the availability of married accommodation to Defence
service personnel, the Ministry of Defence obtained approval of the Cabinet
Committee on Security (CCS) in May, 2002 for construction of 1,98,881 dwelling
units (DUs) for the three Defence Services under Married Accommodation
Project (MAP) proposed to be executed in four phases at an estimated cost of
Rs.17,357 crore.
1.7 Elaborating further on the issue, the representative of the Ministry of
Defence stated during evidence:
“When the Major Works Programme of the Army did not deliver with as
much speed as the Government wanted, MAP was envisaged and this is a
novel project which has few parallels in the world.”
1.8 Replying to a question as to why was it proposed to construct only
1,98,881 units in four phases under MAP as against the projected deficiency of
2,80,992 DUs, the Ministry of Defence in their written note stated as follows:-
  “After a detailed analysis in 2001-02, of the deficiency of Married
 Accommodation for the Defence Service personnel of the three Services,
 the Services HQ identified construction of 198,881 dwelling units for all the
 three services excluding the construction of certain number of DUs in
 some areas of J&K and the North East because of the prevailing law and
 order situation in those areas”.
1.9 Asked whether prevailing law and order situation in J&K and North East
was a convincing reason for excluding those areas for the purposes of DUs for
married accommodation under the project, the Ministry of Defence in their written
note clarified as under:
“Prevailing law and order situation is a reason as family accommodation
requires support systems like children schools, market areas etc. which
are not fully accessible in these areas.”

12
1.10 The Ministry of Defence also stated that the shortage/requirement of
Married Accommodation in border areas is comparatively less, as troops are not
willing to keep their families in such stations due to non-availability of facilities
like Schools, etc.
1.11 Replying to a question regarding number of DUs required for providing
married accommodation to Defence Personnel posted in J&K and North-East,
the extent of availability of such accommodation and how is it proposed to meet
the shortfall in these areas, the Ministry of Defence in their written note stated as
follows:
“The number of Dwelling Units for married accommodation required for
Defence Personnel posted in J&K and North-East is 1,28,520 and the
extent of present availability of such accommodation is 42,787…The
shortfall is proposed to be met by construction of Dwelling Units under
MAP.”
1.12 When asked about the number of DUs proposed to be constructed under
MAP in Leh and  other border areas, the Ministry of Defence stated :-
“Under MAP Phase-I dwelling units are not proposed for construction in
Leh. The details of married accommodation proposed for construction in
other border areas under MAP Phase-I are as follows:-
Name of Station Total No. of DUs
Amritsar 1168
Jammu 858
Janglot 120
Mamun 2518
Pathankot 130
Sanjuwan 130
 Married Accommodation is proposed for construction in Leh under
MAP Phase-II, Phase-III & IV.”
1.13 According to the Ministry of Defence, the overall service-wise details of
dwelling units proposed to be constructed in the four phases under MAP are as
follows:
Service Phase-I Phase-II Phase-III Phase-IV Total
Army 50924 58382 33939 33195 176440
Navy 3225 3107 -- -- 6332
Air Force 7509 5283 2484 878 16109
Total 61658 66727 36423 34073 198881

13
1.14 When enquired about the dates of commencement proposed for each of
the four phases of MAP, the Ministry of Defence submitted the following
information:-
“The commencement date of Phase-I is April, 2004. Phase-II, III and IV
have not yet commenced. Phase-II will commence immediately after due
approvals are obtained. Phases III & IV will be planned subsequently.”
1.15 Asked about the time limit contemplated for completion of all the four
phases of MAP, the representative of the Ministry of Defence stated during oral
evidence:-
“It is going beyond the 12 th Plan. I cannot say the exact year.  It is
three/four years per phase.”
1.16 During evidence, the Committee also desired to know the extent to which
the requirement of each of the services would be met after completion of different
phases of MAP.  In his reply, the representative of the Army informed that 50,924
families would be accommodated as against the requirement of 1,76,000 after
completion of Phase-I and that 84 per cent of the requirement of the Army would
be met after completion of all the four phase.  In this context, the representative
of the Air Force added as follows:
“For the Air Force the total requirement is 86,900.  Out of which shortage
today is 32,637.  In phase I we have planned 7,800; phase II – 5,238;
phase III –2,484; phase IV –879.  So, the total is 16,046. For the DSC and
NCC through the MAP the construction will not be taken.  That will be
taken through the normal route of AMWP.  In this, we need 7,474 houses.
For the Jammu and Kashmir and the North Eastern sector, we have not
taken the calculation earlier in the initial stages.  For that it is 8,757
houses.  All these figures add up to 32,637…..”
1.17 The representative of the Navy deposed that the shortage of 1231 units
would remain even after completion of phase I and II of MAP.

14
CHAPTER-II
IMPLEMENTATION OF MAP
Phase-I of MAP
2.1 Elaborating on the physical and financial targets set for Phase-I of MAP,
the Ministry of Defence in their written note stated as follows: -
“As per the approval of the Cabinet Committee on Security (CCS) the
period of Phase I of MAP was from 2002-03 to 2005-06. It was also
proposed that 61,658 DUs would be constructed in Phase I at an
estimated cost of Rs.5,478.73 crore. Subsequently, approval of the CCS
was obtained for extending the Probable Date of Completion (PDC) of
Phase up-to 1 st January, 2009 and for construction 58,391 DUs at a cost
of Rs.5,329.39 crore instead of 61,658 DUs at a cost of Rs.5,478.73 crore
projected earlier.”
2.2 During evidence, the Committee enquired about the reasons for reducing
the number of DUs to be constructed under Phase-I from 61,658 to 58,391.
Clarifying the position, the representative of the Ministry of Defence stated :-
“They realised that in some stations, perhaps the requirement was not to
that extent, like North-East and Jammu & Kashmir, etc. Therefore, the
number of dwelling units came down. But this was approved much earlier.
It was a deliberate decision taken a few years ago when we had just
commenced Phase-I. That is why the number has come down. In fact in
the last meeting there was a proposal from one of the Services, perhaps
Air Force, that they want to increase their numbers of DUs slightly. So, we
saw there was scope for increase. Once the proposal is examined, we
may increase the number because we have some cushion physically and
financially.”
2.3 Dwelling upon the reasons for extending probable date of completion of
construction from the year 2006 to 2009 as well as for reducing number of DUs
for construction under Phase-I, the Ministry of Defence in their written note,
elaborated as under:-
“The probable date of completion of Phase I has been extended to 1 st
January, 2009, with the approval of Cabinet Committee on Security
(CCS). Now, it is proposed to construct 58391 DUs in Phase-I at a cost of
Rs.5,329.392 crore. The reduction in DUs is because of deferring
construction of ‘Captains’ accommodation due to their rank upgradation on
acceptance of recommendations of the AVS Committee Report, necessity

15
of resiting of DUs at certain stations, due to reasons of un-buildable land
and other constraints peculiar to the sites.”
2.4 In reply to a question about the precise reasons for delay of three years in
implementation of Phase-I of the project, the Ministry of Defence submitted the
following information:-
“Though as per the approval of CCS the period of Phase-I of the project
was from 2002-03 to 2005-06, the organization of Director General, MAP
was sanctioned in May 2002, and actually raised by May 2003, with the
responsibility of project implementation. Thereafter, an exercise was
carried out to identify and allot work to the Executing Agencies (Govt.
agencies and PSUs engaged in construction works) viz. NBCC, RITES,
IRCON, CPWD and the DRDO. Work procedures to be adopted for the
project were finalized and MAP Works Procedure was approved in Nov,
2003. As advised by the MoF, Contract Agreements with PSUs were
finalized in consultation with the Ministry of Law and signed in March,
2004. General and Special conditions of Contract for MAP were approved
in March, 2004 fulfilling all statutory requirements/obtaining necessary
clearance of Central and State bodies, dealing with multiplicity of
executing agencies etc. affected the initial start of the project and delayed
the commencement of work. The physical work under the project
commenced only in 2004. However, after the initial gestation period there
has been significant progress.”
2.5 Elaborating further on the reasons for delay, the representative of the
Ministry of Defence depose during oral evidence as follows :
“The construction started late because of two or three reasons. It was a
totally new project undertaken at a vast scale. Secondly, entire financial
powers have been delegated to the Apex Committee, which meets once a
month to sanction proposals. It is something new, which rarely exists
elsewhere in the Government. There are several agencies, including
RITES, IRCON, CPWD, etc. involved in the construction and, therefore, a
common MAP Works Procedure had to be evolved. That was done and
was approved within about one year. Thus, one year was spent in setting
up the systems. However, after that there has been marked progress and
they are hoping that in January 2009 they will be able to deliver 87 per
cent, to be precise, of the dwelling units.”
2.6 In a subsequent note, the Ministry of Defence further explained the
reasons for slow pace of execution of works under Phase-I of MAP as follows:-
“The slow progress is limited to 18 stations out of 86 stations and affects
only 13% of Dwelling Units.  In most of these cases also; only the part
accommodation is delayed and major part will be completed.  This is a

16
normal phenomenon when works of such large magnitude are being
executed. The reasons for slow pace of execution of works are (a) Court
Cases, (b) Contract Cancellation (c) Non availability of Contractors in
some cases which resulted in many calls before which tenders were
accepted. ”
2.7 On being enquired about outsourcing of certain activities to outside
agencies for early completion of Phase-I of the project, the representative of the
Ministry of Defence stated during oral evidence:
“….we have outsourced it to Government agencies.”
2.8 Responding to another related question, the witness added:
“It is more a question of physical progress which because of two to three
reasons has taken a little longer time…..The Budget or availability of funds
is not really a big issue right now….Unlimited financial powers have been
given to the Apex Committee which is chaired by the Defence
Secretary….It is just that it was a new project and work procedures had to
be evolved and the functions of various agencies like the CPWD, the MES
and  others had to be reconciled and coordinated. The office of DG MAP
had to be established. That took one year. Establishments had to be
created….”
2.9 On being enquired about the mechanism put in place for award of work to
various agencies and for coordinating execution of works in time – bound and
efficient manner, the Ministry of Defence stated:
“The Executive Agencies (EAs) were picked up for MAP works based on
their existing spare capacities as well as the presence of the agency, in
the geographical area of their operation vis-à-vis the MAP Project.
Coordination between the EAs is being ensured based on the monitoring
of the monthly progress reports, regular interactions and visits at various
levels.”
2.10 In reply to a question about problems encountered due to increase in
prices during the period of execution of the project, the witness stated:
“That has been one of the problems and that is why a lot of project have
required re-tendering. That is beyond our control. In a couple of stations,
there have been court cases. Then there is price rise too. These are the
reasons for the delay.”
2.11 When specifically asked about the expected cost escalation on account of
delay in execution of Phase-I, the Ministry of Defence stated that there has been

17
no cost escalation as there is no escalation clause in MAP contracts and that in
no case the cost has gone beyond the administrative approval amount.
2.12 On being asked about the nature of court cases faced during execution of
Phase-I, the representative of the Army deposed during oral evidence:
“The cases are not in the case of contractors. They are on the litigation of
lands.”
2.13 In their subsequent written note, the Ministry of Defence informed that
“Bangalore Station is one where the title of the defence land has been claimed
by some people which had adversely affected the progress of work.  The issue
has been pursued and the Hon’ble Court has taken a decision in Army’s favour.”
2.14 Asked as to how the Ministry proposed to proceed against the agencies
responsible for slow pace of activities under the project, the Ministry of Defence
stated that the “reasons for delay are examined on case to case basis and if
found to be due to the fault of agencies deployed, the compensation may be
levied as per MOUs and contract provisions.”
2.15 The details showing status of works being executed in phase-I of MAP are
given at Annexure.  Perusal of this information would show that there has been
delay in completing the construction work in as many as 79 out of 86 stations and
the delay ranged for 3 months to over 3 years.  Perusal of this information would
show that there has been delay in completing the construction work in as many
as 79 out of 86 stations and the delay ranged from 3 months to over 3 years.
2.16 As regards the physical progress of Phase-I of MAP, the Ministry of
Defence submitted the following information:-
“6311 Dwelling Units have been completed. Out of 86 stations, 100 %
work has been completed at 11 stations. The progress of work is between
75% to 99% at 28 stations and 50 to 75% at 24 stations.
2.17 On being specifically asked whether the work at all stations undertaken
during Phase-I would be completed by the extended date of 1 st January 2009 as
approved by the Cabinet Committee on Security (CCS), the Ministry stated that

18
works at the following 12 stations are expected to spill over beyond 1 st January,
2009:
Sl.No. Stations No. of DUs expected to
spillover beyond 1st
January, 2009
Executive Agency
1. Bangalore 420 DGMAP
2. Kochi (N) 352 DGMAP
3. Mumbai (N) 520 DGMAP
4. Mumbai (A) 198 DGMAP
5. Shillong 637 RITES
6. Amritsar 210 CPWD
7. Delhi GP-II (Baird
Place)
384 DGMAP
8. Delhi GP-VIII
(Dwarka)
324 DGMAP
9. Jalandhar 772 CPWD
10. Mamum 398 CPWD
11. Subathu 42 CPWD
12. Pathankot 128 CPWD
   Total                 4385
2.18 Responding to a question on the extent of construction remaining
incomplete under the Phase-I, the representative of the Ministry of Defence
stated during evidence:-
“Out of a 100 percent target, 13 percent will be spilled over for the second
phase, 87 percent will be complete in the first phase.”
Phase-II of MAP
2.19 According to the Ministry of Defence, Phase II of the Married
Accommodation Project for construction of 66,727 dwelling units at an estimated
cost of Rs.9,938.71 crore with the probable date of completion of 31 March 2012,
has been approved by the Cabinet Committee on Security (CCS) in its meeting
held on 22nd May, 2008.
2.20 The Ministry of Defence also informed that Phase-II is to be taken up
keeping in view the experiences of Phase-I and can be commenced after
obtaining necessary approvals even if Phase-I has not been entirely completed.

19
2.21 In reply to a question on commencement of Phase-II of Married
Accommodation Project, the representative of Ministry of Defence stated during
evidence:-
“Now, the actual execution of the project will start according to the plan.
We may even plan its commencement before Phase-I is formally over in
January and that will be our objective and effort Secondly, Phase-
II has been sanctioned for 66,727 dwelling units at a cost of Rs.9,396
crores approximately. It is supposed to commence after Phase-I and be
completed by March, 2012. We shall keep that target in mind and make
our endeavors accordingly. The other important point about Phase-II is
that this time, we have decided to execute only through MES and MAP
instead of going through other public sector undertakings. MES will do
roughly 25 per cent of the work and DG, MAP will do 75 per cent of the
work because their office is also now established and expertise and other
wherewithal are in place. That is how we have planned to
proceed………..”
2.22 The witness further added:-
“……some public sector undertakings are not going to be entrusted with
this work in the second phase. Earlier, it was seven or eight public sector
undertakings in addition to DG MAP and MES”
2.23 Responding to another related question, the representative of the Ministry
of  Defence deposed during evidence:
“…The partial reason for discontinuing with these PSUs is non
performance such as in the case of NBCC.  The other reason is, they are
given 7 per cent agency charges from the project which will be saved
now....”
2.24 In reply to a question regarding involvement of Military Engineer Services
(MES) in the execution of work under MAP and the strength of manpower of
MES engaged in MAP, the Ministry of Defence submitted the following
information:-
“The MES is directly not executing any project in Phase-I except for two
small packages at Mamum and Pathankot which were withdrawn from the
CPWD and handed over to the MES lately. MAP work is being executed
by the CPWD, DRDO, NBCC, IRCON, RITES and DG MAP. However,
MES is providing manpower to the organisation of DG, MAP.

20
The details of manpower of MES sanctioned for Married Accommodation
Project is as follows:-
(a) Director General 01
(b) Deputy Director General 02
(c) Director Command MAP 09
(d) Project Managers, Staff Officer Grade-I 53
(e) Senior Architect/Architect 07
(f) Senior Surveyor of Works/ Surveyor of Works 11
(g) Technical Advisors, Staff Officer
Grade-II, Project Managers
63
146
 Against a sanctioned strength of 146, a total of 132 officers are
posted as on date for execution of the Project.”
 2.25 During a presentation made before the Committee, the representative
from the organisation of DG MAP stated that based on analysis of execution of
projects under Phase-I, the following measures have been contemplated for
execution of Phase-II:-
“(i) DUs in all stations finalized
(ii) Sitting Board of Officers (BOO) being ordered in advance for
finalizing location of DUs with Defence Estate Officer (DEO) and
District Forest Officer (DFO) as members.
(iii) More time for quality Concept Project Report(CPR)/Detailed Project
Report (DPR), consultant contract conditions being made stringent
and legally binding.
(iv) Include escalation clause.
(v) Realistic completion time.
(vi) Selection of builders.
It was also highlighted in the presentation that  since DUs would be
designed to last for 100 years, feedback had been obtained from Stations
for incorporation in Phase-2, which would mainly include improvements as
listed below:-
Improvement in General Scales of Married Accommodation Project
(i) 2 per cent of the Accommodation should be made especially
designed for physically challenged.
(ii) Garages for
(a) All Officers
  (Rs.0.369 lakhs per DU/30.58 crore for PH-2)
(b) JCOs upto 40 %
  (Rs.0.157 lakhs per DUE/13.38 crore for PH-2)
   (c) 25 % hard standing for OR
     (Rs.0.026 lakhs per DU/12.96 crore for PH-2)

21
  (iii) One additional bathroom for PBOR (Addl PA 2 SQM)
(Rs.0.171 lakhs per DU/95.25 crore)
  (iv) Drying out balcony to be added in scales of accommodation
   for Personnel Below Officers Rank (PBOR) (Addl PA 2.5
   S Q M )
     (Rs.0.193 lakhs per DU/106.84 crore)
(iii) Shopping complexes with Military Intelligence Rooms to be
constructed in PH-2.
Improvement in ARCHITECTURE/LAYOUT plan of Married
Accommodation Project
Road furniture to be added for aesthetics and comfort of drive.
SPECIFICATIONS
(i) Permanent external finishes viz grit finishes for no external
maintenance.
(ii) Ceramic tiles for Dwelling Units better for ease of
construction.
(iii) Large tiles for officers.
(iv) Oil bound distemper as interior finish
ELECTRICAL
(i) Fresh air fan in bathrooms and kitchen.
(ii) Additional plug points.
MISCELLANEOUS
(i) Trunk line to be laid in the initial stages.
(ii) Chain link fencing for Dwelling Units.”
Use of Latest Technology
2.26 In reply to a question regarding use of latest technology for expeditious
completion of dwelling units at low cost under MAP, the Ministry submitted the
following information:-
“The latest technology followed for expeditious completion and low cost
dwelling units are:-
(a) Use of composites pipes and ductile Iron (DI) pipes.
(b) Solar water heating systems provided to reduce
electricity consumption.
(c) Use of automatic batching plants and concreting
pumps to speed up the construction time.

22
(d) Use of Rainwater Harvesting to recharge the ground
water.
(e) Provision of package type Sewage Treatment Plant
(STP) with moving bed bio-reactor (MBBR)
Technology to enable recycle of the effluent for
flushing and arboriculture purpose.”
2.27 On being asked about the use of pre-fabricated technology for
construction of DUs under MAP, the representative of the Ministry of Defence
stated during evidence:
“In fact, the Cabinet Committee also made this comment. So, we will be
considering that.”
Provision for other facilities
2.28 Responding to a specific query regarding the requirement and planning for
construction of schools, etc., under Married Accommodation Project, the
representative of the Ministry of Defence stated:
“ We plan it separately for the Major Work Programme every year.  In fact,
the Defence Services have now recommended to the Ministry that since
because of Married Accommodation Project, the number of children living
in areas where more schools are required to go up; more schools may be
provided for in such areas.”
2.29 The witness further clarified:
“….other than married accommodation like school buildings, hospital
building, are taken up under the Major Works Programme (MWP) which is
the capital construction Head for the Defence Services in every year’s
plan budget.’
2.30  The Committee during evidence pointed out that there should be an
integrated approach for construction of DUs under MAP and construction of
schools, hospitals, etc. in that area.  The representative of the Ministry of
Defence explained during evidence:-
“I would like to submit that the approach is integrated except that it is done
from a different source.”

23
2.31 Asked as to why a number of agencies are involved in construction of
houses and other buildings etc., the representative of the Ministry of Defence
stated during oral evidence:
“The agency is only one, namely, Engineer-in-Chief Branch which is doing
only that work so far for the Army.  MAP is being done by DG MAP which
has been constituted before Phase-I of this particular project. E-in-C
undertakes  construction of houses, hospitals, roads, etc.”

24
CHAPTER-III
IMPLEMENTING AGENCY
Role of Organisation of Directorate General of Married Accommodation
Project (DGMAP)
3.1 According to information made available by the Ministry of Defence, the
organisation of Directorate General, MAP was sanctioned in May 2002 and
actually raised by May 2003, with the responsibility of project implementation.
The organisation of DGMAP is stated to be executing works worth Rs.2,438.65
crore.
3.2 During the presentation made before the Committee,  a representative of
Ministry of Defence explained the role and duties of DG MAP as follows:-
“ROLE AND DUTIES OF DG MAP
 1. As Member Secretary, Apex Steering Committee (ASC)
(a) Preparation of proposals for allotment of project, Approval of
par based on Concept Project Report (CPR). Administrative
approval of Detailed Project Report (DPRs) and guidelines
for contracts.
(b) Convey allotment of work, Administration/Finance approvals.
[
2. As Head of MAP
(a) Preparation  through consult-Concept Project Report (CPRs)
and Detailed Project Report (DPRs), for work allotted to DG
MAP.
(b) Submit proposals and obtain approval from Apex Steering
Committee/Vice Chief’s Committee.
(c) Time bound action for inviting tenders and examining them
technically and financially.
(d) Entering into contract with lowest bidder.
(e) Monitor programme.
 3. As coordinator Vis-à-vis CPWD/PSUs
(a) Examining  core competence of PSUs/CPWD.
(b) Submission of proposal to Apex Steering Committee.
(c) Conveying allotment of Project to PSUs/CPWD.
(d) Obtaining CPRs/DPRs from PSUs/CPWD; examining them
from technical and finance angle and submit summarized
proposal to concerned committees, convey their
approval/orders.
(e) Obtain details of lowest bids in open tender bids.

25
(f) Obtain periodical reports from PSUs/CPWD and Station
Concept Project Reports (CDRs) and submit to concerned
committees.
4. Any other responsibility entrusted by the Ministry of Defence.”
3.3 The following table shows the present position of deployment of the staff
in Headquarter, DG MAP:-
DEFICIENCY OF STAFF: HQ DG MAP
SER
No.
APPOINTMENT NO OF OFFICEERS
PRESENT
AUTH
POSTED  DEFICIENCY
1 DIRECTOR
GENERAL
01 01 -
2 DEPUTY DIRECTOR
GENERAL
02 02 -
3 COLONEL/PROJECT
REPORT DIRECTOR
04 03 01
4 LIEUTENANT
COLONEL  /
DIRECTOR
  25 15
01 Dues-in
09
5 MAJOR / JOINT
DIRECTOR
6 SUPERITENDANT
SURVEYOR OF
WORKS (SSW)
02 02 -
7 SURVEYOR OF
WORKS
04 01 (Maj)
ASW-02
01
8 SENIOR
ARCHITECT /
ARCHITECT
01 01 -
9 MAJOR /
ARCHITECT
01 01
(Lt. Col)
-
 TOTAL 40 29 11
3.4 On the efficacy of the role being played by the organisation of DG MAP in
the execution of project, the representative of Ministry of Defence stated:
“In fact, now we have proposed that the DG MAP office should continue.
But, this is subject to review. We have sent it to Cabinet for approval.”

26
Monitoring Mechanism for MAP
3.5 The progress of Married Accommodation Project (MAP) is presently being
monitored through three Committees viz., Apex Steering Committee (ASC) under
the Chairmanship of Defence Secretary, Vice Chiefs Committees (VCC) and the
Command Committees (CC). In addition, the project is being monitored by
Director General, MAP, a Lt. Gen. Rank officer through regular visits to the
stations/construction sites.
3.6 The composition and role of each of the three Monitoring Committees is
given below:-
(a) Apex Steering Committee (ASC)
Composition
1. Defence Secretary   - Chairman
2. Secretary Defence (Finance) - Member
3. Vice Chief of Army Staff(VCOAS) - Member
4. Vice Chief of Naval Staff(VCNS) - Member
5. Additional Secretary  - Member
6. Quarter Master General(QMG) - Member
7. Engineer in Chief(E-in-C)  - Member
8. Assistant Chief of Naval Staff
(Policy & Planning) (ACNS(P&P) - Member
9. Air Officers Administration (AOA) - Member
10. DG MAP    - Member Secretary
Role
1. Acceptance of the necessity for construction of number of dwelling
units at each station.
2. Decision about the agency to whom the work is to be entrusted for
execution, based on core competence.
3. Appointment of consultants
4. Laying down general guidelines for awarding the contracts.
5. Monitoring the progress of the project through regular meetings.
6. Prescribe guidelines for Vice Chiefs Committees (VCC) and Command
Committees (CC)

27
(b)  Vice Chief’s Committee (VCC)
Composition
1. Vice Chiefs of respective Services        - Chairman
2. QMG/AOA/ACNS (P&P)          - Member
3. E-in-C             - Member
4. JS/Addl. FA of Respective Services        - Member
5. DG MAP            - Member
6. Additional Directorate General Land Work Environment
     (ADGLWE)/ Principal Director Works (PDW)/
     Assistant Chief of Naval Staff (Works) (ACAS (WKS))       - Member
7. Deputy Director General (DDG MAP)          -Member
        Secretary
Role
1. Approval of Detailed Project Reports (DPRs) for MAP works costing
above Rs.20 crore but below Rs.50 crore for all project assigned to DG
MAP and below Rs. 50 crore for all project assigned to PSUs/other
Govt. agencies.
2. Accord financial concurrence in cases where expenditure exceeds 5 %
of the administration  approval amount within the ceiling of Rs. 50
crore.
3. Monitoring progress of the project.
(c)  Command Committee (CC)
Composition
1.  Chief Of Staff(COS)/Air Officer
Commanding-in-Chief(AOC-in-C)/
Flag Officer Commanding-in-Chief(FOC-in-C)  - Chairman
2. Major General In-charge Administration(MG-IC-ADM)/
Senior Officer In-charge Administration (SOA)/
Senior Air Staff Officer(SASO)/
Command Signal Officer(CSO) (P&A)                      -Member
3. Chief Engineer, Command (CE COMD)/Chief Engineer
Air Force (CE AF)/Chief Engineer Navy (CE Navy)          -Member
4.   Area Commander/Air Officer Command(AOC)/
Station Commander      -Member
5. Controller of Defence Accounts (CDA)/
Integrated Financial Advisor(IFA)/
Joint Controller of Defence Accounts(JCDA)  -Member
6. Brigadier OL/ Brigadier Administration/
Commander Works Officer    -Member Secretary

28
Role
1. Approval of Detailed Project Reports (DPRs) upto Rs. 20 crore.
2. Accord Financial Concurrence in cases where expenditure exceeds 5
per cent of the administration approval amount within the ceiling of Rs.
20 crore.
3. Monitoring progress of the Project.
4. Appointment of consultant, if required, for Command (MAP) Project,
with the approval of the ASC.
3.7  Replying to a specific query regarding the directions given from time to
time  by the Monitoring Committee to the project authorities for ensuring  timely
completion of the projects, the Ministry of Defence stated  in a written note as
under:
“To ensure timely completion of the projects, the Monitoring Committees
have from time to time given directions that review of Married
Accommodation Project progress should be done frequently to ensure
speedy disposal of the pending issues and the gap between completion of
the DUs and handing over/ taking over be reduced so that the DUs
completed do not remain unutilized.”
3.8 On being asked about the number of times the Apex Steering Committee
(ASC), Vice Chiefs’ Committee (VCC) and the Command Committees met during
the years 2006 and 2007 to monitor MAP, the Ministry of Defence informed that
17 meetings of the ASC were held during the years 2006 and 2007 and one
meeting of VCC was held during the period 2006 and 2007 on 28.11.2007.
Maintenance of Buildings constructed under MAP
3.9 The Cantonment areas are maintained under the aegis of the Local
Cantonment Board through the Cantonment Executive Officer (CEO) under the
Directorate General of Defence Estates (DGDE). The maintenance services i.e.
repairs, renewal and upkeep of all Military Buildings and related infrastructure is
undertaken by the MES through a dedicated tailor made organisation co-located
in the station based on laid down, Maintenance Scales as approved by the MoD

29
and corresponding Maintenance Grant from the overall Works Budget of the
Services.
3.10 On being asked by the Committee about the mechanism put in place for
maintenance of buildings constructed under married accommodation project and
the terms and conditions signed with the constructing agency for maintenance of
the buildings under MAP, the Ministry of Defence in a written reply stated as
follows:-
“In respect of completed projects, the defects are being attended to by the
respective builder during the defect liability period. Thereafter the
maintenance will be done by the MES. On completion of MAP works, the
accommodation will be taken over by the MES for maintenance purpose.”
3.11  During the oral evidence, the representative of the Ministry of Defence
also informed the Committee that MES would also be doing 25 percent of the
construction work in phase-II of MAP.
 3.12 When asked about possibility of outsourcing maintenance work to private
agencies, the representative of Ministry of Defence informed as under :
“So far as it has been planned, the MES will take them over for
maintenance.  But when we go in for the planning for the second phase
and its execution, we shall consider this aspect considering that MES will
construct 25 percent of the dwelling units.  We will go into this aspect if
necessary and clinch the issue accordingly….”
 3.13 During the study visit of the Committee to Military Engineer Services
(MES), Mumbai on 29 October 2007 the `Brief on MES Establishment’ furnished
by the Ministry of Defence highlighted that the approximate annual workload of
MAP is Rs. 4000 crores out of which 20 % is being undertaken by MES. MES
has also provided manpower to DG (MAP) and maintenance of MAP assets will
also have to be carried out with existing depleted strength.

30
CHAPTER-IV
OTHER ISSUES
Common Accommodation Pool for three Services
4.1 On being asked about the  views of the Ministry for creating a common
pool of residential accommodation for all the three Services to optimally utilize
the existing residential accommodations, the Ministry in their written reply stated
as follows:-
“With the exception of Delhi, where all the three Services HQrs. are
functioning in close proximity, since in most of the other places the three
services are widely dispersed due to functional diversities, common pool
accommodation for all the three services may not be feasible.”
 4.2 During the oral evidence, a representative of Ministry of Defence also
informed :
“All the three Services have been asked to consider this issue earlier and
the joint opinion was that it will not be feasible for various reasons…….
As far as Ministry is considered, we will not let the construction suffer
because of this attitude.”
 4.3 As regards the present mechanism available with the Ministry for transfer
of accommodation from one pool to another, the Ministry in a written reply stated:
“As per requirement, if such transfers are necessary, then it can be
considered by Ministry of Defence on case to case basis.”
4.4 At the instance of the Committee,  the Ministry of  Defence furnished the
following information on availability of residential accommodation to Service
officers posted to Armed Forces Headquarters (AFHQ) and International
Standard Organisation (ISO) in Delhi/New Delhi:-
“Residential accommodation to Service Officers posted to AFHQ/ISOs at
Delhi/New Delhi is provided out of MOD pool accommodation.  There are
a total of 4,232 (approx.) Service officers posted to AFHQ/ISOs. The detail
of total availability of married accommodation with Office of the Chief

31
Administrative Officer  (CAO) is as below :
Sl.No. Type of accommodation  No. of Units
(a) Bungalows 89
(b) Regular 2,084
(c) Temporary 508
(d) Hired 130
Total No. of Units 2,811
There is a shortage of 1,421 Units.  In order to overcome the existing
deficiency, major thrust is being given to hiring of temporary
accommodation in Delhi and Noida.”
Transit Accommodation
4.5 On a specific query regarding planning for construction of  transit
accommodation, the Ministry in their written reply stated:
“Transit accommodation in the form of transit camps is constructed as
special works at rail/road/air heads for troops transiting to forward areas.
Transit camp accommodation is meant for short stays, i.e. only for a few
days.  Transit `married’ accommodation at duty station is not authorized in
Scales of Accommodation and as such there are no plans for construction
of such accommodation.”
4.6 Regarding availability of transit accommodation for the personnel of three
Services, the representative of the Ministry of  Defence stated during evidence:
“Transit accommodation is not coming under Map at all.  Transit camps
are created for the command funds.  These are basically in J&K and
North-East for people to get to the station and move out. That is provided
by MWP Programme.  We have allotted sufficient funds.  That comes
under MOVE Directorate.  There are about 17 stations camps, depending
upon the locations.  For that funding is there.  We will be finishing them in
the scheduled time.”

32
CHAPTER -V
STATUS OF MARRIED ACCOMMODATION IN ALLIED SERVICES
5.1 Elaborating on the procedure in vague for  construction of married
accommodation for the personnel of Coast Guard and Border Roads
Organisation (BRO), the representative of the Ministry of Defence deposed
during oral evidence as under:
“As far as the Coast Guard and BRO are concerned, unfortunately, they
have not come under MAP so far because they are both taken up from the
other source i.e., the Major Work Programme of the Army.  So, MES and
the E-in-C Branch are already constructing the targeted number of
dwelling units for BRO and for Coast Guard.”
Married Accommodation for Coast Guard
 5.2 The Indian Coast Guard was constituted on 1 February 1977. The Service
has total force strength of 7872 personnel. The married accommodation for
Coast Guard is being provided as per the laid down scales of accommodation for
Defence Services, 1983. At present, the Coast Guard has 1513 units of married
accommodation which is about 40 % of the authorization.
 5.3 The following tables show the laid down scales of married accommodation
for personnel of Coast Guard:-
“Stations having 56.5% AME-Total 07
Sl.
No.
Category Ashore Afloat Average Remarks
(a) Officers 75% 50%
(b) Subordinate
Officers
50% 100%
(c) Enrolled
Personnel
50% 14%
Average
56.5%
(d) Civilians 15% 60% in A&N
Islands

33
Stations having 80% AME-Total 18
Sl.
No.
Category Ashore Afloat Average Remarks
(a) Officers 80% 80%
(b) Subordinate
Officers
80% 80%
(c) Enrolled
Personnel
80% 80%
Average
80%
(d) Civilians 15% 60% in A&N
Islands
 5.4 On being asked by the Committee about the steps taken by the Ministry to
meet the requirements of  married accommodation for personnel of Coast Guard,
the Ministry of Defence in their written reply stated:
“The Indian Coast Guard is authorized for 3742 Married Accommodations.
Out of this, a total of 1513 Married Accommodations are available. The
Coast Guard has obtained sanction for construction of 849 Married
Accommodations at 13 Coast Guard Stations.
 From the above sanctions, construction of 52 Nos. Married
Accommodation is in progress and construction of balance
accommodation of 797 are likely to commence shortly. On completion of
the above projects the deficiency will come down to 1380, which is 37%
deficient of the total present authorization. In addition proposals for 415
Married Accommodation are being progressed.
 On completion of the above projects the deficiencies will further
come down to 965 which is 26% deficient of the present authorization.”
Married Accommodation for Border Roads Organisation
 5.5 The Border Roads Organisation (BRO) was set up in 1960 for meeting the
operational road requirements of the Army. The statistical data on the personnel
strength as well as requirement, availability and shortage of married
accommodation in BRO is as follows:
(In Nos.)
 (a) Personnel strength of BRO  : 42,646
 (b) Married Accommodation required  : 21,397
 (c) Married Accommodation available  : 1,148
 (d) Shortage of married accommodation  : 20,249

34
5.6 At the instance of the Committee, the Ministry of  Defence furnished the
following information  about the dates of approval given by Government for
construction of married accommodation for BRO personnel, the status of its
completion and the plans for meeting the entire requirement of BRO:-
“The Government approved construction of married accommodation in
three phases for BRO personnel.  The date of approval phase wise is as
under:
i. Phase –I  1,277 Nos on 4 th March, 1977.
ii. Phase-II 502 Nos on 26 th March, 1987
iii. Phase-III 123 Nos on 6 th Dec., 1997
Phase wise dates of completion originally scheduled were as under:-
(a) Phase - I  1277 houses (Period not specified)
(b) Phase – II 502 houses (Period 1988-93)
(c) Phases –III 123 houses (Period not specified).
Steps are being taken to complete the sanctioned
Accommodation works.
 Plan for construction of married accommodation to meet the entire
requirement is under preparation.”
 5.7 Explaining the plan prepared by the Ministry to meet the requirement of
approx. 20,249 dwelling units for BRO personnel, the Ministry of Defence in their
written reply stated as follows:-
“Out of the requirement of approx. 20,249 dwelling units, a plan was
evolved for sanction of 1902 Nos. of accommodation in three phases and
1148 Nos. have been completed till date. For the balance requirement the
plan is under preparation and it will be finalized once the restructuring of
BRO is completed.”
 5.8 On being asked about the  actual date of completion of Phase-II of MAP
and the cost incurred against the original estimated cost, the Ministry of Defence
in a written reply stated:
“Phase-II of MAP for BRO is still under progress. So far a total of 502
dwelling units have sanctioned at 12 locations. Out of these 12 locations,
construction has been completed at 6 locations. A total of 281 houses
have been completed. As MAP Phase-II is still in progress, the exact cost
of construction in MAP Phase-II cannot be ascertained at this stage.”

35
 5.9 Explaining the reasons for slow progress in construction of dwelling units,
the Ministry of Defence stated:
“The funding of Border Roads Organisation (BRO) is dependent upon
General Staff Fund (GS funds), which are released by the Ministry of
Defence and through funds provided for agency works. The essential
budgetary requirement for construction of dwelling units is met out of the
funds provided for GS works as well as agency works. However, the
allotment of GS fund has been insufficient.
 Non-availability of land from civil/revenue authorities in the area
where BRO is working has also resulted in slow progress in construction
of dwelling units for BRO personnel.”

36
PART-II
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
Deficiency of Married Accommodation for Defence Service Personnel
1. The Committee note that the Government stand committed to
provide married accommodation for Defence service personnel and that
certain norms in the form of `Scale of Accommodation for Defence
Services 1983’ have been laid down for planning married accommodation
for officers and other ranks in the Armed Forces. They are, however,
astonished to find that the extant satisfaction level of availability of married
accommodation for officers and other ranks in the three Services is a
meagre 45 per cent in case of Army followed by 67 per cent in Air Force
and 72 per cent in Navy.  Obviously, no tangible and timely steps appear to
have been taken by the Ministry of Defence to construct dwelling units for
married accommodation in order to meet the requirement of service
personnel with the result that the deficiency of married accommodation
stood at a staggering figure of 2,80,992 dwelling units in 2001.  Lamentably,
the service personnel worst affected by this deficiency were those
belonging to the category of other ranks; sailors; and Personnel Below
Officers Ranks(PBORs) etc., with the percentage of their share to the total
deficiency in respective services being as high as 92 in Navy; 82 in Army;
and 59 in Air Force.  Although the Ministry of Defence subsequently
envisaged Married Accommodation Project (MAP) to enhance the
availability of married accommodation for defence service

37
personnel and obtained approval of the Cabinet Committee on
Security(CCS) in May, 2002 for construction of  1,98,881 dwelling units in
four phases under MAP, the Committee’s examination of execution of MAP
in its initial stages and other related issues have revealed a number of
disquieting features which are dealt with in the succeeding paragraphs.
Married Accommodation Project(MAP)
2. The Committee have been informed during evidence that MAP was
envisaged “when the major works programme of the Army did not deliver
with as much speed as the Government wanted”.  Curiously enough, the
Ministry of Defence themselves have neither prescribed any time frame for
commencement of Phases-II, III and IV of MAP nor contemplated any time
limit for completion of all the four phases under MAP.  It is clear that no
target dates were fixed for speedy completion of different phases of MAP
as is evident from the cryptic reply of the representative of the Ministry of
Defence that the completion of MAP might go beyond the 12 th Plan and that
the exact year of completion could not be indicated. The Committee are in
no doubt that while envisaging MAP for execution in four phases, the
Ministry of Defence in 2002 had also not fully anticipated the ground
realties about the establishments that would be required for executing the
project. The net result was that even MAP as conceived by the Ministry of
Defence failed to keep pace with the originally planned schedule for Phase-
I, as has been brought out in the succeeding paragraph of this Report.
While expressing their unhappiness over the piecemeal approach and

38
perfunctory manner in which MAP has been conceived and is being taken
up for execution, the Committee desire the Ministry to at least now  draw a
realistic time-schedule  for expeditious completion of all the four phases of
MAP having due regard to the pressing demands for the married
accommodation for all ranks in the Armed Forces.  Needless to say that the
action plan so drawn by the Ministry must aim at a situation where different
phases of MAP are taken up for execution without any intervening period
between them so that the time schedule for execution of MAP is not only
kept to the barest minimum but all the ranks are also not made to
indefinitely wait for availability of married accommodation to them.  The
Committee would like to emphasise that  firm dates for completion of  all
the phases of MAP should be prescribed and the project execution be
decentralized to command level to complete the works strictly in a time
bound manner.   They also desire that the precise steps taken in this
direction be informed to the Committee by the Ministry of  Defence within
three months of the presentation of this report.
3. Construction of 1,98,881 dwelling units identified by the Service
Headquarter under MAP has excluded some areas of Jammu and Kashmir
and the North East because of the prevailing law and order situation in
those areas.  According to the Ministry of Defence, family accommodation
requires support systems like school for children, market areas etc., which
are not fully accessible in Jammu and Kashmir and North East due to
prevailing law and order situation.  While giving due credence to this
explanation of the Ministry, the Committee also wi sh to

39
point out that a specific study has brought out the fact that non-availability
of family accommodation is one of the causative factors for stress among
certain ranks serving in those areas.  They, therefore, urge that the Ministry
should assess the requirement of married accommodation in counter-
insurgency and border areas and take immediate steps to undertake
construction of requisite number of dwelling units under MAP.
Phase-I of  MAP
4. The approval of CCS was obtained in May, 2002 for construction of
61,658 dwelling units during Phase-I to be executed between 2002-03 and
2005-06.  Although the number of dwelling units approved for construction
under Phase-I has been subsequently reduced to 58,391 and the probable
date of completion extended to 1 st January, 2009, the Committee are
distressed to find that the construction of dwelling units under Phase-I has
not progressed as planned.  There has been delay ranging from three
months to over three years in completion of projects in as many as 79 out
of 86 stations of Phase-I of MAP.  Explaining the reasons for delay in
execution of Phase-I, the representative of the Ministry of Defence deposed
during evidence, “…….. it is just that it was a new project and work
procedures had to be evolved and the functions of various agencies like
the CPWD, the MES and others had to be reconciled and coordinated.  The
Office of Director General of MAP (DGMAP) had to be established.  That
took one year….”    The Ministry of Defence also pleaded that “this is a
normal phenomenon when works of such large magnitude are being

40
executed.”  The Committee are not inclined to accept the reasons adduced
by the Ministry to justify the inexplicable delay in execution of Phase-I of
MAP. The Committee feel convinced that the Ministry of Defence undertook
MAP in a rather casual manner without paying adequate attention towards
aspects relating to establishment of main executive agency and the work
procedures required to be put in place before embarking upon project of
such a nature. The Committee are also constrained to point out that the
Ministry of Defence could not properly analyse the progress of works
under Phase-I even at the time when they sought approval of CCS for
extending the probable date of completion of construction as is borne out
by the fact that works at certain stations continue to be plagued with
delays beyond the extended date.   The Committee trust that the Ministry of
Defence would now take appropriate initiatives well in advance for working
out the plans for execution of the subsequent phases of MAP so as to
obviate any consequential delays due to poor planning as has happened in
the execution of the first phase of MAP.
Phase-II of  MAP
 5. Phase-II of the MAP has been approved by the CCS on 22 nd May,
2008 for construction of 66,727 dwelling units with the probable date of
completion of 31 st March, 2012.  The Committee have been informed that
the Government have decided to execute this phase only through MES and
DGMAP instead of going through Public Sector Undertakings (PSUs).  The
reasons advanced for such a decision are  non-performance by the PSUs

41
and the saving of seven percent agency charges from the project which
were being paid to PSUs.  Without going into the merit of such a decision,
the Committee would like the Ministry of Defence to take effective steps to
ensure timely completion of the Phase–II of MAP. It is not clear whether the
contracts with the builders contain any penalty clause for slippages. In
case there is no such provision in the existing contracts, immediate steps
be taken to provide for the same.
6.          In terms of the decision taken by the Government, 75 per cent
of the work under Phase-II would be executed by DGMAP and the
remaining 25 per cent would go to the MES.  In the light of the fact that the
works undertaken in Phase-I by DGMAP at six stations are still languishing
even beyond the extended date of completion, the Committee find it
incomprehensible as to what factors have weighed with the Government in
arriving at the decision that the work of such a magnitude spread over a
large number of stations could be assigned to the Organisation of   DGMAP
having a working strength of only 29 officers in its Headquarters.  The
Committee also doubt whether MES with its existing workload of
maintenance services will be in a position to undertake the MAP works at
different stations that too with only 132 of its officers presently deployed
for MAP as against 146 posts sanctioned for the purpose.  These facts
reinforce the apprehensions of the Committee that the whole issue is not
being addressed with the seriousness it deserves particularly when
Phase-II envisages construction of more number of dwelling units in a
compressed time frame as compared to Phase-I.  The Committee, therefore,
recommend that the entire process of selection of executive agencies for

42
undertaking Phase-II and subsequent phases of MAP should be realistically
examined afresh and appropriate remedial steps taken to strengthen these
agencies so that the project is not beset by further delays.
7. Keeping in view the slow pace of works undertaken by DGMAP in the
first phase, the Committee strongly feel that the Ministry of  Defence
should also consider engaging specialized consultants/agencies as per
need arises from time to time in order to ensure timely completion of the
project.
8. The Committee have been informed that certain changes for
improvement in general scales of accommodation and architectural layout
plan under MAP are being considered for incorporation in Phase-II.  The
Committee urge that such changes should be finalised early as part of
project planning exercise and it should be ensured that cost and time
schedules do not subsequently go awry on this count.
Use of Latest Technology
9. It has been stated that latest technologies are followed for
expeditious completion and lowering cost of dwelling units. There are use
of composites and ductile iron pipes; solar water heating systems;
rainwater harvesting; recycling of effluent; and use of concreting pumps to
speed up the construction time.   The question of using pre-fabricated
technology is stated to be under consideration.  The Committee stress that
the dwelling units should be of superior quality and should be earthquake

43
resistant. Urgent attention is also required to ensure the use of innovative,
environment-friendly, energy-efficient and cost effective building materials
and technologies in MAP.  The Ministry of  Defence should also undertake
construction of multi-storeyed  buildings under MAP particularly at those
stations where the availability of land for the purpose is scarce.
Provision for other facilities
10. Yet another area which has engaged the attention of the Committee
relates to inadequate provision for school and hospital buildings in the
vicinity of housing complexes constructed under MAP.  The fact that the
Defence Services have also made a request to the Ministry of Defence for
providing more schools under MAP is a clear pointer towards lack of an
integrated approach at the time of conceptualization of the project.
Considering the fact that school and hospital buildings are constructed
from the funds made available by the Ministry under the `Major Works
Programme’, the Committee urge the Ministry of Defence to formulate a
comprehensive plan in this regard and ensure timely provision of funds for
constructing such buildings so as to meet the essential requirements of
service personnel utilizing housing complexes built under MAP. The
Committee need hardly emphasise that the construction of such essential
buildings should ideally form part of MAP and provision of funds under an
appropriate single head of account should be made in this regard.

44
11. The Committee are also of the view that MAP should have integrated
provision for vocational training institutes for imparting gainful training to
housewives of  Defence personnel. The services of ex-serviceman to the
maximum extent, be utilized for running such institutes.  Besides being a
beneficial activity for the residents, such an act would also provide  gainful
employment to ex-servicemen.
Role of Organisation of DGMAP
12. The Organisation of DGMAP was raised in May, 2003 with the
responsibility of implementing MAP.  The main duties of this organisation
inter-alia, include preparation of proposals and obtaining approval of the
same from competent authorities; invitation of tenders and its technical
and financial examination; entering into contract with the implementing
agencies; and monitoring the project. The representatives of the Ministry
of Defence informed during evidence that a proposal had been sent to the
Cabinet seeking approval for continuance of the organisation of DGMAP.
The Committee believe that proper steps would be taken at the earliest to
strengthen this organisation to obviate repetition of the experiences of
Phase-I of MAP. The Committee are in no doubt that with proper application
of modern communication technologies and computerization, the paper-
work and the manpower deployment for monitoring purposes can be
minimized.

45
Monitoring Mechanism for MAP
13. The Committee note that the three committees namely, Apex
Steering committee under the chairmanship of Defence Secretary; Vice-
Chiefs committee; and the Commands committee have been constituted for
monitoring the progress of works being executed under MAP.  While the
Apex Steering committee is stated to have met 17 times during the years
2006 and 2007, the Committee find it rather strange that the Vice Chiefs
committee met only once during these two years.  It is not clear as to what
is the role and responsibility of Vice-Chiefs committee.  It is obvious that it
has not been discharging its role effectively. It is the responsibility of the
Apex Steering committee to ensure that the Vice-Chiefs committee and the
Commands committee meet periodically and function effectively. The
Committee also feel that the  committees at the command level should be
strengthened with adequate financial and administrative powers to enable
them to take appropriate timely action for completion of works without
delay. The monitoring committees at the higher level should be entrusted
with the responsibility of reviewing the progress at regular intervals and
issuing necessary guidelines and directions to command committees with
a view to ensuring proper and timely completion of the project.
Maintenance of  Buildings constructed under MAP
14. The Committee note that besides undertaking their routine
assignments of maintenance services including repairs and upkeep of all
military buildings and related infrastructure, MES will be required to

46
undertake 25 per cent of the construction work as executive agency in the
second phase of MAP. In addition, MES will also be responsible for
maintenance of the accommodation being constructed under MAP.
Keeping in view the fact that the scope of MES would be enlarged manifold
in near future and that 146 posts from this service have already been
sanctioned for MAP out of its existing manpower, the Committee are of firm
view that an elaborate and well planned mechanism needs to be put in
place to meet maintenance requirements of existing and planned
accommodation for MAP without putting any additional pressure on the
existing depleted strength of MES. They, therefore, desire that the Ministry
of Defence should work out an acceptable and cost effective scheme for
outsourcing the maintenance requirements of accommodation constructed
under MAP to the agencies of proven competence in public or private
sector.  The Committee would also like to be apprised of the precise steps
taken in this regard.
Common Pool of Residential Accommodation for the Three Services
15. There is presently no common pool of residential accommodation for
the three services. According to the Ministry of Defence, a common pool of
residential accommodation for all the three services may not be feasible as
the three services are widely dispersed due to functional diversity in most
of the places except Delhi where the three Services headquarters are
functioning in close proximity . Keeping in view the facts that the
Government propose to promote jointness within the services and

47
transfers of accommodation from one pool to another can be considered
by the Ministry on case to case basis, the Committee desire that the
Ministry of Defence should undertake a review of vacant married
accommodation at different stations and examine practicability of creating
a common pool of residential accommodation wherever possible so that
the issue of extant deficiency of married accommodation for all ranks of
defence personnel in the three services at those stations could be partially
addressed till the completion of  MAP.
 Incidentally,  the Committee would also like the Ministry of Defence
to take appropriate steps to ensure that surplus or vacant units under
separated family accommodation; single officers accommodation; and
messes at various stations are put to optimal use for meeting the existing
deficiency of married accommodation of the three services at those
stations.
Transit Accommodation
16. Transit accommodation is meant for short stay of a few days and
such accommodation is stated to be created from the Command Funds
provided under Major Works Programme.  Though there has been shortage
of such accommodation, MAP being the accommodation project for
married  persons does not cover construction of Transit accommodation at
all. Keeping in view the frequent movement  which the Armed Forces
personnel are required to undertake in Jammu & Kashmir and North
Eastern region of the country, the need for construction of sufficient
number of units of transit accommodation at all transitory points cannot be

48
over emphasised. The Committee desire that an assessment of shortfall in
this regard be made expeditiously and steps taken to construct additional
transit accommodation to meet the shortfall. This is necessary to ensure
smooth and timely mobility of armed forces personnel at times of need.
Married Accommodation for Allied Services
17. The Committee are dismayed to find that the extent of deficiency of
married accommodation as against the total requirement for the personnel
of Border Roads Organisation and Coast Guard is as high as 94 per cent
and 60 per cent respectively.  Surprisingly enough, no efforts seem to be
directed towards mitigating their hardship even in distant future as is
evident from the fact that no definite time schedules have been
contemplated for construction of even approved works for married
accommodation for personnel of both these organisations.  In the absence
of any plausible explanation for slow pace of construction of dwelling units
for personnel of these two organisations, the Committee are in no doubt
that the Ministry of Defence have not given any serious thought in the past
for evolving a concrete action plan in this regard.  The Committee trust that
the Ministry of Defence would at least now accord priority to these
organisations by providing adequate budgetary support for undertaking
construction of requisite married accommodation in a time bound manner.
New Delhi;          BALASAHEB VIKHE PATIL,
3 October, 2008        C h a i r m a n ,
11 Asvina, 1930 (Saka)        Standing Committee on Defence.

49
Annexure
(vide para No.2.15 of Chapter II )
DETAILS OF MAP WORKS
Typ
es
of
DUs
Ser.
No.
Stati
on
EA
Maj &
above
Capt Lt JCOs Ors Total
ODC EDC Cost
(DPR)
Expected cost
DPR+∑ addl
Fund appd by
ASC
(in Cr.)
Remarks
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14
1. GOLCONDA DRDO 8 2 0 32 108 150 6-Nov-07 31-Aug-06 1244 1244 Completed
2. SECUNDERABA
D
DRDO 90 36 10 84 550 770 1-Nov-06 31-Aug-06 5586 5586 Completed
3. AHMEDABAD NBCC 20 4 0 36 400 460 7-Mar-07 31-Oct-08 3898 3827
4. AHMEDNAGAR NBCC 22 0 0 0 400 422 7-Apr-07 31-Aug-08 3313 3173
5. BARODA (A) NBCC 8 4 0 0 0 12 6-May-07 30-Jun-07 221 213 Bldg.
completed
6. DEOLALI NBCC 40 8 0 48 800 896 7-May-07 31-Oct-08 7103 6852
7. JAIPUR NBCC 28 0 0 48 800 876 7-Jan-07 31-May-08 6507 6507 Bldg.
completed
8. JAISALMER NBCC 24 16 8 48 400 496 7-May-07 31-Dec-08 4648 4648
9. JODHPUR (A) NBCC 62 58 0 68 1100 1288 7-Nov-07 31-Dec-08 11455 10984
10. NASIRABAD NBCC 16 8 0 5 400 429 7-May-07 19-Feb-07 3325 3203 Bldg.
completed
11. SHILLONG RITES 46 0 0 117 544 707 7-Nov-07 3-Mar-10 12902 12467
12. ALWAR DG MAP 24 0 0 48 600 672 8-Mar-07 31-Dec-08 4821 4821
13. AURANGABAD DG MAP 8 14 0 12 300 334 7-Sep-07 30-Apr-08 2880 2880
14. BANGALORE (A) DG MAP 0 0 0 100 320 420 9-Dec-06 2-Feb-09 2984 3676.5
15. CHENNAI DG MAP 18 6 4 26 250 304 29-Jun-07 26-Dec-08 3092 3745
16. GUWAHATI DG MAP 10 0 0 38 268 316 8-Mar-07 31-May-08 3283 3283
17. KIRKEE DG MAP 40 24 0 67 1200 1331 8-Mar-07 31-Mar-10 10951 10951
18. KOLKATA DG MAP 72 0 0 51 648 771 8-Jan-07 31-Dec-08 9033 9702
19. PUNE (A) DG MAP 84 0 4 27 250 365 8-Mar-07 31-Oct-10 3853 3853
20. BELGAUM CC MAP 14 10 0 48 48 120 11-Jun-07 12-Jun-07 1070 1070 Bldg.
Completed
21. BINAGURI CC MAP 0 0 0 0 96 96 7-Aug-07 23-Jan-08 631 605
22. GANGTOK CC MAP 0 0 0 0 132 132 8-Jan-07 24-Oct-08 1077 1082
23. JAMNAGAR CC MAP 8 4 0 12 300 324 12-Apr-07 20-Oct-07 1901 1845 Completed
24. KAMPTEE CC MAP 24 0 0 48 200 272 6-Jan-07 24-Feb-06 1998 1998 Completed
25. MUMBAI (A) DG MAP 12 8 4 24 150 198 - - - - DEPMC
Tender
26. SUKNA CC MAP 0 0 0 0 200 200 7-Oct-07 1-Oct-08 1288 1295
27. TRIVENDRUM CC MAP 0 0 0 0 180 180 1-Mar-06 31-Aug-06 1260 1260 Completed
28. GOA (N) DG MAP 2 0 4 5 141 152 7-Sep-07 30-Apr-08 1272 1426
29. KARWAR (N) DG MAP 55 36 0 10 336 437 8-Sep-07 31-Mar-09 6061 6061
30. KOCHI (N) DG MAP 92 7 0 72 280 451 8-Jan-07 30-Sep-09 7696 7696
31. MUMBAI (N) DG MAP 72 0 0 0 464 536 8-May-07 31-Dec-08 5283 5283
32. PORT BLAIR (N) DG MAP 0 0 0 0 102 102 8-Jan-07 31-Aug-08 1450 1766
33. VIZAG (N) DG MAP 239 0 0 410 360 1009 20-Jun-07 31-May-08 13042 13042
34. AMBALA (AF) NBCC 27 9 0 160 808 1004 7-Mar-07 31-May-08 8100 8100
35. JODHPUR (AF) NBCC 20 0 0 53 547 620 7-Mar-07 30-Sep-07 4592 4592 Near
Completion
36. SULUR (AF) NBCC 0 0 0 0 303 303 6-Sep-07 30-Sep-07 2180 2180 Bldg.
Completed
37. VADODARA (AF) NBCC 17 42 0 100 438 597 1-Sep-06 30-Jun-08 6606 6606 Near
Completion
38. KANPUR (AF) RITES 0 0 0 66 636 702 7-Oct-07 31-May-08 7015 7015
39. AGRA (AF) DRDO 105 8 0 134 197 444 6-Nov-07 30-Dec-07 4279 4279 Near
Completion

50
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14
40. B’LORE AF (S) DG MAP 47 12 0 39 110 208 7-Aug-07 31-May-08 2847 2947
41. B’LORE AF (N) DG MAP 704 0 0 147 110 961 7-Nov-07 31-July-08 4395 4879
42. B’LORE AF © DG MAP 36 0 40 16 77 169 7-Sep-07 20-Apr-08 2426 2870
43. C’GARH 12 WG
AF
DG MAP 20 0 0 0 283 303 7-Dec-07 31-Dec-08 1945 2237
44. C’GARH 3 BRD
AF GP-I
DG MAP 0 0 0 55 - 199 7-Sep-07 31-Dec-08 1450 1516
45. C’GARH 3 BRD
AF GP-II
DG MAP 34 0 0 285 189 508 7-Nov-07 31-Dec-08 5020 5020
46. DELHI (AF) DG MAP 47 13 0 215 717 992 31-Dec-06 31-Dec-08 7796 7796
47. GWALIOR (AF) DG MAP 37 0 0 68 444 549 7-May-07 31-Mar-08 4063 4063
48. PUNE (AF) DG MAP 22 12 2 149 651 836 7-Sep-07 31-Mar-08 6646 6950
49. AGRA DRDO 71 0 0 45 906 1022 19.10.07 May-08 85.420 85.420
50. DEHRADUN DRDO 35 5 0 76 1022 1138 26.12.06 Oct-08 86.180 86.180
51. ALLAHABAD IRCON 60 0 0 72 996 1128 09.09.06 Dec-08 79.500 79.500
52. BHOPAL IRCON 162 28 6 152 1154 1502 17.12.06 Dec-08 118.950 118.950
53. JHANSI IRCON 100 46 10 224 1608 1988 25.04.07 Jun-09 158.710 158.710
54. BAREILLY RITES 76 20 0 36 1186 1318 09.03.07 Jun-08 103.330 103.330
55. MATHURA RITES 84 28 0 120 1076 1308 18.07.06 Jun-08 94.620 108.010 As per rev A/A
56. SHAHJAHANPUR RITES 8 4 0 0 268 280 30.06.07 Nov-08 26.360 26.360
57. ARITSAR CPWD 99 45 0 76 948 1168 25.04.07 Dec-09 114.780 115.000
58. BATHINDA CPWD 299 42 13 342 2236 2932 08.08.07 31.03.09 246.360 258.290
59. BIKANER CPWD 77 15 5 210 1048 1355 15.06.07 31.03.09 104.020 104.020
60. JALANDHAR CPWD 102 28 8 300 1132 1570 22.06.07 Dec-09 109.740 138.980
61. JAMMU CPWD 38 38 0 106 676 858 25.04.07 Sep-08 74.580 79.840
62. JANGLOT CPWD 0 0 0 0 128 128 03.05.06 Apr-07 7.830 9.160 wk completed
63. MEMUM CPWD 65 16 0 68 2300 2449 16.08.07 Jun-09 191.240 201.960
64. PATHANKOT CPWD 30 0 0 61 304 395 15.06.07 Jun-09 41.940 44.270
65. PATIALA CPWD 70 0 0 164 572 806 22.12.07 Dec-08 74.440 74.860
66. SANJUWAN CPWD 0 0 0 30 100 130 28.06.06 Apr-07 8.720 9.108 wk completed
67. SRI
GANGANAGAR
CPWD 42 6 2 48 396 494 09.11.06 30.04.08 38.430 38.430
68. SURATGARH CPWD 84 12 4 96 798 994 25.02.07 31.12.08 95.970 100.570
69. CHANDIMANDIR DG MAP 125 0 0 32 1019 1176 Oct-07 31.08.08 107.780 107.780
70. FARIDKOT DG MAP 12 24 4 48 450 538 Jun-07 31.08.08 46.020 46.020
71. FEROZEPUR DG MAP 56 0 0 30 368 554 Jun-07 31.08.08 45.310 45.310
72. HISSAR DG MAP 184 0 0 330 1980 2494 15.09.07 31.12.08 229.890 229.890
73. LUCKNOW DG MAP 138 0 0 248 1836 2222 11.12.07 Dec-08 183.150 218.990 As per rev A/A
74. DELHI (E) &
Group I
DG MAP 0 0 0 0 700 700 10.03.06 31.05.07 42.220 42.220 completed
75. DELHI (W) &
Group II
DG MAP 384 0 0 0 0 384 26.12.08 20.10.09 93.280 93.280
76. DELHI (E) &
Group III
DG MAP 0 0 0 100 685 785 09.04.07 31.01.08 57.860 57.860 completed
77. DELHI (E) &
Group IV
DG MAP 346 98 12 0 0 456 16.07.07 31.12.08 82.410 82.410
78. DELHI (W) &
Group V
DG MAP 0 0 0 325 916 1241 09.09.07 31.12.08 109.240 109.240
79. DELHI (E) &
Group VI
DG MAP 80 32 0 0 539 651 04.11.06 Jun-08 57.100 57.100
80. DELHI (W) &
Group VII
DG MAP 0 0 0 41 123 164 09.09.07 Jun-09 14.400 14.400
81. DELHI (W) &
Group VIII
DG MAP 324 0 0 0 0 324 30.12.07 07.11.09 83.780 83.780
82. ABOHAR CC MAP 12 0 0 0 48 60 29.09.07 31.12.07 5.440 5.440
83. DANAPUR CC MAP 23 0 0 8 12 43 28.04.06 07.11.06 5.380 5.380 Fur tender in
Hand
84. LALGARH
JATTAN
CC MAP 18 0 0 18 60 96 29.09.07 31.12.07 8.130 8.130
85. SUBATHU CPWD 6 0 0 9 30 45 29.09.07 Dec-08 4.930 8.000
86. YOL CANTT CPWD 0 0 0 39 124 163 15.05.07 Jun-08 10.420 12.050

51
LIST OF ABBREVIATIONS
1. Fit. Lt.  - Flight Lieutenant
2. Fg. Offr. - Flying Officer
3. MWO  - Master Warrant Officer
4. MO  - Medical Officer / Military Operations
5. JWO  - Junior Warrant Officer
6. NCOs  - Non Commissioned Officer
7. NcsE  - Non Combat Enrolled
8. MCPOs - Master Command Petty Officer
9. CPOs  - Command Petty Officer
10. POs  - Petty Officer
11. DEO  - Defence Estate Office(r)
12. DFO  - District Forest Officer
13. CPR  - Concept Project Report
14. DPR  - Detailed Project Report
15. MI  - Military Intelligence
16. CDR  - Commander
17. SSW  - Superintendent Surveyor of Work
18. AOA  - Air Officer Administration
19. ACNS  - Assistant Chief of Naval Staff
20. ADM  - Administration
21. SW  - Surveyor of Work
22. MAP  - Married Accommodation Project
23. CCS  - Cabinet Committee on Security
24. PBORs - Personnel Below Officers Rank
25. MES  - Military Engineer Services
26. DG MAP - Director General of Married Accommodation Project

52
MINUTES OF THE TWENTY- NINTH SITTING OF THE STANDING
COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE (2007-2008)
 The Committee sat on Tuesday, the 29 th April, 2008 from 1500 to 1605
hrs. in Committee Room ‘E’, Parliament House Annexe,  New Delhi.
PRESENT
Shri Balasaheb Vikhe Patil – Chairman
MEMBERS
LOK SABHA
2. Shri Vijay Bahuguna
3. Shri Santosh Gangwar
4. Dr. K.S. Manoj
5. Shri Shrinivas Patil
6. Dr. H.T. Sangliana
RAJYA SABHA
7. Smt. Viplove Thakur
SECRETARIAT
1. Shri A. Louis Martin  - Joint Secretary
2. Shri Rajeev Sharma  - Director
3.      Shri D.R. Shekhar  - Deputy Secretary-II
4.      Smt. J.M. Sinha   - Under Secretary
   REPRESENTATIVES OF THE MINSTRY OF DEFENCE
1. Shri Vijay Singh   -  Defence Secretary
2. Shri P.K.Rastogi   - Spl Secy (R)
3. Smt. H.K. Pannu   - FA (DS)
4. Smt. Neelam Nath  - Addl. Secy (N)
5. Dr. W. Selvamurthy  - CCR&D (LS&HR)
6. Lt. Gen Sudhir Sharma  - QMG
7. Lt. Gen A.K. Nanda  - DG,BR
8. Shri Sanjeeva Kumar  - JS (ESW)
9. Shri Dilip Biswas  - Addl FA (D)
10. Shri Jatinderbir Singh  - JS (Trg) & CAO
11. AVM V.K. Dayalu  - ACAS (AF Wks)

53
12. Maj. Gen BB Sharma  - DG MAP
13. Maj Gen Brajesh Kumar - DG (Wks), E-in-C
14. IG A. Rajashekhar  - Dy. DG, CG
15. DIG VSR Murthy   - TM, Pr Dir (Wks), CG
16. Rear Adml. Girish Luthra - ACNS (P&P)
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the representatives of the Ministry
of Defence to the sitting of the Committee and drew their attention to Direction 58
of Directions by the Speaker, Lok Sabha.
3. The Chairman then requested the representatives of  the Ministry of
Defence to brief the Committee on existing satisfaction level of Defence
personnel in availability of Married Accommodation for eligible officers in Armed
Forces and steps being taken by the Ministry to construct accommodation for
Coast Guard and BRO personnel, latest position of the proposal for Married
Accommodation Project  (MAP) Phase-II, problems, if any, being faced by the
Ministry in acquiring land for MAP, common pool of accommodation for three
Services, etc.
4. As the Chairman had to leave during the course of the sitting, the
Committee chose Dr. H.T. Sangliana, M.P.  and  member  of the Committee to
act as the Chairman of the Committee, under Rule 258(3) of the Rules &
Procedure and Conduct of Business in Lok Sabha.
5. The representatives of the Ministry of Defence then made a power point
presentation before the Committee on the subject  `Status of Married
Accommodation in Defence and Allied Services’.  The Committee, thereafter,
held discussion on the issues which included delay in completion of the Phase I
of MAP and cost escalation, outsourcing of work to private agencies, road
furniture for MAP, etc.
 6. As regards the reasons of delay in completion of Phase I, the
representatives of Ministry of Defence informed the Committee that MAP was a
new project and work procedures had to be evolved so as to coordinate the
functions of various agencies like CPWD, Military Engineer Service and others.
In regard to the progress of work, the Committee was further informed that they
would be able to complete 87% of the targeted accommodation for Services
under MAP by January, 2009.

54
7. The representatives of the Ministry of Defence also informed the
Committee that they had received a formal communication from the Chiefs of
Staff Committee on the service related issues arising out of the
recommendations made by the Sixth Pay Commission and the same were under
examination of the Ministry of Defence.  The issues raised, inter-alia,  included:
Common pay scales for Personnel Below Officers Rank (PBORs), refixing of
grade pay, military services pay for Armed Forces personnel, one rank one
pension and status of Lt. Generals and equivalent, assured career progression,
transport allowance, compensation in lieu of Quarters, gratuity for PBOR,
disability pension, NPA for calculation of pension for pre 01.01.96 Army Medical
Crops Pensioner, equation of Special Force with Navy marques and Govt-funded
risk insurance to Armed Forces Personnel, etc.  The Secretary, Ministry of
Defence stated that the matter was under consideration of a Committee of
Secretaries.
8. As regards the points on which the representatives could not readily
respond, the Ministry was asked to furnish written information at the earliest.
9. A copy of verbatim record of the proceeding has been kept.
The Committee then adjourned.

55
MINUTES OF THE THIRTY – SECOND OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON
DEFENCE (2007-2008)
 The Committee sat on Monday, the 2 nd June, 2008 from 1500 to 1620 hrs.
in Room No. `074’, Parliament Library Building,  New Delhi.
PRESENT
Shri Balasaheb Vikhe Patil – Chairman
MEMBERS
LOK SABHA
2. Shri S. Bangarappa
3. Shri Santosh Gangwar
4. Dr. K.S. Manoj
5. Shri Raju Rana
6. Shri Arjun Charan Sethi
RAJYA SABHA
7. Shri A. Elavarasan
8. Dr. Farooq Abdullah
9. Shri Abu Asim Azmi
10. Shri Jai Parkash Aggarwal
11. Shri K.B. Shanappa
12. Smt. Viplove Thakur
SECRETARIAT
1. Shri Rajeev Sharma  - Director
2. Smt. J.M. Sinha   -  Under Secretary
REPRESENTATIVES OF THE MINISTRY OF DEFENCE
1. Smt.  Neelam Nath, Addl. Secy (N)
2. Smt. H.K. Pannu, FA (DS)
3. Shri Anand Misra, JS (C&W)
4. Lt. Gen. Sudhir Sharma, QMG
5. Maj. Gen. Rajeev Datt, ADG LWE
6. Maj. Gen. B.B. Sharma, DG MAP
7. Maj. Gen. Brajesh Kumar, DGW
8. AVM V.K. Dayalu, ACAS (AF Wks.)
9. Rear Adml. Girish Luthra, ACNS (P&P)

56
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members of the Committee and
informed that he had received a communication from Secretary, Ministry of
Defence regarding grant of exemption from personal appearance before the
Committee in today’s meeting due to his prior commitment and that Smt. Neelam
Nath, Additional Secretary would be representing the Ministry in his absence.
3. The Chairman, thereafter, drew their attention to Direction 58 of Directions
by the Speaker, Lok Sabha.
4. The Chairman then requested the representatives of the Ministry of
Defence to apprise the Committee of the reasons for delay in completion of
projects in Delhi and at other stations, the likely date of commencement of
Phase-II of MAP, total expenditure incurred during Phase-I of the Project, steps
taken to provide utility services like shopping complex and  medical services in
the vicinity of married accommodation projects, construction of transit
accommodation and outsourcing  of maintenance work to private agencies.
5. The representatives of the Ministry of Defence informed the Committee
that the Cabinet had approved the phase-II of MAP recently and it could be
started early for being completed by March, 2012.  They also informed the
Committee that Military Engineering Service (MES) and Director General,
Married Accommodation Project would be the only Executing Agencies for
Phase-II of MAP.
 6. The Chairman and Members of the Committee also enquired about the
total requirement of married accommodation in the three services and steps
contemplated for maintenance of the buildings constructed under MAP.
7. In reply to specific queries, the representatives of Ministry of Defence also
apprised the Committee about the Major Works Programme which covered the
construction of married accommodation   for   personnel of   Coast Guard   and
BRO.
8. The Chairman also requested the Ministry of Defence to furnish written
replies to the issues raised during the evidence.
9. A copy of verbatim record of the proceedings has been kept.
The Committee then adjourned.

57
MINUTES OF THE SEVENTH SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE
ON DEFENCE (2008- 09)
 The Committee sat on Friday, the 3 rd October 2008 from 1500 to     1530
hrs. in Committee Room `C’, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Shri Balasaheb Vikhe Patil  -      Chairman
MEMBERS
LOK SABHA
2. Shri Vijay Bahuguna
3. Shri S. Bangarappa
4. Shri Milind Murli Deora
5. Shri Santosh Gangwar
6. Dr. K.S. Manoj
7. Dr. H.T. Sangliana
RAJYA SABHA
8. Shri Jai Parkash Aggarwal
9. Shri R.K. Dhawan
10. Shri A. Elavarasan
11. Shri M.V. Mysura Reddy
12. Shri K.B. Shanappa
13. Smt. Viplove Thakur
SECRETARIAT
1.  Shri A. Louis Martin  - Joint Secretary
2. Shri Rajeev Sharma  - Director
3. Smt. J.M. Sinha  - Under Secretary
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members to the sitting of the
Committee.  The Committee, thereafter, took up for consideration the draft report
on the subject `Status of Married Accommodation in Defence and Allied
Services’, and adopted the same, without any modification.
3. The Committee then authorized the Chairman to finalise the report and
present the same  to the Parliament.
The Committee then adjourned.

58
“All Parliamentary Publications including DRSC Reports are available on
sale at the Sales Counter, Reception, Parliament House (Tel.Nos.
23034726, 23034495, 23034496), Agents appointed by Lok Sabha
Secretariat and Publications Division, Ministry of information and
Broadcasting, CGO Complex, Lodhi Road, New Delhi (Tel. Nos.
24367260, 24365610) and their outlets. The said information is available
on website   ‘www.parliamentofindia.nic.in’.
 The Souvenir items with logo of Parliament are also available at Sales
Counter, Reception, Parliament House, New Delhi.  The Souvenir items
with Parliament Museum logo are available for sale at Souvenir Shop (Tel.
No. 23035323), Parliament Museum, Parliament Library Building, New
Delhi.  List of these items are available on the website mentioned above.”