31 STANDING COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE
(2008-2009)
(FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA)
MINISTRY OF DEFENCE
STRESS MANAGEMENT IN ARMED FORCES
THIRTY FIRST REPORT
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
October, 2008/Asvina, 1930 (Saka)
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

2
THIRTY FIRST REPORT
STANDING COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE
(2008-2009)
(FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA)
       MINISTRY OF DEFENCE
STRESS MANAGEMENT IN ARMED FORCES
Presented to Lok Sabha on 21.10.2008
Laid in Raiya Sabha on  21.10.2008
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
October, 2008/Asvina, 1930 (Saka)
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

3
C.O.D. No. 97
Price: Rs.
© 2008 By LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

4
CONTENTS
Pages
Composition of the Committee (2008-09) ……… (ii)
Introduction ……… (iv)
PART-I
BACKGROUND ANALYSIS
Chapter-I Stress Management in the Armed Forces
Introductory ……… 1
Common Stressors ……… 2
Consequences of Stress ……… 3
Cases of suicides and fratricidal killings ……… 3
Cases of Desertion ……… 6
Causes of Stress ……… 6
Familial Reasons for Stress ……… 7
Responsiveness of Civil Administration ……… 8
Impact of Shortage of Officers ……… 10
Reluctance in psychiatrist’s help ……… 11
Basic amenities of the soldiers posted in high altitude
stations
……… 11
Establishment of Armed Forces Tribunal ……… 12
Chapter-II Management of Stress in the Indian Army
Studies conducted on stress related incidents ……… 14
Remedial measures initiated at Army Headquarters Level ……… 15
Visit by Senior Staff Officers ……… 17
Liberalized Leave Policy ……… 18
Measures initiated/undertaken in the Ministry ……… 18
Trainings for Stress Management ……… 19
Deployment as Sahayaks ……… 21
Group Activities ……… 22
Availability of Psychological Counsellors ……… 23
Chapter-III Stress Management in Indian Navy ……… 24
Chapter-IV Stress Management in Indian Air Force
Measures taken to counter stress/suicides ……… 26
Study conducted on Stress Level ……… 27
Liberalized Leave Policy ……… 28
PART-II
Recommendations/Observations of the Committee ……… 29
Appendices Minutes of the sittings of the Committee held on
04.12.2007, 19.05.2008, 09.6.2008, 23.06.2008 and
13.10.2008
……… 39
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

5
(ii)
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE (2008-09)
Shri Balasaheb Vikhe Patil   - Chairman
MEMBERS
LOK SABHA
2. Shri Vijay Bahuguna
3. Shri S. Bangarappa
4. Shri Milind Murli Deora
5. Shri Santosh Gangwar
6. Shri Jigajinagi Ramesh Chandappa
7. Shri Suresh Kalmadi
8. Shri C. Kuppusami
9. Dr. K.S. Manoj
10. Ms. Ingrid Mcleod
11. Shri Asaduddin Owaisi
12. Shri Adhalrao Shivaji Patil
13. Shri Shrinivas Patil
14. Shri Raju Rana
15. Shri Arjun Charan Sethi
16. Prof. Mahadeorao Shiwankar
17. Shri Manavendra Singh
18. Shri Balashowry Vallabhaneni
19. Shri Rajesh Verma
20. Shri Anil Shukla Warsi
RAJYA SABHA
21. Shri A. Elavarasan
22. Dr. Farooq Abdullah
23. Shri Jai Parkash Aggarwal
24. Shri Abu Asim Azmi
25. Smt. Shobhana Bhartia
26. Shri R.K. Dhawan
27. Shri K.B. Shanappa
28. Shri Arun Shourie
29. Smt. Viplove Thakur
30. Shri M.V. Mysura Reddy
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

6
(iii)
SECRETARIAT
1. Shri A. Louis Martin  - Joint Secretary
2. Shri Rajeev Sharma  - Director
3. Shri D.R. Shekhar  - Deputy Secretary
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

7
(iv)
INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairman, Standing Committee on Defence (2008-09) having been
authorised by the Committee to submit the Report on their behalf, present this Thirty-first
Report on the subject ‘Stress Management in the Armed Forces’.
2.  The Committee selected the above subject for examination during the year 2007-
08. As the examination of the subject remained inconclusive, it was re-selected by the
Standing Committee on Defence for examination during the year 2008-09.
3.  During their examination of the subject, the Committee took briefing and evidence
of the representatives of the Ministry of Defence and ex-servicemen and experts having
experience in this field on 4 December 2007, 9 June 2008, 23 June 2008 and 19 May
2008 on the subject.
4.  Based on the background note and written replies to the list of points furnished by
the Ministry of Defence on the subject; memoranda submitted by ex-servicemen and
experts; briefing/oral evidence tendered by the representatives of the Ministry and non-
official witnesses; and the observations made by the members of the Committee during
the Study visit to Delhi Cantonment Area in June 2008; the Committee finalised and
adopted the draft Report at their sitting held on 13 October, 2008.
5.  Taking note of the number of cases of suicide and fratricidal killings in the three
services of the Armed Forces and certain measures stated to have been initiated in the
recent past for Stress Management, the Committee have observed that this issue has not
been perceived by the Ministry of Defence in its entirety with a view to devising
appropriate and timely strategies to minimize the stress level of the serving personnel of
the Armed Forces. They have accordingly desired the Ministry to make a realistic
assessment of the problems plaguing the Armed Forces Personnel so as to identify the
areas needing urgent reform in the right direction.
6. The Committee have observed that after having identified the specific causative
factors for stress among the Armed Forces Personnel through various studies, the
Ministry have not contemplated multipronged strategies to address the problems of
negative stress behaviour in the Armed Forces.  The Committee have accordingly, urged
upon the Ministry to realize the gravity of the problem in all its ramifications and take
expeditious steps to bring about perceptible improvement in the prevailing situation.
7. The Committee have also emaphasised upon the need for statutory provisions
mandating the district authorities to address the problems and grievances relating to
criminal and civil disputes of the families members of the Armed forces personnel
deployed on hard duties at far flung places.
8. The Committee have desired the Ministry of Defence to keep the shortages of
personnel at the Unit level to the barest minimum in the counter insurgency and in the
border areas and also desired that the duration of deployment of defence service
personnel in those areas should be reviewed and rationalised so as to contain their
stress level.
9.  The Committee wish to convey their thanks to the representatives of the Ministry
of Defence and ex-servicemen and experts for appearing before the Committee for
tendering evidence and for furnishing the relevant information in connection with the
examination of this subject.
10.  For facility of reference and convenience, the observations/ recommendations of
the Committee have been printed in thick type in the body of the Report.
  NEW DELHI;      BALASAHEB VIKHE PATIL,
17 October, 2008 Chairman,
25  Asvina, 1930 (Saka) Standing Committee on Defence.
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

8
CHAPTER-I
STRESS MANAGEMENT IN THE ARMED FORCES
Introductory
1.1 The Armed Forces operate in a dynamic environment, which presents
several challenges to its personnel.  As the Armed Forces are becoming more
and more complex in terms of technology and operations, the amount of
stress faced by the personnel is also increasing. According to the Ministry of
Defence, the changing scenarios in the country along with the environmental
and operational commitments together have put enormous demands for
adjustment on the uniformed services.
1.2   Elaborating on the stress related issues in the Armed Forces, the
Ministry of Defence in their note stated as under:-
 “Though the overall psychiatric morbidity in the Armed Forces has
been less than the national figures, even a few unusual incidents in the
Armed Forces draw excessive media attention. Stress manifests itself
in various ways in peacetime and wartime environment and can affect
anyone serving at any level. Soldiers engaged in low intensity conflicts
over long periods of time are prone to develop psychological problems.
The rapid change in society has also led to considerable upheaval in
the soldier’s life. The change from joint family to the nuclear family
system, increasing aspirations for a good quality life and frequent
dislocations, long waiting for married accommodation have caused
additional stress and strain leading to psychological distress. Response
of a soldier to the stress can be positive or negative. Positive
responses can be a sense of purpose and mission, pride in uniform,
regimental spirit, camaraderie, vigilance, endurance of hardship pain
and injury, heroic acts of courage and self-sacrifice. Negative stress
behaviours include misconduct behaviours (self inflicted wounds,
malingering, absent without leave, desertion, suicide etc.) combat
fatigue and posttraumatic stress disorder etc. Apart from these stress
can precipitate psychiatric illnesses like depression, anxiety, insanity,
and alcohol and drug abuse.”
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

9
Common Stressors
1.3 Explaining the common stressors in the Armed Forces, the Ministry of
Defence in their note on the subject stated as under:
“(a) During Training Period: Tender age at recruitment, loss of
emotional support from family and friends, strenuous physical demands
of training activities, limited scope for privacy and problems at distant
home.
(b) In Peace: Marital problems, children’s education, property
disputes, financial problems, difficulties with civil administration in
resolving disputes.
(c) In Field: Separation from family members, adverse climatic
conditions, isolation, long tenures, unknown enemy in counter
insurgency areas, uncertainty of life, difficult living conditions and
fatigue.”
1.4 As regards, the mental health scenario in Armed Forces in India, the
Ministry of Defence submitted the following information:-
“WHO’s projections indicate that by 2020 depression is going to be the
second most common illness globally after cardiovascular diseases.
There is a rising trend of psychiatric illnesses in our country over the
last few decades. Armed Forces personnel being drawn from the same
society are not immune to unique operational and environmental
stresses, which are resulting in creasing incidence of psychiatric
disturbances.”
1.5 According to the Ministry of Defence, the following Mental Health Care
Delivery System is in existence in Armed Forces:-
“Armed Forces community has a culture of its own. Each unit both
medical and non medical have an inbuilt system of developing and
taking care of all the individuals both socially as well as professionally.
From the very beginning a Commander takes these aspects as his key
result areas using buddy care system, frequent interactions and Sainik
Sammelans. A sense of belonging and responsibility are thereby
cultivated in an individual resulting in displaying of camaraderie.
However, because of fresh stress and strain of environment these
mechanism need to be strengthened. In addition to this, mental health
care is delivered through a wide net work of medical professionals,
including medical officers at unit level, medical specialists in peripheral
hospitals and a team of specially trained mental health professionals
including psychiatrists, psychologists, psychiatric nurses and
psychiatric nursing assistants in well established psychiatric centres at
zonal and command hospitals.”
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

10
 Consequences of Stress
1.6 According to the information made available by an expert, stress has
been recognised as a cause for a variety of illnesses and behavioural
problems. It can lead to suicide, fratricidal killings, early mortality and
desertion from Armed Forces. The direct cost of stress for the Indian armed
forces could be several hundred crores of rupees per year due to man-days
of work lost, cost of treatment and deaths. The indirect costs are very difficult
to estimate, and include such things as impaired motivation, prolonged un-
serviceability of equipment, poor decision-making, poor quality of work, loss
of creativity and accidents. Under stress `attention’ gets narrowed: People
under stress ignore the central cues and respond to peripheral signals.
Cases of suicides and fratricidal killings
1.7 The following table shows number of deaths in the three Services of
the Armed Forces due to suicide during the last five years:
2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008
(upto 31.3.08)
Army 96 100 92* 120 115 27
Air Force 24 13 23 24 16 06
Navy 0 04 05 01 02 0
Total 120 117 120 145 133 33
* Includes 15 attempted suicide cases
1.8 An analysis of above figures, reveals that during the period 2003 to
2007, there were 635 cases of suicide in the Armed Forces, which also
included 15 cases of attempted suicide in Armed Forces.
1.9 On being asked whether these suicide cases could be related to the
operational stress, the Ministry of Defence stated in their written reply that “the
number of cases of suicides in peace areas has been more than field
locations except in the year 2005 where suicide cases in field were marginally
higher than peace areas. However, the suicide rate of Indian Army is
approximately 7.48 per lakh based on data from 2002 to 31 October 2007.
The suicide rate in Army is below the national average, which is
approximately 11 per lakh.” The Ministry also stated that none of the suicides
in Indian Air Force as well as Indian Navy for the period 2002 to 2007 has
been attributed to operational stress.
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

11
1.10 When enquired whether the phenomenon of suicide could be
symptomatic to any systemic problem, the Ministry of Defence replied as
under:
“The socio-economic environment in the country has changed and has
led to break-up of joint family system. This has led to numerous
domestic problems for troops who stay far away from their families
most of the time. Domestic problems coupled with marital discord,
broken love affairs, financial strain and serious medical ailments are
amongst the main causes for suicides among troops. Suicides
attributable to work related reasons are few. Thus there is apparently
no systemic problem.”
1.11 On being asked whether more number of cases of suicide are reported
from field stations, a representative of the Ministry of Defence deposed during
the evidence:-
“Peace station is slightly higher compared to field stations.”
1.12 According to the Ministry of Defence, Army orders a Court of Inquiry
(COI) after every incident of suicide to investigate the matter and ascertain the
causes of suicide. In this context, the representative of Institute for Defence
Studies and Analysis (IDSA) deposed during evidence as under:-
“The Courts of Inquiry must be conducted after every incident of
suicide and they are conducted.  But something, which the Armed
Forces may internally look, is, how independent, objective and
transparent they are. If that is done in an objective and transparent
manner and if there is genuine redressal of grievance or genuine
investigation for the cause of such a suicide, then I think it will be much
better.  They will learn the right kind of lessons and so far as the
person concerned also, there is a feeling that there is fairness in
justice.  There is a perception that these Courts of Inquiry are not as
transparent as they can be.   This is something that the Forces can
themselves look into because they have to ensure discipline.  It can be
like any other court.  But in the changing circumstances, the more
objective and transparent they are the better it will be. “
1.13 During the evidence, the representative of the Ministry of Defence
explained the reasons for fratricidal killings in the Armed Forces as follows:-
“I will first deal with this fratricide issue because it is more of a personal
nature, relates to an individual and not so much as an organisational
thing. A person takes this drastic step when he is very much
antagonistic towards that individual and has a personal grievance
against him, whatever is the reason and it could be perceived also. At
that point of time he resorts to this extreme step ´
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

12
1.14 As per the data furnished by the Ministry of Defence in their
background note on the subject, number of deaths due to fratricide during the
last five years are as under:-
2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008
(upto 31.3.08)
Army 08 11 13 24 08 0
Air Force 01 01 01 0 0 0
Navy 0 0 0 0 0 0
Total 09 12 14 24 08 0
1.15 The aforesaid table reveals that 67 cases of fratricide were reported
during 2003 to 2007.
1.16 Elaborating on the medical aspect of cases of suicide and fratricide a
representative of the Ministry of Defence stated during evidence as follows:-
“As far as the medical aspect of it is concerned, this happens primarily
because of depression. The suicides particularly are on account of
depression. The soldier or say a junior commissioned officer gets into a
depressing mood and that drives him to this extreme step. There may
be two people who may face equally difficult circumstances. One may
respond to it more robustly and may handle that difficulty; the other one
may not be able to do so because of their psychological weaknesses
and they get into depression. Of course, the current circumstances
make it very much more difficult.”
1.17 However, when inquired whether there has been any mechanism to
identify soldiers suffering from Stress, a representative of the Ministry of
Defence stated as under:-
“People are trained in such a manner that they are able to identify
soldiers, who are already there in the service, and we keep a discreet
watch on them so that we do not take these unfortunate steps.”
1.18 When enquired whether any psychological test of recruits is conducted
at the time of induction of soldiers, the witness clarified:-
“There is no psychological screening as of now.”
1.19 On being asked whether the Ministry have undertaken any study to
compare suicide rates in Indian Armed Forces with that in developed
countries, the representative of the Ministry of Defence stated during evidence
as under:-
“….we have compared four countries, three developed countries, the
US, UK, France and India and found that the rate in India is about half
compared to the developed countries.”
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

13
1.20 During the evidence, the representative of the Institute for Defence
Studies and Analysis (IDSA) while acknowledging that there has been
increase in the cases of suicide and fratricide in the Armed Forces, made
following submission:-
“The number of suicides and fratricides are both on the increase. This
is a disturbing trend. The reasons for these are, of course, also
something that we have mentioned. These people have to live in
extremely difficult conditions. We are fully aware of the circumstances
of soldiers who live in counter-insurgency operations fighting amongst
your own people, when the community around also cannot be trusted.
There could be people who come from the shadows of society. That
can be an extremely difficult task. There tackling internal insurgency is
a very difficult task. Then, the fact that, sometimes, the kind of climatic
conditions and difficult conditions that they have to live in, like Siachen
or say some difficult areas near the border, that can cause extreme
stress on soldiers because they are away from their families for a very
long period of time. As you know, they have been engaged in counter-
insurgency operations for many years now and because of this their
replacement has already been delayed. Relief comes with great
difficulty and that causes additional stress.”
Cases of Desertion
1.21 At the instance of the Committee, the Ministry of Defence furnished the
following statistical data on the number of personnel who have deserted
Armed Forces during last two years:-
 2006 2007 Total
Army 1401 983 2384
Navy 159 367 526
Air Force 71 39 110
Total: 1631 1389 3020
Causes of Stress
1.22 According to the Ministry of Defence, the causative factors identified on
the basis of the studies undertaken in the recent past are as under :-
“(a) Socio Economic Causes:
(i) Family discords
(ii) Increased responsibilities towards family and difficulty in taking
adequate care of family responsibilities due to break up of joint
family system.
(iii) Extra marital affairs
(iv) Poor financial conditions and inability in meeting the family
obligations.
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

14
(v) Due to socio – economic changes individuals get into heavy
debt and are unable to pay back dues/loans.
(vi) Psychological pressure on a soldier due to constant exposure of
family to social ills like dowry demand, sexual exploitation,
alcoholism and drug abuse etc. Also inability to remedy the
situation.
(b) Environmental/ Organizational Causes
(i) Prolonged separation from family and difficulty in attending to
family commitments.
(ii) Stress due to prolonged commitment in counter insurgency
environment.
(iii) Uncongenial and stressful environment in the lines and frugal
living conditions coupled with lack of rest due to operational
commitments.
(iv) Ignorance of the signs of stress & suicidal behaviour amongst
junior leaders.
(v) Low relationship-high task orientation of leaders
(vi) Denial of leave inspite of domestic problems leading to
frustration and a sense of hopelessness.
(c) Medical/Psychological Causes
(i) Individual suffering from mental depression and lack of mental
robustness
(ii) Poor interpersonal relationship of individual in the unit
(iii) Stigma attached to individual seeking medical help from
psychiatrist (mental/Psychological case)
(iv) Low tolerance levels in certain soldiers further aggravated by
stress.
(v) Suffering from long drawn and incurable disease
(vi) Apprehension of sexual dysfunction.”
Familial Reasons for Stress
1.23  During the evidence, the representative of the Institute for Defence
Studies and Analysis (IDSA) made following observation on the reasons for
familial stress in the Armed Forces:-
“One more condition I would like to bring to your notice is, of course,
what happens to their families when they leave their families behind.
Sometimes, accommodation may not be able to them, but more often
than not, they have the problems of financial nature. Then, if they are
coming from rural areas, they may have land problems; their lands may
be occupied by others or they may have held some land for which they
want regularization which is not possible to get; they may have revenue
disputes; they may have civil disputes. Invariably, commanding officers
take them up with the District Magistrates, but they also have their
constraints. That is because there is a certain law and we have to go
through the due process of law. In that process, the soldier does not
get quick relief. That causes frustration. Now-a-days, there is a great
deal of exploitation; there is the aspiration that their children should do
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

15
extremely well. Competitive pressures in society are also increasing
and, therefore, when their children are unable to get admissions in
good colleges or are unemployed, it becomes even more difficult.
Finally, Sir, the fact that now-a-days we have nuclear families, and joint
family system is breaking down, takes away the source of support that
you could get in the past. The uncle or a nephew, or an old mother in
the joint family used to look after their children, but now-a-days their
families are small. There is great aspiration for material well being and
your conditions of work are extremely difficult. So, these factors put
together put excessive stress on people, particularly those who are not
well off and who are not very well connected in society and who do not
exercise much influence. They get into a mode of depression and are
often driven to suicides.”
1.24 Explaining the familial reasons for stress, the representative of the
Ministry of Defence stated during evidence as follows:-
“The genesis of a suicide lies more in the family problems. Most of the
suicides are due to family problems, financial problems, failed love
affair, not getting married to the lady one loved, wife ringing up on the
mobile straight away with some problem, etc.  He is not in a position to
influence the situation and is put under a tremendous stress as he is
not able to help them out. At the same time even the family is getting
ill-treated by the goondas, etc.  There are problems like land disputes
and even getting an electric connection for his agricultural land. These
kind of small problems do not get resolved when the soldier comes
home on leave for about sixty days. After spending his leave when he
goes back, the problems remain where they are. A number of suicides
have occurred when a soldier has come back from leave. That
indicates that the genesis lies in the family problems which he is not
able to solve.”
Responsiveness of Civil Administration
1.25 While highlighting the importance of Civil Administration in helping the
Defence personnel and their family in cases related to civil disputes, a
representative of the Ministry of Defence deposed as under:-
“The civil administration becoming more responsive will very largely
contribute towards a reduction in the suicides.  In fact, the Defence
Minister had written a letter and the Chief Secretary had also written
letter to the Defence Secretary. However, on ground the effect is very
minimal. They are still treated as routine with no special priority being
given. You yourself brought out that in the earlier times it used to be
promptly acted upon and a communication responding to this used to
be sent back to the Commanding Officer. I am afraid nothing is
happening in that regard. “
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

16
1.26 On being asked about the basis of the statement on the poor response
from civil authorities, a representative of the Ministry of Defence deposed as
under:-
“We will have to compile the data from the unit level.  From the feed
back by the Commanders, it is pointed out that there is absolutely no
response.”
1.27 Responding to a question about the steps needed to make the Civil
Administration responsive to the grievances of the Armed Forces personnel, a
representative of the Ministry of Defence deposed as under:-
“Sir, something similar to RTI can be done for addressing grievances of
the Armed Forces. That may make it more transparent and people
more accountable.”
1.28 Elaborating further on the issue, another representative of the Ministry
of  Defence stated as under:-
“When he says that it should be on the pattern of RTI, perhaps he
means that we lay down fixed time schedule within which he must
respond like in the case of an RTI question, we are obliged to reply
within 30 days. Accordingly, priority is given. Factual information is
given because if facts are not written, it is of no use. If we can lay down
some time-frame, it will help.”
1.29 When asked whether it is possible for the Ministry of Defence to set up
a mechanism for collecting data from Commands or Units, the representative
of the Ministry of Defence deposed as under:-
“We will have to set up a net electronically. That could be the best and
the fastest way. If a letter is taken by jawan to the District Collector, the
same thing is processed up electronically to the Command and to the
Army Headquarters and MoD also. Then, from this side, somebody
may interact with the State Government that so and so has approached
the DC. If we have that kind of a net connection, it can be done.”
1.30 The Ministry of Defence also furnished a copy of the letter written by
Raksha Mantri to Chief Ministers of all the States stressing on the need for
prompt response from district authorities for redressal of grievances of serving
soldiers and their families. In this connection, explaining the circumstances,
which warranted such a communication from Raksha Mantri to Chief Ministers
of different States and the response of the Chief Ministers of different States
in this regard, the Ministry of Defence, in their subsequent note, stated as
follows:-
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

17
“Due to a sudden spurt in suicides and fratricides in Army during
September-October 2006, a meeting was taken in the Ministry of
Defence by Raksha Mantri on 8.11.2006 to discuss the problem and
take suitable remedial measures to curb such incidents. It was decided
in the meeting that a letter will be written by RM to the Chief Ministers
of all States requesting to instruct the State/District authorities to attend
to the problems of the soldiers both serving as well as ex-servicemen
and their families on priority basis.
 The response of State Governments has been positive and
encouraging. Many State Governments have put in place grievances
redressal monitoring mechanism for serving soldiers/veterans and their
dependants. Some State Governments have constituted district  level
Sainik Welfare Committees and senior functionaries of State
Government have been nominated as members of the Committee.
State Governments have issued instructions to District level officers to
be proactive in solving the problems of serving and ex-servicemen of
the Armed Forces.”
Impact of Shortage of Officers
1.31 A representative of the Ministry of Defence, while highlighting the
relation between the shortage of  officers and stress, stated as under:-
“We are authorised to 22 officers in an Infantry Battalion. As against
that we have only got about nine in a battalion. Out of that, due to
various professional commitments people go out.  Therefore, the
number of people actually available is very less. It is because of this
paucity of officers that the type of interaction which we need at our
junior officers’ level is lacking. The need of the hour today is that you
have to be much more intimate because the troops are more educated.
However, I would like to bring to your notice that with the measure that
has been adopted and with the Commanders focusing on this, in about
six months of this year there was only one incident of fratricide.”
1.32 Elaborating further, a non-official witness stated during evidence as
under:-
“As you are all very well aware that the Armed Forces are short of over
12000 officers which is almost 25% of the authorised strength.  This
shortage is in the units mainly.  The formation Headquarters run with
full authorisation and are therefore not affected by this shortfall.  A unit
with authorised strength of 24 officers have no more than 10-12
present.  Out of these some are on leave and some more are
committed to doing various course or studies to meet the demands of
newer technologies and tactics resulting in merely 3-4 officers present
in the unit at any one time.”
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

18
1.33 In this context, the representative of the Ministry of Defence stated as
under:-
“As I said, Sir, once the deficiency of Army officers is made up and the
number of officers increases, things will be better. What is happening
now is that one officer is doing his work in addition to his operational
task on which he is out with the troops. If the troops are out in the night,
he is also out.“
1.34 The Committee have taken up for examination the issue of shortage of
officers and other allied subjects and their Report on these issues will be
presented to Lok Sabha separately.
Reluctance in psychiatrist’s help
1.35 The Ministry in their written reply informed the Committee of the
following factors for stress classifiable under Medical/Psychological category:-
“Medical/Psychological causes like individual suffering from long drawn
and incurable disease, mental depression and lack of mental
robustness, stigma attached to individual seeking medical help from
psychiatrist (mental/psychological case), low tolerance levels in certain
soldiers further aggravated by stress etc.”
1.36   Explaining the meaning of  stigma in context of  availing the help from
psychiatrist,  a non-official witness in his written note informed the Committee
as follows:-
“referral to psychiatrist treatment is considered a ‘stigma’. The
commanding officer fills up a document called Medical Form 10 for
psychiatric evaluation. The fact that Form 10 has been raised for an
individual makes him outcaste. When an individual is referred for
psychiatrist’s evaluation and treatment, he is kept under escorts till his
psychiatrist clears him. This ‘stigma’ may adversely affect an
individual’s service carrier, thus prompting him to hide his mental
problems.”
Basic amenities to the soldiers posted at high altitude stations
1.37 During the study visit of the Standing Committee on Defence to
Jammu, Leh, Srinagar and other forward areas, the Committee observed that
there were delays in supply of consumable and non-consumable items to the
Armed Forces. During the visit of the Committee to Siachen Area, it was
noticed that soldiers were being issued used items of personal clothing which
were not fit for reuse.
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

19
Establishment of Armed Forces Tribunal
1.38 A large number of cases relating to service matter of the members of
the Armed Forces have been pending in the Courts for a long time. In a note
to the Committee, the Ministry of Defence have informed that the number of
cases pending before the Supreme Court and various Courts as on
31.10.2005 were as under:
Supreme Court High Courts
Army              94       7611
Navy              12         463
Air Force              22       1250
Total            125        9324
1.39  Stressing upon the need of setting up an appellate body composed of
non-military personnel or civil personnel, the Supreme Court in its judgment in
Prithvi Pal Singh vs Union of India (1982) had observed:-
“with the expanding horizons of fair play in action even in administrative
decisions, the universal declaration of human rights and retributive
justice being relegated to the uncivilized days, a time has come when a
step is required to be taken for at least one review and it must truly be
a judicial review as and by way of appeal to a body composed of non-
military personnel or civil personnel.”
1.40 The Committee, in view of the above judgement of Supreme Court as
well as the recommendation of Law Commission had urged the Ministry in
their Second Report on the Demands for Grants (2005-2006) to work out a
new mechanism to deal with all the outstanding court cases pertaining to the
Armed Forces personnel. In pursuance to this, the Ministry of Defence
proposed to enact a new legislation by constituting an Armed Forces Tribunal
for the adjudication of complaints and disputes regarding service matters and
appeals arising out of the verdicts of the court martial of the three services.
1.41 The Armed Forces Tribunal Act, 2007 notified on 28 December, 2007
provides for the adjudication or trial by Armed Forces Tribunal of disputes and
complaints with respect to commission, appointments, enrolment and
conditions of services in respect of persons subject to the Army Act, 1950, the
Navy Act, 1957 and the Air Force Act, 1950 and also to provide for appeals
arising out of orders, findings or sentences of court martial held under the said
Acts and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

20
1.42 The Ministry of Defence during examination of Demands for Grants
(2008-09) on the issue of enactment of  Armed Forces Tribunal Act, 2007
furnished the following information: -
“Armed Forces Tribunal Act 2007 (55 of 2007) has come into force
w.e.f.15.06.2008 in terms of Section 1(2) of the Act. However,
establishment of the Tribunal is yet to be notified under section (4) of
the Act…. By way of temporary arrangement, it has been decided to
set up the Principal Bench of the Tribunal at West Block-8, R.K.Puram,
New Delhi. The lay out plan has been finalized in consultation with
CPWD and it is expected that the civil works will begin soon. Efforts are
on to locate a permanent accommodation for the Principal Bench at
Delhi.”
1.43 Elaborating further on the issue, the Ministry of Defence in their note
stated as under:-
“…. A Selection Committee is being constituted for Selection of
Members of the Tribunal; Chief Justice of India has nominated the
name of one sitting Judge of Supreme Court of India to act as the
Chairman of the Selection Committee for appointment of Members of
the Armed Forces Tribunal. The other three members of the Committee
will be (i) Chairperson AFT; (ii) Defence Secretary & (iii) Secretary,
Law.”
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

21
CHAPTER-II
MANAGEMENT OF STRESS IN THE INDIAN ARMY
2.1. The Committee have been informed that the Army is addressing the
issue of stress with seriousness and concern that it deserves.
2.2 The Ministry of Defence also informed that there are well laid out
formalized Standing Operating Procedures (SOP) on all issues related to unit
administration, welfare and man management in the units and formations. In
addition, numbers of letters on the subject insisting upon strict compliance of
the same by Commanders have been issued. The Commanders have been
sensitised to the gravity of situation and superior Commanders in the chain
are carrying out necessary checks during their interaction, visits and
inspection of the units/formations.
Studies Conducted on Stress related incidents
2. 3 The Committee have been informed by the Ministry that stress related
incidents have been studied and analysed in detail to arrive at likely causes
and remedial measures. Following studies have been conducted on the
subject:-
(a) Suicides in the Army by College of Defence Management in 2005.
(b) Suicide Awareness and Prevention Strategies by Lieutenant
Colonel S. Dixit, classified specialist of psychiatric of 155 Base
Hospital in 2006.
(a) Case studies on 'Attempted Suicides' in 2006.
(b) Suicide in the Army and Guidelines for Detection & Prevention at
various levels by Service Selection Board, Bhopal.
(c) Management of Stress in the Army' By Northern & Eastern
Commands in 2006.
(d) Study reports on Soldiers Running Amok cases in Northern
Command in 2006.
(e) Suicide and Fratricide amongst Troops Deployed in Counter
Insurgency Areas in 2007 by DIPR.
2.4 Asked about the findings of the aforementioned studies, the Ministry of
Defence informed that the following causative factors have been identified on
the basis of the studies conducted by Army:-
“(a) Socio-Economic Causes like family problems/discords, extra
 marital affairs, financial problems, Psychological pressure on a
 soldier due to constant exposure of family to social ills and their
 inability to remedy the situation.
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

22
(b) Environmental/organisational causes like prolonged separation
 from family and difficulty in attending to family commitments,
 stress due to prolonged commitment in counter insurgency
 environment, ignorance of the signs of stress & suicidal
 behaviour amongst junior leaders, denial of leave etc.
(c) Medical/Psychological causes like individual suffering from long
 drawn and incurable disease, mental depression and lack of
 mental robustness, stigma attached to individual seeking
 medical help from psychiatrist (mental/psychological case), low
 tolerance levels in certain soldiers further aggravated by stress,
 etc.”
2.5 The Committee have also been informed that Defence Institute of
Psychological Research (DIPR) had conducted a study on `Psycho-Social
aspect of optimising the operational efficiency of Security Forces to combat
insurgency’ during September, 2000-May 2005 in the North Easter Region.
As regards the major findings of the study and the recommendations of DIPR
thereon, the Ministry of Defence stated as under:-
“Among various stressors, three main operational stressors like fear of
harassment followed by uncertain environment and domestic stress
have emerged as the most significant stresses responsible for the
onset of psychological problems like anxiety, depression, helplessness
etc.  amongst officers. Amongst the three groups of population
(officers, JCOs and Jawans) the Officers are the most stressed lot.
Thus they emerge as the most vulnerable Group for undergoing
various psychological disorders and adjustment problems.  Another
observation was that Assam Rifles Troops carried a strong relative
deprivation as compared to Army Units.  This was due to the
organisational climate and their role in the climate. Organisational
climate and support contributes significantly more towards one’s
commitment, operational efficiency and lower role stress as compared
to one’s emotional quotient.  Thus, intervention for modulating the
organisational climate towards making it more supportive for various
harsh and hostile uncertain environments is more important than
intending to make any change in one’s personality to optimise one’s
commitment.”
Remedial Measures Initiated at Army Headquarters Level
2.6 When asked about the remedial measures initiated to manage stress
among Defence personnel, the Ministry of Defence stated that the following
measures have been initiated at Army Headquarters Level: -
“(a) Liberalized leave policy has been enforced. Larger percentage
is being granted leave. Further, splitting of annual and casual
leave is being permitted.
(b) Frequent Visits by senior staff officers apart from formation
commanders to units to assess conditions of employment and
living have been asked for.
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

23
(c) Focus on leadership, man management, motivation and morale.
Commanders at all levels to be more intimately involved with
their Command.
(d) Contact between the leaders and the led, both formal and
informal, has been further enhanced to feel the pulse of the
troops. Commanders must be accessible and keep the channels
of communication open.
(e) The Junior Commissioned Officers and Non Commissioned
Officers have been educated and sensitized to be alive to the
sensitivity of the troops and treat them with due respect and
dignity.
(f) Characteristics of troops, temperaments and behavioural
tendencies are being kept in mind while dealing with troops
belonging to different regions especially in an all Indian Mixed
Class Composition unit.
(g) Unit administration and officer-man relationship is being
accorded high priority. Accountability of commanders down to
section level has been enforced.
(h) Buddy system is being expanded to be among four/five
Personnel Below Officers Rank to be effective.
(j) Group activities like sports, games and recreational activities are
being encouraged at unit/formation level within the constraints of
operational deployment.
(k) A number of Junior Commissioned Officers, Non Commissioned
Officers of Nursing Technician and Nursing Assistant cadre
have already been imparted training of psychological
counsellors through three courses held at Base Hospital Delhi
Cantonment, Command Hospitals Eastern and Northern
Commands. They have been trained to identify 'high risk
personnel' to provide timely treatment and avoid loss of trained
manpower. These trained psychological counsellors have
already been posted to Northern and Eastern sectors in Armed
Forces.
(l) Using the services of 'Psychological Health Mentors' at unit level
who are trained in psychiatric centers of various hospitals.
These mentors are the Religious teachers, Army Education
Corps Junior Commissioned Officers/Non Commissioned
Officers and Regimental Medical Officers.
(m) It has been decided to further augment and strengthen the
resources by providing in-house training on psychological
counselling to selected PBOR from non-medical units. The
training in the form of short courses/training capsules will be
conducted at the Psychiatry Centers under the Commands. 60
personals from various Commands will be trained in 12 week
course.
(n) It is also proposed to train Religious Teachers (RT) JCOs as
psychological counsellors. The training will be for 12 weeks. It is
proposed to train 1500 RT JCOs through this programme during
the next three to four years. Modalities for the same have been
worked out by DG MS (Army) and are in final stages of
implementation.
(o) Committees have been established at Army Headquarters,
Command Headquarters, Corps Headquarters and Divisional
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

24
Headquarters level to monitor and periodically review measures
to be adopted. At Army Headquarters the Committee is headed
by the DG DC&W with ADGMS, ADG PS and ADG D&V as
members.
(p) Yoga and Pranayam have been introduced during PT period to
counter negative thinking and stress.
(q) Rest & Recouping/Distressing Centres have been established in
Eastern and Northern Commands.
 (r) Religious teachers are also utilized to preach & counsel
vulnerable troops.
  (s) Training of doctors and Junior leaders by service psychiatrists
has been undertaken in dealing with personnel at high risk of
stress related diseases.
(t) Regular & frequent spells of leave & turnover/rotation of
personnel deployed in sensitive/stressful situations are ensured
(u) All personnel returning to unit after leave are interviewed &
medically examined by the Regt MO. Any stress marker is
looked for and motivational talk is rendered to all.”
(v) All medical officers are being trained to look for early signs &
symptoms amongst defence personnel while conducting their
regular medical examinations and referring them to appropriate
auth for necessary further action.
Visit by Senior Staff Officers
2.7 Army Headquarters have initiated a measure of frequent Visits by
senior staff officers apart from formation commanders to units to assess
conditions of employment. When asked whether this measure would helpful,
the representative of the Ministry of Defence stated during the evidence:-
“Inspections may be one thing. They are official activities. But this kind
of a phenomenon is to encourage camaraderie between the two levels.
Suffering and not complaining may be inherent sense of discipline,
which is there in the Defence Forces, and because on which there may
be some break down of communication. So, specifically to address
that, these things have been designed.”
2.8 Elaborating further the importance of the visits made by senior staff
officers, another representative of the Ministry of Defence stated during
evidence:-
“The Commander will not be in a position to go every time to every
place. So, the only way out is that we have the Staff Officer visiting the
Unit to find out if things are being implemented. He is not really going
out for an inspection because he does not have that authority. It is the
Staff Officer on behalf of the Commanding Officer who goes and finds
out whether it is there, to give an input to the Commander. If that is
adding to the stress factor, we can look at it.”
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

25
Liberalized Leave Policy
2.9 When asked to state the details of the liberalized leave policy, the
Ministry of Defence furnished the following information:-
“The management of leave of both officers and PBOR is an important
facet and the existing policy on Annual leave has been revised.  Fresh
guidelines have been issued vide letter dated 10 January 2007
emphasising on various aspects as mentioned below:-
(a) Leave, as such should not be denied to troops except under
exigencies of services or on operational grounds.
(b) No local restrictions on grant of leave shall be imposed,
whatsoever, except with the explicit permission of the competent
authority.
(c) Officers may avail annual leave in three parts instead of earlier
two, subject to exigencies of service.  There are no restrictions on
splitting of annual leave by PBOR.”
2.10 The Committee pointed out that there might be instance when a soldier
proceeding  on leave have to spend several days in reaching their home town
from the place of their posting and enquired whether they are entitled to have
additional travel time. In his reply, the representative of the Ministry of
Defence deposed as under:-
“I wish to bring one more thing to your notice that when a jawan goes
on leave, he gets a certain number of days plus the traveling time.
Therefore, one keeps on getting additional time for travel for the further
one is situated. It is not that a fixed number of days are given to him.
We give extra time -- to each and every jawan -- that is taken for
travel.”
Measures Initiated/undertaken in the Ministry
2.11 The Ministry also informed that they have initiated following measures
to address the issues relating to stress:-
  “(i)  Removal of restriction of 1450 Kms while availing all India LTC
in respect of all service personnel.
 (ii)    Authorization of two free warrants to JCOs/OR deployed in
CI/CT    operational areas.
 (iii)   Government has enhanced High Attitude Area Allowance
substantially to all ranks deployed in areas above 14000 feet.
(iv)  RM has written to all Chief Ministers of all states to address
problems of soldiers on priority.  Similar letters have been
issued to Chief Secretaries.
  (v)   Rescheduling of the existing chartered flights to cover more
destinations specially in North, North east and South has been
accepted and is being implemented.
 (vi)  With the implementation of Part-I of the AV Singh Report,
officers have been assured time based promotion up to the rank
of Col (Time Scale), thus increasing the promotional avenues
and enhancing the satisfaction level.
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

26
 (vii)   State Governments have been requested to fill all vacancies in
district Sainik welfare department and all the departments where
reservation for ex-servicemen exists.
 (viii) Under the married accommodation project, houses are being
built at different stations to improve the availability of family
accommodation.
 (ix) Government is considering various measures to further improve
the service conditions of Armed Forces personnel.”
Trainings for Stress Management
2.12 Ministry of Defence informed the Committee that training measures
required to be incorporated in institutionalized Training and formation/unit
Training to tackle the stress has been identified. When asked about the steps
taken in this regard, the Ministry of Defence stated in their written reply as
under:-
“Headquarters Army Training Command has been tasked to review
institutionalised training being imparted on the subject, especially in
Platoon Commander, Potential Subedar Major, Junior Leader Course
(Non Commissioned Officers Academy), Young Officers, Junior
Command and all Company Commander level courses of all arms and
services and senior command course.  Capsules are also being
introduced in Defence Service Staff College, Wellington. The following
aspects are being incorporated: -
(a) Introduction of a capsule on leadership, improvement in inter-
personal relationship, man management and stress
management.
(b)  Case studies on the subject.
(c) Importance and effectiveness of Yoga and Pranayam”
2.13 According to the Ministry of Defence, Formation Headquarters have
been suggested to organize the following as per circumstances and
necessity:-
  “(a) Each Divisional/Area Headquarters will organize a  training
 workshop on man management and stress  management for
 five days which will be attended by at  least one officer, one
 Junior Commissioned Officer and one Non Commissioned
 Officer from each unit of the Army.
(b) Committees to review and analysis stress related incidents and
 suggest additional measures have been established at
 Command, Corps Headquarters and Divisional Headquarters.
(c)  Widespread dissemination of reading material on
 management of stress in appropriate languages.”
2.14 On being asked to furnish details of the terms and references of such
Committees and their composition, the Ministry of Defence stated   in their
written reply as under:-
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

27
“Committees have been established at Army Headquarters,
Command Headquarters, Corps Headquarters and Divisional
Headquarters to monitor and review stress related incidents and
suggest remedial measures.  These Committees meet once in a
quarter.   The constitution of Committees at various levels is as given
below:-
(a)       Integrated Headquarters of MoD (Army).
(i)      Chairman     - DG DC&W.
(ii)      Members      - ADG MS (Army, ADG D&V and ADG PS.
(b) Command HQ.
(i)      Chairman     - COS.
(ii)      Members      - MGIC Adm, Brig A and DDMS.
(c) Corps HQ.
(i)     Chairman      -  COS.
(ii)     Members      - Brig Adm, DDMS and Col DV.
(d) Divisional HQ.
(i)     Chairman      - Dy GOC.
(ii)     Members     - Col A, ADMS.”
2.15 When enquired, whether the training/workshop have been conducted in
each Divisional/Area Headquarter on man management and stress
management, the Ministry of Defence in their written note stated in their
written replies:-
 “Workshops on stress and man management were organised by each
Command in the Army for five days at division/area level.  These workshops
were conducted in all the formations by way of lectures, open forum,
discussions, case studies and Yoga/Pranayam in a phased manner.  Phase I
entailed training of instructor teams followed by training of nucleus staff of
each unit in Phase II.  In Phase III, these nuclei staff trained personnel in
each unit.  These workshops have been conducted upto all Division/Area
level.”
2.16  The Committee have been informed that in order to minimize casualty
due to fratricide/suicide/assault & affray, Havildars and Naib Subedar in all
units/Headquarters/Camps are being sensitized and made effective in respect
of their role, importance and responsibility in leadership, inter-personal
relationship, sub unit administration and man management. In addition,
Commanding Officers and formation commanders will ensure the following:-
(a) Commanding Officers will personally get involved in leadership,
man management and stress management training of Havildars &
Naib Subedars during routine Individual Training Cycles,
promotion or weapon/equipment cadres.
(b) Formation Commanders will ensure focus of training towards
junior leaders and its implementation on ground.
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

28
2.17 According to the information furnished to the Committee, Headquarters
Army Training Command has been tasked to review institutionalized training
being imparted on the subject, especially in Platoon Commander, Potential
Subedar Major, Junior Leader Course (Non Commissioned Officers
Academy), Young Officer Junior Command and all company commander level
courses of all arms being introduced in DSSC, Wellington. The following
aspects are also being incorporated:-
(a)  Introduction of a capsule on leadership, improvement in inter-
personal relationship, man management and stress
management.
 (b)  Case studies on the subject.
 (c)  Importance and effectiveness of Yoga and Pranayam
Deployment as Sahayaks
2.18 In reply to a specific query regarding deployment of lower ranks in any
of the three Services as Sahayaks in any form in the Armed Forces and
specific duties assigned to them, the Ministry of Defence in their written note
stated as follows:-
“Sahayaks are authorized to Officers and Junior Commissioned
Officers in the Army when serving with units or Headquarters
functioning on War Establishment. The scale of authorization of
Sahayak is given below:-
(i) One for every field officer and above.
(ii) One for every two officers of the rank of captain and below
(iii) One for every subedar major
(iv) One for every two Junior Commissioned Officers of the rank of
subedar and below.
The duties assigned to Sahayaks are as under:-
(i) To provide personal protection and security.
(ii) To attend telephones, receive and deliver messages during
operations, training and exercise and in peace.
(iii) To maintain weapons, uniforms and equipment of
Officers/Junior Commissioned Officers in accordance with
custom and usage in the Army.
(iv) To assist in digging trenches, erect bivouacs and shelters during
war, training or exercise while the leaders are more busy in
planning, coordination and execution of operations.
(v) To be of assistance during patrols and independent missions.
(vi) To carry and operate radio sets, maps and other military
equipment during operations, training cadres and outdoor
exercises.
No personnel in Navy and Air Force are deployed on duties as Batman/
Orderly/Sahayak.”
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

29
2.19 During study visits, the interaction of the Committee with Jawans has
brought out that some of the soldiers are deployed to work as Sahayaks with
the families of the officers.
2.20 On being asked about the deployment of soldiers as Sahayaks, the
representative of the Army stated during evidence as follows:
“The issue of Sahayaks is misconstrued.  They are more like a buddy
to the individuals.”
2.21 Replying to a specific query that several instances have come to notice
where soldiers have been seen to be deployed at the residence of officers,
the witness clarified:
“Would have been attending the work at home due to reverence. He is
not supposed to do it technically. He is not supposed to work in the
house.”
2.22 In reply to another specific query whether any case had come to notice
where any Orderly had committed suicide because of the unhappiness with
his officer, the representative of the Army deposed as under:
“Not at the level of Army Headquarters.  If at unit level there is such as
case, I will check it if you will give me the year.”
Group Activities
2.23 When enquired whether there is any particular time for sports and other
recreational activities, a representative of Ministry of Defence  stated as
under:-
“You may be well aware that there is so much focus on recreational
activities, especially sports.  Maybe, in the field area we cannot
conduct normal sports but even there, there are recreational rooms.
TV, of course is very common.  Films are shown to the troops,
especially in field areas.  There is a lot of focus on sports.  You are
very well aware that the Armed Forces do exceptionally well in sports.”
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

30
Availability of Psychological Counsellors
2.24 When enquired, whether the existing number of psychological
counsellors is adequate in view of the recommendation of DIPR to have one
psychologist for every 1000 personnel, the Ministry of Defence stated as
under:-
“As per the initials proposal 46 AMC personnel (Senior NCOs of
Nursing Assistant and Nursing Technical Category) have been
trained as psychological counsellors and thereafter promoted as
JCOs.  In order to meet additional requirements the following
measures have been taken and are in the pipeline:-
(i) Selected personnel from non-AMC units are being imparted 12
weeks Psychological Counsellors training at designated psychiatry
centres to function as `Unit Psychological Counsellors’.
(ii) Proposal for training of all the Religious Teachers in Army as
Psychological counsellors is being finalised and will be implemented
with effect from 2008.
(iii) Next batch of 50 AMC JCO Psychological Counsellors will be
trained from July to September, 2008.
(iv) 600 RT JCOs and PBOR from non AMC units will be trained as
psychological counsellors in various training nodes every year with
effect from 2008.”
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

31
CHAPTER-III
STRESS MANAGEMENT IN INDIAN NAVY
3.1 When enquired whether any study has been conducted to examine the
stress level among personnel serving in Indian Navy, the Ministry of Defence
in their written reply stated as under:-
“ An in-house study titled “Occupational Stress in Naval personnel”
was carried out at INHS Aswini, Mumbai in 2005-2006 which found
that Naval personnel on board submarine and ship had lower level
of occupational stress as compared to those serving’ on shore
establishments. Occupational stress was more in junior sailors as
compared to officers and senior sailors.”
3.2 The Committee have been informed that the Indian Navy has a
mechanism to cater to the factors identified for causing or precipitating the
stress related illnesses among the naval personnel and their families. The
following steps have been taken by Navy to improve the mental health/mental
stress state of naval personnel are given in succeeding paragraphs.
(a) Divisional System
3.3  According to the information made available by the Ministry of
Defence, in the Navy the ‘Divisional System’ is a time tested unique forum,
which provides regular interaction between officers and sailors. In this system
a group of sailors are assigned to one Divisional Officer (who may also be the
departmental Officer) acting as their ‘guide, philosopher and friend’.  The
sailors are encouraged to share all their problems including personal,
domestic, service and any other issue affecting them.  The Divisional Officer
renders all possible help in the form of informing appropriate agencies,
authorities and the command to ensure ‘Redressel of their Grievances’ in an
informal environment. In addition ‘Divisional Officer’s Periods’ (DOP) are
conducted periodically and problems posed by sailors are recorded with
remedial measures taken. The sailors in the Navy have a well laid down
system of forwarding their requests to Divisional Officer pertaining to their
welfare, promotion and domestic issues which are disposed off in a time
bound manner at appropriate levels. These issues can reach right up to the
‘Chief of the Naval Staff’ for attention and redressel.
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

32
(b) Physical Activity
3.4 The daily routine of ships and establishments includes morning
physical training and evening sports activities. In addition the living
accommodation of all sailors is adequately provided with television, indoor
games and internet facilities (wherever possible).  The sailors are also
permitted to proceed ashore (i.e. to city) to take care of any household chores
etc. and the married sailors are permitted to proceed home at the end of the
day’s work when in harbour.  Further arrangements have also been made for
conduct of stress busting classes like Yoga, Pranayam, Art of living etc.
periodically.
(c) Sensitization of commanders
3.5  At every appropriate level the issue of stress and strain in service is
addressed by Commanders in a very comprehensive manner. The
Commanding Officers, Divisional Officers and Medical officers on board
address the issue appropriately through COs Durbar, Group Discussions,
Workshops and Counselling Sessions.
(d) Regular and frequent spells of leave
3.6  Turnover and rotation of personnel deployed in sensitive and stressful
situations in ensured.
(e) Liberalized leave policy
3.7 When asked to state the details of the liberalized leave policy, the
Ministry stated in their written reply as under:
“In the Navy officers and sailors are entitled to 60 days of annual leave
and 20 and 30 days of casual leave respectively.  Leave is granted as per
leave plan in majority of the cases subject to service exigencies.  Sailors
are also granted advance of annual leave in emergencies.”
(d) Early Detection of Stressors
3.8  All personnel returning back to unit after leave are interviewed and
medically examined by the AMA, who looks for any stress marker or overt
sign of psychiatry illness.  AMAs are trained to keep an index of suspicion for
symptoms or signs of psychiatric illnesses or stress disorders among the
servicemen and promptly attend to them/refer them to appropriate level of
specialist care.
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

33
CHAPTER-IV
STRESS MANAGEMENT IN INDIAN AIR FORCE
Measures Taken to Counter Stress/Suicides
4.1 According to the information furnished by the Ministry of Defence in
their written note on the subject, the Indian Air Force has a well-established
system for addressing personal problems of individuals.  The relevant details
of the extant system are reproduced below:-
(a) Redressal of Grievances .  A well-established system of speedy
redressal of grievances exists under Air Force Law for all personnel of
the IAF.  The system is fair and has stood the test of time.
(b) Organizational Support and Welfare of Personnel and Families.
Welfare meetings are held regularly for the personnel to address
welfare related measures separately for Airmen, Non Combatant
(Enrolled) and Defence Security Core (DSC) at all stations of the IAF.
The problems put up by the station personnel are followed up by the
Welfare Officer for remedial action and a feedback on the measures
taken is given by him during the next meeting.  Where requested or felt
necessary, assistance is also provided by the station administration
through Provost Units of IAF to address domestic/personal problems of
individuals at their native places.  Where required, the station
administration interacts with the civil administrative machinery to try
and resolve personal/legal problems and disputes of individual.  In
addition, an open forum exists at stations for the personnel to resolve
personal problems through interviews with their Commanding
Officer(CO)/Air Officer Commanding(AOC) . For the families, the Air
Force Wives Welfare Association (AFWWA) meeting is held regularly
wherein educational activities and welfare activities being provided by
the administration are highlighted for the benefits of the Personnel
Below Officer Rank (PBOR) families by the senior ladies of the station.
(c) Counselling/Interview with Commanders . Counselling sessions
are held by supervisors for their subordinates on a regular basis.
Similarly, a system of interview with the CO/Station commander/AOC
also exists at all stations for individuals to seek a solution to their
personal problems that cannot be resolved by their immediate
superiors.
(d) Leave. The stations have been advised to ensure liberal grant of
leave to needy personnel, especially for those with compassionate
reasons.
4.2 On being asked about the frequency of meetings held to address
welfare related measures, the Ministry of Defence informed that Welfare
meetings for Airmen & NCs(E) and DSC Durbars are held once in a quarter at
every station/ Independent unit by Air  Officer Commanding/ Commanding
Officer/ Station  Commandant/ Commanding Officer.
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

34
Study conducted  on Stress Level
4.3 When enquired about study conducted to examine the Stress level
among Personnel serving in Indian Air Force, the Ministry in their written reply
stated as under:-
“An internal study was conducted on suicides reported during the
period 2002-2007 (31 st October, 2007).  It found that causative
factors in 21% cases were relating to domestic problems, 17% due to
financial problems, 23% due to medical problems and 12% due to
marital problems alcoholism etc.”
4.4. According to the Ministry of Defence, the Indian Air Force have also
taken some additional measures in the last two years for addressing stress
related problems in personnel and the same are given below:-
(a) Improvement in Living and Working Conditions of
Personnel.  The Married Accommodation Project at stations are
being progressed on a fast track to increase availability of
married accommodation to personnel since lack of married
accommodation is a long-standing problem and is the root
cause of several other problems including stress.  Similarly
working environment is being improved through provision of
better amenities, improving the work place ambience, relaxed
and friendly work atmosphere, and better interpersonal
communications through increased interactions between airmen
right from their training stage through the ‘Buddy’ concept and
between officers and PBORs at stations.  Regular turnover of
personnel is ensured at isolated places.  Schooling, sports and
recreational facilities at stations are also being improved in a
phased manner.
(b) Formation of ‘Samvedna’ and ‘Sadbhavana’ Cells.   In 2006,
‘Samvedna’ cells were formed at all AF stations to ensure that
the family members/next of kin (NOK) of a deceased person
receive the Non Effective (NE) benefits expeditiously.  An NE
cell has also been formed at the Dte. Of Accts at Air HQ which
monitors and co-ordinates the progress of entitled NE benefits
for the NOK/family of the deceased individuals.  Similarly,
‘Sadbhavana’ cells have been created this year at all AF
stations to improve quality of life of air-warriors. These cells
provide administrative assistance to individuals arriving on
posting/those who leave the unit on posting out. This helps the
individuals in settling down in/clearance from the station.
(c) Use of trained mentors /employment of psychological
counsellors at stations .   A bout 525 trained mentors are
deployed at the stations for the purpose of counselling
individuals. In addition 48 psychological counsellors are also
engaged by the Commands.
(d) Thrust on physical fitness through AFFIT, sports and
games.   The Air Force fitness programme called AFFIT has
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

35
been established in more than 75 stations of AF.  Sports and
games are being given due thrust with increased participation
and interaction between officers and PBORs.
(e) Promotion of Yoga  Ground training instructors trained in Yoga
impart yoga training at the stations.  Training of more instructors
has been planned.  Yoga also forms an integral part of the
physical training syllabus at the training centers.
4.5 When enquired, whether Air Force also has a system like `Divisional
System’ prevalent in Indian Navy, the Ministry of Defence stated in their
written reply as under:-
“In Air Force, a facility is available for all Air Force Personnel to post
any suggestion/query complaint at the Chief of the Air Staff (CAS)
website on IAF intra-net which are considered at appropriate level and
feedback given for the query/suggestion/complaint expeditiously.  In
addition, separate Welfare meetings are being conducted at Station
level every quarter. Facility of open interviews by Air Officer
Commanding/Station Commander/COs with Warriors on any issue to
instil confidence and faith in the leadership and resolve the issues.”
4.6 On being asked about the system of redressal of grievances in put in
place in Indian Air Force, the Ministry stated in their written reply:-
“Section 26 of the Air Force Act, 1950, authorises an airman, who
deems himself wronged by his Commanding Officer or other superior
officer, to submit a representation to such officer’s superior officer, who
shall make as complete an investigation as possible.  The detailed
procedure for dealing with such a complaint has been prescribed at
para 621 of the Regulations for the Air Force, 1964.  Likewise, the
statutory provision for officers’ grievances is stipulated at para 622 of
the Regulations for Air Force.  Besides, the above, statutory right is
also available to a person tried by Court Martial at the pre and post
confirmation stage.”
Liberalized Leave Policy
4.7 When asked to state the details of the liberalized leave policy, the
Ministry stated in their written reply as under:-
“In the Air Force air warriors are entitled to 60 days annual leave and
30 days of causal leave in a year and no restriction is placed on them
from availing their entitlement of leave as per their leave plan.”
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

36
PART-II
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
Cases of suicides and fratricidal killings
There were as many as 635 cases of suicide including attempted
suicides and 67 cases of fratricidal killings in the three services of the
Armed Forces during the years 2003 to 2007.  These statistics also
indicate that Army was worst affected by this malady in terms of number
of cases of suicides and fratricide in each of the year during this period.
While expressing their grave concern over this alarming trend of
suicides and fratricidal killings in the Armed Forces during the recent
past, the Committee are in no doubt that this phenomenon is
attributable to increased stress environment leading to psychological
imbalance in the soldiers.  The Committee have been informed that
seven studies on issues related to stress management have been
conducted by Army since 2005 besides an internal study by Air Force on
suicides reported during the period 2002-2007 and an in-house study by
Navy on `Occupational stress in Naval personnel’.   The Ministry of
Defence have informed that the main causes for suicides among troops
identified on the basis of these studies are changing socio-economic
environment in the country and the domestic problems and there is
apparently no systemic failure as suicides attributable to work related
reasons are few.   While certain measures are also stated to have been
initiated in the recent past to manage stress in the Armed Forces, the
Committee are of the considered view that it is premature to ascertain
the efficacy of these measures at this stage. The Committee’s
examination of the subject and their interaction with the ex-servicemen,
experts and organisations having experience in this field has brought
out that this issue has not been perceived by the Ministry of Defence in
its entirety with a view to devising appropriate and timely strategies to
minimize the stress level of serving personnel of Armed Forces.  The
Committee have dealt with some of the important aspects related to the
subject in the succeeding paragraphs of this Report.
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

37
Stress Management in the Armed Forces
2. The Committee understand that the demands on the personnel of
Indian Armed Forces have been increasing over the years due to
changing operational commitments of diverse nature.  At the same time,
they are required to meet aspirations of their family members for a good
quality life on account of rapidly changing socio-economic conditions
in the society.  Undoubtedly, the inability of soldiers to solve their
family problems due to operational requirements and other constraints
within which they have to work and non-fulfillment of some of their
expectations in certain cases results in enhanced negative stress
leading to a variety of illnesses and behavioural problems including
suicide, fratricidal killing, early mortality or desertion from the Armed
Forces.  The Committee wish to point out that besides adversely
affecting the efficiency and performance of the defence personnel due
to impaired motivation, negative stress level also put additional burden
on the public exchequer in the form of man-days lost due to sickness,
cost of medical treatment and loss of trained officers and soldiers.  To
the utter dismay of the Committee, the Ministry of Defence have made
an attempt to downplay the magnitude of the problem by putting forth
the plea that “the overall psychiatric morbidity in the Armed Forces has
been less than the national figures”.  Equally specious is the plea
advanced by the Ministry of Defence that there is a rising trend of
psychiatric illnesses in our country over the last few decades and
Armed Force personnel being drawn from the same society are not
immune to these influences.  The Committee consider it lamentable that
the Ministry of Defence, rather than making an earnest attempt to
identify the precise reasons for untimely loss of such a large number of
precious lives of trained soldiers, have taken recourse to drawing
satisfaction from the facts that such cases are on the rise in the society
and the psychiatric morbidity in Armed Forces is less than the national
averages.  In the opinion of the Committee, this attitude of the Ministry
not only displays insensitivity towards the problem but also highlights
their inaction to improve conditions in Armed Forces where soldiers are
trained enough to fight under adverse situations.  The Committee trust
that the Ministry of Defence would now make a realistic assessment of
the problems plaguing the Armed Forces personnel with a view to
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

38
identifying the areas needing urgent reforms in the right direction.  The
Committee also suggest that the organisations from both public and
private sector having expertise in the area, should be associated with
such studies so that the causes of the increasing stress are identified at
its root in an independent manner and appropriate solutions found to
remedy the situation. The Committee would like to be apprised of the
precise action taken in this regard.
Studies conducted on stress related incidents
3. There were as many as nine studies undertaken in the Armed
Forces on suicides and matters relating to stress management. Though
these studies reportedly identified specific causative factors for stress
among various ranks deployed in different areas in the three services,
the Committee received an impression that no effective follow up action
has been taken on crucial areas such as sensitizing the officers,
improving basic facilities in the field, etc.  The Committee await the
outcome of specific action taken in pursuance of each of these studies.
Study Reports on Stress Management
4. The Committee regret to point out that one copy each of the only
two Reports relating to suicide and fratricide and on stress management
was made available marked as `secret’.  The Committee wonder why
reports of these studies should not be made public which do not appear
to contain any thing sensitive or strategic. Such studies can yield
desired results only if the reports are made public and there is
concerted action by all concerned.  The Committee, therefore, suggest
that the veil of secrecy should be removed from such studies and the
reports placed in public domain.
Suicide in Peace Stations
5. Though a majority of suicide cases in Army are stated to be
taking place at peace stations, the Committee find it rather surprising
that  no specific study on this aspect has been undertaken to identify
the exact causes for such a phenomenon.  The Committee feel that it is
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

39
an important area requiring urgent attention of the Ministry of Defence.
They, therefore, desire that immediate steps should be taken to make
objective studies on the cases of suicide reported from peace stations
with a view to identifying the main reasons for prevalence of
psychological problems in peace stations and appropriate follow-up
action taken to minimize such incidents.
Causes of Stress
6. The studies on stress management in the Armed Forces have
identified certain causative factors for stress which are broadly
classifiable under the three categories namely, socio-economic
including familial reasons, environmental/organizational and
medical/psychological causes. The Committee are in no doubt that after
having identified these specific causative factors for stress among the
Armed Forces personnel, the Ministry of Defence have not
contemplated multipronged strategies to address the problems of
negative stress behaviour of different ranks in the Armed Forces.
Though certain remedial measures have recently been initiated at the
Service Headquarter level and by the Ministry to manage stress among
the Defence personnel, the Committee feel convinced that much is still
left to be desired to address the organizational issues like better
manpower management, provisions for better amenities and conducive
climate to counter negative thinking among the Defence service
personnel at the lower ranks so as to minimize the undesirable
consequences of stress in the Armed Forces in the long run. They trust
that the Ministry of Defence would atleast now realise the gravity of the
problem in all its ramifications and take expeditious steps to bring
about perceptible improvement in the prevailing situation.
Familial Reasons for Stress
7. The Committee have been given to understand that familial
reasons are one of the predominating causative factors of stress among
the Armed Forces personnel.  These reasons include aspects like
separation from family, familial discords and disputes, concern
regarding children’s education and their upbringing and welfare
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

40
measures for the family.  The Committee are of the firm view that while
Armed Forces personnel have to strike a balance between their personal
and military life within the constraints inherent in the military service,
the Government also cannot fully absolve themselves of their
responsibilities towards personnel engaged in meeting diverse
challenges before the nation.  Undoubtedly, there is an imperative
necessity to address the legitimate needs of Defence personnel and the
Committee would strongly recommend the following measures:
(i) The Government should make earnest efforts to provide family
accommodation at the station of choice of the Armed Forces
personnel deployed on operational duties in counter insurgency
and border areas. Married Accommodation Project should be
completed expeditiously and different categories of residential
accommodation lying vacant at various military stations should
be utilised for the purpose.
(ii) Efforts should also be directed towards imparting skill
development and extending help to the   children of Armed Forces
personnel in getting admission in schools and institutions of
higher professional and technical studies.  Opening of institutions
for imparting higher technical education in different parts of the
country primarily for the wards of the Armed Forces personnel be
considered .
(iii)The welfare organisations for Defence services personnel and
their family members should be financially strengthened to enable
them to extend necessary help to the distressed families of
different ranks and also to act as psychological counsellors for
soldiers and their family members.
Responsiveness of Civil Administration
8. With a view to mitigating the hardships on account of family
problems due to criminal or civil disputes of serving Armed Forces
personnel deployed on hard duties at far flung places, the Defence
Minister sent a communication in December, 2006 to Chief Ministers of
all the States requesting them to instruct the district authorities and the
State Government officials to be more pro-active in giving prompt
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

41
response to the grievances and problems of the defence personnel and
their families.  The Committee are however, distressed to find that this
communication has not yielded desired results and such matters are
still treated in routine manner with no special priority being given to
such cases.  The Committee are of view that such an apathetic attitude
to the part of the district authorities adversely affects the morale of the
entire force to the detriment of national interests. They, therefore,
recommend that the Ministry of Defence should once again take up this
matter with all the State/Union Territory Governments at appropriate
level emphasizing the need for according priority and considerate
approach in all such cases. Specific steps should be taken to pay
greater attention at Tehsil/Block level in those areas from where greater
number of personnel traditionally join and serve the Armed Forces.
There should be statutory provisions mandating the district authorities
to address the problems and grievances of serving Defence personnel
within a stipulated time frame.  The Committee also desire the Ministry
of Defence to make institutionalised arrangements in close coordination
with the State Governments/officials and put in place a computerised
and  centralized mechanism to monitor the progress of each complaint
received from defence service personnel or their family members.
Inter Personal relationship
9. Another major reason for stress in the Armed Forces relates to
conflict in interpersonal relationships. The Committee have been
informed that the Armed Forces Community has a culture of its own,
where sense of belonging and responsibility are cultivated in an
individual to display camaraderie. Admittedly, the existing mechanism in
this regard needs to be strengthened because of fresh environment of
stress and strain. Needless to say that the JCOs and the officers posted
at the unit/platoon level have to be sensitised towards the needs of the
soldiers both as an individual and group.  This assumes greater
importance as the soldiers now being inducted in the Armed Forces
possess a higher educational level. Steps should also be taken to impart
necessary training to all these ranks with a view to making them a
source of guidance and assistance for the soldiers.  The Committee also
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

42
feel that appropriate training is also needed to change the mindset of
senior officers in the Armed Forces. They trust that appropriate
improvements in the existing system will be made without any further
loss of time to ensure better interaction between Armed Forces
personnel of different ranks. The soldiers should be encouraged to
share their problems with their seniors and emphasis must be laid on
redressal of their genuine grievances.
Abolition of practice of domestic `Sahayaks ¶
10. The Committee understand that the practice of utilizing services
of Jawans as Sahayaks is prevalent in the Army in one form or other
since British days. It is learnt that numerous Jawans are engaged at the
residence of some of the senior officers for domestic work and to serve
the family members of officers. A representative of the Army
categorically deposed before the Committee that the Jawans are not
technically supposed to attend to the household duties at the residence
of the officers and the personnel attending to such duties do so due to
their reverence.   The Committee hardly need to stress that Jawans are
recruited for serving the nation and not to serve the family members of
officers in  household work which is demeaning and humiliating.   The
Committee take a very serious view of the shameful practice which
should have no place in the independent India.  The Committee expect
the Ministry of Defence to issue instructions to stop forthwith the
practice, which lowers the self-esteem of Jawan.  Any officer found to be
violating the instruction in this regard be dealt with severely. Similar
action needs to be taken by the Ministry of Home Affairs in respect of
para military organisations and other organisations.
Basic Amenities
11. The Committee need hardly emphasise that the basic facilities for
the soldiers particularly those deployed at high altitudes or in border
areas need to be met in a most efficient manner.  Delays in supply of
consumable and non-consumable items should be avoided and they
should not be deprived of better quality of weather appropriate clothing
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

43
and good quality of ration. The requirement of such essential items
must be reviewed at regular intervals and the supply of items as per
entitled scales must be monitored at appropriate level. The Committee
would like to be apprised of the specific measures taken in this regard.
Shortage of Manpower
12. Presently there is a shortage of approximately 12,000 officers in
the Army and this shortage is adversely affecting the functioning at the
unit level.    The Committee have been informed during evidence that
this shortage of officers is leading to greater stress among junior and
middle level officers owing to the need to perform multiple functions
and inadequate time and opportunity for intimate administration of
personnel under command.  Considering the fact that such shortages of
officers coupled with stressful conditions in the most inhospitable
conditions particularly in counter insurgency operational areas impinge
upon performance of both officers and the soldiers, the Committee are
of strong view that it is high time that concrete and result oriented steps
are taken to reduce the stress at the battalion/unit level.  While the issue
of shortage of officers continues to remain an area of concern and the
same is being dealt with by the Committee in a separate Report, they
would like that in the meantime, the Ministry of Defence should take up
this matter with the Army Headquarters impressing upon them the need
for keeping the shortages of personnel at unit level to the barest
minimum particularly in the counter insurgency and border areas so that
the situation does not go worse.
13. The Committee also suggest that the duration of deployment of
defence service personnel in the counter-insurgency or high altitude
operational areas should be reviewed and rationalised so as to contain
their stress levels.   The Committee would like to be apprised of the
precise steps taken in this regard.
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

44
Leave Policy
14. Yet another area causing stress to the personnel of Armed Forces
relates to the denial of leave even in times of extreme need ostensibly
on the grounds of exigencies of services, operational requirements and
shortage of manpower in the field units. Although liberalised leave
policy has been put in place permitting the officers to spilt their annual
leave in three parts with no restrictions on splitting of annual leave by
PBORs, the Committee are convinced that the ground realities present a
different picture. This is corroborated by the deposition of the
representative of the Army that there are certain issues involved in the
matters connected with grant of leave to a person deployed in a
battalion or a unit in the sense that certain tasks have to be performed
and other personnel may also at the same time go out on training
courses. The Committee are also constrained to observe that while no
restrictions exist for PBORs to split their annual leave, no
commensurate facility of free warrants for the travel has been provided
for in the liberalized rules except grant of an additional rail warrant to all
ranks serving in field or counter insurgency operational areas. The
Committee, therefore, recommend that the entire issue of extending
benefits to the service personnel under liberalised leave policy should
be examined by the Ministry of  Defence with an open mind so that the
benefits of this policy may  percolate down at least to  the lower ranks in
the Armed Forces.
Reluctance in seeking Psychiatrist ¶s help
15. The Committee’s examination has also revealed that personnel in
the Armed forces are prompted to hide their mental problems as any
referral to a psychiatrist for treatment is considered a `stigma’ which
may adversely affect the career of a service personnel.  Since such
cases have been identified as a causative factor for stress, the
Committee feel that the system of referring a person specifically for
psychiatrist’s evaluation by the commanding officer should be suitably
modified by ensuring that Defence personnel of all ranks undergo such
evaluation during medical examination in batches at fixed intervals of
time.  While the modified system would take care of the distressed
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

45
person for appropriate and timely treatment, he would at the same time
remain saved from being branded as an outcaste in the eyes of his
colleagues.
Mental Health Professionals
16. The Committee are concerned to note that the authorised strength
of mental health professionals is much lower than the felt need
particularly in view of the increasing instances of stress in the Armed
Forces. The Committee need hardly point out that this difficulty is not
such which cannot be surmounted.    The Committee hope that the
Ministry will pay serious attention to this aspect and initiate appropriate
administrative action to remove bottlenecks being experienced in this
regard.
Establishment of Armed Forces Tribunal
17. The Committee understand that one of the reasons for increasing
stress in Armed Forces relates to non-availability of quicker appellate
mechanism to deal with the service related problems and disputes, etc.
They are, however, distressed to note that despite notification of Armed
Forces Tribunal Act, 2007 on 28 th December, 2007, the Ministry of
Defence have not been able to establish the Tribunal even after  lapse of
a period of over nine months.   Keeping in view the fact that a large
number of cases relating to service matters of the personnel from
Armed Forces are pending for a long time in various courts of law, the
Committee are of firm belief that the Armed Forces Tribunal is required
to be set up expeditiously to provide quicker relief to the aggrieved
Defence service personnel. They, therefore, desire that the Ministry of
Defence should make earnest efforts for establishing the Tribunal at the
earliest.
New Delhi;      BALASAHEB VIKHE PATIL,
13 October, 2008      Chairman,
21 Asvina, 1930 (Saka)   Standing Committee on Defence.
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

46
APPENDICES
MINUTES OF THE NINTH  SITTING OF THE STANDING
COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE (2007-2008)
 The Committee sat on Tuesday, the 4 th December 2007 from 1500 to
1630 hrs. in Committee Room ‘C’, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Shri Balasaheb Vikhe Patil – Chairman
MEMBERS
LOK SABHA
2. Shri Ramesh C. Jigajinagi
3. Dr. K.S. Manoj
4. Shri Adhalrao Shivaji Patil
5. Dr. H.T. Sangliana
6. Shri Arjun Charan Sethi
7. Prof. Mahadeorao Shiwankar
8. Shri Manavendra Singh
RAJYA SABHA
9.    Smt. N.P. Durga
10.   Shri K.B. Shanappa
SECRETARIAT
1. Shri S.K. Sharma - Additional Secretary
2. Shri A. Louis Martin - Joint Secretary
3. Shri Gopal Singh - Director
4. Shri D.R. Shekhar - Deputy Secretary-II
5. Smt. J.M.Sinha  - Under Secretary
MINISTRY OF DEFENCE
1. Smt. Neelam Nath  -    Addl. Secretary(N)
2. Smt. Neelkamal Narang -    FA (DS)
3. Shri Ajay Tirkey  -   JS(E)
4.       Shri G. Elangovan  -   CCR&D (R&M), DRDO
5.        Lt Gen Y. Singh                 -   DGAFMS Sr. Col Comdt., AF Hq.
 6. Lt. Gen. I. J. Koshy  -   DG, C&W & Offg AG, AF Hq.
 7. Air Marshall J.N. Burma -   AOA, AF Hq.
8.        Surg V. Adml. Sujan Singh-   DGMS(Navy) , AF Hq.
9.       Maj. Gen Nilendra Kumar -  JAG(Army), AF Hq.
10.       Maj Gen S. R. Mehta -  Sr. Consultant (Med), AF Hq.
11.       Rear Adml Anil Chopra -  ACNS ((P&P), AF Hq.
12.       Cmde M. Phadke  -  JAG (Navy), AF Hq.
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

47
2. At the outset, the Chairman drew the attention of the representatives of
the Ministry of Defence to the Direction 58 of the Directions by the Speaker,
Lok Sabha regarding maintaining confidentiality of the deliberations of the
sitting.  Due to paucity of time, Hon’ble Chairman desired to have briefing on
the subject  ‘Stress Management in Armed Forces (Civil and Defence
Personnel)’ only and the briefing on the subject ‘Married Accommodation
Project’ has been postponed to a later date.  Thereafter, the representatives
of the Ministry briefed the Committee on the subject ‘Stress Management in
Armed Forces (Civil and Defence Personnel)’.
3. The Committee sought clarification on the issues viz. existing modality
for engagement of psychological counsellors to manage the stress, the
studies conducted by the Ministry of Defence to examine the causes of
suicides among the troops and officers, the newly introduced liberalized leave
policy, provision for recreational and sport activities, high altitude allowance
for the armed forces and proposal to provide flight facility to the troops located
at high altitude and North Eastern Region and other difficult area.  The
Committee also emphasised the need for conducting specific research to
identify the causes of suicides among the troops and officers.
4. The representatives of the Ministry of Defence then clarified the issues.
As regards the points on which the representatives could not readily respond,
the Committee desired the Ministry to furnish written information at the
earliest.
5. A copy of verbatim record of the proceedings has been kept.
The Committee then adjourned.
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

48
MINUTES OF THE THIRTEETH OF THE STANDING
COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE (2007-2008)
 The Committee sat on Monday, the 19 th May 2008 from 1100 to 1250
hrs. in Room No. `074’, Parliament Library Building,  New Delhi.
PRESENT
Shri Balasaheb Vikhe Patil – Chairman
MEMBERS
LOK SABHA
2. Shri Vijay Bahuguna
3. Shri Ramesh C. Jigajinagi
4. Shri Santosh Gangwar
5. Shri Suresh Kalmadi
6. Dr. K.S. Manoj
7. Shri Raju Rana
8. Dr. H.T. Sangliana
9. Shri Arjun Charan Sethi
10. Shri Manavendra Singh
RAJYA SABHA
11. Shri Jai Parkash Aggarwal
12. Shri R.K. Dhawan
13. Shri A. Elavarasan
SECRETARIAT
1. Shri A. Louis Martin - Joint Secretary
2. Shri D. R. Shekhar - Deputy Secretary - II
WITNESSES
 1. Wing Cdr. (Dr.) U.C. Jha (Retd.)
 2. Lt. Col. Inderjit Singh (Retd.)
 3. Capt. U.R. Nikam (Retd.)
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

49
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed Wing Cdr. (Dr.) U.C. Jha (Retd.)
to the sitting of the Committee  and drew his attention to Direction 58 of
Directions by the Speaker, Lok Sabha. He then, requested him to express his
views on the subject, `Stress Management in Armed Forces (Civil and
Defence  Personnel)’.
3. Wing Cdr. (Dr.) U.C. Jha (Retd.) briefed the Committee on the above
subject and expressed his views on the issues relating to effect of stress,
need for human rights’ approach towards Armed Forces, having transparency
in writing CRs, prescribing time limit to finalize the complaint by Services HQs,
modernization of military justice system, liberalization of leave policy, creation
of just and favorable work condition, compensation for overtime, etc. He also
responded to the queries raised by the Members.
 Witness then withdrew.
4. The Committee then, requested Lt. Col. Inderjit Singh (Retd.) to brief
the Committee on the above mentioned subject. Lt. Col. Inderjit Singh (Retd.)
expressed concerned over acute shortage of officers at unit level, which
adversely affected Officer-man relationship in the Armed Forces. He also
highlighted the changes in socio-economic environment and its role in career
aspirations in the Defence Services. He stressed on improving quality of
officers and creating conducive environment in which Jawans could perform
their duties.  He also laid stress on strengthening Zila Sainik Board by
conferring them statutory power. He also answered to the questions raised by
the Members.
5. A copy of verbatim record of the proceedings has been kept.
The Committee then adjourned.
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

50
MINUTES OF THE THIRTY-THIRD OF THE STANDING
COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE (2007-2008)
 The Committee sat on Monday, the 9 th June, 2008 from 1500 to 1625
hrs. in Room No. `139’, Parliament House Annexe,  New Delhi.
PRESENT
Shri Balasaheb Vikhe Patil – Chairman
MEMBERS
LOK SABHA
1. Shri Santosh Gangwar
2. Shri Jigajinagi Ramesh Chandappa
3. Shri Suresh Kalmadi
4. Dr. K.S. Manoj
5. Shri Rajesh Verma
RAJYA SABHA
6. Shri Jai Parkash Aggarwal
7. Shri Abu Asim Azmi
8. Shri R.K. Dhawan
9. Shri K.B. Shanappa
10. Smt. Viplove Thakur
11. Shri M.V. Mysura Reddy
SECRETARIAT
1. Shri S.K. Sharma - Additional Secretary
2.   Shri Rajeev Sharma - Director
3.   Shri D.R. Shekhar -  Deputy Secretary – II
4. Smt. J.M.Sinha  - Under Secretary
REPRESENTATIVES OF THE MINISTRY OF DEFENCE
1.  Shri N.S. Sisodiya  -    D.G, IDSA
2.  Maj. Gen. P.K. Rath -    ADG, D&V Director
3.  Brig. D. Saldanha  -    Prof. &HOD Psychiatry, AFMC, Pune
4. Col. H.R.A. Prabhu  -    Sr. Adv. Psychiatry, BHDC
5. Surg. Capt. A.A. Pawar -    Sr. Adv. Psychiatry, INHS, Asvini
6. Wg. Cdr. P.L. Narayana -    Spec., Psychiatry, AFCME, New Delhi
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

51
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed Shri N.S. Sisodiya from IDSA
and other officials from the Armed Forces to the sitting of the Committee and
requested them to brief the Committee on the subject ‘Stress Management in
Armed Forces (Civil and Defence Personnel)’ and also drew their attention to
the Direction 58 of Directions by the Speaker, Lok Sabha.
3. Then the experts/officials from the Armed Forces briefed the
Committee on the issues relating to problems of the soldiers deployed in
inhospitable and hostile environment, their absence from home and family for
a very long period of time, stress among personnel serving in Navy and Air
Force due to specific difficulties, adverse effect of shortage of officers on the
relationship between officer and soldiers, etc.
4. The officials also expressed their views on the role of outside factors,
such as, change in value system of the society, increasing aspirations of
youth, prevalence of conspicuous consumption etc. in causing stress among
Armed Forces personnel.
5. The Committee also inquired about the actual implementation of the
measures initiated by the Ministry to address the issue of stress among
service personnel. They also stressed upon the need for undertaking case
studies to ascertain the actual reasons of the suicide committed by the service
personnel.
6. The officials also responded one-by-one to the queries raised by the
members. As regards the points on which they could not readily respond, the
Committee desired them to furnish written information at the earliest.
7. A copy of verbatim record of the proceedings has been kept.
The Committee then adjourned.
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

52
MINUTES OF THE THIRTY-FOURTH SITTING OF THE STANDING
COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE (2007-2008)
 The Committee sat on Monday, the 23 rd June 2008 from 1500 to 1615
hrs. in Committee Room ‘G-074’, Parliament Library Building, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Shri Balasaheb Vikhe Patil – Chairman
MEMBERS
LOK SABHA
2. Shri Vijay Bahuguna
3.   Shri Santosh Gangwar
4. Dr. K.S. Manoj
5. Shri Asaduddin Owaisi
6. Prof. Mahadeorao Shiwankar
7. Shri Manavendra Singh
RAJYA SABHA
8. Shri Jai Parkash Aggarwal
9. Shri Abu Asim Azmi
10. Shri A. Elavarasan
11. Shri M.V. Mysura Reddy
12. Shri K.B. Shanappa
SECRETARIAT
1. Shri A. Louis Martin   - Joint Secretary
2. Shri Rajeev Sharma   - Director
3. Shri D.R. Shekhar    - Deputy Secretary-I
MINISTRY OF DEFENCE
1. Shri P.K. Rastogi   - Spl. Secretary ( R)
2. Lt. Gen Thomas Mathew  - AG
3. Lt. Gen Yogendra Singh  - DGAFMS
4. Vice Adm D.K Dewan  - COP
5. Surg. Vice Adm V.S. Dixit   - DGMS (Navy)
6. Air Mshl S Mukerji   - AOP
7. Shri Ajay Tirkey   - JS (E)
8. Maj Gen P.K. Rath   - ADG (D&V)
9. Dr. M.K. Mandal   - Director DIPR
10. Brig A.K. Singh   - DDG (D&V)
11. Shri P.M. Sanyal   - Sr. Principal Director
       ( C i v i l i a n s )
12. Shri V. Rajagopalan   - Director (CP)
13. Shri S.C. Barmma   - Director (AG)
14. Col AK Sharma   - Dir. (HRC)
15. Col A.K. Verma   - Dir AFMS
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

53
2. At the outset, the Chairman drew the attention of the representatives of
the Ministry of Defence to the Direction 58 of the Directions by the Speaker,
Lok Sabha regarding maintaining confidentiality of the deliberations of the
sitting.  The Chairman then requested the representative of the Ministry to
give their views on the subject ‘Stress Management in Armed Forces (Civil
and Defence Personnel)’.
3. The representative of the Ministry then responded to the specific
queries of the Chairman and members of the Committee on the issues
relating to reasons for stress among Service personnel, trends of suicide
cases among Service personnel, the measures taken by the Ministry to
address the problems of stress among Armed Forces personnel, etc.
4. Members of the Committee, inquired about the actual implementation
of the measures taken by the Ministry to address the issue of stress among
service personnel. They also desired to know whether the Ministry had
received the feedback from the State Governments on the letter written by the
Defence Minister to the Chief Ministers of the State Governments about being
proactive towards the grievances and problems of the defence personnel and
their families. The Committee also requested Director, Defence Institute of
Psychological Research (DIPR) to furnish details of the study made by them
on the stress related issues in Northern and Western Commands.
5. The representatives of the Ministry responded one-by-one to the
queries raised by the members. As regards the points on which the
representatives could not readily respond, the Committee desired the Ministry
to furnish written information at the earliest.
7. A copy of verbatim record of the proceedings has been kept.
The Committee then adjourned.
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

54
MINUTES OF THE EIGHTH SITTING OF THE STANDING
COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE (2008- 09)
 The Committee sat on Monday, the 13th October 2008 from 1500 to
1530 hrs. in Committee Room `D’, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Shri Balasaheb Vikhe Patil  -      Chairman
MEMBERS
LOK SABHA
2. Shri Santosh Gangwar
3. Shri Jigajinagi Ramesh Chandappa
4. Dr. K.S. Manoj
5. Shri Shrinivas Patil
6. Shri Manavendra Singh
7. Shri Balashowry Vallabhaneni
RAJYA SABHA
8. Dr. Farooq Abdullah
9. Shri Jai Parkash Aggarwal
10. Shri Abu Asim Azmi
11. Shri R.K. Dhawan
12. Shri M.V. Mysura Reddy
13. Shri K.B. Shanappa
SECRETARIAT
1.  Shri Rajeev Sharma  - Director
2. Shri D. R. Shekhar  - Deputy Secretary
3. Smt. J.M. Sinha  - Under Secretary
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members to the sitting of the
Committee.  The Committee, thereafter, took up for consideration the draft
report on the subject `Stress Management in the Armed Forces’, and adopted
the same, without any modification.
3. The Committee then authorized the Chairman to finalise the report in
light of the observations made by the Ministry of Defence after factual
verification of the narrative portion of the draft Report and present the same to
the Parliament.
The Committee then adjourned.
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages

55
“All Parliamentary Publications including DRSC Reports are available
on sale at the Sales Counter, Reception, Parliament House (Tel.Nos.
23034726, 23034495, 23034496), Agents appointed by Lok Sabha
Secretariat and Publications Division, Ministry of information and
Broadcasting, CGO Complex, Lodhi Road, New Delhi (Tel. Nos.
24367260, 24365610) and their outlets. The said information is
available on website   ‘www.parliamentofindia.nic.in’.
The Souvenir items with logo of Parliament are also available at
Sales Counter, Reception, Parliament House, New Delhi.  The
Souvenir items with Parliament Museum logo are available for sale at
Souvenir Shop (Tel. No. 23035323), Parliament Museum, Parliament
Library Building, New Delhi.  List of these items are available on the
website mentioned above.”
Documents
PDFComplete
Click Here & Upgrade
Expanded Features
Unlimited Pages