NINTH REPORT
STANDING COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE
(2005-06)
(FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA)
MINISTRY OF DEFENCE
DEFENCE PUBLIC SECTOR UNDERTAKINGS
Presented to Lok Sabha on 20.3.2006
Laid  in  Rajya Sabha  on 20.3.2006
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
March, 2006/Phalguna, 1927 (Saka)

C.O.D. No. 73
Price : Rs. 102.00
© 2006 BY LOK S ABHA S ECRETARIAT
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of
Business in Lok Sabha (Eleventh Edition) and Printed by Jainco Art India,
New Delhi-110 005.

CONTENTS
PAGES
COMPOSITION OF THE C OMMITTEE .............................................................. (iii)
PREFACE ........................................................................................................ (v)
CHAPTER I Introduction ................................................................... 1
CHAPTER II Hindustan Aeronautics Limited ............................... 6
CHAPTER III Bharat Electronics Limited ........................................ 17
CHAPTER IV Bharat Earth Movers Limited................................... 27
CHAPTER V Bharat Dynamics Limited .......................................... 32
CHAPTER VI Mishra Dhatu Nigam Limited ................................. 37
CHAPTER VII Goa Shipyards Limited .............................................. 42
CHAPTER VIII Gar den Reach Shipbuilders and Engineers
Limited ........................................................................... 51
CHAPTER IX Mazagon Dock Limited ............................................. 62
CHAPTER X Private Sector Participation in Defence
Productions .................................................................... 75
APPENDICES
Minutes of the Sitting of the Committee held
on 24.05.05, 02.06.05, 04.07.05, 14.07.05, 20.12.05,
08.02.06, 10.02.06 and 16.02.06 ................................. 77
(i)

COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE
ON DEFENCE (2005-06)
Shri Balasaheb Vikhe Patil— Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Churchill Alemao
3. Shri Iliyas Azmi
4. Shri A.V . Bellarmin
***5. Shri Suresh Chandel
6. Shri Thupstan Chhewang
7. Smt. Sangeeta Kumari Singh Deo
8. Shri Milind Deora
**9. Smt. Priya Dutt
10. Shri Ramesh Jigajinagi
11. Shri Suresh Kalmadi
12. Dr. C. Krishnan
13. Shri S.D. Mandlik
14. Dr. K.S. Manoj
15. Shri Raghuraj Singh Shakya
16. Shri Mahadeorao Shivankar
17. Shri Ganesh Prasad Singh
18. Shri Manvendra Singh
19. Shri Balashowry Vallabhaneni
20. Ms. Ingrid Mcleod
21. Shri Dharmendra Yadav
(iii)
** Nominated  w.e.f. 9.12.2005.
*** Ceased to be a Member of the Committee w.e.f. 22.12.2005.

Rajya Sabha
22. Shri R.K. Anand
23. Dr. Farooq Abdullah
******24. Shri Jai Prakash Aggarwal
*25. Gen. Shankar Roy Chowdhury (Retd.)
26. Shri T.T.V . Dhinakaran
27. Smt. N.P . Durga
*****28. Shri Janardan Dwivedi
29. Shri Pramod Mahajan
30. Shri Mukhtar Abbas Naqvi
****31. Shri Anand Sharma
32. Shri Lalit Suri
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri John Joseph — Secretary
2. Shri S.K. Sharma — Additional Secretary
3. Shri R.C. Ahuja — Joint Secretary
4. Smt. Anita Jain — Deputy Secretary
5. Shri D.R. Shekhar — Under Secretary
6. Shri Rahul Singh — Senior Executive Assistant
(iv)
* Ceased to be a Member of the Committee w.e.f. 18.8.2005.
**** Ceased to be a Member of the Committee w.e.f. 29.1.2006.
***** Ceased to be a Member of the Committee w.e.f. 8.3.2006.
****** Nominated w.e.f. 8.3.2006.

PREFACE
I, the Chairman, Standing Committee on Defence (2005-06) having
been authorised by the Committee to submit the Report on their behalf,
present this Ninth Report on the subject ‘Defence Public Sector
Undertakings’.
2. The subject was selected for examination by the Standing
Committee on Defence (2004-05). As the examination of the subject
remained inconclusive, it was re-selected by the Standing Committee
on Defence for examination during the year 2005-06.
3. The Committee during the examination of the subject took oral
evidences of representatives of Ministry of Defence including the
Chairman and Managing Directors of 8 DPSUs viz. Hindustan
Aeronautics Limited, Bharat Earth Movers Limited, Bharat Electronics
Limited, Bharat Dynamics Limited, Mishra Dhatu Nigam Limited,
Mazagon Dock Limited, Goa Shipyard Limited and Garden Reach
Shipbuilders and Engineers Limited on 24.05.05, 02.06.05, 04.07.05 and
14.07.05. The Committee also heard views of representatives of
Confederation of Indian Industry on 04.07.05. The Committee also
undertook an on-the-spot study visit to some Defence Public Sector
Undertakings at Hyderabad, Bangalore, Mumbai, Goa and Nasik during
September-October 2005 for an in-depth analysis of the subject matter.
4. Based on the background note, written replies to the list of
points furnished by the Ministry of Defence on the subject, briefing/
oral evidence tendered by the representatives of the Ministry and the
DPSUs and CII, the draft report was finalized. The Committee adopted
the draft report at their sitting held on 16.02.2006.
5. The Committee in their report after detailed examination of
DPSUs have particularly emphasized on points namely financial
autonomy to DPSUs to raise resources from market, in house R&D
centers in DPSUs, clear cut export policy for defence products. The
Committee have to also stressed that DPSUs should focus only on
defence sector and slowly get out of non-defence production.
6. The Committee wish to express their thanks to the representatives
of the Ministry of Defence for appearing before the Committee for
evidence and for furnishing the valuable material and information in
(v)

a very short span of time which the Committee desired in connection
with the examination of the subject. The Committee are also thankful
to the representatives of Confederation of Indian Industry and
Chairmen and Managing Directors of Defence Public Sector
Undertakings for appearing before the Committee and submitting useful
information.
7. For facility of reference and convenience, the observations/
recommendations of the Committee have been printed in thick type in
the body of the Report.
   N
EW D ELHI; BALASAHEB VIKHE PATIL,
13 March, 2006 Chairman,
22 Phalguna, 1927 (Saka) Standing Committee on Defence.
(vi)

9
STANDING COMMITTEE
ON DEFENCE
(2005-06)
FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA
MINISTRY OF DEFENCE
DEFENCE PUBLIC SECTOR UNDERTAKINGS
NINTH REPORT
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
March, 2006/Phalguna, 1927 (Saka)

CHAPTER I
INTRODUCTION
1.1 India has a large, established and diverse defence industry
restricted mainly to public sector. The Department of Defence
Production (DDP) of the Ministry of Defence which oversees the
defence production units has a substantial infrastructure developed
over the years, consisting of 39 Ordnance Factories and 8 Defence
Public Sector Undertakings. It also draws upon supplies from the Indian
civil/private sector wherever feasible and forms the backbone of the
country’s defence production. Its main objectives are:
(a) Synergy amongst the Defence Production Units, DRDEs,
Services and Private Industry for mutual sharing of
infrastructure and technologies to harness the best out of
the existing capacities and also to shorten the time period
for the development of new products and induction thereof
in the Defence Forces.
(b) Modernisation of the existing infrastructure with the
objective of improving productivity and developing
versatility for diverse product profile.
(c) Redefine the role of Quality Assurance, Standardisation.
(d) Increased role of private enterprise in defence production.
(e) Initiatives for enhancing exports of products and services.
(f) Restructuring of Ordnance Factories and Defence PSUs so
as to respond faster to the emerging needs.
(g) Self-certification.
The following eight DPSUs under the Department of Defence
Production cater to the requirements of Defence forces:
(i) Hindustan Aeronautics Limited (HAL)
(ii) Bharat Electronics Limited (BEL)
(iii) Bharat Earth Movers Limited (BEML)
(iv) Mazagon Dock Limited (MDL)

2
(v) Goa Shipyard Limited (GSL)
(vi) Garden Reach Shipbuilders & Engineers Ltd. (GRSE)
(vii) Bharat Dynamics Limited (BDL)
(viii) Mishra Dhatu Nigam Limited (MIDHANI).
The capabilities of Defence Public Sector Undertakings include:
• Design of aerospace, maritime and land systems.
• CAD/CAM facilities for manufacture of high-technology
products.
• Modern project management tools—ERP systems.
• Quality circles: ISO certification obtained.
• Reliable maintenance, repair and overhaul, facilities.
• Facilities for manufacture of strategic materials.
• Large pool of skilled scientists, engineers and technicians.
1.2 The three public sector undertakings namely Mazagon Dock
Limited (MDL), Goa Shipyard Limited (GSL) and Garden Reach
Shipbuilders and Engineers Limited (GRSE) are engaged in shipbuilding
Warship construction by the shipyards is governed by the Indigenous
warship Building procedure which was promulgated on 18th March,
2004. As per procedure the selection of the yard for a major project is
made by Department of Defence Production keeping in mind the
capability of the yard for a particular project and available capacity. It
is attempted to maximize the synergy amongst the defence shipyards
and avoid competition amongst them. However, for minor vessels the
yards compete amongst themselves as well as with the private sector
depending on capacity available. The Ministry of Defence has stated
that is committed to building up indigenous warship building capability
and therefore has made efforts for optimum utilization of each ship
building DPSU by placing orders on the DPSU based on their capability,
facilities available, past experience of building, which include the size
and type of ship constructed by the shipyard.
1.3 According to the Ministry , consolidated value of production in
the year 2003-04 for all DPSUs was Rs. 10078.22 crore and provisional
figure for the year 2004-05 is Rs. 12185.56 crore. The turnover for
DPSUs in the year 2003-04 was Rs. 9892.73 crore and provisional figure
for turnover for the year 2004-05 is Rs. 11120.38 crore. The total sales

3
of Defence Public Sector Undertakings is on the rise from Rs. 7205
crore in 1998-99 to Rs. 11120 crore in 2004-05.
1.4 The Standing Committee on Defence, while examining the above
subject, visited some DPSUs namely, HAL, BDL, GSL, MDL and BEML
and held informal discussions with their other representatives in order
to make appraisal of the performance of the eight Defence Public
Sector Undertakings (DPSUs) of the Ministry of Defence and have
given certain suggestions in the form of recommendations to further
improve the working of the DPSUs. Keeping in view the increasing
capability and capacity of private sector, the Committee also heard the
views of representatives of Confederation of Indian Industry to find
out as to how they can more effectively participate and contribute in
defence production. Recommendations of the Committee on each DPSU
and private participation in Defence production are given in the
succeeding chapters/paragraphs.
1.5 The Committee note that the Ministry of Defence has eight
Public Sector Undertakings (DPSUs) which cater to the basic strategic
requirements of Defence Forces. The Committee also note that
defence production is a highly sophisticated sector, which requires
state-of-the-art technology. A major challenge before these DPSUs is
therefore to constantly upgrade their technology and products so
that their products may be of world standards and may successfully
compete in the international market.
1.6 To achieve the above objectives, DPSUs need sufficient
resources/funds to undertake modernization of their plants and make
investment in R&D, manpower training etc. Therefore, the Committee
are of the view that DPSUs should be given more financial autonomy
and allowed to raise resources through market-borrowing by way of
equity/bonds/loan from public. The Committee recommend that the
Government should permit DPSUs to utilize a certain percentage of
the money received from market borrowing for modernization
purposes. It will ensure accountability and also increase the resource
bases of the organizations. It will also make them self-sufficient
and reduce their dependency on government funds. The DPSUs
should also be given more autonomy in decision making and in
matters like entering into joint venture/co-development and co-
production agreements with foreign countries. The Committee further
desire that DPSUs should appoint a Committee of experts including
some outside experts also which may, from time to time, give well-
considered advice to improve their products and bring efficiency in
the work.

4
1.7 The Committee feel that in R&D matters DPSUs should not
depend only on DRDO/foreign technology. They are of the view
that in the fast changing technology regime, there is an imperative
need for in-house R&D centres in each of DPSUs so that they may
also themselves undertake technology upgradation. For this purpose,
a minimum percentage of the profit earned by the DPSUs should be
allowed to be utilized by them for their R&D centres. This will also
enable the DPSUs to avail benefit of the inbuilt provision in the
income tax law whereby they can seek admissible exemption in the
income tax for investments made in R&D. In this way DPSUs will
be able to spend more money on R&D, thereby taking the country
further on the path of self reliance in defence technology. The
Committee also feel that DPSUs should maintain effective
coordination among themselves in the R&D field to have optimum
results therefrom. The Committee desire that in all DRDO projects,
users and DPSUs should always be involved at the time of
conceptualisation of the project.
1.8 The Committee recommend that Government should formulate
a well planned export policy for defence products in consultation
with DPSUs and outside experts in the field. A strategy should be
evolved to give export orientation to the defence products and market
them effectively in the international market. In this connection, the
Committee also desire that, like in many countries, matters relating
to defence exports should be actively taken up with foreign countries
at Government level. The Committee also desire that Government
should appoint authorized agents to promote defence exports in
international market.
1.9 The Committee note that an offset clause has been introduced
in new Defence Procurement Policy-2005. Government should give
necessary freedom to the defence establishments so that they may
utilise this clause in the best possible and effective manner to ensure
maximum benefit for the country. Besides, for more effective
utilization of the offset clause, defence PSUs should be given
autonomy to enter into MOUs with other DPSUs, ordnance factories,
private sector and foreign countries.
1.10 The Committee emphasize that defence products
manufactured by DPSUs should be of top quality, at par with the
international standards. The Committee also desire that Government
should formulate a policy for all defence units including DPSUs to
allow them to move towards self certification of all their defence
products. It will increase the accountability/responsibility of DPSUs/

5
Ordnance Factories/Private Sector in maintaining the quality of the
products and will go a long way in establishing their creditability
and quality assurance with the defence services.
1.11 The Committee note that DPSUs, in addition to defence
equipment, are also making hi tech equipment for non-defence sector,
and thereby diluting their status and character as DPSUs. The
Committee, therefore, desire that DPSUs should slowly get rid of
the non-defence sector items and focus only on defence requirements.
The Committee further stress that only after meeting their prime
responsibility towards defence sector, the DPSUs may use their spare
capacity if any, for other sectors for generating additional revenue.
1.12 The Committee desire that the Government while granting
the status of Mini Ratna, should not follow the criteria of
Independent Directors on the Company Board, in the case of defence
establishment. The Committee are of the strong view that for this
strategic industry, Government should evolve different criteria for
granting the status of Mini Ratna.
1.13 The Committee note that there are three DPSUs namely
Mazagaon Dock Limited (MDL), Goa Shipyard Limited (GSL) and
Garden Reach Shipbuilders and Engineers Limited (GRSE) engaged
in shipbuilding. The Committee desire that those DPSUs which are
producing the same or similar kind of products or supplementary to
each other should be restructured/integrated in order to synergise
their resources. Such an integration/restructuring will enormously
help in modernisation of the existing facilities, besides resulting in
optimum utilisation of Human Resource and production capacity.
The Committee also desire that during the process of restructuring
of DPSUs, the interests of the labourers and workmen must be taken
in account by the Government.

6
CHAPTER II
HINDUSTAN AERONAUTICS LIMITED
2.1 Hindustan Aeronautics Limited was formed in October, 1964
by merger of Hindustan Aircraft Limited and Aeronautics India Limited.
The Company has 16 divisions located in six States. All the divisions
of HAL have ISO 9001-2000 accreditations and 12 divisions have also
obtained ISO 14001-1996 Environment Management System certification.
HAL is a MoU signing company and is declared as Mini Ratna
(Category I) Company.
2.2 Giving the product profile of HAL, the Ministry stated:—
“Since its inception, Hindustan Aeronautics Limited (HAL)) has
evolved into a large Aeronautics Complex. It has built up
comprehensive skills in Design, Manufacture and Overhaul of
Fighters, Trainers, Helicopters, Transport Aircraft, Engines, avionics
and System Equipment. Its product tract record consists of 11 types
of Aircraft from in-house R&D and 13 types by licence production
inclusive of 8 types of Aero Engines and over 1000 items of Aircraft
System Equipment (Avionics, Mechanical, Electrical). HAL has
produced 3344 aircraft, 3538 aero engines and overhauled 7960
aircraft & 26803 engines by 2003-04 besides related systems and
their life time support. The company has the requisite core
competence base with demonstrated potential to become a global
player”
2.3 As regards the customer base the Ministry informed that:—
“HAL’s major supplies/services are to IAF, Navy, Army, Coast
Guard and BSF. As a spin-off, Transport aircraft and Helicopters
have been supplied to Airlines as well as State Governments. The
company has also achieved a foothold in export to more than
20 countries, having demonstrated its quality and price
competitiveness. HAL also supports fully the Space Vehicle
programmes of ISRO. It has diversified into the fields of Industrial
& Marine Gas Turbine business and Real-time software business.”
2.4 In their examination of PSUs, the Committee visited HAL units
in Bangalore and Nasik and interacted with the CMD and other officials
of HAL. The Committee also visited various shops of HAL units.

7
Capacity Utilisation
The Committee enquired about the capacity utilisation in HAL,
the Ministry stated:—
“The manpower capacity utilisation in relation to the available
capacity is indicated below as percentage value:—
2002-03 2003-04 2004-05
Aircraft 87% 92% 97%
Engine 99% 98% 97%
Avionics/ 90% 93% 93%
Accessories
Total HAL 91% 94% 96%
It was further informed that HAL has a satisfactory order book
and is getting sufficient orders.
On a query of the Committee, the Ministry informed that
following 9 types of Aircrafts are presently under production at
HAL:
(1) Advanced Light Helicopter (Dhruv)
(2) TEJAS-LCA
(3) SU-30 MKI
(4) Jaguar Strike
(5) Dornier-228
(6) Advanced Jet Trainer (AJT-Hawk) facilities
Financial Performance
2.5 The Ministry has stated that in terms of financial performance,
the company has been achieving a steady growth in sales, value added,
profit, dividend paid and internal generation of resources. Details for
past 3 years are given as below:—
Particulars 2001-2002 2002-2003 2003-2004
MoU Actuals MoU Actuals MoU Actuals
Turnvoer/sales 2556.00 2774.81 2810.00 3120.42 3230.00 3799.78
Value Added 1620.05 1707.59 1750.88 1870.33 1760.28 2082.79
Profit 303.36 373.48 297.76 433.37 395.34 599.42
Dividend Paid 29.40 68.96* 45.94 87.98* 62.44 92.46*
Internal 395.50 474.21 374.84 537.67 507.34 756.31
Generation of
Resources

8
2.6 During the year 2003-04, the sales figure of the company stood
at Rs. 3799.78 crores and value of exports at Rs. 215.34 crores. The
company paid a dividend of Rs. 81.96 crores for the year 2003-04.
Perspective Plan
2.7 As regard perspective plan of HAL, the Ministry in a written
note to the Committee has interalia stated:—
“HAL has prepared a Perspective Plan (2003-2012) in coordination
with Service Headquarters. The plan incorporates the
Manufacturing, Repair & Overhaul and Design and Development
projects. The Plan covers the projected task, manpower plan, cost
reduction plan, research & development and indigenisation plans,
export plans, quality plans and financial projections. The projections
made in the Plan up to 2011-12 are derived from available firm
orders, Letter of Intents and anticipated projects based on
indications from Defence Services. The document has been prepared
to bring out the objectives, goals & strategies and document has
been prepared to bring out the objectives, goals & strategies and
also to provide guidelines and milestones for future Plans of the
Company, including resource needs in terms of manpower,
technology and finance.
The Perspective Plan of HAL is derived from its long term
mission of appropriate enlargement of its product range, expansion
into production of civil aircraft and system equipment business
and a new thrust on exports. The plan has also brought out the
actions needed to be taken in the context of the decisions already
taken, as well as decisions that are expected to be taken by the
Government.”
Current Status of Major Projects
2.8 When asked about the major projects being executed by HAL
on priority basis and whether they are on schedule, the Ministry has
furnished that the following projects are in schedule/revised schedule:—
(i) ALH (Dhruv) Development & Production
(ii) Manufacture of SU-30 MKI Aircraft
(iii) Jaguar Strike Aircraft (20 Nos)
(iv) MiG-27M Upgrade
(v) DORNIER (DO-228) for NA VY

9
(vi) HAWK-AJT
(vii) Light Combat Aircraft (LCA)-TEJAS
(viii) Intermediate Jet Trainer (IJT)
(ix) PTA (Lakshya)
Research and Development
2.9 On being asked about major R&D projects being undertaken
by HAL, the Ministry informed that Intermediate Jet Trainer, Advanced,
Light Helicopter, Jaguar Navwass Upgrade, MiG 27 M Upgrade, Light
Combat Helicopter (Planned), Advanced Jet Trainer (indigenous)
(Planned) and HPT-32 replacement (Planned) are the major R&D
projects.
On a specific question about the efforts being made to achieve
indigenisation of various products & technology by HAL, the Ministry
furnished the following:—
“The Company has achieved indigenous content in its sales
(through R&D in product and technology) to the extent of 70—75
per cent in manufactures products and to the extent of 80—85 per
cent in repair and overhaul services of major products. The process
of Indigenisation, will be a continuous effort and increased
involvement of private sector industry in low and medium
technology areas will be actively encouraged to enable HAL’s
expertise to be utilised in high-tech areas. The main thrust in
Indigenisation will be to increase in-house R&D and strategic
alliance.
A three year Indigenisation rolling plan for the period 2003-04
to 2005-06 has been formulated and is under implementation. In
terms of number of items a three year Indigenisation rolling plan
for the period 2003-04 to 2005-06 has been formulated and is under
implementation. In terms of number of items indigenised, the level
of Indigenisation is proposed to be increased to 82% as of March
2006.”
Intermediate Jet Trainer (IJT)
2.10 When asked by the Committee to give details of the
Intermediate Jet Trainer (IJT) being developed by HAL, the Ministry
stated as under:—
“Recognising that Kiran Trainers of IAF, utilised for Stage-II
training, would need to be progressively phased out due to expiry

10
of the structural life, HAL initiated the proposal for a new
Intermediate Jet Trainer, called HJT-36, with features of better
performance, higher manoeuvrability, lower operating cost, higher
armament carrying capability and with modern System & Avionics.
The Government of India accorded approval for the proposal in
July 1999 for the design & development of the IJT (HJT-36).
The development of IJT has been progressed and the aircraft
has been designed and two prototypes produced. The first flight
of the first prototype took place in March 2003 within 20 months
of start of metal cutting. Subsequently, the second prototype flew
in March 2004. Presently, Larzac-04H20 engine of M/s. Snecma,
France is fitted on the prototypes for the development phase of
this Trainer. Al-551 of Lyulka Saturn of Russia, has been selected
through international competition for the production phase of IJT,
which will result in performance improvements. The two prototypes
of IJT together have flown around 180 sorties as of end May 2005
towards flight development process. The results from the flight
tests carried out have been encouraging as the parameters from
the test reports are very close to estimated performance level.
Techno commercial proposals have also been forwarded to IAF for
manufacturing of 12 IJT Limited Series Production Aircraft.
Presently contract negotiations are under way in respect of the
above.”
2.11 When asked about the difficulties being faced by the DRDO/
HAL in indigenously developing the engine of HJT-36 and steps being
taken to overcome those difficulties. The Ministry of Defence has replied
as under:—
“The development of any aircraft is invariably undertaken with
proven engine and system items in order to minimise the
developmental risks. At a later stage, indigenisation of items is
taken up.”
In respect of status of indigenisation of LRUs, the Ministry has
stated that:—
“Indigenisation of avionics/LRUs was considered from the start of
the programme and the indigenisation was planned by ARDC,
Lucknow, Hyderabad, Korwa and other non-HAL agencies. 85
numbers are developed out of 173 for various system LRUs. Further
strengthening of design centres is planned by HAL to increase the
pace of indigenisation of avionics LRUs.”

11
2.12 In respect of indigenisation of HJT-36 engine, the Ministry
submitted the following:
• “In order to meet the requirement of IJT aircraft, LARZAC-
04H20 engine of Snecma, France was selected for the
prototypes. But this engine showed marginal reduction in
performance in few parameters considering an estimated
growth of 10% in weight of the aircraft and 5% increase in
drag. Hence it was decided to use higher thrust engine.
• After detailed study and assessment of commercial bids,
AL-551 engine of Russia was selected for development by
NPO “Saturn” and manufactured by JSC “UMPO” and for
License Production and Transfer of Technology to HAL.
• Design of AL-551 engine is based on the principles of design
of AL31FP engine. HAL Koraput Division is planning for
production of AL31FP engine for SU 30 aircraft. Hence the
production of AL551 engine for IJT is also planned at
Koraput so that facilities and infrastructures already available
can be utilised to some extent for the production of AL-551
engine.”
The Ministry further informed that 179 flights on the two Prototype
aircraft have been completed till date. Further tests for assessment of
lateral and longitudinal controls will continue.
PTA (LAKSHYA)
In regard to development of PTA (LAKSHYA) the Ministry stated:
“5 PTAs were produced during 2004-05 against an order of
27 Nos. for IAF, Navy and DRDO. Equipping is under progress
on 5 aircrafts. Phase 2 development of PTAE-7 engine to meet
9 KM altitude requirement is progressing. Fabrication of 2 flight
test engines incorporating modifications was completed in April
2004. Flight tests were carried out on these 2 engines at Balasore
in end April 05.”
Cheetah and Chetak Helicopters
2.13 The HAL are supplying Cheetah/Chetak Helicopter to Defence
Forces. On the question of Indigenous content in Cheetah/Chetak, the
Ministry of Defence has stated that indigenous content in Airframes of
Helicopters is 88% and in engine it is 72%. On the question of
replacement of Cheetah and Chetak Helicopters which are in service

12
for many years, the Ministry replied that no decision has yet been
taken on the issue.
Advanced Light Helicopter (ALH)
2.14 HAL has developed Advance Light Helicopter (DHRUV)
indigenously. Elaborating the features of ALH, the Ministry stated:
“Advanced Light Helicopter (ALH, named DHRUV), designed and
produced by HAL, is a 5.5 ton helicopter with multi-role, multi-
mission capabilities for use in a wide range of Military and Civil
applications. ALH has been designed to meet the most challenging
and stringent requirements of the Armed Forces and operators….
With a twin engine configuration ALH provides increased safety
and allows continued flight virtually throughout the flight envelope.
It is excellently suited for high speed cruise for rapid deployment
and to maximize the area of operations. It provides cruise capability
for low-speed loiter on station with an option for additional fuel
for increased range. It has a large fuel capacity for long range
operations, or increased loiter time on station.
ALH can fly 12 fully equipped troops (in normal seating
capacity or 14 passengers (in compact seating capacity) or up to
1500 Kgs, in addition to 2 pilots. Along with the rear clamshell
doors, the two sliding doors on the LH and RH side of the cabin
allow rapid emplaning, deplaning, rappelling and rope extractions
most efficiently. A rescue hoist is provided for search and rescue
missions.
ALH is designed for extremes of climatic conditions and it has
most outstanding hot weather and high altitude performance. Large
scale use of composite materials in the structure of the helicopter
ensures prolonged performance in coastal and marine environment.
It performs efficiently in temperatures ranging between-30 & + 50
degree Celsius.”
As regard the induction of Helicopters into IAF, the Ministry
has replied that Six Helicopters have been inducted into IAF and
further 7 Helicopters are under induction. Air Force is satisfied
with the performance.
2.15 When the Committee wanted to know the production
performance of ALH against the Target, the Ministry submitted that
out of 18 Aircrafts targeted, 15 could be advanced for one year
2004-05. Giving the reasons for shortfall, the Ministry stated that
production for the year was affected due to delay in supply of
470 mm diameter collector gear bearing filled in main Gear by (MGB)

13
by SMEA, France. These were available only in first week of February
2005.
Exports
2.16 On a specific question regarding status of export market of
HAL, the Ministry has stated that HAL has established a foothold in
export by competitive bidding in several areas, such as aero-structures
to Boeing (USA) & Aerospatiale (France). The spares and services for
a variety of military and civil aircraft, engine, equipment, spares and
devices. HAL has also been successful in terms of entering export
market in the area of Computer Aided Design (CAD) Modelling and
Services. Exports in terms of financial figures have grown from
Rs. 103.89 crores in 2002-03 to Rs. 214.34 crores in 2003-04.
As regard the areas where the Company plans to capitalize on its
export potential, the Ministry submitted as follows:
(i) Advanced Light Helicopter (Civil & Military).
(ii) Overhaul services for Military & Civil aircraft, engines &
equipment.
(iii) Supply of metallic and composite aero-structures and engine
components.
(iv) IT based services in the field of Design and Development.
(v) Maintenance facilities for Civil aircrafts/Helicopters.
(vi) Multirole Transport Aircraft.
The exports are targeted to reach Rs. 500 crore by 2011-2012. The
total sales of the company are targeted to reach around Rs. 15000
crore by 2011-2012.
2.17 The Ministry was asked about the exports performance of
HAL during the financial years 2002-03, 2003-04 and 2004-05, the
Ministry has replied as under:
“HAL’s exports for last three years have exceeded the MOU targets.
Details as given by the Ministry are given below:
Year MOU Target Exports Achievement
(Excellent) Rs. in Crores
Rs. in Crores
2002-03 71.0 103.89
2003-04 78.0 215.35
2004-05 149.0 149.04 (Provisional)”
As per perspective plan, exports are therefore to reach Rs. 500
crore by 2011-12.

14
Inclusion of Offset Clause
2.18 The Committee was informed that HAL is pursuing for
inclusion of offset clause in the draft aviation policy by Ministry of
Civil Aviation for early implementation which will help HAL to boost
export. In this connection the Ministry submitted:
“HAL has been in correspondence with Ministry for the
incorporation of direct Offset clauses while finalizing the Purchase
Agreements for military/civil aviation products. HAL with its
proven capabilities & facilities had offered its products & services
to leverage Offset obligations. Considering wide range of HAL’s
experience and with its various centres of excellence, major work
packages can be undertaken by HAL to supply against offset
obligations of foreign suppliers. This could result in substantial
increase in revenue, growth of technology and new business
opportunities. Also, HAL has been putting forth for consideration
that HAL may be considered to be involved in the negotiations/
discussions stage in order to obtain maximum advantages during
procurement of military/civil aviation products. Ministry of Civil
Aviation is likely to procure new fleet of aircraft for Indian Airlines
& Air India. MOD is actively discussing with all concerned
regarding incorporation of offset clauses and role of HAL in
management of offsets for enhanced exports.”
2.19 The Committee are happy to note that Hindustan Aeronautics
Limited (HAL) has evolved itself into a large Aeronautics complex
and in many areas, it has built up indigenous comprehensive skills
in design, manufacturing and overhaul of fighters, trainers,
helicopters, transport aircraft, engines, avionics and system
equipment. The Committee, however, observe that there are still some
areas which need to be addressed in right perspective in order to
have optimum utilisation and better exploitation of capability and
potentiality of the HAL such as increase in self reliance or
indigenisation of product and technology through more emphasis
on R&D and exploitation of global market through export.
2.20 The Committee further note that HAL’s exports, in
comparison to its total sales, are very small. During the year
2003-04, the company’s total sales were Rs. 3799.78 crores and the
exports were only Rs. 215.34 crores which is less than 6% of the
total sales. The Committee hold the view that HAL by virtue of its
vast capability and expertise should play a vital role in global market
which can be achieved by increased thrust on exports of their

15
products. The Committee therefore, desire the HAL to formulate a
well planned strategy in consultation with experts so as to give
export orientation to their products and market them effectively in
the global market. for giving wide publicity to their products,
Defence attaché posted in various countries should be actively
involved to play a positive role in this regard. The Committee would
like that a clear cut export policy be laid down to tap the vast
export potential note only for the HAL but also for all Defence
PSUs products.
2.21 The Committee are also given to understand that proposal
for incorporation of direct offset clause while finalising the purchase
agreement for military/civil aviation products is pending for clearance
with the Government. Keeping in view the fact that this offset clause
would result in increased revenue technology upgradation and
creation of new business opportunities, the Committee strongly
recommend that Government should accord its approval therefore
expeditiously.
2.22 Further the Committee, in view of the technological expertise
gained by the HAL, desire that it should invariably be involved at
the negotiations/discussions stage in order to obtain maximum
advantages during procurement of military/civil aviation products.
The Committee further recommend that technical expertise of not
only HAL but also of other Defence PSUs should be gainfully
utilised by associating them at negotiations/discussions stage while
finalising agreements for purchase of high tech equipments in their
field.
2.23 The Committee also note that in most of the cases,
indigenisation is between 70 to 85%. The Committee feel that the
remaining 15 to 20% are the critical components for which the country
is totally dependent on imports which can at any time be denied by
foreign countries. Thus, there is a need to spend more money on
R&D efforts so that country’s dependence on foreign sources can be
minimised.
2.24 The Committee is happy to learn that HAL has developed
ALH Dhruv, which is a well equipped advanced Helicopter with
capability to operate in extremities of temperatures suitable to Indian
conditions. However the Committee note that production target of
ALH Dhruv in 2004-05 could not be achieved due to delay in supply
of 470 mm diameter collector gear bearing by SNFA, France. The
Committee, therefore, recommend that HAL should try to develop

16
such items indigenously through Transfer of Technology or inhouse
R&D to avoid such delays. The Committee desire that besides DRDO,
private sector should also be involved in R&D/supply of the critical
components so that their expertise/capacity could be beneficially
utilised. Keeping in view the highly advanced technology and
multipurpose role of ALH (Dhruv) to meet the requirements of
modern era, the Committee desire that HAL should vigorously pursue
for export of ALH. The Committee also desire that HAL should
enter into strategic alliances/business cooperation for enhancing their
export in international market.
2.25 The Committee further note that HAL has taken up the
development of Intermediate Jet Engine called HJT-36. This project
was sanctioned in 1999 and as of now, two prototypes have been
developed and trials are going on with different engines. The
Committee desire that for development of IJT a time frame be fixed
and should be strictly adhered to so that cost escalation etc. could
be checked.
2.26 The Committee note that the engine for Intermediate Jet
Trainer IJT or HJT 36 aircraft is being imported by HAL in order to
minimise developmental risks. The Committee however desire, that
HAL should strive for an indigenous engine for this aircraft to make
the country self reliant in production of Intermediate Jet Trainer.
The Committee also desire that regular supply of engines from MiS
Snecma, France and LPO Sateern, Russia should be ensured to avoid
future developmental and production difficulties.
2.27 The Committee strongly feel that HAL should now strive to
develop Advanced Jet Trainer indigenously. In this connection, the
Committee desire that concerted efforts of DRDO/HAL and other
related agencies be made to translate it into reality.

17
CHAPTER III
BHARAT ELECTRONICS LIMITED
3.1 Bharat Electronics Limited (BEL) was established at Bangalore
by the Government of India under the Ministry of Defence in the year
1954. Initially, with the technical collaboration from M/s. CSF, France,
BEL manufactured Transceivers, used by the Indian Army for radio
communication. Since then, to cater to the growing needs of the Defence
Services in the area of Electronics, the company has progressed to
manufacture high-tech products like Radars, Sonars, Communication
equipment, Electronic Warfare equipment, Opto electronics, Tank
Electronics, Components etc. BEL pioneered the growth of the Electronic
‘Components’ industry in the country by setting up the manufacture
of Transmitting Tubes, Microwave Tubes, X-Ray tubes, Vacuum
Interrupters, Semiconductor Devices, Integrated Circuits, Hybrid Micro
Circuits, Liquid Crystal Displays, Solar Cells & Systems etc.
3.2 BEL has also played a significant role in the Civilian
‘Professional Electronics’ sector of the country particularly for the
Ministry of Information and Broadcasting by supplying bulk of its
infrastructure requirements for Radio and TV Broadcasting, like Studio
Equipment. BEL contributed in the modernisation of the Airports
through supply of Primary/Secondary Surveillance Radars to Airports
Authority of India. Some of the recent additions to BEL’s product-mix
in the Civil Sector include Electronic Voting Machine (EVM). BEL has
supplied around 5 lakh EVMs to Election Commission and a record
number of 2.31 lakh EVMs were supplied during 2003-04, which
enabled Election Commission to conduct recent polls through use of
EVMs throughout the country.
The Company has one subsidiary (BEL Optronic Devices Limited)
and two Joint Venture Companies (GE-BE Limited and BEL-Multione
Limited).
Customer Profile
3.3 When the Committee desired to know the customer profile of
the BEL, the Ministry submitted:
“the customer profile of BEL can be broadly classified into two
groups viz., Defence & Non-Defence (Civil). While the Army, Navy

18
& Air Force and Defence Public Sector Undertakings constitute the
Defence Services, other customers are Paramilitary Forces like
Border Security Force, Assam Rifles, Central Industrial Security
Forces etc. also procure items from BEL.
Among the Non-Defence (Civil) customers, All India Radio &
Doordarshan and Bharat Sanchar Nigam Limited (BSNL) emerge
as major customers. Other civilian customers include Airports
Authority of India, Indian Space Research Organisation, Railways,
Election Commission of India etc. Manufacturers of consumer
electronic goods like Radio, TV & other products are also part of
the customer profile of BEL.
Around 80% of BEL’s turnover has been for the Defence Services
and during the year 2003-04, 77% of the revenue accrued from
supply to Defence Services.”
Infrastructure
3.4 On being asked about the availability of infrastructure facilities,
the BEL submitted:
“Over the years, BEL has set up ‘State-of-the-art’ manufacturing,
testing & quality assurance facilities in all its Units and has been
continuously updating/modernising them. Online computerisation
for Materials Management, back-up support for Standardisation,
Technical Information and Documentation, Computer Aided Design
and Manufacture have enabled BEL to be a modern professional
electronic company.”
3.5 As regards to comparative performance of the BEL during the
last five years, the Ministry furnished the following information:
Item 1999-2000 2000-01 2001-02 2002-03 2003-04
12 3 4 5 6
Value of Production 1543.29 1787.57 2029.98 2536.39 2807.83
Sales 1494.15 1715.33 1941.99 25.08.02 2898.59
Export 25.98 31.36 30.71 48.12 40.64
Profit Before Tax 166.43 219.91 284.73 386.16 469.02
Profit After Tax 107.93 155.21 199.68 260.61 316.10
Net Worth 491.25 626.88 777.12 986.62 1229.08

19
12 3 4 5 6
Earing per Share (Rs.) 13.49 19.40 24.96 32.58 39.51
MoU Ratings Excellent Excellent Excellent Excellent Excellent
Manpower 14807 14177 13572 13750 13038
Turnover per 10.09 12.10 14.31 18.24 21.46
employee (Rs. Lakhs)
Value Added per 4.67 5.54 6.42 7.20 9.49
employee (Rs. Lakhs)
Research & Development
3.6 On being asked about the Research & Development activities
being undertaken by BEL, the Ministry stated:
“BEL Established Research & Development departments from mid
1960s. Numerous collaboration agreements entered into by BEL
prior to this period enabled BEL to acquire enough capability to
assimilate the technologies taken from foreign manufacturers. BEL
has set up in-house Research & Development groups in all the
Units in the respective product area.”
3.7 On the question of taking the help from DRDO in R&D
activities to set up a state of art manufacturing, testing and quality
assurance facilities, the Ministry stated:
“BEL has established strong relationship with DRDO and its Labs.
BEL does concurrent product development and is involved with
DRDO Labs right from start of the project. DRDO is a very
important partner with whom BEL has developed large No. of
products indigenously. Around 15% of BEL’s turnover comes
through products developed by DRDO and its Labs and this will
continue to improve in the coming years as large number of
products are going to be inducted for Defence Services. BEL also
at times is seeking DRDO’s test facilities to test some of the
systems/sub-systems as required. BEL had taken help from NPOL
for transducer and other underwater measurement facilities, from
LRDE for EMI/EMC measurements, from IRDE for Laser
measurements, from DLRL/RCI, EW testing facilities etc. till
facilities were created at BEL during Productionisation.”
3.8 The Ministry has further stated that BEL is closely associated
with the following Labs of DRDO for development of new products,
which are as under:—
Centre for Artificial Intelligence & Robotics (CAIR)
Centre for Airborne Systems (CABS)

20
Combat Vehicle Research & Development Establishment (CVRDE)
Defence Electronics & Application Lab (DEAL)
Defence Electronics Research Lab (DLRL)
Defence Avionics Research Establishment (DARE)
Defence Research & Development Lab (DRDL)
Instrument Research & Development Establishment (IRDE)
Electronics & Radar Development Establishment (LRDE)
Microwave Tube Research & Development Centre (MTRDC)
Naval Physical & Oceanographic Lab (NPOL)
Naval Science & Technological Lab (NSTL)
Research Centre Imarat (RCI)
Research & Development Establishment (Engineers) (R&DE)
Scientific Analysis Group (SAG)
Vehicles Research & Development Establishment (VRDE)
3.9 The Committee wanted to now how far BEL has utilised/
inducted the achievement/developments of various defence research
units to reduce the import content in sophisticated electronic products
for radar aviation application, the Ministry informed the Committee
as under:—
“BEL has established a very good rapport with LRDE since early
days and BEL & LRDE have a history of cooperation with each
other in developing state-of-the-art indigenous Radar systems for
India’s defence requirements. BEL has also acquired relevant
technologies to indigenise radar subsystems like Antennae, IFF
systems, Microwave Tubes, Microwave Components etc. required
for various radar systems from various Labs like LRDE, DLRL,
CABS, MTRDC etc.”
3.10 The Ministry has also informed that in addition to the Research
& Development groups in all the Units, the company has set up two
Central Research Laboratories (CRL) at Bangalore & Ghaziabad for
undertaking research in futuristic areas with a view to identify and
realise latest technologies relevant to the company’s products. The
intention is to make Bharat Electronics a fountain head of electronics
technology thus improving its leadership position within the Indian
electronics industry and making it a major international electronics

21
company. R&D expenditure of BEL has risen from Rs. 77 crore from
1999-2000 to Rs. 130.61 crore in 2003-04.
3.11 The Committee enquired about the initiatives taken by BEL in
R&D front, the CMD, BEL stated:—
“For some normal development projects within the company, we
are able to invest an our own. But they are some strategic projects
which the country needs. We have to develop the technology within
the country. For that investment requirements are very high. But
they are economically viable. For that we have requested the
Government for funds.”
3.12 The CMD further informed that they have approached
Planning Commission for additional Rs. 1000 crore for R&D investment
about six months back but they have not yet taken any decision.
3.13 On the development and procurement of radars, during the
oral evidence, the Defence Secretary has stated:—
“…….our emphasis is on western model of radars. The coverage
of radars should be increased as well as their numbers. The
discussion in the Ministry are going on whether BEL can make
radars or we have to buy it from abroad, types or radars, their
cost factor is being taken into consideration.”
Diversification/Future Plans/New Products
3.14 On being asked by the Committee about the diversification/
future plans/new products, the BEL submitted:—
“Though supplies to Defence constitute a majority share in BEL’s
turnover, BEL realises that, to grow in the years to come, it has to
seek other potential areas and diversify into them. BEL has been
continuously introducing new or upgraded products, every year,
based on in-house/indigenous technology in its efforts to be in
the forefront of technology. Also the expertise gained by BEL due
to its operations in the defence sector has resulted in the emergence
of spin-off technologies. Some of the major areas of diversification
are listed below:—
(i) Telecommunication-Switching Equipment, Access Products,
Point-to-Multipoint Radio, Mobile Satcom
(ii) Information Technology-Data Encryption, SIMPUTERS

22
(iii) Modernisation of Airports-ASR/MSSR Radars, Display
Systems
(iv) Energy Saving Products-Solar Cells & Systems
(v) Satellite Communication-Doordarshan, BSNL, Corporate
Houses, Distance Education
(vi) Pr oducts for Ministry of Home Affairs-Secure Message
Terminals, Transreceivers, Night Vision Devices, SECTEL,
SECFAX etc.
(vii) Smart Cards/Access Systems
(viii) Compact Vacuum Interrupter Tubes
(ix) Telemedicine System
(x) V ehicle Tracking & Monitoring System
(xi) Set Top Box.”
Exports
3.15 When the Committee wanted to know the export status of
BEL in terms of value, the Ministry has stated:
“BEL met and exceeded the export targets set by MoD for both
the years.
Year Target                  Actual
US$M US$M Rs. Crore
2002-03 8.00 10.16 48.12
2003-04 8.80 9.23 40.64
The exports during 2002-03 included a one-time export of Skyshield
Air Defence Radar System to M/s. Oerlikon Contraves (OCAG,
Singapore) worth US $ 4.41 M. But for this aberration during
2002-03, the exports of the company have improved. The export
figure for the year 2004-05 is US $ 12.72 M (Provisional). The
accounts are under finalization.”
Indigenisation/Cost Reduction
3.16 In reply to a question of the Committee on indigenisation
efforts by BEL, the Ministry stated:—
“indigenisation is continuing activity in BEL to conserve foreign
exchange and also a measure of self-reliance. Raw Materials,

23
Components and Sub-assemblies are covered under this activity.
In addition, the company also encourages indigenous development
and manufacture of capital equipment through its own Projects &
Consultancy Group. BEL has been systematically indigenising the
components & sub-assemblies of ToT products in a phased manner,
in order to avoid over-dependence of the foreign sources on a
continuous basis, overcome possible sanction related issues and
ensure a base for providing product support to the customers
during the entire life of the product.”
When the Committee desire to know the ratio of success in
achieving indigenisation, the Ministry stated:
“the indigenisation effort in the company has been quite successful
and BEL could achieve substantial amount of cost reduction
through indigenisation. In some of the major projects, the current
level of indigenisation against start of the production is indicated
below:
            Indigenous Content
Equipment At the start of Current
Production Level
USFM Radar 28% 70%
Flycatcher Radar 15% 60%
Reporter Radar 5% 75%
UHF Radio Relay RL 432 5% 56%
Laser Range Finder LH-30 20% 70%
HHTI 5% 35%
PRC 6020 8% 66%
The company has identified Indigenisation as one of its Thrust
Areas. At the beginning of each year, every business unit identifies
potential areas for indigenisation, be it a project through in-house
R&D, through DRDO or through ToT route. Through the active
participation of Standards Department and others involved in the
project from the business units, actions are taken to indigenise the
identified items and evaluate them for the intended applications.
The company has a Standards Department, which, apart from
standardizing raw materials and components, is involved with task

24
of identifying indigenous sources for the above items. Constant
interaction takes place between the Standards Department and
identified vendors, who are supported by BEL in this task.”
As regards the cost-reduction the Committee were further informed:—
“Cost Reduction for Survival” has been the motto in the company
during the past five years. Specific thrust has been given to cost
reduction in all areas of activity. Task Forces have been formed in
all the Units to address areas like indigenisation, design change,
alternate sourcing, alternate components, negotiations, energy
savings etc. This has resulted in a significant cost reduction in all
the Units of BEL. Because of BEL’s continuous cost reduction efforts,
it could contain the cost escalations and could absorb the usual
escalations due to inflation, exchange rate variation etc., and offer
products without escalating its prices over the last supply prices
or with minor increase in prices. All the 9 Units of BEL have been
making profits during the last five years. Profit of the company
has been increasing steadily.”
3.17 On being asked by the Committee to state what strategy which
have been formulated by the Ministry to increase the clientele of BEL
(particularly in civil side) in order to earn more revenue, the Ministry
has replied as under:—
“BEL has been systematically addressing areas other than the
Defence customers and focusing on diversifying into certain areas
of civilian electronic products like SATCOM equipment, Airport
Surveillance Radars, Electronic V oting Machines, Solar Photovoltaic
Systems (Traffic Lights, Power Plants), Vacuum Interrupters, Set
Top Box, Multipurpose National Identity Card (MNIC) project,
Simputer, Smart Card Systems etc. BEL has executed SATCOM
network for Andhra Pradesh Government and is in the process of
executing the same for Police network in the entire country. BEL
has also set up a Systems Strategic Business Unit to explore and
address the civilian market. This process of diversification will be
continued.”
Modernisation
3.18 When the Committee asked about the steps taken by the
Ministry to modernize BEL to bring it to world standard company, the
Ministry replied as under:—
“BEL is involved in the manufacture of sophisticated electronic
equipment wherein the technologies of not only the products, but

25
also the processes change continuously . Specific groups in all the
Units continuously scan the technology changes that are taking
place and new machines introduced all over the world towards
identifying new machines to be introduced in the company. This
enables the company to maintain the manufacturing expertise at
par with international standards. Whenever a new product is
introduced based on in-house/indigenous design or collaboration,
new manufacturing line/plant & equipment are acquired driven
by the new product technology. To meet the stringent requirement
of new technology, “BEL has adopted various Quality Initiatives
like Six Sigma Methodology as a process for achieving break-
through solutions, has set up Quality Improvement Teams in
different work areas, benchmarking of processes and self-
certification of some of its products. The company has been
strategically adopting this philosophy for introducing modern
facilities and updating the technology status in all its Manufacturing
Units, like setting up of Advance Manufacturing Facilities, CNC
Facilities and Test Facilities. BEL has also taken up development
of new products based on internal R&D on a proactive basis to
meet the customer requirements.”
3.19 The Committee note that 80% of BEL production in 2004-05
was meant for defence forces. The Committee further note that BEL
has taken a number of steps to meet the demands of civilian
electronics sector also. The Committee feel, that while meeting the
demand of civilian sector, priority should always be given to the
defence sector.
3.20 The Committee are happy to note that BEL has established
strong relationship with DRDO and its labs in R&D activities and
is also doing concurrent product developments. The Committee, feel
that BEL, in partnership with DRDO, should intensify their R&D
programme so that more and more electronic systems used in defence
equipments can be indigenously manufactured. The Committee note
that BEL has put up proposal for Rs. 1000 crore grant to Planning
Commission for undertaking research in some strategic areas for
which the Commission has not given its decision even after a lapse
of six months. The Committee are of the view that such a project
which undertakes research to develop technology in strategic area,
involving very high expenditure, should be funded at Government
level with close and effective monitoring. They, therefore, desire the
Planning Commission to urgently take a decision on BEL proposal
and make available requisite funds so that work on the project can
start at an early date. The Committee further desire that BEL should

26
also invest in R&D from the profit earned by the company. In this
regard, BEL can also take advantage of inbuilt provision in income
tax laws wherein they can seek suitable exemption in the income
tax for the investments made in R&D. The Committee feel that BEL,
besides DRDO, should also coordinate with other defence public
sector undertakings in R&D field. It should invest money only on
those areas which have not been covered by any of the PSUs so as
to avoid duplication of efforts. The Committee also desire the
Ministry to explore the possibility of involving private sector in
various selective R&D projects and manufacturing of various
products.
3.21 The Committee also feel that quality upgradation and cost-
effectiveness of defence products are imperative to keep the Defence
PSUs, including BEL, vigilant, agile and responsive to the needs
and concern of Defence forces. The Committee therefore desire that
BEL should continuously introduce new or upgraded products every
year based on in-house/indigenous technology in its efforts to be in
the forefront of Technology. The Committee feel that to achieve the
goals of modernisation, concerted efforts need to be made with a
clear mandate. Production of items should be undertaken side by
side with quality upgradation and cost effectiveness so as to attract
global market also.

27
CHAPTER IV
BHARAT EARTH MOVERS LIMITED
4.1 Bharat Earth Movers Limited (BEML) came into being in May
1964 as a Public Sector Undertaking. It is under the administrative
control of Department of Defence Production, Ministry of Defence.
BEML commenced its operation from 1st January 1965 with the
production of Rail coaches and assembly of spare parts at its Bangalore
Unit. The Company has six manufacturing units established at
Bangalore, Kolar Gold Fields (KGF) and Mysore including a 10%
subsidiary steel foundry in Tarikere, Chikkmagalur District—all in the
State of Karnataka. BEML’s Bangalore complex has been established
basically as a manufacturing unit for rail coaches and related rail
products.
4.2 The Committee during study visit to Bangalore also held
informal discussion with the representatives of the BEML on certain
issues viz. capability to manufacture Railway coaches and wagons,
export possibility, financial performance and order book position etc.
BEML, during the study visit of the Committee, inter alia sought
support from the Committee in obtaining MINI-RATNA status.
Financial Performance and Order Book Status
4.3 When Committee asked about the financial performance and
order book status of BEML, the Ministry submitted:—
“The turnover of the Company started with Rs. 5.17 crores in 1965
and has crossed Rs. 1765 crores by end March 2004. The Order
Book as on 01-04-2004 is Rs. 2100 Crs. Company has been making
profits right from inception and posted a record PBT of
Rs. 50.17 Crs. in 2003-04. The company has set for itself a turnover
target of Rs. 1987 Crs. and is confident of achieving the same. The
company has on hand, an order book of Rs. 2005 crore as on
1st April 2005, which consists of Rs. 1276 crore for the current
year and the balance for supply in the subsequent years. BEML is
in Defence business for quite some time supplying critical and
essential ground support equipment and almost 40% of the turnover
of the company comes from Defence sector. However the constraint
in this business is the placement of continuous orders by the
Defence Services.”

28
4.4 As regards order book position, the Ministry further stated:—
“BEML’s Bangalore complex has been established basically as a
manufacturing unit for rail coaches and related rail products such
as DC/AC EMUs, rail coaches and other related special products
required by Indian Railways and was totally dependant on orders
from Indian Railways for feeding the dedicated facilities and
manpower of the unit apart from export of coaches. The established
facilities is for 400 coaches per annum. This capacity and
infrastructure at BEML has been taken on record by the Indian
Railways while obtaining cabinet approval for setting up for new
railway production units at Kapurthala. As against the rated
capacity for 400 coaches, except for the year 93-94, the capacity
has not been fully exploited due to lack of order from Railway
Board.”
Perspective Plan
4.5 When asked by the Committee whether the company has
prepared a long term perspective plan, a representative of the Ministry
replied:—
“The Perspective Plan of BEML has been prepared by BEML. A
growth rate (Cumulative Average Growth) of around 8% per year
has been envisaged in the plan keeping in view the prevailing
market conditions and areas of diversification possible in the
coming years.”
4.6 On the query of the Committee, the Ministry has stated that
BEML has prepared corporate plan taking the turnover to over
Rs. 5000 crore by 2013-14 which coincides with the Golden Jubilee
year of the Company. The details of the year-wise plan and the business
group-wise break-up are projected below:—
(Rs. in crore)
Business group 2005-06 2009-10 2014-15
Earthmoving eqpt. & spares 1050-1200 1050-1250 1100-1500
Defence 1050-1250 850-1250 850-1450
Railways 200-300 450-1000 750-1300
New Business 90-165 500-750 1000-1400
Grand Total 2390-2915 2850-4250 3700-5650

29
The company intends to augment the manufacturing facilities
to meet the above sales and volumes by suitable capital investments
in plant and machinery. In addition to this, outsourcing of certain
processes is also envisaged.”
4.7 When the Committee asked about the possible new avenues,
where company can grow and raise more revenue, the representative
of the Ministry stated:—
“BEML is also in railway business including metro and in mining
construction business and the said business, as an average gives
the company a business turnover of 50-60%. BEML’s endeavour is
to increase Defence portion of the business and hope the volume
continues to grow when the company’s turnover improves. In EM
segment to compete with MNCs and lowering of import tariffs
and easy import of second hand equipment will also have adverse
impact of company’s sales. In rail coaches, the pricing is based on
pricing fixed for Indian Railway production unit and no guarantees
of continuous order.
The Ministry has further stated that the company depends on
purchase preference policy of government and any possible removal
of the same in future will severely affect the sales turnover and
growth. Even now the purchase preference policy is not renewed
beyond 31.03.2005.”
Research & Development
4.8 On a specific question raised by the Committee regarding
activities being undertaken by the company on R&D, the representatives
of the Ministry replied:—
“The Company has a strong base of in-house design and
development setup. Company’s R&D division at KGF has designed,
developed and successfully productionised a number of new
products. The activities of R&D include technology absorption,
import substitution, cost reduction and product development for
domestic and export markets. Company has R&D units for Design
and Product Development at both Bangalore and Mysore
Complexes. The company has employed 134 engineers in R&D.”
4.9 On being further asked by the Committee about the reduction
in R&D expenditure, the Ministry has stated:—
“There has not been any reduction in R&D expenditure during the
last three years. There is no perspective plan for R&D. However,
we are making a perspective plan for R&D now.”

30
4.10 From the material furnished by Ministry it is seen that there
is an increase in import content of BEML. The Ministry in reply
stated:—
“The import content has shown an increase over the above period
on account of the sales turnover of the company which has
increased from Rs. 1317.09 crore in 1999-2000 to Rs. 1856.01 crore
in 2004-05 and subsequent to the year 1999-2000 BEML has
introduced various new products such as Tatra Trucks, ARVs, HRVs
etc., For these models imported content is high due to phased
indigenisation programme. During the said period, supply of
Defence products has increased from Rs. 304.86 crore. (1999-2000)
to Rs. 562.99 crore (2004-05) and therefore there has been a
corresponding increase in import content.
BEML’s products are sold and serviced through its large
marketing network. The Marketing Division, in addition to sales
and after-sale activities, provides support services like application
engineering, rehabilitation of equipment, training facilities to
customers’ operation and maintenance staff and equipment
operators etc.”
Exports
4.11 When the Committee asked about the exports performance of
BEML, the representatives of the Ministry replied:—
“BEML’s products are exported to almost 30 countries such as
Middle East, Syria, Tunisia, UK, South Africa, Jordan, Sri Lanka,
Bangladesh etc. Till date, BEML has exported goods and services
valued around Rs. 650 crores. BEML has secured repeat orders
from countries like Syria and Tunisia for its products in view of
their commendable performance. BEML is adopting new strategies
to create brand image and international presence for its products.
Company has set an ambitious export target of Rs. 137 crores for
the current year.”
4.12 The Committee note that BEML Bangalore was established
basically as a manufacturing unit for rail coaches and related rail
products. The Committee, however, observe that since 1998-99, the
installed capacity of BEML for 400 coaches has not been fully
exploited due to lack of orders from Indian Railways. The Committee
feel that Ministry of Defence should take up the matter with the
Ministry of Railways at the highest level so that sufficient orders
are placed on BEML and its capacity could be utilised fully. The

31
Committee would like to have details of efforts made by the Ministry
in this regard.
4.13 The Committee note that BEML also produces Metro Coaches
which are at par with imported coaches in terms of quality and
performance and has full order book position. The Committee,
however, note that a major bottleneck is being faced by BEML in
achieving the production quantities as per delivery schedule i.e. delay
in receipt of “free supply items” such as steel, wheel sets, etc. from
Indian Railways. The Committee, therefore, stress that in order to
supply full order of coaches to Metro, it is essential that the matter
may be taken up with the Ministry of Railways to redress the
bottleneck coming in the way of achieving the production quantities
as per delivery schedule.
4.14 The Committee note that BEML which is supplying critical
and essential ground support equipment to the Defence services, is
facing problem of placement of continuous orders from them. The
Committee, therefore, desire that the Ministry should ensure that
sufficient orders are made available to BEML in consonance with
the perspective plan of Defence services.
4.15 The Committee are concerned to note that there has been a
continuous rise in import content due to increase in the sales turnover
of the company. The Committee are of the view that there is an
imperative need to prepare a long term perspective plan to reduce
import content in a planned and phased manner and to make the
company self-reliant.
4.16 The Committee also note that the profitability of BEML
depends on purchase preference policy of government and the same
has not been renewed beyond 31 March 2005. Since BEML is
supplying critical ground support equipment to defence services,
Government should renew purchase preference policy in favour of
the company. The Committee also desire that BEML should also
strive to consolidate its strength to face competition so that it may
not have to depend on Government purchase preference policy in
future. The Committee are of the view the BEML should also strive
to be closely and exclusively associated with defence industry and
supply critical and essential ground support to the defence services.
In this connection, the Committee desire that Government should
examine this issue and try to separate non defence production of
the BEML. The Committee also desire that there should be a separate
organization for production of non defence products like rail coaches
and other rail products.

32
CHAPTER V
BHARAT DYNAMICS LIMITED
5.1 Bharat Dynamics Limited (BDL), a Government of India
Enterprise under the Ministry of Defence, was established in 1970.
BDL is one amongst a few industries in the world having the capability
to produce state of art guided weapon systems. BDL is the prime
production agency for all the missiles, developed by DRDO under
Integrated Guided Missiles Development Programme (IGMDP).
Major Activities of BDL
5.2 The Ministry of Defence has stated that BDL is manufacturing
Guided Missiles, Torpedoes and Decoys under licence and supply the
same to Armed Forces. It is supporting Defence Research &
Development Organisation (DRDO) in realising new missiles and
Torpedoes. BDL is the manufacture of some of the DRDO developed
missiles & Torpedoes. The company is developing the associated
equipment for missiles/torpedoes, refurbishment of missiles as required
by the Armed Forces Indigenisation of the sub-systems of the missiles
and manufacture missile components for export to OEMs abroad.
5.3 On being asked by the Committee whether BDL has or plan
to develop by using the experience of three decades in manufacture of
missiles, the Ministry has replied that BDL has not developed any
Missile Defence System and has no immediate plans for the same.
When Committee desired to know the new projects of BDL and
target of dated for their completion, the Ministry furnished details of
the status of new projects under progress, which are as under:
New Products
Status of new projects under progress:
(a) TAL (Advanced Light Torpedo) BDL supplied 5 no. of
D&E version. Users trial
completed successfully.
(b) Decoy C-303 : Contract awarded to BDL
for execution.

33
(c) Life Extension/Refurbishment: Proposals for R-60MK and
Shtrum under
consideration by MoD. The
proposal for refurbishment
for R-73 submitted to IAF.
(d) Milan-2T (ATGM) REP to OEM under issue.
(e) IGLA-S (MANPADS) RFP received by BDL.
(f) Takshak (HWT) Project being revised by
Naval Hqrs.
(g) LAHAT Demonstration trial from
Arjun Tank completed
successfully. BDL may be
nominated for production
of this under licence.
(h) ATGM for ALH & special forces Light Weight ATGMs are
being considered as a
weapon fit for ALH. The
selection process in
progress.
(i) K-15 Missile Missile under development
by DRDO. BDL is
involved in system
integration for missiles for
development and user
trials.
(j) Anti Torpedo Surface Launch Navy is considering
Decoy System procurement of Anti-
Torpedo Surface launched
Decoy system for its ships.
BDL has been nominated
for manufacture of Naval
Decoy System and may be
nominated for the
production of the surface
launched decoys.
(k) ASTRA The missile is under
development by DRDO
and subsequent to
completion of the user
trial, production may be
taken up by BDL.

34
Capacity Utilisation
5.4 On being enquired about the capacity utilization and Order
Book position of the company, the Ministry has provided the following
data in regard to manpower and machine utilisation and order book
position:
Details 2000-01 2001-02 2002-03 2003-04 2004-05
Manpower 73% 74% 74% 58% 47%
Machines 55% 54% 51% 38% 44%
Order Book Position
As on Orders on Hand
(Rs. in crores)
1st April 2001 1022.83
1st April 2002 1556.25
1st April 2003 2492.28
1st April 2004 2479.46
1st April 2005 1957.00
During the study tour CMD, BDL submitted that to maximise the
utilisation of the investment made by the Government in BDL, all
missiles and torpedoes that are indigenously developed or planned
for procurement from abroad, should be manufactured by the BDL.
Manpower Planning
5.5 During the oral evidence, the Committee desired to know
manpower position in the company. The CMD, BDL stated:
“We have carried out gradual reduction in the manpower by not
inducting persons in place of personnel who are retiring. We have
also been giving VRS to our employees. We are totally following
the requirements of the Government of India in regard to SC, ST
and ex-servicemen. They have been employed in the desired ratio
as has been desired by the Government of India……… it is 5 per
cent. This ratio has come down because we have not been inducting
any manpower in the last 5 years. The greater number of persons
who have been retiring belonged to ex-servicemen who joined at
a higher age while the other have not retired. This ratio would be
met once we start inducting manpower.”

35
Mini Ratna Status to BDL
5.6 During the oral evidence Committee wanted to know the status
of the company as to whether it is Mini Ratna or not, the CMD, BDL
stated:—
“We have not yet become a Mini Ratna in the sense that we have
not yet got non-official independent Directors in the Board BDL
yet. We will start operating as Mini Ratna once we have these
independent Directors on the Board…………… In our Board of
Directors, we have four Directors as working Directors from within
the company. We have DRDO representative, three representatives
from the Ministry, two Deputy Chiefs, one Air Force Deputy Chief
and one Army Deputy Chief.”
5.7 On a query regarding the number of Government
representatives allowed on Company Board to be considered for Mini
Ratna status, the CMD, BDL stated:
“The Ministry has taken a proposal from us in which we have
recommended that there would be two Ministry’s representatives
and three external representatives. We have recommended that the
Service representatives should stay. We have recommended that at
least one Service representative should stay because they form as
a helping hand to us.”
On being pointed out that the condition of less or number of
Government Director on Board should not apply to strategic industries,
the Defence Secretary stated:
“We have taken same stand. But basically what the Department of
Public Enterprises wants is that companies must become more and
more professional and too many Government Directors make it
like a Government Department. Therefore, this is a constraint. Our
argument has been that there are customers and customers’
representatives should be there and they are very useful Directors
in the Board. But that does not cut too much of ice.”
Explaining the advantages of Mini Ratna, the Defence Secretary
stated that Mini Ratna or Nav Ratna can form joint venture.
5.8 The Committee note with concern that capacity utilisation of
the Bharat Dynamics Limited (BDL) in terms of both manpower and
machine has been decreasing since 2002-03 and the order book
position has also gone down from Rs. 2479.46 on 1 April 2004 to
Rs. 1957.00 on 1 April 2005. To maximise the utilisation of the capacity
of BDL, the Committee recommend that all missiles and torpedoes

36
that are indigenously developed or planned for procurement from
abroad under ToT, should be given for production to BDL.
5.9 The Committee note that BDL manufactures products like
Milan and Konkurs ATGMs under licence from French and Russian
Companies and before these products can be exported, BDL requires
clearance from the Original Equipment Manufacture (OEM) and
Ministry of Defence. The Committee, therefore, desire that BDL
should scrupulously examine and identify the products, which have
the export potential, on case to case basis and get the approval of
OEM and Ministry of Defence, in order to augment its revenue
resources. The Committee, further desire that Ministry while making
procurement under Buy and Make category, should examine the
feasibility of inserting suitable clause to avoid clearance from the
Original Equipment Manufacturer for exporting these products.
5.10 The Committee feel that in view of increasing threat
perception of missiles from enemy, ballistic missile defences are
essential in order to defend the country. The Committee, therefore,
recommend that a time bound programme must be chalked out
urgently to develop the Missile Defence System, so that our defence
forces can counter any possible attack from any hostile country.
5.11 The Committee note, that the number of new projects
undertaken by the BDL are in different stages of progress and none
of the project has been completed in toto. The Committee, therefore,
would like that all out efforts should be made by the Ministry/BDL
to complete these projects and in a time bound manner. The
Committee would also like to have details of commissioning stage
of the projects, targets fixed for completion, reasons for delay in
completion corrective measures taken in this regard.
5.12 The Committee note that the Government has not granted
status of Mini Ratna to BDL as it does not fulfil the prescribed
criteria of independent Directors on the Company Board. The
Committee have also been informed of the advantage of Mini Ratna
status to PSUs i.e. it provides them more functional autonomy and
enables them to form joint ventures. The Committee are of the strong
view that for strategic industry like BDL, different criteria for
granting Mini Ratna status should be prescribed. Because of its very
nature, defence industry cannot have independent Directors on
Company Board. The Committee, therefore, recommend the
Government to review the criteria for granting status of Mini Ratna
particularly to the defence industries including BDL so as to enable
it to avail the benefit of Mini Ratna.

37
CHAPTER VI
MISHRA DHATU NIGAM LIMITED
6.1 Mishra Dhatu Nigam Limited (MIDHANI), Hyderabad was
conceived in the early 70s to achieve self-reliance in areas of special
steels, superalloys, titanium alloys etc. for strategic sectors and came
into existence as a Corporate Body ( i.e. DPSU) in 1973 under the
administrative control of Ministry of Defence, Department of Defence
Production and Supplies. By that point of time the country had made
some progress in the strategic sector like nuclear power generation,
manufacture of air craft, rocket lunching by Department of Space etc.
However, there was no facility to make special alloys required for
these activities and there was heavy dependence on import of these
alloys. For setting up MIDHANI, technical collaboration with Creusot-
Loire, Pachiney Ugine Kuhlamann of France and Krupps of Germany
was entered into with a view to achieve some degree of self-reliance
in special steels, superalloys and titanium needed by critical sectors
such as Defence, Aeronautics, Nuclear and Space.
6.2 The Ministry has stated that for nearly two decades now,
MIDHANI has been handling challenging developmental tasks, taking
a lead position in indigenisation of critical technologies and products
to render support to several programmes of national importance and
hi-tech segments of Indian Industry. In the Defence sector they comprise
missile development programme, T-72 Tanks, 155 mm Howitzer, MBT
Arjun Tanks, MiG, Kaveri Engine Programme (LCA), Prithvi & Agni,
special materials and weld electrodes for Advanced Technology Vessel
Programme (AVTP) in the Space sector they include PSLV , GSLV ,
Niobhat-101 a Hafnium alloy and in the field of atomic energy the
very special steels for nuclear power plants and fuel reprocessing.
Product Profile
6.3 On being asked by the Committee regarding product profile of
the MIDHANI, Ministry stated:
“The product range of MIDHANI can be divided into five major
categories viz. superalloys, titanium alloys, special purpose steels,
special products (weld consumables for Navy, Titanium and Steel
Tubes for Power plants, Moly Wire and Plates for Auto, Lamp
Industries and Moly Boats for Nuclear) and alloys for electrical
and electronics applications with and application in the form of
Forgings, Rods, Sheets, Strips, Wires, Remelt Sticks and Castings.”

38
6.4 In reply to a question raised by the Committee regarding the
total turnover of the company and the steps taken by the Ministry to
increase the turnover, the Ministry furnished the following data:
(Rs. in Crore)
Particulars 2000-01 2001-02 2002-03 2003-04 2004-05
Actual Actual Actual Actual Actual
Sales 112.61 104.30 91.52 125.13 131.27
Value of Production 113.87 107.17 93.50 116.42 141.67
(Incl. of ED)
6.5 According to the Ministry the installed capacity of the furnaces
in MIDHANI vis-a-vis sales turnover is as under:
Melt Capacities Sales Expected Total
Furnace (No of Heats) expected
Sales Value
(Rs. Lakh)
Per month Per Qty Avg. Value
Annum (MT) Rs./Kg
ARC 50 600 1200 300 3600
Furnace 15 180
VIR Furnace
AIM 20 240 240 450 1080
VIM 20 240 240 2000 4800
VAR-I 25 500 65 2000 1300
(Titanium)
Molybdenum — — 15 2400 360
Total 11140
6.6 As regards the efforts made by the company in converting its
material into value added products, the Ministry has further stated
that:
“The melting capacities available in the company translates into a
annual sales of Rs. 111.40 Crore. However, company taken up
several value added jobs of providing the customer not just the
material but the finished product by utilizing the facilities available
in other PSUs like RSP , Rourkela, NFC etc., in converting its
materials into value added products to increase its turn over. This
has resulted in improved sales turnover in the last two years.”

39
Upgradation & Modernisation
6.7 When asked by the Committee regarding upgradation and
modernisation of MIDHANI, the Ministry informed:
“It is estimated that the total modernization of MIDHANI into a
state of the art Company would involve an investment of about
Rs. 1000 Crore to Rs. 1200 Crore. As this being not feasible,
Company has identified bare minimum equipment/facilities that
require immediate up-gradation and modernization so as to meet
the strategic material requirements of major programmes announced
by Defence, Space, Atomic Energy, Defence PSU’s and Ordnance
Factories, in the next five years. The fund required for this purpose
has been assessed at Rs. 100.63 Crore. Proposal for modernization
is under the consideration of Government.”
Elaborating on the need for modernisation of company, during the
oral evidence, the Chairman & Managing Director (MIDHANI) stated:
“It is a 30-year old Company. For the last 30 years, MIDHANI has
not been modernised. If this company is not going to be
modernised, then most of the strategic products would be
jeopardised. As the Secretary has mentioned, the Government of
India has given active consideration to us. We are in the process
of being sanctioning a sum of Rs. 66 crore, and Rs. 35 crore has
been given to us by the Department of Space for modernisation.
This is only phase-I for carrying on the manufacturing of materials,
which are required by the strategic industries.”
As regards the upgradation of plant machinery and facilities at
MIDHANI, the Ministry stated:
“The Plant, Machinery and Facilities at MIDHANI have not been
up-graded and modernized in the last two decades. Sensing the
need the Ministry had set up a Committee to review the working
of MIDHANI. The Committee has recommended investments for
the up-gradation and modernization of the outdated and obsolete
facilities. Ministry has moved a cabinet note for providing a
budgetary grant of Rs. 66.63 crore to MIDHANI for its
modernization plan. With the modernization and creation facilities
financed both by the Ministry and MIDHANI’s customers would
ensure MIDHANI achieving a sales turnover of about Rs. 330 crore
by 2010-11.”

40
Self Reliance
6.8 In reply to a question raised by the Committee regarding efforts
being made by the Ministry to make special alloys required for nuclear
power generation, manufacture of aircraft etc, with a view to achieve
a degree of self reliance, the Ministry has stated:
“MIDHANI has already indigenised 13 of the 19 alloys required
for SU-30 aero engine programme of HAL. These 13 alloys are
already presently being supplied by MIDHANI to HAL for MiG
programme. MIDHANI jointly with HAL is contemplating
indigenisation the remaining six alloys to become self reliant in
the manufacture of aero-engine for SU-30 programme.”
According to the Ministry, MIDHANI has achieved self-reliance in
the areas of Missile programme, Aeronautics, Navy, Space and Atomic
Energy.
Bullet Proof Jackets
6.9 On the question raised by the Committee regarding making
light weight and cost effective Bullet Proof Jackets (BPJs), the Ministry
stated:
“MIDHANI is in the business of 100% indigenous manufacture of
Bullet Proof Jacket (as per MIDHANI Grade MDN 45 Armour
plates) and Bullet Proof Patka (Head Gear). However, Bullet Proof
Jackets (BPJs) made by MIDHANI are heavier in comparison with
foreign make. For Protection against 9 mm SMC (5.5 Kgs) from a
distance of 10 meters-Rs. 5,000/-each, Protection against AK 47
(9.0 Kgs) from a distance of 10 meters-Rs. 5,300/-each, Protection
against 7.62 SLR (9.5 Kgs) from a distance of 10 meters-Rs. 5,800/-
each.”
6.10 The Ministry further stated:
“Presently Indian Army and other Para Military Forces have been
seeking Light Weight Bullet Proof Jacket (LWBPJ). The specification
of LWBPJ are different from the one being manufactured by
MIDHANI. The MIDHANI BPJ is of Hard Armour (weight ranging
from 9 to 9.5 kgs) and the BPJ sought by Indian Army and other
Para Military Forces was Soft Armour Panel (SAP) (weight ranging
from 5 to 5.5 Kgs)”.
6.11 The Ministry has also informed that “SAP is made up of
hybrid materials like aramid and unidirectional polyethylene and are

41
in the nature of composites and not materials. Hence MIDHANI’s
(BPJs) manufactured from Armour Steel is not comparable with LWBPJ
now being sought by Indian Army and other Para Military Forces.”
6.12 During the oral evidence, the Committee desired to know the
weight of imported jackets, the CMD, MIDHANI informed the
Committee that weight of foreign made jackets is between 3.5 kgs to
4.5 kgs.
6.13 The Committee note that MIDHANI is supplying special
steels, super alloys and titanium alloys for strategic sectors, which
forms the core material not only for defence needs but also for
space and atomic energy programmes, and these alloys are very
crucial in timely completion of various projects of strategic
importance. The Committee are constrained to note that despite the
critical importance, the plant, machinery and facilities of MIDHANI
have not been up-graded and modernized for the last two decades.
The Committee also note that a Committee set up by the Ministry
to review the working of MIDHANI has recommended for the up-
gradation and modernization of the outdated and obsolete facilities
of it with adequate investment. For this purpose, the Ministry has
moved a Cabinet note for providing a budgetary grant of Rs. 66.63
crore to MIDHANI for its modernization plan. The Committee,
therefore, recommend that MIDHANI should be allocated adequate
budgetary grants expeditiously so that plant, machinery and facilities
of MIDHANI could be upgraded and modernised to save strategic
products from being jeopardised.
6.14 The Committee note that the Indian Army and other Para
Military Forces are using heavier jackets weighing more than 9 kgs
which are being manufactured by MIDHANI. The Committee are
given to understand that light weighted imported bullet proof jackets
are being demanded by the Indian Army and other Para Military
Forces and MIDHANI has not been able to produce that quality of
LWBPJ. Therefore, the Committee desire that MIDHANI should
collaborate with the foreign manufacturer for making light weight
BPJs, so that our forces could increase their work efficiency by getting
lighter BPJs and country can become self reliant in this field also.

42
CHAPTER VII
GOA SHIPYARD LIMITED
7.1 Goa Shipyard Limited (GSL), is the largest enterprise in the
State of Goa employing about 1700 people. The shipyard covers an
area of about one lakh square meters and was originally established
by the Portuguese as a small barge repair facility in 1957, under the
name “Estaleiros Navais De Goa”. Following the liberation of Goa in
end of 1961 this yard was leased to Mazagon Dock till October, 1967,
when it was renamed as Goa Shipyard Limited. The paid up capital
of the Company stands at Rs. 19.40 crore. Government of India
accorded status of Schedule ‘B’ to the Company w.e.f. 30th January,
1997.
7.2 Giving details of product range of shipyard, the Ministry stated:
“Goa Shipyard Limited has build and delivered 175 ships for
various customers in Government and private sectors including a
small number of export orders. GSL can design and build modern,
medium size, special purpose vessels upto 1105 metres in length
3000 tonnes displacement and 4.5 metres draught. The product
range of the shipyard includes Fast Patrol Vessels, Survey Vessels,
Sail Training Ships, Missile Crafts, Offshore Patrol Vessels, Pollution
Control Vessels, Damage, Landing Crafts and Extra Fast Attack
Crafts to the Defence Sector and Passenger Vessels, Tug Boats,
Barges, Pontons & Fishing Vessels for the Civil Sector. In addition,
GSL also undertakes construction of training simulators for Indian
Navy and ONGC. The ship repair capability of GSL includes repairs
of large vessels upto 105 mtrs. long, 2000 DWT and 4.5 mtrs
draught.”
Order Book Position
7.3 When asked about the Order Book Position of GSL by the
Committee, the Ministry furnished the same as follows:
Sl.No. Project Nos. Value Expected
(Rs. in dated of
crore) delivery
1. 5th AOPV for Coast Guard 01 228.14 August, 2007
2. Extra Fast Patrol Vessels 05 222.85 First two ships to be
of Coast Guard delivered in March and
June 2006 respectively
3. Survival at Sea Training 01 March, 2005
Facility for ONGC

43
Sl.No. V essel Type Qty Customer Value of Total contract
each value
(Rs. Crore) (Rs. In crore)
1. Advanced Offshore 1 Coast 199.00 199.00
Patrol Vessel Guard
2. Extra Fast Patrol 5 Coast 38.85 194.25
Vessel Guard
3. Offshore Patrol 3 Indian 361.15 1084.46
Vessel Navy
Total 1477.71
Capacity Utilisation
7.4 As regards the capacity utilization of GSL, the Ministry stated
that the capacity utilization in the last three financial years in GSL
was as follows:
Year Capacity Utilisation
2001-2002 91.01%
2002-2003 41.34%
2003-2004 30.31%
7.5 On the specific question asked about steps taken by GSL for
their optimum capacity utilization, the Ministry replied as under:
“As adequate orders have now been received, more resources,
manpower and facilities would be utilized to enhance capacity
utilization.”
As regard the steps taken by the Ministry to ensure regular orders
to GSL to avoid gross under utilization of its capacity in future, the
Ministry has replied as under:
“Goa Shipyard Limited would be considered for construction of
small and medium vessels that are required for Indian Navy and
Coast Guard. This has been reflected in the 10th and 11th
acquisition plans of Indian Navy and Coast Guard.”

44
Perspective Plan
7.6 The Ministry was asked to furnish details of perspective plan
envisaged by the Ministry with a view to improve construction
period of vessels as well as improvement in productivity. The Ministry
stated:
“The Perspective Plan envisages a progressive increase in VOP as
percentage of capital employed and a progressive increase in the
value added per employee. Modernisation and upgradation have
been planned with a view to improve in construction period of
vessels by 17 to 20% by the end of the Tenth Plan period as well
improvement in productivity by 5 to 7% by the 10th Plan.”
7.7 The Ministry further stated:
“GSL has planned to enhance the share of outsourcing from 23%
to 47%. It has formed a separate Outsourcing Cell to bolster the
outsourcing activities. GSL has undertaken upgradation and
modernization of its facilities, so as to curtail the build period and
become competitive.”
7.8 The Committee asked the Ministry as to how outsourcing will
help in faster production rate and whether build period of the vessels
is competitive with the time (period) taken in other advanced countries,
the Ministry stated:
“Outsourcing is resorted to when in-house capacity is inadequate
to meet the agreed delivery schedules as also for economic reasons.
Additional human resources provided by contractors would
supplement the available work force and thereby expedite the vessel
completion at lower cost.
The build periods of GSL are presently not comparable with the
build periods of foreign shipyards. With a view to achieve major
improvements in his aspect, various steps have been taken
including modernization/upgradation of infrastructure facilities,
adoption of infrastructure technology systems etc.”
7.9 During the oral evidence, the Committee wanted to know the
collaboration of GSL with private industry , the CMD, GSL informed
the Committee:
“….. 65 percent of our ships are actually outsourced to private
parties and more than 90 percent of what goes into a defence
sector is actually done by the private sector.”

45
Research & Development
7.10 The Committee enquired about the investment in R&D by
GSL, the Ministry stated:
“GSL has not incurred any specific expenditure on R&D, however,
improvements in design of equipment are effected through vendors
while carrying technical negotiations with the suppliers and
ordering equipment. At the same time, recently GSL have designed
and developed a new configuration for Naval OPVs which was
successfully model tested at Maritime Research Institute (MARIN),
Netherlands. The cost of this will get reflected in the year 2005-
06.”
During the oral evidence, when asked by the Committee about
selection of designs, CMD, GSL stated:
“….. we select a design, we do not have any design ourselves…….
Navy does not select design. The shipyard will go round looking
for designs.”
Modernisation/Up-Gradation
7.11 When the Committee desired to know the modernisation/
upgradation programme of the GSL, the Ministry submitted:
“GSL has started modernization and upgradation process by
upgrading the state-of-the-art design software TRIBON and
associated hardware, which is being used for CAD. In the area of
information technology, GSL has put in place the ERP system-
BaaN customized to the yard requirement. This initiative integrated
with Peimavera project management tool, is expected to improving
the overall efficiency and productivity of the yard. GSL also has
a modern steel preparation shop with computer controlled plasma
and flame cutting machine, automatic shot blasting equipment &
processor controlled bending machine. A modern electronic
workshop has also been established providing an in-house facility
for testing instruments and electronic equipment. The existing pipe
shop has been updated with several modern machines to improve
pipe working capacity. In the area of welding technology, several
latest equipment and production multipliers are being added to
improve the quality and productivity.
GSL has plans to modernize the existing infrastructure and facilities
to meet future challenges The plan involves major funds outlay

46
and are based on likely Naval and Coast Guard acquisition during
10th to 12th Five Year Plan period for high technology ships such
as Mine Counter Measure Vessels, Air Cushion Vessels and Offshore
Patrol V essels. The modernization plans also take into consideration
the fact that the facility so created should also help enhance
capacity and capability of series construction of ships of the present
product range. The implementation of modernization is largely
planned through project funding.”
7.12 When the Committee asked about the various activities of the
GSL with a view to modernize/upgrade state of art, design sale-wise
TRIBON etc., the Ministry replied:—
“In foreseeable future, GSL is expected to receive orders from
Indian Navy and Coast Guard for series construction of ships i.e.
Offshore Patrol Vessels (OPVs), Fast Patrol Vessels (FPVs), Extra
Fast Attack Crafts (XFACs), Survey Vessels (SVs) and Sail Training
Ships (STSs). The yard has also been earmarked for the indigenous
construction of Mine Counter Measure Vessels (MCMVs) for the
Indian Navy. With greater emphasis being laid on Navy and Coast
Guard to modernize their forces, GSL has to gear itself to meet
the challenge of constructing high-tech vessels with international
quality, at competitive prices and at shorter duration.
This is planned to be achieved through modernization aimed at
creating new infrastructural facilities, augmenting or upgrading our
existing facilities, infusing new technology and processes. This will
also remove the present infrastructural bottlenecks.”
7.13 As regards the Master Plan for modernisation, the Ministry
further stated:—
“Studying the existing facilities and activities of Goa Shipyard vis-
a-vis the existing Master Plan and to prepare new revised Master
Plan based on business objectives projected by GSL and likely
facilities envisaged by the yard are as under:
(a) Setting up of a modular construction shop with associated
services at an appropriate place in the yard.
(b) Creating a marine outfit centre integrated with existing Hull
Outfit Shop.
(c) Setting up of a dedicated shipbuilding complex for GRP
hull Mine Counter Measure Vessels (MCMVs).

47
(d) Shiplift system with adjoining hard stand and docking jetty
arm for shipbuilding and ship repair.
(e) Augmentation of outfitting capabilities for shipbuilding
including augmentation of jetty and its facilities.
(f) Setting up of modern storage facility in the yard.
(g) Augmentation of carnage and material handling facilities
with consideration of block transportation system.
(h) Augmentation of Slipway No. 1, 2, 3 and 4
(i) Study and upgradation of ancillary services.”
7.14 For preparation of Master Plan and for implementation of
phase of modernisation projects, the Ministry has appointed an
international consultant, details of which furnished by the Ministry,
are as under:—
“To achieve the above objectives GSL has appointed
M/s Haskoning Nederlands B.V . (M/s Royal Haskonings group),
an international consultants of repute as consultants for preparation
of Master Plan followed by preparation of Preliminary Project
Report and Detailed Project Report. The consultants will also
provide supervisory services for the implementation phase of the
modernization project. The agreement for consultancy services was
signed with the firm on 22.4.2005. The time frame envisaged for
preparatory services is 84 weeks followed by implementation phase
of 30 months. Consultancy work has already been commenced by
the firm and at present the draft master plan concepts are being
developed. Master Plan and Preliminary Project Report (PPR) are
expected be ready by the end of July, 2005.”
7.15 During the oral evidence, CMD, GSL, has thus informed the
Committee on the state of modernization and on the total cost:
“……our modernization which we hope to commence in full
earnest by February, 2006……Rs. 241 crore is the current
production…… we will meet this out of our own finances.”
Exports
7.16 When the Committee desired to know the efforts made by
the Ministry for export of ships, the Ministry replied as under:—
“The Goa Shipyard Limited (GSL) have been making efforts to
design, build and export ships. In order to propagate indigenous

48
shipbuilding capability, GSL along with MDL and GRSE participates
in various defence exhibitions throughout the world. Concerted
marketing efforts are in hand to target orders for Patrol Vessels
from countries like Tanzania, Kenya, Mozambique, Sri Lanka,
Maldives etc.”
7.17 From the material furnished, it is seen that exports of GSL
during the year 1999-00, 2000-01, 2001-02, 2002-03 and 2003-04 was
‘NIL’. When enquired, the Ministry stated as under:—
“Since 1999, GSL has submitted the following offers to various
countries and gave presentation and had technical discussion at
appropriate levels regarding the same.
(a) Sri Lanka — T echno-Commercial offer of
Advanced Offshore Patrol Vessel
(AOPV)
(b) Mauritius — T echno-Commercial offer of
Advanced Offshore Patrol Vessel
(AOPV)
(c) Mozambique — T echno-Commercial offer of Fast
Patrol Vessel (FPV)
(d) Tanzania — T echno-Commercial offer of Fast
Patrol Vessel (FPV)
(e) Maldives — T echno-Commercial offer of Fast
Patrol Vessel (FPV).
(f) Indonesia — T echno-Commercial offer of Fast
Patrol Vessel (FPV)
(g) Kenya — Technical offer of Fast Patrol Vessel
(FPV)
Offers mentioned above at Sl. No. (a) to (e) were considered
favourably by the customers, however, these could not materialise
for want of financial assistance required by the country. Offers
recently submitted to Indonesia & Kenya [Sl. No. (f) & (g)] are
under active consideration and are being followed up aggressively
by GSL.”
7.18 On being asked about the concrete steps taken or proposed to
be taken by the Ministry to materialise export orders for GSL, the
Ministry informed:—
“For materialisation of the export of specialised class of vessels,
aggressive support of High Commission Office is considered

49
essential to push the product at Government level. Further
Government can consider to extend the soft loan facility to these
countries so that export orders can materialise expeditiously.
Goa Shipyard Limited (GSL) is encouraged to participate in
international defence expositions to show-case its products and
abilities. GSL as on date has sufficient orders to fully book its
production capacity. Export avenues are being constantly explored
and financing option are also being considered for export orders.
An inter Ministerial Committee has also been framed for fast track
clearance of export proposals.”
7.19 When asked about the possibility to provide soft loan/credit
facilities to the buyers as other competitors do, the Ministry replied as
under:—
“A decision on providing an Indian line of credit to selected
countries is taken by the Ministry of External Affairs based on
geo-political requirements and availability of funds. Possibility of
funding through international agencies, as well as banking agencies,
are being explored by the shipyards. The approximate cost of the
vessels targeted for export, range for Rs. 50 to Rs. 200 crore.”
7.20 During their oral evidence on the issue of soft loans, CMD,
GSL stated:
“It was all done with the Govt. approval. As was pointed out by
CMD, MDL, the main thing is that they want soft finance….. we
have gone through the banks PNB and SBI are more than ready
to provide money.”
7.21 The Committee note that the order book position of Goa
Shipyard Limited is not healthy and there is constant shrinking of
capacity utilisation, which has gone down from 91.01% in 2001-02 to
30.31% in 2003-04. To improve capacity utilisation, the Committee
desire that the order for construction of small and medium vessels
required by Navy and Coast Guard as reflected in 10th and 11th
Acquisition Plan of Navy and Coast Guard, may be given to GSL.
The Committee further desire that the Ministry should make it
obligatory for each DPSU shipyard to constitute a Committee which
besides examining the need for creating resources for healthy order
book position, should also suggest ways and means for full and
effective utilisation of the installed capacity and submit its report to
the Government.

50
7.22 The Committee are constrained to note that GSL has not
made any export during the last five years despite the keen interest
shown by some countries on their products. As stated by the GSL,
the main reason, therefore, was the non-availability of financial
assistance to these countries for procurement of GSL ships. The
Committee note that if soft finance is provided to these countries,
the interest shown by the countries can materialise in orders. The
Committee also note that two of our nationalised banks namely PNB
and SBI are ready to provide soft loans. In view of long term
advantage to Indian shipping industry in general and GSL in
particular in terms of export of vessels, the Committee recommend
that the Government should give necessary approval to the DPSUs
to avail bank facility to extend soft loan to the importing countries.
The Committee further desire that GSL should chalk out a clear cut
plan to increase its export to fully book its production capacity.
7.23 The Committee are surprised to note that GSL has not
incurred any expenditure on the important and vital area of R&D,
which shows that it has not taken up any R&D initiative of its own
and is relying on the designs supplied by vendors or depending on
the obsolete designs. As R&D is the base of technology upgradation
and modernisation of equipment and plant, the Committee strongly
recommend that GSL must allocate substantial amount on R&D and
should undertake selected R&D project in close coordination with
DRDO and other Defence shipyards so as to upgrade and modernise
their products. The Committee further desire that there must be a
Research and Development centre in every defence shipyard
especially in GSL with modern CAD/CAM facilities for constant
improvement in present level of designing so that they can compete
with the best in the world.
7.24 The Committee note that GSL is taking various steps to
modernise its facilities with an investment of Rs. 241 crore, which
is to be arranged internally during the 10th and 12th Five Year Plan
period for high technology ships. The Committee hope that concerted
and timely action will be taken by the GSL to implement its
modernisation and upgradation plan in order to generate its internal
resources for the purpose. The Committee are of the opinion that
besides special modernisation plan there is a need to put concerted
efforts by GSL to make modernisation activities as a part of the
annual budgetary exercise of the company.

51
CHAPTER VIII
GARDEN REACH SHIPBUILDERS & ENGINEERS LTD
8.1 Garden Reach Shipbuilders & Engineers Limited (GRSE), was
established in 1884 as a small ship repair workshop. In 1934, it was
converted into a Limited Liability company, as Garden Reach Workshop
was spread over 20 hectares with a river frontage of about a kilometer
therefore, shipbuilding activity was not undertaken as part of the policy
of British Industrial interest. Realising the potential of this industry,
the Company was taken over by the Government of India in early
1960. Shipbuilding activity formally started in the Company after
nationalization. Thereafter, the company diversified into engineering
activities. Presently GRSE has 8 units in and around Kolkata, and a
Diesel Engine Plant at Ranchi, Jharkhand.
The division-wise product range of GRSE is as under:
Products Division  No. of Units Location
Ship building & Ship repairs Ship 2 1. Ship building at main
for Navy and Coast Guard workshop, Kolkata.
2. Fitting Out Jetty at
Netaji Subhash Dock
Extension, Kolkata.
Shipborne equipment, Engineering 4 1. 61, Park Unit at
Bailey type Bridges and Division Gar den Reach Road,
Technology structure and Kolkata.
equipment including 2. Belur Unit, Dharam
Turnkey Projects Tala, Howrah.
3. Baranagar Unit (TTC),
Rabindra Nath Tagore
Road, Kolkata.
4. Taratola Unit, Deck
Machinery, Kolkata.
Diesel and Gas Engines Engine 1 Ranchi, Jharkhand.
Division

52
8.2 Fabrication jobs reduced since most of the ships were under
fitting out stage.
When the Committee asked the reasons for lack of orders as stated
for Shipbuilding and Engineering division, the Ministry replied as
under:
“GRSE under the Ministry of Defence builds warships and other
vessels to cater the country’s defence requirement and other
maritime activities. The Defence Shipyards are, therefore, captive
PSUs’, primarily meeting the shipbuilding requirements of the
Indian Navy & Coast Guard. The performance of GRSE is further
intricately linked with the Perspective Plan of the Indian Navy &
Coast Guard for construction/acquisition of their warships/patrol
vessels. Pending finalisation of the Perspective Plan, nomination of
ships for construction and its consequent placement of order on
Shipyards is delayed. As on date GRSE has received orders for
3 LST (1) and 4 Fast Attack Crafts which are low value non-
weapon intensive ships. Order for 4 Anti Submarine Warships
(Corvettes) has also been received but its production could not be
started due to delay in availability of ABA Quality Steel.”
8.3 During the oral evidence CMD, GRSE has also stated:
“If no order comes other than what is stated here, we will be
under loaded. We have appealed to the Ministry, and to the Defence
Minister to increase our orders. The Ministry deliberately developed
us as a second frigate line. We need to get orders for frigates.”
When the Committee asked the specific reasons for not placing
any new shipbuilding orders during the period 1996 to 2002, the
Ministry further informed as under:
“Acquisition of ships by the Navy is in accordance with its long
term plan and subject to availability of funds. Navy did not acquire
any ships in GRSE’s range of production during this period due
to constraint of funds.”
The Committee asked the Ministry to explain the reason behind
the massive under-utilisation of capacity in shipbuilding and engine
division of GRSE and capacity utilization of Engine Division which
was 93 percent in 2001-02 but declined to 22 percent in 2002-03. The
Ministry in its reply stated as under:
“The Capacity Utilisation in Shipbuilding is assessed on the basis
of steel through put compared with its installed capacity. Further,
the steel through put is planned depending on the volume of
order in hand. It may be noted that during the period 1996 to

53
2002 GRSE did not receive any new shipbuilding order. The hull
construction activity gradually declined till receipt of steel in June,
2003 for commencement of three new LST (L) orders received in
December, 2001. The installed capacity of GRSE was assessed as
5400 Eq.MT based on plain type of construction as existing in
commercial ships with thick steel plates in use. Presently, GRSE
manufactures warships whose thickness of steel plates are much
less and qualitative requirements very stringent, having higher
shock & vibration standards and critical shape factor. As such, the
existing norms of capacity utilization assessment do not reflect the
true picture based on the present product range, the installed
capacity has been reassessed as 3650 Eq.MT and accordingly the
capacity utilization for the last 3 years is given below:
Year Steel            Capacity Utilisation Remarks
through put
achieved in based on based on
Eq.MT 5400 Eq. MT 3560 Eq. MT
2002-03 2066* 38% 57% Shortage of work load.
2003-04 3043* 56% 83%
2004-05 2948 54% 81%
*Including 180T, 238T & 44T of Gen. Engg. (NTPC & Bailey Bridges) work were
produced by Ship Division Structural Shop at Main.
Modernisation/Upgradation
8.4 As regard the modernisation and upgradation of the GRSE, the
Ministry stated:
“In order to meet the customers’ requirement of quick delivery
and adherence to schedule, GRSE, has started upgradation and
modernization of its infrastructure facilities in respect of
Block Fabrication, Block Erection, and Pre-outfitting fitting.
M/s Gifford, UK has been engaged for consultancy in respect of
modernization. The Consultant has submitted his Preliminary
Project Report.
GRSE’s modernization programme is linked with construction of
ASW Corvette Project for the Indian Navy and the cost involved is

54
being provided by the Navy through this project. The facilities to be
created and the cost involved are:
Cost Estimates Facilities (Rs. in crore)
Hull Shop-II Modernisation 42.00
Slipway No. 4 Modernisation 90.00
Modular Construction Workshop 50.00
Total 182.00
The Company has upgraded the production facility by introducing
CNC Plate Cutting Machine with Plasma Head Attachment, CNC
Pipe Bending Machine, CNC Lathe etc. in different shops. Semi-
automatic and automatic and TIG/MIG Welding Machines are
extensively provided in Structural Shops. Use of Ceramic Back
Strip for welding has improved the production process. ERP System
has been introduced with on line connection between design,
planning, procurement and production. Prima Vera Software and
Tribon Software has been installed in Planning & Design
Department for upgrading of activities.”
8.5 The Ministry was asked to state the modernization programmes
taken from time to time to upgrade the technology to bring it at par
with modern times. The Ministry stated as under:
“To meet the customers expectation of faster delivery, GRSE has
embarked on a Modernisation Plan to reduce the build period
wherein Rs. 90 crore would be  spent from Internal Accruals for
upgradation of Technology & Production Aids and Rs. 180 crore
for Infrastructure Development. The modernization plan has since
been approved and is in progress in phases. Details of initiatives
taken are enumerated below:
Technology Upgradation
Augmenting existing design capabilities with procurement of
additional licensed softwares for generation of faster
—P roduction Drawings
— Plate Cutting & Pipe Bending details
— Equipment & Composite Modelling etc.

55
2. Integrating Design, Planning & Production through an ERP
System (SAP Software).
3. Project Planning & Monitoring through Prima Vera Software.
4. Production Automation.
•P rocurement of modern Welding Machines
• CNC Plate Cutting Machines
• CNC Pipe Bending Machines
Phase-I Infrastructure Development
• Augmentation of Block Handling Capacity to 65 Ton in shop
floors.
• Increasing Building Berth capacity to 2500 Ton
• Construction of New Store
Phase-II-Yard Modernisation
The second phase of Yard Modernisation envisages Enhancement
of Block Fabrication Capacity from 540 Eq. TPA to 1170 Eq. TPA at
Shop floor level. Towards accomplishment of the aim a Modern Hull
Shop II with a floor area of 8512 Sq.M and Crane capacity of 65 Ton
to 70 Ton have been progressed in two phases at an estimated cost of
Rs. 41 Crore. Phase-I has been completed and Phase-II is expected to
be completed in July, 2005.
Phase-III-Yard Modernisation
The third phase envisages-
(a) Enhancement of Block erection capacity on slipway. The
existing Slipway No. 4 to be replaced by a suitable launching
system to enable higher launching capacity from the present
900T to 3000T and higher ship length from existing 90M to
120M.
(b) Construction of Module Shop at a cost of Rs. 50 crore for
enhancing the pre-outfit activities from 25-30% to 60-80%.
To progress Phase-III of the modernization, GRSE with the approval
of the Board engaged a Global Consultant M/s Gifford Associates,
U.K. Detailed Project Report has since been submitted and approved
by the Board on 11 January, 2005. For effective utilization of the

56
modernization facilities for the ASWI the Consultant included certain
added features which were not envisaged at the conceptual stage.
This has resulted in increase in the modernization estimates to
Rs. 419 Crore from Rs. 270 Crore. The modalities for funding the project
are worked out in consultation with Navy and Ministry of Defence.
On completion of modernization plan, GRSE will be able to bring
down the total production time of Warships as shown below:
Type of Ship Present build period Revised expected build
in years period in years
Frigates 09 05
Corvettes 06 04
FACs 03 02
LST(L)s 07 03
Research and Development
8.6 It is seen from the material furnished by the Ministry that
there has been negligible expenditure on R&D for the last five years,
one being asked about the reasons therefore, the Ministry has replied
as under:
“GRSE has 3 Division-Ship, Engineering & Engine Division—each
contributing 86%, 11% & 4% in terms of the Annual Value of
Production (VOP). In respect of Ship Division the R&D activities
are progressed by the R&D Wing/Units of the Customers i.e. Indian
Navy & Coast Guard. Efforts made towards upgradation of the
products are listed below division-wise:
A. Ship Division
Modern trend in Warship design such stealth features and low
self noise generation are being incorporated in the new Anti
Submarine Warship (Corvette), in consultation with the Indian
Navy. Various inputs which are required to achieve these
parameters are provided by the Indian Navy or from the agencies
nominated by them.
The ASWI Project 28, is totally a new design ship being built
in GRSE for the first time. All R&D aspects to improve upon the
performance are incorporated at the design stage itself.

57
B. Engineering Division
For upgradation and new design of the Bailey Bridges the following
efforts have been made:
(a) Conversion of timber decking to steel decking.
(b) Design, fabrication and testing double-lane bridges.
(c) Designing of large size panel bridge in consultation with
IIT, Kharagpur considering the following aspects:
(i) Longer Span
(ii) Higher Load Class for given Span.
(iii) Lower configuration for given Load Class and given
Span.
(iv) Reducing the number of components as well as
reduction in weight.
(v) Galvanizing of components to enhance the lift Span.
(vi) Simplify design for easy fabrication and assembly at
site by unskilled labours.
Further, GRSE is also in dialogue with Mabey & Johnson, UK
for manufacturing of portable steel bridges under transfer of
technology.
Engine Division
The manufacture of Marine Engines being in collaboration with
MTU Germany, the R&D activities are restricted. Notwithstanding
the same, the Diesel Engine Plant is progressing re-engineering of
Ajay Class Ships with MTU 1163 series Engines. The feasibility
report has been submitted and accepted by the Indian Navy.”
Exports
8.7 When the Committee desired to know the export position of
the GRSE, the Ministry submitted:
“The products offered by GRSE for exports range from Ships
(Warships and Auxiliary Ships) and Ship Board equipment to Bailey
Bridges & Components and Pumps for the Agro Sector. The
countries targeted are South East Asian countries, SAARC Countries
other that Pakistan, the Middle East Asia and certain African

58
countries. The Company has made deemed export of Rs. 1.90 crore
during the year 2003-04 in respect of supply of equipment of NTPC
Talcher Coal Handling Plan Project.
The following steps have been taken by the company in the recent
past to promote exports:
(a) The Company regularly participates in International Defence
Exhibitions organized by different agencies in India and
abroad. The three Defence Shipyards together had put up
an “Indian Defence Shipyards” pavilion at the recently held
DEFEXPO India 2004 at Pragati Maidan, New Delhi. During
the Financial Year 2004-2005, they have participated in Africa
Aerospace and Defence 2004 at South Africa as part of the
Integrated India Pavilion, which was coordinated by the
Defence Exhibition Organisation.
(b) The Company maintains constant liaison without Defence
Attaches in target countries and various business houses
abroad, for obtaining information on various demands
arising in these countries.
(c) They have, along with the other shipyards under the
Ministry of Defence, appointed “RITES” as their agent for
promoting their business abroad. GRSE have also appointed
M/s Shaheen Al-Jazera General trading and contracting
company, Kuwait as agent to promote their business in
Kuwait.”
Perspective Plan
8.8 The Draft Perspective Plan of GRSE envisages investments for
upgradation of facilities and modernization of infrastructure to enhance
its productivity. Due emphasis is laid down also on export,
indigenisation, diversification and optimum utilisation of manpower.
As the Perspective Plan of the Shipyards is largely dependant on the
Shipbuilding Plan of the Indian Navy and Coast Guards, the Defence
Shipyards have been asked to recast their Perspective Plan and bring
it in consonance with the 10 year Shipbuilding Plan of the Indian
Navy. This exercise is under way. In the meantime, the shipyards have
also been asked to formulate their Corporate Strategy independent of
the orders expected from the Services and their Perspective Plans.
8.9 The Committee desired to know the specific steps taken by
GRSE in its perspective plan to boost export, increase the content of

59
indigenisation, diversification and optimum utilization of available
facilities and manpower. The Ministry replied as under:
“To sustain and achieve a steady growth in the present liberalized
environment a ‘Corporate Plan’ is under preparation by M/s Price
Waterhouse Coopers Pvt. Ltd. up to the 11th Plan period i.e. 2012
with the following SORs:
(a) Consolidating GRSE strengths in its core competence
areas.
(b) Identification of possible areas for diversification, merger &
acquisition which are generally within the basic expertise
and related fields.
(c) Modernisation of infrastructure facilities dovetailing the
ongoing modernization activities and ensuring optimum
capacity utilization of existing facilities to meet the
customers’ requirement of quicker delivery.
(d) Rationalisation and restructuring the human resources for
optimum utilization.
(e) Explore the export market and assess the export possibilities
of GRSE products and means to succeed.
The Draft Report has since been received and under scrutiny.”
Constraints
8.10 In a note to the Committee, the Ministry explained the
following constraints in improving the performance:
(a) “Unreliable Dry Dock availability from Kolkata Port
Trust.
(b) Limited sources for quality castings and forgings required
for manufacture of ship borne equipment and engineering
products.
(c) The average age of workforce is around 54 years.
(d) Delay in supply and poor quality of material received from
indigenous suppliers.
(e) Limited scope of expansion and restricted approach road to
main yard due to its geographical location.

60
(f) Low draft of the river poses problem in building bigger
size vessels.
The decay of Kolkata port and situation of river Hooghly pose
problems for the future of this shipyard which may have to be
shifted to an alternate location.”
8.11 When the Committee asked the Ministry on steps taken to
remove the above constraints, the Ministry replied as under:
“In order to overcome the refit constrains due to non-availability
of Dry Dock facilities. Chairman & Managing Director, GRSE
proposed that Kolkata Port Trust (KPT)) and GRSE join hands
together to form a joint venture for undertaking repairs of ships
in the Eastern Region. Secretary (Shipping), Ministry of Shipping
& Transport, desired that a group consisting of KPT, SCI & GRSE
look into the matter and submit a report. Consequent discussions
with the Senior Management of KPT, it was decided that a Draft
MOU will be prepared by GRSE which will be discussed between
the two parties and a final draft will be prepared. The final draft
will be put up by the parties to their respective Boards for
approval.”
8.12 The Committee note that there has been underutilisation of
capacity of Garden Reach Shipbuilders and Engineers Limited (GRSE)
since 2001-2002 due to shortage of workload. The Committee are
given to understand that the Navy did not acquire any ships in
GRSE’s range of production during this period. The Committee
further note that there has been a negligible R&D expenditure by
GRSE during the last five years. As regards the modernisation and
upgradation of the GRSE, the Committee note that phase I of the
modernisation of project has already been completed, phase II was
expected to be completed by July 2005 and about phase III, the
detailed project report has since been submitted by the consultant
from UK with certain added features and the same is to be approved
by the Board before its finalisation. The Committee are informed
that on completion of modernisation plan, GRSE will be able to
drastically bring down the total production time of warships, which
in turn will help to obtian optimum capacity utilisation of existing
infrastructure and available manpower. The Committee, therefore,
strongly recommend that Ministry should make all concerted efforts
to finalise and implement the modernisation plan in a time bound
manner without further showing time and cost overrun so that
intended benefits could be availed by the company.

61
The Committee also desire that the Indian Navy and Coast Guard
should prepare and give their actual shipbuilding requirements to
the GRSE, so that it may also prepare its perspective plan accordingly
and available capacity and manpower may not go underutilised. As
regards the constraints being faced by GRSE, the Committee desire
the Ministry to take initiative for signing and finalisation of MoU
between the GRSE and Kolkata Port Trust (KPT) so that its refit
constraints due to non availability of dry dock facilities, could be
resolved.

62
CHAPTER IX
MAZAGON DOCK LIMITED
9.1 Mazagon Dock Limited (MDL), was taken over as a Public
Sector Undertaking under the Administrative control of the Ministry
of Defence, Department of Defence Production and Supplies in May
1960 prior to which it was a Joint Stock Company owned by P&O
Steam Navigation Company and BI Steam Navigation Company. At
the time of take-over, the company was mainly a ship repair yard.
The yard has been expanded to build warships of 6500 tonne
displacement and merchant ships upto 27000 DWT. The Company has
also diversified into the manufacture and installation of offshore
platforms for ONGC for exploration of Oil. For this purpose, three
additional production units were established, one at Alcock Yard in
Mumbai adjacent to the main yard, another at Nhava and a third at
Mangalore during the period 1977-1985.
9.2 In 1980, it was decided that construction of submarines for the
Navy will be carried out at Mazagon Dock Ltd. A dedicated Yard for
submarine construction was, therefore, built during the period 1982-
88. The yard has significantly served import substitution.
9.3 Since its take-over, the company has built and delivered to the
Indian Navy 6 Leander Class Frigates, 3 Godavari Class Frigates, 3 Missile
Corvettes, 4 Missile Boats, 1 Cadet Training Ship, 2 Submarines and
3 Destroyers. The company has also built 7 Offshore Patrol Vessels for
the Indian Coast Guard. It is the ‘Lead Shipyard’ and is entrusted
with the construction of ‘First of Class’ ships. The company has also
built Cargo and Passenger Ships, Supply Vessels, Diving Support Ship,
Dredgers, Tugs, Tankers, Barges and several other ships for a number
of customers in India as well as abroad. In the offshore business,
MDL has fabricated and delivered 65 Well Head Platforms, 3 Process
Platforms, 2 Jack-up Rigs and coated 903 Kms. and laid 586 Kms. of
sub-sea pipelines for ONGCL. About 50 percent of the offshore
platforms installed in the Bombay High, have been build by MDL.
The paid up capital of the Company stands at Rs. 199.20 crore. The
shipyard has been upgraded to Schedule ‘A’ on 5th January, 2000.

63
Product Range
9.4 The activities of the Company may be classified into:
(a) Ship building
(b) Ship repair and
(c) Construction of off-shore platforms
Shipbuilding is undertaken at the North Yard and South
Yard. Submarines are built in the East Yard.
Defence Sector Products
Destroyers, Frigates, Corvettes, Missile Boats, Cadets Training Ship,
Offshore Patrol Vessel and Submarines.
Civil Production
(a) Cargo Ships, Coasters, Passenger-cum-Cargo Ships, Tankers,
Offshore Supply Vessels, Dredgers, Tugs, Cargo Barges,
Floating Cranes, Sail Training Ships, Fishing Trawlers, Barges,
Pontoons & Launches, Multi Purpose Support Vessels,
Diving Support Vessels.
(b) Surface Shipbuilding production, Ship repair and General
Engineering activities are carried out in the North Yard &
South Yard.
I. Offshore fabrication is done at Alcock Yard and Nhava Yard
consists of:
— Fabrication of Wellhead Platforms, Process Platforms, Jack-
up Rigs.
— Modifications and repairs to Offshore structures.
—T ransportation, Installation and laying of subsea pipelines.
Capacity Utilisation
9.5 As regards the capacity utilisation of shipbuilding in MDL in
the last three years, the information furnished by the Ministry is as
under:
Year Capacity Utilisation
2001-2002 26.92%
2002-2003 33.19%
2003-2004 71.00%

64
The above figures are related to shipbuilding. As regards the
capacity utilisation of submarines, the Ministry stated that the
submarine facilities are presently lying idle due to lack of orders.
When the Committee asked the reasons for low Order Book
position and the proposal of the Government to address this problem
for optimal utilization of the capacity, the Ministry replied:
“Low Order Book position during the years 2000-01 to 2002-03
was due to delay in placement of orders for P17 and P15A ships.
As regards Merchant Ship building is concerned the current trend
is to procure large vessels of over 30,000 DWT capacity and hence
MDL has not been in a position to participate in tenders for such
requirement due to its infrastructure limitations. MDL has not been
in a position to furnish competitive offer in comparison to other
private Shipyards/Foreign Yards, for medium and small vessels
due to (a) their low labour input cost and overheads (b) incidents
of Octroi Duty on inputs which is applicable for Mumbai Municipal
Corporation (c) confirmed availability of subsidy at the time of
quotation for export orders (as per the present subsidy scheme,
the subsidy applicable can be applied on receipt of order by the
Shipyard and will be granted subject to availability of funds and
valuation of price in case of non tender orders). MDL will be able
to improve on productivity and competitiveness gradually after
the modernization project such as Modular Shop, additional Wet
Basin, Heavy Lift Crane etc. are completed. Hence, it is necessary
to place orders for P17A early so that similar situation of under-
utilisation does not recur.”
9.6 The Committee asked the Ministry to state the reasons for
‘Nil’ order position of Heavy Engineering Division of MDL. The
Ministry has replied as under:
“The Heavy Engineering Division business includes work related
to fabrication of jackets and platforms for offshore projects of
ONGC and includes also the repairs/modifications to existing
structures at Bombay High. The Division’s product range also
includes items such as Pressure V essels of various sizes and types
required by Industries such as Refineries, Fertiliser & Chemical
Plants, Power Stations, etc. besides other heavy fabrication work
related project.
As far as offshore work for the ONGC is concerned, MDL is at a
disadvantage as it has no marine spread assets (such as specialized

65
barges, support vessels, floating cranes, etc.) which consequently
limits MDL’s role in this field to that of only an onshore fabricator
of jackets/platforms. To obtain orders for such work, MDL has to
offer its services as a fabrication sub-contractor to one or more of
the main bidders for the concerned ONGC tenders which are all
of the turn-key variety and further, MDL has to enter into a pre-
bid agreement with the main bidder(s) for that purpose. Only if
that main bidder wins that contract, can MDL expect to obtain the
fabrication order as a sub-contractor. As per ONGC’s current
stipulation, MDL cannot qualify as a main bidder. MDL has been
following this line of action for quote some time now.
Of late, ONGC’s orders for such offshore new projects have also
started to dwindle but MDL is continuing to pursue the above
strategy as briefly enunciated above to try and obtain fabrication
orders for jackets/platforms through main bidders such as L&T
and EIL. Insofar as non-ONGC work is concerned, the Heavy Engg.
Division is continuing to try and obtain fabrication orders but
without success so far, as there as established players in this field
already .”
9.7 During the evidence on being asked by the Committee about
the submarine construction, the CMD, MDL stated:
“As regards the submarine construction, we have got it in 1992
and 1994. Two submarines were delivered. Since then, there is no
order.”
The Ministry was further asked by the Committee about the reasons
for under utilisation of capacity of MDL. In its reply, the Ministry
stated as under:
“The utilization of shipbuilding capacity in MDL has been 71.36%
and 75.86% during 2003-04 and 2004-05. Three stealth frigates have
already been launched and the first ship of P15A destroyer is
getting ready for launching. The hull shops will be underutilized
as the slipways will become vacant after the launch of P15A Ships.
Placement of orders for follow-up of projects 17 and Project 15A
is, therefore, very crucial for sustainability of MDL’s capacity
utilization.
The order book position of the Heavy Engineering division is
Nil as on today. However Mazagon Dock Ltd. is in dialogue with
various companies in order to work as their fabricators in cases of
forthcoming orders from ONGC.”

66
9.8 The Committee asked the Ministry on the investment made till
date to build assembly line for submarines at Mazagaon Dock Ltd.
and how far this investment has been utilized by way of getting returns
thereon. The reply furnished by the Ministry is as under:
“The investment made in East Yard (Submarine construction yard)
for creation of submarine construction was Rs. 49.34 Crore in 1984.
The construction of the first and second submarines commenced
in January 1984 and September 1984 respectively. Both these
submarines were commissioned in February 1992 and May 1994
respectively. Subsequently East Yard also constructed one Missile
Boat P 1241 RE from May 1990 to December 1994. EY facility was
idle from January 1995 to June 1998 and since then mid-life refit
cum modernization of two SSK submarines were undertaken at
EY. However, the dedicated assembly line for construction of
submarines has been idle since commissioning of second submarine,
as follow-up order to continue new construction of Submarines
has not been placed by the Navy.”
9.9 The Committee further asked the reasons for non-placement of
orders with MDL and responsibility fixed for delay in processing the
case for placing order for the submarines. The Ministry has stated as
under:
“The proposal for the acquisition of submarines for the Indian
Navy is presently under consideration of Government.”
The Committee when desired to know the specific reasons for
non-utilisation of submarine building facilities and exploring
possibilities for supplying indigenously made submarines to other
countries, the Ministry replied as under:
“The specific reason for non-utilisation of submarine building
facilities, insofar as MDL is concerned is that no submarine building
order has been placed on MDL since 1993 till date. The last and
the only submarine building order placed on MDL was in the
1980’s for two submarines which have since been successfully
executed and delivered to the Indian Navy in 1992 and 1994.
There is no indigenous design available with the country for
construction of submarine.”
The Committee asked the reasons for failure of the Government to
take a decision on the Navy’s request to get submarines for them and

67
cost escalations due to delay in discussion. The Ministry replied:
“Government recognize the need to restart the submarine
production line at MDL, Mumbai, for preserving skills relating to
submarine building and for augmenting the strength of Naval
submarine fleet. A proposal for indigenous construction of
submarines is presently under consideration.”
9.10 When the Committee enquired about the shortage of
submarines after 1994 and the status of acquisition of submarines, the
Defence Secretary during oral evidence stated:
“It is correct to say that the Mazagon Dockyard did not
manufacture submarines after 1994. In fact, it was doing the
repairing and maintenance work of submarine. As far as the
requirement of the Navy is concerned, talks are going on with the
French companies. The aim even at that time was that it would be
bought through technology transfer and the submarine will be
built in our submarine manufacturing yard, that is Mazagon
Docks.”
9.11 As regard the query of cost escalation due to delay in finalizing
the submarine project, the Defence Secretary stated:
“There was a question of cost escalation because the negotiation
were prolonging. So the Ministry of Defence again negotiated
regarding limiting cost escalation and finally last week the Cabinet
Committee on Security have cleared the submarine projects and
India will manufacture Scorpene class submarine with French
technology and French parts in the Mazagon Docks. So our
Mazagon Dock capability will be restored.”
The Committee asked as to when the MDL’s capacity was expected
to be utilized with the current order position and what has been that
latest position of getting further orders of Project 17 & 15A. The
Ministry replied as under:
“MDL’s capacity for shipbuilding needs to be viewed from 2 angles;
one being from the angle of utilization of manpower and the second
being from the angle of utilization of its basic infrastructure such
as slipways and hull fabrication shops. With the current order
position, MDL’s capacity is expected to be by and large, fully
utilized upto the year 2010 as far as manpower is concerned.
However, as far as basic infrastructure is concerned, MDL’s
shipbuilding capacity would progressively remain unutilised

68
commencing end 2005 when the slipways would start falling vacant
and the loading of the hull fabrication shops starts getting reduced.
This is because both the P-17 & P-15A ships (total 6 in number)
would have largely finished with their respective hull fabrication
and launching requirements by then.
Three Project 17 class of ships presently under construction, are
likely to be delivered between March 2007 and March 2008. Orders
for three Project 15A ships have been placed on the yard. Their
delivery class are likely to be between March 2009 to Sep. 2010.”
Perspective Plan
9.12 As regards the Perspective Plan, the Ministry submitted as
under:
“The Perspective Plan of MDL covering the Tenth and Eleventh
Plan period from 2002-2003 to 2011-2012 has been prepared based
on the shipbuilding and submarine construction projects expected
to be assigned to MDL in light of the long term acquisition plan
of the Indian Navy, in addition to existing orders in hand. However,
in view of the uncertainty over the anticipated orders materializing
as the Naval Plans are undergoing changes, the Company is in
the process of formulating a Corporate plan upto 2012.”
9.13 The Committee further asked details of the perspective plan
prepared by MDL for 10th and 11th Plan periods and the percentage
of funds utilization and physical achievements made so far. The
Ministry replied as under:
“The perspective plan of MDL is based on Indian Navy’s
acquisition plan for the Tenth and Eleventh Plan periods. The plan
is under preparation in consultation with Indian Navy . It is
understood that orders for follow-on ships of P17 and P15 A are
planned to be placed on MDL in the foreseeable future. The
perspective plan of MDL will be finalized after firming of the
Naval acquisition plan.”
9.14 During the oral evidence on the orders to be obtained by
MDL from Navy, CMD, MDL informed the Committee:
“It is the Indian Navy’s acquisition plan for the XI, XII and the
XIII Plans. For the MDL, they have earmarked 17 Alfa frigates,
P75 etc. during the XI Plan.”

69
Modernisation/Upgradation
9.15 When the Committee asked as to the efforts made by the
Ministry for modernization/upgradation of the MDL, the Ministry
replied as under:
“The Company’s 10 year modernization and capital investment
plan has been approved by the Government. The Primary objective
is to maximize productivity of existing capital assets by providing
balancing equipments and judicious essential replacements. New
generation plant and machinery is acquired where new product
lines are taken up under diversification.”
The total capital outlay proposed is approximately Rs. 445 crore.
Leasing of equipment and machinery is preferred. Internal generation
will also help finance a part of the costs. The infrastructure to be
developed are:
(i) Modular workshop with EOT cranes
(ii) Extension of slipway No. 2 in South Yard
(iii) Additional West Basin with LL Cranes
(iv) Cradle Assembly shop & stores for Submarines
(v) Upgradation of Design Software
(vi) Upgradation of Welding stations.
Creation of the above facilities is expected to be completed by
early 2007.
9.16 During the oral evidence on the issue of modernisation, CMD,
MDL further supplemented as under:
“This slide is just to show you those 11 blocks will be done. Each
block will stand-alone and they will be integrated after the
modernization is done. We will have a crane of 300 tonnes.
Presently, our heaviest crane is 60 tonnes only. This is a crane
which we are showing in the slide. This is the way in which they
will be straddling along. These are the main ingredients of the
modernization. Today, in fact, the stage is that we do not have
wet basins. We are dependent on port trusts. We hire them for a
particular time and then our manpower has to go in for work but
security problems are there. All kinds of productivity losses are
there. We have taken a very major initiative on outsourcing.

70
Total modernization package is around Rs. 417 crore including
submarine projects, as well as, ships which we are doing. This
will be valid for future ships also. As I said in one of my earlier
slides that although money has been given to this shipyard but
shipyard has not invested any money into modernization after
1994. That means there is no modernization at all. This is the way
all those things are essential. “Otherwise, we will be stuck and
built periods will be like as it used to be earlier.”
9.17 On the issue of investment being made on the modernization
of MDL, Shipyards, the CMD, MDL informed the Committee as under:
“……basically, coming 1994 onwards, we have not had any
investments in modernization for the shipyards. I fact, there has
been hardly any investment for upgradation and modernization…..”
Exports
9.18 When the Committee desired to know the export order position
of MDL, the Ministry replied as under:
“In spite of various measures such as market research and survey,
appointment of agents, circulation of MDL product literature,
participation in exhibitions, MDL has not been able to secure export
orders in the recent past because of the following constraints:
(a) Most foreign shipyards are being subsidized heavily by their
respective governments.
(b) Soft loans/credit facilities are available to buyers from
foreign shipyards.
The Company, however, will continue with its efforts such as
participating in International exhibitions and circulating its product
literature, advertisement on Internet and in leading journals on
shipbuilding, working closely with RITES for securing export and
participating in global tenders.
CMD, MDL during the oral evidence informed the Committee—
“today, one of the biggest hurdles is that all the countries, which
are coming to us, want ‘soft loan funding pattern’. They say that
you may fund them. We have requested the Ministry, and they are
very positively looking at it. Now, Sir, export is one of the key
result areas.”

71
9.19 The Ministry was asked by the Committee to comment on
inability of MDL to secure any order for exports due to foreign
Shipyards being heavily subsidized by their Governments and soft
loans etc. offered by them to the buyers. The Ministry replied as under:
“MDL continues with efforts as enumerated below:
• Sourcing shipbuilding tenders from overseas clients through
websites, high commissions & agents.
• Participating in International exhibitions and circulating
product literature.
• Advertising on Internet and in leading journals of
shipbuilding.
• Participation in global tenders.
• Inviting international dignitaries to MDL Yards for
presentations on the Company’s capabilities.
While the scope for exporting warships awaits enlargement with
availability of indigenous weapon systems, the company’s export
efforts are aimed at a few types of Offshore Patrol and Auxiliary
Vessels in the Defence sector and Dredgers & proven selected ferries
in the Merchant-ship Sector.”
9.20 The Ministry further supplemented that the Indian
Shipbuilding industry can become competitive internationally if the
following steps are taken by the Government:
• Arrange to provide soft loans/credit facilities to the buyers
similar to those provided by foreign shipyards, such as Title
XI guarantees provided by the US Government.
•P rovide working capital at low interest rates commensurate
with the interest rates given in countries like Japan/Korea/
USA for export viz. around 4%.
• Exemption of Plant & Machinery procured for shipbuilding,
from Customs/Excise duties, as applicable to the Ship Repair
industry.
• Where offers are to be made on deferred payment basis,
the interest on export credits offered through financial
institutions may be subsidized to the extent that the interest
payable by the buyer is brought at par with that being
charged in other countries.

72
• Exemption from Income Tax payable in respect of engineers/
specialists from original Equipment Manufactures (OEM’s)
deputed to the Shipyards for assisting with installation, STW
(setting to work and commissioning of their products.)
• Exemption from levy on TOT and related activities.
• Rationalisation of taxation to enable the Shipyard to compete
on a level playing field at both National and International
levels.”
9.21 The Committee asked the reasons for higher labour input cost
and overheads in comparison to other shipyards and whether the issues
of octroi duty and subsidy were taken up at appropriate level. The
Ministry replied as under:
“The reasons for higher labour input cost are due to higher
mandays expended in executing a given order as compared to
other shipyards for the same class of ships. The higher mandays
are primarily due to the peculiar trade structure of workmen at
MDL due to historical reasons. MDL is currently in the process to
convert the workmen into multi-skilled category and also to
introduce work output norms. Both these initiatives have some
linked monetary incentives as approved by the Board. It is expected
that within the next year or so the mandays expended at MDL
would favourably compare with those at other shipyards for similar
work.
As regards octroi duty, etc. the recent promulgation of VAT would
largely eliminate the adverse effects of high sales tax levies hitherto
in force in Maharashtra. As regards octroi the ill effects would be
felt on the cost of the civil ships. As regards subsidy for exports,
a 30% subsidy on value of ship for export, irrespective of size,
already exists.”
9.22 The Committee asked the Ministry regarding steps being taken
by the Government to make MDL competitive in international arena
as also to improve the quality of the products offered by the Dock.
The Ministry replied as under:
“MDL has been sourcing various tenders through Internet, Indian
Mission Aboard and directly from customers. Membership of
tenders information website is also taken to obtain information on
International and national tenders. In order to make competitive
offer proposal are made based on outsourcing of construction work

73
wherever feasible. Company also maintains accreditation to ISO
9000-2000 standard for quality assurance which is essential for
export market.
MDL currently has plans for modernization of the infrastructure
as part of Naval Project to facilitate reduction in build period and
cost of Ships. This is being done by having longer slipways, heavier
cranes, additional wet basin and modular construction shops in
line with international……”
9.23 During the oral evidence the Committee wanted to know the
efforts being made by MDL for enhancing its area, the CMD, MDL
informed the Committee:
“This slide shows the map of our Bombay Docks. If you see the
slide, one the left-hand side is the Mumbai Port Trust. On the
right-hand side is the Ship-breaking Yard of the Darukhana, as we
have called. We are totally cocooned between them. As regards
the draughts, we are stuck at 4.5 meters, and there is no scope for
further expansion. Today, there is a definite need for deeper
draughts if we are going to hit the global market. There is a need
for ships of more than hundred thousand tonnes all around the
shipping industry. We have capacity only for 126 thousand tonnes
and not more than that. It is because of draught constraints, etc.
Therefore, we are looking at the Green Field Site. As Mr. Chairman
has asked, we are looking for a Green field site in Bombay , but I
do not think there is any possibility of that. There has to be a
very deep draught. There has to be a good availability of sea
frontage. This exercise is going on in line with the Government’s
policy of enabling capacities in the East Coast as well as West
Coast.
……We have got one in Gujarat Coast and the other is in the East
Coast on Krishna-Godavari Basin. It is because there is some
possibility of deep draught.”
9.24 The Committee note that MDL has not been able to qualify
as the main bidder in shipbuilding tenders due to non-availability
of adequate infrastructure as compared to the private/foreign
shipyards. The Committee further note that other shipyards are
blessed with low labour input cost and overheads and cut in octroi
duties and various subsidies. The Committee, therefore, recommend
that Ministry should chalk out a plan for development and
strengthening of infrastructure of Defence shipyard, not only for
effective participation in shipbuilding tenders but also to qualify as
the main bidder. The Committee also recommend that a study group

74
should be constituted to examine the possibility of extending
exemptions to defence shipyards in the matter of subsidies, tax
benefits and excise duties etc. in order to make it cost effective and
competitive with foreign/private shipyards.
9.25 The Committee also note that there has not been any export
by the company during the last five years. The Committee hope that
after substantial investment for modernisation of shipyard MDL, it
would be possible to initiate and enhance the export at the optimum
level. For this purpose, the Committee desire that Government should
explore the possibility of subsidising shipyards heavily and to extend
soft loan credit facility to the buyers as is being done by some
other countries.
9.26 The Committee note that perspective plan of MDL is based
on the Navy’s acquisition plans for the Tenth and Eleventh plan
period. The Committee desire that not only proposed Navy
acquisition plan should be implemented effectively but also
Committee should be apprised about effective steps taken by the
Ministry in this regard.
9.27 The Committee note the difficulties posed by the CMD,
MDL regarding expansion of the shipyard since at present the
draught of the shipyard is only 4.5 meters and there is no scope of
further increase in draught as well as in length and breadth as it is
surrounded by Mumbai Port Trust and ship-breaking yard of
Darukhana. The Committee also note that MDL is looking for Green
Field site for deeper draught to hit the global market and to make
bigger ships. The Committee, therefore, recommend that the
Government should explore the possibility of arranging a site at the
Gujarat Coast or East Coast, so that the trained manpower and
resources of MDL could be utilised for ship building of more than
1000 tonnes for exports, thereby enabling the MDL to hit the global
market.
9.28 The Committee note that submarine building facility in MDL
has been lying idle for more than eleven years as no order was
given to them. The Committee have been informed that a decision
has now been taken to manufacture Scorpene class submarine with
French technology and French parts in MDL. Since the acquisition
of submarine has been long delayed, the Committee desire the
Ministry to take urgent steps to upgrade the facilities at submarine
building of MDL in a time-bound manner with adequate allocation
of funds and induction of technical manpower so that any further
delay in manufacturing of submarine may be avoided.

75
CHAPTER X
PRIVATE SECTOR PARTICIPATION IN DEFENCE PRODUCTION
10.1 The defence requirements of armed forces are largely met by
DPSUs and ordnance factories which form the backbone of defence
production. The private sector which would not participate in defence
production earlier has grown in size and reach over the years. It has
acquired modern manufacturing capabilities and resources. The
Government opened up defence production to private sector and
opened 26% Foreign Direct Investment (FDI) in May 2001. In reply to
a question why FDI in Defence Sector has not yet taken place, the
Ministry has replied as under:
“Presently, in the Defence strategic sector, Foreign Direct Investment
(FDI) is permitted with prior Government approval subject to
licensing and security requirements. Government had recently
considered a proposal to impose the composite ceiling of 49% with
no sub-ceiling for FDI and FII (Foreign Institutional Investment) in
the Defence Production sector. After a careful examination of the
proposal, it was decided that in view of the current geo-political
environment in the sub-continent, it will not be appropriate to
expose the strategic Defence Sector to the uncertainty caused by
sanctions/withdrawals etc. under the policy of foreign government.”
10.2 To understand the role of private sector in defence production
and how they can contribute more effectively in strengthening
indigenous defence production, the Committee decided to hear the
views of Confederation of Indian Industry.
10.3 In a presentation before the Committee the representatives of
Confederation of Indian Industry strongly emphasized the need for
public-private partnerships for co-development and manufacture of
defence system. They stated that Secretary (Defence Production) should
be given a mandate to develop private/public defence production
capabilities in the country.
10.4 On being asked by the Committee regarding capability of
private sector to meet the requirement of defence forces, the
representative stated:
“when we look at generic… capability, there are enough islands of
excellence within the country. There is enough basic capability in
Indian industrial sector to meet the requirements. But we talk
specific things. Unless the Indian industry goes through the process
of developing it for a customer. The capability does not exist and
that is a journey that we all have to take.”

76
10.5 They further stated preferential treatment is being given to
foreign vendors in payment terms and duties and taxes. Indian vendors
are loaded with Excise, Sales Tax, and Octroi as applicable where as
foreign vendor is generally exempt from all duties. They, therefore,
stressed for level playing field with foreign vendor.
10.6 When asked about the reaction of Defence Ministry of the
problem of private sector, the representative stated:
“We are constantly dialoguing with them and we find at the level
of policy-making, there is a very positive approach. Implementation
is the biggest issue.”
10.7 The Committee note that over the years the private sector
has grown in size and reach to form an important part of country’s
industrial base. The Committee are of the view that their capabilities
and resources should be made use of in strengthening the country’s
defence production. The Committee feel that with their expertise
and capability, the public/private sector/DRDO can contribute in
building self reliance and home grown technologies in major defence
systems. The Committee also feel that now there is a need to create
an environment where both public and private sector/DRDO can
grow together and be partner with each other. Further R&D efforts
of both the public and private sector should be synergised and,
coordinated by the DRDO.
The Committee, therefore, recommend the Government to chalk
out a National Defence Production policy to synergise the capabilities
of public and private sector and DRDO in defence production with
greater emphasis on indigenous content. The Committee also
recommend the Government to explore the possibility of promoting
defence R&D by involving private sector in selective R&D projects.
10.8 The Committee note that at present 45% of the production
work is outsourced to private sector. The Committee desire the
Government to explore the possibility of outsourcing more and more
work to the private sector particularly in areas where they have
sufficient infrastructure and technology to supply the required
products.
   N
EW D ELHI; BALASAHEB VIKHE PATIL,
16 February, 2006 Chairman,
27 Magha, 1927 (Saka) Standing Committee on Defence.

77
APPENDIX
MINUTES OF THE THIRTIETH SITTING OF THE STANDING
COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE (2004-05)
The Committee sat on Tuesday, the 24th May, 2005 at 1100 hrs. to
1235 in Committee  Room ‘B’, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Shri, Balasaheb Vikhe Patil— Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri A.V . Bellarmin
3. Shri Suresh Chandel
4. Shri Thupstan Chhewang
5. Shri Ramesh Jigajinagi
6. Dr. C. Krishnan
7. Shri S.D. Mandlik
8. Shri Ganesh Prasad Singh
Rajya Sabha
9. Dr. Farooq Abdullah
10. Shri Janardan Dwivedi
11. Shri Pramod Mahajan
12. Shri Anand Sharma
13. Shri Lalit Suri
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri P .D.T. Achary — Secretary
2. Shri P .K. Bhandari — Director
3. Smt. Anita Jain — Deputy Secretary
4. Shri D.R. Shekhar — Under Secretary
List of Witness of Ministry of Defence
1. Shri Ajai Vikram Singh, Defence Secretary
2. Shri M. Natarajan, Secretary (R&D)

78
3. Ms. Somi Tandon, Secretary (Def. Min.)
4. Shri S. Banerjee, Addl. Secretary (DP)
5. Shri H.C. Gupta, Special Secretary (Acq.)
6. Shri V .R.S. Natarajan, CMD, BEML
7. Maj. Gen. R.S. Balyan, DQA (Armament)
8. Shri Sudhir Nath, JS (HAL)
9. Smt. Rita Menon, JS (SY)
10. Shri Alok Perti, JS (S/OF)
11. Shri Tapan Ray, JS (X)
12. Shri R.K.M. Bhattacharya, JS (C)
13. Shri P .K. Mishra, Chairman, OFB & DGOF
14. R.Adm. R.M. Bhatia, CMD, MDL
15. Shri Devasis Chowdhury, CMD, Midhani
2. At the outset, the Hon’ble Chairman welcomed the
representatives of Ministry of Defence to the sitting of the Committee
and invited them to brief the Committee on the subject ‘Defence
Ordnance Factories’ and ‘Defence Public Sector Undertakings’.
3. The Defence Secretary then informed that a presentation on
Defence Ordnance Factories and Defence Public Sector Undertakings
which would be made before the Committee by the concerned official.
4. The Chairman, Ordnance Factory Board then apprised the
Committee about the brief history of Indian Ordnance Factories
organisation, location of ordnance factories, share of Ordnance Factories
in defence production and share of Ordnance Factories in Army Budget.
He also apprised the Committee about the ammunitions and explosives
being supplied to Defence Forces by the Ordnance Factories. He also
stressed for autonomy for Ordnance Factories.
5. Representative of the Ministry also informed the Committee
about the MBT Arjun and its production capacity which would be
fifty tanks per year from 2007-08 onwards. He further stated that there
would be continuous growth in turnover, productivity and expansion
of customer profile. The Ordnance Factories were facing challenges in
the field of stagnant requirement of Indian Armed Forces, changes in
Geo-political scenario, rapid advancement in war technology, opening
up of Defence sector to Private Sector, no scope for growth in export
in the operated market segment. The Ministry further informed that
the Ordnance Factories was also upgrading 155 mm Bofors guns.

79
6. The Chairman and Members raised certain queries on the
functioning of Ordinance  Factories and the same were resolved by
the Ministry. The Members also desired that a visit to PSUs/Ordnance
Factories may be arranged at the earliest.
7. The briefing remained inconclusive.
8. The verbatim record of the proceedings was kept.
The Witnesses then withdrew.
The Committee then adjourned.

80
MINUTES OF THE THIRTY FIRST SITTING OF THE STANDING
COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE (2004-05)
The Committee sat on Thursday, 2nd June, 2005 at 1100 hrs. to
1615 in Committee  Room No. 139, Parliament House Annexe,
New Delhi.
PRESENT
Shri, Balasaheb Vikhe Patil— Chairman
M
EMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Ramesh Jigajinagi
3. Dr. C. Krishnan
4. Shri Raghuraj Singh Shakya
5. Shri Balashowry Vallabhaneni
Rajya Sabha
6. Shri Janardan Dwivedi
7. Shri Lalit Suri
SECRETARIAT
1. Shri M. Rajagopalan Nair — Additional Secretary
2. Shri P .K. Bhandari — Director
3. Smt. Anita Jain — Deputy Secretary
4. Shri D.R. Shekhar — Under Secretary
Representatives of Ministry of Defence
1. Shri Ajai Vikram Singh, Defence Secretary
2. Shri Shekhar Dutt, Secretary (DP)
3. Dr. M. Natarajan, Secretary (R&D)
4. Ms. Somi Tandon, Secretary (Defence Finance)
5. Shri H.C. Gupta, Special Secretary (Acquisition)
6. Shri S. Banerjee, AS (DP)

81
7. Shri Ranjit Issar, Additional Secretary (I)
8. Shri Sudhir Nath, JS (HAL)
9. Smt. Rita Menon, JS (SY)
10. Shri Alok Perti, JS (S/OF)
11. Shri Tapan Ray, JS (X)
12. Shri R.K.M. Bhattacharya, JS (COORD)
13. Shri S.C. Narang, CCR &D (R&M)
14. Shri K.U. Limaye, CCR&D (ECS)
15. Dr. D. Banerjee (CCR&D) (AMS)
16. Maj. Gen. R.S. Balyan, DQA (Armament)
17. Shri P .K. Misra, Chairman OFB & DGOF
18. Shri Ashok K. Baweja, Chairman, HAL
19. Shri V .R.S. Natrajan, CMD, BEML
20. Maj. Gen. R. Gossain, CMD, BDL
21. Shri Y. Gopala Rao, CMD BEL
22. R Adm. R.M. Bhatia, CMD, MDL
23. Shri Devasis Chowdhury, CMD, Midhani
24. Rear Adm. Sampath Pillai, CMD GSL
25. Cmde G.N. Sreekumar, CMD, GRSE
26. Shri B. Saha, Secretary , OFB
27. Cdr Hardev Inder, Regional Chief Minister, GRSE
28. Shri K.G. Gupta, DDB/O.F. Cell
2. At the outset, the Hon’ble Chairman welcomed the
representatives of the Ministry of Defence to the sitting of the
Committee and invited them to make presentation on the subject
‘Defence Ordnance Factories’. The representatives of the Ministry
apprised the Hon’ble Chairman and some members of the Committee
of the various aspects of the ordnance factories viz. capacity utilization,
technological upgradation, manpower planning, etc. The Committee
felt that a roadmap should be prepared for the Defence Public Sector
Undertakings (DPSUs), Ordnance Factories and R&D Organisations with
the aim of attaining self-reliance in Defence technologies. The Defence
Secretary and other representatives of the Ministry further elaborated
the issues raised by Members.
3. The committee resumed the sitting after lunch break and heard
the presentation by the representatives of the Ministry on Defence

82
Public Sector Undertakings (DPSUs). Out of the eight Defence PSUs,
Chief Managing Directors (CMDs) of the four PSUs viz Hindustan
Aeronautics Limited (HAL), Bharat Electronics Limited (BEL), Mishra
Dhatu Nigam Limited (MIDHANI), and Bharat Earth Movers Limited
(BEML) made presentation on the functioning and performance of their
respective organisation.
4. The Committee discussed with representatives of HAL the issues
of participation of Private Sector in the production of fighter aircraft
so as to minimise dependency on foreign suppliers, shortage of
manpower in HAL in view of the ongoing recruitment policy of the
Government. The CMD of BEL inter-alia apprised the Committee of
the major projects where BEL is closely working with DRDO and
supply of Radars to Defence Forces. The representative of MIDHANI
apprised the Committee of the strategic importance of company in
supply of special materials like super alloys for Department of Space,
Atomic Energy & Defence. He also replied to queries of members
regarding manufacture of bullet proof jackets for the Armed Forces.
The CMD, BEML elaborated the major achievements of the company.
5. The representatives of the Ministry then responded to the queries
raised by the Chairman and other members of the Committee. The
Presentation, however, remained inconclusive.
6. A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept.
The Committee then adjourned.

83
MINUTES OF THE THIRTY THIRD SITTING OF THE STANDING
COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE (2004-05)
The Committee sat on Monday, the 4th July, 2005 at 1500 hrs. to
1800 in Committee Room No. ‘G-074’, Parliament Library Building,
New Delhi.
PRESENT
Shri, Balasaheb Vikhe Patil— Chairman
M
EMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Churchill Alemao
3. Shri Iliyas Azmi
4. Smt. Sangeeta Kumari Singh Deo
5. Shri Ramesh Jigajinagi
6. Shri Suresh Kalmadi
7. Shri S.D. Mandlik
8. Dr. K.S. Manoj
9. Shri Raghuraj Singh Shakya
10. Shri Mahadeorao Shivankar
11. Shri Balashowry Vallabhaneni
12. Ms. Ingrid Mcleod
Rajya Sabha
13. Shri R.K. Anand
14. Gen. (Retd.) Shankar Rao Chowdhury
15. Smt. N.P . Durga
16. Shri Janardan Dwivedi
17. Shri Mukhtar Abbas Naqvi
18. Shri Anand Sharma
19. Shri Lalit Suri

84
SECRETARIAT
1. Shri John Joseph — Secretary
2. Shri P .K. Bhandari — Director
3. Smt. Anita Jain — Deputy Secretary
4. Shri D.R. Shekhar — Under Secretary
Representatives of Confederation of Indian Industry
Sl.No. Name Designation
 1. Shri Satish K. Kaura Chairman, CII Fiscal and
Institutional Infrastructure
Council
 2. Shri M.V . Kotwal Sr. Vice President, Larsen &
Toubro Limited
 3. Brig. K.A. Hai Chief Executive, Mahindra
and Mahindra Limited
 4. Shri Joseph Alexander V ice President (Govt.
Relations) Tata Services
Limited
 5. Shri S. Sen Head Defence Division and
Deputy Director General, CII
 6. Shri N.B. Mathur Adviser, CII
 7. Shri Sujith Haridas Director (Defence), CII
 8. Shri Rakesh Kumar Verma Consultant (Defence), CII
 9. Shri V . Vaidhyanathan Executive Officer, CII
10. Dr. A. Bashir GM, Tata Power
Representatives of Ministry of Defence
Sl.No. Name Designation
1. Ms. Somi Tandon Secretary (Def. Fin.)
2. Shri H.C. Gupta Spl. Secy. (Acq)
3. Shri Ranjit Issar Additional Secretary (I)
4. Shri S. Banerjee Addl. Secy. (DP)
5. Smt. Rita Menon JS (SY)
6. Shri Alok Perti JS (S/OF)
7. Shri R.K.M. Bhattacharya JS (COORD)

85
 8. Shri D.C. Bajaj Adviser (Cost)
 9. Maj. Gen. R. Gossain CMD, BDL
10. Rear Adm. R.M. Bhatia CMD, MDL
11. Rear Adm. Sampath Pillai CMD, GSL
12. Rear Adm. T.S. Ganeshan CMD, GRSE
2. At the outset, the Hon’ble Chairman welcomed the
representatives of Confederation of Indian Industry (CII) to the sitting
of the Committee and invited their attention to Direction 58 of the
Directions by the Speaker, Lok Sabha and asked them to brief the
Committee on ‘The Role of Private Sector in Defence Production’. The
representatives of Confederation of Indian Industry apprised the
Committee about the burgeoning defence imports which amounted to
70 percent of the present requirements. They further informed that the
import of equipments included sub-systems and components which
could be made within the country instead of importing them. The
representatives of the CII expressed need to move beyond import
substitution and to depend on “Home Grown Technologies”.
3. Representatives of CII also stressed that basic capability and
potentiality of the Indian Industrial sector would have to be developed
in the area of atomic energy, space and defence sector. They further
stressed to develop strong private/public partnership and the private
sector could be benefited with the huge set up of CSIR and DRDO
labs. The CII further deposed that Government must take imperative
initiative for strong private sector participation in defence sector. It
was pointed out that for basic R&D, there was a need to change the
concept ‘of no cost no commitment’ to ‘full cost no commitment’ or
‘no cost full commitment’.
4. The Chairman and Members raised certain queries and the same
were resolved by the representatives of CII. On certain issues,
representatives of CII assured to furnish the information to Committee
later on.
(Witnesses then withdrew)
5. The Hon’ble Chairman then brought to the notice of the
Committee Members that the permission to visit PSUs/Ordnance
Factories is still pending clearance from Hon’ble Speaker and that he
had decided to hold the meeting with all the Chairmen of the
Parliamentary Committees in the ensuing session and would give
clearance after that only.

86
6. Hon’ble Chairman then welcomed the representatives of Ministry
of Defence and invited their attention to Direction 55 of the Directions
by the Speaker, Lok Sabha and asked them to brief the Committee on
the role of defence shipyards in attaining self-reliance in the production
of off-shore patrol vessels and submarines and frigates for the defence
forces and also the constraints being faced by them.
7. CMD, Mazagon Dock Limited gave presentation on financial
performance, major on-going projects, capacity utilisation, new
initiatives planned, R&D efforts, MoU achievements, area of concern
and support required. The Committee expressed their displeasure over
non-utilisation of submarine construction capability which was lying
idle. CMD stated that for the last ten years, there were no orders for
construction of submarines, however, 71 percent of shipbuilding
capacity was being utilised. Secretary (Defence Finance) replied that
decision for giving orders for construction of submarines to MDL was
being processed at the highest level in the Ministry.
8. CMD, Goa Shipyards Limited (GSL) and CMD, Garden Reach
Shipbuilders & Engineers (GRSE) also gave presentations on the profile
of the two companies, order book position and capacity utilisation.
The Chairman and Members raised certain queries and the same were
resolved by the representatives of Ministry of Defence.
9. The verbatim record of the proceedings was kept.
The witnesses then withdrew.
The Committee then adjourned.

87
MINUTES OF THE THIRTY FOURTH SITTING OF THE
STANDING COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE (2004-05)
The Committee sat on Thursday, the 14th July, 2005 at 1610 hrs. to
1740 hrs. in Committee Room ‘B’, Parliament House Annexe,
New Delhi.
PRESENT
Shri Balasaheb Vikhe Patil— Chairman
M
EMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Churchill Alemao
3. Shri Iliyas Azmi
4. Shri A.V . Bellarmin
5. Shri Suresh Chandel
6. Smt. Sangeeta Kumari Singh Deo
7. Dr. C. Krishnan
8. Shri Raghuraj Singh Shakya
9. Shri Ganesh Prasad Singh
10. Shri Balashowry Vallabhaneni
11. Ms. Ingrid Mcleod
Rajya Sabha
12. Shri R.K. Anand
13. Gen. (Retd.) Shankar Roy Chowdhury
14. Smt. N.P . Durga
15. Shri Janardan Dwivedi
16. Shri Pramod Mahajan
17. Shri Anand Sharma
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri P .K. Bhandari — Director
2. Smt. Anita Jain — Deputy Secretary
3. Shri D.R. Shekhar — Under Secretary

88
Representatives of Ministry of Defence
Sl.No.      Name  Designation
 1. Shri Ajai Vikram Singh Defence Secretary
 2. Shri Shekhar Dutt Secretary (DP)
 3. Ms. Somi Tandon Secretary (Defence Finance)
 4. Shri Ranjit Issar Additional Secretary (I)
 5. Shri S. Banerjee Additional Secretary (DP)
 6. Dr. A.S. Pillai CCR&D (ACE&NS)&DS
 7. Shri Alok Perti JS (S)
 8. Smt. Rita Menon JS (SY)
 9. Shri Sudhir Nath JS (HAL)
10. Shri S.C. Narang CCR&D (R&M)
11. Maj. Gen. Rajnesh Gossain CMD, BDL
2. At the outset, the Hon’ble Chairman welcomed the
representatives of the Ministry of Defence to the sitting of the
Committee and invited them to make presentation on Bharat Dynamics
Limited. The CMD, BDL apprised the Committee about the mission
statement of the company and stated that BDL established itself as an
industry for manufacturing of Integrated guided weapons and
simultaneously emerged as a sophisticated, self-sufficient, high
technology enterprise, serving the defence needs of the nation.
3. The representative of BDL also apprised the Committee about
the production of (27,000) Milan missiles for the Indian Army in
collaboration with Euro Missiles of France and the Russian type Konkur
Missile.
4. The representative of BDL highlighted the company’s
achievement regarding Prithvi-II and Dhanush Missile which were
developed with successful participation of BDL and DRDO.
5. The Secretary (Defence Production) then replied to queries of
members regarding export control regime of missile. He stated that
for exports desirability/permissions has to be taken from the Minister
of External Affairs in each case.
6. The representatives of the Ministry then responded to the queries
raised by the Chairman and other members of the Committee on
private sector participation in defence production.

89
7. The Members of the Committee again demanded for a immediate
tour to the PSUs and Ordnance Factories to see the actual working of
such units before making necessary recommendations and also
expressed desire to meet the Speaker at the earliest.
8. A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept.
Witnesses then withdrew.
The Committee then adjourned.

90
MINUTES OF THE FOURTEENTH SITTING OF THE STANDING
COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE (2005-06)
The Committee sat on Tuesday, the 20th December, 2005 from 0930 hrs.
to 1020 hrs. in Committee Room No. ‘139’, Parliament House Annexe,
New Delhi.
PRESENT
Shri Balasaheb Vikhe Patil— Chairman
M
EMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Iliyas Azmi
3. Shri Suresh Kalmadi
4. Dr. C. Krishnan
5. Shri S.D. Mandlik
6. Dr. K.S. Manoj
Rajya Sabha
7. Smt. N.P . Durga
8. Shri Anand Sharma
9. Shri Lalit Suri
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri R.C. Ahuja — Joint Secretary
2. Smt. Anita Jain — Deputy Secretary
3. Shri D.R. Shekhar — Under Secretary
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members to the
sitting of the Committee.
3. The Committee then took up draft report on ‘Defence Public
Sector Undertakings’ for consideration. However, Hon’ble Chairman
suggested that some more issues need to be incorporated in the draft
Report. Accordingly, the Committee decided to postpone the
consideration of the draft report. The Committee also decided to
consider the amended draft report during the Budget Session of the
Parliament.
The Committee then adjourned.

91
MINUTES OF THE TWENTY SECOND SITTING OF THE
STANDING COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE (2005-06)
The Committee sat on Wednesday, the 8th February, 2006 from
1100 hrs. to 1130 hrs. in Committee Room ‘D’, Parliament House
Annexe, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Shri Balasaheb Vikhe Patil— Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Iliyas Azmi
3. Shri Thupstan Cheewang
4. Dr. K.S. Manoj
5. Shri Raghuraj Singh Shakya
6. Shri Balashowry Vallabhaneni
Rajya Sabha
7. Dr. Farooq Abdullah
8. Shri Janardan Dwivedi
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri S.K. Sharma — Additional Secretary
2. Shri R.C. Ahuja — Joint Secretary
3. Smt. Anita Jain — Deputy Secretary
4. Shri D.R. Shekhar — Under Secretary
2. Under Rule 259 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of
Business in Lok Sabha quorum of the Committee shall be as near as
one third of the total members i.e. ten members, however as only 8
members came to attend the sitting, therefore, the sitting of the
Committee was adjourned.

92
3. ** ** ** ** **
4. Hon’ble Chairman then directed that draft report on ‘Defence
Public Sector Undertakings’ may be considered on 10th February, 2006
before the evidence of non-official experts on ‘Review of Medical
Education and Services in Defence Sector’.
The Committee then adjourned.
**Related to other matters.

93
MINUTES OF THE TWENTY THIRD SITTING OF THE STANDING
COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE (2005-2006)
The Committee sat on Friday, the 10th February, 2006 from 1100 hrs.
to 1240 hrs. in Committee Room ‘G-074’, Parliament House Annexe,
New Delhi.
PRESENT
Shri, Balasaheb Vikhe Patil— Chairman
M
EMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Thupstan Chhewang
3. Dr. C. Krishnan
4. Shri Raghuraj Singh Shakya
Rajya Sabha
5. Dr. Farooq Abdullah
6. Shri Janardan Dwivedi
SECRETARIAT
1. Smt. Anita Jain — Deputy Secretary
2. Shri D.R. Shekhar — Under Secretary
2. The Committee could not take up the consideration & adoption
of draft Report on ‘Defence Public Sector Undertakings’ due to lack of
quorum. Hon’ble Chairman directed that the draft report may be
considered on 16th February, 2006.
3. ** ** ** ** ** **
The Committee then adjourned.
**Related to other matters.

94
MINUTES OF THE TWENTY FOURTH SITTING OF THE
STANDING COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE (2005-2006)
The Committee sat on Wednesday, the 16th February, 2006 from
1500 hrs. to 1700 hrs. in Committee Room ‘D’, Parliament House
Annexe, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Shri, Balasaheb Vikhe Patil— Chairman
M
EMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Iliyas Azmi
3. Shri A.V . Bellarmin
4. Shri Thupstan Chhewang
5. Dr. K.S. Manoj
6. Shri Mahadeorao Shiwankar
7. Shri Ganesh Prasad Singh
8. Shri Balashowry Vallabhaneni
Rajya Sabha
9. Dr. Farooq Abdullah
10. Smt. N.P . Durga
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri R.C. Ahuja — Joint Secretary
2. Smt. Anita Jain — Deputy Secretary
3. Shri D.R. Shekhar — Under Secretary
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members to the
sitting of the Committee.

95
3. The Committee then took up draft report on ‘Defence Public
Sector Undertakings’ for consideration. The Committee considered and
adopted the draft Report with some modifications. The Committee
also authorised the chairman to present the report to the House of
Lok Sabha after making necessary modifications changes in the report.
** ** ** ** ** **
The Committee then adjourned.
**Related to other matters.