10
STANDING COMMITTEE
ON DEFENCE
(2005-06)
FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA
MINISTRY OF DEFENCE
THE ARMED FORCES TRIBUNAL BILL, 2005
TENTH REPORT
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
May, 2006/Vaisakha, 1928 (Saka)

TENTH REPORT
STANDING COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE
(2005-06)
(FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA)
MINISTRY OF DEFENCE
THE ARMED FORCES TRIBUNAL BILL, 2005
Presented to Lok Sabha on 23.5.2006
Laid  in  Rajya Sabha  on 23.5.2006
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
May, 2006/Vaisakha, 1928 (Saka)

C.O.D. No. 74
Price : Rs. 103.00
© 2006 BY LOK S ABHA S ECRETARIAT
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of
Business in Lok Sabha (Eleventh Edition) and Printed by Jainco Art India,
New Delhi-110 005.

CONTENTS
PAGES
COMPOSITION OF THE C OMMITTEE .............................................................. (iii)
INTRODUCTION .............................................................................................. (v)
REPORT
INTRODUCTORY .............................................................................................. 1
CHAPTER I Military Justice System in India .............................. 5
CHAPTER II Armed Forces Tribunal Bill ...................................... 7
CHAPTER III Preamble of the Bill.................................................... 10
CHAPTER IV Leave of any kind ...................................................... 13
CHAPTER V Summary disposal and trials ................................... 14
CHAPTER VI Transfer and Posting ................................................... 16
CHAPTER VII Qualification for appointment of Chairperson
and Members ................................................................ 17
CHAPTER VIII T erm of the office of the Chairperson
and other Members .................................................... 20
CHAPTER IX Jurisdiction and power of the Tribunal fee ......... 21
CHAPTER X Grant of Bail ................................................................. 22
CHAPTER XI Compensation of miscarriage of justice ................ 24
CHAPTER XII Period for availing remedies available .................. 26
CHAPTER XIII Fixing of Time frame ................................................. 27
CHAPTER XIV Jurisdiction of Tribunal and High Court in
Matters relating to appeal ......................................... 28
ANNEXURE .................................................................................................... 31
APPENDICES
Minutes of the sitting of the Committee held on 13 January,
23, 24 and 29 March, 13 and 28 April and 16 May 2006 .......... 39
(i)

COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE
ON DEFENCE (2005-06)
  Shri Balasaheb Vikhe Patil— Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Churchill Alemao
3. Shri Iliyas Azmi
4. Shri A.V . Bellarmin
***5. Shri Suresh Chandel
6. Shri Thupstan Chhewang
7. Smt. Sangeeta Kumari Singh Deo
8. Shri Milind Deora
**9. Smt. Priya Dutt
10. Shri Ramesh Jigajinagi
11. Shri Suresh Kalmadi
12. Dr. C. Krishnan
13. Shri S.D. Mandlik
14. Dr. K.S. Manoj
15. Shri Raghuraj Singh Shakya
16. Shri Mahadeorao Shivankar
17. Shri Ganesh Prasad Singh
18. Shri Manvendra Singh
19. Shri Balashowry Vallabhaneni
20. Ms. Ingrid Mcleod
21. Shri Dharmendra Yadav
(iii)
** Nominated  w.e.f. 9.12.2005.
*** Ceased to be a Member of the Committee w.e.f. 22.12.2005.

Rajya Sabha
@@22. Shri R.K. Anand
23. Dr. Farooq Abdullah
$24. Shri Jai Prakash Aggarwal
*25. Gen. Shankar Roy Chowdhury (Retd.)
26. Shri T.T.V . Dhinakaran
27. Smt. N.P . Durga
†28. Shri Janardan Dwivedi
@@@29. Shri Pramod Mahajan
30. Shri Mukhtar Abbas Naqvi
@31. Shri Anand Sharma
32. Shri Lalit Suri
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri S.K. Sharma — Additional Secretary
2. Shri R.C. Ahuja — Joint Secretary
3. Smt. Anita Jain — Deputy Secretary
4. Shri D.R. Shekhar — Under Secretary
* Ceased to be a Member of the Committee w.e.f. 18.8.2005.
@ Ceased to be a Member of the Committee w.e.f. 29.1.2006.
† Ceased to be a Member of the Committee w.e.f. 8.3.2006.
$ Nominated w.e.f. 8.3.2006.
@@ Ceaed to be a member of the Committee w.e.f. 2.4.2006.
@@@ Demised on 3.5.2006, consequently his seat remained vacant w.e.f. 3.5.2006.
(iv)

(v)
INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairman, Standing Committee on Defence (2005-06) having
been authorized by the Committee to submit the Report on their behalf,
present this Tenth report on ‘The Armed Forces Tribunal Bill, 2005’.
2. The Standing Committee on Defence (2005-06) was constituted
on 5th August, 2005. One of the functions of the Standing Committee,
as laid down in Rule 331E of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of
Business in Lok Sabha, is to examine such Bills pertaining to the
concerned Ministry/Department as are referred to the Committee by
the Chairman, Rajya Sabha or the Speaker, as the case may be, and to
make a Report on the same to the House.
3. The Armed Forces Tribunal Bill, 2005 was introduced in
Rajya Sabha on 20 December 2005 and was referred to the Standing
Committee on Defence by the Hon’ble Speaker on 23 December, 2005.
4. The Committee had the briefing of the representatives of the
Ministry of Defence on the Bill on 13 January, 2006 and oral evidence
on 28 April, 2006. Besides this, the Committee also took evidence of
the Ministry of Law & Justice. The Committee also sought the opinion
of experts in the field on 23, 24 and 29 March and 13 April, 2006.
5. The draft report was considered and adopted by the Standing
Committee on Defence at their sitting held on 16 May, 2006.
6. The Committee were greatly benefited from the views/
suggestions of various individuals/associations/experts on various
provisions of the Bill. They wish to express thanks to all of them who
furnished memoranda and appeared before the Committee for evidence.
7. The Committee wish to express their thanks to the
representatives of the Ministry of Defence and Ministry of Law &
Justice for appearing before the Committee for evidence and for
furnishing the valuable material and information in a very short span
of time which the Committee desired in connection with the
examination of the Bill.
8. For facility of reference and convenience, the observations/
recommendations of the Committee have been printed in bold type in
the body of the report.
 N
EW D ELHI; BALASAHEB VIKHE PATIL,
16 May, 2006 Chairman,
26 Vaisakha, 1928 (Saka) Standing Committee on Defence.

THE ARMED FORCES TRIBUNAL BILL, 2005
INTRODUCTORY
The existing system of administration of justice in the Armed Forces
provides for submission of statutory complaints against grievances
relating to service matters and pre and post confirmation petitions to
various authorities against the findings and sentences of courts-martial.
There is no independent adjudicatory forum for hearing complaints of
defence personnel relating to the service matters and appeals against
the judgment of Court Martial.
2. A large number of cases relating to service matters of the
members of the Armed Forces have been pending in the courts for a
long time. In a note to the Committee, the Ministry of Defence informed
that the number of cases pending before the Supreme Court & various
Courts as on 31.10.05 are as under:
Supreme Court High Courts
Army 94 7611
Navy 12 463
Air Force 22 1250
Total 125 9324
3. Emphasising the need for setting up an independent
adjudicatory forum for defence personnel, various Committees have
opined as under:—
(i) Law Commission in its 169th report at chapter V has opined
that it is necessary to provide an appropriate appellate forum
to entertain appeals against final orders passed by the Courts
Martial’. The Commission in its recommendations has
strongly recommended for setting up an Appellate Tribunal
for the Armed Forces.
(ii) Supreme Court, in 1982, held that the absence of even one
appeal with power to review evidence, legal formulation,
conclusion and adequacy or otherwise of punishment in
the laws relating to the armed forces was a distressing and
glaring lacuna and urged the Government to take steps to
provide for at least one judicial review in service matters.

2
(iii) The Estimates Committee of the Parliament in their 19th
Report presented to the Lok Sabha on 20th August, 1992
had desired that the Government should constitute an
independent statutory Board or Tribunal for service
personnel.
(iv) The Standing Committee on Defence in their 20th Report
presented to Lok Sabha on 19.8.2003 inter alia recommended
that special court of appeal on the line of countries like
France, Germany, Russia, Sweden and United Kingdom be
constituted for redressel of grievances of the service
personnel, where aggrieved personnel may appeal against
the judgment of military court. In pursuance thereof, the
Standing Committee on Defence (2004-05) in their 2nd
Report presented on 25.4.2005 again stressed on the urgency
of new mechanism to deal with the large number of cases
pertaining to the Armed Forces.
4. Article 323A of the Constitution of India empowers Parliament
to provide, by law, for the adjudication or trial by administrative
tribunals. Under this Article, Parliament enacted the Administrative
Tribunals Act, 1985. As a sequel thereto, the Central Administrative
Tribunal (CAT) adjudicates service matters concerning Central
Government employees. The Central Administrative Tribunal Act, 1985
does not apply to the personnel of the Armed Forces.
5. The proposal of Ministry of Defence for setting up of an Armed
Forces Tribunal for adjudicating service matters excluding transfer and
postings of the Armed Forces personnel, and appeals arising out of
the verdicts of the courts martial was approved by the Cabinet in its
meeting held on 29th September, 2005. The Armed Forces Tribunal is
proposed to be set up under Article 246 of the Constitution read with
Entry 2 of List-1 (Union List) in the Seventh Schedule to the
Constitution.
6. In view of the above, Ministry of Defence has proposed to
enact a new legislation by constituting an Armed Forces Tribunal for
the adjudication of complaints and disputes regarding service matters
and appeals arising out of the verdicts of the courts-martial of the
members of the three services (Army, Navy and Air Force) . The Armed
Forces Tribunal Bill, 2005 was introduced in Rajya Sabha on 20
December, 2005. The Speaker referred the bill to Standing Committee
on Defence on 23 December, 2005 for examination and report.

3
7. As per Objects and Reasons of the Bill, the establishment of an
independent Armed Forces Tribunal will fortify the trust and confidence
amongst members of the three services in the system of dispensation
of justice in relation to their service matters and will provide for a
judicial appeal on points of law and facts against the verdict of court
martial which is a crying need of the day. It will provide quicker and
less expensive justice to the members of the Armed Forces. The salient
features of the proposed Armed Forces Tribunal Bill, 2005 as given by
the Ministry of Defence are as under:—
(i) There will be one Tribunal to deal with service matters
(original jurisdiction) and appeals from the verdicts of
Courts-Martial (appellate jurisdiction). The number of
benches will be determined by the Central Government after
appointment of Chairperson.
(ii) The Chairperson of the Armed Forces Tribunal Shall be
either a retired judge of the Supreme Court or a retired
Chief Justice of a High Court.
(iii) The Administrative member(s) shall be a serving or retired
Major General or above in the Army or equivalent rank in
the Navy or the Air Force with three years of service in
that rank.
(iv) The judicial member should be a serving or retired judge
of the High Court. However, serving or retired Judge
Advocate Generals who are of the rank of Major General in
the Army or equivalent in the Navy or Air Force can also
be appointed. The serving officers shall have to seek
retirement before assuming such appointment.
(v) One or more member(s) of the Tribunal may be appointed
as Vice-Chairperson(s) by the Central Government.
(vi) The Chairperson and members shall have a 4 year non-
extendable tenure, subject to the maximum age of 70 years
if he/she is a retired judge of the Supreme Court and 65
years if he/she is a retired Chief Justice of a High Court.
(vii) The Tribunal shall have powers to punish for its contempt.
(viii) The Tribunal shall decide both question of law and facts.
The Central Government shall have powers to make rules
to carry out the provisions of the proposed Tribunal.
(ix) All appointments to the Armed Forces Tribunal will be made
in consultation with the Chief Justice of India.

4
8. Keeping in view that the Armed Forces Tribunal Bill, 2005
deals with servicemen and ex-servicemen of the Armed Forces
personnel who live all over India including remote and hilly terrain of
the country, the Committee decided to invite memoranda on the Bill
from public in general and expert organizations/associations interested
in the subject in particular. A Press communiqué was issued in various
newspapers on 28.2.2006 in this regard and text of the Bill was put on
internet at the web site www.parliamentofindia.nic.in for soliciting
views/suggestions thereon.
9. The Committee received a number of memoranda from the
various individuals on the provisions of the Bill. After going through
the memoranda, the Committee invited Wing Commander U. C. Jha
(Retd.) research scholar, Col. Satwant Singh (Retd.), Col. Jag Mohan
(Retd.) to depose and place their view points before the Committee on
29 March 2006. The Committee further heard the views of Wing
Commander, U.C. Jha (Retd.) on 13 April, 2006. The Committee also
heard the views of Shri Ajay Vikram Singh, Defence Secretary (Retd.)
and General V .P . Malik (Retd.) on the Bill on 23 March and 24 March
2006 respectively. The Committee also called representatives of the
Ministry of Defence for evidence on 13 January and 28 April, 2006.
The Committee also sought clarifications from the representatives of
the Ministry of Law and Justice on various provisions of the Bill.

CHAPTER I
MILITARY JUSTICE SYSTEM IN INDIA
10. The Armed Force personnel of the three services are subject to
the Indian Army Act, 1950, Indian Air Force Act, 1950 and the Navy
Act, 1957. In this connection several submissions have been received
that the Acts suffer from inherent defects and violate the constitutional
rights of a person. The Supreme Court and High Courts have in their
judgments in several cases taken note of harsh punishments being
awarded to service personnel by commanding officers for relatively
minor offences.
11. Answering the query whether the Acts have been amended in
the light of the Supreme Court judgment, the Ministry stated :—
“The Government have not amended the existing Acts of the
Armed Forces in the light of the judgements delivered by the
Courts. However, some changes have been introduced in the last
50 years. The review of the existing Acts of the Armed Forces is
a continuous process. Further changes would be introduced as
and when it is required.”
12. Asked about the need to create common disciplinary code for
the three services the Ministry informed :—
“So far as creation of common disciplinary code for the three
services is concerned, the matter is under deliberations of the Chiefs
of the Staff Committee.”
13. The Committee note that the proposed Armed Forces Tribunal
will deal with appeals from Court Martial verdicts and the grievances
related to service matters. Service matters of Defence personnel and
Court Martial trials are governed by the Army Act, 1950, the Air
Force Act, 1950 and the Navy Act, 1957. The Committee have been
given to understand that all these Acts have originated from the
related Acts enacted during the British rule which were colonial and
oppressive in nature. The Committee are conscious that Military laws
should be strict enough to deal with Military offences firmly and
effectively to enforce discipline among the forces, but at the same
time hold the view that the laws should not be oppressive to the
extent of having a demoralizing affect on the defence personnel. In
5

6
this connection the Committee note that Supreme Court in a number
of cases of the Armed Forces personnel has given the ruling that
punishments given to the accused were not commensurate with the
offences committed and has set aside the orders of the commanding
authorities. The Committee therefore, strongly feel that it is high
time that these Acts be reviewed in totality in the light of the
judgments delivered by the courts to make their provisions more
democratic. The Committee, therefore, recommend that an expert
committee be constituted to thoroughly review their Acts and make
recommendations to bring them in tune with the norms being
followed in other democratic countries. The Committee would like
that review of the above Acts be taken up urgently so that the
revised Acts are in place before the establishment of the Tribunal.
Since the Tribunal would deal with cases of all the three forces, the
Committee desire that the common disciplinary code be created so
as to bring uniformity in dispensation of justice to the Armed Forces
Personnel.

CHAPTER II
ARMED FORCES TRIBUNAL BILL
14. The Armed Force Tribunal Bill contains 43 Clauses pertaining
inter alia about composition of tribunal jurisdiction authority etc. It
provides that every rule made by the Central Government under the
Act shall be required to be laid down before each House of Parliament.
The Committee after carefully consideration of various Clauses of the
Bill in light of various submissions by non-officials and Ministry’s
view point have come to the following conclusions:—
15. The Committee note that as per the statement of the objects
and reasons of the Bill, the establishment of Armed Force T ribunal
as an independent adjudicating forum for defence personnel will
fortify their trust and confidence in the system of dispensation of
justice. It will also provide quicker and less expensive justice to the
members of Armed Forces. The Committee desire that concept of
quicker and less expensive justice should be implemented in letter
and spirit and by following principle of natural justice. The
Committee, however, while making indepth study of the various
provisions of the Bill find that the aims and objects mentioned in
the Bill, have not been adequately reflected in its provisions.
16. The most important issue is the composition of the tribunal.
The Bill provides for appointment of administrative member from
retired Armed Force services personnel while judicial members can
be appointed from amongst the retired High Court Judges or retired
JAG. The Committee find that it could lead to a situation where in
the two member bench, both the member administrative and judicial
would be with the armed forces background. The Committee feel
that then there would be hardly any difference in the existing system
of administration of justice and the judicial review proposed under
the Bill. The Committee, therefore, recommend that the judicial
member of the tribunal should necessarily be a retired High Court
Judge.
17. The Committee note that Summary Disposals and Trials have
been kept within the purview of the proposed tribunal in the Bill.
The Ministry, however, in their subsequent note have proposed that
summary disposals and trials be kept outside the purview of the
7

8
Tribunal since the punishments awarded under this process are minor
in nature. The Committee note that punishments awarded under
summary disposals and trials by the commanding officers have
invariably and deeply affected the career prospects of the serving
personnel. The Committee, therefore, recommend that summary
disposals and trials must be in the purview of the Tribunal in order
to ensure justice to the Armed Forces Personnel.
18. The Committee note that appeal against the judgment of the
Tribunal will go to Supreme Court. However, the Committee were
informed that in a judgment, the Supreme Court has held that powers
of the High Court under Art 226 and 227 cannot be taken away by
an Act of Parliament. The Committee are of the view that the appeal
against the Tribunal should be preferred as per provisions of the
Constitution.
19. The Committee note that more than 9000 cases are pending
in various courts which will be transferred to Tribunal upon its
establishment. The number of cases are likely to be increase further
with the establishment of the Tribunal. The Committee desire that
in order to clear the backlog it is essential that Government should
set up temporary/special benches for the purpose. The Committee,
therefore, are of the view that for smooth adjudication and to avoid
inordinate delay in such large number of cases, regional benches be
appointed in various parts of the country.
Keeping in view, the large number of cases pending in High
Court and Supreme Court, the Committee desire that the Government
should explore the possibility to refer the cases pertaining to Ex-
Serviceman to Lok Adalat  so that number of pending cases may
come down significantly.
The Committee also feel that, provision should be made in the
Bill to empower The Tribunal, wherever necessary, to appoint
Arbitrator for negotiation/conciliation of the matter.
20. The Committee note that proposed Bill provides that the
Tribunal shall decide every application made to it as expeditiously
as possible. Keeping in view the large number of cases already
pending in the court, the Committee feel that the term ‘as
expeditiously as possible’ needs to be defined and a fixed time limit
should be laid down. The Committee desire that a time limit of six
months should be fixed within which tribunal should dispose of
every application.

9
The Committee also desire that provision be made in the Bill
for free legal aid to the military personnel particularly for Personnel
Below Officer Rank (PBOR).
21. The clause wise examination of the Bill by the Committee is
given in succeeding paragraphs. The Committee desire that
modifications/amendments suggested by them in the paragraphs may
be incorporated in the bill and the revised AFT bill may be presented
in the Parliament at an early date.

CHAPTER III
PREAMBLE OF THE BILL
22. The preamble of the Bill reads as under:
“to provide for the adjudication or trial by Armed Forces Tribunal
of disputes and complaints with respect to commission,
appointments, enrolment and conditions of service in respect of
persons subject to the Army Act, 1950, the Navy Act, 1957 and the
Air Force Act, 1950 and also to provide for appeals arising out of
orders, findings or sentences of court-martial held under the said
Acts and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.”
23. In this regard a non-official witness submitted during evidence
that since tribunal under the bill is adjudicating service matters for
the armed personnel and appeals arising out of verdicts of court
marshal, the word ‘trial’ be deleted from the preamble.
24. Giving their clarification, the Ministry however in a note to
the Committee stated:—
“The Armed Forces Tribunal would be both an appellate as well
as trial court. Since the proposed Armed Forces Tribunal will be
adjudicating the disputes both in criminal and service matters, it
would be conducting trial in the legal sense. In view of this, there
is no proposal to delete the word “trial” from the preamble of the
Bill.”
25. The Committee, are not convinced with the Ministry’s reply
and recommend that since proposed Tribunal is an adjudicatory and
appellant authority, the word ‘trial’ may be deleted from the preamble
of the Bill.
Clause 2(2)
26. The sub-clause states:—
This Act shall also apply to retired personnel subject to the Army
Act, 1950, or the Navy Act, 1957 or the Air Force Act 1950,
including their dependents, heirs and successions in so far as it
relates to their service matters.
10

11
27.  On the query of the Committee whether the scope of the Bill
also includes released, discharged and dismissed personnel, the Ministry
stated:—
“The definition of ‘retired personnel’ has wider connotation and
includes personnel released, discharged, and dismissed. This
provision would be amplified at the time of drafting the Rules in
this regard.”
28. The Committee do not agree with Ministry’s reply that the
provision would be amplified at the time of drafting the Rules and
recommend that Clause (2) may be suitably modified to specifically
include personnel released, discharged and dismissed in the purview
of the Bill.
Clause 3 (f)
29. This sub-clause defines the term court-martial:
3 ( f) “court-martial” means a court-martial held under the Army
Act, 1950 or the Navy Act, 1957 or the Air Force Act, 1950.
30. On query of the Committee as to whether the Court Martial
under the proposed Bill also includes judgements of disciplinary courts
under Section 15 (1) of the Navy Act, the Ministry in a written note
submitted:—
“Section 15 (1) of the Navy Act, 1957 deals with the doctrine of
pleasure of President and does not relate to Disciplinary Courts.
Disciplinary Courts are dealt with in Section 95 and 96 of the
Navy Act, 1957. Cases of Disciplinary Courts being tried under
the Navy Act are expected to be covered by the Armed Forces
Tribunal”
31. The Committee desire that to remove ambiguity the clause
should be modified so as to mention that disciplinary courts under
the relevant Section of the Navy Act, are covered by the Armed
Forces Tribunal.
Clause 3 Definition of Service Matters:
32. This Clause defines the certain words and expressions used in
the bill. The Clause 3 (o) of the Bill reads as under:
In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires:
(o) “service matters”, in relation to the persons subject to the Army
Act, 1950, the Navy Act, 1957 and the Air Force Act, 1950, mean

12
all matters relating to the conditions of their service and shall
include—
(i)r emuneration (including allowances), pension and other
retirement benefits;
(ii) tenure, including commission, appointment, enrolment,
probation, confirmation, seniority , training, promotion,
reversion, premature retirement, superannuation, termination
of service and penal deductions;
(iii) leave of any kind;
(iv) summary disposal and trials;
 ( v) any other matter, whatsoever, but shall not include matters
relating to—
(i)o rders issued under section 18 of the Army Act, 1950,
sub-section ( 1) of section 15 of the Navy Act, 1957 and
section 18 of the Air Force Act, 1950; and
(ii) transfers and postings in relation to the persons subject
to the Acts mentioned in this clause.
33. The Committee have received several representations on various
provisions of this clause which includes leave of any kind, summary
disposals and trial and transfer and postings. The Committee examined
these issues in the light of the suggestions given by non-official and
evidences tendered by the Ministry.
34. The Committee wanted to know the break up of cases filed in
various courts by the armed forces personnel, the Ministry furnished
the following information:—
Army Navy Air Force Total
1. Court Martial 840 42 84 996
2. Leave 05 02 -  07
3. Summary Trial  60 34 07 101
4. Posting & Transfer 42  01 31  74
5. Service Conditions 4826 234 1122 6182
6. Other Misc. 1811 20 204 2035
Total 7584 333 1448 9365

CHAPTER IV
LEAVE OF ANY KIND
35. The sub-section 3(o)(iii) provides that in service matters ‘leave
of any kind’ is included in the purview of the tribunal.
36.  When the Committee desired to know the rationale for
keeping ‘leave of any kind’ in the purview of the Tribunal, the
representative of the Ministry of Defence during oral evidence
stated:
“The leave has been included in the service matter because leave
is something of a direct pertinent relevance. However, any scope
of a person rushing to the Tribunal in the case of denial of leave
may not really come about because care has been taken that a
person has to first apply for and make use of the existing remedy.
The existing remedy is that he has to go to the Commanding
Officer for a remedy. If the Commanding Officer does not grant
him leave, then he has to put up a statutory complaint. It is only
when a final order has been given by the Central Government on
the case of denial.”
37. However, in a subsequent note to the Committee the Ministry
stated:
“The suggestion of the Committee that ‘leave of any kind’ should
not be included with in the jurisdiction of the Tribunal appears to
be appropriate. Therefore, clause 3 (o) (iii) of the Armed Forces
Tribunal Bill, 2005 could be deleted.”
38. Elaborating further the representative of the Ministry further
stated:
“It is apprehended that Units may be burdened with excessive
litigation arising out of leave, which may effect their operational
preparedness and discipline.”
39. In view of the above suggestion of the Ministry and after
detailed discussion on the subject, the Committee recommend that
‘leave of any kind’ under clause 3(o) (iii) may be deleted from the
purview of the Tribunal.
13

CHAPTER V
SUMMARY DISPOSALS AND TRIALS
40. Summary disposal and trials have been included in the purview
of the Bill vide 3 (o) (iv). However, the Ministry subsequently informed
the Committee that summary disposals and trials are proposed to be
deleted from the purview of the tribunal.
In this connection, a non-official deposed before the Committee:—
“This has been correctly included in the proposed definition of
“Service matters” and should not be deleted. It should be
appreciated that summary trials carry scope for punishment upto
42 days imprisonment and detention/confinement to a soldier by
this Commanding Officer. His liberty is curtailed. He is put to
monetary loss by way of deduction of his pay and allowances.
Such serious consequences of punishment given by non-legal
persons and without any scope for appeal, may have grave
consequences in the disciplined forces like the Armed Forces.”
41. The Committee enquired the reasons for subsequent proposal
for excluding the summary disposals and trials out of the scope of the
Tribunal, the Ministry stated:—
“Commanding Officers are authorized to award only minor
punishments during summary disposal of charges under Armed
Forces Act. These powers are essential for expeditiously meting
out justice and maintenance of discipline of the Unit. It is
apprehended that if appeals are permitted in case of summary
disposal of charges, units may be embroiled in innumerable
litigations. Therefore, the Ministry of Defence propose exclusion of
summary disposal and trials from the definition of ‘service matters.”
42. In this regard the Committee enquired about the specific cases
relating to decision of summary Court Martial, the Ministry furnished
the summary of judgments of the few cases relating to summary Court
Martial (SCM) (Annexure–I). The Committee after going through these
cases observed that the Supreme Court in most of cases held that
punishment awarded was not commensurate with the offence and the
same was therefore set aside and matter remanded back to SCM.
14

15
43. On the query of the Committee on how punishments given on
summary trials can affect the prospects and career of defence personnel,
the Ministry stated:—
“In certain cases these punishments affect the prospects and the
career of the service personnel adversely.”
44. When asked to give the number of summary trial that took
place in armed forces in the last five years the Ministry stated:—
“The cases of the summary trials are conducted at the Unit level
for minor offences and these are not reported to the Service
Headquarters and the Ministry. In view of this, it is not possible
to furnish the number of such cases during the last 5 years.”
45. From the foregoing, the Committee feel that summary
disposals and trials are important and vital issues and as admitted
by the Ministry in certain cases these decisions have long lasting
effect on career and prospects of the armed forces personnel. The
Committee take a serious note of the fact that in several cases the
Supreme Court has ruled that judgment given by the SCM was
vindictive, unduly harsh and disproportionate to the offence as to
shock the conscience and amounted in itself to conclusive evidence
of bias without any scope for appeal. The Committee in order to
ensure fair dispensation of justice to armed forces personnel, strongly
recommend that summary disposals and trials must be kept in the
purview of the Tribunal.
The Committee are surprised to note that cases of summary trials
are not reported to service headquarters. They desire that a note on
each summary trial conducted in the unit and punishment awarded
must be communicated to service headquarters within a specified
period.

CHAPTER VI
TRANSFER AND POSTING
46. The matter of exclusion of transfer and posting from the
purview of the Bill was also commented upon by various non-officials.
It was strongly mentioned by some non-officials that matter relating
to transfer and posting should be included in the purview of the Bill.
A submission made by non-official in this regard is as follows:—
“Transfers and posting should not be excluded from the purview
of the proposed Tribunal, because if these important service matters
are kept beyond the scope of the said Tribunal, it shall cause
grave injustice to the Armed Forces personnel. If exempted, then
for a genuine case, where a person is victimized or his posting/
transfer is ordered due to malafide, for example, posting beyond
normal tenure at high altitudes, it shall be denial of a legal remedy
under this act. Then such persons shall have no option but to
approach High Courts under their writ Jurisdiction.”
47. The Committee enquired the reasons for not including transfers
and postings in the definition of service matters. The Ministry in a
written reply stated:—
“Transfer is an incidence of service. For operational requirements
and in the interest of discipline, transfer and posting can not be
included in the purview of the Tribunal.”
48. The Committee examined the pros and cons of the issue
carefully and are of the view that transfer and posting should not
be kept in the purview of the tribunal as it would affect the
operational requirements and discipline of the forces. The Committee,
however, desire that where there is a clear case of bias or harassment
in the matter relating to transfers and postings, the aggrieved person
as a special case should be given right to go to Tribunal to redress
his grievances. The Committee also desire that a clear cut transfer
policy should be formulated by the services and genuine and justified
cases should be sympathetically considered by the officers.
16

CHAPTER VII
CLAUSE 6 (2) (B): QUALIFICATION FOR APPOINTMENT
OF CHAIRPERSON AND MEMBERS
49. Qualification for appointment of Chairperson and the members
of the proposed Tribunal.
Clause 6 provides for appointment of Chairperson and other
Members. It reads as: —
(1) A person shall not be qualified for appointment as the
Chairperson unless he is a retired Judge of the Supreme Court or a
retired Chief Justice of a High Court.
(2) A person shall not be qualified for appointment as a Judicial
Member unless—
(a) he is or has been a Judge of a High Court; or
(b) he has held the post of Judge Advocate General in the rank of
Major General in the Army or equivalent rank in the Navy or the
Air Force, as the case may be.
Explanation.—When a serving person referred to in clause ( b) is
appointed as Judicial Member, he shall have retired from service prior
to assuming such appointment.
(3) A person shall not be qualified for appointment as an
Administrative Member unless he has held or is holding the rank of
Major General or above for a total period of at least three years in the
Army or equivalent rank in the Navy or the Air Force.
Explanation .—When a serving person is appointed as an
Administrative Member, he shall have retired from service prior to
assuming such appointment.
50. On a specific query of the Committee that rank of JAG is not
equivalent to the Major General in Air Force and Navy, meaning
thereby no official from Air Force and Navy would be appointed in
the proposed Tribunal, the Ministry stated:—
“The suggestion of the Committee about the qualification of service
personnel to be appointed as judicial member of the Tribunal is
17

18
accepted. Therefore, the existing clause contained in clause 6 (ii)
(b) could be amended to read as “He is holding or has held the
post of Judge Advocate General in the Army, Navy or Air Force.”
51. The Committee have however, received several representations
on the non-desirability of a person with military background as judicial
member of the Tribunal. In this regard a non-official witness elaborated:—
“The presence of an ex-serviceman from military background as
“Judicial Member” of the Tribunal may be detrimental to its image,
as it may not be perceived as an independent judicial forum. An
officer who has served in the armed forces under the ‘command
influence’ for around 30 years cannot be expected to sever his ties
and loyalty overnight. In the case of a Bench of the Tribunal [Clause
5 (2) and (3) of the Bill] consisting of one Judicial Member and
one Administrative Member, both may be former service officers
and the Bench then may not present the appearance of
independence. The actual lack of independence need not be
established. The test should be whether an informed and reasonable
person would perceive the tribunal to be independent.“
52. Supreme Court in its judgment in Prithvi Pal Singh vs Union
of Indian (1982) stated:—
“With the expanding horizons of fair play in action even in
administrative decisions, the universal declaration of human rights
and retributive justice being relegated to the uncivilized days, a
time has come when a step is required to be taken for at least one
review and it must truly be a judicial review as and by way of
appeal to a body composed of non-military personnel or civil
personnel.”
53. Comparing the provisions in the proposed Bill with systems
prevalent in other countries, the non-official informed that in United
Kingdom, Judges of the Court are ex-officio and ordinary Judges of the
Court of Appeal and judges of the High Court are appointed by Lord
Chief Justice. In United States of America, in United Courts of appeals
for Armed Forces have five civilian judges appointed by the President
and confirmed by Congress (Annexure-II).
54. The Ministry also furnished a comparative chart showing
military justice system of some other countries (Annexure-III).
55. When the Committee asked the Ministry to reply on the issue,
they stated:—
“The Chairperson of the Tribunal will be retired Judge of the
Supreme Court or retired Chief Justice of a High Court and the

19
Judicial member of the Tribunal will be a retired High Court Judge
or a retired Judge Advocate General (JAG) of three services. Further,
any apprehension about in-house Service Member influencing the
Tribunal would be misplaced because the service officers will have
to retire before they are appointed as members of the Tribunal. As
such, he would be outside the influence of the Government. Use
of purely and exclusively civil Judges would not enable utilization
of technical expertise warranted in a military matter of discipline.
Further, only a Tribunal with a military member can properly take
judicial notice of a question based on armed forces situation.”
56. The Committee observe that Supreme Court in the case of
Prithvi Pal versus Union of India had stated that review must be a
judicial review as and by way of appeal to a body composed of
non-military personnel or civil personnel. The Committee also feel
that the presence of ex-serviceman with military background as
judicial member in the tribunal may lead to a situation whereon a
two member bench, both the members would be with military
background. It may dilute the faith and creditability of servicemen
in the efficacy and independence of the proposed Tribunal. The
Committee in order to ensure unbiased and credible delivery of
justice to the armed forces personnel, strongly recommend that Clause
6(2)(b) of the proposed Bill be deleted.
As regards the administrative member of the proposed Tribunal,
the Committee are of the view that he should be appointed amongst
the three services.

CHAPTER VIII
CLAUSE 8: TERM OF THE OFFICE OF THE CHAIRPERSON
AND OTHER MEMBERS
57. This clause provides for the term of office of the Chairperson
and other Members of the Tribunal for holding the office.
The Chairperson or a Member shall hold office for a term of four
years from the date on which he enters upon his office and shall not
be eligible for re-appointment.
(a) In case he has been a Judge of the Supreme Court, the age
of seventy years;
(b) In case he has been the Chief Justice of a High Court, the
age of sixty-five years;
Provided further that no other Member shall hold office as such
Member after he has attained the age of sixty-five years.
58. A non-official witness submitted before Committee, that tenure
of Chairperson & Member limited to one term under this Clause is
not logical, and this restriction is not there in any other tribunal.
59. When asked by the Committee reasons for fixing the term of
the Chairperson and members of the Tribunal for one term only, the
representative of the Ministry of Defence stated:
“Tenure of four years is considered adequate. But there is no
apparent reason to limit the tenure to one term only. There is no
such condition in any other Tribunal or for higher judiciary. The
maximum age is already provided. In case, where required after
one term, renewal may not be granted in cases when so felt
necessary. Hence, the clause banning reappointment could be
deleted.”
60. The Committee endorse the views of the Ministry of Defence
and recommend that the proviso to clause 8 banning re-appointment
of the Chairperson and Members on the proposed Tribunal be
deleted.
20

CHAPTER IX
CLAUSE 14 (2) : JURISDICTION AND POWER
OF THE TRIBUNAL FEE
61. The Clause 14(2) provides:—
Subject to the other provisions of this Act, a person aggrieved by
an order pertaining to any service matter may make an application to
the Tribunal in such form an accompanied by such documents or
other evidence and on payment of such fee as may be prescribed.
62. In a written memoranda a non official witness submitted before
the Committee that imposition of any court fee would be against the
aims and objectives of the Tribunal.
63. When the Committee asked the Ministry on justification to
pay prescribed court fees with the application, the Ministry replied:
“Court fee is an administrative requirement. Also such a stipulation
will discourage superfluous litigations. Free legal aid has already
been provided for by the Legal Services Authorities Act, 1987.
Any appellant who falls within the categories specified under the
said Act is entitled to free legal aid.”
64. The Committee after due consideration, observe that court
fee is a administrative requirement and it is also charged in Central
Administrative Tribunal while application is filed. The Committee,
however, desire that in order to provide speedy and less expensive
justice, the fee prescribed should be nominal and affordable for all
service personnel and Ex-Servicemen. Therefore, the Committee
recommend that in this clause the word ‘fee’, may be substituted by
‘nominal fee’.
21

CHAPTER X
SUB CLAUSE 15 (3) : GRANT OF BAIL
65. Provides that the Tribunal shall have powers to grant bail
except in an offence punishable with death or imprisonment for life
which reads as under:—
“The Tribunal shall have power to grant bail to any person accused
of an offence and in military custody, with or without any
conditions which it considers necessary:
Provided that no accused person shall be released if there appears
reasonable ground for believing that he has been guilty of an
offence punishable with death or imprisonment for life.”
66. On being asked by the Committee for non-granting bail to
guilty of the offence punishable to the death or imprisonment for life,
the Ministry of Defence stated as under:
“The question was whether the Tribunal can give bail if an appeal
is against death or life imprisonment. So, our recommendation is
that except these two, the Tribunal has been given powers to grant
bail, but not on people who have been sentenced with death or
life imprisonment.”
67. During the evidence when the Committee desired to know the
comments of the Ministry of Law & Justice on issue of granting bail
to the personnel punishable with death or life imprisonment, they
stated:
“Under Section 437(1) of the Cr. P .C., similar provision exists for
granting bail for non-bailable offences. Since the provision is similar
to Section 437, I do not think that there is any legal objection to
this provision.
There are some other enactments like Cr. P .C. etc. In narcotic
offences also there is no provision for bail. But then the Hon.
Supreme Court and the High Court, in cases where they found
that someone’s right to personal liberty is being violated, they
have granted bail. So, the powers of the High Court and the
Supreme Court cannot be denied even by this Act.”
22

23
68. The Committee after elaborate discussions on the issue find
that no convincing reason has been given for restricting the Tribunal’s
power to grant bail to a person charged of an offence punishable
with death or imprisonment for life. The Committee hold a view
that the Tribunal may have discretion to grant bail to Armed Forces
personnel charged with offences punishable with death or
imprisonment for life, as is being provided by the High Courts to
accused person under section 437 of Cr. PC. The Committee, therefore,
recommend that the matter may be reconsidered and a similar
provision be added as per operational and disciplinary requirement
of Armed Forces.

CHAPTER XI
CLAUSE 15 (4) : COMPENSATION OF
MISCARRIAGE OF JUSTICE
69. This clause provides that the Tribunal shall allow an appeal
against conviction by a court-martial where—
(a) The finding of the court-martial is legally not sustainable
due to any reason whatsoever; or
(b) The finding involves wrong decision on a question of law;
or
(c) There was a material irregularity in the course of the trial
resulting in miscarriage of justice,
But, in any other case, may dismiss the appeal where the Tribunal
considers that no miscarriage of justice is likely to be caused or has
actually resulted to the appellant:
Provided that no order dismissing the appeal by the Tribunal shall
be passed unless such order is made after recording reasons therefor
in writing.
70. The non-official in this regard submitted before the Committee
that:
“Clause 15 (4) of the Bill though mentions about miscarriage of
justice, but there is no provision for award of compensation for
miscarriage of justice.”
71. He further submitted:
“The provisions for award of compensation for miscarriage of
justice is contained in ICCPR, to which India is a signatory. Article
14 of the ICCPR deals with the “Right to a Fair Trial”.
72. He quoted Article 14 (6) of ICCPR as under:
“When a person has by a final decision been convicted of a criminal
offence and when subsequently his conviction has been reversed
or he has been pardoned on the ground that a new or newly
discovered fact shows conclusively that there has been a miscarriage
of justice, the person who has suffered punishment as a result of
24

25
such conviction shall be compensated according to law, unless it is
proved that non-disclosure of the unknown fact in time wholly or
partly attributable to him.”
73. He further informed that the provision for compensation of
miscarriage of justice has been introduced in the UK military justice
system since 2001 and has also been incorporated in the proposed
Armed Forces Act, 2006 (Section 275).”
It is an evolving concept of justice and the tribunal must be
empowered to award cost as well as compensation for miscarriage of
justice. Otherwise individual will be forced to seek second remedy
either from a civil court or the Supreme Court.
74. In this connection, the Committee asked the Ministry to
give their comments, the Ministry replied:
“Clause 15 (6) (f) of the proposed Bill empowers the Tribunal to
pass any other orders as it may think appropriate. Under this
clause, the Tribunal may also award compensation.”
75. The Committee, after careful consideration, are of the view
that miscarriage of justice in the case of any person, should be
adequately compensated by the Government as per the international
norms. The Committee are not convinced by the reply furnished by
the Ministry that general provision regarding the power of tribunal
to pass any order under Clause 15(6) will take care of a case where
there is a need to award compensation for miscarriage of justice.
They, therefore, desire that a specific provision may be made in this
regard.

CHAPTER XII
CLAUSE 21 (1) : PERIOD FOR AVAILING REMEDIES AVAILABLE
76. This clause provides:
The Tribunal shall not ordinarily admit an application unless it is
satisfied that the applicant had availed of the remedies available to
him under the Army Act, 1950 or the Navy Act, 1957 or the Air Force
Act, 1950 as the case may be, and respective rules and regulations
made thereunder.
77. For the purpose of sub-section (1), a person shall be deemed
to have availed of all the remedies available to him under the Army
Act, 1950 or the Navy Act, 1957 or the Air Force Act, 1950, and
respective rules and regulations.
(a) If a final order has been made by the Central Government
or other authority or officer or other person competent to
pass such order under the said Acts, rules and regulations,
rejecting any petition preferred or representation made by
such person;
(b) Where no final order has been made by the Central
Government or other authority or officer or other person
competent to pass such order with regard to the petition
preferred or representation made by such person, if a period
of six months from the date on which such petition was
preferred or representation was made has expired.
78. When the Committee desired to know the comments of the
Ministry if time limit of six months be reduced to one month, the
Ministry replied:
“Fixing the period as one month would be too little for a person
to decide and exercise his right to seek remedy from the Tribunal
or for the authorities to dispose.”
79. The Committee while agreeing in principle with the Clause
feel that time limit of six months for which a person has to wait
after the date of filing a complaint for seeking alternative remedy,
is on the higher side. The Committee, therefore, recommend that
time limit of six months be reduced to three months so that such
cases are disposed of on priority basis by the officers and they do
not keep such files pending for long and there may not be any
delay in dispensation of justice.
26

CHAPTER XIII
CLAUSE 23 (2) : FIXING OF TIME FRAME
80. The sub-clause 23 (2) deals with procedures and powers of the
tribunal. It states:
23 ( 2) The Tribunal shall decide every application made to it as
expeditiously as possible after a perusal of documents, affidavits
and written representations and after hearing such oral arguments
as may be advanced.
81. The Committee during evidence pointed out that the term ‘as
expeditiously as possible’ is vague and a time frame be fixed for
finalisation of cases by the tribunal.
82. When enquired the view of Ministry on fixing of this frame
for the Tribunal to dispose off the cases, the Ministry stated:
“A time limit of one year is considered appropriate for disposal of
grievances in a majority of the cases. This one year period should
be reckoned from the date of filing of application (appeal) complete
in all respect. Extension of period, on merit, could be allowed by
the Chairperson. The views of the Supreme Court always stress
early and quick disposal of pending cases.”
83. The Committee note that it has been mentioned in sub clause
23(2) of the Bill that Tribunal may decide every application made to
it as expeditiously as possible. The Committee feel that the
expressions ‘as expeditiously as possible’ is vague. The Committee,
therefore, desire that Tribunal should decide every case within six
months.
27

CHAPTER XIV
CLAUSE 30 : JURISDICTION OF TRIBUNAL AND HIGH COURT
IN MATTERS RELATING TO APPEAL
84. Clause 30 provides
1. Subject to the provision of section 31, an appeal shall lie to the
Supreme Court against the final decision or order of the Tribunal (other
than an order passed under section 19):
Provided that such appeal is preferred within a period of ninety
days of the said decision or order.
Provided further that there shall be no appeal against an
interlocutory order of the Tribunal.
2. An appeal shall lie to the Supreme Court as of right from any
order or decisions of the Tribunal in the exercise of its jurisdiction to
punish for contempt.
Provided that an appeal under this sub-section shall be filed in
the Supreme Court within sixty days from the date of the order
appealed against.
3. Pending any appeal under sub-section (2), the Supreme Court
may order that:
(a) the execution of the punishment or the order appealed
against be suspended;
(b) if the appellant is in confinement, he be released on bail;
Provided that where an appellant satisfies the Tribunal that he
intends to prefer an appeal, the Tribunal may also exercise any of the
powers conferred under clause (a) or clause (b), as the case may be.
85. The Committee enquired about the nature of the proposed
Tribunal, whether it would be a judicial, quasi judicial body in the
line of Central Administrative Tribunal, the Ministry replied:
“Since the Armed Forces Tribunal would be dealing with offences,
legally awardable punishments and termination of service etc. and
the Tribunal is being armed with the powers of contempt, it would
be a judicial body. It would be a permanent Tribunal and a Court
of record.”
28

29
86. When Committee asked, whether appeal would be preferred
in High Courts or Supreme Court, the Ministry stated:
“Clause 30 of the Armed Forces Tribunal Bill, 2005 provides that
an appeal against the final decision or order of Armed Forces
Tribunal shall lie to the Supreme Court. Under the Constitution,
the power of superintendence of High Court is already excluded
against a Court Martial verdict.”
87. On a specific query to the representatives of the Ministry of
Law & Justice, on the issue of appeal against the order of the Tribunal,
they stated:
“In a case, L. Chandrakumar’s case, which was relating to the
Central Administrative Tribunal, which was established by an Act
of Parliament, similar provisions were there where an appeal
against the orders of the Central Administrative Tribunal was
preferred to the Supreme Court but for some time it was
entertained by the Supreme Court. But later on, subsequently in
L. Chandrakumar’s case, the Supreme Court said that the powers
of the High Court under articles 226 and 227 cannot be taken
away by an Act of Parliament. Thus, you know again from the
orders of Central Administrative Tribunal, we have started
preferring appeals to the High Court under article 226.”
88. They further supplemented:
“It is not only in one case but also subsequently in a number of
cases, the Supreme Court reiterated that principle. Many High
Courts have reiterated that principle. When in another Bill, that is,
National Tax Tribunal was being processed in this Committee Room
by another Committee, there also many hon. Members of the
Standing Committee said that in view of L. Chandrakumar’s case,
you cannot have a touch tribunal from which you can directly go
to the Supreme Court and we had accede that before that
Committee that article 226 is still there with the High Court. The
minute you abolish article 226, then it will be treated by the
Supreme Court as a violation of the essential characteristics of the
basic structure of the Constitution, which is a limitation even on
the power of Parliament to amend the Constitution.”
89. When the Committee asked the Ministry of Law & Justice
regarding possible solution of it, they stated that:
“We have processed the Bill. In the Bill we have taken the
precaution that the Chairman of the Tribunal should be a retired

30
judge or a sitting judge of the Supreme Court. If the Chairman of
the Tribunal himself is a Supreme Court judge, then you know the
High Courts are slightly hesitant in interfering with the judgment.
That is only thing but if a judge finds that there is a Constitutional
violation of certain fundamental rights or there is a gross
arbitrariness in an order of the Tribunal, then it will exercise its
jurisdiction under article 226.”
In this connection, the Ministry of Defence in a written note stated:
“The proposed Armed Forces Tribunal Bill, 2005 does not envisage
a situation where an accused can approach the High Court in an
appeal against the order of the Tribunal. There can be no equation
between the High Court and any other Tribunal. On the other
hand, analogy can be drawn between the CAT and the proposed
Armed Forces Tribunal. In CAT, single member also constitutes a
Bench [section 5(6)]. However, in the Armed Forces Tribunal, the
minimum number of members to constitute a Bench is two. Further,
as opposed to the CAT where the Chairperson is a serving or
retired High Court judge, the Chairperson of the Armed Forces
Tribunal is a retired Supreme Court Judge or retired Chief Justice
of the High Court. Further Article 227(iv) of the Constitution
excludes the power of superintendence of High Courts over any
court or Tribunal constituted by or under any law relating to the
Armed Forces. Therefore, an accused cannot go to the High Court
in appeal against the order of the Armed Forces Tribunal.”
90. The Committee note that clause 30 provides that subject to
provisions of section 31, an appeal shall lie to Supreme Court against
the final decision or order of the Tribunal. The Committee, however,
are given to understand that in the case of L. Chanderkumar, where
appeal against the order of the Central Administrative Tribunal was
preferred to Supreme Court, the Court stated that powers of the
High Court under Articles 226 and 227 cannot be taken away by an
Act of Parliament. The Committee are of the view that the appeal
against the Tribunal should be preferred as per the provisions of
the Constitution.
 N
EW D ELHI; BALASAHEB VIKHE PATIL,
16 May, 2006 Chairman,
26 Vaisakha, 1928 (Saka) Standing Committee on Defence.

ANNEXURE I
SUMMARY OF JUDGMENTS
1. Ranjit Thakur Vs. UOI and others [1987(4) SCC 611]
This judgment dealt with a Summary Court Martial where for an
offence of disobedience lawful command of not eating food, the accused
petitioner was sentenced to one year rigorous imprisonment with
dismissal. This judgment deals with scope of judicial review and judicial
review of punishments awarded by a Court Martial.
In the above regard it was held by the Hon’ble Supreme Court
that ‘Judicial review, generally speaking, is not directed against a
decision, but is directed against the “decision-making process”. The
question of the choice and quantum of punishment is within the
jurisdiction and discretion of the court-martial. But the sentence has to
suit the offence and the offender. It should not be vindictive or unduly
harsh. It should not be so disproportionate to the offence as to shock
the conscience and amount in itself to conclusive evidence of bias.
The doctrine of proportionality, as part of the concept of judicial review,
would ensure that even on an aspect which is, otherwise, within the
exclusive province of the court-martial, if the decision of the court
even as to sentence is an outrageous defiance of logic, then the sentence
would not be immune from correction. Irrationality and perversity are
recognized grounds of judicial review. In the present case the
punishment is so strikingly disproportionate as to call for and justify
interference’.
2. Chaudhary M.R. Ex. Sepoy Vs Union of India [CWP No. 563 of
1990 (HP)]
The present case related to a trial of the petitioner by a Summary
Court Martial under Army Act Section 40(a) for using criminal force
to a JCO, his superior officer while serving with the IPKF in Sri Lanka.
The criminal force used was a push to the JCO. The Summary Court
Martial found the petitioner guilty and sentenced him to suffer RI for
six months and dismissal. At the time of review, the RI was reduced
to one month. Still when the petitioner challenged his trial, the Hon’ble
HP High Court held that the punishment awarded was not
commensurate with the offence and was therefore set aside and the
matter remanded back to SCM.
31

32
3. Duraibabu R. Vs Union of India [WP No. 11525 of 1990 and
WQA No. 794 of 1992 dated 9 Apr. 1992 (Madras)]
The present case related to the legality of second trial after the
first trial was set aside by the Army Authorities for want of jurisdiction
due to non-compliance of the provisions of Army Rule 22. The
petitioner was tried by SCM for overstayal of leave and awarded three
months RI and dismissal by the first trial and on its setting aside was
awarded dismissal by the second trial. Holding that the second trial
was prohibited by Army Act Section 121, the Court held that whether
the order is void or illegal was for the petitioner to question and not
for the respondents to set aside the earlier order on that ground and
order fresh inquiry ad punish the petitioner again. On the above ground
Hon’ble Madras High Court set aside the second trial by SCM.
4. Balwant Singh Vs Union of India [1992 Cri LJ 1512 (J&K)]
The present related to the effect of the non-compliance with the
procedure at a Summary Court Martial. Holding that non-compliance
with the provisions of Army Rule 115, which deals with procedure on
plea of guilty, is fatal. On that ground the proceedings of SCM were
set aside by the Hon’ble J&K High Court.
5. Uma Shankar Pathak Vs Union of India [1989(3) SLR 405
(Allahabad)]
The present case related to challenge of the order passed by the
Summary Court Martial sentencing the petitioner to reduction to ranks
and two months rigorous imprisonment for an offence of theft. The
proceedings were challenged on the ground of non-compliance with
the provisions of Army Rule 34 which deals with preparation of defence
and Army Rule 115 (2) which deals with procedure on plea of guilty.
With reference to Army 34, it was alleged that whereas the said rule
provides for minimum 96 hours notice before trial, the said provision
was violated in respect of petitioner. As regards Army Rule 115(2), it
was alleged that the said provision was not complied with.
As regards the nature of Army Rule 34, the Hon’ble Allahabad
High Court held that the requirement that at least 96 hours notice
should be given the accused is mandatory and that the breach of the
said rule would vitiate the entire trial. With reference to the scope of
Army Rule 115(2), the Hon’ble Court held that if the plea is recorded
without complying with the provisions of the said rule, the trial would
be vitiated. On facts, the court found that the provisions of Army
Rule 34 as well as 115(2) were violated and, therefore, the petition
was allowed.

33
6. L/Nk Mirza Nazir Ahmed Vs Union of India [WP No. 317 of 1981
Dated 30 January, 1988 (J&K)]
The case pertains to the trial of the petitioner by an SCM for an
offence of disobedience of lawful command wherein the petitioner on
conviction was sentenced to one year RI and dismissal. Relying on the
judgment of the Hon’ble Supreme Court in Ranjit Thakur Vs. UOI
and others [1987(4) SCC 611], Hon’ble J&K High Court held that the
sentence has to suit the offence and the offender. It should not be
vindictive or unduly harsh or so disproportionate to the offence as to
shock the conscience and amount in itself to conclusive evidence of
bias.
The Court further held that the doctrine of proportionality, as part
of the concept of judicial review, would ensure that even on an aspect
which is, otherwise, within the exclusive province of the court-martial,
if the decision of the court even as to sentence is an outrageous defiance
of logic, then the sentence would not be immune from correction. On
facts, the Court found the sentence as grossly disproportionate and
quashed the same.
7. Ex-Naik Sardar Singh Vs Union of India [1991 (3) SCC 213]
The present case is also related to the quantum of punishment.
The petitioner was tried by a Summary Court Martial for an offence
of carrying more than the permitted quota of liquor from Army Canteen
while proceeding for home town on leave and enroute passed through
an area under prohibition where he was arrested by the Civil Police
and later handed over to Army for disciplinary action. The SCM found
him guilty of the offence and sentenced him to suffer RI for three
months and dismissal. The Hon’ble Supreme Court, holding that the
punishment awarded by Court Martial must be commensurate with
the gravity of the misconduct and that disproportionately severe
punishment is arbitrary and open to court’s interference, set aside the
punishment as severe.
8. Ex Hav Prithpal Singh Vs Union of India [1984 (3) SLR 675 (J&K)]
The present case deals with the effect of non-compliance with the
provisions of Army Rule 115(2), which deals with procedure on plea
of guilty, in a Summary Court Martial. The petitioner was tried by
Summary Court Martial on three charges of which one was for absent
without leave and the remaining two were for using in subordinate
language to his Commandant and Deputy Commandant and on
conviction was dismissed from the service. As per the SCM proceedings,

34
the petition had pleaded guilty to all the charges and he was found
guilty accordingly. The petitioner challenged the SCM proceedings
alleging non-compliance with the provisions of Army Rule 115(2).
Holding that the provisions of Army Rule 115(2) are mandatory, the
Hon’ble J&K High Court, on facts, found that the said provisions
were not complied with and, therefore, held that the trial was vitiated.
9. Ravinder Singh Vs Union of India and others [97 (2002) DLT 756
(Delhi)]
The present case related to the quantum of sentence. Aggrieved
by his dismissal by an SCM for an offence of overstayal of leave by
about two months, the present Writ Petition was filed. The Hon’ble
Delhi High Court on facts held that considering the young age of 25
years of the petitioner and his past record, the punishment was
disproportionate. The same was set aside and the matter was remanded
back for award of fresh sentence.
10. Surinder Singh Vs Union of India [Misc. Petition No. 2323 of
1991 (MP)]
The present case related to the legality of second trial after the
first trial was set aside by the Army Authorities for want of jurisdiction
due to non-compliance of the provisions of Army Rule 22. The
petitioner was tried by an SCM for committing an offence of sodomy
and was awarded six months RI and dismissal by the first trial. This
trial was set aside on technical ground of non-compliance with the
provisions of Army Rule 22 at the trial stage. Thereafter, the petitioner
was sought to be re-tried by a General Court Martial, which the
petitioner challenged on the ground of double jeopardy.
The Hon’ble court held that the second trial of the petitioner for
the same offence was clearly barred by the express provisions of Army
Act Section 121. The court also held that the petitioner also had a
constitutional protection under Article 20(2), which prohibits re-trial.
11. Sep Veer Bhan Vs COAS [WP(C) No. 311 of 1995 (Delhi)]
Details not available.

ANNEXURE II
COMPARATIVE CHART—MILITARY JUSTICE SYSTEM
OF OTHER COUNTRIES
United Kingdom United States of America Canada
12 3
In respect of judicial review
of decisions of Court
Martial the U.K. had
enacted a Court Martial
(Appeals) Act of 1951,
under which Court Martial
Appellate Court has been
established. This Act was,
later, amended by the
Court Martial (Appeals)
Act, 1968. The Act
empowers the Court
Martial Appellate Court to
hear appeals from the
Army, Navy and Air Force
Courts Martial. The Court
has power of full judicial
review with the leave,
appeal from Court Martial
Appellate Court lies to the
House of Lords.
(a) The military appellate
process involves mandatory
review by the convening
authority, often with the
advice of a Staff Judge
Advocate (SJA),
Additionally, further
reviews are catered for by
superiors of the convening
authority, Judge Advocate
General; the Court of
Criminal Appeals and the
United States Court of
Appeals for the Armed
Forces. In rare cases,
subsequent review by
Supreme Court is also
envisaged. Article 66(a) of
the uniform Code of
Military Justice Act, 1950,
extensively revised in 2002
provides for setting up of
a Court of Criminal
Appeals (in short the CCA).
This CCA reviews the cases
referred to it by the Judge
Advocate General. The
CCA may issue all writs
necessary or appropriate in
aid of its jurisdiction and
any party may petition the
CCA for extra ordinary
(a) Under Section 9.3 of the
National Defence Act, the
Judge Advocate General of
the Canadian Forces is
required to annual report
on the administration of
Military Justice to the
Minister of National
Defence. The report is to be
laid before the Parliament
within 15 days. Section 201
of the Canada National
Defence Act, 1985, provides
for establishment of Court
Martial Appeal Court.
Under the said National
Defence Act, every person
who has been tried and
found guilty by a Court
Martial has a right to
appeal against legality of
finding and legality and
severity of sentence. The
Act also declares that the
Court Martial Appeal Court
is a superior court of record.
(b) It may be pertinent to
note that, under Section 208
of the Canada National
Defence Act, against the
judgment of the Court
Martial Appeal Court,
35

36
12 3
relief. CCA is composed of
not less than three
members usually selected
from among Senior active
or retired JAG officers who
have previously been
appointed as military
Judges.
(b) Article 141 of the
Uniform Code provides for
United States Court of
Appeals for the Armed
Forces (USCAAF)
established under Article 1
of the Constitution of the
United States. This Court of
Appeals reviews record in
all cases in which the
sentence as affirmed by a
CCA extends to death, all
cases reviewed by a CCA
which the Judge Advocate
General sends to it and all
cases reviewed by CCA in
which upon petition by the
accused, it grants
permission for review. It is
to be noted that, as
provided by Article 67(a),
decisions of the Court of
Appeals are subject to
review by the Supreme
Court for which an accused
may make petition to the
Supreme Court.
appeal lies to the Supreme
Court of Canada. Such
appeals may be made on
any question of law which
a judge of the CMAC
dissents, or on any question
of law if leave to appeal is
granted by the Supreme
Court of Canada.

ANNEXURE III
NOTE FURNISHED BY NON OFFICIAL SYSTEM PREVAILING IN
OTHER COUNTRIES ON APPEAL AGAINST COURT MARTIAL
United Kingdom
The Court-Martial Appeals Court was established by the Court-
Martial (Appeals) Act, 1951 for the purpose of hearing appeals from
naval, army and air force courts-martial. The Appeal Court is a superior
court of record. The Judges of the Appeal Court are ex-officio and
ordinary judges of the Court of Appeal and judges of the High Court
and appointed by the Lord Chief Justice. The Lord Chancellor may
appoint other persons having legal experience as judges of the Court-
Martial Appeals Court.
The United States
The United States Court of Appeals for the Armed Forces has five
civilian judges, appointed by the President and confirmed by Congress,
and serve for a term of 15 years. CAAF is also responsible for
overseeing the military justice system.
Canada
The Court Martial Appeals Court of Canada is established under
Section 234 of the National Defence Act. The judges of the Appeals
Court are judges of the Federal Court of Appeal and designated by
the Governor in Council.
Australia
The Defence Force Discipline Appeal Tribunal consists of a
President, a Deputy President, and such other persons as are appointed
by the Governor-General by commission to be members of the Tribunal.
In order to qualify for appointment as President or Deputy President,
a person must be a Justice or Judge of a federal court or of the
Supreme Court of a state or territory; and to qualify for appointment
as a member, a person must be a Justice or Judge of a federal court
or of the Supreme Court of a state or territory or a judge of a district
court or country court of a state.
37

ANNEXURE IV
LIST OF INDIVIDUALS/EXPERTS WHO APPEARED
BEFORE THE COMMITTEE
1. Shri U.C. Jha, Wing Commander (Retd.)
2. Col. Satwant Singh (Retd.)
3. Col. Dr. Jag Mohan (Retd.)
4. Shri Ajay Vikram Singh, Former Defence Secretary
5. Major General (Retired) Bikram Singh Kanwar, Ex-MP
6. Col. Sudhir Sawant, Ex-MP
7. Vice-Admiral Retired K.K. Nair
8. Gen. (Retired) V .P . Malik
38

MINUTES OF THE EIGHTEENTH SITTING OF THE STANDING
COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE (2005-06)
The Committee sat on Friday, the 13 January , 2006 from 1100 hrs.
to 1245 hrs. in Committee Room ‘C’, Parliament House Annexe,
New Delhi.
PRESENT
Shri R. K. Anand— In the Chair
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri A.V . Bellarmin
3. Dr. K. S. Manoj
4. Shri Raghuraj Singh Sakya
5. Shri Mahadeorao Shiwankar
6. Shri Ganesh Prasad Singh
Rajya Sabha
7. Smt. N.P . Durga
8. Shri Janardan Dwivedi
9. Shri Pramod Mahajan
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri R. C. Ahuja — Joint Secretary
2. Smt. Anita Jain — Deputy Secretary
3. Shri D.R. Shekhar — Under Secretary
LIST OF W ITNESSES OF M INISTRY OF D EFENCE
1. Shri Shekhar Dutt, Defence Secretary
2. Shri V . K. Mishra, FA (DS)
3. Shri Ranjit Issar, Additional Secretary (I)
4. Shri Anand Misra, JS (E)
5. Smt. Anula Kumar, Dir (CP).
Services HQtrs.
6. Lt. Gen. S. Pattabhiraman, VCOAS
7. Air Mshl Ajit Bhavnani, VCAS
39

40
8. V Adml. Venkat Bharathan – VCNS
9. V Adml. Nirmal Verma, COP
10. Air Mshl. H. S. Garkal, AOA
11. Lt. Gen. A. S. Jamwal, AG
12. Lt. Gen. (Retd.) Mohinder Singh, EX-AG
13. Maj. Gen. Nilender Kumar, JAG (Army)
14. Gp. Capt. PC Grover, JAG (Air)
15. Cmde. Mohan Phadke, JAG (Navy)
16. Maj. Sachidananda Prabhu
2. In the absence of Chairman, the Committee chose Shri R. K.
Anand, M.P . and Member of the Committee to act as Chairman for
that sitting under sub Rule 3 of Rule 258 of the Rules of Procedure
and conduct of Business in the Lok Sabha. The Chairman then
welcomed the Members and representatives of the Ministry of Defence
including three Vice-Chiefs of the Armed Forces. The Chairman
informed the Members that ‘The Armed Forces Tribunal Bill, 2005 had
been referred by the Hon’ble Speaker to the Standing Committee on
Defence for examination and Report thereon.
3. The Chairman thereafter requested the Ministry of Defence to
brief the Committee on objects and reasons of the proposed Bill, details
of existing system for adjudicating complaints and disputes regarding
service matters and also details of new legislation for constituting an
Armed Forces Tribunal. The representatives of the Ministry then made
detailed Power Point presentation on the subject under consideration.
4. The Members of the Committee sought clarifications on issues
viz. details of expenditure on the proposed Tribunal and its Benches,
time prescribed for disposing of cases by Tribunal, provision for appeal
during Court Martial proceedings, relevance of clause 3 (o) (iii)
regarding leave of any kind, clause 6 regarding qualification for
membership of the proposed Tribunal, need to maintain equality in
representing JAGs of the three wings of the Armed Forces in the
Tribunal and Summary Trial etc. The Defence Secretary and the three
Vice- Chiefs of the Armed Forces responded to the queries raised by
the Members. On clause 3 regarding leave of any kind and clause 6
regarding qualifications for membership of the proposed Tribunal, the
Ministry assured the Committee to review these clauses in the light of
the discussion with the Committee.
A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept.
The Committee then adjourned.

MINUTES OF THE THIRTY-FIRST SITTING OF THE STANDING
COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE (2005-06)
The Committee sat on Thursday, the 23 March, 2006 from 1500 hrs
to 1630 hrs in Committee Room No. ‘074., Parliament Library Building,
New Delhi.
PRESENT
Shri Balasaheb Vikhe Patil— Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Churchill Alemao
3. Shri Iliyas Azmi
4. Shri Thupstan Chhewang
5. Shri Ramesh Jigajinagi
6. Shri Raghuraj Singh Shakya
7. Shri Mahadeorao Shiwankar
8. Shri Ganesh Prasad Singh
9. Shri Manvendra Singh
10. Ms. Ingrid Mcleod
Rajya Sabha
11. Smt. N.P . Durga
12. Shri Jai Parkash Aggarwal
SECRETARIAT
1. Shri S. K. Sharma — Additional Secretary
2. Smt. Anita Jain — Deputy Secretary
3. Shri D.R. Shekhar — Under Secretary
LIST OF N ON-OFFICIAL W ITNESSES
1. Shri Ajay Vikram Singh — Former Defence Secretary
2. Major General (Retired) — Ex-MP
Bikram Singh Kanwar
3. Col. Sudhir Sawant — Ex-MP
4. Vice-Admiral Retired K.K. Nair
41

42
2. At the outset, Hon’ble Chairman welcomed Shri Ajai Vikram
Singh, Defence Secretary (Retd.) and requested him to putforth his
view points on (i) Armed Forces Tribunal Bill, 2005, (ii) Threat
perception, (iii) Demands for Grants (iv) Role of DRDO in Self-Reliance,
and (v) Welfare of Ex-Servicemen.
On Armed Forces Tribunal Bill, he suggested the following points:—
1. It is not practical to fix a time frame within which Tribunal
should dispose of cases. Some indicative time frame can be
given to the Tribunal to try to complete its proceedings.
2. In Clause 16(3) of the Bill, drafting/composition is not clear.
3. Transfers & postings should not be included in the purview
of the Bill. Otherwise, Tribunal would have so many cases
of personnel who do not want to go to relatively harder
stations.
On Defence Budget planning and Threat perception, Shri Singh
shared his views on the following points, with the Committee:—
1. The threat to national security need not come in the form
of military attack. It can be by denying some vital element
in its requirement. Therefore, a country has to shape up its
policies.
2. National Security Council or its secretariat has not been
able to live up to the expectation and therefore every
Ministry or organization and even within .Ministry different
organizations are acting in isolation or without coordination
with each other. There should not be adhocism in decision
taking during emergent situation.
4. The techniques used in counter insurgency operation as in
J&K and North East are quite different from conventional
battles. There is need for reshaping of the structure of
training part viz. light soldiers, good intelligence network
and highly sophisticated equipment.
6. About non-conventional threats, a well developed
intelligence net work is the only safeguard.
In regard to relief to ex-servicemen, the former Defence Secretary
was of the view that the Central Government and State Governments
have to be more responsive to the requirements of Ex-Servicemen.

43
As regards DRDO, he stated that keeping in view the large size
of procurement from outside, our main concern should be to make
the R&D efforts of the country more effective by involving and working
together closely with private sector, ordnance factories and Defence
PSUs.
The witness then withdrew.
Then Hon’ble Chairman welcomed Maj. Gen.(Retd.) Vikram Singh
Kanwar, Ex-MP to express his opinion on the Armed Forces Tribunal
Bill, 2005, (ii) Threat perception (iii) Demands for Grants (iv) Role of
DRDO in Self-Reliance and (v) Welfare of Ex-servicemen.
On Armed Forces Tribunal Bill 2005 the witness stated that In the
applicability of the Act, Clause 2(2) only includes retired Personnel
and not released, discharged and dismissed personnel. They should be
included in this category.
On Ex-servicemen’s Welfare he suggested the following points:—
(i) In Family pension, Armed forces are discriminated. They
get family pension at the rate of 30%. That discrimination
should be avoided.
 (ii) W ith regard to disability pension, there is a difference
between personnel who joined before 1996 and who joined
after 1996. Those who have joined before, they get less
pension and those who have joined after, get more pension.
That discrimination should not be there.
(iii) When a Havildar becomes Naib Subedar, he gets honorarium
of Rs. 100. But when a subedar become major, he does not
get any honorarium. Therefore, he must get same
honorarium.
 (iv) As per the new rule of the Government the widow and
widowed daughter of a jawan are treated as dependant on
him. However, the unmarried daughters of the Jawans above
25 years is not considered dependant on him. She should
also be treated as dependant.
 (v) Parity in Pension, which we have been claiming for the last
three decades, i.e. one rank one pension should be given.
 (vi) All ex-servicemen should get 50% pay as pension as in the
case of their civilian counterparts. Particularly the Jawan
who retires after service of 17 years should also get a
pension of 50% of their salary. Discrimination between
Officers & Jawans in getting Pension should not be there.

44
(vii) Armed Forces Personnel get their pension as per their
designation. However, cases are there, where, a retired Major
General is getting less pension than a Brigadier for the last
10 years. Court has given favourable decision. This anomaly
be rectified.
(viii) There should be a separate pay Commission for the Armed
Forces.
(ix) ECHS Facilities for Ex-servicemen are available in few cities.
These should be extended to remote villages, because ex-
soldiers live in remote areas.
The Witness then withdrew
Then Hon’ble Chairman welcomed Col. Sudhir Sawant, Ex-MP and
request him to putforth his suggestions on the Armed Forces Tribunal
Bill, 2005, (ii) Threat perception, (iii) Demands for Grants, (iv) Role of
DRDO in Self-Reliance, and (v) Welfare of Ex-servicemen.
Col. Sudhir Sawant briefed the Committee on the following
aspects/dimensions of security concerns/threat perception:
1. China is a key issue to our recently concern.
2. Criminal anarchy is the main threat to India.
3. Armed Forces should not be involved anywhere to counter
terrorism and to meet internal insurgency.
4. We must develop a concept of small standing Army and a
large reserve to be grouped into the territorial army
companies. The territorial army can perform all support role.
5. Territorial army should be a nodal organization for disaster
management.
Hon’ble Chairman then welcomed Vice Admiral (Retired) K.K.
Nayyar and requested him to put forth his view point on the subject.
He was of the view that problems in the armed forces could be
resolved if there was a board consisting of three service Chiefs and
the Minister.
The witnesses then withdrew.
A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept.
The Committee then adjourned.

MINUTES OF THE THIRTY SECOND SITTING OF THE
STANDING COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE (2005-06)
The Committee sat on Friday, the 24th March, 2006 from 1100 hrs.
to 1430 hrs. in Committee Room ‘G-074’, Parliament Library Building,
New Delhi.
PRESENT
Shri Balasaheb Vikhe Patil— Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Iliyas Azmi
3. Shri Thupstan Chhewang
4. Shri Ramesh Jigajinagi
5. Shri Mahadeorao Shiwankar
6. Shri Ganesh Prasad Singh
7. Shri Balashowry Vallabhaneni
Rajya Sabha
8. Shri Jai Parkash Aggarwal
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri S.K. Sharma — Additional Secretary
2. Shri R.C. Ahuja — Joint Secretary
2. Smt. Anita Jain — Deputy Secretary
3. Shri D.R. Shekhar — Under Secretary
NON-OFFICIAL W ITNESS
1. Gen. (Retired) V .P . Malik
LIST OF R EPRESENTATIVES FROM M INISTRY OF D EFENCE
Department of Defence
6. Shri Shekhar Dutt, Defence Secretary
7. Shri K.P . Singh, Secretary (DP)
45

46
3. Dr. M. Natrajan, SA to RM
4. Shri S. Banerjee, DG (Acq)
5. Shri V .K. Misra, FA(DS)
6. Shri C.R. Mohapatra, DGDE
7. Dr. (Smt.) Rekha Bhargava, Addl. Secy. (B)
8. Shri K.P . Lakshmana Rao, FA(Acq) & AS
9. Shri Asad Ahmed, Offg. DGQA
10. Shri S.C. Narang, CCR&D(R)
11. Shri Alok Perti, JS(S)
12. Shri S.K. Sharma, JS&AM(Air)
13. Dr. Thomas Mathew, JS&AM(MS)
14. Shri T. Ramachandru, JS(OF)
15. Shri Amit Cowshish, Addl. FA(A)
16. Shri P .K. Jena, Addl. FA(J)
17. Smt. Anuradha Mitra, Addl. FA(AM)
18. Shri Mohd. Haleem Khan, Addl.FA(H)
19. Shri S.L. Bunker, FM (Air)
20. Shri G.S. Sood, FM (MS)
21. Shri Ashok Harnal, Addl. DGDE
Army Headquarters
1. Lt. Gen. G.D. Singh, PVSM, AVSM-DCOAS
2. Lt. Gen. Y.K. Jain, DG, MAP
3. Maj. Gen. S.B.S. Bains, VSM-ADG FP
4. Maj. Gen. A.K. Mehra, ADG (WE)
Naval Headquarters
1. Vice Adml. J.S. Bedi, DCNS
2. R. Adml. R. K. Dhowan, YSM-ACNS(P&P)
3. Cmde. Girish Luthra, PDNP
4. Cmde. Arvind Sharma, OIC Project 75 Cell
Air Headquarters
1. Air Mshl. A.K. Nagalia, AVSM, VM, VSM-DCAS
2. AVM, K.K. Nohwar, ACAS (Plans)
3. AVMN, Vijay Kumar, ACAS (FP)

47
2. At the outset, the Hon’ble Chairman welcomed Gen. (Retired)
V.P. Malik to share his viewpoints on (i) Armed Forces Tribunal Bill,
2005; (ii) Threat Perception; (iii) Demands for Grants; (iv) Role of DRDO
in self-reliance; and (v) Welfare of Ex-servicemen.
3. On Armed Forces Tribunal Bill, 2005 he suggested the following
points:—
(i) In the proposed Bill, provision be added for consideration
by Tribunal, various administrative orders that are issued
for dismissals, restricting pensions etc.
(ii) Large number of benches will be required to deal with the
case of growing number of Servicemen & Ex-servicemen.
(iii) The decision of Medical Board on recommending enhanced
pension due to disability on account of service condition
should be final.
(iv) As regards of the Administrative member of the Bench, he
suggested that the Administrative member may be
recommended by Chiefs of Staff Committee.
(v) The decision of the Tribunal should be final.
4. On Threat perception he suggested the following points:—
-T oday, the internal and external threats are meshed together.
They have to be dealt with together. Our threats are no
longer conventional in nature.
-W e have to strengthen our surveillance system on our
borders. There must be coordination among three services
for the use of surveillance equipment.
- Internal as well as external threats require an immediate
reaction. Therefore the political authority and the Armed
Forces should start looking for the possible contingencies,
where we may have to react very fast. There could be a
mechanism to study and suggest contingency plans. He
suggested that Cabinet Committee on Security is enough to
do the needful. Regarding appointment of CDS, he opined
that this will facilitate the decision making process.
5. On DRDO he suggested the following points:—
- Every year the budget allocation is increasing, without
accountability. Our country is spending 2.5% of GDP on

48
defence and out of that 18 billion dollars worth equipment
are being imported.
- There is a need to upgrade our DRDO. There is a need for
capital investment and import of technology and
involvement of private sector engaged in defence production.
- The DRDO should do some in-house introspection as to
what happened in those 10 years, where they have gone
wrong, why they have not been able to stick to that plan.
They themselves ought to do this introspection.
- They should work now as a consortium with the private
sector within the country.
- Users should be closely associated with DRDO and
manufacturers.
- All the Ordnance Factories and all defence PSUs must be
given total freedom to upgrade their R&D.
- GSQR should always be done by the Armed Forces and
DRDO together and it should be under the General staff.
- DGQA has been wrongly placed and has failed in the
services on very important equipment. Instead of expanding
the capability, the Ministry is expanding the manpower. That
is a wrong step. People who are manufacturing are cleaning
their equipment.
- There should be a Non-lapsable Fund.
6. On Ex-Servicemen’s Welfare he suggested the following points:—
- All the Ex-Servicemen should get full pension.
- Some Major General gets lesser pension than the Brigadier.
This anomaly must be sorted out.
- For Welfare of Ex-Servicemen State Govts. have to be given
more authority and responsibility of getting people together
and giving them employment.
- Complete restructuring of Zila Sainik Boards and Rajya
Sainik Boards should be carried out.
- The State Governments must allot land to the Jawans as
form of incentive to join Armed Forces.
The Witnesses then withdrew.

49
7. Then Hon’ble Chairman welcomed the representatives of
Ministry of Defence to render oral Evidence on Demands for
Grants(2006-07) relating to Navy. The Hon’ble Chairman and Members
sought clarifications on certain important points on Demand No. 23
relating to Navy i.e. substantial cut in Capital Budget for Navy in the
RE 2005-06 against BE 2005-06, reasons for decreased allocations, major
cuts made in various acquisition programmes and its impact on various
acquisition programmes and overall defence preparedness, decline in
allocation for purchase of Naval vessels and submarine for Mazagon
Dock Limited in RE 2005-06, modernisation of Naval Dockyard,
Mumbai, Fifteen year long term plan for Navy, thrust areas in the
11th Plan and shortfall in the 10th Plan, status of indigenous production
of submarines and acquisition of low level radars and long term fund
support etc. The representatives responded to the queries of the
Members one by one
The Witnesses then withdrew.
8. A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept.
The Committee then adjourned.

MINUTES OF THE THIRTY THIRD SITTING OF THE STANDING
COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE (2005-06)
The Committee sat on Wednesday, the 29th March, 2006 from 1100 hrs.
to 1240 hrs. in Committee Room ‘53’, Parliament House, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Shri Balasaheb Vikhe Patil— Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Illiyas Azmi
3. Shri Thupstan Chhewang
4. Dr. K.S. Manoj
5. Shri Raghuraj Singh Shakya
6. Shri Ganesh Prasad Singh
7. Shri Balashowry Vallabhaneni
8. Ms. Ingrid Mcleod
Rajya Sabha
9. Smt. N.P . Durga
10. Shri Pramod Mahajan
11. Shri Jai Parkash Aggarwal
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri S.K. Sharma — Additional Secretary
2. Smt. Anita Jain — Deputy Secretary
3. Shri D.R. Shekhar — Under Secretary
LIST OF W ITNESSES
1. Shri U.C. Jha, Wing Commander (Retd.)
2. Col. Satwant Singh (Retd.)
3. Col. Dr. Jag Mohan (Retd.)
50

51
2.  At the outset, Hon’ble Chairman welcomed the Members to
the sitting of the Committee. The Chairman then informed that
Committee would take oral evidence of the non-official witnesses on
“The Armed Forces Tribunal Bill, 2005”. The Committee then invited
Shri U.C. Jha, Wing Commander (Retd.) for placing his views on the
various provisions of the proposed Bill and invited his attention to the
direction 58 of the Directions by the Speaker, Lok Sabha regarding
maintaining confidentiality of the proceedings of the Committee.
Shri U. C. Jha then submitted the following suggestions on the
provisions of the Bill:—
(i) Old laws of Armed Forces Act, 1950-1957 have not been
amended effectively in the democratic spirit of the country.
These laws are required to be reviewed and amended.
(ii) Article 20 and 21 of the Constitution relating to right to life
and personal liberty of the individual as available to a
civilian, should also be made available to the Defence
personnel.
(iii) Free legal aid be provided to Armed Forces as is available
to civilians.
(iv) Judge Advocate General (JAG) from Armed Forces should
not be a member and Chairman of the proposed Tribunal.
A civilian Judge preferably of High Court or Supreme court
would be more impartial and independent.
(v) There should be a common code for all the three services
as in UK and Australia.
(vi) In summary trial, principles of natural justice must be
observed.
(vii) International covenants on Civil Political Rights have been
incorporated in the Civil Laws but in military laws, these
have not been incorporated.
(viii) Provision relating to Court fee, as prescribed in the Bill,
should be deleted.
(ix) There should be a time limit for disposal of cases by the
Tribunal.
(x) As per clause 15 (6), (d), and (f), Tribunal should have full-
fledged powers to determine any question necessary for the
purpose.
The witness then withdrew.

52
The Committee then invited Col. Satwant Singh (Retd.), for placing
his view on the Bill. He gave the following suggestions:—
(i) Time frame be fixed to dispose of cases.
(ii) No military officer should be member of the proposed
Tribunal.
(iii) Term of the Judges of the Tribunal should be three years.
(iv) Retired High Court Judges be appointed Judicial member
and Chairperson of the Tribunal.
The witness then withdrew.
The Committee then invited Col. Dr. Jag Mohan (Retd.). He gave
the following suggestions on the Bill for consideration of the
Committee:—
(i) Judge Advocate General or equivalent from Armed Forces
should not be appointed as judicial member.
(ii) Leave of any kind, must not be taken out of the definition
of “service matter”.
(iii) Transfers and postings should be included in the purview
of the Bill.
(iv) Award of censure should also be included in “service
matter” and inserted as Section 3 (o) (v) in the proposed
Bill.
(v) Confining the Tribunal Judges to serve only one tenure and
laying down that they would not be eligible for
reemployment is not logical.
The witness then withdrew.
The Committee then adjourned.

MINUTES OF THE THIRTY SIXTH SITTING OF THE STANDING
COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE (2005-06)
The Committee sat on Thursday, the 13th April, 2006 from
1100 hrs. to 1300 hrs. in Committee Room ‘G-74’, Parliament Library
Building, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Shri Balasaheb Vikhe Patil— Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Thupstan Chhewang
3. Dr. K.S. Manoj
4. Shri Mahadeorao Shiwankar
5. Shri Ganesh Prasad Singh
Rajya Sabha
6. Dr. Farooq Abdullah
7. Shri Jai Parkash Aggarwal
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri R.C. Ahuja — Joint Secretary
2. Smt. Anita Jain — Deputy Secretary
3. Shri D.R. Shekhar — Under Secretary
LIST OF R EPRESENTATIVES FROM M INISTRY OF F INANCE
1. Dr. Adarsh Kishore, Finance Secretary and Secretary
(Expenditure)
2. Shri Atanu Chakraborty, Joint Secretary, Department of
Expenditure
3. Shri R.K. Arora, Director (E.II), Department of Expenditure
4. Shri P .R. Das, Additional Budget Officer, Department of
Economic Affairs
53

54
NON O FFICIAL E XPERT
1. Wing Commander U.C. Jha (Retd.)
2. At the outset, Hon’ble Chairman welcomed the Representatives
of Ministry of Finance to the Sitting of the Committee. Then Hon’ble
Chairman and Members requested them to clarify some crucial issues
pertaining to Defence Budget and Defence Planning. The representatives
replied to all the queries of the Members one by one.
The witnesses then withdrew.
3. The Committee then invited Wing Commander U.C. Jha (Retd.)
to make presentation on the Armed Forces Tribunal Bill, 2005. He then
gave detailed presentation on the various provisions of the Bill.
Members raised certain queries on the provision of the Bill. The same
were responded to by the witness.
The witness then withdrew.
4. A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept.
The Committee then adjourned.

MINUTES OF THE THIRTY NINTH SITTING OF THE STANDING
COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE (2005-06)
The Committee sat on Thursday, the 28 April, 2006 from 1400 hrs.
to 1600 hrs. in Committee Room ‘D’, Parliament House Annexe,
New Delhi.
PRESENT
Shri Balasaheb Vikhe Patil— Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Illiyas Azmi
3. Shri Thupstan Chhewang
4. Dr. C. Krishnan
5. Shri Raghuraj Singh Shakya
6. Shri Mahadeorao Shiwankar
7. Shri Ganesh Prasad Singh
8. Shri Balashowry Vallabhaneni
9. Shri Dharmendra Yadav
Rajya Sabha
10. Smt. N. P . Durga
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri R. C. Ahuja — Joint Secretary
2. Smt. Anita Jain — Deputy Secretary
3. Shri D.R. Shekhar — Under Secretary
LIST OF R EPRESENTATIVES FROM M INISTRY OF D EFENCE
1. Shri Shekhar Dutt, Defence Secretary
2. Shri Bimal Julka, JS (E)
3. Shri S. C. Barmma, Director
55

56
Army HQrs.
1. Lt. Gen. A. S. Jamwal, AG
2. Lt. Gen. M. G. Girish, DG, DC&W
3. V . Adml. Nirmal Verma, COP
4. Air Mshl. H. S. H. S. Garkal, AOA
5. Maj. Gen. Nilendra Kumar, JAG (Army)
6. Cmde. Mohan Phadke, JAG (Navy)
7. Gp. Capt. PC Grover, JAG (Air)
8. Maj. Sachidanand Prabhu, AJAG (Army)
L
IST OF R EPRESENTATIVES FROM M INISTRY OF L AW & J USTICE
1. Shri K. D. Singh, Additional Secretary
2. Shri S. S. Chahar, Joint Secretary
2.  At the outset, Hon’ble Chairman welcomed the Members to
the sitting of the Committee. The Committee thereafter took oral
evidence of the Ministry of Defence & the Ministry of Law & Justice
on The Armed Forces Tribunal Bill, 2005. During the discussions
following points were raised:
(i) Composition of the proposed Tribunal;
(ii) Summary disposals and trials;
(iii) Disposal of around 9000 cases pending in various courts;
(iv) Review the existing Acts of Armed Forces;
(v) Award of compensation in case of miscarriage of justice;
(vi) Power of the Tribunal to grant Bail;
(vii) Proposed Bill and Coast Guards;
(viii) Provision for appeal against the orders of the Tribunal;
(ix) Need to evolve uniform discipline code for three services.
3. The Committee also discussed with the representatives of the
Ministries on various suggestions / views given by the non official
witnesses on the Bill. The Committee also sought certain information
from the Ministry of Defence & the Ministry of Law & Justice on the
subject. They assured to submit written replies on the issues.
4. A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept.
The Committee then adjourned.

MINUTES OF THE FORTY FIRST SITTING OF THE STANDING
COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE (2005-06)
The Committee sat on Tuesday , the 16 May, 2006 from 1730 hrs.
to 1845 hrs. in Committee Room ‘C’, Parliament House Annexe,
New Delhi.
PRESENT
Shri Balasaheb Vikhe Patil— Chairman
M
EMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Illiyas Azmi
3. Shri A. V . Bellarmin
4. Shri Thupstan Chhewang
5. Smt. Sangeeta Kumari Singh Deo
6. Smt. Priya Dutt
7. Shri S. D. Mandlik
8. Dr. K. S. Manoj
9. Shri Raghuraj Singh Shakya
10. Shri Ganesh Prasad Singh
11. Shri Manvendra Singh
12. Ms. Ingrid Mcleod
Rajya Sabha
13. Smt. N. P . Durga
14. Shri Jai Parkash Aggarwal
15. Shri Lalit Suri
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri R. C. Ahuja — Joint Secretary
2. Smt. Anita Jain — Deputy Secretary
3. Shri D.R. Shekhar — Under Secretary
57

58
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomes the Members to the
sitting of the Committee. The Chairman then informed the Members
that the Committee would take up Draft Report on the ‘The Armed
Forces Tribunal Bill, 2005’ for consideration and adoption.
3. The Committee then took up the Draft Report on the Bill for
consideration. The Committee, after elaborate discussion on the
provisions of the Bill, adopted the Draft Report with minor
modifications.
4. The Committee then authorised the Chairman to make
necessary amendments, if necessary, in the Report and present the
same to the Parliament.
The Committee then adjourned.

TO BE I NTRODUCED IN THE R AJYA S ABHA
Bill No. CXXIX of 2005
THE ARMED FORCES TRIBUNAL BILL, 2005
————
ARRANGEMENT OF CLAUSES
————
Clauses
CHAPTER I
PRELIMINARY
1. Short title and commencement.
2. Applicability of the Act.
3. Definitions.
CHAPTER II
E
STABLISHMENT OF T RIBUNAL AND B ENCHES T HEREOF
4. Establishment of Armed Forces Tribunal.
5. Composition of Tribunal and Benches thereof.
6. Qualifications for appointment of Chairperson and other
Members.
7. Appointment of Chairpersons and other Members.
8. Term of office.
9. Resignation and removal.
10. Salaries, allowances and other terms and conditions of
service of Chairperson and other Members.
11.P rohibitions as to holding of offices, etc., by Chairperson or
Member on ceasing to be such Chairperson or Member.
12. Financial and administrative powers of Chairperson.
13. Staff of the Tribunal.
59

60
Clauses
CHAPTER III
JURISDICTION, P OWERS AND A UTHORITY OF THE T RIBUNAL
14. Jurisdiction, powers and authority in service matters.
15. Jurisdiction, powers and authority in matters of appeal
against court-martial.
16. Re-trial.
17. Powers of the Tribunal on appeal under section 15.
18. Cost.
19. Power to punish for contempt.
20. Distribution of business among the Benches.
CHAPTER IV
P
ROCEDURE
21. Application not to be admitted unless other remedies
exhausted.
22. Limitation.
23. Procedure and powers of the Tribunal.
24. Term of sentence and its effect on appeal.
25. Right of applicant or of a appellant to take assistance of a
legal practitioner and of Government, etc., to appoint
counsel.
26. Condition as to making of interim order.
27. Power of Chairperson to transfer cases from one Bench to
another.
28. Decision to be by majority .
29. Execution of order of the Tribunal.
CHAPTER V
A
PPEAL
30. Appeal to the Supreme Court.
31. Leave to appeal.
32. Condonation.
CHAPTER VI
MISCELLANEOUS
33. Exclusion of jurisdiction of civil courts.
34. Transfer of pending cases.

61
Clauses
35. Provision for filling of certain appeals.
36. Proceedings before Tribunal to be judicial proceedings.
37. Members and staff of Tribunal to be public servants.
38. Protection of action taken in good faith.
39. Act to have overriding effect.
40. Power to remove difficulties.
41. Power of Central Government to make rules.
42. Power to make rules retrospectively.
43. Laying of rules.

Bill No. CXXIX of 2005
THE ARMED FORCES TRIBUNAL BILL, 2005
A
BILL
to provide for the adjudication or trial by Armed Forces Tribunal of disputes
and complaints with respect to commission, appointments, enrolment and
conditions of service in respect of persons subject to the Army Act,
1950, the Navy Act, 1957 and the Air Force Act, 1950 and also to
provide for appeals arising out of orders, findings or sentences of court-
martial held under the said Acts and for matters connected therewith or
incidental thereto.
B
E it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-sixth Year of the Republic
of India as follows:
CHAPTER I
PRELIMINARY
1. (1) This Act may be called the Armed
Forces Tribunal Act, 2005.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as
the Central Government may, by notification,
appoint.
2. (1) The provisions of this Act shall apply
to all persons subject to the Army Act, 1950,
the Navy Act, 1957 and the Air Force Act, 1950.
(2) This Act shall also apply to retired
personnel subject to the Army Act, 1950 or the
Navy Act, 1957 or the Air Force Act, 1950,
including their dependants, heirs and
successors, in so far as it relates to their service
matters.
3. In this Act, unless the context otherwise
requires,—
(a) “Administrative Member” means a
member of the Tribunal who is not a
Judicial Member within the meaning of
clause (g);
Short title
and
commence-
ment.
Applicability
of the Act.
Definitions.
46 of 1950.
62 of 1957.
45 of 1950.
62

63
(b) “application” means an application
made under sub-section (2) of section 14;
(c) “appointed day” means the date
with effect from which the Tribunal is
established by notification under section 4;
(d) “Bench” means a Bench of the
Tribunal;
(e) “Chairperson” means the
Chairperson of the Tribunal;
(f) “court-martial” means a court-
martial held under the Army Act, 1950 or
the Navy Act, 1957 or the Air Force Act,
1950;
(g) “Judicial Member” means a member
of the Tribunal appointed as such under
this Act, and includes the Chairperson, who
possesses any of the qualifications specified
in sub-section (2) of section 6;
(h) “Member” means a member
(whether Judicial or Administrative) of the
Tribunal and includes the Chairperson;
(i) “military custody” means the arrest
or confinement of a person according to
the usages of the service and includes naval
or air force custody;
(j) “notification” means a notification
published in the Official Gazette;
(k) “prescribed” means prescribed by
rules made under this Act;
(l) “President” means the President of
India;
(m) “rules” means the rules made
under this Act;
(n) “service” means the service within
or outside India;
46 of 1950.
62 of 1957.
45 of 1950.

64
(o) “service matters”, in relation to the
persons subject to the Army Act, 1950, the
Navy Act, 1957 and the Air Force Act, 1950,
mean all matters relating to the conditions
of their service and shall include—
(i) remuneration (including
allowances), pension and other
retirement benefits;
(ii) tenure, including commission,
appointment, enrolment, probation,
confirmation, seniority, training,
promotion, reversion, premature
retirement, superannuation, termination
of service and penal deductions;
(iii) leave of any kind;
(iv) summary disposal and trials;
(v) any other matter, whatsoever,
but shall not include matters relating
to—
(i) orders issued under section 18
of the Army Act, 1950, sub-section (1)
of section 15 of the Navy Act, 1957 and
section 18 of the Air Force Act, 1950;
and
(ii) transfers and postings in relation
to the persons subject to the Acts
mentioned in this clause;
(p) “summary disposals and trials”
means summary disposals and trials
held under the Army Act, 1950, the
Navy Act, 1957 and the Air Force Act,
1950;
(q) “Tribunal” means the Armed
Forces Tribunal established under
section 4.
46 of 1950.
62 of 1957.
45 of 1950.
46 of 1950.
62 of 1957.
45 of 1950.
46 of 1950.
62 of 1957.
45 of 1950.

65
CHAPTER II
ESTABLISHMENT OF T RIBUNAL AND
BENCHES T HEREOF
4. The Central Government shall, by
notification, establish a Tribunal to be known
as the Armed Forces Tribunal to exercise the
jurisdiction, powers and authority conferred
on it by or under this Act.
5. (1) The Tribunal shall consist of a
Chairperson, and such number of Judicial and
Administrative Members as the Central
Government may deem fit and, subject to the
other provisions of this Act, the jurisdiction,
powers and authority of the Tribunal may be
exercised by Benches thereof.
(2)) Subject to the other provisions of this
Act, a Bench shall consist of one Judicial
Member and one Administrative Member.
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in
sub-section (1), the Chairperson—
(a) may, in addition to discharging the
functions of a Judicial Member of the Bench
to which he is appointed, discharge the
functions of an Administrative Member of
any other Bench;
(b) may transfer a Member from one
Bench to another Bench;
(c) may, for the purpose of securing that
any case or cases, which having regard to
the nature of the questions involved,
requires or require, in his opinion, or under
the rules made under this Act, to be
decided by a Bench composed of more than
two members, issue such general or special
orders, as he may deem fit:
Provided that every bench constituted
in pursuance of this clause shall include at
least one Judicial Member and one
Administrative Member.
Establishment
or Armed
Forces
Tribunal.
Composition
of Tribunal
and
Benches
thereof.

66
(4) Subject to the other provisions of
this Act, the Benches of the Tribunal shall
ordinarily sit at Delhi (which shall be
known as the Principal Bench), and at such
other places as the Central Government
may, by notification, specify.
6. (1) A person shall not be qualified for
appointment as the Chairperson unless he is a
retired Judge of the Supreme Court or a retired
Chief Justice of a High Court.
(2) A person shall not be qualified for
appointment as a Judicial Member unless—
(a) he is or has been a Judge of a High
Court; or
(b) he has held the post of Judge
Advocate General in the rank of Major
General in the Army or equivalent rank in
the Navy or the Air Force, as the case may
be.
Explanation.— When a serving person
referred to in clause (b) is appointed as
Judicial Member, he shall have retired from
service prior to assuming such appointment.
(3) A person shall not be qualified for
appointment as an Administrative Member
unless he has held or is holding the rank of
Major General or above for a total period of at
least three years in the Army or equivalent rank
in the Navy or the Air Force.
Explanation.— When a serving person is
appointed as an Administrative Member, he
shall have retired from service prior to
assuming such appointment.
7. (1) Subject to the provisions of this
section, the Chairperson and other Members of
the Tribunal shall be appointed by the
President:
Provided that no appointment under this
sub-section shall be made except after
consultation with the Chief Justice of India.
Qualifications
for
appointment
of
Chairperson
and other
Members.
Appointment
of
Chairperson
and other
Members.

67
(2) The president may appoint one or more
Members of the Tribunal to be the Vice-
Chairperson, or, as the case may be, the Vice-
Chairpersons, thereof.
8. The Chairperson or a Member shall hold
office for a term of four years form the date
on which he enters upon his office and shall
not be eligible for re-appointment;
Provided that no Chairperson shall hold
office as such after he has attained,—
(a) in case he has been a Judge of the
Supreme Court, the age of seventy years;
and
(b) in case he has been the Chief Justice
of a High Court, the age of sixty-five years:
Provided further that no other Member
shall hold office as such Member after he has
attained the age of sixty-five years.
9. (1) The Chairperson or a Member may,
by notice in writing under his hand addressed
to the President, resign his office:
Provided that the Chairperson or a Member
shall, unless he is permitted by the President
to relinquish his office sooner, continue to hold
office until the expiry of three months from
the date of receipt of such notice or until a
person duly appointed as his successor enters
upon his office or until the expiry of his term
of office, whichever is the earliest.
(2) The Chairperson or a Member shall not
be removed from his office except by an order
made by the President on the ground of proved
misbehaviour or incapacity after an inquiry
made by a sitting Judge of the Supreme Court
in which such Chairperson or other Member
had been informed of the charges against him
and given a reasonable opportunity of being
heard in respect of those charges.
Term of
office.
Resignation
and
removal.

68
(3) The Central Government may, by rules,
regulate the procedure for the investigation of
misbehaviour or incapacity of the Chairperson
or other Member referred to in sub-section (2).
10. The salaries and allowances payable to,
and the other terms and conditions of service
(including pension, gratuity and other
retirement benefits) of, the Chairperson and
other Members shall be such as may be
prescribed by the Central Government:
Provided that neither the salary and
allowances nor the other terms and conditions
of service of the Chairperson and other
Members shall be varied to their disadvantage
after their appointment.
11. On ceasing to hold office—
(a) the Chairperson shall be ineligible
for further employment either under the
Government of India or under the
Government of a State;
(b) a Member other than the
Chairperson shall, subject to the provisions
of this Act, be eligible for appointment as
a member of any other Tribunal but not
for any other employment either under the
Government of India or under the
Government of a State;
(c) the Chairperson or other Members
shall not appear, act or plead before the
Tribunal.
12. The Chairperson shall exercise such
financial and administrative powers over the
Benches as may be prescribed:
Provided that the Chairperson shall have
the authority to delegate such of his financial
and administrative powers as he may think fit
to any other Member or any officer of the
Tribunal, subject to the conditions that such
Salaries,
allownaces
and other
terms and
conditions
of service
of
Chairperson
and other
Members.
Prohibitions
as to
holding of
offices,
etc., by
Chairperson
or Member
on ceasing
to be such
Chairperson
or
Member.
Financial
and
administrative
powers of
Chairperson.

69
Member or officer shall, while exercising such
delegated powers, continue to act under the
direction, control and supervision of the
Chairperson.
13. (1) The Central Government shall
determine the nature and categories of the
officers and other employees required to assist
the Tribunal in the discharge of its functions
and provide the Tribunal with such officers
and other employees as it may think fit.
(2) The salaries and allowances payable to,
and the other terms and conditions of service
of the officers and other employees of the
Tribunal shall be such as may be prescribed.
(3) The officers and other employees of the
Tribunal shall discharge their functions under
the general superintendence of the Chairperson.
CHAPTER III
J
URISDICTION, P OWERS AND A UTHORITY
OF THE T RIBUNAL
14. (1) Save as otherwise expressly provided
in this Act, the Tribunal shall exercise, on and
from the appointed day, all the jurisdiction,
powers and authority, exercisable immediately
before that day by all courts (except the
Supreme Court or a High Court exercising
jurisdiction under articles 226 and 227 of the
Constitution) in relation to all service matters.
(2) Subject to the other provisions of this
Act, a person aggrieved by an order pertaining
to any service matter may make an application
to the Tribunal in such form and accompanied
by such documents or other evidence and on
payment of such fee as may be prescribed.
(3) On receipt of an application relating to
service matters, the Tribunal shall, if satisfied
after due inquiry, as it may deem necessary,
that it is fit for adjudication by it, admit such
Staff of the
Tribunal.
Jurisdiction,
powers
and
authority
in service
matters.

70
application; but where the Tribunal is not so
satisfied, it may dismiss the application after
recording its reasons in writing.
(4) For the purpose of adjudicating an
application, the Tribunal shall have the same
powers as are vested in a Civil Court under
the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908, while trying
a suit in respect of the following matters,
namely:—
(a) summoning and enforcing the
attendance of any person and examining
him on oath;
(b) requiring the discovery and
production of documents;
(c) receiving evidence on affidavits;
(d) subject to the provisions of sections
123 and 124 of the Indian Evidence Act,
1872, requisitioning any public record or
document or copy of such record or
document from any office;
(e) issuing commissions for the
examination of witnesses or documents;
(f) reviewing its decisions;
(g) dismissing an application for default
or deciding it ex parte;
(h) setting aside any order of dismissal
of any application for default or any order
passed by it ex parte; and
(i) any other matter which may be
prescribed by the Central Government.
(5) The Tribunal shall decide both questions
of law and facts that may be raised before it.
15. (1) Save as otherwise expressly provided
in this Act, the Tribunal shall exercise, on and
from the appointed day, all the jurisdiction,
powers and authority exercisable under this Act
in relation to appeal against any order, decision,
5 of 1908.
Jurisdiction,
powers
and
authority
in matters
of appeal
against
court-
martial.
1 of 1872.

71
finding or sentence passed by a court-martial
or any matter connected therewith or incidental
thereto.
(2) Any person aggrieved by an order,
decision, finding or sentence passed by a court-
martial may prefer an appeal in such form,
manner and within such time as may be
prescribed.
(3) The Tribunal shall have power to grant
bail to any person accused of an offence and
in military custody, with or without any
conditions which it considers necessary:
Provided that no accused persons hall be
so released if there appears reasonable ground
for believing that he has been guilty of an
offence punishable with death or imprisonment
for life.
(4) The Tribunal shall allow an appeal
against conviction by a court-martial where—
(a) the finding of the court-martial is
legally not sustainable due to any reason
whatsoever; or
(b) the finding involves wrong decision
on a question of law; or
(c) there was a material irregularity in
the course of the trial resulting in
miscarriage of justice.
but, in any other case, may dismiss the appeals
where the Tribunal considers that no
miscarriage of justice is likely to be caused or
has actually resulted to the appellant:
Provided that no order dismissing the
appeal by the Tribunal shall be passed unless
such order is made after recording reasons
therefor in writing.

72
(5) The Tribunal may allow an appeal
against conviction, and pass appropriate order
thereon.
(6) Notwithstanding anything contained in
the foregoing provisions of this section, the
Tribunal shall have the power to—
(a) substitute for the findings of the
court-martial, a finding of guilty for any
other offence for which the offender could
have been lawfully found guilty by the
court-martial and pass a sentence afresh for
the offence specified or involved in such
finding under the provisions of the Army
Act, 1950 or the Navy Act, 1957 or the Air
Force Act, 1950, as the case may be; or
(b) if sentence is found to be excessive,
illegal or unjust, the Tribunal may—
(i) remit the whole or any part of
the sentence, with or without
conditions;
(ii) mitigate the punishment
awarded;
(iii) commute such punishment to
any lesser punishment or punishments
mentioned in the Army Act, 1950, the
Navy Act, 1957 and the Air Force Act,
1950, as the case may be;
(c) enhance the sentence awarded by a
court-martial;
Provided that no such sentence shall
be enhanced unless the appellant has been
given an opportunity of being heard.
(d) release the appellant, if sentenced
to imprisonment, on parole with or without
conditions;
(e) suspend a sentence of imprisonment;
(f) pass any other order as it may think
appropriate.
46 of 1950.
62 of 1957.
45 of 1950.
46 of 1950.
62 of 1957.
45 of 1950.

73
(7) Notwithstanding any other provisions
in this Act, for the purposes of this section, the
Tribunal shall be deemed to be a criminal court
for the purposes of section 175, 178, 179, 180,
193, 195, 196 or 228 of the Indian Penal Code
and Chapter XXVI of the Code of Criminal
Procedure, 1973.
16. (1) Except as provided by this Act,
where the conviction of a person by court-
martial for an offence has been quashed, he
shall not be liable to be tried again for that
offence by a court-martial or by any other
Court.
(2) The Tribunal shall have the power of
quashing a conviction, to make an order
authorising the appellant to be retried by court-
martial, but shall only exercise this power when
the appeal against conviction is allowed by
reasons only of evidence received or available
to be received by the Tribunal under this Act
and it appears to the Tribunal that the interests
of justice require that an order under this
section should be made:
Provided that an appellant shall not be
retried under this section for an offence other
than—
(a) the offence for which he was
convicted by the original court-martial and
in respect of which his appeal is allowed;
(b) any offence for which he could have
been convicted at the original court-martial
on a charge of the first-mentioned offence;
(c) any offence charged in the
alternative in respect of which the court-
martial recorded no finding in consequence
of convicting him of the first-mentioned
offence.
(3) A person who is to be retried under
this section for an offence shall, if the Tribunal
Re-trial.
45 of 1860.
2 of 1974.

74
or the Supreme Court so directs, whether or
not such person is being tried or retired on
one or more of the original charges, no fresh
investigation or other action shall be taken
under the relevant provision of the Army Act,
1950 or the Navy Act, 1957 or the Air Force
Act, 1950, as the case may be, or rules and
regulations made thereunder, in relation to the
said charge or charges on which he is to be
retried.
17. The Tribunal, while hearing and
deciding an appeal under section 15, shall have
the power—
(a) to order production of documents
or exhibits connected with the proceedings
before the court-martial;
(b) to order the attendance of the
witnesses;
(c) to receive evidence;
(d) to obtain reports from court martial;
(e) order reference of any question for
enquiry;
(f) appoint a person with special expert
knowledge to act as an assessor; and
(g) to determine any question which is
necessary to be determined in order to do
justice in the case.
18. While disposing of the application under
section 14 or an appeal under section 15, the
Tribunal shall have power to make such order
as to costs as it may deem just.
19. (1) Any person who is guilty of
contempt of the Tribunal by using any insulting
or threatening language, or by causing any
interruption or disturbance in the proceedings
of such Tribunal shall, on conviction, be liable
to suffer imprisonment for a term which may
extend to three years.
Powers of
the
Tribunal
on appeal
under
section 15.
Cost.
Power to
punish for
contempt.
46 of 1950.
62 of 1957.
45 of 1950.

75
(2) For the purposes of trying an offence
under this section, the provisions of sections
14, 15, 17, 18 and 20 of the Contempt of Courts
Act, 1971 shall mutatis mutandils apply, as if a
reference therein to—
(a) Supreme Court or High Court were
a reference to the Tribunal;
(b) Chief Justice were a reference to the
Chairperson;
(c) Judge were a reference to the
Judicial or Administrative Member of the
Tribunal;
(d) Advocate-General were a reference
to the prosecutor; and
(e) Court were a reference to the
Tribunal.
20. The Chairperson may make provisions
as to the distribution of the business of the
Tribunal among its Benches.
CHAPTER IV
PROCEDURE
21. (1) The Tribunal shall not ordinarily
admit an application unless it is satisfied that
the applicant had availed of the remedies
available to him under the Army Act, 1950 or
the Navy Act, 1957 or the Air Force Act, 1950,
as the case may be, and respective rules and
regulations made thereunder.
(2) For the purposes of sub-section (1), a
person shall be deemed to have availed of all
the remedies available to him under the Army
Act, 1950 or the Navy act, 1957 or the Air Force
Act, 1950, and respective rules and
regulations—
(a) if a final order has been made by
the Central Government or other authority
Distribution
of business
among the
Benches.
Application
not to be
admitted
unless
other
remedies
exhausted.
46 of 1950.
62 of 1957.
45 of 1950.
46 of 1950.
62 of 1957.
45 of 1950.

76
or officer or other person competent to pass
such order under the said Acts, rules and
regulations, rejecting any petition preferred
or representation made by such person;
(b) where no final order has been made
by the Central Government or other
authority or officer or other person
competent to pass such order with regard
to the petition preferred or representation
made by such person, if a period of six
months from the date on which such
petition was preferred or representation was
made has expired.
22. The Tribunal shall not admit an
application—
(a) in a case where a final order such as
is mentioned in clause (a) of sub-section (2)
of section 21 has been made unless the
application is made within six months from
the date on which such final order has been
made;
(b) in a case where a petition or a
representation such as is mentioned in
clause (b) of sub-section of section 21 has
been made and the period of six months
has expired thereafter without such final
order having been made;
(c) in a case where the grievance in
respect of which an application is made had
arisen by reason of any order made at any
time during the period of three years
immediately preceding the date on which
jurisdiction, powers and authority of the
Tribunal became exercisable under this Act,
in respect of the matter to which such order
relates and no proceedings for the redressal
of such grievance had been commenced
before the said date before the High Court.
Limitation.

77
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in
sub-section (1), the Tribunal may admit an
application after the period of six months
referred to in clause (a) or clause (b) of sub-
section (1), as the case may be, or prior to the
period of three years specified in clause (c), if
the Tribunal is satisfied that the applicant had
sufficient cause for not making the application
within such period.
23. (1) The Tribunal shall not be bound by
the procedure laid down in the Code of Civil
Procedure, 1908 but shall be guided by the
principles of natural justice and subject to the
other provisions of this Act and any rules made
thereunder, the Tribunal shall have the power
to lay down and regulate its own procedure
including the fixing of place and time of its
inquiry and deciding whether to sit in public
or in camera.
(2) The Tribunal shall decide every
application made to it as expeditiously as
possible after a perusal of documents, affidavits
and written representations and after hearing
such oral arguments as may be advanced:
Provided that where the Tribunal deems it
necessary, for reasons to be recorded in writing,
it may allow oral evidence to be adduced.
(3) No adjournment shall be granted by the
Tribunal without recording the reasons
justifying the grant of such adjournment and
cost shall be awarded, if a party requests for
adjournment more than twice.
24. (1) The term of any sentence passed by
the Tribunal under clause (a) of sub-section (6)
of section 15 of this Act shall, unless the
Tribunal otherwise directs, be reckoned to
commence on the day on which it would have
commenced under the Army Act, 1950, the
Navy Act, 1957 or the Air Force Act, 1950, as
the case may be, under which the court martial
against which the appeal was filed, had been
held.
Procedure
and
Powers of
the
Tribunal.
Term of
sentence
and its
effect on
appeal.
5 of 1908.
46 of 1950.
62 of 1957.
45 of 1950.

78
(2) Subject to the provisions of sub-section
(3), any sentence passed on an appeal from the
Tribunal to the Supreme Court in substitution
for another sentence shall, unless the Supreme
Court otherwise directs, be reckoned to
commence on the day on which the original
sentence would have commenced.
(3) Where a person who is undergoing
sentence is granted stay of the operation of the
said sentence, either by suspension or
otherwise, pending an appeal, the period
during which he is so released due to the
sentence having been so stayed, shall be
excluded in computing the term for which he
is so sentenced by the Tribunal or the Supreme
Court, as the case may be.
25. (1) A person making an application or
preferring an appeal to the Tribunal may either
appear in person or take the assistance of a
legal practitioner of his choice to present his
case before the Tribunal.
(2) The Central Government or the
competent authority, as may be prescribed, may
authorise one or more legal practitioners or any
of its law officers to act as counsel and every
person so authorised by it may present its case
with respect to any application or appeal, as
the case may be, before the Tribunal.
26. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained
in any other provision of this Act or in any
other law for the time being in force, no interim
order (whether by way of injunction or stay or
in any other manner) shall be made on an
application or appeal, or in any proceeding
relating thereto, unless,—
(a) copies of such application or appeal,
as the case may be, and all documents in
support of the plea for such interim order
are furnished to the party against whom
such application or appeal, as the case may
be, is made or proposed to be made; and
Right of
applicant
or of
appellant
to take
assistance
of a legal
practitioner
and of
Government,
etc., to
appoint
counsel.
Condition
as to
making of
interim
order.

79
(b) opportunity of being heard is given
to the other party in the matter:
Provided that the tribunal may dispense
with the requirements of clauses (a) and (b)
and make an interim order as an exceptional
measure if it is satisfied, for reasons to be
recorded in writing, that it is necessary so to
do for preventing any loss being caused to the
applicant or to the appellant, as the case may
be.
(2) Where any party against whom an
interim order, whether by way of injunction or
stay or in any other manner, is made on an
application or appeal or in any proceeding
relating thereto under sub-section (1), without—
(a) furnishing to such party copies of
such application or appeal, as the case may
be, and all documents in support of the
plea for such interim order; and
(b) giving such party an opportunity
of being heard, and making an application
to the Tribunal for the vacation of such
order and furnishing a copy of such
application or appeal, as the case may be,
to the party in whose favour such order
has been made or the counsel of such party;
the Tribunal shall dispose of the application
within a period of fourteen days from the date
on which it is received or from the date on
which the copy of such application is so
furnished, whichever is later, or where the
Tribunal is closed on the last day of that period,
before the expirty of the next working day; and
if the application is not so disposed of, the
interim order shall, on the expiry of that period,
or, as the case may be, the expiry of the said
next working day, stand vacated.

80
27. On the application of any of the parties
and after notice to the parties concerned, and
after hearing such of them as he may desire to
be heard, or on his own motion without such
notice, the Chairperson may transfer any case
pending before one Bench for disposal, to any
other Bench.
28. If the Members of a Bench differ in
opinion on any point, the point shall be decided
according to the opinion of the majority, if there
is a majority, but if the Members are equally
divided, they shall state the point or points on
which they differ and make a reference to the
Chairperson who shall either hear the point or
points himself or refer the case for hearing on
such point or points by one or more of the
Members of the Tribunal and such point or
points shall be decided according to the opinion
of the majority of the Members of the Tribunal
who have heard the case, including those who
first heard it.
29. Subject to the other provisions of this
Act and the rules made thereunder, the order
of the Tribunal disposing of an application shall
be final and shall not be called in question in
any Court and such order shall be executed
accordingly.
CHAPTER V
A
PPEAL
30. (1) Subject to the provisions of section
31, an appeal shall lie to the Supreme Court
against the final decision or order of the
Tribunal (other than an order passed under
section 19):
Provided that such appeal is preferred
within a period of ninety days of the said
decision or order:
Provided further that there shall be no
appeal against an interlucutory order of the
Tribunal.
Power of
Chairperson
to transfer
cases from
one Bench
to another.
Decision to
be taken
by
majority.
Execution
of order of
the
Tribunal.
Appeal to
the
Supreme
Court.

81
(2) An appeal shall lie to the Supreme
Court as of right from any order or decision of
the Tribunal in the exercise of its jurisdiction
to punish for contempt:
Provided that an appeal under this sub-
section shall be filed in the Supreme Court
within sixty days from the date of the order
appealed against.
(3) Pending any appeal under sub-section
(2), the Supreme Court may order that—
(a) the execution of the punishment or
the order appealed against be suspended;
or
(b) if the appellant is in confinement,
he be released on bail:
Provided that where an appellant satisfies
the Tribunal that he intends to prefer an appeal,
the Tribunal may also exercise any of the
powers conferred under clause (a) or clause (b),
as the case may be.
31. (1) An appeal to the Supreme Court
shall lie with the leave of the Tribunal; and
such leave shall not be granted unless it is
certified by the Tribunal that a point of law of
general public importance is involved in the
decision, or it appears to the Supreme Court
that the point is one which ought to be
considered by that Court.
(2) An application to the Tribunal for leave
to appeal to the Supreme Court shall be made
within a period of thirty days beginning with
the date of the decision of the Tribunal and an
application to the Supreme Court for leave shall
be made within a period of thirty days
beginning with the date on which the
application for leave is refused by the Tribunal.
(3) An appeal shall be treated as pending
until any application for leave to appeal is
Leave to
appeal.

82
disposed of and if leave to appeal is granted,
until the appeal is disposed of; and an
application for leave to appeal shall be treated
as disposed of at the expiration of the time
within which it might have been made, but it
is not made within that time.
32. The Supreme Court may, upon an
application made at any time by the appellant,
extend the time within which an appeal may
be preferred by him to that Court under section
30 or sub-section (2) of section 31.
CHAPTER VI
M
ISCELLANEOUS
33. On and from the date from which any
jurisdiction, powers and authority becomes
exercisable by the Tribunal in relation to service
matters under this Act, no Civil Court shall
have, or be entitled to exercise, such
jurisdiction, power or authority in relation to
those service matters.
34. (1) Every suit, or other proceeding
pending before any court including a High
Court or other authority immediately before the
date of establishment of the Tribunal under this
Act, being a suit or proceeding the cause of
action whereon it is based, is such that it would
have been within the jurisdiction of the
Tribunal, if it had arisen after such
establishment within the jurisdiction of such
Tribunal, stand transferred on that date to such
Tribunal.
(2) Where any suit, or other proceeding
stands transferred from any court including a
High Court or other authority to the Tribunal
under sub-section (1),—
(a) the court or other authority shall,
as soon as may be, after such transfer,
forward the records of such suit, or other
proceeding to the Tribunal;
Condonation.
Exclusion
of
jurisdiction
of civil
courts.
Transfer of
pending
cases.

83
(b) the Tribunal may, on receipt of such
records, proceed to deal with such suit, or
other proceeding, so far as may be, in the
same manner as in the case of an
application made under sub-section (2) of
section 14 from the stage which was
reached before such transfer or from any
earlier stage or de novo as the Tribunal may
deem fit.
35. Where any decree or order has been
made or passed by any court (other than a
High Court) or any other authority in any suit
or proceeding before the establishment of the
Tribunal, being a suit or proceeding the cause
of action whereon it is based, is such that it
would have been, if it had arisen after such
establishment, within the jurisdiction of the
Tribunal, and no appeal has been preferred
against such decree or order before such
establishment or if preferred, the same is
pending for disposal before any court including
High Court and the time for preferring such
appeal under any law for the time being in
force had not expired before such establishment,
such appeal shall lie to the Tribunal, within
ninety days from the date on which the
Tribunal is established, or within ninety days
from the date of receipt of the copy of such
decree or order, whichever is later.
36. All proceedings before the Tribunal shall
be deemed to be judicial proceedings within
the meaning of sections 193, 219 and 228 of
the Indian Penal Code.
37. The Chairperson, other Members and
the officers and other employees provided
under section 13 to the Tribunal shall be
deemed to be public servants within the
meaning of section 21 of the Indian Penal Code.
38. No suit, prosecution or other legal
proceeding shall lie against the Central
Government or against the Chairperson or any
Provision
for filing
of certain
appeals.
Procedings
before
Tribunal to
be judicial
proceeding.
Members
and staff
of Tribunal
to be
public
servants.
Protection
of action
taken in
good faith.
45 of 1860.
45 of 1860

84
other Member or any other person authorised
by the Chairperson, for anything which is done
in good faith or intended to be done in
pursuance of this Act or any rule or order made
thereunder in the discharge of official duties.
39. The provisions of this Act shall have
effect notwithstanding anything inconsistent
therewith contained in any other law for the
time being in force or in any instrument having
effect by virtue of any law other than this Act.
40. (1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect
to the provisions of this Act, the Central
Government may, by order published in the
official Gazette, make such provisions, not
inconsistent with the provisions of this Act as
appear to it to be necessary or expedient for
removing the difficulty:
Provided that no order shall be made under
this section after the expirty of two years from
the date of commencement of this Act.
(2) Every order made under this section
shall, as soon as may be after it is made, be
laid before each House of Parliament.
41. (1) The Central Government may, by
notification, make rules for the purpose of
carrying out the provisions of this Act.
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of
the foregoing power, such rules may provide
for all or any of the following matters, namely:—
(a) the case or cases which shall be
decided by a bench composed of more than
two Members under clause (c) of sub-
section (3) of section 5;
(b) the procedure under sub-section (3)
of section 9 for the investigation of
misbehaviour or incapacity of Chairperson
or other Member;
Act to
have
overriding
effect.
Power to
remove
difficulties.
Power of
Central
Government
to make
rules.

85
(c) the salaries and allowances payable
to, and the other terms and conditions of
service of the Chairperson and other
Members under section 10;
(d) the financial and administrative
powers which the Chairperson may exercise
over the Benches of the Tribunal under
section 12;
(e) the salaries and allowances payable
to, and other terms and conditions of
service of the officers and other employees
of the Tribunal under sub-section (2) of
section 13;
(f) the form in which an application
may be made under sub-section (2) of
section 14, the documents and other
evidence by which such application shall
be accompanied and the fee payable in
respect of the filing of such application or
for the service of execution of processes;
(g) the other matter which may be
prescribed under clause (i) of sub-section
(4) of section 14;
(h) the form and manner in which an
appeal may be filed, the fee payable
thereon and the time within which such
appeal may be filed under sub-section (2)
of section 15;
(i) the rules subject to which the
Tribunal shall have to regulate its own
procedure under sub-section (1) of section
23;
(j) competent authority who may
authorise legal practitioners or law officers
to act as counsel under sub-section (2) of
section 25;
(k) any other matter which may be
prescribed or in respect of which rules are
required to be made by the Central
Government.

86
42. The powers to make rules under section
41 shall include the power to make such rules
or any of them retrospectively from a date not
earlier than the date on which this Act shall
come into operation but no such retrospective
effect shall be given to any such rule so as to
prejudicially affect the interests of any person
to whom such rule may be applicable.
43. Every rule made under this Act shall
be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament while it is in
session, for a total period of thirty days which
may be comprised in one session or in two or
more successive sessions, and if, before, the
expiry of the session immediately following the
session or the successive sessions aforesaid,
both Houses agree in making any modification
in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule
should not be made, the rule shall thereafter
have effect only in such modified form or be
of no effect, as the case may be; so, however,
that any such modification or annulment shall
be without prejudice to the validity of anything
previously done under that rule.
Power to
make rules
retrospec-
tively.
Laying of
rules.

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The existing system of administration of justice in the Army and
Air Force provides for submission of statutory complaints against
grievances relating to service matters and pre and post confirmation
petitions to various authorities against the findings and sentences of
court-martial. In Navy, an aggrieved person has a right to submit a
complaint relating to service matters and has a right of audience before
the Judge Advocate General in the Navy in regard to the finding and
sentence of a court martial before the same are finally put up to the
Chief of the Naval Staff.
2. Having regard to the fact that a large number of cases relating
to service matters of the members of the above-mentioned three armed
forces of Union have been pending in the courts for a long time, the
question of constituting an independent adjudicatory forum for the
Defence personnel has been engaging the attention of the Central
Government for quite some time. In 1982, the Supreme Court in Prithi
Pal Singh Bedi v. Union of India  and others (AIR 1982 SC 1413) held
that the absence of even one appeal with power to review evidence,
legal formulation, conclusion and adequacy or otherwise of punishment
in the laws relating to the armed forces was a distressing and glaring
lacuna and urged the Government to take steps to provide for at least
one judicial review in service matters. The Estimates Committee of the
Parliament in their 19th Report presented to the Lok Sabha on
20th August, 1992 had desired that the Government should constitute
an independent statutory Board or Tribunal for service personnel.
3. In view of the above, it is proposed to enact a new legislation
by constituting an Armed Forces Tribunal for the adjudication of
complaints and dispute regarding service matters and appeals arising
out of the verdicts of the courts-martial of the members of the three
services (Army, Navy and Air Force) to provide for quicker and less
expensive justice to the members of the said Armed Forces of the
Union.
4. Establishment of an independent Armed Forces Tribunal will
fortify the trust and confidence amongst members of the three services
in the system of dispensation of justice in relation to their service
matters.
87

88
5. The Bill seeks to provide for a judicial appeal on points of law
and facts against the verdicts of courts-martial which is a crying need
of the day and lack of it has often been adversely commented upon
by the Supreme Court. The Tribunal will oust the jurisdiction of all
courts except the Supreme Court whereby resources of the Armed
Forces in terms of manpower, material and time will be conserved
besides resulting in expeditious disposal of the cases and reduction in
the number of cases pending before various courts. Ultimately, it will
result in speedy and less expensive dispensation of justice to the
Members of the above-mentioned three Armed Forces of the Union.
6. The Notes on clauses explain in detail the various provisions
contained in the Bill.
7. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objectives.
  N
EW D ELHI; PRANAB MUKHERJEE
The 15th December, 2005.

Notes on Clauses
Clause 1.— This clause provides for the short title of the Bill and
its commencement. As certain preparatory steps are required to be
taken before the proposed legislation is brought into force, it is
proposed to empower the Central Government to bring the legislation
into force from a date to be appointed by it.
Clause 2.—This clause specifies the persons to whom the provisions
of the proposed legislation shall apply. It will be applicable to all
persons who are subject to the Army Act, 1950, the Navy Act, 1957
and the Air Force Act, 1950. It will also apply to retired personnel
subject to the aforesaid acts including their dependents, heirs and
successors, in so far as it relates to the service matters of such retired
personnel and others.
Clause 3.— This clause defines certain words and expressions used
in the Bill. The definitions of “Administrative Member”, “court martial”,
“military custody”, “service matters” etc., are some of them.
Clause 4.— This clause empowers the Central Government to
establish the Armed Forces Tribunal to exercise the jurisdiction, powers
and authority conferred on it by or under the proposed legislation.
Clause 5.— This clause contains the composition of the Tribunal
and the Benches thereof. This clause also provides the duties of the
Chairperson and the location of the Principle and other Benches.
Clause 6.— This clause specifies the qualifications for appointment
of Chairperson and other Members of the Tribunal.
Clause 7.— This clause specifies the authority for selection and
appointment of Chairperson, Vice-Chairperson and other Members of
the Tribunal.
Clause 8.— This clause provides for the term of office of the
Chairperson and other Members of the Tribunal for holding the office.
Clause 9.— This clause specifies the manner in which the
Chairperson and a Member shall resign his office and the manner of
their removal from office. Such a removal could be on the grounds of
proved misbehaviour or incapacity. Sub-clause (3) of the said clause
empowers the Central Government to make rules to regulate the
procedure for the investigation of misbehaviour or incapacity of the
Chairperson or other Members.
89

90
Clause 10.— This clause specifies the authority to determine the
salaries, allowances and other terms and conditions of service (including
pension, gratuity and other retirement benefits) of the Chairperson
and other Members.
Clause 11.—This clause provides for the prohibitions for holding of
offices, etc., by the Chairperson or other Members on ceasing to be
such Chairperson or Member.
Clause 12.— This clause specifies the financial and administrative
powers of the Chairperson.
Clause 13.— This clause empowers the Central Government to
determine the nature, categories and salaries and allowances of the
officers and other employees required to assist the Tribunal in the
discharge of its functions.
Clause 14.— This clause specifies the jurisdiction, powers and
authority in relation to service matters to be exercised by the Tribunal
and also the procedure for filing an application by the aggrieved person
and deciding the admissibility of such application by the Tribunal.
The Tribunal shall decide both questions of law and facts that may be
raised before it. Sub-clause (4) of the said clause confers certain powers
of a Civil Court under the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 to the Tribunal
while trying a suit under the proposed legislation. These matters,
inter alia,  include the power to summon and enforce the attendance of
any person and examine him on oath, receiving of evidence on
affidavits and reviewing its decisions.
Clause 15.— This clause specifies the jurisdiction, powers and
authority to be exercised by the Tribunal in relation to matters of
appeal against any order, decision, finding or sentence passed by a
court-martial or any matter connected therewith or incidental thereto.
Sub-clause (2) specifies the right to any aggrieved person to prefer an
appeal against an order, decision, finding or sentence passed by a
court-martial. Sub-clause (3) provides that the Tribunal shall have
powers to grant bail except in an offence punishable with death or
imprisonment for lie. Sub-clause (7) provides that the Tribunal shall
be deemed to be a criminal court for the purposes of section 175, 178,
179, 180, 193, 195, 196 or 228 of the Indian Penal Code and Chapter
XXVI of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973.
Clause 16.— This clause empowers the Tribunal for quashing a
conviction and make order for retrial by a court-martial on certain
conditions and specifies the offences for which an appellant shall not
be retried under this clause.

91
Clause 17.— This clause specifies the powers of the Tribunal on
appeal under clause 15 of the Bill. Such powers include the power to
order the production of documents or exhibits connected with the
proceedings before the court-martial, order attendance of witnesses and
securing attendance of witnesses.
Clause 18.—This clause specifies the powers of the Tribunal to make
such order as to costs as it may deem fit, while disposing of the
application under clause 14, or an appeal under clause 15, of the Bill.
Clause 19.— This clause confers powers on the Tribunal to punish
for its contempt for using any insulting or threatening language, or by
causing any interruption or disturbance in the proceedings of such
Tribunal. For the purposes of trying an offence under this clause, the
provisions of sections 14, 15, 17, 18 and 20 of the Contempt of Courts
Act, 1971 shall mutatis mutandis  apply.
Clause 20.— This clause empowers the Chairperson to make
provisions for distribution of the business of the Tribunal amongst its
Benches.
Clause 21.— This clause specifies the condition for not admitting an
application unless other available remedies are exhausted. It also
specifies the remedies available and the time limit for preferring the
petition or representation.
Clause 22.— This clause specifies the period of limitation for
admitting or otherwise of an application and also to condone the
limitation provided under this clause.
Clause 23.— This clause provides the procedural powers of the
Tribunal such as laying down and regulation of its own procedure,
fixing of place and time of inquiry, perusal of documents, affidavits or
written representations or oral arguments, adjournment, etc. It also
specifies the condition for grant of adjournment and awarding of cost.
Clause 24.— This clause specifies the reckoning or commencement
of term of sentence on appeal.
Clause 25.— This clause provides the right to the applicant or of
the appellant for taking assistance of legal practitioner or Government
Counsels to present the case before the Tribunal.
Clause 26.— This clause specifies the condition and the procedure
for making of interim orders.
Clause 27.— This clause empowers the Chairperson to transfer any
case pending before one Bench for disposal to another Bench.

92
Clause 28.— This clause provides that if the Members of a Bench of
the Tribunal differ in opinion on any point or points, the point or
points shall be decided according to the opinion of the majority.
Clause 29.— This clause relates to the finality of the execution of
the order of the Tribunal.
Clause 30.— This clause provides that an appeal shall lie to the
Supreme Court against the final decision or order of the Tribunal (other
than an order passed under proposed section 19).
Clause 31.— This clause provides that an appeal to the Supreme
Court shall lie with the leave of the Tribunal and the manner of making
appeal to the Tribunal for leave to appeal.
Clause 32.— This clause specifies the powers of the Supreme Court
to extend the time within which an appeal may be preferred.
Clause 33.— This clause ousts the jurisdiction of the Civil Courts to
exercise the jurisdiction, power or authority in relation to such service
matters as are exercisable by the Tribunal.
Clause 34.— This clause specifies the condition for transfer of cases
pending before any court including a High court or other authority,
immediately on establishment of the Tribunal.
Clause 35.—This clause relates to the provisions for filing of appeal
to the Tribunal and the period of limitation for filing of such appeal,
where any decree or order has been made or passed by any court
(other than a High Court).
Clause 36.— This clause provides that all proceedings before the
Tribunals hall be deemed to be judicial proceedings within the meaning
of sections 193, 219 and 228 of the Indian Penal Code.
Clause 37.— This clause provides that the Chairperson, other
Members and the officers and other employees provided under clause
13 of the Bill shall be deemed to be public servants within the meaning
of section 21 of the Indian Penal Code.
Clause 38.— This clause seeks to provide the protection to the
Central Government, the Chairperson, any other Member or any other
person against suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding for the action
taken in good faith or in discharge of the official duties.
Clause 39.—This clause provides that the provisions of the proposed
legislation shall have an overriding effect on any other law for the
time being in force or any instrument having the force of law.

93
Clause 40.—This clause empowers the Central Government to make,
by order published in the Official Gazette, provisions for removal of
difficulties in giving effect to the provisions of the proposed legislation.
Such orders could be made only within two years from the
commencement of the proposed legislation. Sub-clause (2) provides
that every order issued under this clause is required to be laid before
each House of Parliament.
Clause 41.— Sub-clause (1) of this clause empowers the Central
Government to make, by notification in the Official Gazette, rules for
the purpose of carrying out the provisions of the proposed legislation.
Sub-clause (2) enumerates the matters in respect of which such rules
may be made. These matters, inter alia, include the case or cases which
shall be decided by a Bench composed of more than two members
under item (c) of sub-clause (3) of clause 5; the procedure under sub-
clause (3) of clause 9 for the investigation of misbehaviour or incapacity
of Chairperson or other Members, the salaries and allowances payable
to, and the other terms and conditions of service of, the Chairperson
and other Members under clause 10, the financial and administrative
powers which the Chairperson may exercise over the benches of the
Tribunal under section 12, the salaries and allowances payable to, and
the other terms and conditions of service of the officers and other
employees of the Tribunal under sub-clause (2) of clause 13, the form
in which an application may be made under sub-clause (2) of clause
14, the documents and other evidence by which such application shall
be accompanied and the fee payable in respect of the filing of such
application or for the service of execution of processes, the other matters
which may be prescribed under item (i) of sub-clause (4) of clause 14,
the form and manner in which an appeal may be filed, the fee payable
thereon and the time within which such appeal may be filed under
sub-clause (2) of clause 15, the rules subject to which the Tribunal
shall have power to regulate its own procedure under sub-clause (1)
of clause 23 and competent authority who may authorise legal
practitioners or law officers to act as counsel under sub-clause (2) of
clause 25.
Clause 42.—This clause empowers the Central Government to make
rules retrospectively from a date not earlier than the date on which
this Act shall come into operation. But no such retrospective effect
shall be given to any such rule so as to prejudicially affect the interest
of any person to whom such rule may be applicable.
Clause 43.— This clause provides that every rule made by the
Central Government shall be required to be laid before each House of
Parliament.

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 4 of the Bill provides that the Central Government shall
establish a Tribunal to be known as the Armed Forces Tribunal to
exercise the jurisdiction, powers and authority conferred on its by or
under the proposed legislation. Sub-clause (1) of clause 5 of the Bill
provides that the Tribunal shall consist of a Chairperson and such
number of judicial and administrative Members as the Central
Government may deem fit. Clause 10 of the Bill provides that the
salaries and allowances payable to, and the other terms and conditions
of service (including pension, gratuity and other retirement benefits)
of the Chairperson and other Members shall be determined by the
Central Government by rules made by it. Sub-clause (1) of clause 13
of the Bill empowers the Central Government to determine the nature
and categories of officers and other employees require to assist the
Tribunal. Sub-clause (2) of said clause empowers the Central
Government to make rules specifying the salaries and allowances
payable to, and the other terms and conditions of service, of the officers
and other employees of the Tribunal.
2. It is proposed to establish, in the first instance, a Principal Bench
of the proposed Armed Forces Tribunal. On a representative basis, the
recurring annual expenditure on salary of the Chairperson, Members,
officers and other staff of the Principal Bench would be estimated to
be Rs. 1.90 crore and for one one Bench a similar recurring annual
expenditure would be to the tune of Rs. 85 lakhs. The number of the
benches, the manpower requirement and the total financial implication
in terms of recurring and non-recurring expenditure as well as the
modalities involved would, however, be determined after appointment
of the Chairperson of the proposed Armed Forces Tribunal. Hence, it
would be difficult to work out the exact expenditure, both recurring
and non-recurring at this stage.
94

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Sub-clause (1) of clause 41 of the Bill empowers the Central
Government to make rules, by notification in the Official Gazette, for
carrying out the provisions of the proposed legislation. Sub-clause (2)
of that clause enumerates the matters with respect to which rules may
be made under the proposed legislation. These matters, inter alia, relate
to deciding of cases by a bench of the Armed Forces Tribunal composed
of more than two Members, the procedure for investigation of
misbehaviour or incapacity of the Chairperson and other Members,
the salaries, allowances and other terms and conditions of service
(including pension, gratuity and other retirement benefits) of the
Chairperson and other Members of the Armed Forces Tribunal, financial
and administrative powers of the Chairperson, the nature and categories
of officers and other employees require for the Tribunal, the salaries,
allowances and other terms and conditions of the service of officers
and other employees, the fee for making application to the Tribunal,
the matters to be tried by the Tribunal, the form, manner and time for
preferring an appeal by an aggrieved person and the procedure of
fixing of place and time of inquiry, and the authorisation of legal
practitioners or any of its law officers to act as counsel before the
Tribunal.
2. Clause 43 of the Bill requires that the rules made under the
proposed legislation shall have to be laid before Parliament.
3. The matters in respect of which rules may be made relate to
matters of procedure or administrative details and it is not practicable
to provide for them in the Bill itself. The delegation of legislative
power is, therefore, of normal character.
95

RAJYA SABHA
————
A
Bill
to provide for the adjudication or trial by Armed Forces Tribunal of disputes
and complaints with respect to commission, appointments, enrolment and
conditions of service in respect of persons subject to the Army Act,
1950, the Navy Act, 1957 and the Air Force Act, 1950 and also to
provide for appeals arising out of orders, findings or sentences of courts-
martial held under the said Acts and for matters connected therewith or
incidental thereto.
—————
(Shri Pranab Mukherjee, Minister of Defence)
96