 
15 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE 
(2006-2007) 
 
(FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
MINISTRY OF DEFENCE 
 
 
{Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations contained in the 11th 
Report of the Committee (Fourteenth Lok Sabha) on the Demands for Grants of the 
Ministry of Defence for the year 2006-07} 
 
 
 
FIFTEENTH REPORT 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
 
NEW DELHI 
 
 
April 2007, Baisakha, 1928 (Saka)
 1

 
 
FIFTEENTH REPORT 
 
 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE 
(2006-2007) 
 
(FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
MINISTRY OF DEFENCE 
 
{Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations contained in the 11th 
Report of the Committee (Fourteenth Lok Sabha) on the Demands for Grants of the 
Ministry of Defence for the year 2006-07} 
   
 
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on  27.04.2007 
 
Laid in Raiya Sabha on 27.04.2007 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
 
NEW DELHI 
 
April 2007, Baisakha, 1928 (Saka)
 2

 
 
C.O.D.  NO. 81 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Price :  Rs. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
© 2007 BY LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
 3

CONTENTS 
 
PAGES 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (2006-07)……………………………………………     5 
 
PREFACE………………………………………………….……………………………………..     7 
 
 
 
CHAPTER – I             Report……………………………………………………………..     8  
 
CHAPTER - II  Recommendations/Observations which have  
been accepted by the Government…………………………………….  59  
 
CHAPTER - III  Recommendations/Observations which the  
Committee do not desire to pursue in view  
of the Government’s replies …………………………………………..    82 
 
CHAPTER - IV Recommendations/Observations in respect of  
which replies of the Government have not been 
Accepted by the Committee ……………..……………………………    91 
 
CHAPTER - V  Recommendations/Observations in respect of 
which final replies of the Government are still 
awaited……………………………………………………………. …..  104 
 
Minutes of the Sitting…………………………………………………………………………….   106 
 
APPENDIX  Analysis of Action Taken by Government on the  
Recommendations contained in the First Report  
of the Standing Committee on Defence  
(Fourteenth Lok Sabha) on the Demands for  
Grants of the Ministry of Defence (2006-07)…………………………  111   
 
 
 4

COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE (2006-07) 
Shri Balasaheb Vikhe Patil   - Chairman     
 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri Churchill Alemao 
3. Shri S. Bangarappa 
4. Shri Milind Murli Deora 
5. Shri Santosh Kumar Gangwar 
6. Shri Ramesh C. Jigajinagi  
7. Shri Suresh Kalmadi 
8. Shri C. Kuppusami 
9. Dr. K.S. Manoj 
10. Ms. Ingrid Mcleod 
11. Shri Asaduddin Owaisi 
12. Shri Adhalrao Shivaji Patil 
13. Shri Shriniwas Patil 
14. Shri Rajendrasinh Ghanshyamsinh Rana (Raju Rana) 
15. Dr. H.T. Sangliana 
16. Shri Arjun Charan Sethi 
17. Prof. Mahadeorao Shiwankar 
18. Shri Manvendra Singh 
19. Shri Balashowry Vallabhaneni 
20. Shri Rajesh Verma 
   
 RAJYA SABHA 
 
21. Dr. Farooq Abdullah 
22. Shri Jai Parkash Aggarwal 
23. Shri Abu Asim Azmi 
24. Smt. Sobhana Bharatia 
25. Shri R.K. Dhawan 
26. Smt. N.P. Durga 
27. Shri S.P.M. Syed Khan 
28. Shri K.B. Shanappa 
29. Shri Arun Shourie 
30. Smt. Viplove Thakur 
 
 
 
 
 
 5

SECRETARIAT 
 
  
1. Shri S. K. Sharma  - Additional Secretary 
2. Shri P.K. Bhandari  - Joint Secretary 
3. Shri Gopal Singh  - Director 
4. Shri D.R. Shekhar  - Deputy Secretary-II 
5. Smt. Jyochnamayi Sinha - Under Secretary  
 
 6

PREFACE  
 
 
I, the Chairman, Standing Committee on  Defence (2006-07) having been 
authorized by the Committee to s ubmit the Report on their be half, present this Fifteenth 
Report on Action Tak en by the Government on the recommendations cont ained in th e 
Eleventh Report of the Committee (Fourteenth Lok Sabha) on the Demands for Grants  
of the Ministry of Defence for the year 2006-07. 
 
2.  The Eleventh Report  was pres ented to /laid in Lok Sabha/Ra jya Sabha on 23 
May, 2006. The Government furnished their r eplies indicating action taken on the 
recommendations contained in t he Report . The Com mittee took oral ev idence of the 
representatives of Ministry of Defence on 19 February, 2007 to hav e clarifications on 
certain issues arising out of the action taken replies. The Draft Action Taken Report was 
considered and adopted by the Standing Committee on Defence (2006-07) at their  
sitting held on 12 March, 2007. 
 
3.  An analysis of action taken by the Government on recommendations contained in 
the Eleventh Report of the Standing Committ ee on Defence (Fourteenth Lok Sabha) is  
given in Appendix. 
 
4 For facility of reference and convenience, the observations/recommendations of 
the Committee have been printed in thick type in the body of the Report. 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI;       BALASAHEB VIKHE PATIL, 
April, 2007        Chairman, 
Baisakha, 1928 (Saka)         Standing Committee on Defence. 
 
 7

 
 
CHAPTER – I 
 
REPORT 
 
1. The report of the Standing Committee on Defence deals with action taken by the 
Government on the r ecommendations/observations contained in t heir Eleventh Report  
(14th Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants (2006-07) of the Mini stry of Defence whic h 
was presented and laid in both the Houses of Parliament on 23.05.06. 
 
2. In the Eleventh Report (14 th Lok Sabha), the Committee had made 55 
recommendations on the following subjects :- 
1. Need to have comprehensive review  of security scenario, adequate 
contingency plan and maintain high level preparedness. 
2. Need for restructuring and modernizing the Armed Forces 
3. Need to have a separate specialised force to handle internal security  
4. Need to strengthen R&D in Defence Sector and Private Sector Participation 
5. Need to bridge the gap between the projections and budgetary allocations 
6. Need to augment the capital budget of Army 
7. Need for advance  p lanning for  hundred  per cent utilization of capita l 
expenditure  
8. Strict adherence to the parameters while submitting acquisition proposals 
9. Financial Delegation to Service HQs 
10. Defence Modernization Fund 
11. Married Accommodation Project (MAP)  
12. Tenth Plan and Long Term Integrated Perspective Plan 
13. Eleventh Defence Plan 
14.  Chief of Defence Staff  
15. Indian National Defence University (INDU) 
16. Modernization of Army 
17. Night Fighting Devices 
18. Procurement of Artillery Guns at the earliest 
19. Need to ensure ToT in case of procurement of Guns 
20. Bullet Proof Jacket 
21. MBT Arjun Tank 
22. DGQA 
23. Modernization of Indian Navy 
24. Construction of Air Defence ship 
25. Enhance the features of Air Defenceship 
26. Need to augment the maritime surveillance air craft capability 
27. Strengthening of Indian Navy 
28. Production of radar  
29. Squadron Strength of Air Force 
30. Light Combat Aircraft (LCA) 
31. Force multipliers in Indian Air Force 
32. Adequate coverage of Radars 
33. Upgradation of Aircraft 
34. Upgradation of Sukhoi-30 MK1  
35. Conversion of units of HAL to separate PSUs 
 8

36. Fifth Generation Fighter Aircraft 
37. Procurement of multi-role helicopters 
38. Modernization of missiles firing units 
39. R & D expenditure 
40. Delegation of in-house R&D to DPSUs and OFs 
41. Fixing of target for self-reliance in Eleventh Defence Plan 
42. Involvement of users at the conceptualization stage of the projects 
43. Force level of coast guard 
44. Need to intensify patrolling operation by Indian Coast Guard 
45. Computerization of L and Rec ord and measure taken to make the deficit 
cantonment self-sufficient 
46. Restructuring of Defence Estate Organization 
47. Separate Bill for the management of Defence Lands 
48. Granting benefit of thirty-three years qualifying service to the PBOR  
49. One Rank One Pension 
50. Separate Pay Commission for Armed Forces Personnel 
51. Ex-Servicemen Contributory Health Scheme (ECHS) 
52. Dependant Pension for unmarried daughters of Ex-Servicemen 
53. Allotment of available surplus land to the Armed Forces Personnel 
54. Need to explore various international  standard games for the participation of  
Indian Naval Personnel 
55. Need to constitute a core group of military disaster management 
 
 
3. Action Taken Replies have been received fr om the Government in respect of all 
the recommendations/observations contained in the Report.  T he Committee took or al 
evidence of the representativ es of the Ministry of De fence on 19.02.2007 to have 
clarification on some of the issues arisin g out of the Action Taken Replies.  T he 
Committee have examined the Action Taken Replies received from the Ministry and the  
same have been categorized as follows :- 
 
(i) Recommendations/obs ervations which have been accepted by the Government:- 
(Para No. 1.3, 1.5, 1.6, 1.22, 1.30,  1.51, 1.64, 2.7, 2.13, 3. 14, 3.17, 3.21,  3.28,  4.23,  
5.13, 5.22,  5.34, 5.35, 5.41, 5.46,  6.13,  6.16, 7.7, 7.10,  7.15, 7.17,  7.20,  8.14,  8.16 
and 9.4)  
(ii) Recommendations/obs ervations which the Committee do not d esire to pursue in 
view of the Government replies. 
(Para No. 2.19, 4.5, 4.10, 4.12, 5.32, 5.38, 5.49, 8.11, 8.13 and 10.7)  
(iii) Recommendations/observations in res pect of which replies of the Government 
have not been accepted by the Committee.   
(Para No. 1.4, 1.43, 1. 55, 1.58,2.19, 2.21, 3.22,  3.40, 4.11,  4. 14 & 4.15,  5.23, 6.14,  
6.15 and 8.12) 
 9

(iv) Recommendations/obs ervations in respect of whic h final replies  of the 
Government are still awaited. 
(Para No.  3.26, 5.12 and 8.15) 
 
4. The Com mittee trust that utmost  importance w ill be given to the  
implementation of the recommendations accep ted by the Government.  In cases,  
where it is not possible for an y reason  to imple ment the recommendations i n 
letter and spirit, the matter should be re ported to the Committee with reasons for 
non-implementation. The Committee desi re that action taken notes on t he 
recommendations/observations contained in Chapter – I and final replies to the 
recommendations contained in Chapter – V of the Report be furnished to the m 
urgently and in no case later than sixth months of the presentation of the Report.   
 
5. The Committee will now de al with the action taken by  the Government on s ome 
of their recommendations as contained in Chapter – I of this Report.  
 10

Need to h ave comprehensive review of s ecurity scenario, adequate co ntingency 
plan and maintain high level preparedness 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 1.3) 
 
6. The Com mittee are of the view that  the global s ecurity scenario has been 
changing drastically and with this change the concept of threat perception has als o 
changed significantly.  Today, war is not conf ined to conventional methods  of warfare 
but it als o encompasses a host of other th reats, e.g. threat to energy, financial, 
economic and food security, etc., and as such t here is a need to rethink our strategy for 
tackling the various threats to the security of the nation.  The Committee also feel that a 
comprehensive review of the exis ting security advisory mechanism  may be undertaken 
and experts from different fields  like se curity, defence, economy and indus try should 
also be associated with the mechanism.  To face all such threats, it is imperative that we 
have adequate contingency plan and maintain a high level of preparedness and ability to 
react speedily to meet any eventuality. 
 
 
7. The Ministry, in their action taken reply have stated : 
 
“The national securit y set up including the defence set up was reviewed by a 
Group of Ministers which su bmitted its report on “Reforming National Security 
System” in Feb 2001.  The report of GO M was accepted by Government and its  
recommendations are in various stages of implementation. 
 
Appropriate planning is done to  meet the challenges to national security and the 
defence forces are adequately  trained and equipped to maintain high level of 
preparedness.” 
 
 
Ministry of Defence OM No. H-11013/15/2006/D(Parl) dated 15.2.2007 
 11

Comments of the Committee 
 
 
8. The Committee note that the nationa l security system has been revie wed 
by a Group of Minis ters and the recomme ndations contained in the ir report on 
‘Reforming National Securit y System’ are in various stages of imple mentation.  
The Committee desire that the Ministry in consultation with the nodal agency may 
apprise the actual implementation status and compliance of each of the 
recommendations with reasons for not implementing any  r ecommendation of 
GoM. 
 
 
 12

Need for restructuring and modernizing the Armed Forces 
 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 1.4) 
 
 
9. The Committee are aware of the rapi d technological advancements and changes  
taking place globally in the warfare technolog y and feel that there is an imperative need 
to constitute a high level empowered Com mittee to examine the entire sec urity gamut 
and suggest reforms including re-structuring of the Armed forces, as may be necessary 
to meet any eventuality in the future.  The Committee note that there has been no 
thorough review of the structural set up  of the Armed forces since  independenc e, 
especially of the Army whose strength constitutes almost ninety percent of our defence 
forces.  The need of the hour is to optimally use the availa ble limited resources.  For a 
country like India, there are several budgetary constraints even for the defence forces  
and, therefore, the f und allocated have t o be utiliz ed judiciously.  The proposed 
Committee should be given the mandate to s uggest suitable manpower restructuring by 
way of trimming the force size (teeth to tail ratio) with corresponding increase in the use 
of advanced and sophisticated technology in our Armed forces;  review the authorization 
the peace and war establishments which are existing since the second World War.  The 
Committee should als o examine the relevance of involvement of the Defenc e forces in 
non-defence activities like military farms, stud farms and other such activities that can be 
outsourced.  It is high time to effect s ubstantial sav ings within the available Defe nce 
budget for restructuring and mo dernizing our forces.  The entire defence budget is  a 
Government Budget without an y other source and hence t he s avings bec ome all the 
more important. 
 
 
10. The Ministry, in their action taken reply have stated : 
 
“The process of restructuring of armed forces is a continuous one, which  is  
carried out by each Service Headquarters based on threat assessments.  Ther e 
are Standing Establis hment Committees in the three Services which review the  
structure of various service es tablishments periodic ally and based on their 
recommendations the establishments are rest ructured from time to time. As and 
when there is requirement of raising of new units / establishments, the same is  
also considered on case to case basis. In addition the entire security system was 
also reviewed by a Group of Ministers, which submitted its report in Feb 2001.  
The recommendations of the GoM were a ccepted by the Government and are in 
various stages of implementation. Induction of advanced and sophistic ated 
technology is also ensured in a plann ed manner through acquis ition procedures 
as laid down in Defence Procurement Procedure (DPP) 2006.  Proper and timely  
utilization of funds is also closely monitored through the institutional system put in 
place.” 
 
 
Ministry of Defence OM No. H-11013/15/2006/D(Parl) dated 15.2.2007 
 
 
 13

Comments of the Committee 
 
 
11. The Com mittee note that review  of restructuring of v arious service 
establishments is being carried out by the Standing Establishment Committees in 
the three Services.  Requirement of estab lishing new units is also con sidered on 
case to case basis.  How ever, the Committ ee’s suggestion for constitution of a 
high level empow ered committee for restru cturing of Armed Forces i n order t o 
have o ptimum use of limited resources a nd to  suggest trimming the force si ze 
with corre sponding increase in the use of  sophisticated technolog y has been  
totally ignored by the Ministry .  The Committee fu rther note that the 
recommendation of the Committee to examine the relevance of  involvement of  
the Defence Forces in non-defence activ ities has been left unans wered.  
Therefore, the Committee w ish to reit erate their earlier recommen dation an d 
desire that the Minis try should give a serious thought to the recommendation in 
order to use the scarce resour ce in a w ell-planned manner and desire to have a 
detailed reply in this regard. 
 14

Need to have a separate specialised force to handle internal security  
 
Recommendation (Para No. 1.5) 
 
12. The Com mittee note that our Defence forces apart from containing threat  
emanating from external source s are also involved in handling various internal security 
operations, inc luding terrorism.  This  is  a di fferent kind of operation, which requires  
specialized training.  T here has also been an inc reasing demand by the State 
Governments for military assistance for mainta ining law and ord er in their States.  The 
Committee feel that it is neit her in the int erest of the Armed f orces nor desirable t o 
deploy them for such purposes.   The Committ ee feel that use of Armed Forces as a 
substitute of the state police force diverts the attention of the A rmy from their prim e 
objective i.e. to safeguard our borders.  The Committee therefore, are of the strong view 
that there should be a separat e specialized force for handli ng such situations and the 
Ministry should take necessary action in this regard. 
 
 
13. The Ministry, in their action taken reply have stated : 
 
“In the Union Government, MHA is respons ible for internal securit y matters such 
as maintenance of law and order, tackling insurge ncy and militancy in the   
country.  The State Polic e Organisations along with the Central Para Military  
Forces (CPMFs) are deploy ed in handling such situations in the States.  When 
the magnitude of these problems is perceived to be beyond the capabilities of the 
Police Forces, services of Defence Forces are requisitioned in aid to Civil 
Authorities.  When required, the Defenc e Forces als o extend assistance to the 
affected States by way of providing trai ning to Para Military Fo rces and State 
Police personnel as also in setting up training facilities. 
  
The CPOs/CPMFs under MHA are trained to hand le internal security situations.   
CRPF in the main Ce ntral Reserve Force to supplement the resources of State 
Government for handling internal security.  Over the years, the strength of CRPF  
has been augmented and it is being trained and equipped to meet the challenges.  
The National Sec urity Guards is  a s pecialised force for anti-hijacking and other 
special operations.  Assa m Rifles which is under the administrative control o f 
MHA and operational control of the Army has been  trained and equipped to 
handle ins urgencies and militancy in the No rth East .  Rashtriy a Rifles, a force 
under the administrative control of MO D and operationa l control of Army is 
similarly tr ained and  equip ped f or handlin g militancy especially  in the  Sta te of 
J&K.   In addition, the Army and other Border Guarding Forces are also deployed 
at times to handle internal security situation.  Keeping in view, it is t he considered 
view of the Ministry of Defence t hat if the CPOs/CPMFs under MHA are 
adequately trained and equipped with the St ate-of-the art equipment, they should 
be in a position to ef fectively handle the emerging internal sec urity challenges.  
Therefore, there already exists a mechani sm to handle such situations and there 
is no need to have more Special forces  under MOD.   Howe ver, the subject 
matter pertains to MHA.” 
 
 
 15
Ministry of Defence OM No. H-11013/15/2006/D(Parl) dated 15.2.2007 

Comments of the Committee 
 
 
14. The Committee are not satisfied w ith the replies furnished by  the Mi nistry.  
The Com mittee had recommended to create a separat e specialised force to  
handle various internal security  opera tions including terrorism instead of 
deploying the Defence Forces for this purpo se.  The Committee are of the strong  
view that there is an imperative need  to  create a ‘federal police’ comprising of 
State Police Force and Central Police Force and Intelligence Agencies with full co-
ordination w ith each other in order t o handle law  and order situation in the 
country. The Commi ttee are of the vie w that this w ill also facilitate the Armed 
Forces to concentrate on their prime object ive i.e. to safeguard ou r borders.  
Therefore, the Com mittee desire that the Mi nistry of Defence in  consultation with 
the Minis try of Home Affair s must ta ke concer ted steps for creation of such  
separate and specialised force for handling internal security including terrorism.   
 16

 Need for advance planning for hundred per cent utilization of capital expenditure  
 
Recommendation (Para No. 1.43) 
 
15. The Committee note with serious concer n that B.E.(2005-06)  of Rs.83000 crore 
was reduced to Rs 81700 crore  in R.E.(2005- 06) stage thereby showing a reduction of 
Rs 1300 cr ore.  The reduction has also be en made in capital budget whic h has been 
reduced from Rs. 34375 crore in BE (2005-06) to Rs. 33075 crore in RE (2005-06) even 
though there were enough projects with Ministry in the pipeline. In this connection, the 
Committee were informed by the Ministry of Finance that the reduction has been  made 
after due consultation at the Minister’s leve l taking into account the actual trend of  
expenditure during the year. Upto December 2005, the c apital expenditure was only  
41%  of the allocation made in the BE (2005-06). 
 
Further, the Committee were given to  understand that Rs . 2646 crore was 
surrendered by Ministry of Defence at t he end of financial ye ar 2005-06 due to non-
fructification of envis aged schemes. The Commi ttee feel that this clearly  shows the 
inability of the Ministry of Defence to timely  plan and  process the cases so  as to bring  
them to the concluding stage during the first three quarters of the financial year so as to 
secure financing of projects provided in the Budget.  Expressing strong displeasure, the 
Committee feel that t here is  a need for better financial plannin g and management in 
Ministry of Defence.  The large scale su rrender of funds at the end of the year has  
eroded the ir credib ility and  ability to utilis e the a llocated funds  wh ich are  so mu ch 
required for modernization/up gradation of  defence forces.  The Committee further 
observed that rush of proposal in the last m onth of initial year a nd  hurried expenditur e 
gives room for import and disco urage the indigenisation.  The Committee, therefore, 
recommend that the Ministry should analyse the whole issue an d monitor the progress 
of Capital expenditure more closely.  In this regard, the Committee wish to reiterate their 
recommendation made in their earlier Report that the Ministry should mak e advance 
planning in order to submit  a calendar for acquisition during the year with firm  
commitment to the Ministry of Finance.  Th is will facilitate optimum utilization of scarce 
resources alloc ated for ‘Defence’ and timely completion of schemes / projects  
envisaged by the Ministry of Defence to maintain highest level of Defence  
preparedness. 
 
16. The Ministry, in their action taken reply have stated : 
 
“It is correct that BE 2005- 06 has been reduced by  Rs.1300 crores.  But it was 
reduced by Ministry of Finance at the RE  stage though Ministry of Defence had 
not indicated any surrender.  It is also tr ue that 41% of the Capital expenditure 
was spent till December, 2005.  While Ministry of Defence were in the process of 
planning to spend the allocation, due to reduction at RE stage these could not be 
implemented. 
 17

 
2. The total gross surrender of Rs.2646 cr ores at the Modified Appropriation sta ge 
was the net result of supplementary gr ant of Rs.542.50 cror es taken in s ome 
Grants during the y ear, net reduction of Rs.1300 cr ores at RE stage, further 
reduction of Rs.888.66 crores at MA st age and increase in Rec eipts/Recoveries 
of Rs.85.20 crores. 
  
3. It has always been the endeavour of the Ministry of Defence to evenly spread the 
pace of expenditure in four quarters so as to avoid rush of expenditure in the last 
quarter.  The progress of expenditure is  closely monitored on monthly basis and 
Inter-Departmental Monitoring Groups have also been constituted in the Min istry 
to monitor the progress of expenditure on weekly basis in the la st quarter of the 
financial year.  Defence procurement par ticularly ac quisition cases, follows a 
certain cycle and cas h outflow is linked to  fixed milestones (of supplies).  Any  
slippages at the Supplier’s  end,  whic h are not within the control of Ministry of  
Defence, lead to under utilization. The surrenders have, however, not resulted in  
unplanned procurement from foreign sources or had an adverse impact on the 
indigenisation  process of the Services. 
 
4. However, without compromising on transparency and accountabaility, the 
existing pr ocedures as laid down in the Defence Procurement Procedure ar e 
reviewed  f rom time to time so as to streamline the procurement modalities  and 
cut down delays, which  will help in avoiding surrender of funds”   
 
 
Ministry of Defence OM No. H-11013/15/2006/D(Parl) dated 15.2.2007 
 
 18

Comments of the Government 
 
 
17. The Committee do not agree with the replies furnished by the Ministry.  The 
Committee note that the Ministr y of Fina nce reduced the allocation at RE stag e 
after due consultation with the Ministry of Defence at the highest level, after mid-
term review  of the progress of expend iture.  It w as an agreed figure.  The 
Committee further  note tha t 41 % of the capital expenditure w as spent til l 
December 2005, inspite of close monitori ng of the progress of expenditure.  The 
Committee strongly feel that it is the sole responsibility of the Ministry of Defence 
to fully  utilize the allocation made to them and t hey may  not escape from the 
responsibility of not incurring full expenditure.   Therefore, the Committee wish to 
reiterate their earlie r recommendation and d esire that the  Minis try should have 
done an advance pl anning in order to ensure timel y completion of all procedural 
formalities and optimum utilization of scarce resources. 
 19

 
Financial Delegation to Service HQs 
 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 1.55) 
 
18. The Com mittee observe that there are many procurement cases with the 
Services which c ost less tha n Rs. 50  crore.  The entire procurement includes 
categorization, acceptance of necessity, qua lity vetting, technical evaluation trials, 
contract negotiation and placement of supply order of these cases, which consumes a 
lot of time in getting the proposal cleared by  the Ministry.  The Co mmittee are informed 
that the Ministry of Defence has modified the procedure for Price Negotiation Committee 
(PNC).  They have delegated this power to the Service Headquarters in case of revenue 
purchase and are planning to extend this to the capital procurements also.  Therefore, 
the Committee recommend that the Government should del egate the entire processing 
of cases of acquisition, both in the case of revenue and capital, upto Rs. 50 crore to the 
Service Headquarters and Rs. 300 crore to the Raksha Mantri as per the priorities of the 
Services.  Appropriate fi nancial delegation s hould also be given to the Defence 
Secretary for capital acquisition. 
 
The Committee strongly feel that the delegation of power will reduce the work load of 
the Ministry of Defence, allowing them more  time for processing proposals of higher  
cost, thereby clearing the proposals of higher cost, thereby clearing the proposals well in 
time and bringing improvement in the utilization of allocated funds.  This will also reduce 
the time taken on procurement and ensure time availability of the procured items. 
 
 
 
19. The Ministry, in their action taken reply have stated : 
 
“Revised delegation of financial powers to various Indian Air Force authorities has 
been issued on 14.7.2006. 
 
As per these powers, Air HQrs have be en empowered with financial powers for 
procurement on the Revenue side as under :- 
 
(a) Import Rs.20 crores 
(b) From indigenous sources Rs.20 crores 
(c) From PSUs Rs.30 crores 
(d) On PAC basis (all categories) Rs.10 crores 
(e) On Single Tender basis (all categories)         Rs.2 crores” 
 
 
 
Ministry of Defence OM No. H-11013/15/2006/D(Parl) dated 15.2.2007 
 
 20

Comments of the Committee 
 
  
20. The Committee are not satisfied with the reply of the Ministry of Defence as 
the Ministr y have sent information onl y in case o f delegation of pow ers to Air 
Force authorities and wish to reiterate their earlier recommendations to delegate 
the entire processing of acquisition both revenue and capital, upto Rs. 50 crore to 
the three Service Head Quarters and Rs . 300 cro re to the Raksha Mantri as per  
priority of the Services and appropriate  financial delegation to the Defenc e 
Secretary for capital acquisition. 
 
 21

 
Defence Modernization Fund 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 1.58) 
 
 
21. The Committee, in their earlier repor ts had recommended for creation of a non–
lapsable Defence Modernization Fund (DMF) to streamline the Procurement Procedure 
and to ens ure timely availability of Funds for acquisition of Defence equipment.  The 
Committee have bee n informed that utility of DMF in addressing  the issue of assured  
availability of funds woul d be limited s ince unspe nt f unds of DMF would n ot be 
automatically available to the Ministry of Defence for utilizatio n in s ubsequent financial 
year and the Ministry of Defenc e would be required to seek  approval of Ministry of  
Finance and Parliament for its utilization.  
 
The Com mittee observes that during 20 05-06, there were large number of 
proposals in the pipeline, but since they co uld not be approved in time there was  large 
surrender of funds at the end of  financial year.  Had all the cas es in the pipeline wer e 
cleared, the Ministry would hav e required addi tional alloc ation.  As proc urement of 
Defence equipment requires a long lead time  ranging from two to three years, the 
proposals which do not fructify i n a financial y ear, normally spill over to next financia l 
year.  Ther efore, the Committee strongly r ecommend that the Minist ry of Defence as 
well as Ministry of Finance mus t reconsider the proposal for setting up of DMF at the 
earliest.  T he Commit tee are of the view t hat if the planned a nd assured budgetary 
allocations are made known to t he Services, then the capital ac quisition schemes and 
long term plan can be drawn up within the f unds available with the DMF in a systematic 
manner as  per futuristic requir ements.  The Committee strongly recommend that  
Defence M odernization Fund (DMF) should be used only for the priority projects and 
not for all projects.   
 
 
22. The Ministry, in their action taken reply have stated : 
  
“The modernization of Defence Forc es is an on- going process and under  
utilization of funds in a financial year does not result in dropping of any propo sal.  
The process of moderniza tion through new acquisiti ons, however, inherently  
involves long gestation periods .  As in timated earlier, t he creation of non-
lapsable Defence Mo dernization Fund (DM F) has a limited utility  in as  much as  
the funds available in the DM F would not automatically be available to the 
Ministry of Defence for utilization in  the subseque nt financia l year and  the 
Ministry would be required to seek approv al of the Ministry of Finance and the 
Parliament for its utilizatio n.  The Ministry of Finance hav e also iss ued 
guidelines/instructions on 7 th January, 2005(copy enclosed) whereby 
Reserve/Corpus Funds in Government account are created when Government 
has surplus funds to spare on specific objects of expenditure.   However , as 
Government is resorting to deficit financi ng, creation of funds out of its revenue 
stream or through borrowing is considered not appropriate.  Funds created out of 
borrowings also add to fiscal def icit and become a liability of the Government.  
These instructions further provide that pr oposals for creation of funds either out  
 22

of revenue stream or out of Governm ent borrowings will, henceforth, not be 
allowed.  In the circumstances creation of Defence Modernization Fund may not 
be viable.” 
 
 
Ministry of Defence OM No. H-11013/15/2006/D(Parl) dated 15.2.2007 
 
 23

Comments of the Committee 
 
  
23. The Committee are not convinced w ith the repl y furnished by the Mi nistry 
regarding the non-viabilit y of creation of non-lapsable Defence Modernisation 
Fund.  The Ministry  in their earlier re plies to Recommendation No. 1.43 on 
reduction of fund at RE stag e have themsel ves stated that “w hile Ministry  of  
Defence were in the process of planning to spend the allocation, due to reduction 
at RE stage, these could no t be implem ented”.  In vie w of the reduction of  
allocation at RE stage and non-fructification of scheme to spend the allocation as 
per plan envisaged  and long gestati on period of acquisition process, the 
Committee w ish to reiterate their ear lier recommendation for creation of a 
Defence Modernisation Fund.  The Committee again stress that the Government’s 
decision for not cr eating a non-lapsable funds created out of borrow ings or  
revenue stream sho uld not b e made a pplicable for defence moderni zation and 
security of the country.  Therefore, the Committee are of the vie w that even if the  
Ministry of Defence have to take approval of Finance Mi nister and Parliament for 
incurring expenditure from DMF the Government must  reconsider for creatin g 
the fund as it w ill provide an assu red amount to the Services for their 
modernisation and new acquisition with sufficient flexibility as per the demand of 
the time. 
 24

Married Accommodation Project (MAP)  
 
  
Recommendation (Para No.1.64) 
 
24. The Committee are pained to note that due to delay in finalisation of the Detailed 
Project Report (DPR) and other procedural ma tters, there has been under utilisation of 
allocation under Married Acc ommodation Project (MAP) since 2002-03.  Further, there 
has been about 50%  reduction of budgetary allocation in RE (2005-06) co mpared to 
B.E. (2005-06) under the project.  As a result of such inordi nate delay, the personnel of 
the three Services suffer a lot.  T he Committee are further given t o understand that the 
Ministry has engaged major consultants from t he private and public se ctors to expedite 
the project.  The Committee  recommend that in  addition to the abov e, the Ministry of 
Defence may involve private construction companies as it is bei ng done in a number of  
mega projects.  The Committee hope that the Ministry will take  all corrective steps t o 
expedite the project so t hat the intended benefits are a ccrued to the service personnel 
without further delay.   
 
 
25. The Ministry, in their action taken reply have stated : 
 
“The pace of expendit ure for MAP work in  the initial stage was slow.  Physical 
work could begin only after the process of identifying and allocating wor k to 
Executing Agencies, formulating work proce dures for the project in consultation 
with the Ministry of Finance, finalis ing of  c ontract agreements with the Public  
Sector Undertakings in cons ultation with the Ministry of Law was complete.  It 
also took time to appoint Engineering and Project Management Consultants and 
finalise the terms and conditions  of their contracts, fulfil stat utory requiremen ts 
and obtain necessary clearances of central and state bodies. 
 
2. The pace of expendit ure has now picked up.  In the Financial Year 05-06, the 
expenditure incurred under t he project was 4.6 times t he expenditure incurred in 
04-05.  Wi th the majority of tenders having now been acc epted, the pace of  
expenditure will further accelerate during Financial Year 2006-07. 
 
3. Private construction companies, vi z Gammons India Li mited, Simplex 
Infrastructures, IVRCL, IDEB Limited,  MAYTAS Limited, Ramky Constructions  
are already executing a number of works relating to Married Accommodation 
projects.  There is no embargo on private construction companies to execute 
Married Ac commodation Project.  Thes e co mpanies have to apply through the 
open tendering process to pre-qualify and bid competitively. 
 
4. Regular monitoring is  being done to ensure timely completion of all on-going  
MAP projects, so that in tended benefits relating to  provis ion of married 
accommodation to the Service Personnel are provided as early as possible.” 
 
 
Ministry of Defence OM No. H-11013/15/2006/D(Parl) dated 15.2.2007 
 
 25

Comments of the Committee 
 
 
26. The Com mittee de sire that a ti me-bound programme for completion of  
Married Accommod ation Project (MAP) be ch alked out by the Minis try w ith a n 
effective and regular monitoring to ensu re timely completi on of all the  ongoing 
MAP projects.  The Committee would like to be apprised of the progress made b y 
the Ministry from time to time in this regard.  
 
 
 26

 
Indian National Defence University (INDU) 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 2.21) 
27. The Committee note that the proposal for s etting up of Indian Nat ional Defence 
University (INDU) has been formulated an d selection of site is g oing on.  As t he matter 
has been long delayed, the Committee desire the Ministry to taken an early decision in 
this regard and start functioning  at the earliest. The Committee desire that th ey may be 
apprised of the progress from time to time. 
 
28. The Ministry, in their action taken reply have stated : 
 
‘The iss ue relating to the selection of a suitable location for establishing the 
Indian National Defence University (INDU) is under the active consideration of the 
Government.  Extensive consultations on  this issue are in progress, among 
others, with the Chiefs of Staff Committee (COSC).” 
 
 
 
Ministry of Defence OM No. H-11013/15/2006/D(Parl) dated 15.2.2007 
 
 27

Comments of the Committee 
 
 
29. The Com mittee are unhappy  to not e that ins pite of the Committee’s 
repeated recommendations, the issue rela ting to the sel ection of a suitable 
location for establishing the Indian Nationa l Defence University  (INDU) is still 
under consideration of the Government.  The Committe e are not inclined t o 
accept such type of repl y of the Ministry of Defence.  The Committee desire that  
the Ministry of Defence may  explore th e possibilities for setting up of INDU in a 
remote area.  The Committee further desire the Ministry to expedite the matter in  
a time bound manner and apprise the Committee about the progress made by the 
Government in this regard.  
 28

 Need to ensure ToT in case of procurement of Guns 
 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 3.22) 
 
30. The Committee are constrained to note that DRDO has not undertaken research 
work on development of 155 mm SP Gun despite the Co mmittee’s recommendation in 
earlier rep ort.  The Committee again rec ommend that DRDO  should init iate research 
work for development of 155 mm SP Gun so  that the country does not depend on 
foreign suppliers for this crucial equipm ent.  The Committee further recommend that 
while signing the contract for procurement of Gun, Transfer of Technology (ToT) should 
be obtained from the exporting country. 
 
 
31. The Ministry, in their action taken reply have stated : 
 
“In March 1994, Army issued a GSQR No. 621 for development of 155 mm GP 
Gun system.  In 1996, the GSQR 621 was amended and in the amended version 
the barrel length was mentioned as 45/52 calibre, in addition to other aspects. 
 
As an int ermediate option, in F ebruary 1997, VCOAS req uested Defence 
Research and Development Organisation (DRDO) to carry  out feasib ility on the 
integration 155 mm of T-6 and AS-90 turrets on the Main Battle Tank (MBT)  
Arjun derivative Chasis.  T- 6 (South Africa) and AC-90 (UK)  conform to 
GSQR 621.  By June 1998 Combat Vehicle Research & Development  
Establishment (CVRDE) configured and fu lly prepared two pr ototypes Arjun 
derivative Chasis (PPS-1 and  PPS-2) to integrate thes e turrets.  In the summer 
months of 1998, the developm ent cum us er trials were done and only the T- 6 
turret was trial evaluated, as AS-90 did not  participate.  T-6 turret mounted on 
Arjun derivative Chassis was named as Bhim T-6.  Agai n during 1999, extensive 
user trial were carried out on Bhim T-6 and the Army trial team recommended it s 
induction.  The issue of indent for production of   155 MM  B him T-6  has  got 
delayed due to suspension of all dealings on M/s D enel as per Government 
decision.” 
 
 
Ministry of Defence OM No. H-11013/15/2006/D(Parl) dated 15.2.2007 
 29

 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
 
32. The Com mittee are constrained to note that despite Army’s issuin g of 
GSQR for development of 155 mm GP Gun System in 1994, the GSQR for this gun 
have changed year after year by the Army itself.  After integration of 155 mm of T6 
variety in MBT Arjun as per Ar my’s requirement which has been named Bhim T-6  
and after its successful trial in 1999 an d final decision by the Arm y to induct it, 
the issue of indent for production of 155 MM Bhim T-6 has got delay ed due t o 
suspension of all dealing w ith M/s De nel as per Government’s decision.  The 
Committee observe that after lapse of mo re than 12 years,  155 mm GP Gun has 
not seen t he light of the day .  Therefor e, the Co mmittee desire that the user s 
should not make major changes in the GSQR time and again and the Government 
must avoid single vendor sy stem and go fo r multi-vendor sy stem.  It must also 
emphasize upon ToT. 
 30

Bullet Proof Jacket 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 3.26) 
 
33. The Com mittee Note that there is a la rge requirement of Bullet Proof Jackets  
(BPJs) in the Army, which is very essent ial for saving the life of a soldier.  The 
Committee are happy  to note that the bullet-pr oof jacket made in India is  at par wit h 
international standard and by the end of this Plan the country would have enough bullet-
proof jackets for all the soldiers. The Commi ttee note that crucial fibre used in making 
BPJ is being imported.  Since the jackets  are required in large number, the Committee 
desire that the Ministry should tr y to obtain ToT so that the production of fibre can be 
undertaken in the country itself.  
 
 
34. The Ministry, in their action taken reply have stated : 
 
“The Ordnance Factory Board (OFB) were  advised to obtain ToT so that the 
production of fibre, used in making Bullet Proof Jackets (BPJs), can be 
undertaken in the country itself.  OFB have approached the Original Equipm ent 
Manufactures for ToT/Co-development/Co- production of basic  fibre for hard 
armour plate and soft armour plate, wh ich are the basic components of the 
BPJs.” 
 
 
 
Ministry of Defence OM No. H-11013/15/2006/D(Parl) dated 15.2.2007 
 
 
 31

Comments of the Committee 
 
 
35. The Committee observe that Ordnance Factory Board (OFB) have approached 
the original equipment manufactures for ToT/co-develo pment/co-production of  
basic fibre used in making Bullet Proof Jacket.  The Committee desire that the OFB 
must exp edite the process i n a time  bound manner and apprise the Committee 
about the present status/progress made by the OFB in this regard. 
 32

MBT Arjun Tank 
  
Recommendation (Para No. 3.28) 
 
36. “The Committee are deeply concerned about the progress of Arjun Tank as its 
production schedule are going very slow.  The Com mittee, as recommended in their 
earlier reports, desire that Ordnance Factory in coordination with DRDO should carry out 
suitable m odifications in ‘Gunners main sight’ and ‘Gun control system’ of the Arjun 
Tank at the earliest and hand over the rectified Tanks to the Army 2007-08.  The 
Committee also stres s that time limit pr escribed should not be f urther extended. The 
Committee also desire that accountability for delay in production of the Arjun Tank may  
be fixed”. 
 
 
37. The Ministry, in their action taken reply have stated : 
 
“All the technical iss ues in the Gunner’s Main Sight and Gun Control Sy stem 
have been resolved. Suitable modification s have been carried out in these sub-
systems on the initial five tanks of MBT Arjun by DRDO, the age ncy involved for 
conception and development of the project. After succe ssful DRDO evaluation,  
five tanks have already been handed over  to Army on 20 th Jun 2006. Army has  
been invited for Joint Receipt Inspection ( JRI) of Nine more tanks. The J RI is 
likely to commence from 1 st week of February 2007. It is expected that a total of 
29 MBT Arjun tanks will be ready for ins pection by Army by the end of March 
2007. The concern of the Committee for fixing up accountabilit y for delays is 
noted.  In a project of this magni tude involv ing design, development, 
manufacturing, and integrat ion of diverse technologies, delays normally happen 
due to technical hitches in perfecting the technology.” 
 
 
Ministry of Defence OM No. H-11013/15/2006/D(Parl) dated 15.2.2007 
 33

Comments of the Committee 
 
 
38. The Com mittee note that all techni cal issues relating to Arjun Tank have 
been resolved and after successful evaluation five tanks have been ha nded over 
to Arm y i n June 2006 and 29 MBT Arjun Tanks w ill be read y for inspection b y 
Army by the end of March 2007.  The Committee hope that progress of Arjun Tank 
will go on as per schedule and in future there will not be any technical problem in 
operation of Arjun Tank in any form in or der to avoid frequent discussion on this 
matter.  The Committee strongl y recommend that accountability may be fixed for 
inordinate delay in production of MBT Ar jun and the Committee may  be informed 
about the action taken in this matter.   
 34

DGQA 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 3.40) 
 
 
39. The Committee note DGQA is responsible  for Quality assurance of all defence 
stores and equipment, both imported and indigenous for the Army, Navy(excluding naval 
Armaments) and common user items for the Ai r Forc e procured from all s ources viz  
private sector, public sector undertakings and ordnance factories. 
   The Committee also note the shortcom ings of DGQA for which it has been 
severely criticized by t he Comptroller and Auditor General (CAG).The Committee would 
like the Ministry to seriously examine the CAG report and take c orrective action in this  
regard. The Committee may be apprised of the action taken by the Government in this 
regard and how it proposed to restructure the DGQA in the light of the CAG report.  
  The Committee further note that the pos t of Director General(QA) has been lying 
vacant since 31 st August, 2004 due to stay order granted by the High Court. The 
Committee feels that Government  has not made serious efforts in this direction. Since 
DGQA is a key organisation headed by Dir ector General(QA) responsible for ensuring 
the quality assurance of all Defence stores and equipmen t, the Committee desire that 
Ministry should clarify  the pos ition before High Cour t to get the s tay order v acated so 
that post of Director General(QA) can be filled up as early as possible. 
  The Committee note that as per the changes made in the functioning of DG QA, 
the indigenisation responsibility has been transferred from DGQA to manufacturing unit s 
and servic e Headquarters. Also steps are being taken to progressively make the 
manufacturers including DPSUs, OFs and private sector responsible for qualit y 
assurance of product manufactured by them. Inspection of input material required by  
manufacturing units under the department and vendor devel opment which was earlier  
done by  DGQA has now been transferred to manufacturing units. Only the final 
inspection coverage and quality outputs and surveillance has remained with DGQA. 
   In view of the foregoing, it is  seen that there has been sharp decline in 
responsibilities of DG QA. Moreover, there have been complaints from the users o f 
quality of equipment that have been certified by this organisation. In this connection, the 
committee had expressed serious concern ov er revalidating of vintage mines during 
operation “ Prakaram’ which le d to large scale of cas ualties. The committee therefore 
desire that Government should seriously examine t he role of DGQA with a view of 
disbanding the organi sation. The qual ity assurance c an be entrusted to DR DO and 
manufacturers. In this regard the staff of  DGQA can be absorbed in other departments. 
This will save the country a fair amount  of revenue and self cer tification by 
manufacturers will bring more accountability and responsib ility in the vital area of  
defence preparedness. 
 
40. The Ministry, in their action taken reply have stated : 
 
“The CAG performance audit on DGQA made a number of recommendations for 
aligning DGQA functioning with contemporary Quality Management Systems. The 
CAG Report is under examination of the Ministry and draft ATN is under process.  
     
The post of DGQA has since b een fille d up with the appointme nt of Lt. Gen.  
Rakesh Puri as Director General Quality Assurance. 
   
 35

As noted by the Committee, the prime responsibility of  DGQA is the Qualit y 
Assurance of equipment/spares procured fr om OFs, DPSUs, priv ate sector and 
imports. Having been intimately associat ed with technical activities of  all 
equipment in Indian Army, DGQA has acquired a unique experience in its 
multifarious role with r egard to defence equipment, in the formulation of General 
Staff Qualitative Requirements (GSQR), in the assessment of equipment before it 
is inducted into Services, in providin g services during entir e life span of 
equipment and in processing all forma lities/documentation for spares 
management.  
   
In addition, DGQA carries out the fo llowing funct ions which are exc lusive 
responsibilities and are essential for s pares management, repair and overhaul of  
the equipment: 
¾ Preparation and publishing of technical manuals for services. 
¾ Preparation and publis hing of DGQA Approval ba sed on which all actions  
pertaining to introduction and c hange of stat us of equipment takes place. Audit  
authorities also take it as a financial document. 
¾ Preparation of Assignment Lists of equipment. 
¾ Holding of particulars and specifications of all the equipment. 
¾ Technical evaluation of equipment being inducted indigenously or through import. 
¾ Laboratory facilities for testing of Arms/Ammunition Equipment. 
¾ DGQA owns a servic e ammunition breakdo wn laboratory, whic h is unique and 
only one of its kind in India.  Services are als o provided to other organisations  on 
need basis. 
¾ Defect Investigation to identity  assign able causes of prem ature failures  and 
implementations of corrective measures  to minimize the frequency of such 
premature failures. 
 
The Com mittee has noted that there hav e been complaints from the users of 
quality of equipment  that have been certified by DGQA. The committee has  
expressed serious concern over revalidating of vint age mines during operation 
“Prakaram’ which led to large scale of cas ualties. In this regard, it is submitted 
that shelf life of ammunition is based on t he effect of time on various components 
of the system like explosiv e filling, metallic components and their deterior ation 
due to various environmental factors. These may not be same for all components 
of the ammunition, and hence proof testing is carried out to ascertain whether the 
ammunition will function in the desired man ner after extension of  shelf life. Thus, 
functional efficiency and testing of the ammunition is ensured before extending its 
shelf life. In keeping with t he prescribed guidelines f or extension of shelf life, 
mines certified as ‘Serviceable’ were used during Operation PARAKARAM. 
  
Traditionally, for strategic equipment  produced by Ordnance Factories, input  
stage inspection was  being carried out by  DGQA. The responsibility has s ince 
been transferred to OFB. Howev er, this may not be seen as a diminishing of the 
role of DG QA in ass uring the quality of  defence goods. Rather , with the transfer 
of input inspection to OFs and DPSUs, the focus of the role of D GQA has shifted 
to audit and surveillance activity. It may also be further emphasized that DGQA 
organisation and its working have in the recent past been the subject matter of 
examination by Jaffa Committee  and Kelkar Committee, as also of a 
performance audit by CAG. In all the r eports, recommendations have a common 
point: that is, to convert DGQA into a v ibrant QA organization by adopting 
 36

modern/contemporary Quality Assurance techniques . None of the reports hav e 
suggested disbanding of DGQA.  
 
Procurement and production of  defence goods necessarily entails the ne ed to 
ensure that quality standards are being met by the supplier so that the interests of 
the State in acquisition of defence goods are not compromised. DGQA has built 
up a unique expertise in this field over many decades of interface with the user, 
the production agencies and other suppliers. With this expertise and revamping of 
the organiz ation in step with the recomm endations of various Committees, it is  
felt that the organis ation w ill render itself comparable to contemporary quality 
management organizations.” 
 
 
Ministry of Defence OM No. H-11013/15/2006/D(Parl) dated 15.2.2007 
 
 37

Comments of the Committee 
 
41. The Com mittee are not satisfied with the repl y submitted by  the 
Governemnt on performance of DGQA.  In the light of the observation made by 
the Committee on Defence an d CAG in  their report, Government must seriously 
examine the role of DGQA and review  it s working in toto and find out new 
mechanism for quality  assurance.  Th e Co mmittee w ould also like to know  the  
Action Taken Notes on CAG Report to be submitted by the Ministry. 
 38

 Construction of Air Defence ship 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 4.11) 
 
  
42. The Committee note that project for cons truction of Air Defence Ship is alread y 
behind the schedule on account of non-availability of the Sp ecial quality steel and dela y 
in procurement of bulb bars.  Since th ese two problems have been r esolved, t he 
Committee hope that ongoing construction of Air Defence ship and induction of Aircraft 
carrier Admiral Gorshkov would be completed as per schedule without showing time and 
cost overrun. 
 
 
43. The Ministry, in their action taken reply have stated : 
 
“The projects relating to construction of  A ir Defence Ship  at Co chin Shipy ard 
Limited, Cochin and Repair and Re-equipping of Aircraft carrier Admiral Gorshkov 
at Russia are being closely monitored by various committe es includ ing the  
Empowered Apex Steering Com mittee headed by the Defence Secretary. These 
committees regularly review the progress of the projects and ensure that remedial 
steps are taken to resolve outst anding iss ues.  Measures to recover lost time 
through innovative building strategy are also being examined. 
 
When asked about the correct st atus of the construction of Air Defence s hip at 
Cochin Shipyard Limit ed, the representativ es of the Ministry of Defence during 
oral evidence stated : 
 
As per the ship-building procedure for a ll the Defence PSU yards , after the CCS 
Part I approval we start construction proc ess and a year later we then firm up the 
costs and proceed with the serial  order if it is required.  This particular y ard 
comes under the Ministry of Shipping.  In  this particular case, they were quite 
insistent on having a contract to proceed wit h.  So, the costing they had giv e for 
Phase I which allows f or the construction process would need to be done for the 
next three years.  The CNC report has been approved by the RM on the 3 rd of 
January.  The contract is in the final stages .  But I would assure that no work has  
stopped in the sense t hat there are certain c onsultancy studies which have to be 
done to build the ship and all that is going on in parallel like the propulsion system 
integration.  It is a very major part of pre-construction activity to decide how to 
build the s hip.  That has already been ne gotiated with a company.  Similarly for 
the flight deck and the avia tion element, there is already  a c onsultancy contract 
which is under discussion with ROE of Russia.  So, you may not actually see a lot 
of physical constructi on going on but the pre-construction activity but a fair 
amount of work has been done.  But yes  we have not been able to s ign the 
contract for some time which I think we should be able to do shortly.” 
 
 
 
Ministry of Defence OM No. H-11013/15/2006/D(Parl) dated 15.2.2007 
 
 39
  

Comments of the Committee 
 
 
44. The Committee observe that for constr uction of Air Defence ship (ADS) at 
Cochin Shipyard Limited in a ddition to undertaking  certain consultancy  studies 
to build ship, the  propulsion sy stem in tegration and fair amount of pre -
construction work has already been done.  However, the Committee are dismayed 
to note that the Ministr y have not been ab le to sign the contract to proceed w ith 
the construction w ork.  There fore, the Co mmittee strongl y desire that Ministry 
must sign the contract at the earliest, so  that the construction w ork of ADS ma y 
be started and com pleted as per sched ule w ithout an y time and cost overrun.   
The Committee wo uld also like to know th e existing capability  of surveillance of 
Navy and requirement of third Air Defence Ship of the decommissioning of virat.   
The Committee may be apprised of the Action Taken in this matter.  
 40

 Need to augment the maritime surveillance air craft capability 
 
 
Recommendation (Para No 4.14 and 4.15) 
 
45. The Committee note that the Navy faces shortage of both shor t range as well as  
long range maritime surveill ance aircraft. There is also shortage of Unmanned Aerial 
Vehicles (UAV) and Dornier Air craft, being used by the Navy for coastal surveillance. 
The Committee also note that pr ocurement of these aircraft is  in the initia l stage.  It 
negates the very proposition of the Ministry that Nav y has got adequate forces to meet 
any emergent requirement to safeguard maritime interests.  The Committee feel that  
Navy is  an equipment intensive Service and procurement of such  critical equipment  
cannot be sidelined a nd therefore strongly stress that adequate a ttention should be 
given by the Ministry and required funds made available for procurement of these 
aircraft. 
 
 The Committee also feel that, keeping in view the transport of petroleum products 
by sea from various part of the world, t he Indian Navy has a major role to play in 
providing security along the oi l routes in the subcontinent.  With an eye to the present 
day's environment, not only  for security r easons but for economic reason s also, Navy 
needs to be strengthened. 
 
 
46. The Ministry, in their action taken reply have stated : 
 
“Maritime surveilla nce aircraft capability  is being enhanced in a planned 
manner over the long term as mentioned in the succeeding paragraphs. 
 
Long Range Maritime Reconnaissan ce (LRM R) Aircraft : Long Term 
Perspective Plan envisages an adequate num ber of LRMR Aircraft.  The presen t 
holding of  LRMR aircraft is 13.  The long range surveillance gap is  being 
addressed through replacement and inducti on of LRMR aircraft over the  10 th to 
13th Plan period. 
 
Short Range Maritime Reco nnaissance (SRMR) Aircraft :  The enhancement 
of the short range surveillance capability is being addressed through replacement 
and induction of SRMR aircraft. 
 
Unmanned Aerial Vehicle (UAV ): The pr esent holding of  12 UAVs  would be 
further1 augmented by induction of indigenous long endurance UAVs.   In 
addition, the Navy also plans to induct rotary UAVs deployable from ships.” 
 
“Navy’s force levels are planned in the context of its designated roles, the security 
environment and threat perception. Growth plans of the Navy are therefore being 
formulated keeping in view its evolvi ng responsibilities.  In addition, the 
operational tasking of the ships includes  monitoring of our Sea Lanes of  
Communication (SLOCs) and providing security along the oil routes.” 
 
 
Ministry of Defence OM No. H-11013/15/2006/D(Parl) dated 15.2.2007 
 41

Comments of the Committee 
 
 
47. The Com mittee note that N avy is Pl anning to increase its maritime 
surveillance aircraft capability in its Lon g Term Int egrated Perspective Plan and 
over the 10 th to 13 th Plan period.  The enhan cement of the short range 
surveillance capability is being addresse d through replacement  and induction of 
Short Ran ge Maritime Recon naissance (SRMR) aircraft and Unmanned Aeri al 
Vehicle (UAV).  The Committee further note that there has already been inordinate 
delay in the finalisation of LTIPP and the 11 th Plan is also pending for the final 
approval of the Ministry of Finance which is to be commenced from April 2007. 
 
 The Committee take a serious note of the inordinate delay in enhancement 
of the short range surveillance capabilit y and finalisation of LTIPP wh ich may 
seriously affect our country’s naval security in terms of surveillance and in other  
way due to absence of such important equipment.  
 
Keeping i n view  the vital securit y con cern involved in this matter, th e 
Committee are of the vie w that Ministry must chalk out a time-bound programm e 
for augmenting the short and long range ma ritime surveillance aircraft capabilit y 
and adequate funds for the purpose be m ade available so that economic interest 
and the securit y of nation may  not be compromised at an y cost.  Action taken  
may be intimated to the Committee at the earliest.  
 
 42

Squadron Strength of Air Force 
  
Recommendation (Para No. 5.12) 
 
 
48. The Committee note that the squadron st rength of Air Force at the end of 10 th,        
11th and 12 th Plan period will be  29, 34 and 36 respectively.  The Committee also note 
that the peak strength attained s o far by Ai r Force at any point of  time has been 39.5 , 
while the ideal requir ement is 44 squadron s.  The Committee note that induction a nd 
phasing out of Aircraft go side by side in Air Force, however, during the upcoming period 
2005-17, phasing out of several ageing Airc raft, is likely to be a major concern, thereby  
causing substantial depletion of squadron strength in the coming Plan periods. 
 
The Com mittee also note that 140 num ber of Su-30 MKI and 100 LCAs are 
expected to be available for induction during 11 th and 12 th Plans.  The Committee, 
however, feel that despite this, achiev ing the number of 44 squadr ons appears to be a 
distant dream.  Keeping in view the present pace of phasing out and induction of aircraft, 
the Committee strongly recommend that the Gove rnment should accord highest priority  
to ensure that Squadron strength at any ti me must not fall below 39.5 and strive to 
achieve ideal requirement of 44 Squadrons. 
 
49. The Ministry, in their action taken reply have stated : 
 
“With an objective to impr ove the depleting squadron strength of the Indian Air  
Force, the Government have accorded A cceptance of Necessity (AON) for 126 
Medium Multi-role C ombat Aircraft  (MMRCA) for which RFP  is likely to be  
issued shortly.  Government have also accorded Acceptance of Necessity (AON)  
for additional 40 SU 30 MKI Aircraft to meet immediate requirement of  IAF.” 
 
 
Ministry of Defence OM No. H-11013/15/2006/D(Parl) dated 15.2.2007 
 
 43

Comments of the Committee 
 
50. The Committee note that the Governmen t with an objective to improve the 
depleting squadron strength of the Indian Air Force have  accorded acceptance of 
necessity of 126 medium multi-role co mbat aircraft for w hich Request For 
Proposal (RFP) is lik ely to be issued shortly .  The Committe e do not a pprove the 
stereotype repl y given by  the Ministry  a nd inconsistent dela y in issuing RFP to  
improve the depleting squadr on strength of  India n Air Force.  Therefore, the y 
desire that the Ministr y shoul d strictly  adhere to the prescribed time limit and  
induct the same as per 11  & 12th Plan w ithout further delay so as to improve and 
maintain the required squadron strength of Air Force.  The Committee would like 
to be apprised of the progress made by the Ministry in this regard.  
 
 44

Adequate coverage of radars 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 5.23) 
 
51. The Committee are concerned to note that there is i nadequate coverage with the 
existing network of radars available with Air Fo rce, resulting in signi ficant gaps all over 
the country particularly at peninsular India,  thereby making it  vulnerable to sudd en 
attacks due to failure of timely detection.  The Committee note that some efforts in the 
right direction for indigenous manufacturi ng of radars have been initiated by the 
Government.  The Committee feel that radar  surveillance is s uch an iss ue whic h can 
hardly be put on side track and therefore recommend that in  additio n to indigenous  
efforts for manufacturing, import options s hould also  be taken up on priority and the 
Government should not hesitate to ma ke adequate funds available for their 
procurement. 
 
52. The Ministry, in their action taken reply have stated : 
To provide adequate c overage of radars, following proc urement cases in respect 
of Low Le vel Transportable Radars  (LLTRs), Medium Pow er Radars  ( MPRs), and 
Low Level Light Weight Radars (LLLWRs) are being progressed. 
 
Ministry of Defence OM No. H-11013/15/2006/D(Parl) dated 15.2.2007 
 45

Comments of the Committee 
 
53. The Committee note that procuremen t of LLTR, MRR and LLLWR ar e being 
progressed.  The Committee are con cerned to note that due of inadequate 
coverage of the exi sting radars netw ork available w ith Air Force, our countr y’s 
security is facing serious threat due to failu re of timel y detection.  Therefore, the 
Committee wish to reiterate their earlie r recommendation and desire to expedite 
the action being taken in this regard an d the Ministry may apprise the Committee 
of the progress made thereon. 
 
 
 
 46

 Delegation of in-house R&D to DPSUs and OFs 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 6.14) 
 
54. The Committee are further constrained to note that only 8 to 10 percent of DRDO  
budget is being spent on fundamental resear ch.  As recommended by the Committee in 
their earlier reports, the DRDO should c oncentrate more on fundamental research and 
applied res earch for upgradation of weapon s system should be left to the concerned 
manufacturing units.  In this connection, the Committee again emphasis that the DPSUs 
and OFs should hav e their inhouse R&D c entres so that need to approac h DRDO for 
small up gradation could be avoided and DRDO could concentrate on critical 
technological.   
 
55. The Ministry, in their action taken reply have stated : 
 
“DRDO is mandated to desig n and develop weapons systems and platforms for 
the Armed Forces.  The following pattern of expenditure is given for different 
categories of R&D activities:- 
 
Type of Projects X  Plan (Percentage of total DRDO  
Budget) 
Mission M ode (Deliv erables to Armed 
Forces) 
69% 
Technology Demonstrators (Applied 
Research & Dev elopment for future 
technology) 
16% 
Science & Tech. Projects including 
enabling Research Infra-structure 
15% 
 
DRDO  belives in utilizing the capabilities in academia/universities for supporting 
the DRDO’s short term and long term programmes.  It spends  approxim ately 
1.5% of its  budget on basic research programmes in universities and is currently 
running 250 projects.  Three c enters of excellence have bee n establish ed in 
universities and two more are envisaged in the XI  Plan.  Eigh ty five aca demic 
institutions are working on DRDO supported basic research programmes.” 
 
 
Ministry of Defence OM No. H-11013/15/2006/D(Parl) dated 15.2.2007 
 47

 
Comments of the Committee 
 
 
56. The Committee note that during the Te nth Plan, DRDO sp ent 69% of its total  
budget on mission mode, 16%  o n app lied research and development for future 
technology and 15 % on Science and Technology .  It spends approximatel y 1.5% of 
its budget on basic research programme in Universities.  How ever, the Committee 
are concerned to note that their recomme ndation to create in house R&D Centres in 
DPSUs and OFS,  in  order to avoid app roaching DRDO e ven for small upgradat ion,  
and allow  DRDO to concentrate on critical  technologies has been totall y ignor ed.  
Therefore, the Committee reiterate their ear lier recommendation and desire that the 
Ministry ma y cons ider to delegate th e pow er of DRDO  for s ystem/sub-system 
development and manufacturing activiti es to DPSUs and OFs and DRDO sh ould 
concentrate on fundamental research onl y and for the purpose more funds may  be 
allocated to DRDO.  The Com mittee also desire that Navy’ s in-house R&D m odel 
should be followed by other Defence Services also.  The Committee further desire to 
be apprised of the break up of expenditure incurred on basic research programme in 
Universities by the DRDO.  
  
 48

Fixing of target for self-reliance in Eleventh Defence Plan 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 6.15) 
 
57. The Committee note with deep conc ern that the percentage of defence 
expenditure on imports which was 25.95 percent in the 7th Defence Plan, has not shown 
improvement even after completion of another four Defence Plans and has remained the 
same in the i.e. 10th Defence Plan.  The Committee are further surprised to note that the 
Ministry has not fixed any target for self-reliance for the Eleventh and subsequent Plans.  
The Committee desire that stra tegic plan be c halked out co ntaining targets for self-
reliance for the next 12 years and assessment s of achievem ent of the target with 
accountability be done year wise at the highest level. 
 
 
58. The Ministry, in their action taken reply have stated : 
 
“As far as Research  and Deve lopment ac tivities in DRDO are  concerne d, th e 
area of armament self-relianc e has been achieved almost totally. In the area of 
aeronautics and av ionics this is  about 60 percent. It is in the ar ea of electronics  
and computer related activities that self -reliance figure is still low a nd around 4 0 
percent. 
 
There is  a continuous effort to achiev e self-relian ce in  all t he areas  alike.  
Establishment of facilities lik e Galle nium A rsenic Ena bling Tech nology Ce ntre 
(GAETC) Hyderabad and SI TAR are the effort in this direction. To give best 
equipments to our Armed Forces technol ogy upgradation has to be a regular on 
going process and to that extent certain degree of interdependence in technology 
matter is likely to continue. However,  DRDO is encouraging indigenous res earch 
and development activity, development of indigenous implementation of research 
projects and in digenous vend or develop ment. All these effort will c ertainly 
enhance the over all self-reliance figure for the organization.” 
  
 
Ministry of Defence OM No. H-11013/15/2006/D(Parl) dated 15.2.2007 
 49

 
Comments of the Committee 
 
 
59. The Com mittee are perturbed to not e that even after completion of ten 
Defence Plans and continuous efforts to achieve self-re liance in various areas,  
the country could achieve 60 p er cent self-reliance in the area of aeronautics an d 
avionics and only 40 per cent in the area of  electronics and computer.  Therefore, 
the Committee desire to reiterate thei r earlier recommen dation to chalk out a 
strategic Plan at the highest  level for the next 12 years to achieve self-reliance in  
defence matters. 
 
 In this regard, the Committee stro ngly desi re that private sector 
participation in defence sector must be encouraged by out sourcing particular ly 
in the area of computer and electronics, where India is considered a pioneer in 
the export market. 
 
 50

 
 Restructuring of Defence Estate Organization 
 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 7.17) 
 
60. The Com mittee observe that the propos al for restructuring of DEO is unde r 
examination of t he Ministry of D efence and it is proposed to  be implemented over a 
period of five years. The Com mittee hope t hat organizational rest ructuring will bring 
democratic reforms in the administration of DEO which inc lude dec entralization, 
transparency, accountability and simplificat ion. The Committee des ire that in t he 
restructuring process, stress should be given on proper training of officers & staff of 
DEO. Besides, the regular trai ning in Land & Reve nue, the officers should a lso b e 
imparted training in handling sensitive situation involv ing general public whose 
land/property has been taken over.  The Commi ttee hope this will enable the officers to 
effectively interact with the aggrieved parties / individuals showin g sensitivit y to their 
grievances. The Committee, therefore desire that the Government should take 
appropriate view to the matter and apprise the Committee. 
  
61. The Ministry, in their action taken reply have stated : 
 
“Directorate General of Defence Es tates have s ubmitted a proposal fo r 
restructuring of Defence Estates Organisation.   The proposal is being examined 
keeping in view the existing Government policy of optimization of staff.  
 
Directorate General of Defence Estates have also set up a training institute 
called National Institute of  Defence Estates Managem ent in Delhi Cantonment 
for imparting training to the IDES (Indian Defence Estates Service ) Probationers, 
officers and staff of the Defenc e Estates Organisation and Cant onment Boards. 
18 training courses have been s cheduled for the year  2006-07 of which 2 have 
already been conc luded. At the institute, training courses on Acquis ition and 
Rehabilitation, Key issues of Pub lic Healt h, Land Management  and computer 
courses in MS Office for officers and sta ff of Defence Estate s Organisation and 
Cantonment Boards are offered. Courses for senior officers include training in e- 
governance, Vertical Mix Programme and refresher courses.” 
 
 
 
Ministry of Defence OM No. H-11013/15/2006/D(Parl) dated 15.2.2007 
 
 
 51

Comments of the Committee 
 
 
62. The Com mittee note that the proposal for restructuring of Defence Estate 
Organisation is still under examination b y the Ministry  of Defence.  How ever, 
Directorate General of Defence Estate have set up a training institute for imparting 
training to the IDES.  The Committee des ire that the Ministr y should complete the 
proposal for examination of restructuring of DEO.  The C ommittee feel that the 
dealing officer’s knowledge of statutory position, rules and procedure involved in 
such cases is not sufficient, in additi on, the Committee are of the view  that 
specialized training be imparted to chan ge the attitude and mind set of officers to 
make them positive and facilitator to maintain human relations an d to assist t he 
displaced person for  their re-settlement a nd rehabilitation in a dignified manner.   
The Committee also desire t hat the Government may settle the p ending case s 
related to rehabilitation and resettlemen t out of th e court and no land should be 
acquired without the  know ledge of the Mi nistry of Defence.  The Committee may  
be apprised of the action taken in this regard.  
 52

Separate Bill on Management of Defence Lands  
 
Recommendation (Para No. 7.20) 
 
63. The Standing Committee on Def ence (14th Lok Sabha) in their 5 th Report on ‘the 
Cantonments Bill, 2003’ had recommended to amend various provisions of the Bill and  
bring a separate Bill on Defence lands other than the cantonment. The Com mittee are 
unhappy to note that despite their having pres ented the report on Bill in Parliament in 
May, 2005, the Government has not brought t he revised Cantonment Bill in Parliament  
even after a lapse of one year. Out of 62 C antonments, 61 are vari ed and there is an 
urgent need to hold elections in these cantonments, so t hat the elected boards as  
envisaged in the Bill are in place for smooth admin istration. The Committee, therefore, 
desire the Ministry of Def ence to expedite the matter for placing the modifie d 
Cantonments Bill, 2003 in Parliament so t hat the new Cantonment  Act can be  enacted 
at an early date. The Committee further desi re that a separate Bill on the m anagement 
of defence land as recommended by the Co mmittee in their above report may be 
brought urgently in Parliament.   
 
64. The Ministry, in their action taken reply have stated : 
 
 The Cantonments Act, 2006 (41 of 2006) has  since been notified in the Official 
Gazette and it has commenced with effect from 18th December, 2006. 
 
In view of the above, the constitution of  all the 62 Cant onment Boards had to be 
varied to meet legal requirements.  Necessary steps are being taken, in accordance with 
the Cantonments Act, 2006 to hold election to all the Cantonment Boards.  Elections will 
be held after completing the requisite legal/statutory formalities. 
 
The Government has also acc epted the Committee’s recommendation f or a 
separate Bill for the manageme nt of defence lands other than cantonments and a ne w 
Bill has already been drafted for the management of defence lands and military stations 
outside cantonments.  This has  been circ ulated to the three services to obtain thei r 
views/comments. 
 
 
Ministry of Defence OM No. H-11013/15/2006/D(Parl) dated 15.2.2007 
 
 53

Comments of the Committee 
 
65. The Committee are happ y to  note th at the Government has accepted the 
their recommendation for a separate bi ll for the managem ent of Def ence lands 
other than cantonments and military  st ations outside cantonments and this has 
been circulated to the three Services to  obtain their view  points.  The Committee 
desire that the matter may be expedited in a time-bound manner and they  may be 
apprised of the progress made in this regard. 
 54

ONE RANK ONE PENSION 
 
Recommendation (Para No.  8.12) 
 
66 The Committee note that long st anding demand of Ex-servicemen for ‘One Rank 
One Pension’ is still pending with the Go vernment.  Despite repeated recommendations 
of the Committee in this regard, t he same has not been implemented by the 
Government so far.  The Committee again urge the Governm ent to implement the long 
awaited ‘One Rank One Pension’ demand of Armed Forces at the earliest. 
 
 
67. The Ministry, in their action taken reply have stated : 
 
 Ex-Servicemen have  been r epresenting for grant ‘One R ank One Pension’.  The 
matter was examined in Ministry. 
 
 The pensionary benefits of service pers onnel have c onsiderably been improv ed 
after implementation of the recommendations of 5 th Central Pay Com mission a s 
accepted by Government.  The demand for ‘O ne Rank One Pension’ and removal of 
conditionality of 33 years have also been ex amined in detail by the Government, but  
while the demand for ‘one rank one pens ion’ has not been agreed to, the pensionary 
benefits have been further substantially improved w.e.f. 1.2.2006:- 
 
(i) With effect from 1.1.2006, the weightage for the pur pose of calculations of 
pension for past as well as future retirees  Personnel Below Officer Ra nk (PBOR) of 
Sepoy, Naik and Havildar ranks and equivalent  ranks in Navy and Air Force  will be 10 
years, 8 years and 6 years respectively subj ect to a maximum qualifying s ervice of 30 
years. 
 
(ii) With effect from 1.1.2006, pension of pre-1.1.1996 retire PBORs would be 
revised with reference to the maximum pay in the revised scales of pay introduced with 
effect from 1.1.1996.  The benef it would be given with pros pective effect and no arrears 
will be given. 
 
(iii) The abov e benefit would be on ly in res pect of service pens ion inclu ding 
invalid pension, service element of disability pension and war injury pension. 
 
 
Ministry of Defence OM No. H-11013/15/2006/D(Parl) dated 15.2.2007 
     
 
  
 
 55

Comments of the Committee 
 
68. The Committee are constrained to note that the Demand for One Rank One 
Pension has not been agreed to by  the Govern ment b y giving plea that the 
pensionary benefits have been  substantially improved w .e.f. 1.2.2006.  Therefore, 
the Comm ittee w ished to reiterate th eir earlier recommendation and again urge 
upon the Government to re-consider the long standing demand of One Rank One 
Pension of Armed Forces.                          
 56

Dependant Pension for unmarried daughters of Ex-Servicemen 
 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 8.15) 
 
 
69. The committee also recommend that other demands of Ex-servicemen viz. issues 
of dependent pension for unma rried daughters above 25 year s of Ex-Servicemen;  
second e mployment guarante e/lateral in duction into Central Para-Milit ary Forces;  
disparity in the monet ary award of disability pension of  pre and post 1996 pensioners; 
anomaly in fixation of pension and insur ance coverage to soldiers  should be 
immediately looked into to provide relief to Ex-Servicemen. 
 
70. The Ministry, in their action taken reply have stated : 
 
 “The matters regarding removal of age restriction in the case of widowed/divorced 
 daughters who are in receipt of specia l/liberalized family pens ion (dependent) 
 and dis parity in the monet ary award of disability pension of pre and post 1996 
 pensioners are under consideration in cons ultation with Dep tt. of Pension and 
 Pensioner’s Welfare.  A Working Group examined the issue of second 
 employment/ lateral induction of ex-servicemen in Central Paramilitary Forces but 
 could not reach at a consensus.   Army  Hqrs. are now suggesting a proposal 
 different from the first one for the consi deration of the Working Group.  There is 
 no anomaly in fixation of pension and insurance coverage to soldiers.” 
 
 
Ministry of Defence OM No. H-11013/15/2006/D(Parl) dated 15.2.2007 
 57

Comments of the Committee 
 
 
71. The Com mittee are not satisfied w ith the repl y of the Ministr y as the 
important matter has been kept in abeyan ce.  The Committee, therefore, reiterate 
their recommendation and desire that th e Minis try should tr eat the w idow and 
unmarried daughter  as part of the fam ily of the ex-servi cemen and extend all  
medical facilities to them on humanitari an ground so as to encourage the people 
to join the Armed Forces.  
 58

CHAPTER – II 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH HAVE 
BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 1.3) 
 
 
 The Com mittee are of the view that  the global s ecurity scenario has been 
changing drastically and with this change the concept of threat perception has a lso 
changed significantly.  Today, war is not conf ined to conventional methods  of warfare 
but it als o encompasses a host of other th reats, e.g. threat to energy, financial, 
economic and food security, etc., and as such t here is a need to rethink our strategy for 
tackling the various threats to the security of  the nation.  The committee also feel that a 
comprehensive review of the exis ting security advisory mechanism  may be undertaken 
and experts from different fields  like se curity, defence, economy and indus try should 
also be associated with the mechanism.  To face all such threats, it is imperative that we 
have adequate contingency plan and maintain a high level of preparedness and ability to 
react speedily to meet any eventuality. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 The national security  set up including the defence set up was  reviewed by a 
Group of Ministers which subm itted its report on “Reforming National Security System” 
in Feb 2001. The report of GOM wa s accepted by Government and it s 
recommendations are in various stages of implementation. 
  
Appropriate planning is done to  meet the challenges to national security and the 
defence forces are adequately trained and equipped to maintain high lev el of 
preparedness. 
 
 
Ministry of Defence OM No. H-11013/15/2006/D(Parl) dated 15.2.2007 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
(Please see Para 8 of Chapter 1) 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 1.5) 
 
 
The Com mittee note that our Defence fo rces apart from containing threat  
emanating from external source s are also involved in handling various internal security 
operations, inc luding terrorism.  This  is  a di fferent kind of operation, which requires  
specialized training.  T here has also been an inc reasing demand by the State 
Governments for military assistance for mainta ining law and ord er in their States.  The 
Committee feel that it is neit her in the int erest of the Armed f orces nor desirable t o 
deploy them for such purposes.   The Committ ee feel that use of Armed Forces as a 
substitute of the state police force diverts the attention of the A rmy from their prim e 
objective i.e. to safeguard our borders.  The Committee therefore, are of the strong view 
 59

that there should be a separat e specialized force for handli ng such situations and the 
Ministry should take necessary action in this regard. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 In the Union Government, MHA is responsib le for internal securit y matters such 
as maintenance of law and order, tackling insurgency and militancy in the  country.  The 
State Polic e Organisa tions a long with th e C entral Pa ra Military Forces (CPMFs) are 
deployed in handling such situations in t he States.  When the magnitude of these 
problems is perceived to be beyond the capabilit ies of the Police Forces, services of 
Defence Forces are requisitioned in aid to ‘Aid  to Civil Authorities’.  When required, the 
Defence F orces also extend assistance to the affected States by  way of providing 
training to Para Military Forc es and State Police personnel as also in setting up training 
facilities. 
  
The CPOs/CPMFs under MHA are trained to hand le internal security situations.   
CRPF in  the main Central Reserve Fo rce to sup plement the resource s of State 
Government for handling internal  security.  Over the year s, the strength of CRPF ha s 
been augmented and it is bein g trained and equipped to m eet the challenges.  The 
National Security Guards is  a specialised force for ant i-hijacking and ot her special  
operations.  Assam Rifles whic h is under the administra tive control of  MHA and 
operational control of the A rmy has been trained and equipped to handle insurgencies  
and militan cy in the North East.  Rashtriy a Rifles, a force under the administrative 
control of MOD and operational control of Army is similarly trained and  equipp ed for 
handling m ilitancy es pecially in the State of J&K.   In addition,  the Army and other 
Border Guarding Forces are also deployed at times to handle inte rnal security situation.  
Keeping in view, it is the considered view of the Minist ry of Defence that if the 
CPOs/CPMFs under MHA are adequately trained and equipped with the State-of-the art 
equipment, they should be in a position t o effectively handle t he emerging internal 
security challenges.  Theref ore, there already exists a mechanism to handle such 
situations and there is no need to have more Special forces under MOD.   However, the 
subject matter pertains to MHA.  
 
 
Ministry of Defence OM No. H-11013/15/2006/D(Parl) dated 15.2.2007 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
(Please see Para 14 of Chapter 1) 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 1.6) 
 
 
The Committee in their earlier reports  have repeatedly  emphasized on need for  
achieving self-relianc e in defence producti on.  The Committee again reiterate that 
greater thrust should be giv en to strengthen R&D in  Defence s ector on sharing basi s 
with private sector. 
 
 
 
 60

Reply of the Government 
 
DRDO is committed for achieving self-reliance is developing critical technologies 
for use by Armed Forces.  DRDO has be en in volving public a nd private industries i n 
development projects and progr ammes, wherever feasible.  It has involv ed more than 
400 private sector companies in its various  projects and programmes and will continue 
to involv e more Small and M edium Enterprises (SMEs) in new development  projects.  
However, it must be clearly rec ognized that the extent of participation of the privat e 
sector in R&D depends on th e human resources, infrastr ucture and capability and 
commitment created by private i ndustry within its organization.  DRDO can only support 
R&D in private indust ry to the extent that internal organiza tional commitment exists in  
such industries. 
 
In fact, more and mor e R&D type of work is being out sourced directly to private 
industries to enhance  their R&D capability.  DRDO is also assisting such industries  
through knowledge s haring and allowing t hem to  us e special f acilities av ailable wit h 
DRDO for testing. 
 
 
Ministry of Defence OM No. H-11013/15/2006/D(Parl) dated 15.2.2007 
 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 1.22) 
 
 The Committee observe that despite an increase of 7.23 per cent in t he BE 
2006-07 against the BE 2005-06 and 8.94 per cent increase over the RE 2005-06, there 
is still a gap of Rs.5,183.17 crore  between the proj ections made by the Ministry of 
Defence and the allocation ma de in the Defence Budget Estimates for the year 2006-
07.  The Committee note that the projecti ons for funds flow from the Services  
Acquisition Plan, which are examined thoroughl y in the Ministry of Defence and are 
based on t he changing security environment and threat perception.  The Committee, 
therefore, desire that  the Government should take i mmediate steps to bridge the gap 
between the projections and bu dgetary allocation, so  that there is no com promise on 
defence preparedness due to shortfall in defence acquisition programme. 
 
Reply of the Government: 
 
 The gap between Budget allocation for t he year 2006-07 and the projection 
made by the Ministry of Defence was Rs.5, 183.17  crore. However, the entire impact 
was not borne by Modernization Schem es.  Cons equent upon this shortfall, the 
allocation for Capital Acquisition/Modernization schemes was reduced only to the extent 
of Rs.2,153 crore, wit h the re st of the impact being abso rbed by other Capital Hea ds, 
such as Land and Works and the Revenue Heads. 
 
 Modernization of Armed Fo rce is an on-going process  and having regard to the 
trend of expenditure, if need for additional sums  for Capital Acquisition/Modernizatio n 
Schemes is felt, Ministry of Finance will be  approached for supplementary grant at the 
appropriate time. 
 
 61

 As a long-term measure, the entire issue of  voids in defence preparedness has  
been examined in-depth as a par t of the exercise carried out in the Ministry of Defenc e 
for finalizing the 11th Defence Plan and the projection has been made to the Ministry of 
Finance in July 2006. 
 
Ministry of Defence OM No. H-11013/15/2006/D(Parl) dated 15.2.2007 
 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 1.30) 
 
   The Committee note that the rati o of Revenue to Capital expenditure in Defence 
Budget has improved from 75:25 in 2000-01 to 58:42 in  BE (2006-07). This reflects the 
intention of the Government to alloc ate higher share of Defence Budget towards 
modernization process capital expenditure. Ho wever, the Committee note with concern 
that in comparison to Air force and Navy, the percentage share of  revenue expenditure 
of Army is on much higher side i.e. 82.07 percent in  2001-02 and 75.42 percent in 
2006-07 vis-à-vis capital expenditure i.e. 17.93 percent in 2001-2002 and 24.58 percent 
in 2006-07. In BE (2006-07), the Capital Acquis ition allocation of Army i s only Rs . 
6472.50 crore as against Rs. 8803.32 crore provided for Navy and Rs. 14445.01 crore 
for Air Force. The Committee, therefore, feel that the intention of the Ministry to allocate 
higher s hare of Defence Budge t towards capital expenditu re to boost modernization 
does not reflect in the case of Army’s budget. Therefore, the Committee recommend 
that the Government must give serious thought to this aspect and provide highe r 
allocation for Army’s Capital Budget with a vi ew to modernize a nd upgrade its weapon 
systems to enhance it s combat capability to address the requirement s of modern day  
warfare. The Committee further desires the Ministry should submit long term  
perspective plan of the services  to Ministry  of Finance urgently  to get assurance of 
funds so that the modernization process is carried out in a planned and systematic 
manner. 
 
Reply of the Government: 
 
 The higher percentage share of Revenue expenditure in t he Army is due to 
greater expenditure on pay and allowances of the Army, owing to its operational 
commitments and c onsequently its large strengt h as c ompared to Navy  and Air Force.  
Pay & Allowances being oblig atory in nature have to be catered for and as such the 
percentage share of Revenue ex penditure will, to some ext ent, be higher in the Army 
for this reason.   Whereas the Navy and Air Force are Capital int ensive Services,  the 
Army is a manpower intensive Service.  Th e cost of Aircraft, He licopters, various air  
borne systems and weapons, Ships,  Submarines is higher  by several order of  
magnitude than their ground based equivalent systems.  Hence it  is natural that Capital 
expenditure of Navy and Air Force would be higher than t hat of t he Army.  Further the 
budgetary allocation to the three Services have to be need based and not as per fixe d 
percentages, year after year .  Notwithstanding this,  the Capital budget for the Army 
needs to be augment ed with a v iew to modernizing it and steps are being t aken in this 
direction in the 11th Defence Plan. 
 
Capability-based Def ence modernizati on, as envis aged in t he Long Term 
Integrated Perspective Pl an ( LTIPP) and the 11 th Defence Plan projections now 
comprehensively addr esses the long-term m odernization requirements of the Army, 
 62

Navy and Air Force, according due priority  to various projects, after detailed 
consultations between the respective Services and the Ministry of Defence. 
 
 
Ministry of Defence OM No. H-11013/15/2006/D(Parl) dated 15.2.2007 
 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 1.51) 
 
 The Committee note that a time period of 20 to 30 months is required by Ministry 
of Defence for clearing acquis ition cases in accordanc e with the procedure laid d own in 
Defence Procurement Procedur e, 2005. As  also recommended in their earlier reports, 
the Committee would like that the Ministry should give serious thought to it, and work out 
mechanism in cons ultation with concerned agenc ies to cut down levels  and curtail the 
time period. 
 
The Committee note that certain parameters have been laid down by the Ministry 
of Finance for submission of proposals by  the Ministry of Defenc e so as to answer the 
queries prima facie to avoid cross referencing.  Therefore, the Committee desire that the 
Ministry of Defence should strictly adher e to these parameters while s ending the 
acquisition proposals .  The Ministry of Def ence, in consultation with the Ministry of  
Finance should work out a strate gy to have a systematic improvement in clearing of the 
proposals.  If parameters given by the Ministry  of Finance are stringent, the Ministry of 
Defence should take up this matter with Minist ry of Finance in order to cut short delays.   
The Com mittee desire that a sm all core group comprising of official of Ministry of 
Defence and Ministry of Finance should be formed for the purpose. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 Ministry of Defence,  in cons ultation with Ministry of Finance, formulated in 
September 2005 a detailed prof orma that should accompany procurement proposals to  
be examined by MOF. This proforma seeks t he kind of information and det ails that are 
required to examine t he proposals from vari ous angles. All procur ement proposals are 
now sent to Ministry of Finance after provi ding the details according to the proforma. 
This approach would decrease the need for seek ing additional information. The existing 
arrangement would be reviewed to further shorten the time  required for processing the 
cases. Further, Defence Procurement Procedur e (DPP) 2006 also giv es the indicativ e 
time within which the various steps of acquisition proposals are to be completed. 
 
 
Ministry of Defence OM No. H-11013/15/2006/D(Parl) dated 15.2.2007 
 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 1.64) 
 
 The Committee are pained to note that due to delay in finalisation of the Detailed 
Project Report (DPR) and other procedural ma tters, there has been under utilisation of 
allocation under Married Acc ommodation Project (MAP) since 2002-03.  Further, there 
has been about 50%  reduction of  budgetary allocation in RE (2005-06) co mpared to 
B.E. (2005-06) under the project.  As a result of such inordi nate delay, the personnel of 
the three Services suffer a lot.  T he Committee are further given t o understand that the 
 63

Ministry has engaged major consultants from t he private and public sectors to expedit e 
the project.  The Committee are further gi ven to understand that the Ministry has 
engaged major consultants from t he private and public  sectors to expedite the project.  
The Committee  recommend that in addition to  the above, the Ministry of Defence may  
involve private construction companies as  it is being done in a number of mega 
projects.  The Committee hope that the Ministry will take all corrective steps to expedite 
the project so that the in tended benefits are accrued to t he service personnel without 
further delay.   
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 The pac e of expenditure for MAP work in t he initial st age was s low.  Physical 
work could begin only  after the process of identifying and allocat ing work to Exec uting 
Agencies, formulating work procedures for the project in consultation with the Ministry of 
Finance, finalis ing of contra ct agreements with the Public Sector Undertakings in 
consultation with the Ministry of Law was co mplete.  It also took time  to appoint 
Engineering and Project Management Consultants and finalise the terms and conditions 
of their contracts, ful fil st atutory requirem ents and obtain nec essary cle arances of  
central and state bodies. 
 
2. The pace of expendit ure has now picked up.  In the Financial Year 05-06, the 
expenditure incurred under the project was 4.6 times the expenditure incurred in 04-05.  
With the majority of tenders hav ing now b een accept ed, the pace of expenditure will 
further accelerate during Financial Year 2006-07. 
 
3. Private construction companies, vi z Gammons India Li mited, Simplex 
Infrastructures, IVRCL, IDEB Limited,  M AYTAS Limited, Ramky Constructions are 
already executing a number of works rela ting to Married Acc ommodation projects.  
There is no embargo on priv ate construction companies  to exec ute Married  
Accommodation Project.  These companies  have to apply through the open tendering 
process to pre-qualify and bid competitively. 
 
4. Regular monitoring is  being done to ensure timely completion of all on-going  
MAP projects, so that int ended benefits relating to provis ion of married accommodation 
to the Service Personnel are provided as early as possible.   
 
 
Ministry of Defence OM No. H-11013/15/2006/D(Parl) dated 15.2.2007 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
(Please see Para 26 of Chapter 1) 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 2.7) 
 
 The Committee are distressed to note that t he 10th Defence Plan was propo sed 
by Ministry of Defence only in J anuary, 2002, whereas the period of Tenth Plan was to 
begin from April, 2002.  T here has been further inordinate delay in approv ing the plan  
by Ministry of Financ e as  it was approved only in December, 2004.  Although, the 
Ministry of Financ e had agreed, in princ iple, to the latest projections made by the 
Ministry of Defence of Rs.4 ,18,101 crores for the Tenth Defence Plan (2002-2007), the 
 64

total allocation for the Plan is Rs ,3,64,000 crore.  Therefore, there has been a gap of  
Rs.54,101 crore between the indicative figur e and the total alloca tion.  The Committee 
are concerned to note that this gap has re sulted in short fall in s ome of the 
modernisation schemes as some acquisi tion proposals  targeted for the 10 th Plan have 
been postponed and spilled over to the next Plan.  It appears to the Committee that due 
to lack of systematic planning  and proper coordination with  Ministry of Finance, the 
Ministry of Defence has not been able to push  forward their planned proposals. This  
has let to adhocism in decision making, ther eby creating a stumblin g block on the path 
of modernisation and overall Defence preparedness. 
 
 The Committee note t hat acquis ition of ca pital assets and moder nisation flows 
from 15 year long-term Perspective Plan to 5 year Defence Plan and ultimately Annual 
acquisition plan.  It is, therefore, noteworthy that the Ministry of Defence must formulate 
such Plan well in adv ance and  get it approved by the Mini stry of Finance  with firm  
commitment of funds.  The Government mu st evolve a better coordination between 
these two Ministries and work out a systematic  approach to be followed in the years to  
come.  The Committee further recommend that the mid-term review of the Defence Plan 
by the Ministry of Finance ma y be carried out in the f ive years Defence Plans, as it i s 
being done in other Ministries.  The Committee are of the view that Ministry of Defence 
should prepare a long term perspective plan  for the three Servic es and get it approved 
from the Ministry of Finance so that its defence acquisition may not suffer due to lack of 
planning, coordination and timely availability of funds. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
1. A Long Term Perspective Plan already exists in the form of LTIPP 2002- 17.  
However, it is be ing r evised keeping in v iew the like ly availability of funds during th e 
Eleventh Plan and the shift from Equipm ent based approac h to Capability bas ed 
approach, which was approved by the Defence Acquisition Council in June 2006. 
 
2. The process of revision has already been completed by the Navy in the form of 
Maritime Capability Perspective Plan, whic h covers the period 2007-22.  The other two 
Services are in the process of completing this exerc ise of upd ating the LTIPP from 
2002-17 to 2007-22 based on the final projections for the XI Plan period from 2007-12.  
Once these individual plans ar e ready thes e will be integrated into one long-term 
perspective plan and after necessary approv als within the Ministry of Defence, it will be 
taken up with the Ministry of Finance for approval  in pr inciple of the overall size of the 
Long Term Integrated Perspectiv e Plan cov ering the t hree Plan periods from 11 th Plan 
to 13th Plan. 
 
3. As per the timeframe appr oved by the Defence Acquis ition Council, the LTIPP 
2007-22 has to prepared and approved by the Defence Acquisition Council by 31 st 
October, 2009. 
 
4. The Eleventh Plan projections, co vering the period 2007- 12 have, however,  
already been finaliz ed and sent to the Mi nistry of Finance for consideration with the 
approval of  the Raksha Mantri.  The matter is  being p ursued and it is expected that 
necessary approvals will be in place before the commencement of the Elev enth Plan.  
As regards the mid-term review, as sugges ted by the Standing Committee on Defence,  
 65

the issue will be taken up with the Ministry of Finance after the Eleventh Pla n is initially 
approved by the Ministry of Finance. 
 
Ministry of Defence OM No. H-11013/15/2006/D(Parl) dated 15.2.2007 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 2.13) 
 
The Com mittee observe that the 11 th Defence Plan is  presently  under 
examination in the Ministry of Defence and it is expect ed that the entire process of 
finalisation/submission of the Plan to the Ministry of Finance shall be completed around 
June, 2006.  The Ministry of Finance has also  assured that the Plan when received in 
their Ministry, will be returned to the Minist ry of Defence with c omments in a short 
period.   Therefore, the Co mmittee strongly desire that the Ministry of Defence should 
expedite the finalisation of the 11 th Plan and send it to the Minis try of Finance at th e 
earliest.  Early finalis ation of t he Defence plan will give impetus to indi gestion efforts.  
The Com mittee also desire that a Long-Te rm perspective Plan should also be got 
approved along-with the 11 th Plan.  The Committee hope t hat, with proper coordination 
with the Ministry of Finance, the Ministry of Defence would be able to get the approv al 
of the 11th Defence Plan by the month of December, 2006.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 The 11th Defence Plan projections were sent  to the Ministry of Finance for  
consideration with the approval  of Raksha Mantri in July 2006.  After obtaining 
necessary approvals, the Plan is expected to  be in place before the commencement of 
the first year of the 11th Plan, which covers the period 2007-12. 
 
As regards the Long Term Integrated Perspective Plan, the position has been 
explained in response to Para 2.7 of this Report. 
 
 
Ministry of Defence OM No. H-11013/15/2006/D(Parl) dated 15.2.2007 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 3.14) 
 
  
The Committee note with concern that there is decline in share of Army in total 
Defence budget. During 10th Defence Plan, it has declined from 57% in the beginning of 
the Plan to 47% by the end of  the Plan. The Committee, however, further note that 
revenue to capital ratio has improved from 83:17 to 75:25 since the start of 10th Plan but 
It is still ve ry much on the hig her side. Since there are serious  limitations in curtailin g 
revenue expenditure, the Committee desire that the A rmy should focus on increasin g 
capital expenditure. 
 The Committee note that the Army pr ojected a demand of Rs. 7139.50 crore for 
modernisation in the BE 2006- 07. However, only Rs  6472.50 crore were alloc ated 
which is  less than 15% of the t otal Army  budget. The Committee note that reduced  
allocation will have adverse effect on acquisi tion of aircraft, aero-engines, heavy an d 
medium vehicles and speedy modernisation of Rashtriya Rifles. The Committee further 
note that allocation of Rs. 5647 crore provided in B.E.  (2005-06) for Capital acquis ition 
(modernisation) was increased to Rs.6332 cr ore at the R.E. stage. This shows t he 
 66

capacity of Army to absorb additional a llocation of funds for modernisation. T he 
Committee feel that Indian Army besides com bating external s ecurity threats are also 
involved in tackling int ernal security problems and disaster management and therefore, 
should be equipped with moder n armaments weapons and equipments with special 
attention to infantry soldiers. The Committ ee, therefore, recomm end modernisation of  
Army should be undertaken vigorously on prio rity basis and sufficient allocation be 
made for the purpose. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
1. In FY 2005-06, the BE a llocation of Rs.5,647 Crs fo r Capital Modernisation was  
increased t o Rs.6,332 Crs at RE stage, pr imarily to cater for certain New Schemes  
which fructified during the FY.  As far as the Revenue expenditure is concerned, it is  
based on Annual Pr ovisioning Review and cannot be curtailed.  Howev er, correct 
projections based on various inputs is bei ng ensured at RE s tage to obviate any  
over/under projection of funds. 
 
2. There has been a steady increase in the numbers of new schem es each year as 
regards modernization of the Army.  Th e modernisation is b eing undertaken in a 
phased manner and there are a number of schemes, which are on the threshold of 
being contracted. The demand for additional funds for New Schemes (Modernisation ) 
would be made at RE stage, depending on the progress of New Schemes of FY 2006-
07. 
 
3. The case f or Modernisation of Rashtriy a Rifles battalions was  initiated in Dec  
2003, whic h includ ed enhance ment of firepower, surveilla nce capabilities , personne l 
protection and night fighting ca pability.  Pending finalisation of  scales for Rashtriy a 
Rifles, the proposals for weapons and equipment were based on the scale as approved 
for Infantry to enable Rashtriy a Rifles battalions t o perform its primary (Counter  
Insurgency) and secondary (augmenting Army in conventional operations) roles.   
 
4. The moder nization of Infantry has been taken up as  a major focus area wit h 
suitable provision for the entir e range of  modern weapons and equipments from  
enhanced firepower , state-of-the-art night vision capability, better surveillanc e 
capability, mobility protection, personnel protection to airborne facilities.    
 
 
Ministry of Defence OM No. H-11013/15/2006/D(Parl) dated 15.2.2007 
 
Recommendation (Para No.3.17) 
 
 The Committee are constrained to n ote that the quality of the night fighting 
devices held by the Army is not fully at par with the advanced countries.  Th e 
Committee observe that war winning capability of any country is determined not only on  
the availability of sophistic ated lethal weaponry but  also capability to identify and 
accurately strike the enemy in the dark gives the nec essary edges to our for ce against 
enemy. 
 
 67

 The Committee therefore desir e that our country must be ahead from the 
neighbouring countries in particular in quality of night fighting devices for the security of 
the country. 
 
 The Committee, therefore, recommend the Governm ent to make concerted 
efforts to acquire the latest  state-of-art devices with Transfer of Technology (ToT ) 
urgently so that armed forces are fully equipped with night fighting devices by the end of 
10th Plan period.  Simultaneously DRDO in partner ship with  private sector should 
undertake development of these sophisticat ed equipment so that self reliance can be 
attained in the vital area.  The Indian manufacturer industries should be encouraged for 
developing the technology. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Night Fighting Devices 
1. Equipping of the Army with Night Fight ing Devices  is a continuous proc ess.  
Army had included the prioritized requirem ent of Night Fighting Devices  in the Service 
Capital Ac quisition Plan (SCAP) during the 10 th Plan period.  Followin g major 
acquisitions related to night vision devices have been done during 10th Plan: - 
(a) Thermal Imaging Stand Alone Sights for Mechanized Forces. 
(b) Hand Held Thermal Imaging Sights for Infantry and Rashtriya Rifles. 
(c) Night Vision Sights for Sniper Rifles held by Infantry and Rashtriya Rifles. 
(d) Night Vision Devices for Forward Observation Officers of Artillery and 
Mortar Fire Controllers of Infantry. 
2. As a result, a part of the requirem ent has already  been ac quired. The other 
remaining planned requirement is also proposed for acquis ition during the 10 th Pla n. 
Moreover, Army has identified Night Fighting Capability as one of the top  priorities 
for 11th Plan and included more Night Fighting Devices in the 11th Plan SCAP.   
 
Ministry of Defence OM No. H-11013/15/2006/D(Parl) dated 15.2.2007 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 3.21) 
 The Committee note that the Army need 280 Tracked and Wheeled Guns and 
procurement from a single ve ndor M/s Denel has  been put on hold.  Therefore, the 
Committee recommend that whenever the proc urement of any type of weapons system 
is decided, Procurement Board should alwa ys have at least three vendors on the panel 
so that in case of any irr egularities from the vendor sele cted, the other vendors on the 
panel can be considered and delay in procurement can be mini mized.  In the present  
case the committee desire that all out effo rts should be made to procure the Guns at  
the earliest. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Defence Procurement Procedure 2006 (DPP 2006) has been implemented in 
September 2006 to make t he procurement process trans parent and efficient and to 
encourage a multi-vendor si tuation. As regards t he procurement of the Self-Propelled 
Guns (Wheeled and Tracked), cases for procurement of 100 numbers of Tracked SP 
guns and 180 numbers of Wheeled SP guns have been re-initiated in accor dance with 
DPP 2006, after having formulat ed new GSQRs separately for both Tracked and 
 68

Wheeled SP gun s. The RF P f or both the cases is  cu rrently in the proc ess of being 
issued on a multi-vendor basis. 
 
Ministry of Defence OM No. H-11013/15/2006/D(Parl) dated 15.2.2007 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 3.28) 
 
“The Committee are deeply concerned about t he progress of Arjun Tank as its 
production schedule are going very slow.  The Com mittee, as recommended in their 
earlier reports, desire that Ordnance Factory in coordination with DRDO should carry out 
suitable m odifications in ‘Gunners main sight’ and ‘Gun control system’ of the Arjun 
Tank at the earliest and hand over the rectified Tanks to the Army 2007-08.  The 
Committee also stres s that time limit pr escribed should not be f urther extended. The 
Committee also desire that accountability for delay in production of the Arjun Tank may  
be fixed”. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
All the technical issues in the Gunner’s Main Sight and Gun Control System have 
been resolved. Suitable modific ations hav e been c arried out in these sub-systems on 
the initial five tanks of MBT Arjun by DRDO, the agency involved for conception and 
development of the project. After successful DRDO evaluation, five tanks h ave already 
been handed over to Army on 20 th Jun 2006. Army has been invited for Joint Receipt  
Inspection (JRI) of Nine more tanks. The JRI is lik ely to commence from 1 st week of  
February 2007. It is expected that a total of 29 MBT Arjun tan ks will be ready for  
inspection by Army by the end of March 2007.  The concern of the Committee for fixin g 
up accountability for delays is noted.  In a project of this magnit ude involving design,  
development, manufacturing, an d integration of div erse te chnologies, de lays normally  
happen due to technical hitches in perfecting the technology   
 
 
Ministry of Defence OM No. H-11013/15/2006/D(Parl) dated 15.2.2007 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
(Please see Para 38 of Chapter 1) 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 4.23) 
 
The Committee are dismayed to note that some of the ships inducted in Navy are 
operating without radars and most of the radars fitted on ship s are imported.  Moreover, 
most of the missiles, under in duction of the Armed F orces, are also imported, whic h is 
reflective of serious incapab ility of our indigeno us R&D efforts.  The Committee are 
further constrained to note that only one DPSU i.e. Bharat Electronics Limited (BEL) has 
the infrastructure and capability to design and manufacture radars.  The Committee also 
note that L&T c ompany ha s been projected as an impo rtant partner in radar 
development in collaboration with BEL.  Also, assistance for some electronic system and 
important modules is  being s ought from other private co mpanies.  The Committee feel 
that involv ement of private companies in  the development of r adar technology is  a 
positive effort.  The Committee are of the vi ew that DRDO an d priv ate se ctor should 
intensify their R&D efforts in order to make Radars indigenously, side-by-side with 
purchase of Radars from foreign countrie s.  The Committee further desire that  
 69

Government must sign agreem ent for procur ement of radars under ‘buy  and  make’ 
provisions of the new proc urement procedure so that dependence on foreign countries 
for radars can be minimized.   The transferred technology  and design m ust be shared 
among DRDO, Ordnance Factor ies, Defence PS Us and Priv ate Sect or engaged in 
Defence production for further modernization of  existing technology and  developing the 
new ones.  This strategy will not only he lp the DRDO to develop their own infrastructure 
and technology base but will also contribute  substantially to the production systems, 
thereby achieving cost effectiveness of  the products and reducing dependence on 
imports in the long run.   
 
Reply of the Government 
 
DRDO has  develope d ‘Revathi’ 3D-Surveillance rada r for Corvette Class of 
Ships and order for two number s has bee n received by BEL from Navy.  DRDO ha s 
also developed SV 2000 Radar for Naval Air Borne application for Naval ALH and which 
is also configured for dornier Platform. 
 
Private Sector PSUs should in tensify R&D efforts to ma ke radars indigenously  
side-by-side with purchase of radars from foreign countries. 
 
For involvement of D efence Sector PSUs/ Private industry in indigenous design 
and dev elopment of radar, DRDO has propos ed the following programmes for such 
design and development in respect of Fire Control Radar for Combat Aircraft, Lo w 
Level Transportable Radar, Medium Pow er Radars, 3D Tact ical Control & Short  
Range Radars during 11th Plan period. 
 
Ministry of Defence OM No. H-11013/15/2006/D(Parl) dated 15.2.2007 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 5.13) 
 
 The Committee are constrained to note t hat, keeping in view the ever-increasing 
delay in operation clearance of  LCA, early induction of the same as IAF squadrons 
seems to be an unrealistic proposition.  T he Committee are given to understand by the 
Ministry that the order for 20 numbers of LCA had alr eady been placed an d remaining 
100 LCA would be made available during the 11th and 12th Plan period.  Keeping in view 
the slow development and repeatedly revision in the schedule of LCA, the committee 
recommend that Government should also expl ore alternate option to import the aircraft 
on ToT  so that squadron str ength at any  time may not fall below the 39.5.  The 
Committee also desire that Ministry to strive hard to intensify their efforts to achieve the 
authorized squadron strength during the 11th and      12th plan period. 
Reply of the Government 
The Government have accorded Acceptance of Necessity (AON) for 126 Medium 
Multi-role Combat Aircraft (MMRCA) for which RF P is likely to b e issued shortly.  The 
proposal envisages purchase of the initial lot of aircraft as ‘buy’ and the remaining  
number being manufactured in India under  licence produc tion with ToT.  The 
Government are also progressing the case for procurement of additional 40 SU-30 MKI 
aircraft.  Beside this,  steps are being taken to ensure early operation clearance of LCA. 
 
Ministry of Defence OM No. H-11013/15/2006/D(Parl) dated 15.2.2007 
 70

  
Recommendation (Para No. 5.22) 
 
The Committee note the immens e role of forc e multiplier in Indi an Air Force viz. 
Flight Refueling Aircraft (FRA) and Airborne Warning & Control System (AWACS), which 
are able to enhance the capability of other weapon sy stems presently deployed with Air 
Force.  The Committee note that India has not yet developed a pla tform for ex ploiting 
the role of FRA, thus, Transfer of Tec hnology (ToT ) has not been sought for its 
indigenous development.  The Ministry has, however, made significant progress on the 
procurement of three AWACS to be fitted on IL-76 aircraft which are due to be inducted 
by 2009.  The Committee also note that the Government has decided to develop the 
technology on the lines of AWACS and has, t herefore, initiated the project on the 
development of Airborne Early Warning & Control (AEW&C) aircraft, which is likely to be 
developed by April 2011.  The Committee, therefore, keeping  in v iew the role of force 
multipliers, recommend that the efforts for the indigenous development  of AEW&C 
aircraft should be intensified.  The Ministry s hould also take initiatives to involve private 
entrepreneurs/ agenc ies in the design & development of critical components of the 
equipment under the ageis of DRDO on sharing basis.      
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Since the requirement of Flight Refueling Aircraft  (FRA) was limited, it was 
considered appropriate to procure the same.  The iss ue of indigenous dev elopment of 
capability of production of Flight Refueling Aircraft  will depend on numbers requir ed 
and viability of such indigenous projects.   
 
It is agreed that the efforts on indigenous Airborne Earl y War ning & Control  
(AEW&C) system should be int ensified AEW&C aircraft for a complementary role of  
Airborne Warning and Control System (AWACS) has been launched.  A large number of 
system development activities have been initia ted and based on initial des ign, some o f 
the system/hardware have been ordered.   O perational Requirement parameters have 
been finalized and platform choice has been firmed up based on disc ussions with Air 
HQrs.  A signific ant role for pri vate design and development houses, and nationa l 
laboratories (other than DRDO) exists in the programme.  The current AEW&C 
programme can lead to a variety of variants.  These include early warning of land based 
weapon launches by the enemies, maritime surveillance etc.  These are to be exploited  
in future programmes. 
 
 
Ministry of Defence OM No. H-11013/15/2006/D(Parl) dated 15.2.2007 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 5.34) 
 
 The Com mittee note that most  of the aircraft viz. MiG se ries aircraft, Jaguar,    
Sukhoi-30, etc composing t he combat fleet of Air Forc e have become old and outdated 
and therefore require immedi ate upgradation / repl acement to make the Air Force 
squadrons vibrant, responsiv e and combat wort hy.  The Com mittee feel that efforts  
being taken by the Ministry for their upgradat ion are in t he right direction and should go 
on in a routine manner, as and when required, to keep the fleet up-to-date and meet the 
constantly increasing challenges of Air Defence. 
 
 71

Reply of the Government 
Upgrade of MiG-21 Bi s, Jaguar (Nav WASS ) and MiG-27 aircraft is expected to 
be completed by 2006-2007.  Upgrade of Jaguar (DARIN I) and Mirage-2000 aircraft are 
planned during the 10 th and 11 th Plan periods.  A contract has been concluded for the 
upgrade of MK I  Phase I and Phase II aircraft to Phase III standards. 
 
Ministry of Defence OM No. H-11013/15/2006/D(Parl) dated 15.2.2007 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 5.35) 
  
The Comm ittee note that while entering in to the negotiation for procurement of  
Sukhoi-30 Aircraft, upgradation of the Aircraft, as and when required, was also provided  
for in the contract.  After the need for its upgradation was realised by t he Indian Air  
Force, the matter was taken up with the Russian Government.  The Russians, after 
making technical assessment of the economic feasibility of its upgradation, informed that 
the same could not be taken up due to thre e reasons viz. for accommodating the thrust  
vector control engine,  the r ear portion of the fuselage  needed to be ent irely changed; 
entire primary load structure required to be c hanged; and the canard which gives super 
maneuverability in Sukhoi-30 MKI needed to be fitted on a special structure in the 
fuselage.  The Committee also note that th is matter has been examined in consultation 
with the DRDO, HAL and the Air Force and thus the decision has been taken for the 
swap deal meaning that a certai n number of Sukhoi- 30 aircraft will be sent to Russia 
which will be replenis hed with MKI features .  The Committee further note that, keeping 
in view the multi role features of the Su khoi-30 MKI, negotiation for its procurement has 
been signed sunder which 50 such aircraft have been imported and further licenced  
production of 140 aircraft is already going on at HAL. 
 
In view of the foregoing, the Committee feel that t he Ministry  should explor e 
economic f easibility fo r upgradation of Sukh oi-30 a ircraft and further recommend that 
the Ministry should c ontinue with the ongoing product ion of MKI version of the aircraft  
which has the capability to enhance the air strike capability of the Air Force. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 A contract for upgrade of SU-30 MKI Phase-1 and Phase-2 aircraft to SU-30 MKI  
Phase-3 has been c oncluded with Russ ians.  Further, a proposal for swap of SU-30K  
aircraft with new SU- 30 MKI  Phase-3 airc raft is under consideration.  Also,  production 
schedule of SU-30 MKI aircraft at HAL has been compressed with a target of completing 
the licensed production of SU-30 MK air craft by 2014-2015 against 2017-2018  as   
envisaged earlier. 
 
Ministry of Defence OM No. H-11013/15/2006/D(Parl) dated 15.2.2007 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 72

Recommendation (Para No. 5.41) 
  
 The Committee note that the various featur es of Fifth Generation Fighter Air craft 
(FGFA), as enunciated by the Mi nistry of Defence, are far more advanced as compared 
to that of the existing aircraft available with Indian Air Force.  Presentation on the aircraft 
has been made by the Sukhoi Design Bur eau and RAC MiG and the proposal is still 
under examination.  Also cons ultations are going on with Russ ian Government in this 
regard for joint development.  The Committee are informed that Indian Air Force is  
finalising the Air staff require ments for the FGFA and  the concept for i ts development 
has not yet been finalised.  The Committee, t herefore, recommend that the Ministry  
must give serious thought to finalise t he concept of FGFA at the earliest.  The 
Committee also wish to be apprised periodically by the Ministry of the progress made in 
this regard. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The Committee constituted under the Chairm anship of Secretary, Department of 
Defence Production has recommended the steps to  be put up in plac e to progress the 
programme.  ‘In princ iple’ approval has been accorded in J anuary, 2007 for a joint 
development of the  Fifth Generation Fighter Aircraft (FGFA) with Russians. 
 
Ministry of Defence OM No. H-11013/15/2006/D(Parl) dated 15.2.2007 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 5.46) 
 
  The Committee note that the Air Force is facing shortage of Helicopters in its fleet 
and is in the process of acquiring various types to augment the fleet.  The Committee 
are concerned to note that the procurement of heavy  category multi-role Helicopters is  
still at the conceptual stage.  The Committee, therefore, str ongly feel that the Ministr y 
must give utmost pri ority to the procur ement of requirement- based Helicopters wit h 
assured availability of funds for the same.  The Ministry should also immediately finalise 
the procurement or joint development of multi-role Helicopters for the Air Force. 
 
Reply of the Government 
Government have signed a c ontract for pr ocurement of 10 Cheetal helicopters 
with M/s Hindustan Aeronautics Li mited (HAL).  Proposals for procurement of additional 
Advance Light Helicopters  from HAL and Medium Lift Helicopters  (MLH) from 
Russia are also under progress. 
 
Ministry of Defence OM No. H-11013/15/2006/D(Parl) dated 15.2.2007 
 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 6.13) 
 
The Committee note that the percentage ex penditure on R&D in 2 006-07 is 6.13 
percent of the Defenc e Budget.  The Committ ee desire the Ministry to make efforts t o 
increase the percentage expendit ure on R&D so as to improve self-reliance in defence 
production. 
 73

 
Reply of the Government 
 
 
In the Budget Estimate 2006-07,  Defence R&D Budget is 5453.73 which is about 
6.13% of the Defenc e Budget. DRDO has  not  had any proble m in getting financia l 
resources in the past. However, all efforts will be made to allocate more funds for R&D. 
 
 
Ministry of Defence OM No. H-11013/15/2006/D(Parl) dated 15.2.2007 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 6.16) 
 
The Committee note t hat the inv olvement of the user with DRDO  is v ery limited, 
thereby the final product lack the facilities  and qualities as per the requirement of the 
user.  The Committee recommend that user mu st be involved at the concep tualization 
stage so that defects, if any  may be rectified during produc tion stage itself and deliver y 
of the product to the user may not get delayed for a long time. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
At present, Users Representative are members in Monitoring Committees/Boards 
in the Staff oriented projects, which meet periodically, to review the progress, give future 
directions and take necessary decisions, incl uding mid-course corrections, as and when 
required. 
 
Further, the Users have positioned their re presentatives as part of Project Teams 
in the DRDO laboratories undertaking the Staff Projects. 
 
DRDO will also follow the recently  app roved “Make category” procedure  
prescribed by the Ministry of Defence in which the Us er and Production Agencies are 
involved in the project from the concept stage, to minimize any defects which may occur 
during production stage and to avoid unwanted delivery delays. 
 
As some projects have large realization time, continuation of “User Officers”  in 
the projects up to field trials should be ensured by the Service HQrs. 
 
 
Ministry of Defence OM No. H-11013/15/2006/D(Parl) dated 15.2.2007 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 7.7) 
 
 The Committee are concerned t o note that  there are serious shortages in force 
level of Coast Guard.  Against the aut horized strength of 158 comprising 106 vessels 
and 52 aircraft, the present force level is only 111 comprising 66 vessels and 45 aircraft.  
The Committee are unhappy that force leve l has  been allowed to fall below the 
authorized strength due to non-acquisition of requisite number of vessels over the years 
which are procured through indi genous construction by Indian Shipyards.  On the one 
hand, the coast guard fleet has depleted, on t he other, ship building capacity of  
 74

shipyards has been under util ized due to low order book position.  The Committee 
therefore earnestly desire that the Ministry should take effective steps to place sufficient 
orders to shipyards for constructi on of ships for Coast Guard and induct them in a time-
bound manner.  In this connection, the Committee desire the Ministry to fully utilize the 
increased allocation in BE for 2006-07 and if required they should ask for more funds at 
the supplementary stage.  The Committee further desire that the Coast Guard 
Development plan, approved by Raksha Mantri may also got approved by the Ministry of 
Finance so that necessary allocation can be made by Ministry for implementation of the 
plan.  
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 The Annual Acquisition Plan of  Coast Guard for the year 2006-07 has been 
approved by the Defence Proc urement Board and acquisiti on activities  are being 
undertaken as per laid down pr ocedure. As regards the recommendations relating t o 
Coast Guard Development Plans (CGDP) fo r the XI plan period, the case has been 
forwarded to the Ministry of Finance afte r approval of Raksha Mantri. Cases for  
induction of 15 new ships and 223 new air craft in addition to smaller craft have bee n 
included in the XI Plan. 
 
 
Ministry of Defence OM No. H-11013/15/2006/D(Parl) dated 15.2.2007 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 7.10) 
 The Committee are given to  understand that protection  of T amil Nadu Coas t 
against infiltration has been entru sted to the Indian Navy and the Coast Gu ard.  Coast  
Guard ships and aircraft remain on continuous patrol/surveillance duty in the Palk  Strait 
and Gulf of Mannar.  The Comm ittee note that  along the international maritime border, 
joint patrolling between Coast Guard and Sri Lankan authorities are conducted to ensure 
that there are no transgression of fisherm en.   The Committee further observe that  
despite several steps being taken by the Gove rnment, several fishing vessels are ver y 
often misguided on the Tamil Nadu coast and ta ke the route to Sr i Lanka, and thus the 
fishermen fall under their custody.  Besides, incidence of smuggling of narcotics, Petrol 
and diesel has increased in that region.  The Com mittee observe that same kinds  of 
problems are prevailing in other coastal r egions also.   Th erefore, the Committee 
strongly recommend that Government should intensify their joint patrolling  operation 
between the Coast guard, Indi an Navy and authorities of other respective countries, in 
order to strengthen and maint ain high level of vigilance to contain the increas ing 
incidence of smuggling and protect the interests of people of coastal region, in general 
and the Fishermen in particular. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
1.  The Ministry has taken note of the concerns expres sed by the Committee.  It 
may, however, be clarified that the Coast G uard is responsible to ensure safety and 
protection of offshore installa tions, to protect fishermen,  to take search and rescue 
(SAR) measures, to take measures to prevent marine pollution as well as to assist other 
Governmental agencies in anti-smuggling and anti-poaching operations by patrolling the 
Maritime Zone of India.  The Indian Navy is responsible for t he overall maritime security 
 75

of India.  There is a close coordination between the Indian Navy and the Coast Guard in 
discharge of their assigned roles. 
 
2. The Indian Navy and the Indian Coast G uard carry out intensive patrollin g under 
Operation Tasha using hovercraft, surface ships and aircraft, on the Indian side of the 
International Maritime Boundary Line (IMBL) in Palk Bay for monitoring fishing and other 
maritime activities; preventing terrorists fr om using the sea and pr eventing smuggling of 
contraband across the IMBL.   Similarly, t he Sri Lankan Navy also c arries out regular 
patrol on their side of IMBL.  
 
3. The Coast Guard, the local police and port authorities r egularly advise the fishing 
community not to cross the IMBL.     
 
4. Close patrolling is carried out by the Coast Guard al ong the Tamil Nadu coast, in 
coordination with the Narcotics Control Bureau.  Seizure of narcotics was carried out on 
7 January 2006, 19 February 2006, 20 Febr uary 2006 and 12 March 2006.  Overall 
there were five incidents of interception of contraband from J anuary to July 2006 whe n 
the Coast Guard has caught smuggled goods worth Rs. 228.58 crore during patrolling.     
 
5. Similarly, intensive patrolling by  the C oast Guard in coordina tion with the Indian 
Navy and State authorities, along the Guja rat and Maharashtra coast is  carried out  
under Operation Swan.   
 
6. In addition, the Ministry of Home Affa irs have also started a scheme for patrolling 
by the coastal police stations  of the Coastal St ates and Union Terri tories in the sea 
close to the coast, to prevent smuggling and illegal tr afficking.  This will supplement the 
efforts of the Indian Navy and Coast Guard.   
 
7. The Indian Navy and t he Sri Lankan Nav y have als o agreed on measur es to 
ensure compatible c ommunication and e xchange of information between the units  
patrolling o n both sid es of the IMBL.  The se inc lude the establishment of a hotlin e 
between t he two Navies; establishment of  a common communications network for 
exchange of information to rule  out mutual interference; conduct of quarterly flag 
meetings at the IMBL betw een the two countries; and c onduct of bi-annual o perational 
review meetings between the two Navies. 
 
8. An MoU was signed on 3 rd October 2005 between the Indian Coast Guard and 
Pakistan Maritime Security Agency on the establishment of communication link fo r 
exchange of information betwe en the two agencies on violation of each other’s  
Exclusive Economic Zone (EEZ ), pollution incid ents affecting the EEZ of two countries , 
the searc h and rescue operations as  per international c onventions, natural 
disasters/calamities, smugglin g and illicit trafficking in nar cotics.  Consequently, the 
communication link between the Indian Coast Guard at Coast Guard Headquarters, New 
Delhi and Pakistan M aritime Security Agen cy Headquarters at Karachi, Pakistan was 
inaugurated at 1030  hrs (IST) on 14 th November  2006 and the communication is 
exchanged every Wednesday at 0930 hrs. 
 
 
Ministry of Defence OM No. H-11013/15/2006/D(Parl) dated 15.2.2007 
 
 76

Recommendation (Para No. 7.15) 
 
 The Committee are happy to note that  as a result of the Committee’s  
recommendation in their 5 th Re port on ‘the Canton ment Bill,2 003’,  Def ence Estate  
Organisation (DEO) has initiated a project to  computerize records  of Defenc e lands all 
over the c ountry. The Committee feel that this pos itive step wil l go a long way in 
streamlining the defence land records. The Committee are informed that the project will 
be implemented in three phases in a period of  15 months. The first stage of the project 
has already started. The pr oposal for sanction of the se cond and third stage is under 
examination of the Mi nistry of Defence.  The Commi ttee therefore desir e that the 
Ministry should approve the second and third st age’s of the project at  the earliest an d 
implement the same in letter and spirit without any loss of time. 
   
The Committee would also like to be appr ised of the Grant-in-Aid given to th e 
deficit Cantonment Boards for last 10 years and the steps ta ken by the Government to 
make them self-reliant.   
Reply of the Government 
The aspec t of security of land r ecords in t he context of computerization and 
placing it in network was required to be examined in consultation with the Army 
Headquarters.  It has been proposed that  the computerization pr ogramme be 
implemented in stages.  To begin with, digitization of existing records is to be 
implemented.  Once the system is stabilized and s uitable security solutions arrived at, 
the data will be put in the internet to enable data sharing by respective users. 
 
The details of Grants-in Aid provided to the Cantonment Boards during the last 10 
years are given as under:- 
 
Sl. No. Year Amount of Grant-in Aid (in Rs.) 
1. 19996-
1997 
15,00,00,000 
2. 1997-1998 18,70,00,000 
3. 1998-1999 22,00,00,000 
4. 1999-2000 21,78,00,000 
5. 2000-2001 22,43,28,000 
6. 2001-2002 23,96,80,000 
7. 2002-2003 25,98,00,000 
8. 2003-2004 25,00,00,000 
9. 2004-2005 29,97,00,000 
10. 2005-2006 30,98,25,000 
 
Out of 62 Cantonment Boards, 35 Boards have become self-sufficient. Various 
steps have been taken to augment the resource  base of the cantonment boards.  Thes e 
include self financing schemes for develop ing s hopping complex, community centres 
etc.  Revision of rates and taxes  are also u ndertaken.  The Government also release s 
service charges to the Cantonm ent Boards  so as to undertake de velopment projects 
without straining the local funds  at the disposal of the c antonment boards.  The various 
restrictions on the recruitment and filling up of vacancies are also made applicable to the 
Cantonment Boards so as to cut down expenditure on establishment charges. 
 
 
Ministry of Defence OM No. H-11013/15/2006/D(Parl) dated 15.2.2007 
 77

 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 7.17) 
 
 The Com mittee observe that the propos al for restructuring of DEO is u nder 
examination of t he Ministry of D efence and it is proposed to  be implemented over a 
period of five years. The Com mittee hope t hat organizational rest ructuring will bring 
democratic reforms in the administration  of DEO which inc lude dec entralization, 
transparency, accountability and simplificat ion. The Committee des ire that in t he 
restructuring process, stress should be given on proper training of officers & staff of 
DEO. Besides, the regular trai ning in Land & Reve nue, the officers should a lso b e 
imparted training in handling sensitive situation involv ing general public whose 
land/property has been taken over.  The Commi ttee hope this will enable the officers to 
effectively interact with the aggrieved parties / individuals showing sensitivit y to their 
grievances. The Committee, therefore desire that the Government should take 
appropriate view to the matter and apprise the Committee. 
  
Reply of the Government 
 
 Directorate General of Defence Estates have submitted a proposal for  
restructuring of Defence Estates Organisa tion.   T he propos al is being examined 
keeping in view the existing Government policy of optimization of staff.  
 
Directorate General of Defence Estate s have also set up a training institute 
called National Institute of Defence Estates Management in Delhi Cant onment for 
imparting training to the IDES (Indian Defence Estates Service ) Probatione rs, officers 
and staff of the Defence Estates Organisa tion and Cantonment Boards. 18 training 
courses have been scheduled for the year 2006-07 of whic h 2 have already been  
concluded. At the in stitute, training courses on Acqu isition and Rehabilitation, Key  
issues of Public Health, Land Management and computer courses in M S Office for 
officers and staff of Defence Estates Organisation and Cantonment Boards are offered. 
Courses for senior officers include training  in e- governance, Ve rtical Mix Programme 
and refresher courses. 
 
 
Ministry of Defence OM No. H-11013/15/2006/D(Parl) dated 15.2.2007 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
(Please see Para 62 of Chapter 1) 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 7.20) 
 
 The Standing Committee on Def ence (14th Lok Sabha) in their 5 th Report on ‘the 
Cantonments Bill, 2003’ had recommended to amend various provisions of the Bill and  
bring a separate Bill on Defence lands other than the cantonment. The Com mittee are 
unhappy to note that despite their having pres ented the report on  Bill in Parliament in 
May, 2005, the Government has not brought t he revised Cantonment Bill in Parliament  
even after a lapse of one year. Out of 62 C antonments, 61 are vari ed and there is an 
urgent need to hold elections in these cantonments, so t hat the elected boards as  
envisaged in the Bill are in place for smooth admin istration. The Committee, therefore, 
 78

desire the Ministry of Def ence to expedite the matter for placing the modifie d 
Cantonments Bill, 2003 in Parliament so t hat the new Cantonment  Act can be enac ted 
at an early date. The Committee further desi re that a separate Bill on the m anagement 
of defence land as recommended by the Commi ttee in their above report may be 
brought urgently in Parliament.   
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 The Cantonments Act, 2006 (41 of 2006) has  since been notified in the Official 
Gazette and it has commenced with effect from 18th December, 2006. 
 
In view of the above, the constitution of all the 62 Cant onment Boards had to be 
varied to meet legal requirements.  Necessary steps are being taken, in accordance with 
the Cantonments Act, 2006 to hold election to all the Cantonment Boards.  Elections will 
be held after completing the requisite legal/statutory formalities. 
 
The Government has also acc epted the Committee’s recommendation f or a 
separate Bill for the manageme nt of defence lands other than cantonments and a ne w 
Bill has already been drafted for the management of defence lands and military stations 
outside cantonments.  This has  been circ ulated to the three services to obtain thei r 
views/comments. 
 
 
Ministry of Defence OM No. H-11013/15/2006/D(Parl) dated 15.2.2007 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 8.14) 
 
The Com mittee note that Ex-Serviceme n Contributory Health Scheme (ECHS) 
made operative from 01 April 20 03, which aimed at provid ing comprehensive medical 
care to the Ex-servicemen (ESM) and their dependents through 227 ECHS Polyclinics to 
be establis hed throughout the c ountry by 31 March 2008.  T he Committee, howev er, 
find that Ex-Servicem en Contributory Heal th Scheme is applicab le to pensioners only  
thereby depriving about sixty percent of the Ex-serv icemen to avail this  necessary  
medical facilities.  The Committee, therefor e, desire that Government should set up a  
Committee to examin e this issue thoroughly in order to extend  ECHS fac ilities to all 
those Ex-servicemen. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
        The Ex-Servicemen Contributory Health Schem e (ECHS) was sanctioned by the  
Government of India for providing compre hensive medical care to the ex- servicemen 
who are in receipt of pension/family pension/ disability pension and their dependents.  It 
is considered necess ary to link eligibility to  some minimum servi ce rendered.  To be in 
receipt of pension is a reasonable criteria in  this regard.  The non-pensioners are either  
those who  left the military serv ice voluntarily for their personal reasons or those who  
were removed as a result of departmental  action on disciplinary grounds.  The 
Government does not favour extending th e scheme to non-pensioners due to above  
reasons and because of wide ranging financial implications.  
 
Ministry of Defence OM No. H-11013/15/2006/D(Parl) dated 15.2.2007 
 79

        
Recommendation (Para No. 8.16) 
 
 The Committee learnt that keeping in vi ew of hardship being faced by the Ex-
Servicemen, some State Governments have al lotted surplus land to the retired Armed 
Forces personnel.  The Committee in view of above fact, desire that Government should 
take up the matter with the State Governments to make a policy to allot available surplus 
land in their State to retir ed Armed Forces personnel.  The Ministry of Defence shoul d 
also explore the possibility to allot Defence surplus land other than Cantonments land to 
Ex-Servicemen for Housing projects. 
 
Reply of the Government 
  
 Government have been requesting the State Governments/UTs from time to time 
to identify suitable pockets of  land in the Districts for pr omoting Housing Colonies and 
also reserve a certain percentage of house si te/houses for the ex-servicem en in their  
States.  Most of the State Government s have reserved house sites/houses for ex-
servicemen etc, percentage of  reservati on ranging from 2% to 10%.  One State 
Government viz. Sikk im have reserved 50 % houses/house sites for ex-servicemen of 
their State (a Statement in this regard is enclosed). 
 
 Recently, on 25 th J uly, 2006, Ministry of Defence have requested Chie f 
Secretaries/Administrators of all States /UTs to suitably frame a policy  regarding  
allotment of land to ex-servicemen. 
 
 As regards allotment of Defence surplus land other than Cantonments land to ex-
servicemen for housing projects, it is stated that Ministry of  Defence acquires land fo r 
the specific needs of Armed Forces.  There is  deficiency of defence land for its own  use 
by Armed Forces. 
   
Ministry of Defence OM No. H-11013/15/2006/D(Parl) dated 15.2.2007 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 9.4) 
 
 The Committee are happy to note that 4 th World Milit ary sports will be h eld in  
Hyderabad and preparations are being made fo r this purpose.  The Committee would  
like to complement the Defence Forces the good performance of their personnel who 
participated in internat ional lev el ev ents viz. the Commonwealth Games, Olympics  
recently. The Committee would like the Defence Forces to explore the areas where they 
can compete with international  st andards and chalk  out a Plan to train and motivate 
their personnel in those sports.  The Defenc e Forces should also send more personnel 
to take part in national and international events.  The Committee also des ire that Navy 
should encourage water sports among its pers onnel and necess ary funds be provided 
for promotion of the same.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 The Indian Armed Forces will conduct 4th Military World Games in Hyderabad and 
Mumbai in the month of Oct ober, 2007.  Competitions  will take place in fifteen sports 
disciplines viz. Military Pent athlon, Shooting, Parac huting, Track & F ield, Triathlon, 
Swimming, Sailing, Boxing, Wrestling, Judo, Football, Handball, Volleyball, Field Hockey 
 80

and Kabadi.  Infrastructural facilities to be provided f or conduct of these games are 
nearing completion. 
 
With a v iew to compete with internat ional standards  and gain experienc e to 
enhance performance of Services teams in the ensuing International sporting events, 
these teams took part in the Military World Champions hips conducted  by member 
nations of International C ouncil of Military Sports (CIS M) in the year 2006-2007.  The  
Services teams will a lso take part in the fo rth coming Nationa l Games.  Nodal centres  
for training of services teams especia lly for the Military World Games 2007  have been  
established.  The Mission Olympics Wi ng (MOW) has been set up at Army 
Headquarters comprising of the Army Sports Institute (ASI), Pune and its fiv e nodes for 
providing world c lass infrastr ucture and training in ten disc iplines namely; athletic s, 
archery, boxing, div ing, eques trian, rowing,  shooting, weight lifting, wrestling and 
yachting. 
 
As far as encouragement of water spor ts among Naval personnel is concerned 
10 Water Training Centers have already been established by  the Indian Navy to 
promote Sailing, Wind Surf ing, Kayaking & Canoeing and rowing with n ecessary funds 
support.  The Navy, as a first step, has als o planned to conduct competitions at Fleet  
and Command level in Rowing and Kayaking & Canoeing from the year 2007 onwards. 
 
 
Ministry of Defence OM No. H-11013/15/2006/D(Parl) dated 15.2.2007 
 81

CHAPTER – III 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOTE 
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF GOVERNMENT REPLIES 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 2.19) 
 
 
 The Committee are happy to not e that as a result of repeated recommendations  
of the Committee in their earlier reports for the creation of the pos t of Chief of Defence 
Staff (CDS), the Ministry of Defence has issued lette rs to National and St ate level 
political parties in March 2006 to begin politi cal consultations with them on the issue of  
establishment of the post.  The Committee des ire that since alr eady inor dinate delay  
has taken place, the Government must ex pedite the matter and come to a consensus  
for establishment of CDS, whic h is the need of the hour to face the changing nature of  
war in the 21 st century.  The Committee w ould like to know the progress made by the 
Government from time to time in this regard. 
 
 
 The Ministry, in their action taken reply have stated : 
 
“The process of cons ultation with political parties has  been initiated by iss uing 
letters to National and State level politic al parties by the Raksha Mantri on March 
2, 2006, eliciting their  views on the esta blishment of Chief of  Defence Staff.  A 
reminder has been is sued by the Raksha Mantri on June 12, 2006 and again on 
11 January 2007.  Replies from four politic al parties only have been received so 
far and replies from the majority of the po litical parties are still awaited.  The 
decision in the matter will depend on a larger consensus on the issue. 
 
 
 
Ministry of Defence OM No. H-11013/15/2006/D(Parl) dated 15.2.2007 
 
 
Regarding the views of the Minist ry of Defence for handing ov er the task of CDS 
for joint planning, joint training, joint operation, implementation and joint doctrine to Chief 
of Staff Committee till the  matter is finally decided, the Minist ry of Defence in the ir 
written reply stated :- 
 
“Pending decision on setting up the instit ution of CDS, Headquart ers, Integrated 
Defence Staff has been set up under the Chie f of Integrated Defence Staff to the 
Chairman, Chiefs of Staff Committee (CISC) in 2001 to support the Chiefs of Staff 
Committee and its Chairman in the opt imum performance of its roles and 
functions, bringing together and coordi nating several functions common to the 
Services.  Planning functions, includi ng the formulation of Long Term and Five 
 82

Year Plans have been brought under the In tegrated Defence Staff and Strategic  
Force Command.  Tri-Service commands like the Andaman and Nicobar ‘theatre’ 
Command etc have been set up to prom ote to jointness and synergy in 
operations.  Defence Intelli gence agency coordinates inte lligence inputs from the 
Service int elligence directorates and al so provides  interface with the other 
intelligence agencies like RAW, NTRO, IB etc.  In the fiel d of training sever al tri 
service ins titutions lik e National Def ence Academy, Defence Services Staff 
College and Colle ge of Defence Managem ent (CDM) have been brought under  
the Joint Training Committee of HQ IDS.   Raks ha Mantri has als o re cently 
released the Joint Doctrine for the three Services. 
 
Therefore, it may be stated that pending creation of CDS t he COSC with 
assistance of CISC and HQ IDS is  perfo rming the f unctions of CDS to a large 
extent. 
  
 
 83

 
 
 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 4.5) 
 
  The Com mittee note that, keeping in view the ever-increasing maritime 
interests of the country, Indi an Navy has a major role to play  to safeguard the nation on 
both economic and strategic fronts.  To effe ctively discharge the above role there is an 
urgent need to augment the capability of the Navy by induction of so phisticated state of 
art Naval equipment  and platf orm.  The Co mmittee, therefore, recommend that t he 
development/procurement of the various Naval equipment should be taken up on priority 
and adequate availability of fund s must be ens ured by the Government so as to boost 
the capability of Indian Navy. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 To continue effectively discharging its strategic and economic role, the Nav y is 
processing several acquisition proposals t o augment  its surface, underwater and air  
capabilities. Several approved proposals are also at various stages of completion.  
These inc lude the induction of aircraft carr ier ex-Admiral Gorshkov, submarines, and 
war ships. 
 
 To addres s these gr owing challenges, the Navy’s XI  Plan projections cater for 
induction of equipment and platforms to achieve the augmentation of its capabilities. The 
plan is expected to be finalised soon.  
 
 
Ministry of Defence OM No. H-11013/15/2006/D(Parl) dated 15.2.2007 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 4.10) 
 
  
 The Committee are unhappy to note that t he Ministry of Defence has outrightly  
rejected the feasibilit y for creation of ne cessary infrastructu re for undertaking the 
construction of the third aircraft carrier stating that such facilities  are ava ilable only at 
M/s Cochin Shipyard Limited, Cochin and not at any other public sector shipyards.  The 
Committee are unhappy at such a situation and recommend that, keeping  in view the 
requirements of three aircraft carriers, nece ssary infrastructure should be created in 
Defence public sector shipyard on priority and required manpower be deploy ed so as to 
start the construction of third aircraft carrier. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 The issue of constructi on of indigenous air craft carrier was cons idered and not 
found feasible at the Defenc e Public Sector shipyards namely Mazagon Dock Ltd at 
Mumbai; Garden Reach Shipbuilders & Engineers Ltd. at Kolkata & Goa Shipyard Ltd at 
Vasco due to the channel s ize, draft restrict ion and non availab ility of buildin g dock/dry 
dock commensurate to the dimensions of the aircraft carrier. 
 
 
Ministry of Defence OM No. H-11013/15/2006/D(Parl) dated 15.2.2007 
 
 84

Recommendation (Para No. 4.12) 
 
  
 The Committee also note that in compar ison of the American air craft carrier USS 
Nimitz, our aircraft carriers INS Viraat and Admiral Gorshkov, stand nowhere in terms of 
various features viz. dim ension, displacement and airc raft carrying capacity.  The 
Committee, therefore, recommend that the f eatures of the Air Defence Ship, already  
under cons truction at Cochin Shipyard should  be re-examined and steps be taken t o 
match the capabilities of the best aircraft carr ier to the extent pos sible.  The Committee 
wish to be apprised periodic ally of the progress being made by the Ministry on both 
these fronts. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 Indigenous Aircraft Carrier (IAC) is the fi rst ship of its kind being constructed in 
the country.  Designing and construction of a ship of the size of an aircraft carrier 
requires a very high degree of expertise and cons iderable refinement in s hipbuilding 
processes.  Therefore, it is  quite pragmatic to make a beginning with a light aircraft  
carrier and thereafter graduate to heavier airc raft carriers after attaining requisite 
experience and maturity in shipbuilding processes.  In addition, at present CSL, Cochin, 
is the only yard that can construct a carrier with the dimensions of the IAC.  Further, due 
to channel size, draft restriction and non availability of building dock / dry dock 
commensurate with the dimensions  of the aircraft carri er, construction of a ship of the 
size of USS Nimitz ( Length – 339.2 m Breadth – 78.6 m) is currently not feasible.  
However, in future, possibilities may be explored to create infrastructure in s hipyards for 
building larger aircraft carriers and large vessels in the country. 
 
 
Ministry of Defence OM No. H-11013/15/2006/D(Parl) dated 15.2.2007 
 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 5.23) 
 
 The Committee are concerned to note that  there is inadequate coverage with the 
existing network of radars available with Air Fo rce, resulting in signi ficant gaps all over 
the country particularly at peninsular India,  thereby making it  vulnerable to sudd en 
attacks due to failure of timely detection.  The Committee note that some efforts in the 
right direction for indigenous manufactu ring of radars have been initiated by the 
Government.  The Committee feel that radar  surveillance is s uch an iss ue whic h can 
hardly be put on side track and therefore recommend that in  additio n to indigenous  
efforts for manufacturing, impor t options should also  be taken up on priority and the 
Government should not hesitate to ma ke adequate funds available for their 
procurement. 
Reply of the Government 
To provide adequate c overage of radars, following proc urement cases in respect 
of Low Le vel Transportable Radars  (LLTRs), Medium Pow er Radars  ( MPRs), and 
Low Level Light Weight Radars (LLLWRs) are being progressed. 
 
Ministry of Defence OM No. H-11013/15/2006/D(Parl) dated 15.2.2007 
 
 
 85

Recommendation (Para No. .5.38) 
 
 The Committee are pleased to note that the Hindustan Aeronautics Limited(HAL) 
has attained commendable manufacturing capabilities , which operates through its five  
companies, consisting of 16 divisions and 9 R&D centres spread across the country.   
Starting from Jaguar, Su-30, AJT to ALH and Cheetah Heli copters and upgradation of  
various MiG series aircraft,  the Organisation is involved in multifarious  production 
system.  The Committee feel that, with the present organizational set-up, it is difficult for 
the HAL to cope with the ever-increas ing ass ignments involving cutting-edge 
technologies.  The Committee,  therefore, reco mmend that to bri ng about better and 
efficient management  of the Organisation  and competitiveness among its five 
companies, the HAL should be convert ed into full fledged separate PSUs with 
independent Boards of Managem ent.  The Com mittee also stress that wherever 
required, HAL must resort to outsourcing of  various sub-systems to private agencies s o 
as to achieve cost-effectiveness to the manufacturing activities. 
  
Reply of the Government 
1.1 Presently,      HAL is working as five Business Groups as detailed below: 
 
(a) Bangalore Complex:    Comprising all the Production Divisions situated in 
Bangalore(except Helicopter Division) for manufacture & overhaul of Western and 
Indigenous aircraft. 
(b) MIG Complex: Comprising all the pr oduction Units and R&D Centres at 
Nasik and Koraput for manufacture and overhaul of Russian designed aircraft. 
(c) Accessories Complex: Comprising all the produc tion units and R&D Centres  
at Lucknow, Hyderabad, Korwa and Kanpur , supply ing Access ories & Avionics 
Systems to other complexes. 
(d) Design Complex: R&D Centres in Bangalore fo r indigenous  developm ent of  
aircraft. 
(e) Helicopter Divisions: also forms part of Des ign Complex for implementation 
of ALH project. 
 
1.2. These Complexes are headed by  Managing Directors and have independent  
Committees of Management to oversee the performances of the Divisions / R&D 
Centres working under them. 
1.3. Divisions of HAL are or ganized functionally  into Airc raft, Engines, Helicopt ers, 
Avionics & Accessories (Mechanical & In strument Systems).  The operations 
between various units are closely inter-rela ted.  Divisions in  t he Accessories 
Complex s upply systems to all Aircraft & Engine Divisions.  Engine Divis ions 
supply engines to Aircraft Divisions.  There is continuous interaction between the 
R&D Centr es and the production Units to implement the devel opment of such 
projects.  Such close coordination can be ensured only by having all the Units 
under one organization. 
 
1.4. Aviation Industry is c apital intensiv e bec ause of the sophisticat ed equipm ent 
required for the high and technological pr ocesses involved.  It is therefore 
desirable that such facilities are established within the same organisation to meet  
the requirements of all the business groups.  For inst ance, the Single Cr ystal 
Directionally Solidified  Blade cas ting facilit ies being e stablished at Koraput wil l 
cater to the requirements of both MiG and Bangalore Complexes. 
 86

 
1.5. It is because of the need for such  close c ooperation and synergy and the high 
costs of investments that majo r Aerospace Companies are f orming 
conglomerates to implement their programmes.  United Technology Corporate in 
USA, EADS, SAF RAN, F in Meccanica  in Europe are some of such 
conglomerates which have wide range of Aerospace products in their produc tion 
area.  This arrangement of working under one umbrella giv es them the benefit of 
availability of wide range of  res ources, economies of  scale and deployment of  
best practices of technology, engineer ing and business ov er a range of 
programmes. 
 
1.6. It may also be mentioned her e that  HAL has absorbed a wide variety  of 
technologies from Russia, Europe & USA through transfer of technologies f or its 
products.  The present organizational struc ture is conducive to exchange of  the 
best technological practices for its programmes in different production units. 
 
1.7. The present system of these busi ness gr oups has been working well wit h the 
synergy between all the constituent production Units and R&D Centres. 
 
1.8. The Company is ma naged by  a Management Committ ee which includes the 
Chairman, the Managing Directors of  each Complex and three functional 
Directors for Corporate Planning & Marketing, Finance and Personnel and 
Administration.  The Company  is gov erned by a Board of Directors, whic h 
includes all the me mbers of Management  Committee, Government 
representatives and independent Directors. 
 
1.9. Thus, Restructuring HAL into separate PSUs would not be desirable. 
 
2.0 HAL has been one of the fo rerunners in involving Privat e Sector in the areas of 
Defence Production.  The Committee’s recommendation on outsourcing of  
various sub-systems to achieve cost effe ctiveness has been given priority .  In 
new programmes like SU-30, ALH, LC A etc., outsourcing has been expanded 
substantially from initial component manufacturing stage to Assembly Modules as 
well HAL has over the years inc reased its outsourcing value as indicated below 
towards the objective. 
      ( Rs. Crores) 
 Value of Outsourcing 
2003-2004   98.7 
2004-2005 181.9 
2005-2005 262.1 
 
Ministry of Defence OM No. H-11013/15/2006/D(Parl) dated 15.2.2007 
 
 
 
 
 
 87

Recommendation (Para No. 5.49) 
 
  The Committee note with serious concern that most of the missile firing unit s of     
Air Force are extremely old vintage with no  spare support and no substantial efforts 
being taken to upgrade or replace them.  In  the cas e of Pec hora Missile System, 60 
firing units  procured from Russia are 197 4-90 vintage and as  on date only 50 are 
operational and by the end 200 6 only 24 would be left oper ational.  The procurement 
plan to replace the Pechora System is still at the RFP stage which will not fructify earlier 
than 2008.  As far as OSA-AK System is concerned, the technology is quite outdated 
and is facing shortage of missile and spares. The overhauling of this system is planned 
to be done to extend its life.  T he project of procuring firing uni ts for the same is at CNC 
stage.  Lik ewise, IGLA Missile System is also obsolete and 80 percent of the missiles  
are on life extension.  The Committee further note that some indigenous  efforts for 
replacement of the existing systems have been taken with insignificant success, thereby 
resulting in critical voids. 
 
The Committee, therefore, keeping in vi ew the ageing and obsolete missile firing 
units currently at disposal of Air Force and lackadaisical approach of the Government for 
their modernisation, strongl y recommend that the Government should pay enough  
attention to the upgr adation and modernisation of the missile firing  units to enhance air  
strike capabilities of Air Force, which ha s been ignored since long.  The Committee also 
desire that adequate funds for their modernisation and procurement must be ensured. 
 
Reply of the Government 
The Government have planned acquis ition of Low Level Quick Reaction Mis siles 
(LLQRMs), Medium Range Surf ace to Air Missile (M R SAM), Akash Missile, BrahMos  
Multi Spectral Sensor, and also replacement of IGLA missiles during 11th Plan period for 
modernizing missile firing units of the IAF. 
 
 
Ministry of Defence OM No. H-11013/15/2006/D(Parl) dated 15.2.2007 
 
Recommendation (Para No.  8.11) 
 
The Committee note that Financ e Minister in his Budget speech announc ed new 
pensionary benefits to retired Armed Force Personnel whereby increased weightage will 
be given for the purpose of calculation of pension subject to maximum qualifying service 
of 30 years.  While appreciating the announcem ent, the Committee observe that it still 
does not fully meet the demands  of ex-servicemen as full pensionary benefits are given 
to PBOR only on completing 33 years of service.  The Committee, in view of the fact that 
armed forces personnel are retired com pulsorily at a younger age than civilian 
employees, desire that Government should examine their demand sympathetically. 
 
Reply of the Government: 
 
The issue of removal of 33 years of condition and/or enhancement of weigh tage 
to the extent of making Armed Forces pers onnel eligible for full pensio n admissible for 
33 years qualifying service was c onsidered in detail by the Government.   Considering 
all relevant factors includ ing financial implic ations and reperc ussions elsewhere, a 
 88

conscious view was t aken to enhance the we ightage in the cas e of Sepoy , Naik an d 
Havildar to 10, 8 and 6 years respectively s ubject to maximum qualifying service of 30 
years.  H owever, if a person is getti ng pension for more than 30 years with the 
weightage of 5 years, he will continue to get that.  It has not been found feasible to grant 
benefit of 33 years qualif ying service to the PBOR irres pective of length of actual 
qualifying service rendered. 
 
 
Ministry of Defence OM No. H-11013/15/2006/D(Parl) dated 15.2.2007 
 
 
Recommendation (Para No.  8.13) 
 
The Com mittee note that the Govern ment have announced t he setting up of 
Sixth Pay Commission for Central Government  employees.   In view of altogether  
different job requirements of defence s ervices in peace and war situation, the 
Committee desire that separate Pay Commission be constituted for Defence Service or  
a representative from Armed Forces be in cluded in the proposed Commission so that 
interests of the Armed Forces Personnel could be looked after in the right perspective. 
 
Reply of the Government 
Government of India appoint s as a policy only one C entral Pay Commission for 
all Central Government employees.   A re quest was made to the Ministry of Financ e 
and Sixth Central Pay Commissi on to appoint a person with Service backgr ound in the 
Sixth Central Pay Commission as a Member / Adviser. The name of a retired Lt.General 
was also s uggested to the 6 th Pay Commission for appointment as Adviser.  However, 
the Commission has f elt that there was no need for appointment  of an Adviser as the 
Commission would give full opportunity to the Armed Forces to place their views before 
the Commission. The Services can directly  interact with the Commission and present 
proposals, demands and special problems of the forces in the right perspective.  
 
 
Ministry of Defence OM No. H-11013/15/2006/D(Parl) dated 15.2.2007 
 
Recommendation (Para No.  10.7) 
 
The Com mittee note that the Armed Forc es, besides securing borders of our 
country also assist the civil authorities in  m aintenance of law and order situation and 
rescue and relief operations during natural  and man made disasters.  The Committee 
would like to applaud the commendable job per formed by the Armed Forces during a ll 
kind of dis asters.  The rescue and relief operations of Def ence forces in the wak e of 
Tsunami, earthquake in J&K and other calamiti es besides giving valuable relief to the  
people have also affirmed their faith in defence forces.  The Committee note that  
Defence s ervices incur substantial expendi ture in various operations  in dis aster 
management.  The expenditure of such oper ations/assistance are incurred by  the 
Armed Forces themselves at the first instances and subsequently are reimbursed by the 
concerned State Gov ernments.  The Com mittee desire that a p rovision be made to 
keep separate contingency fund for disast er management within t he Defence services 
so that timely and adequate relief could be extended to the affected people.   
 89

The Committee further observe that the role of the Defence Services in managing 
various kinds of disasters has been outlin ed in Crisis Management plan and is  
dovetailed into the Standard Op erating Procedures (SOPs) wh ich is being formulated.  
The Defence Crisis Management Group (DCMG) in the Ministry of Defence coordinates 
with all concerned agencies in the management of disasters.   However, the Committee 
feel that the Ministry should co nstitute a core group of military Disa ster Management for 
better coordination among the three services  and meet the nati onal disasters mor e 
effectively.  
 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
Though National Dis aster Management Act, 2005 lays down mechanism  and 
provisions for exhaustive National Disa ster Management stru cture throughout the 
country, Armed Forces remain as the firs t responder whenev er m anaging disaster is  
beyond the capacity of the State. 
  The role of various Ministries in m anaging various types of disasters have been 
laid down in the Act and the Standar d O perating Procedures (SOPs) are being 
formulated.   
The Ministry is cons idering a proposal, in  consultation with Ministry of Home 
Affairs/National Disaster Management Authority to pre-locate Composite Disaster Relief 
Bricks in various parts of the country to facilitate quick response.  
As regards the recommendation of the Committee for setting up of Core Group of 
Military on Disaster Management  for better c oordination among the three Services an d 
meet the National Dis asters effectively, a  Defence Crisis Mana gement Group (DCM G) 
already exists with the purpose of performi ng the s ame role.  This  arrangement i s 
considered adequate. 
 
Ministry of Defence OM No. H-11013/15/2006/D(Parl) dated 15.2.2007 
 
 90

CHAPTER – IV 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF 
GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE 
 
Recommendation (Para No 1.4) 
 
The Committee are aware of the rapid technological advancements and changes 
taking place globally in the warfare technolog y and feel that there is an imperative need 
to constitute a high level empowered Com mittee to examine the entire sec urity gamut 
and suggest reforms including re-structuring of the Armed forces, as may be necessary 
to meet any eventuality in the future.  The committee not e that there has been no 
thorough review of the structural set up of the Armed forces since independ ence, 
especially of the Army whose strength constitutes almost ninety percent of our defence 
forces.  The need of the hour is to optimally use the available limited resources.  For a 
country like India, there are several budgetary constraints even for the defence forces  
and, therefore, the f und allocated have t o be utiliz ed judiciously.  The proposed 
Committee should be given the mandate to s uggest suitable manpower restructuring by 
way of trimming the force size (teeth to tail ratio) with co rresponding increase in the use 
of advanced and sophisticated technology in our Armed forces;  review the authorization 
the peace and war establishments which are existing since the second World War.  The 
Committee should als o examine the relevance of involvement of the Defenc e forces in 
non-defence activities like military farms, stud farms and other such activities that can be 
outsourced.  It is high time to effect s ubstantial sav ings within the available Defe nce 
budget for restructuring and mo dernizing our forces.  The entire defence budget is  a 
Government Budget without an y other source and hence t he s avings bec ome all the 
more important. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 The process of restructuring of armed forces is a continuous one, which is carried 
out by eac h Service Headquarters based on threat assessments.  There are Standing 
Establishment Committees in th e three Services whic h review the structure of various  
service establishments periodically and based on their recommendations the 
establishments are restructured from time to time. As and when there is requirement of 
raising of new units / estab lishments, the same is also considered on case to case 
basis. In addition the entire security system was also revi ewed by a Group of Ministers , 
which submitted its report in Feb 2001.  The recommendations of the GoM were 
accepted by the Government and are in vari ous stages of implement ation. Induction o f 
advanced and sophis ticated technology is also  ens ured in a planned manner through 
acquisition procedures as laid down in Defence Proc urement Procedure (DPP) 2006.  
Proper and timely utilization of  funds is also closely moni tored through the institutional 
system put in place.   
 
Ministry of Defence OM No. H-11013/15/2006/D(Parl) dated 15.2.2007 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
(Please see Para 11 of Chapter 1) 
 
 
 
 91

Recommendation (Para No.  1.43) 
 
The Committee note with serious concer n that B.E.(2005-06)  of Rs.83000 crore 
was reduced to Rs 81700 crore  in R.E.(2005- 06) stage thereby showing a reduction of 
Rs 1300 cr ore.  The reduction has also be en made in capital budget whic h has been 
reduced from Rs. 34375 crore in BE (2005-06) to Rs. 33075 crore in RE (2005-06) even 
though there were enough projects with Ministry in the pipeline. In this connection, the 
Committee were informed by the Ministry of Finance that the reduction has been  made 
after due consultation at the Minister’s leve l taking into account the actual trend of  
expenditure during the year. Upto December 2005, the c apital expenditure was only  
41%  of the allocation made in the BE (2005-06). 
 
Further, the Committee were given to  understand that Rs . 2646 crore was 
surrendered by Ministry of Defence at the end of financial ye ar 2005-06 due to non-
fructification of envis aged schemes. The Commi ttee feel that this clearly  shows the 
inability of the Ministry of Defence to timely  plan and  process the cases so  as to bring  
them to the concluding stage during the first three quarters of the financial year so as to 
secure financing of projects provided in the Budget.  Expressing strong displeasure, the 
Committee feel that t here is  a need for better financial plannin g and management in 
Ministry of Defence.  The large scale su rrender of funds at t he end of the year has  
eroded the ir credib ility and  ability to utilis e the a llocated funds  wh ich are  so mu ch 
required for modernization/up gradation of  defence forces.  The Committee further 
observed that rush of proposal in the last m onth of initial year and  hurried expenditur e 
gives room for import and disco urage the indigenisation.  The Committee, therefore, 
recommend that the Ministry should analyse the whole issue an d monitor the progress 
of Capital expenditure more closely.  In this regard, the Committee wish to reiterate their 
recommendation made in their earlier Report that the Ministry should mak e advance 
planning in order to submit  a calendar for acquisition during the year with firm  
commitment to the Ministry of Finance.  Th is will facilitate optimum utilization of scarce 
resources alloc ated for ‘Defence’ and timely completion of schemes / projects  
envisaged by the Ministry of Defence to maintain highest level of Defence 
preparedness. 
 
Reply of the Government: 
It is correct that BE 2005-06 has  been redu ced by Rs.1300 crores.  But it w as 
reduced by  Ministry of Finance at the RE  stage though Ministry of Defence had not  
indicated any surrender.  It is also true that 41% of the Capital expenditure was spent till 
December, 2005.  While Ministry  of Defenc e were in the pr ocess of planning to spe nd 
the allocation, due to reduction at RE stage these could not be implemented. 
 
2. The total gross surrender of Rs.2646 cr ores at the Modified Appropriation sta ge 
was the net result of supplem entary grant of Rs.542.50 cr ores taken in some Grants 
during the year, net reduction of Rs.1300 cr ores at RE stage, further reduction of  
Rs.888.66 crores at MA stage and increase in Receipts/Recoveries of Rs.85.20 crores. 
  
3. It has always been the endeavour of the Ministry of Defence to evenly spread the 
pace of expenditure in four quarters so as to  avoid rush of expenditure in the last  
quarter.  The progres s of expenditure is closely monitored on monthly basis and Inter-
Departmental Monitoring Groups have also been c onstituted in the Ministry to monitor  
 92

the progress of expenditure on weekly bas is in the  last quarter of the financial year .  
Defence pr ocurement particularly acquisition  cases, follows a c ertain cycle and cas h 
outflow is linked to fixed mi lestones (of supplies).  Any  slippages at the Supplier’s  end, 
which are not within the contro l of Ministry of Defence, lead to under utiliz ation. Th e 
surrenders have, however, not resulted in u nplanned procurement from foreign sources 
or had an adverse impact on the indigenisation  process of the Services. 
 
4. However, without compromising on transparency and accountabaility, the 
existing procedures as laid down in the De fence Procurement Procedure are reviewed  
from time to time so as to streamline the procurement modalities and cut down delays , 
which  will help in avoiding surrender of funds.   
 
 
Ministry of Defence OM No. H-11013/15/2006/D(Parl) dated 15.2.2007 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
(Please see Para 17 of Chapter 1) 
 
Recommendation (Para No . 1.55) 
 
  The Committee observe that there are many procurem ent cases with the 
Services which cos t less that Rs. 50 cr ore.  The entire pr ocurement includes 
categorization, acceptance of necessity, qua lity vetting, technical evaluation trials, 
contract negotiation and placement of supply order of these cases, which consumes a 
lot of time in getting the proposal cleared by  the Ministry.  The Co mmittee are informed 
that the Ministry of Defence has modified the procedure for Price Negotiation Committee 
(PNC).  They have delegated this power to the Service Headquarters in case of revenue 
purchase and are planning to extend this to the capital procurements also.  Therefore, 
the Committee recommend that the Government should del egate the entire processing 
of cases of acquisition, both in the case of revenue and capital, upto Rs. 50 crore to the 
Service Headquarters and Rs. 300 crore to the Raksha Mantri as per the priorities of the 
Services.  Appropriate fi nancial delegation s hould also be given to the Defence 
Secretary for capital acquisition. 
 
The Committee strongly feel that the delegation of power will reduce the work load of 
the Ministry of Defence, allowing them more  time for processing proposals of higher  
cost, thereby clearing the proposals of higher cost, thereby clearing the proposals well in 
time and bringing improvement in the utilization of allocated funds.  This will also reduce 
the time taken on procurement and ensure time availability of the procured items. 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
  
Revised delegation of financial powers to various Indian Air Force authorities has 
been issued on 14.7.2006. 
 
As per these powers, Air HQrs have be en empowered with financial powers for 
procurement on the Revenue side as under:- 
 
 93

(a) Import Rs.20 crores 
(b) From indigenous sources Rs.20 crores 
(c) From PSUs Rs.30 crores 
(d) On PAC basis (all categories) Rs.10 crores 
(e) On Single Tender basis (all categories)         Rs.2 crores 
 
Ministry of Defence OM No. H-11013/15/2006/D(Parl) dated 15.2.2007 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
(Please see Para 20 of Chapter 1) 
 
Recommendation (Para No . 1.58) 
 
The Committee, in their earlier reports  had recommended for creation of a non–
lapsable Defence Modernization Fund (DMF) to streamline the Procurement Procedure 
and to ens ure timely availability of Funds for acquisition of Defence equipment.  The 
Committee have bee n informed that utility of DMF in addressing  the issue of assured  
availability of funds woul d be limited s ince unspe nt f unds of DMF would not be 
automatically available to the Ministry of Defence for utilizatio n in s ubsequent financial 
year and the Ministry of Defenc e would be required to seek  approval of Ministry of  
Finance and Parliament for its utilization.  
 
The Com mittee observes that during 20 05-06, there were large number of 
proposals in the pipeline, but since they co uld not be approved in time there was  large 
surrender of funds at the end of  financial year.  Had all the cas es in the pipeline wer e 
cleared, the Ministry would hav e required addi tional alloc ation.  As proc urement of 
Defence equipment requires a long lead time  ranging from two to three years, the 
proposals which do not fructify i n a financial y ear, normally spill over to next financia l 
year.  Ther efore, the Committee strongly r ecommend that the Minist ry of Defence a s 
well as Ministry of Finance mus t reconsider the proposal for setting up of DMF at the 
earliest.  T he Commit tee are of the view t hat if the planned a nd assured budgetary 
allocations are made known to t he Services, then the capital ac quisition schemes and 
long term plan can be drawn up within the f unds available with the DMF in a systematic 
manner as  per futuristic requir ements.  The Committee strongly recommend that  
Defence M odernization Fund (DMF) should be used only for the priority projects and 
not for all projects.   
 
Reply of the Government: 
  
The modernization of Defence Forc es is an on-going process and under  
utilization of funds in a financial year does not result in dropping of any proposal.  The 
process of modernization throug h new acquisitions, however, inherently involves lon g 
gestation periods.  As intimated earlier,  the creation of non-lapsable Defence 
Modernization Fund (DMF) has a lim ited utility in as m uch as the funds available in th e 
DMF would not automatically be available to the Ministry of Defence for utilization in the 
subsequent financial year and t he Ministry would be required to seek approval of the 
Ministry of Finance an d the Parliament for i ts utilization.  The Ministry of Finance hav e 
 94

also issued guidelin es/instructions on 7 th January, 2005(copy enclosed) whereby  
Reserve/Corpus Funds in Gov ernment a ccount are created when Government has  
surplus funds to spare on specific objects of expenditure.  However, as Government is  
resorting to deficit financing,  creation of funds out of it s revenue stream or throug h 
borrowing is consider ed not appropriate.  F unds created out of borrowings also add to 
fiscal defic it and bec ome a liab ility of the Government.  These instruc tions furthe r 
provide that proposals for creation of funds either out of revenu e stream or out of  
Government borrowings will, henceforth, not be allowed.  In the ci rcumstances creation 
of Defence Modernization Fund may not be viable. 
 
 
Ministry of Defence OM No. H-11013/15/2006/D(Parl) dated 15.2.2007 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
(Please see Para 23 of Chapter 1) 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 2.21) 
 The Committee note that the proposal for setting up of  Indian Nat ional Defence 
University (INDU) has been formulated an d selection of site is g oing on.  As t he matter 
has been long delayed, the Committee desire the Ministry to taken an early decision in 
this regard and start functioning  at the earliest. The Committee desire that th ey may be 
apprised of the progress from time to time. 
 
Reply of the Government 
The issue relating to the selection of a suitable location for establishing the Indian 
National Defence University  (INDU) is under the active  consider ation of the 
Government.  Extensive consultations on this  issue are in progres s, among others, with 
the Chiefs of Staff Committee (COSC). 
 
 
Ministry of Defence OM No. H-11013/15/2006/D(Parl) dated 15.2.2007 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
(Please see Para 29 of Chapter 1) 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 3.22) 
 
The Committee are constrained to note t hat DRDO has not undertaken research 
work on development of 155 mm SP Gun despite the Co mmittee’s recommendation in 
earlier rep ort.  The Committee again rec ommend that DRDO  should init iate research 
work for development of 155 mm SP Gun so  that the country does not depend on 
foreign suppliers for this crucial equipm ent.  The Committee further recommend that 
while signing the contract for procurement of Gun, Transfer of Technology (ToT) should 
be obtained from the exporting country. 
 
 
 
 95

 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 In March 1994, Army issued a GSQR No. 621 for development of 155 mm GP 
Gun system.  In 1996, the GSQR 621 was amended and in the amended version the 
barrel length was mentioned as 45/52 calibre, in addition to other aspects. 
 
As an int ermediate option, in F ebruary 1997, VCOAS req uested Defence 
Research and Development Organisation  ( DRDO) to carry out feasibility on th e 
integration 155 mm o f T-6 and AS-90 turrets on the Main Battle Tank (MBT) Arjun  
derivative Chasis.  T -6 (South Africa) and AC-90 ( UK) conform to GSQR 621.  By 
June 1998 Combat  Vehicle Research & Development Est ablishment (CVRDE)  
configured and fully prepared tw o prototypes Arjun derivat ive Chasis (PPS-1 and PPS-
2) to integrate these turrets.  In the summe r months of 1998, the development cum user 
trials were done and only the T-6 turret was tria l evaluated, as AS-90 did not participate.  
T-6 turret mounted on Arjun der ivative Chassis was named as Bhim T-6.  Again during  
1999, extensive us er trial were carried ou t on Bhim T-6 and the Army trial team 
recommended its induction.  The iss ue of indent for production of   155 MM  Bhim T-6  
has got delayed due to suspens ion of all d ealings on M/s Denel as per G overnment 
decision. 
 
Ministry of Defence OM No. H-11013/15/2006/D(Parl) dated 15.2.2007 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
(Please see Para 32 of Chapter 1) 
 
Recommendation (Para No . 3.40) 
 
  The Committee note DGQA is responsible  for Quality assurance of all defence 
stores and equipment, both imported and indigenous for the Army, Navy(excluding naval 
Armaments) and common user items for the Ai r Forc e procured from all s ources viz  
private sector, public sector undertakings and ordnance factories. 
 
   The Committee also note the shortcom ings of DGQA for which it has been 
severely criticized by t he Comptroller and Auditor General (CAG).The Committee would 
like the Ministry to seriously examine the CAG report and take c orrective action in this  
regard. The Committee may be apprised of the action taken by the Government in this 
regard and how it proposed to restructure the DGQA in the light of the CAG report.  
 
  The Committee further note that the pos t of Director General(QA) has bee n lying 
vacant since 31 st August, 2004 due to stay order granted by the High Court. The 
Committee feels that Government  has not made serious efforts in this direction. Since 
DGQA is a key organisation headed by Dir ector General(QA) responsible for ensuring 
the quality assurance of all Defence stores and equipmen t, the Committee desire that 
Ministry should clarify  the pos ition before High Cour t to get the s tay order v acated so 
that post of Director General(QA) can be filled up as early as possible. 
 
  The Committee note that as per the changes made in the functioning of DG QA, 
the indigenisation responsibility has been transferred from DGQA to manufacturing unit s 
and servic e Headquarters. Also steps are being taken to progressively make the 
 96

manufacturers including DPSUs, OFs and private sector responsible for qualit y 
assurance of product manufactured by them. Inspection of input material required by  
manufacturing units under the department and vendor devel opment which was earlier  
done by  DGQA has now been transferred to manufacturing units. Only the final 
inspection coverage and quality outputs and surveillance has remained with DGQA. 
 
   In view of the foregoing, it is  seen that there has be en sharp decline in 
responsibilities of DG QA. Moreover, there have been complaints from the users o f 
quality of equipment that have been certified by this organisation. In this connection, the 
committee had expressed serious concern ov er revalidating of vintage mines during 
operation “ Prakaram’ which le d to large scale of cas ualties. The committee therefore 
desire that Government should seriously examine t he role of DGQA with a view of 
disbanding the organi sation. The qual ity assurance c an be entrusted to DR DO and 
manufacturers. In this regard the staff of  DGQA can be absorbed in other departments. 
This will save the country a fair amount  of revenue and self cer tification by 
manufacturers will bring more accountability  and responsib ility in the vital area of  
defence preparedness. 
 
Reply of the Government 
  The CAG performance audit on DGQA made a numb er of recommendations for  
aligning DGQA functioning with contemporary Quality Management Systems. The CAG 
Report is under examination of the Ministry and draft ATN is under process.  
     
  The post of DGQA has since b een f illed up with the appointme nt of Lt. Gen.  
Rakesh Puri as Director General Quality Assurance. 
   
  As noted by the Committee,  the prime responsibility of DGQA is the Qualit y 
Assurance of equipment/spares procured from OFs, DPSUs, private sector and imports. 
Having been intimately assoc iated with techni cal act ivities of all equipment in India n 
Army, DGQA has acquired a unique experience in it s multifarious role with regard to 
defence equipment, in the for mulation of General Staff Qualitative Requirement s 
(GSQR), in the assessment of equipment before it is inducted into Services, in providing 
services during entire life span of  equipment and in processing all 
formalities/documentation for spares management.  
   
  In addition, DGQA carries out the following funct ions which are exc lusive 
responsibilities and are essential for s pares managem ent, repair and ov erhaul of the 
equipment: 
¾ Preparation and publishing of technical manuals for services. 
¾ Preparation and publis hing of DGQA Approval ba sed on which all actions  
pertaining to introduction and c hange of stat us of equipment takes place. Audit  
authorities also take it as a financial document. 
¾ Preparation of Assignment Lists of equipment. 
¾ Holding of particulars and specifications of all the equipment. 
¾ Technical evaluation of equipment being inducted indigenously or through import. 
¾ Laboratory facilities for testing of Arms/Ammunition Equipment. 
¾ DGQA owns a servic e ammunition breakdo wn laboratory, which is un ique and 
only one of its kind in India.  Services are als o provided to other organisations  on 
need basis. 
 97

¾ Defect Investigation to identity  assign able causes of prem ature failures  and 
implementations of corrective measures  to minimize the frequency of such 
premature failures. 
 
  The Com mittee has noted that there have been complaints from the users of 
quality of equipment that have been certified by DGQA. The committee has expressed 
serious concern over revalidating of vint age mines during oper ation “Prakaram’ whic h 
led to large scale of casualties. In this regard, it is submitted that shelf life of ammunition 
is based on the effect of time on various co mponents of the system like explosiv e filling, 
metallic components and their deterioration due to various environmental factors. These 
may not be same for all components of t he ammunition, and hence proof testing i s 
carried out to ascertain whether the ammuniti on will function in the desired manner after  
extension of shelf lif e. Thus , functional efficiency and test ing of the a mmunition is  
ensured before extending its shel f life. In keeping with the prescribed guidelines for  
extension of shelf lif e, mines  c ertified as  ‘Serv iceable’ were used during Operation 
PARAKARAM.   
 
  Traditionally, for strategic equipm ent produced by Ordnance Factories, input  
stage inspection was  being carr ied out by  DGQA. The responsibility has  since been 
transferred to OFB. However, this may not be seen as a diminishing of the role of DGQA 
in assuring the quality  of defence goods. Rather, with the trans fer of input inspection to 
OFs and DPSUs, the focus of the role of D GQA has shifted to audit and surveillanc e 
activity. It may also be further emphasized that DGQA organisation and its working have 
in the recent past been the subject matter  of examination by  J affa Committee  and 
Kelkar Committee, as also of a perform ance audit by CAG. In all the reports, 
recommendations have a common point: that is , to convert DGQA into a vibrant QA 
organization by adopting moder n/contemporary Quality Assurance techniques. None of  
the reports have suggested disbanding of DGQA.  
 
  Procurement and production of defence goods  necessarily entails the ne ed to 
ensure that quality standards are being met by t he supplier so that t he interests of the 
State in acquisition of defence goods are not compromised. DGQA has built up a unique 
expertise in this field over many decades  of interface with the user, the production 
agencies and other s uppliers. With this expert ise and revamping of t he organization in 
step with the recommendations of various Committees, it is felt that the organisation will 
render itself comparable to contemporary quality management organizations. 
 
Ministry of Defence OM No. H-11013/15/2006/D(Parl) dated 15.2.2007 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
(Please see Para 41 of Chapter 1) 
 
Recommendation (Para No  4.11) 
 
  
 The Committee note that project for constr uction of Air Defence Ship is already  
behind the schedule on account of non-availability of the Sp ecial quality steel and dela y 
in procurement of bulb bars.  Since th ese two problems have been r esolved, t he 
Committee hope that ongoing construction of Ai r D efence ship and Aircraft carrier 
Admiral Gorshkov would be c ompleted as pe r schedule without s howing time and cost 
overrun. 
 98

 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 The projec ts relating to construction of  A ir Defence Ship  at Cochin  Sh ipyard 
Limited, Cochin and Repair and  Re-equipping of Airc raft ca rrier Admiral Gorshkov at  
Russia are being closely monitored by va rious committees including the Empowered 
Apex Steering Com mittee headed by the Defence Secretary. These c ommittees 
regularly review the progress of the projects and ensure that remedial steps are taken to 
resolve outstanding issues.  Measures to re cover lost time through innov ative building 
strategy are also being examined. 
 
 
Ministry of Defence OM No. H-11013/15/2006/D(Parl) dated 15.2.2007 
 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
(Please see Para 44 of Chapter 1) 
 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 4.14) 
 
 The Committee note that the Navy faces shortage of both shor t range as well as  
long range maritime surveill ance aircraft. There is also shortage of Unmanned Aerial 
Vehicles (UAV) and Dornier Air craft, being used by the Navy for coastal surveillance. 
The Committee also note that pr ocurement of these aircraft is in the initial stage.  It 
negates the very proposition of the Ministry that Nav y has got adequate forces to meet 
any emergent requirement to safeguard maritime interests.  The Committee feel that  
Navy is  an equipment intensive Service and procurement of such  critical equipment  
cannot be sidelined a nd therefore strongly stress that adequate a ttention should be 
given by the Ministry and required funds made available for procurement of these 
aircraft. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
  
Maritime surveillance aircraft capabilit y is being enhanced in a pla nned 
manner over the long term as mentioned in the succeeding paragraphs. 
 
Long Range Maritime Reconnaissan ce (LRM R) Aircraft : Long Term 
Perspective Plan envisages an adequate number of LRMR Aircraft.  The present holding 
of LRMR aircraft is 13.  The long range s urveillance gap is  being address ed through 
replacement and induction of LRMR aircraft over the  10th to 13th Plan period. 
 
Short Range Maritime Reco nnaissance (SRMR) Aircraft :  The enhancement 
of the short range surveillance c apability is being addressed through replac ement and 
induction of SRMR aircraft. 
 
 
 
 99

 
Unmanned Aerial Vehicle (UAV ): The pr esent holding of  12 UAVs  would be 
further augmented by  induction of indigenou s long endurance UAVs.  In addition, the 
Navy also plans to induct rotary UAVs deployable from ships. 
 
 
Ministry of Defence OM No. H-11013/15/2006/D(Parl) dated 15.2.2007 
 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
(Please see Para 47 of Chapter 1) 
 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 4.15) 
 
 The Committee also feel that, keeping in view the transport of petroleum products 
by sea from various part of the world, t he Indian Navy has a major role to play in 
providing security along the oi l routes in the subcontinent.  With an eye to the present 
day's environment, not only  for security r easons but for economic reasons also, Navy 
needs to be strengthened. 
 
Reply of the Government 
  
Navy’s force levels are planned in the cont ext of its designated roles, the securit y 
environment and threat perception. Grow th plans of the Navy are therefore being 
formulated keeping in view its  evolving res ponsibilities. In addition, the operation al 
tasking of the ships includes monitoring of our Sea Lanes of Communication (SLOCs)  
and providing security along the oil routes. 
 
 
Ministry of Defence OM No. H-11013/15/2006/D(Parl) dated 15.2.2007 
 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
(Please see Para 47 of Chapter 1) 
 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 5.23) 
 
 The Committee are concerned to note that there is i nadequate coverage with the 
existing network of radars available with Air Fo rce, resulting in signi ficant gaps all over 
the country particularly at peninsular India,  thereby making it  vulnerable to sudd en 
attacks due to failure of timely detection.  The Committee note that some efforts in the 
right direction for indigenous manufacturi ng of radars have been initiated by the 
Government.  The Committee feel that radar  surveillance is s uch an iss ue whic h can 
hardly be put on side track and therefore recommend that in  additio n to indigenous  
efforts for manufacturing, import options s hould also be taken up on priority and the 
Government should not hesitate to ma ke adequate funds available for their 
procurement. 
 
 100

Reply of the Government 
 
To provide adequate c overage of radars, following proc urement cases in respect 
of Low Le vel Transportable Radars  (LLTRs), Medium Pow er Radars  ( MPRs), and 
Low Level Light Weight Radars (LLLWRs) are being progressed. 
 
Ministry of Defence OM No. H-11013/15/2006/D(Parl) dated 15.2.2007 
 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
(Please see Para 53 of Chapter 1 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 6.14) 
 
The Committee are further constrained to note that only 8 to 10 percent of DRDO  
budget is being spent on fundamental resear ch.  As recommended by the Committee in 
their earlier reports, the DRDO should c oncentrate more on fundamental research and 
applied res earch for upgradation of weapon s system should be left to the concerned 
manufacturing units.  In this connection, the Committee again emphasis that the DPSUs 
and OFs should hav e their inhouse R&D c entres so that need to approac h DRDO for 
small up gradation could be avoided and DRDO could concentrate on critical 
technological.   
 
Reply of the Government 
 
DRDO is mandated to design and dev elop weapons systems and platforms for 
the Armed Forces.  T he following pattern of ex penditure is given for different categories 
of R&D activities:- 
 
Type of Projects X  Plan (Percentage of total DRDO  
Budget) 
Mission Mode (Deliverables to Armed Forces) 69% 
Technology Demonst rators (Applied Res earch 
& Development for future technology) 
16% 
Science & Tech. Pr ojects including enabling 
Research Infra-structure 
15% 
 
 
DRDO  belives in utilizing the capabilities in academia/universities for supporting 
the DRDO’s short term and long term programmes.   It spends approximately 1.5% of its  
budget on basic  res earch programmes in univ ersities and is  c urrently running 250 
projects.  Three cent ers of  exc ellence have been establis hed in universities and two 
more are envisaged in the XI  Plan.  Eight y five academic institutions are working on 
DRDO supported basic research programmes. 
 
 
 
Ministry of Defence OM No. H-11013/15/2006/D(Parl) dated 15.2.2007 
 
 
 101

Comments of the Committee 
 
(Please see Para 56 of Chapter 1) 
 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 6.15) 
 
The Committee note with deep concer n that the percentage of defence 
expenditure on imports which was 25.95 percent in the 7th Defence Plan, has not shown 
improvement even after completion of anothe r four Defence Plan and has remained the  
same in the i.e. 10th Defence Plan.  The Committee are further surprised to note that the 
Ministry has not fixed any target for self-reliance for the Eleventh and subsequent Plans.  
The Committee desire that stra tegic plan be c halked out co ntaining targets for self-
reliance for the next 12 years and assessment s of achievem ent of the target with 
accountability be done year wise at the highest level. 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
As far as Research and Development activities in DRDO are concerned, the area 
of armament self-reliance has  been achieved almost totally. In the area of aeronautics 
and avionics this is about 60 percent. It is in the area of electronics and computer 
related activities that self-reliance figure is still low and around 40 percent. 
 
There is  a continuous effort to achiev e self-relian ce in  all t he areas  alike.  
Establishment of facilities like Gallen ium Arsenic Enabling Technology Centre (GAETC) 
Hyderabad and SITAR are the effort in thi s di rection. To give best equipm ents to our 
Armed Forces technology upgradation has  to be a regular on going process  and to tha t 
extent cert ain degree of in terdependence in technology matter is likely  to continue.  
However, DRDO is  encourag ing ind igenous research and  deve lopment activity,  
development of indigenous im plementation of research pr ojects and indigenous vendor  
development. All these effort will certainly enhance the  over all self-reliance  figure for  
the organization. 
  
 
Ministry of Defence OM No. H-11013/15/2006/D(Parl) dated 15.2.2007 
 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
(Please see Para 59 of Chapter 1) 
 
 102

Recommendation (Para No.  8.12) 
 
The Committee note that long st anding demand of Ex-servicemen for ‘One Rank 
One Pension’ is still pending with the Go vernment.  Despite repeated recommendations 
of the Committee in this regard, t he same has not been implemented by the 
Government so far.  The Committee again urge the Governm ent to implement the long 
awaited ‘One Rank One Pension’ demand of Armed Forces at the earliest. 
 
 
Reply of the Government: 
 
Ex-Servicemen have  been representing for grant ‘One Rank One Pension’.  The 
matter was examined in Ministry. 
 
 The pensionary benefits of service pers onnel have c onsiderably been improv ed 
after implementation of the recommendations of 5 th Central Pay Com mission a s 
accepted by Government.  The demand for ‘O ne Rank One Pension’ and removal of 
conditionality of 33 years have also been ex amined in detail by the Government, but  
while the demand for ‘one rank one pens ion’ has not been agreed to, the pensionary 
benefits have been further substantially improved w.e.f. 1.2.2006:- 
 
(i) With effect from 1.1.2006, the weightage for the pur pose of calculations of 
pension for past as well as future retirees  Personnel Below Officer Ra nk (PBOR) of 
Sepoy, Naik and Havildar ranks and equivalent  ranks in Navy and Air Force  will be 10 
years, 8 years and 6 years respectively subj ect to a maximum qualifying s ervice of 30 
years. 
 
(ii) With effect from 1.1.2006, pension of pre-1.1.1996 retire PBORs would be 
revised with reference to the maximum pay in the revised scales of pay introduced with 
effect from 1.1.1996.  The benef it would be given with pros pective effect and no arrears 
will be given. 
 
(iii) The abov e benefit would be on ly in res pect of service pens ion inclu ding 
invalid pension, service element of disability pension and war injury pension. 
 
 
Ministry of Defence OM No. H-11013/15/2006/D(Parl) dated 15.2.2007 
     
Comments of the Committee 
 
(Please see Para 68 of Chapter 1 
 
 103

CHAPTER – V 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL REPLIES 
OF GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED 
 
 
Recommendation (Para No.  3.26) 
 
 The Com mittee Note that there is a la rge requirement of Bullet Proof Jackets  
(BPJs) in the Army, which is very essent ial for saving the life of a soldier.  The 
Committee are happy  to note that the bullet-pr oof jacket made in India is  at par wit h 
international standard and by the end of this Plan the country would have enough bullet-
proof jackets for al the soldiers. The Committee not that crucial fibre used in making BPJ 
is being imported.  Since the jackets are required in large number, the Committee desire 
that the Ministry should tr y to obtain ToT  so that t he production of fibre can be 
undertaken in the country itself.  
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The Ordnance Factory Board (OFB) were advised to obtain T oT so that the 
production of fibre, used in making Bullet Proof Jackets (BPJs), can be undertaken in 
the country itself.  OFB have approached t he Origina l Equipment Manufactures for  
ToT/Co-development/Co-production of basic fibre for hard armour plate and soft armour 
plate, which are the basic components of the BPJs.  
 
 
Ministry of Defence OM No. H-11013/15/2006/D(Parl) dated 15.2.2007 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
(Please see Para 35 of Chapter 1) 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 5.12) 
 
 The Committee note that the squadron str ength of Air Force at the end of 10 th,        
11th and 12 th Plan period will be  29, 34 and 36 respectively.  The Committee also note 
that the peak strength attained s o far by Ai r Force at any point of  time has been 39.5 , 
while the ideal requir ement is 44 squadron s.  The Committee note that induction a nd 
phasing out of Aircraft go side by side in Air Force, however, during the upcoming period 
2005-17, phasing out of several ageing Airc raft, is likely to be a major concern, thereby  
causing substantial depletion of squadron strength in the coming Plan periods. 
 
The Com mittee also note that 140 num ber of Su-30 MKI and 100 LCAs are 
expected to be available for induction during 11 th and 12 th Plans.  The Committee, 
however, feel that despite this, achiev ing the number of 44 squadr ons appears to be a 
distant dream.  Keeping in view the present pace of phasing out and induction of aircraft, 
the Committee strongly recommend that the Gove rnment should accord highest priority  
to ensure that Squadron strength at any ti me must not fall below 39.5 and strive to 
achieve ideal requirement of 44 Squadrons. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 104

With an objective to improve the depleti ng squadron strength of the Indian Air  
Force, the Government have accorded Acceptance of Necessity (AON) for 126 Medium 
Multi-role Combat Aircraft  (MMRCA) for whic h RF P is lik ely to be iss ued shortly.  
Government have als o accorded Acceptanc e of Necessity (AON) for additional 40 SU 
30 MKI Aircraft to meet immediate requirement of  IAF. 
 
Ministry of Defence OM No. H-11013/15/2006/D(Parl) dated 15.2.2007 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
(Please see Para 50 of Chapter 1) 
 
Recommendation (Para No.  8.15) 
 
The committee also recommend that other demands of Ex-servicemen viz. issues 
of dependent pension for unma rried daughters above 25 year s of Ex-Servicemen;  
second e mployment guarante e/lateral in duction into Central Para-Milit ary Forces;  
disparity in the monet ary award of disability pension of  pre and post 1996 pensioners; 
anomaly in fixation of pension and insur ance coverage to soldiers  should be 
immediately looked into to provide relief to Ex-Servicemen. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 The matters regarding removal of age rest riction in the case of wid owed/divorced 
daughters who are in receipt of special/li beralized family pensi on (depe ndent) and 
disparity in the monetary aw ard of disability pension of  pre and post 1996 pensioners  
are under consideration in consultation with D eptt. of Pension and Pe nsioner’s Welfare.  
A Working Group examined the issue of s econd employment/ latera l induction of ex-
servicemen in Central Paramilita ry Forces but could not reach at  a consensus.  Army 
Hqrs. are now suggesting a proposal different from the first one for the consideration of  
the Working Group.  There is no anomaly in fixation of pension and insurance coverag e 
to soldiers.   
 
Ministry of Defence OM No. H-11013/15/2006/D(Parl) dated 15.2.2007 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
(Please see Para 71 of Chapter 1) 
 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi       BALASAHEB VIKHE PATIL 
12 March, 2007              Chairman 
 21 Phalguna, 1928 (Saka        Standing Committee on Defence 
 
 
 105

MINUTES OF THE TWENTY-FIRST SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
DEFENCE (2006-07) 
 
 
 The Committee sat on Monday, the 19th February, 2007 from 1500 to 1630 hrs. in 
Committee Room ‘D’, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
 
PRESENT 
 
Shri Balasaheb Vikhe Patil  -      Chairman 
 
 
MEMBERS 
 
LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri Santosh Kumar Gangwar 
3. Dr. H.T. Sangliana 
 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
4. Shri Abu Asim Azmi 
5. Shri R.K. Dhawan 
6. Smt. N.P. Durga 
7. Shri K.B. Shanappa  
 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri Gopal Singh  - Director 
2. Shri D.R. Shekhar  - Under Secretary 
 
 
WITNESSES 
 
REPRESENTATIVES OF MINISTRY OF DEFENCE 
 
 
1. Shri Shekhar Dutt   - Defence Secretary 
2. Shri K.P. Singh   - Secretary (DP) 
3. Dr. M. Natarajan   - SA to RM 
4. Shri V.K. Misra   - Secretary (Def. Fin.) 
5. Shri S. Banerjee   - DG (ACQ) 
6. Dr. (Mrs.) Rekha Bhargava  - Special Secretary (B) 
7. Shri Alok Perti   - JS (SY) 
 106

8. Shri T. Ramachandru  - JS (S) 
9. Shri Binoy Kumar   - JS (E) 
10. Shri S.N. Mishra   - Addl FA (M) 
11. Shri Amit Cowshish   - Addl FA (A) 
12. Smt. Shobana Joshi ``  - FM (LS) 
13. Maj. Gen. H.S. Sehgal  - TM (LS) 
14. Shri K.K. Kirty   - Dir (Acq) 
15. Shri Mukesh Sinha   - Dir. (Fin/Budget) 
16. Shri S.K. Yagnik   - Dir. (Proc) 
17. Smt. Namita Mehrotra  - Dir (Vig) 
18. Lt. Col. DPK Pillay   - PO (Def) 
19. Shri B.C. Biswas   - Member, OFB 
20. Shri S. Mukhopadhyay  - Member Finance, OFB 
21. Shri M. Fakruddin   - Dir (CP&M), HAL 
22. Shri Prahlada   - CCR & D (SI) & DS 
23. Air Mshl. A.V. Vaidya  - Offg. CISC 
24. Air Cmde K.G. Kumar  - DACIDS (LTP) 
25. Lt. Gen Deepak Kapoor  - VCOAS 
26. Lt. Gen. (Dr.) DDS Sandhu  - ADC 
27. Maj Gen A.K. Mehra  - ADGWE 
28. Air Mshl A.K. Nagalia  - DCAS 
29. AVM N. Vijay Kumar  - ACAS (FP) 
30. V. Adml. Nirmal Verma  - VCNS 
31. Rear Adml R.K. Dhowan  - ACNS (P&P) 
32. IG SPS Basra   - DDG CG 
 
 
2. At the outset, the Hon’ble Chairman welcomed the representatives of the Ministry 
of Defence to the sitting of the Committee and dr ew their attention to Direction 58 of the 
Directions by the Speaker regarding maintaini ng conf identiality of th e deliberations of  
the Committee and invited them to render oral evidence on the Action Taken Replies to 
the recommendations containe d in the Sixth Report on  Procurement Policy and 
Procedure and Eleventh Report on Demands for Grants (2006-07).  
 
3. In regard to the Action Taken Replie s to the recommendations c ontained in the 
Sixth Report, the Chai rman and Members raised c ertain important queries viz. status of 
Eleventh Plan, delegation of fi nancial powers of Raksha Mant ri and the Three Servic e 
Chiefs, off-set clause, single-vendor sit uation and trend of incurring capita l and revenue 
expenditure and Fast Track Procedure for acquisition etc. 
 
4. In regard to the Action Taken Replie s to the recommendations c ontained in the 
Eleventh Report, the Members ra ised some of the vital point s viz. the implementation 
 107

status of all the recomm endations of GoM Report on re forming National Security  
System, challenges to National Security, crea tion of the post of Chief of Defence Staff 
and the present status of the construction of Air Defenceship etc. 
 
5. The representatives of the Ministry of Defence ans wered the queries of the 
Members one-by-one.  On certai n points they  assured the Committee to furnish written 
replies later on. 
 
The witness then withdrew. 
 
6. A verbatim record of proceedings was kept. 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
 
 
 
 108

MINUTES OF TWENTY-SECOND  SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
DEFENCE (2006-2007) 
 
 
 
 The Committee sat on Monday, the 12 th March 2007 from 1500 to 1600 hrs. in 
Committee Room ‘D’, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
 
 
PRESENT 
 
 
Shri. Balasaheb Vikhe Patil – Chairman 
 
Members 
 
Lok Sabha 
 
2.  Shri. Milind Deora 
3.  Shri. Santosh Kumar Gangwar 
4.  Shri Suresh Kalmadi 
5.  Shri. Asaduddin Owaisi 
6.  Shri Rajendrasinh Ghanshyamsinh Rana (Raju Rana) 
7.  Dr. H.T. Sangliana 
 
Rajya Sabha 
 
8.  Shri. Abu Asim Azmi 
9.  Smt. N.P. Durga 
10.  Shri. K.B. Shanappa 
 
Secretariat 
 
      1.  Shri P.K. Bhandari - Joint Secretary 
      2.  Shri Gopal Singh - Director 
      3.  Shri D.R. Shekhar - Deputy Secretary – II 
      4.  Smt. J.M. Sinha - Under Secretary      
 
2. At the out set, Hon’ble Chairman welcom ed the members to the sitting of the 
Committee. The Committee than took up for consideration the draft Action Taken Report 
on the recommendations/observa tions contained in the Elev enth Report of the 
Committee (14th Lok Sabha) on Demands f or Grants of  the Ministry of Defence for the 
year 2007-08. The Committee after some del iberation adopted the draft Action Taken 
Report with some additions/modifications. 
 
 109

3. The Committee then authorised the Hon’bl e Chairman to finalise t he reports and 
present the same to both the Houses of Parliament. 
 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
 110

 111
APPENDIX 
 
ANALYSIS OF THE ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE 
RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE 11th REPORT OF THE STANDING 
COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE (FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA) ON DEMANDS FOR 
GRANTS (2006-07) OF THE MINISTRY OF DEFENCE 
 
 Percentage 
of Total 
 
(i)  Total number of recommendations    55   
 
(ii)  Recommendations/Observations which have  30   55% 
been accepted by the Government:; 
(Para No. 1.3, 1.5, 1.6, 1.22, 1.30,  1.51, 1.64,  
2.7, 2.13, 3.14, 3.17, 3.21,  3.28,  4.23,  5.13,  
5.22,  5.34, 5.35, 5.41, 5.46,  6.13,  6.16, 7.7,  
7.10,  7.15, 7.17,  7.20,  8.14,  8.16 and 9.4) 
 
(iii)  Recommendations/Observations which the  9         16.36% 
Committee do not desire to pursue in 
view of Government replies 
(Para No. 2.19, 4.5,  4.10 & 4.12.  5.23, 5.38,  5.49,  
8.11, 8.13 and  10.7) 
 
(iv)  Recommendations/Observations in  respect  13          23.64% 
of which replies of the Government have 
not been accepted by the Committee:   
(Para No. 1.4, 1.43, 1.55, 1.58, 2.21, 3.22,  
 3.40, 4.11,  4.14 & 4.15,  5.23, 6.14, 6.15 and 8.12) 
 
(v)  Recommendations/Observations in respect   3   5.45% 
of which final replies of Government are 
still awaited: 
(Para No.  3.26, 5.12 and 8.15) 