12
STANDING COMMITTEE
ON DEFENCE
(2005-06)
FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA
MINISTRY OF DEFENCE
REVIEW OF MEDICAL SERVICES AND
EDUCATION IN THE DEFENCE SECTOR
TWELFTH REPORT
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
August, 2006/Sravana, 1928 (Saka)

TWELFTH REPORT
STANDING COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE
(2005-06)
(FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA)
MINISTRY OF DEFENCE
Presented to Lok Sabha on 2.8.2006
Laid  in  Rajya Sabha  on 2.8.2006
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
August, 2006/Sravana, 1928 (Saka)

C.O.D. No. 76
Price : Rs. 91.00
© 2006 BY LOK S ABHA S ECRETARIAT
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of
Business in Lok Sabha (Eleventh Edition) and Printed by Jainco Art India,
New Delhi-110 005.

CONTENTS
PAGES
COMPOSITION OF THE C OMMITTEE .............................................................. (iii)
PREFACE ........................................................................................................ (v)
CHAPTER I Introduction ................................................................... 1
CHAPTER II Role of Armed Forces Medical Services ............... 4
CHAPTER III Authorised and Held Strength ................................ 13
CHAPTER IV AFMS Hospitals & their upgradation .................... 23
CHAPTER V Specialists Facilities in Hospitals ............................. 33
CHAPTER VI Medical Preparedness for Contagious Diseases
and NBC War ............................................................... 47
CHAPTER VII Medical Education ....................................................... 50
CHAPTER VIII Medical Research ......................................................... 55
CHAPTER IX Nursing and Para-Medical Training ....................... 58
CHAPTER X Disaster Management ................................................. 64
CHAPTER XI Medical Equipment and Drugs ............................... 66
CHAPTER XII Medical Services for Ex-Servicemen ....................... 70
APPENDICES
Minutes of the Sittings of the Committee held on 5.12.2005,
30.1.2006, 10.2.2006, 11.5.2006 and 28.07.2006................................... 73
(i)

COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE
ON DEFENCE (2005-06)
  Shri Balasaheb Vikhe Patil —  Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Churchill Alemao
3. Shri Iliyas Azmi
4. Shri A.V . Bellarmin
**5. Shri Suresh Chandel
6. Shri Thupstan Chhewang
7. Smt. Sangeeta Kumari Singh Deo
8. Shri Milind Deora
*9. Smt. Priya Dutt
10. Shri Ramesh Jigajinagi
11. Shri Suresh Kalmadi
12. Dr. C. Krishnan
13. Shri S.D. Mandlik
14. Dr. K.S. Manoj
15. Shri Raghuraj Singh Shakya
16. Shri Mahadeorao Shiwankar
17. Shri Ganesh Prasad Singh
18. Shri Manvendra Singh
19. Shri Balashowry Vallabhaneni
20. Ms. Ingrid Mcleod
21. Shri Dharmendra Yadav
(iii)
* Nominated w.e.f. 9.12.2005.
** Ceased to be a Member of the Committee w.e.f. 22.12.2005.

Rajya Sabha
@@22. Shri R.K. Anand
23. Dr. Farooq Abdullah
@24. Shri Jai Prakash Aggarwal
*25. Gen. Shankar Roy Chowdhury (Retd.)
26. Shri T.T.V . Dhinakaran
27. Smt. N.P . Durga
***28. Shri Janardan Dwivedi
†29. Shri Pramod Mahajan
30. Shri Mukhtar Abbas Naqvi
**31. Shri Anand Sharma
32. Shri Lalit Suri
††33. Shri K.B. Shanappa
$34. Shri R.K. Dhawan
$35. Smt. Viplove Thakur
SECRETARIAT
1. Shri S.K. Sharma — Additional Secretary
2. Shri R.C. Ahuja — Joint Secretary
3. Smt. Anita Jain — Deputy Secretary
4. Shri D.R. Shekhar — Under Secretary
(iv)
* Ceased to be a Member of the Committee w.e.f. 18.8.2005.
** Ceased to be a Member of the Committee w.e.f. 29.1.2006.
*** Ceased to be a Member of the Committee w.e.f. 8.3.2006.
@ Nominated w.e.f. 8.3.2006.
@@ Ceased to be a Member of the Committee w.e.f. 2.4.2006.
† Demised on 3.5.2006, consequently his seat remained vacant w.e.f. 3.5.2006.
†† Nominated w.e.f. 2.6.2006.
$ Nominated w.e.f. 7.7.2006.

PREFACE
I, the Chairman, Standing Committee on Defence (2005-06) having
been authorized by the Committee to submit the Report on their behalf,
present this Twelfth Report on ‘Review of Medical Services and
Education in the Defence Sector’.
2. The subject was selected for examination by the Standing
Committee on Defence (2005-06). The Committee, during their
examination of the subject, took evidence of the representatives of the
Ministry of Defence on 05 December, 2005, 30 January, 2006 and
11 May 2006. The Committee also took evidence of some non-official
experts in the field on 30 January, 2006 and 10 February, 2006. For an
in-depth analysis of the subject matter, the Committee also undertook
study visits to Leh and Srinagar Hospitals during October 2004 and a
local study visit to R & R Hospital and Base Hospital located in Delhi
on 20 May, 2006.
3. Based on the background note, written replies to the list of
points furnished by the Ministry of Defence on the subject, briefing/
oral evidence tendered by the representatives of the Ministry of Defence
and also the suggestions and written memoranda submitted by the
non-official experts, the Committee considered and adopted the draft
report at their sitting held on 28 July, 2006.
4. The Committee wish to express their thanks to the representatives
of the Ministry of Defence for appearing before the Committee for
evidence and for furnishing the valuable material and information in
a very short span of time which the Committee desired in connection
with the examination of this subject.
The Committee also wish to express their thanks to non-official
experts Shri Ajay Vikram Singh, Defence Secretary (Retd.), Gen. V .P .
Mallick (Retd.), Lt. Gen. Dr. B. Sadananda (Retd.), Director General,
Dr. Vikhe Patil Memorial Hospital & Medical College, Col. K.S.
Bhimwal (Retd.), Medical Director, Rockland Hospital, Lt. Col. Inderjit
Singh (Retd.), Chairman, All India Ex-Services Welfare Association who
appeared before the Committee and shared their views on the subject.
5. For facility of reference and convenience, the observations/
recommendations of the Committee have been printed in bold type in
the body of the report.
 N
EW D ELHI; BALASAHEB VIKHE PATIL,
28 July, 2006 Chairman,
6 Sravana, 1928 (Saka) Standing Committee on Defence.
(v)

CHAPTER I
INTRODUCTION
1.1 During 2nd World War it was felt that there should be an
integrated approach for the Medicare of Sick & Wounded Military &
Civil personnel as medical sickness due to Malaria, Pneumonia etc.
were much higher than battle casualties as such. A Committee was
appointed in March, 1947 under the Chairmanship of Dr. B.C. Roy for
considering the question of integration of the three medical services
and medical research in their services. The Committee inter-alia
recommended the following:—
(i) That there should be three branches of the Indian Armed
Forces Medical Services i.e. Army, Air Force and Navy and
that these three branches would deal with the various
medical problems affecting the three forces.
(ii) That there should be a Supreme Controller of all the three
Armed Forces Medical Service designated as Director-General
of the Armed Forces Medical Services who would be the
advisor to the Supreme Commander or the Defence Minister
as the case may be regarding the medical needs of the
Armed Forces. He will be the administrative head of the
Armed Forces Medical Service.
1.2 The Committee also came to the conclusion that it was both
desirable and feasible to establish an integrated medical research
organization for the three branches.
Consequent to the recommendations of Dr. B.C. Roy Committee
Report Armed Forces Medical Services came into existence in 1948.
Armed Forces Medical Services (AFMS) is an integrated service headed
by Director General, Armed Forces Medical Services. It is a tri-service
organization consisting of Medical Services of Army, Navy and
Air Force. Each Medical Service is under a Director General who is
the Medical Advisor to the Chief of Staff of the respective service and
is responsible to him for the day to day administration and proper
functioning of the service under him. DGAFMS is advisor to
Rakhsha Mantri in all health matters pertaining to Armed Forces and
functions directly under the Ministry of Defence.

2
1.3 The Armed Forces Medial Services consist of:—
(a) Officers of the Army Medical Corps (AMC) including AMC
(Non-Technical) officers, officers of the Army Dental Corps
and officers of the Military Nursing Services. Army Medical
Corps and Army Dental Corps officers seconded to the Navy
and Air Force; Ward Master Officers of the Navy and
probationer nurses.
(b) Junior Commissioned Officers, Other Rank of the Army
Medical Corps, Sick Birth attendants of the Navy and
Medical Assistance of the Air Force.
(c) Civilians of categories sanctioned periodically by the
Government.
(d) AFMS is authorized 5440 Medicals Officers, 418 Dental
Officers, 3152 MNS staff & 55500 Paramedical staff.
1.4 The Committee note that AFMS came into existence in 1948
in pursuance of the recommendations of Dr. B.C. Roy Committee set
up to consider the question of integration of three medical services
and medical research in Armed Forces. Dr. B.C. Roy Committee in
its report laid down general principles as to how this integration
could be effected efficiently for providing best medical care to Armed
Forces.
1.5 The Committee, however, on making an in depth examination
of AFMS feel that the B.C. Roy Committee’s recommendations which
are still relevant in present day scenario have not been fully
implemented in letter and spirit. The Roy Committee had envisaged
a higher status of DGAFMS as Advisor of the Supreme Commander
or the Defence Minister. The Committee are constrained to note that
over the years the status of DGAFMS has been slowly downgraded.
This has impinged upon the working of AFMS. The Committee in
this connection would like to point out the manifold increase in the
workload of AFMS over the years with its medical cover having
been extended to families of service personnel, ex-servicemen and
their dependents, para-military forces viz. BSF, ITBP , CRPF, Border
Road Construction Units and other supporting organisations posted
in field and Central/intelligence agencies operating in disturbed areas
and medical aid to civilians in low intensity conflict areas. It also
has a major role to play in international medical missions and in
providing medical relief in case of natural calamity and disaster. It
is ironic that on the one hand there has been a substantial increase
in the role of AFMS which has been earning accolades for its services

3
to the nation and the world and on the other status of DG (AFMS)
is being slowly downgraded. Looking at the size, responsibility and
nature of AFMS, the Committee desire that status of DGAFMS
should be upgraded to that of Secretary, Government of India as in
the case of Director General of Health Services (Civil).
1.6 Having examined various other issues pertaining to the
subject, the Committee inter-alia recommend:
1. Government should increase the strength of AFMS in
proportion to its increased workload and responsibility
for smooth and effective functioning. For this purpose,
Government should set up a high level Committee to
review the authorized strength of each cadre of AFMS.
2. Vacancies of doctors and para medical staff in hospitals
and field units of AFMS should be filled up urgently.
3. AFMS should extend super specialist facilities like
cardiology and Neurology in all zonal hospitals and more
specialist facilities in peripheral hospitals so that soldiers
and officers may be provided with proper medical care in
their vicinity.
4. The staffing norms in AFMS hospitals should be improved
to one Medical Officer per twenty-one beds according to
recommendations given by the AESC Committee in this
regard.
5. 10% cut in recruitment should not be made applicable on
civilian manpower of AFMS particularly in essential
categories and trades like dietician, physiotherapist, etc.
6. The Armed Force Medical College should be converted
into deemed university and all the training courses should
be brought under its umbrella. Besides helping in having
uniform standards for various training courses, this will
facilitate in getting necessary recognition for various
courses.
1.7 There is an imperative need for regular lectures and exercises
on yoga techniques in order to de-stress our Jawans in field units.
Immediate steps may be initiated in this direction.

CHAPTER II
ROLE OF ARMED FORCES MEDICAL SERVICES
2.1 Armed Forces Medical Services (AFMS) provide comprehensive
health care to the serving Armed Forces personnel, their families and
dependents which are about 6.6 million in number. In addition,
personnel of Para-military organizations while posted in the field and
other Central police/intelligence forces operating in the disturbed areas
of the country are provided treatment by the Armed Forces Medical
Services. The Armed Forces Medical Services are also providing medical
care to the ex-servicemen and their dependents to the extent possible.
2.2 Elaborating the role of Armed Forces Medical Services, the
Ministry in a presentation on the subject stated:—
“Although AFMS was initially required to provide medical cover
to Services personnel only but now its services have been extended
to the families and dependents of the serving personnel and ex-
Servicemen and their dependents. More than 40 new
establishments/categories have been made dependent on AFMS in
last few years for providing medical cover within existing
manpower resources.
In addition to the above, in Forward areas, high attitude and remote
areas, they provide medical cover to Para Military Forces, which
includes Counter Insurgency Forces, Border Security Force, Central
Reserve Police Force, Border Roads Units & General Reserve
Engineering Force etc.
AFMS provides medical aid to civilians in case of natural calamities
and also during man made disasters like major aircraft accidents,
major train accidents, road accidents, improvised Explosive Devices
blasts, insurgency etc.
AFMS has been playing major role in International Medical,
Humanitarian and United Nations Aid Missions since early 1950s.”
2.3 On the query as to how the strength of three Forces has
increased since Independence, the Ministry furnished the following:—
Army
Category Strength in 1947 Present Strength Increase
Officers 18,412 34,427 16,015
JCO 22,125 74,995 52,870
OR 4,11,463 12,40,578 8,29,115
4

5
Navy
Category Strength in 1953 Present Strength Increase
Officers 1,096 9,594 8,498
Sailors 9,594 51,642 42,048
Air Force
Category Strength in 1947 Present Strength Increase
Officers 896 10456 9560
PBORs 10350 120011 109661
NCs (E) 820 10343 9523
Civilians Nil 22000 22000
2.4 On Committee’s query as to how AFMS has expanded since
Independence commensurate with its increased role, the Ministry stated:
“In 1947, Armed Forces Medical Services (AFMS) were authorized
900 Med. Officers and gradually this number has increased to
5440 at present. The expansion of AFMS directly relates to
expansion of Armed Forces. The authorization of medical officers
is based on existing and additional/new raisings under respective
Commands of three Services. Where ever required modern
technology has been/is being introduced. To meet the functional
deficiencies pertaining to detailment of medical officers for post
graduate and Doctorate in Medicine/Master of Chirurgery courses,
a case for enhancement in the authorized strength, in terms of
training drafting and leave requirement, is currently under active
consideration of the Ministry.”
2.5 The Committee note that AFMS was established in 1948 with
authorized strength of 900 medical officers and other supporting staff
to provide comprehensive health care to the serving Armed Force
personnel. Over the years the role of AFMS has considerably
increased with its services having been extended to families and
dependents of service personnel since Independence. In addition,
the AFMS also provides medical cover to ex-servicemen and their
dependents, para-military forces viz. BSF, ITBP , CRPF, Border Road
Units, etc. posted in field, Central/intelligence agencies operating in
disturbed areas, and medical aid to civilians in low intensity conflict
areas and in case of natural calamity and disaster. The AFMS has

6
also been playing a major role in International/UN Medical &
Humanitarian Aid Missions since 1950. To cope with the increased
responsibilities, the AFMS has also expanded and at present has an
authorized strength of 5440 medical officers and other supporting
staff.
2.6 The Committee, however, feel that the expansion of AFMS is
not commensurate with the increase in its responsibilities which
have become manifold over the years as AFMS now not only
provides medical cover to Armed Force Personnel, their dependents
and other beneficiaries but also plays a vital role in Disaster
Management and international missions, etc.
2.7 The Committee, therefore, strongly recommend that a high
level Committee should be appointed to comprehensively review
and re-assess the overall increase in work and responsibilities of
AFMS and suitably recommend ideal strength for each cadre so as
to have smooth and efficient functioning. The proposed Committee
should also take into consideration the new medical technologies
that have been introduced in the field requiring trained manpower.
COORDINATION AMONGST MEDICAL SERVICES OF THE THREE
FORCES
2.8 As AFMS is a tri-service organization of Medical Services of
Army, Navy and Air Force, the Committee enquired about the
coordination between departments under the control of DGAFMS and
the medical services of three forces at various levels in peace and war.
The Ministry in their written note stated:
“During Peace Time:  The coordination during peace time are as
follows:—
At Station Level—
(a) Patients from any service avail medical facilities from nearby
service hospital, Army/Navy/Air Force.
(b) Medical Officers of any service regularly attend clinical
meetings/seminars at nearby service hospital for keeping
abreast of latest development in medical field. Medical
Officers posted at various units also visit near by service
hospital to follow up the admitted cases which boosts morale
of the patients. It also helps in enhancement of professional
knowledge and clinical acumen of Medical Officers and
establishing healthy rapport with the specialists of the
hospitals.

7
(c) Though each service hospital is manned by staff of respective
service, Medical Officers & Specialists irrespective of uniform
are posted to any type of service hospital whenever such
arrangement is necessitated because of shortfall in number
of specialists in a particular service at any time.
(d) SEMO (Senior Executive Medical Officer) of the service
hospital looks after overall health and hygiene matters in
that specified area which also includes units of other
services.
At Command Level— Medical head at Commands, i.e. Principal
Medical Officer (Air Force), DDMS in Army & CMO in Navy
work in a co-ordinated manner, in providing replacement from
nearby hospital, when specialists from other service hospital are
away on Temporary Duty or leave.
At HQ Level— DGsMS of three services work in coordinated
manner under the guidance of DGAFMS pertaining to all major
policies involving Armed Forces Medical Services like training,
placement of specialist medical officers, promotion boards for
Medical Officers, provision of medical equipment etc. Medical
Service Advisory Committee comprising of DGAFMS and three
DGsMS frequently meet every month to deliberate on major issues.”
2.9 Replying to integration of medical services of three services
during war time, the Ministry stated:—
“The medical services are very well coordinated and integrated
during peace and war without any differentiation between three
services personnel at hospital level. The integration during war is
complete as the casualties are treated at service hospitals on their
merit and evacuated by different modes viz. air, sea and land route
to base medical echelons depending upon their condition
irrespective of their service. This has been coordinated at the HQ’s
level by Director General Armed Forces Medical Services
(DGAFMS) and Director General Medical Services (DGsMS) and at
command level by Principal Medical Officer (Air Force), Deputy
Director Medical Service (DDMS) (Army) and Chief Medical Officer
(CMO) (Navy). Supply of medical stores and coordinated through
Armed Forces Medical Stores Depots and Armed Forces Transfusion
Centre, centrally be perfect integration of provisioning by DGAFMS
and distribution to periphery by respective DGsMS.”

8
2.10 On the query regarding other areas, which need to be
addressed effectively to keep better coordination amongst the armed
forces in order to provide best possible medical services to their
personnel, the Ministry stated:
“Professional Training of Personnel Below Officer Rank (PBOR) is
at present carried out separately by the three services. It could be
examined if the same can be carried out under the aegis of
DGAFMS in a unified manner so that the level of technical
knowledge of the paramedics of the three services are
standardized.”
2.11 The Committee enquired about this coordination at the
peripheral hospitals at the border, the Defence Secretary stated:
“Whether there is an Army, Navy or Air Force hospital, and the
service person is of a different Service, each hospital can receive
patients of all three services. Supposing there is a Naval hospital
and if it is an Air Force person who falls sick or injured, then in
our system, every hospital can receive patients from there services.”
2.12 In a subsequent note to the Committee DGAFMS furnished
the following information on Inter Service Transfers for better
integration:—
“It is submitted that as per the directives of Dr. B.C. Roy Committee
recommendations duly approved by the Govt., policy exists for
inter service appointments at various ranks from Col. (& Equiv .)
and above. However for Lt. Col. (& Equiv.) and below inter service
transfers are done as per service requirement. The service conditions
in respect of all officers of AFMS are same irrespective of their
uniform. Efforts are on to ensure that there are more inter service
transfers in line with recommendations of Dr. B.C. Roy Committee.
This is also seriously thinking of bringing in the same pattern of
uniform which will be applicable for the personnel of three medical
services i.e. Army, Navy & Air Forces.”
2.13 The Committee note that AFMS is an integrated tri service
organization which is well coordinated during peace and war time.
All service personnel irrespective of their force can avail medical
care at all hospitals. The Committee have, however, been informed
that professional training of PBORs is carried out by the three
services separately. The Committee concur with the suggestion of
DGAFMS that the same may be carried out under the aegis of
DGAFMS in a unified manner so that the level of technical
knowledge of para medicals of the three services are standardized.
The Committee, therefore, recommend that the training institutes for
training various categories of PBORs be placed under DGAFMS
where PBORs from the three services could be imparted training in
a unified manner. This will enable DGAFMS to have proper

9
monitoring of training standards as per the requirements from time
to time and ensure accountability.
AFMS V/S. CIVIL MEDICAL SERVICES
2.14 Comparing AFMS v/s Civil Medical Services, the Ministry
submitted:—
Sl.No. AFMS Civil
1. Doctors serve in Field/High Mostly in cities
Attitude and operational areas
2. Cadre Strength-9362 CGHS-5233 Railways-2569
3. Doctors move with troops by No such requirement
land, sea & air and in Siachen
glacier.
4. 24 Hours on duty. Professional 8 hours duty except emergencies.
work and military duties for
example physical training, parade,
Military exercises with troops,
Field firings etc.
5. Training-Trained for deserts These aspects not
high altitude, seas and covered in details
aerospace medical care Training in civil service.
Includes managing of combat
Casualties and health maintenance
in field conditions. Training
include Casualty evacuation.
2.15 Comparing status of DGAFMS, with Civil counterpart, the
Ministry submitted:—
DGAFMS Civil
Created in 1948 in the rank of Dir ector General Health
Lieutenant General (& Equi- Services (GOI) &
Valent) with the status of Director General Medical
Special Secretary Services (Railways) have
Higher status (Secretary)
Presently-No change in
Rank with status of
Additional Secretary
Pay scale-24050-650-26000 Pay scale-26000 fixed.

10
2.16 In this regard the representatives of the Ministry further
explained:—
“The appointment of DGAFMS was created in 1948 in the rank of
Lieutenant General (& Equivalent) with the status of Special
Secretary. In Civil, the Director General Health Services was
equivalent to Secretary. Since 1948 there has been no change in the
status of DGAFMS and his status at the moment is to the
equivalent of Additional Secretary in the present rank. Whereas it
has been upgraded in the Civil to the status of Secretary. The pay
scale as is given here is Rs. 24050-650-26000 for DGAFMS.”
2.17 The Committee note that post of DGAFMS was created in
1948 in the rank of Lieutenant General with the status of Special
Secretary. In the Civil, the post of Director General Health Services
(DGHS) was equivalent to Director. Since 1948 there has been no
change in the status of DGAFMS which is presently equivalent to
Additional Secretary, whereas in the civil DGHS has been upgraded
to the status of Secretary, Government of India.
2.18 The Committee find that AFMS has expanded manifold since
independence and its role has also considerably increased.
Accordingly, the responsibilities of DGAFMS have also increased
substantially. The Committee, therefore, strongly recommend that the
post of DGAFMS be upgraded to the status of Secretary, Government
of India. The Committee feel upgradation of status of DGAFMS
would not only boost the morale of AFMS but also help DGAFMS
in working effectively.
FUNDS ALLOCATION TO AFMS
2.19 About the availability of funds to the AFMS for performing
its numerous responsibilities, the Ministry provided the details as under:
“The Armed Forces Medical Services have been allotted sufficient
funds. The details of allotment & expenditure of budgetary
allocation for last ten years is as follows:—
Revenue Head
Sl.No.  Financial Year Allotment Expenditure
(Rs. in crore) (Rs. in crore)
12 3 4
(i) 1995-96 95.40 95.6833
(ii) 1996-97 95.40 103.2483

11
12 3 4
(iii) 1997-98 105.00 113.81
(iv) 1998-99 108.60 110.7663
(v) 1999-2000 139.67 110.2424
(vi) 2000-01 153.00 147.77
(vii) 2001-02 184.40 183.16
(viii) 2002-03 258.00 253.97
(ix) 2003-04 258.00 258.8610
(x) 2004-05 305.12 284.87
(xi) 2005-06 308.00 309.12
(as on 24 March, 2006)
Capital Head
Sl.No. Financial Year Allotment Expenditure
(Rs. in crore) (Rs. in crore)
(i) 1997-98 34.50 15.71
(ii) 1998-99 40.00 25.37
(iii) 1999-2000 80.00 21.09
(iv) 2000-01 80.00 49.66
(v) 2001-02 63.00 102.91
(vi) 2002-03 127.00 135.11
(vii) 2003-04 95.00 82.22
(viii) 2004-05 120.00 121.00
(ix) 2005-06 95.00 90.872
(as on 24 March, 2006)
2.20 During oral evidence on the subject, the Defence Secretary
stated:
“In the earlier years, the allocation was there but the expenditure
was not there. Later on, there has been some review and additional
delegations have been given. Therefore, now they are able to work
according to the plan and they are able to spend.”

12
2.21 He further stated:
“The money may have been surrendered in the medical head but
that money might have been used in some other heads.”
2.22 The Committee note the substantial improvement in
expenditure of the allocated capital funds by AFMS in the last few
year. The Committee, however, desire the funds allocated under
medical head be used only for that purpose and should not be
diverted/re-appropriated to other heads.

CHAPTER III
AUTHORISED AND HELD STRENGTH
3.1 The following is the authorized and held strength of the various
cadres of AFMS:
Sl.No. Regiment Authorized Held
1. Army Medical Corps 5440 5288
2. AMC (Non-Technical) 360 259
3. Army Dental Corps 418 418
4. Military Nursing Service 3,152 3,026
5. Personnel Below Officer Rank 55,500 52,494
3.2 To a query on the large scale vacancies in various cadres and
the efforts being made to fill up these vacancies, the Ministry furnished
the information as under:
“The deficiency position of AFMS manpower as on date is around
152 i.e. 2.7%. The reason for above stated deficiency position is
due to the normal releases of SSC officers and Superannuation
and Premature Retirement of Permanent Commission Officers. The
normal wastage is made up by recruiting civil doctors 2 to 3 times
a year and by recruiting doctors trained at AFMC, Pune.
The vacancies are filled by recruitment from Open Market as well
as from AFMC. AFMC cadets are commissioned twice a year.
Recruitment from open market is also done at least twice a year
based on requirements.”
3.3 The Committee are concerned to note the large scale vacancies
in various cadres of AFMS. The Committee have been informed that
vacancies arise due to normal releases of SSC officers, superannuation
and premature retirement of permanent Commission Officers.
3.4 The Committee desire that since most of these vacancies are
anticipated, timely action should be taken to fill up these vacancies.
A career profile in respect of officers should be prepared by the
DGAFMS so that a well planned recruitment programme can be
worked out and there is no deficiency in the sanctioned strength of
officers at any given point of time.
13

14
3.5 The Committee also desire that Government should review
tenure of Short Service Commission Officers in AFMS who are
released from service at a young age. The Committee desire that
SSC medical officers and other staff should have a minimum tenure
of 15 years with 5 years’ extension so that experience and knowledge
gained by the doctors, technical and para-medical staff could be
gainfully utilized. The Committee, further, desire that the retirement
age of PG teachers be increased to 65 years and that of nursing and
technical para-medical staff be increased to 58 years. Government
should also consider time-bound promotion policy for AFMS doctors
and other staff so as to discourage premature retirement/resignation
of permanent commission officers. The Committee are of the view
that for the purpose, if necessary, Government may amend the
existing service rules.
AUTHORISED AND HELD STRENGTH OF DOCTORS
3.6 The Ministry of Defence has furnished detailed information on
the sanctioned and actual strength of Doctors posted in command and
zonal hospitals and field units as under:
Hosp type Auth Held
Command 331 543
Zonal/Mid-Zonal/ 1251 1734
Peripheral Hospitals
Field Units 3858 3011
Total 5440 5288
EASTERN COMMAND
Hosp type Auth Held
Command 37 72
Zonal/Mid-Zonal/ 160 272
Peripheral Hospitals
Field units 269 201
Total 466 545

15
3.7 About the transfer policy of doctors, the following information
has been furnished by the Ministry:
“Transfer policy of non-selection grade rank officers
(a) Medical Officers:  Guidelines for posting Medical Officers up
to the rank of Lt. Col. (& equivalent) is as follows:—
(i) On commission: Postings to hospitals 0-6 months depending
upon the schedule to Medical Officers Basic Course.
(ii) After Medical Officers Basic Course:  Posting to Field as
Regimental Medical Officers or Medical Officers in Field
Ambulances/Ships/Air Force Stations.
(iii) Subsequent postings is to Field Ambulances/Military
Hospitals/Ships/Air Force Stations/Paramilitary
Organizations/Recruiting Organizations/DRDO/Border
Roads/Chief of the Army Staff Guard depending on
organizational requirements and posting profile of officers.
(b) Specialist Officers
(i) Officers Possessing Post Graduate Degree in Clinical or Para
clinical Subject prior to commission: On completion of first
tenure of 1 year, these officers are posted to work
independently in hospitals or Field Ambulances as
authorization and as per service requirements.
(ii) Officers Ex Advance Course: On completion of Advance
course, officers are posted to work under a Senior Advisor/
Senior Specialists for one year. However, this may not be
feasible, till such time adequate number of officers are
available in the respective specialities. In the specialities
where deficiency exists officers ex-advance course are posted
to meet the service requirement. Thereafter these officers
are posted to work independently in hospitals or Field
Ambulances/Ships/Air Force Stations as per service
requirements.
(c) Super Specialists Officers
Depending on the speciality, availability of the vacancies, number
of officers in a particular super speciality and service requirements
officers immediately after training/obtaining Super Specialist
qualification are posted to a centre in the concerned super speciality .
Subsequently the officer is posted alternatively to hospital not having

16
the respective Super Speciality Centre and then to a super speciality
centre.
(d) Tenure
Generally tenure of appointment is 2-3 years. Tenure in High
Altitude Area and Recruiting Organization is of 2 yrs. only. Tenures of
staff officers at Army Hqrs. and Instructors at Army Medical Corps
Centre & School, AFMC Pune is 3-4 years. A minimum gap between
two High Altitude tenures is 6 years and between two Field tenures
is 5 years.
(e) In order to fulfill the Armed Forces role and responsibilities in
peace and war, the organization requirements always have an
overriding consideration vis-a-vis all other requirements.
Notwithstanding any provisions/guidelines on posting or tenure,
posting including compassionate postings are governed by this
overriding important criteria. Depending on organizational requirements
tenures may be truncated, officers be posted prematurely, or previously
granted Compassionate Ground Posting or collocation with spouse may
be reviewed and curtailed.”
3.8 As regards Transfer Policy of Selection Grade Ranks, the
Ministry of Defence stated:—
“(a) Tenure: An endeavor is made to ensure that officers have
two tenures in each selection grade rank up to the rank of
Major General (and equivalent). These will include tenures
in Staff/Command and or various specialist appointments.
This enables officers in selection grade ranks to have
adequate exposure in different appointments.
(b) The normal duration of tenure in various select ranks is as
under:—
          Sl.No. Rank Tenure
(a) Colonel (& Equivalent) 2-3 years
(b) Brigadier (& Equivalent) 1-2 years
(c) Major General (& Equivalent) 1-2 years
(c) The duration of the tenure may be extended/curtailed based
upon the organizational requirements and exigencies of
services.

17
(d) The duration of tenure in the rank of Colonel (& equivalent)
may be extended up to 4 years in the following
appointments:—
(i) Instructional appointments at AFMC Pune and AMC
Centre & School.
(ii) Super Specialist Centres at various hospitals.
(iii) Staff appointments at Service Hqrs.
Provisions for meeting individual officers requirements
There is a provision for compassionate ground postings which
is considered objectively on the merit of each case. An Officer can
apply for compassionate posting for Medical Reasons, Children
Education, Financial Reasons, Posting from Field to Field, Spouse
Posting and Last Tenure Posting. These are considered favourably
subject to the merit of each application, overall organizational
requirements and the availability of vacancies in the choice stations.
Inter-service postings:  The officers are rotated amongst the
services without change in uniform on tenure basis for giving
exposure to the prevailing ethos in the services. Specialist officers
are also posted to inter service hospitals depending upon the
requirement of various specialists in different services.
Conclusion: These instructions and guidelines have been laid
down to ensure objectiveness, fairness and transparency in
placements and posting of officers in order to ensure organizational
effectiveness in times of peace and war. These guidelines do not,
however, confer any right on officers to represent against posting
quoting these orders. It is emphasized that station and tenure of
posting are dependent on various parameters such as organization
requirements, overall manpower situation, career management of
officers, officers profile, professional competence, individual
requirement, availability of vacancies and chain posting. While all
possible endeavor is made to conform to the guidelines enunciated
in the policy, the organizational requirements take over riding
precedence over all other stated parameters.”
3.9 The Committee during evidence enquired the reasons for more
than sanctioned strength of doctors at command hospital when there
is deficiency in field units. The DGAFMS stated:—
“This is peace formation. If you see if carefully, the number you
can see is slightly less because they have been pooled into

18
command officers. But during wartime, these medical officers go
back forthwith in that area.”
3.10 The Committee wanted to know the number of doctors that
normally stay in Mumbai and Delhi for various reasons, the Ministry
furnished the following information:
Officers posted in Delhi:—
Service Auth Posted Remarks
Army 174 327 Most of the Officers are posted
because of requirement of Specialist
and Super Specialist at Base Hospital
& Army Hospital (R&R).
Navy 14 27 4 Of ficers posted in Inter Service
Appointment. 11 Officers posted
within the Specialists/Super specialist
posts to provide Super Specialist cover
in Army Hospital (R&R) and Base
Hospital.
Air Force 64 95
Officers posted in Mumbai:—
Service Auth Posted Remarks
Army 10 25 15 Officers posted as Specialist and
Super Specialist
Navy 146 148
Air Force 8 8
3.11 The Committee wanted to know the married accommodation
provided to DGMS doctors. DG(AFMS) informed that allotment is
through general pool which is around 30% in case of Captain & 60-
80% in case of Major and above. There is no specific accommodation
for Medical Officers.
3.12 Elaborating further, DGAFMS in a note to the Committee
stated:—
“Quota System of Govt. Married Accommodation:—At present there
is no system for earmarking Govt. Married Accommodation for

19
Armed Forces Medical Services (AFMS) Officers [Medical, Dental
AMC (Non Tech.)/SDM officers and Members of MNS]. However
in certain stations earmarked accommodation exists for certain
specialist officers belonging to discipline of Surgery, Medicine,
Anesthesiology, and Obstetrics & Gynaecology . The waiting time
for accomodation for specialist officers at all level is as under:—
(a) In Metropolitan Cities:—
(i) Capt./Maj. — 2 to 2
1/2 years
(ii) Lt. Cols. — Upto 2 years
(iii) Cols./Brigs. — 1 to 1
1/2 years
(iv) Maj. Gen. — upto 1 year
(b) In Other than Metropolitan Cities:—
(i) Capt./Maj. — 1 to 1 2/3 years
(ii) Lt. Cols. — Upto 1 year
(ii) Cols./Brigs. _ 6 months to 1 year
(iv) Maj. Gen. — Earmarked”
3.13 The Committee are constrained to note that whereas the
actual strength of doctors posted in command hospitals is much more
than the authorized strength, there is more than 20% deficiency of
the doctors in field units vis-a-vis authorized strength. This shows
that more doctors are being posted in command hospitals at the cost
of field Units.
3.14 The Committee are not inclined to accept the reasons given
by DGAFMS that it is a peace time formation and during war time
these medical officers go back to the field units. Even during peace
time there should not be any deficiency of doctors in field units so
that the troops receive adequate medical care and remain fit and
healthy to take on any challenge there. The Committee, therefore,
strongly recommend that the Ministry should look into the matter
and take urgent steps to post doctors at field units as per the
authorized strength.
3.15 The Committee further note that the number of doctors
posted in Delhi and Mumbai is double of the authorized strength
because of requirement of specialists and super specialists at hospitals
in these cities. The Committee would like the Government to look
into the lopsided postings and take corrective measures in this regard.
As recommended in an earlier paragraph, the Committee desire the
Government to set up a Committee to review the authorized strength

20
of doctors in various levels of hospitals and field units taking into
consideration the necessity of posting more specialists and super
specialists at command and zonal levels but at the same time
ensuring that there is no shortage of doctors in field units both in
peace time and war time. The Committee desire that adequate reserve
doctors/staff should be kept for leave vacancies so that there is no
deficiency on account of doctors and other staff proceeding on leave/
training.
3.16 The Committee are further constrained to note that at present
there is no system of earmarking Govt. Married Accommodation for
AFMS officers. Only in certain stations earmarked accommodation
exists for certain specialists officers belonging to disciplines of
surgery, medicine, anaesthesiology, obstetrics and gynaecology. The
Committee further note the waiting time for accommodaiton for
specialist officers in Metropolitan cities can be more than two years.
Keeping in view their service requirements which involve medical
exigencies, the Committee recommend that there should be separate
pool with earmarked accommodations for AFMS officers near the
hospitals.
3.17 The Committee understand that investigations/enquiries
against the Medical Officers are often constituted under the purview
of the AFMS. The Committee, in this regard, strongly desire that in
the case of such investigations against a lady officer in AFMS or
any other Defence Services, a lady member should be invariably
appointed on the Board of Enquiry to ensure equity and fair justice.
AUTHORISED AND POSTED STRENGTH OF PARA-MEDICAL
STAFF:
3.18 In regard to authorized and held strength of para-medical
staff posted in various regions, the Ministry furnished the following
information:
Army
The authorized and posted strength of the para-medical staff is as
under:—
Para-medical Staff Distribution As Per Commands
Sl.No. Commands Authorised Held Strength
12 3 4
1. North Comd. 2447 2330
2. South West Comd. 1117 906

21
12 3 4
3. East Comd. 2548 2309
4. Central Comd. 2441 1915
5. South Comd. 2748 2210
6. West Comd. 2209 1776
Total 13510 11446
Navy
   The strength of paramedic staff in various regions are as follows:
Auth Held
(a) Western Naval Command, Mumbai 911 816
(b) Eastern Naval Command, Vishakhapatnam 273 411
(c) Southern Naval Command, Kochi 313 413
(d) Andaman Nicobar Command 83 147
(e) Others 76 94
Air Force
Paramedical Staff Distribution as Per Command
Sl.No. Commands Strength
1. Western Air Command 693
2. Southern Western Air Command 373
3. Training Commands 740
4. Eastern Air Command 475
5. Central Air Command 263
6. Maintenance Command 386
7. Southern Air Command 44
8. Andaman & Nicobar Command 23
9. AIR Head Quarters 291
Total 3288

22
3.19 On a specific query regarding sanctioned strength and actual
number of supporting staff (Nursing Assistance, Ambulance Assistant
and Nursing Technical category persons) posted in Northern-Eastern
region and border areas as under:
Sl.No. Units Authorised Posted
1. In all DGMS (Army) units 26,606 24,461
2. In North-East Region 2,974 3,004
3. In border areas 7,321 7,484
3.20 The Committee are constrained to note that large scale
deficiency in posting strength of paramedical staff against the
authorized strength in most of the service commands. The Committee
would like the Ministry of Defence to take urgent steps to fill up
the vacancies and take concrete steps so that such a situation does
not arise in future.

CHAPTER IV
AFMS HOSPITALS & THEIR UPGRADATION
4.1 AFMS has a total 127 hospitals in the three forces. The Ministry
of Defence has furnished the following details about the AFMS hospitals
spread across the country:
DGMS (Army)
Medical Advisor to Chief of Army Staff
Units
•T raining Centre—AMC Centre & School, Lucknow
• Military Hospitals—Total, including — 109
Army Hospital (Research & Referral) Delhi — 01
Military Hospital (Cardio Thoracic Centre), Pune — 01
Command Hospitals — 05
• Field Ambulances — 87
• Station/Field Health Organisations — 39
• Military Dental Centres — 139
• Nursing Schools — 6
DGMS (Navy)
Advisor to Chief of Naval Staff
Units
•T otal Naval Hospitals including — 7
Indian Naval Hospital Ship Asvini, Mumbai
• Institute of Naval Medicine, Mumbai — 01
• Dental Centres — 12
• Nursing Schools — 2
• Sick Bays — In Every Naval establishment
DGMS (Air Force)
He is Advisor to Chief of Air Staff
Units
•T otal Air Force Hospitals including — 11
Command Hospital Air Force, Bangalore
• Air Force Central Medical Establishment, New Delhi — 01
• Institute of Aero Space Medicine, Bangalore
• Station Medicare Centres—In every Air Force establishment
23

24
4.2 The Committee enquired if the number is adequate to take
care of all Armed Force Personnel, the Ministry stated:
“The number of medical units of the Armed Forces are adequate
to take care of the large number of Armed Forces personnel.
However, these medical establishments may require restructuring
involving additional specialist facilities and manpower.”
4.3 Asked if any review has been made on the facilities available
in various hospitals and the need for upgradation of some of these
hospitals especially in border areas, the Ministry furnished the following
information:—
Upgradation of infrastructures of military hospitals
“A review of the medical facilities available in various hospitals of
the Armed Forces was made by a Committee for Modernisation of
Hospitals appointed by the DGAFMS. After taking a comprehensive
review, the committee recommended a plan for mdoernisation of
hospitals of the Armed Forces. This modernisation plan caters to
all the hospitals of Armed Forces including the hospitals in the
border areas. The plan at a total cost of Rs. 432 crore approx has
been presented to Ministry of Defence and DGAFMS has been
advised that the entire Plan be made into Annual Acquisition Plan
in next three to four years within the annual budget allocation for
each year.
A study on review of medical establishment and rationalization of
medical cover during Peace and Operations has been carried out
recently under the aegis of Operational Logistic (OL) Directorate.
The aim of study was to review existing military hospitals in terms
of bed occupancy, various facilities available with a view to
effectively re-deploy resources to achieve optimization in peace
and war. Study has recommended new hospitals in border areas
like Jaisalmer, Doda, Kargil and Gopalpur by re-locating certain
hospitals in peace areas with less work load. Recommendations of
committee are under consideration of Army Head Quarters.
Upgradation of infrastructures of Naval Hospitals
INHS Asvini was recently modernized at a cost of Rs. 136 crores.
Two new hospitals are under construction at Karwar and Ezhimala.
All Indian Naval Ships carrying Medical Officers have been
equipped with Cardiac monitors and defibrillators, Nebulizers,
Medical Waste disposal equipments. For the current financial year
Central Purchase of 1900 Lakhs & Local Purchase of 503 Lakhs
has been sanctioned.”

25
4.4 In regard to proposal for new Army hospitals, the representative
of AFMS stated:
“There are places like Doda, Gopalpur and Jaisalmer which need
to raise new hospitals because of the operational requirements. We
are trying to relocate the beds in places like Dharamshala and
Palampur”.
4.5 As regards naval hospitals, DG (AFMS) stated:
“This INHS Ashwini is a command hospital for Navy in Mumbai.
It is furnished with every equipment available. It is one of the
finest hospitals that has come up. Besides, that, they have got two
zonal hospitals at Visakhapatnam and Cochin. In addition to this,
two more hospitals are coming at Karwar and Exhimala. Karwar
is almost completed. By the end of this year, it will be operational
though they are running a small set-up. A MI room has come
there at Ezhimala. The hospital will take about a year and a half.
By the end of 2007, the Navy will have two extra hospitals.”
4.6 In regard to Air Force Hospitals, DG (AFMS) stated:
“As far as modernization of Air Force Hospitals is concerned, it
has been completed. Kalaikonda, which is a very small hospital,
has been upgraded to certain operational requirement. We have
established another Air Force pilots testing unit at Jorhat. Previously,
it was one and that was in Delhi. So, the eastern pilots can go to
Jorhat. They have been equipped with all equipment. Most modern
equipment has been provided to them.”
4.7 In a further note to the Committee the Ministry informed that
a proposal for construction of 54 Army Hospitals housed in old
buildings for an estimated cost of Rs. 2960 crore is under consideration
with the Govt.
4.8 It was further stated that at present command hospital Air
Force Bangalore is accommodated in a number of standalone buildings
of various vintages. It has been proposed to replace the building with
Modern Multi-speciality Hospitals complex with an estimated cost of
Rs. 283 crores.
R&R Hospital, Delhi
4.9 The Committee were informed that R&R hospital in Delhi has
been modernized with state of art facilities. In regard to the expenditure

26
incurred on the creation of new facilities in the R&R hospitals, the
following table has been furnished by the Ministry:
“The expenditure incurred on the upgradation of Army Hospital
(R&R) is as follows:
Financial Year Cost (Rs. Crore)
1996-97 4.15
1997-98 29.08
1998-99 2.16
1999-2000 24.56
2000-01 34.28
2001-02 67.69
2002-03 21.23
2003-04 55.19
2004-05 138.55
2005-06 57.07
Total 433.96
Some of the new facilities added in Army Hospital (R&R) are as
follows:
(a) Positron Emission Tomogragphy (PET) Scanner
(b)  Gamma Camera
(c) 3 Tesla Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI)
(d) Assisted Reproductive Treatment (ART) Centre
(e) Molecular Biology Lab
(f) Gama Knife
(g) Bone Marrow Transplant Centre
(h) Digital Subtraction Angiography (DSA) Unit
(j) Robotic Joint Replacement surgery (Robodoc)
(k) Human Patient Simulator for training
The Committee visited R&R hospital for on the spot study.”

27
Leh Hospital
4.10 The Committee in their study tour to J&K in October, 2004
visited Srinagar and Leh Hospital. I was observed that there were
many patients in the Leh hospital suffering from high altitude illnesses.
The Committee enquired if there is any proposal to strengthen hospitals,
the representative of Ministry Stated:
“At Leh, we have general hospital with 200 beds. In addition we
are establishing high altitude research center to take care of all
high altitude illnesses alongwith DRDO.”
4.11 Explaining about the procurement of new oxygen
manufacturing devices for the hospital, the DG (AFMS) stated:—
“...There is something like oxygen manufacturing device which was
lacking. Recently we have got approval for such devices. Now,
these plants can take oxygen from atmosphere and fill the bottle
also. The field trials is planned in month of January in order to
check whether that equipment is going to work in that atmosphere.
We are giving three plants to the northern side, and two plants to
the North-East. The five plants that will be given will have
aluminum bottles which can be filled and which a Jawan can carry
on his shoulder. These are very light. We have taken care of that.
The problem being faced by the North-Indian troops is basically
hypertension. There are also high incidence particularly of mountain
sickness. For that we have designed rapid induction courses for
which we are already doing research. By 2007, we are very sure
that troops who are coming from North will be quickly inducted.
We are paying special attention to all these hospitals to which I
have personally gone alongwith my team. We have supplied MRI,
CT Scan to every center in that side starting from Srinagar, Leh,
and in one more hospital which is coming in Pratappur. Our
attention is more this area because our threat perception is also
more on that side. We can assure you that by 2007 they will have
one of the finest medical systems available in this area.”
4.12 The Committee note that AFMS has a total of 127 hospitals
in the three forces. The Army (R&R) hospital has the state of art
facilities and has been recently upgraded with new facilities.
Similarly, Naval Hospital, Ashwani is also being modernized with
latest facilities. The Committee desire that DGAFMS should strive
to have such state-of-the-art facilities initially at all the Command
Hospitals and then gradually at Zonal Hospitals so that the service
personnel may get best possible medical treatment at their vicinity.

28
This in turn will ease pressure on the Referral and Command
hospitals.
4.13 The Committee note that a modernisation plan of Rs. 432
crore for upgradation of hospitals has been presented by DGAFMS
to Ministry of Defence and DGAFMS has been advised that entire
plan be made into Annual Acquisition Plans in the next 3-4 years
within the annual budget allocation for each year. The Committee
desire that the Ministry should give priority to the modernisation
and expansion plan of AFMS and ensure that the requisite funds
for the plan are made available in the annual budgets and it is
implemented as per the schedule.
4.14 The Committee note that the study on a review of medical
establishment and rationalization of medical cover during operations
has recommended new hospitals in border area Doda, Gopalpur and
Jaisalmer. The Committee desire that an early decision be taken in
this regard so that our forces and supporting organizations at the
border can be given proper medical care.
4.15 The Committee further note that some Military hospitals
and Air Force Command hospital at Bangalore are housed in old
buildings of the British times. A plan for construction of new
buildings is under consideration of Government. The Committee
desire the Government to expedite the approval of the same and
allocate requisite fund to replace the old buildings with Multi-
speciality Hospital complex before any untoward incident takes place.
4.16 The Committee, further desire that the problems faced by
our jawans at high altitude should be studied and requisite
equipment/facilities be made available to treat such illnesses on the
spot at such places. Also the proposed research centre at Leh to
study all high altitude illnesses be expedited.
4.17 The Committee understand that some private organizations
have donated substantially for the setting up of facilities/
modernization at the Army Hospitals. The Committee, therefore,
recommend that these organizations should be exempted from the
deduction of Income Tax for the amount of donation.
FIELD UNITS
4.18 About the medical facilities provided in the field units and
the Plan for their upgradaiton, the Ministry furnished details as under:
“The medical facilities are provided in the field through
field medical units known as “Field Ambulances”. These

29
Field Ambulances provide the following medical facilities to the
troops:
(a) Casualty evacuation
(b) Basic medical cover
(c) Basic diagnostic facilities
(d) Surgical treatment
(e) Preventive Health cover
Modernization of Field Medical Units was carried out 2 years ago
by DGAFMS and field ambulances were provided with 34 new
equipments as given in list placed as Appendix “6A” . In addition,
medical equipment required by the field medical units are being
procured form time to time.”
4.19 When asked about the steps being taken by the Ministry for
providing mobile medical treatment facilities for the field military
personnel as well the civil society residing there, the Ministry informed:
“Mobile medical treatment facilities for the field military personnel
are being provided through RAP (Regimental Aid Post) where a
RMO (Regimental Medical Officer) is posted with basic medical
equipment and treatment facilities. ADS (Advanced Dressing
Station) and Forward Surgical Centre (FSC) is being provided by
the field ambulance. These have 45 beds along with operation
theatre and diagnostic elements like X-Ray, laboratory etc. Civil
population residing in low intensity conflict zones, inaccessible areas
where civil medical infrastructure does not exist is also covered by
Armed Forces Medical Services as aid to civil authority. Medical
camps are being regularly conducted in Northern and North-East
sectors.”
4.20 The Committee note that modernization of field medical
units was carried out two years ago by DGAFMS wherein the field
medical units are provided with 34 new equipment.
4.21 The Committee are of the view that modernisaiton is an on-
going process and technologies in medical field are being upgraded
very rapidly. Our soldiers at the borders should have access to the
latest medical care facilities including mobile hospitals by road, Air
Ambulance services and, therefore, a six monthly review of facilities
at local level and annual review by DGAFMS should be carried out
so as to upgrade the same as per requirement. DGAFMS should

30
also undertake surprise visit to monitor facilities. The Committee
strongly emphasise that there should not be any deficiency in the
strength of doctors and equipment and other manpower in the field
units.
4.22 The Committee further note with satisfaction that AFMS is
providing medical cover to civil population residing in low intensity
conflict zones, inaccessible areas. Such service to civil population
would definitely improve confidence of local population with Armed
Forces which is so essential for maintaining cordial relationship.
The Committee desire that such services be extended to all border
areas where adequate medical facilities are not in place.
IMPACT OF 10 PER CENT CUT IN RECRUITMENT OF MEDICAL
STAFF
4.23 When asked about the problems generated as a result of 10%
cut in manpower recruitment to the medical staff to the Armed Forces,
the Ministry stated:—
“Implementation of 10% cut in Civilian manpower particularly in
essential categories like Ward Sahayika, Barber, Washer man,
Safaiwala/Wali in Armed Forces hospitals has adversely affected
the patient care. Cut in some trades like Dietician., Physiotherapists,
Occupational Therapists, Psychologists, Medical Physicist etc. has
rendered the concerned departments redunant as only one post is
authorized in these categories in one hospital.”
4.24 The Committee note that 10 per cent cut in civilian
manpower particularly in essential categories has adversely affected
the patient care. Also cut in trades like dietician, physiotherapists
etc. has adversely affected the functioning of these departments as
only one post is authorized in these categories in one hospital. The
Committee, therefore, strongly recommend that cut in recruitment
should not be made applicable to the civil manpower connected
with the operationalisation of armed forces medical services as it
has direct ramifications on the health care of our officers in general
and troops in particular.
DOCTOR PATIENT RATIO
4.25 The Committee enquired about the average ratio of patients
and Doctors in various command, zonal and field units, the Ministry,
in a written note, provided the following details:
“The present ratio of staffing in military hospitals as compared to
corporate hospitals in Delhi and staffing norms recommended by

31
various committees is given below:—
Sl.No. Recommending Type of Medical Spl Offrs Nur Staff
Authority Authority Officer Offrs
(a) Sir Ganga Ram Corporate 1 per 4 1 per 4 1 per 1.1 3 per bed
Hospital Hospital beds beds beds
(b) Escorts Corporate 1 per 4 1 per 3 2 per 1 6 per bed
Hospitals beds beds bed
(c) Batra Hospital Corporate 1 per 3 1 per 5 1.3 per 1 4 per bed
Hospital beds beds bed
(d) National Institute of Autonomous 1 per 15 1 per 18- 1 per 3 2 per bed
Health & Family Body beds 21 beds beds
Welfare 1988
(e) Bureau of Indian Govt. 1 per 10 6 per 30 1 per 3 2 per bed
Standards, 2001 Committee beds beds beds
(f) Bajaj Committee Govt. 1 per 15 1 per 17- 1 per 3 3 per bed
1980 Committee beds 20 beds beds
(g) Lt Gen N Foley Inter-Services 1 per 15 1 per 17 1 per 6 2 per bed
Committee 1993 Committee beds beds beds
(h) Existing Army — 1 per 50 0.7 per 1 per 5 0.8 per
Norms 1960 beds 1000 to 20 bed
Vintage troops beds
(1 per 33
beds)
(j) Recommended by — 1 per 21 1 per 15 1 per 8 1.25 per
ASEC (2006) for beds beds beds bed
phase-I of review
of establishment
4.26 On a specific query, the Ministry informed that the norms of
patient doctor ratio has not changed since 1960.
The Defence Secretary in this regard clarified,
“As far as general duty medical officers are concerned, the Armed
Forces are much better. They are better than the norms prescribed.
It is in the specialists side where the norms are much less. Then,
there is one more thing which you used to consider when you
compare it with the civil hospitals. The civil hospitals have far
more OPD patients. The bed strength may be less but the OPD is
very high as compared to Armed Forces. But again in the Armed
Forces, we have to have more staff and doctors available to meet

32
different kind of a scenario. So, the operation threatres must have
proper medical support. That is why there will be a large number
of general duty medical officers and specialists who are actually
working in the hospitals are less. At the same time there are some
hospitals, which we will see later on, where there are large number
of specialists. In fact, there the general duty medical officers are
less. But the specialists can also work as general duty medical
officers. For example, a gastroenterologist can work as general
physician. So, this kind of inter-change of duties are done. The
Commanding Officer of that hospital is empowered to do that.”
4.27 The Committee are constrained to note that norms for
staffing pattern are much lower in AFMS hospitals not only as
compared to corporate hospitals but also civil hospitals. The present
staffing pattern of 1 medical officer per 50 beds and 0.8 staff per
bed being followed in AFMC pertains to 1960 vintage. The
Committee are unhappy to note that Lt. Gen. Foley Committee
recommendation made in 1993 for staffing pattern of 1 medical officer
for 15 beds and 2 staff per bed was not implemented by Government.
ASEC (2006) has now recommended staffing pattern of 1 medical
officer per 21 beds and 1.25 staff per bed.
4.28 The Committee desire the Government to take necessary
action to implement the new staffing norms for AFMC as
recommended by ASEC in a time bound manner so that quality
services can be made available to armed force personnel and their
dependents.

CHAPTER V
SPECIALISTS FACILITIES IN HOSPITALS
5.1 Specialist facilities are provided in hospitals with a bed strength
of 76 and above. The basic specialist facilities like Medicine, Surgery,
Gynaecology are provided for hospitals upto 200 beds upward.
Additional specialist services such as Radiology and Pathology are
provided in hospitals with upto 400 beds. In Zonal hospitals additional
allied specialities i.e. Psychiatry, Skin, Paediatrics, Orthopaedics, Eye,
Ear Nose Throat (ENT), etc. are provided. At Command Hospital, base
Hospitals in additional to Basic and Allied Specialities certain Super-
Specialities such as Cardiology, Neurology, Nephrology, Gastroenterology,
Urology, Reconstructive Surgery & Oncosurgery etc. are provided.
Based on the bed strength there are 1342 Specialists and 210 Super
Specialists in the Armed Forces Hospital. Besides this there are
665 specialists in the annotated appointments, totalling to 2295, this
includes 5% cushion (78 numbers) in the Pool of Specialists for AFMS.
5.2 In a presentation to the Committee, the Ministry informed the
following Pool of Specialists in the AFMS:
• No. of Specialists based on bed strength — 1342
• Number of Super Specialists — 210
• 5% Cushion for future after approval of Government — 78
• Annotated appointments — 665
Total Specialist Strength — 2295
5.3 Giving break up status of various specialists in AFMS the
Ministry of Defence furnished the following information:
General Medicine 285
Dermatology 48
Psychiatry 56
Anaesthesia 209
Obstetrics & Gynaecology 133
33

34
Preventive & Social Medicine 150
Orthopaedics 30
Pharmacology 8
Physiology 18
Tuberculosis & Respiratory Medicine 12
Marine Medicine 17
Forensic Medicine 4
Hospital Administration 87
Paediatrics 82
Radio diagnosis 93
General Surgery 297
Ophthalmology 97
Ear Nose & Throat (ENT) 87
Pathology including Biochemistry 169
Microbiology 30
Anatomy 9
Forensic Medicine 4
Aviation Medicine 90
Master of Dental Surgery (for Dental Officers) 123
Radiotherapy 4
Medical Informatics 8
5.4 When asked if there is a need to improve staff pattern in
specialist and super-super specialist cadre, the Ministry stated:—
“There is a need to improve the existing status of basic speciality,
especially in following subjects:—
(a) Surgery
(b) Medicine
(c) Anesthesia
(d) Orthopaedics
(e) Obstetrics and Gynaecology
(f) Pathology
The super specialist status in the AFMS is adequate.”

35
5.5 In written reply to a question on the need for review of
specialist facilities in the various categories of hospitals, the Ministry
furnished the following details:
“The proposals to review specialist facilities available in various
categories of hospitals have been included by the Army Head
Quarters in the revision of establishment of these hospitals with
the aim to improve the staffing pattern particularly in respect of
technical manpower and specialist. The revision is proposed to be
progressed in a phased manner as under:—
(a) Phase-I (7 Hospitals): All command hospitals of the Army,
Army Hospital (R&R) and Base Hospital, Delhi Cantt.
(b) Phase-II (20 Hospitals): All Ministry Hospitals/Base Hospitals
(400 bedded and above) and Military Hospital (Cardio
Thoracic Centre), Pune.
(c) Phase-II (78 Hospitals): All remaining hospitals.”
5.6 About the demand for providing more specialist facilities in
base and other hospitals, the Ministry has furnished as under:
“According to DGAFMS there is a demand from the clientele for
having basic specialities in all the hospitals up to periphery level.
To meet this requirement additional allotment of upto 300 vacancies
of medical officers by temporarily suppressing 350 vacancies of
regular army has been approved in principle by the Chief of the
Army Staff for further processing.”
5.7 When asked the areas where specialists are not sufficient, the
Ministry stated:—
“There is a functional deficiency in basic specialities because of
medical officers proceeding on study leave/mandatory army
courses etc. A case for authorization of training, drafting, leave
reserve (TDLR) is under consideration of Ministry of Defence.”
5.8 To facilitate Armed Forces Personnel to avail treatment from
civil hospitals the Government issued orders in 1998. In this regard
the Ministry stated:—
“Government of India (GoI) orders issued vide letter No. 20028/
DGAFMS/DG-3A/1348/D (Med.), dt. 28 March 1988 are applicable
for only specialized cardiovascular and renal transplant therapy.
This order was issued consequent to the need for advanced

36
treatment for Heart and Kidney diseases, the facility for which
were not available in Armed Forces hospitals. The order has been
amended from time to time and is applicable till date. However,
the GoI also sanctions such cases of specialized treatment for other
diseases like Cancer/Liver transplantation on a case-to-case basis.”
5.9 The Committee wanted to know the circumstances when
Defence Personnel are allowed to avail treatment under Government
expenses, the Ministry stated:
“(a) In an emergency, the service personnel & their dependents
are provided treatment in local service hospitals to the extent
possible. For specialists/super specialist care they are
referred to larger service hospitals at Govt. expenses.
(b) When no service hospital exists in a station or in the absence
of specialist facilities available locally or if it is impracticable
to transfer a case to another service hospital, these patients
could be referred to a local civil hospital.
(c) In absence of suitable accommodation or facility in the local
civil/government hospital or if patient cannot be transferred
to another hospital, the patient could be referred to local
private hospital/nursing homes for treatment.”
5.10 The Committee note with concern that only basic specialist
facilities like medicine, surgery, gynaecology are provided in
peripheral hospitals and specialist facilities like psychiatry, skin,
paediatrics, orthopaedics, ENT etc. are provided only in zonal
hospitals. Further super specializations such as cardiology, neurology,
etc. are provided only in Command and Base hospitals.
5.11 The Committee are of the view that there is a need to extend
more specialists facilities in peripheral hospitals. ENT, Skin,
paediatrics, orthopaedics related diseases and problems are very
common and therefore, peripherals hospitals should be equipped
effectively to treat such cases. The Committee further desire that
steps should also be taken to upgrade the zonal hospitals with all
specialities and super-specialist facilities as per the demands of agro-
climatic conditions so that the Armed Forces Personnel could get
these facilities at nearby place and they do not have rush to
Command Hospitals for treatment. This will ease the congestion in
the Command Hospitals. The Committee are happy to note that
specialists facilities in various categories of hospitals is under review
of Government. The Committee strongly desire that early decision
may be taken in this regard.

37
CARDIOLOGY CENTRES
5.12 The Committee enquired about the Cardiology facilities in
AFMS, the Ministry in a written note stated:
“(a) Medical specialists are available in almost all service
hospitals and they have the expertise and equipment to
stabilize and treat acute heart ailments and to treat chronic
heart disease such as Hypertension, Valvular diseases not
requiring surgery and Ischaemic Heart Diseases.
(b) There are 10 super speciality centres for cardiology and 4
centres for cardio vascular surgery in the Armed Forces as
under:
Cardiology Centres
1. AH (R&R), Delhi Cantt.
2. Command Hospital (SC), Pune
3. CH (EC), Kolkata
4. CH (CC), Lucknow
5. CH (NC), Udhampur
6. MH, Jalandhar
7. INHS, Asvini
8. CH (AF), Bangalore
9. CH (WC), Chandimandir
10. MH, Secunderabad
Cardio Vascular Surgery Centres
1. AH (R&R) Delhi Cantt.
2. CH (SC), Pune
3. MH CTC, Pune
4. CH (AF), Bangalore
The cases that require advance cardio-vascular treatment as assessed
by treating physician, are referred to these super speciality heart
centres.

38
(c) The facility for advanced cardio-vascular treatment in Armed
Forces hospitals is entitled to Armed Forces Personnel as
well their dependents. Since the number of such cases is
large and cannot be met by the existing cardiology centres,
the GoI had kindly sanctioned in the year 1988, the
treatment of such cases also in Ministry approved civil/
private hospitals under Govt. expense.
(d) In emergencies, facility of cardio-vascular treatment can be
availed even from civil/private unapproved hospitals and
the expenditure is reimbursed at Central Government Health
Scheme (CGHS) rates.”
5.13 On a query about efforts being made to open cardiology
centres so as to meet the requirement of Defence forces, the Ministry
stated:
“Cardiology centres with Catheterisation labs exist in Army Hosp.
(R&R) and Military Hospital (Cardio Thoracic Centre) Pune. These
Cardiology centres have been equipped with state of the art
equipment. All the Command Hospitals, Base Hosp. Delhi Cantt.
Military Hospital Jalandhar, 151 Base Hospital and Military Hospital
Secunderabad also have Cardiology centres with Cardiologists
posted. Every year Armed Forces reviews need of Cardiologists as
well as other super specialists and grants study leave to the
deserving postgraduate doctors who are available to be posted to
these centres. INHS Asvini at Mumbai has also a full fledged
interventional cardiology centre.
In the proposal for revision of Peace Establishments, additional
Cardiology Centres have been suggested in two Zonal Hospitals
i.e. 5 Air Force Hospital (AFH) & 7 AFH.”
5.14 During evidence the representative of Ministry of Defence
informed that they have three cardiac centres and they propose to
make it to 7, in addition to three zonal centres because the number of
clientele has increased in those areas.
5.15 In their tour report on visit to Jammu and Kashmir in October,
2004 the Committee had pointed out that there was no cardiology
specialist facility in Srinagar Hospital. The DGFMS in this regard
stated:—
“After your report, Sir, in northern command cardiology centres
have been opened in Udhampur and Leh. Similarly, we have
opened the centres in Guwahati and Jalandhar. Now we are also
planning to have one centre in Jammu. It is because that is another
area we want to cover.”

39
5.16 The Committee note that there are 10 super speciality centres
for cardiology and 4 cardio vascular centres where cases requiring
advance cardio vascular treatment are referred to by the treating
physician. The Committee further note that since the number of
such cases is large, the existing centres are not adequate to meet the
requirement of all service personnel and their dependents and
therefore the Government has approved treatment of such cases by
civil/private hospitals under Government expense. The Committee
desire that Government should also empanel private hospitals for
cardio vascular treatment.
5.17 The Committee note in the proposal for revision of peace
establishments, additional cardiology centres have been suggested
in two zonal hospitals. The Committee also note that in pursuance
of their tour report wherein they had desired more cardiology
specialist facility in military hospitals, the AFMS has opened new
cardiology centres in Udhampur, Leh, Guwahati and Jalandhar.
5.18 The Committee, however, are not satisfied by opening of
new cardiology centres in some commands. They feel that available
number of cardiology centres are still not sufficient to meet the
present-day requirements. In the recent years, due to highly stressed
working environment, number of cardio cases have considerably
increased. The Committee, therefore, desire that Government should
chalk out a time bound programme for all zonal hospitals to make
available full-fledged cardiology centres with latest equipments so
that precious lives could be saved by providing timely cardio
treatment facilities. The Committee further desire that facilities of
Video-conferencing and Tele-Medicine should be expanded.
ORTHOPAEDIC FACILITY
5.19 The AFMS has state of art orthopaedic facilities. An Artificial
Limb Centre, Pune is working directly under DGAFMS. Army Hospital
(R&R) has a state of art Joints Replacement Programme Centre.
5.20 In a presentation to the Committee, the Ministry informed:
“The state-of-the-art Joints Replacement Programme Centre is at
Army Hospital (Research & Referral), Delhi Cantt. which is one of
the best not only in Asia but in the world. They have carried out
646 complete hip joint replacements, 967 knee joint replacements,
15 elbow replacements, and 19 shoulder replacements without any
complications. All were successful surgeries.”

40
5.21 In regard to Artificial Limb Centre in Pune, the representative
of the Ministry stated:—
“Then, this Artificial Limb Centre in Pune is one of the largest
centres in the world, fully automated where Local Area Network
has been done. The state-of-art Limb and Rehabilitation Aids are
being provided (43 types) and below knee endoskeletal carbon
fibre is the latest technique artificial limb which is now being
fitted in all the patients.
There are more than 48 thousand people, including civilians,
Ex-Servicemen and Armed Forces Personnel provided with artificial
limbs since 1944 and the 25 thousand are on regular follow up as
on date.”
5.22 From the material submitted it is observed that there are only
30 Orthopaedic Specialists in AFMS. When asked if the no. of
Orthopaedic specialists is sufficient, the Ministry stated:
“Efforts are being made to reduce the deficiency of Orthopaedic
Surgeons by the following measures:—
(a) Recruiting Orthopaedic Surgeons from civil.
(b) Increasing the training capacity at the AFMS teaching
hospitals.”
5.23 The Committee are happy to note that AFMS has world
class orthopaedic centres and has been instrumental in undertaking
world class orthopaedic surgery. The beneficiaries include besides
armed force personnel, ex-servicemen and civilians. The Committee
are however constrained to note that there are only 30 orthopaedic
specialists in AFMS. The Committee desire that in view of state of
art orthopaedic centres in AFMS, more specialists should be
appointed so that more and more people, both service personnel
and civilians, may avail benefits of world class orthopaedic facilities.
NEUROLOGIST SPECIALISTS
5.24 In regard to the status of Neurological Department including
the number of Neurologists and Neurosurgeons in the AFMS, the
Ministry has furnished the following:—
“All the Command Hospitals, Base Hospital, Delhi Cantt. and Army
Hospital (R&R) have Neurology department including Neuro
Surgery element. There are 13 Neurologists and 18 Neurosurgeons

41
in the Army. Neurosurgeons are also posted in forward
neurosurgery centres at 92 Base Hospital (J&K) and 151 Base
Hospital (North East). Every year need for more Neurology centres/
specialists is assessed and accordingly one or two post graduate
doctors are being trained at civil institutions for the purpose. At
present there is one neurology centre in AF at Command Hospital
AF, Bangalore with two neurosurgeons. One neurologist is being
posted shortly. At present the centre is adequately equipped. The
hospital has Computed Tomography (CT) scan facility and Magnetic
Resonance Imaging (MRI) is being installed. The requirement of
additional two neurosurgical centres, one each at 5 AF Hospital
and 7 AF Hospital with one neurosurgeon each at both the places
has been projected in the proposed Peace Establishment (PE).”
5.25 The Committee desire that the two neurosurgical centres as
projected in the proposed Peace Establishment should be set up
urgently.
TREATMENT FOR PSYCHOLOGICAL PROBLEMS OF ARMED
FORCES PERSONNEL
5.26 The Committee enquired about the facilities available for stress
management and treatment of psychological problems of soldiers and
officers. The Committee was informed:
“All Command and Zonal military service hospitals have psychiatric
treatment, both OPD indoor. Further, Psychiatric Centres are located
in the hospitals in the area of CI Operations like:
92 Base Hospital in Srinagar
155 Base Hospital in Tejpur
151 Base Hospital in Guwahati
Primary prevention is done by:
(a) Stress management lectures given by Regiment Medical
Officers (RMO) in the units in the field.
(b) Officers, Non Commissioned Officers (NCO) and Religious
teachers are trained as resource persons in separate batches
at the psychiatric centres on short capsule course of one
week to train them in identifying & managing stress in
field.
(c) Psychiatrists in the above hospitals conduct lectures on Stress
Management on induction of troops for the first time in
Counter insurgency operations.

42
(d) Once the personnel are identified to be suffering from strees
related psychological disorders they are removed from the
work place and admitted in psychiatric centres for
observations and management.
Secondary Level
(a) After proper evaluation & diagnosis, psychiatrists attend to
these patients with
— Modern drug therapies
— Psychological forms of therapy like psychotherapy sessions/
Relaxation Techniques/Behaviorual therapy/Religious
therapies
— Sick leave to facilitate recovery
(b) Reevaluation and return to unit under sheltered employment.
(c) Only those patients who do not recover after sufficient
length of observation in sheltered employment are
discharged from service.
(d) More serious psychiatric illnesses like insanity are offered
the best available treatment with modern drugs in the
psychiatric centres and put under sheltered employment.
They are retained in service as long as possible but
discharged from service only when sheltered employment
cannot be provided or the relapses are so frequent that they
become a liability to service.
5.27 On further query on the soldiers released/retrenched due to
psychological disorders, the Ministry furnished the following data:—
Year No. of admissions in No. of Pers Percentage
Psychiatric Centres of invalided out of
Military Hospitals services
2000 2709 457 16.87
2001 2763 345 12.49
2002 4514 522 11.56
2003 4432 538 12.14
2004 4982 443 08.89

43
5.28 On use of yoga/ayurveda/mediation and other Indian systems
of medicines like the Kerala therapy in case of such problems, the
Ministry stated:—
“Stress management techniques such as breathing exercises,
mediation and yoga are actively being studied in the prevention
of heart disease alongwith diet control and life-style modifications.
The personnel who appear to be at high risk of heart diseases
who are detected during annual medical exam are advised life
style modifications to prevent the occurrence of such diseases. The
modifications known to have positive effect are weight reduction
for obese personnel, stopping of tobacco use, dietary changes,
encouragement of exercises and stress management techniques
described above. However, the role of yoga/ayurveda/mediation
and other Indian systems of medicines including Kerala Therapy
in curing heart disease has not been fully established.”
5.29 The Committee note with concern that there has been
substantial increase in stress environment leading to psychological
problems for Armed Forces Personnel. There have been increasing
reports in media where soldiers, unable to bear the highly stressed
working atmosphere, have taken extreme step of committing suicide/
attacking their officers. The troops particularly those stationed in
border areas experience loneliness and anxiety and need proper
professional counseling to de-stress themselves. The Committee,
therefore, feel that it is imperative that these troops should not only
be regularly given lectures on peace and mental relaxation through
yoga techniques/meditation but they should also have easy access to
counsellors in case of need. The Committee, therefore, recommend
the Ministry to seriously examine the issue and post doctor
counsellors specialising in this area, particularly in the field units.
The Committee also desire that there should be proper study of
reasons responsible for creation of stress and feedback received from
it should be given to the doctors for utilisation thereof in the
treatment of such patients.
TREATMENT FACILITIES FOR AIDS/HIV
5.30 The Committee enquired about the treatment facilities for
AIDS/HIV . The Ministry furnished the following information:—
“The details of preventive and curative strategies and treatment
facilities available in Armed Forces are as follows:—
(a) Priority targeted interventions for groups at high risk.
(i) Establishment of Sexually Transmitted Diseases (STD) Clinics
Armed Forces today have fifteen Sexually Transmitted

44
Diseases (STD) clinics established for early diagnosis and
treatment of cases of STD among its personnel. A close
monitoring of all STD clinics have showed early detection
of and a declining trend in the incidence of the sexually
transmitted infections.
(ii) Condom Promotion
The Armed Forces are making a concerted effort to educate
each and every soldier regarding the usages of condoms
and its advantages. The aim is to promote the basic factual
information about Human Immunodeficiency Virus (HIV/
Acquired Immuno deficiency Syndrome (AIDS).
(iii) Surveillance
Surveillance is the backbone of the prevention and control
programme of HIV/AIDS in the Armed Forces. Following
categories of people are screened for HIV:
a. All blood donors
b. All STD cases and those giving history of sexual
promiscuity
c. All antenatal cases and the husbands/children of the HIV
positive cases
d. Spouses and dependent children of HIV infected persons
e. All Intravenous drug users
f. All recipients of blood and blood products
g. Patients on dialysis
h. Suspected Aids Related Complex (ARC)/AIDS cases
i. All cases of pulmonary & extra-pulmonary tuberculosis
j. Personnel proceeding to and returning from foreign
missions/tenures abroad.
k. Other high risk cases .e.g. those who test positive for
Hepatitis B Surface Antigen (HbsAg)/Hepatitis C Virus
(HCV)/Venereal Disease Research Laboratory 9 VDLR)
etc.
l. Any other case which the treating physician deems
necessary
m. Cases undergoing invasive procedures/investigations
where risk of transmission is high.”

45
5.31 The Committee note the facilities available in Armed Forces
hospitals for the treatment of AIDS/HIV . In view of the fact that it
is assuming dangerous proportion all over the country, the Committee
desire that AFMS should be more vigilant in this regard and conduct
regular awareness programmes to educate the troops about the
disease. AFMS should also undertake more research programmes in
this area.
TRADITIONAL SYSTEMS OF TREATMENT
5.32 The Ministry informed that AFMS does not use Indian system
to medicine in any of its hospitals. When asked the efforts being made
to introduce Homoeopathy and Ayurveda system in Service Hospitals
the Ministry stated:
“Armed Forces Medical Services have been debating the
introduction of the Indian System of Medicines and Homeopathy
in services since 1956. However these systems have not been
introduced at a large scale due to the specific role of the AFMS to
support the services during war as the Ayurveda and Homeopathy
systems do not cater for these wartime requirements. However,
efforts are being made to introduce these systems for the families
and the population living in the civil areas by opening up facilities
in the Cantonment General Hospitals. Also, extensive research is
being undertaken by Defence Research and Development
Organisation (DRDO) on various herbal medicines and remedies,
without heavy metal contents for introduction into the Armed
Forces.”
5.33 The DG (AFMS) in this regard stated during evidence:—
“There is a consideration for that also. We are working out. The
problem is coming up only in the mixing up of these systems.
Now we have taken a decision that alternative medicine will be
given a separate place and they will be allowed to develop with
the help of ICMR and DRDO under MOD. We are going to do the
follow up.”
5.34 The Committee are constrained to note that AFMS does not
have any hospitals and education system which are based on Indian
system of medicine and homeopathy which is being used worldwide.
The Indian systems viz., Ayurvedic, Unani, Sidha etc. are proven
systems being practiced since ancient time. Though they may not
cater to the wartime requirements, these systems are very effective
in some areas and service personnel have great faith in them.

46
5.35 The Committee, therefore, desire that Government should
examine the feasibility of introducing the Indian system of medicine
and homeopathy in various hospitals alongwith allopathic system
for service personnel.

CHAPTER VI
MEDICAL PREPAREDNESS FOR CONTAGIOUS
DISEASES AND NBC WAR
6.1 The Committee enquired about the medical preparedness to
tackle the outbreak of various contagious diseases. The Ministry
stated:—
“(a) Contagious disease surveillance and containment activities
are done at each and every level. At the unit level, Medical
Officers/Regimental Medical Officers (RMOs) are trained in
carrying out various preventive and control activities. At
the station level, disease surveillance, prevention and control
activities are carried out by specialists in Preventive and
Social Medicine posted at Station Health Organization/Field
Health Organizations.
(b) Assistant Directors of Health at Command and Corps levels
and Deputy Assistant Director of Health at  Division levels
are actively involved in monitoring the contagious diseases
and enforcing the preventive and control measures.
(c) Regular reporting & notification of contagious diseases to
the higher authorities is done at station levels under Senior
Executive Medical officers. Preventive and Control measures
are closely monitored by specialists in Preventive and Social
Medicine, MOs and RMOs at each level.
(d) A close liaison is kept with civil health authorities and
Director General Health Services by Director General Armed
Forces Medical Services and his staff regarding outbreak of
any contagious disease in civil population adjoining the
military cantonments for immediate implementation of
prevention and control measures to safeguard the health of
troops and families.
6.2 On a further query on separate pool or medical staff in this
regard the Ministry inter-alia stated:-
“Armed Forces Medical Services are authorized 154 specialists in
preventive medicine & public health (including 13 specialists
authorized to department of community medicine at Armed Forces
47

48
Medical College, Pune). Out of these 144 specialists (including 10
in AFMC, Pune) are held with the Armed Forces Medical Services.
Among the specialist para medical staff who are health assistants,
the Armed Forces Medical Services are authorized 393 persons
and posted with 381 health assistances. The specialists in preventive
medicine and public health alongwith specialist para medical staff
are posted in all the 61 station & field health organizations in full
complement. Specialists in preventive medicine are also posted to
various HQs at Divisional, Corps, Area and Command level.
Paramedical staff performing specialized health duties posted apart
from SHOs/FHOs, in Field Ambulances and Military Hospitals.”
Preparedness for Nuclear, Biological & Chemical war (NBC war)
6.3 There has been increasing threat of non-conventional war i.e.
Nuclear, Biological and Chemical war in the future. When asked about
the special preparedness of the AFMS in this regard, the Ministry
stated:—
“(a) To pr ovide medical cover for Nuclear, Biological and
Chemical (NBC) scenario simplified and standardized
treatment protocols have been evolved for prompt and
effective NBC casualty management.
(b) The troops in forward areas are equipped with minimum
individual protective equipments (min IPE), and trained in
mitigation techniques, decontamination drills and for
evacuation of casualties to the hospitals. The NBC Operation
bricks and platoon bricks have been designed and issued.
(c) One QRMT (Quick Reaction Medical Team) per command
and one for Delhi have been earmarked and equipped for
NBC related disasters to work with QRTs. (Quick Reaction
Team).
(d) AF Institute of NBC Protection (AFINBCP) located in Delhi,
also conducts training programme for all service personnel
of Air Force, and these trained people go back to their
units and disseminate the knowledge and skills of NBC
protection.
(e) AFINBCP also trains Medical Officers and Paramedical staff
on treatment of NBC casualties and these trained personnel
propagate acquired knowledge at peripheral units.”

49
6.4 The Committee are of the view that due to changing security
environment the threat of non-conventional i.e. nuclear, biological
and chemical war has increased. The Country therefore should be
well prepared to meet any eventuality in case of such attack. The
Committee, therefore, desire that AFMS should re-look into our
special preparedness and take all the steps as may be necessary so
as to able to deal with such situations more effectively. The
Committee stress that proper equipment and training should be
provided to troops and Bio-medicine developed in this area.

CHAPTER VII
MEDICAL EDUCATION
7.1 AFMS imparts training for various courses as mentioned below:—
• Under Graduate (MBBS)
• Post Graduate (MD/MS)
• Post Doctoral (DM/MCh)
•T raining for paramedical personnel
• Nursing Education (Diploma/Degree)
• Short duration training in Service and institutions
Under Graduate Training
As regards under graduate training the Ministry furnished the
following:
* MBBS degree course at Armed Forces Medical College, Pune
•T otal intake 130 students (105 Boys, 25 Girls)
• Entry through all India entrance test
• Duration—41/2 years + 1 years internship
• Permanent to short Service Candidates = 50:50
Note—So far more than 5000 doctors have been trained
7.2 In written reply to a question on the average percentage of
doctors who leave AFMS after completion of the MBBS course and
also whether it is compulsory for them to serve in the Armed Forces
for a particular number of years, the Ministry of Defence have stated
as under:—
“Medical cadets admitted to AFMC Pune for MBBS course have
compulsory liability to serve as commissioned officers in the Armed
Forces Medical Services (AFMS). 50% of medical cadets are granted
permanent commission (PC) and 50% short service commission
(SSC) on completion of MBBS course. The offer of type of
commission depends on merit-cum-option after final MBBS
examination. The liability of SSC officers passing out of AFMC to
50

51
serve in AFMS is 7 years. The average number of doctors who do
not take commission after paying bond money or due to medical/
other grounds is 10-12 per year.”
7.3 The Committee enquired about the reasons for having only
130 seats in AFMC, even though there is a big campus in the college.
As regards the reasons for not increasing the seats in AFMC, the
Defence Secretary stated:
“What happens is that the bulk of the Armed Forces Medical
Service’s personnel are not placed at AFMC. Bulk of them are
where the Forces are. There are MI rooms. There are field hospitals.
There are field ambulances. There, the requirement is that of
younger age group people like lieutenants, captains and this kind
of people. So, like in the Armed Forces, the structure of the AMC
also has to be young. Therefore, this stream of short service medical
doctors are taken. They are given training in the Army or Navy
or Air Force. Then they are all taken to Lucknow where they
complete their training and then they join the Armed Forces.
Then they are at various field establishments. Some of them come
into major hospitals. Depending upon their speciality or depending
upon their aptitude, they are given further training. This procedure
has made the Armed Forces Medical Service serve all the difficult
areas wherever the Army, Navy and Air Force are deployed.
As you might have seen, they are also in high altitude areas.
Similarly in submarines also, we would have AFMS doctors and
technicians and all areas wherever they are required. Aviation
sickness and all kinds of problems which occur because of difficult
service conditions are there, yet Armed Forces Medical Services
doctors and technicians are there. That is one of the major reasons.”
7.4 The Committee pointed out that even though in Armed Forces
there are 169 dental centres yet AFMC does not have BDS course. The
DGAFMS informed:
“We are going to the Government to have a undergraduate dental
course at AFMS, after creating infrastructure shortly”.
7.5 He added:—
“For BDS we are planning for 50 seats. It takes time. Actually
Dental Council Chairman has been going through the whole
proposal. Once it is approved, perhaps we will be having one.

52
The problem is that of the requirement of teachers. It is because
the Dental Council also insists on the number of teachers required
for each places.”
Post Graduate Training
7.6 In regard to Post Graduate Training, the Ministry furnished
the following information:
“Armed Forces Medical College, Pune (103 Seats)
Army Hospital (Research & Referral), Delhi (14 Seats)
INHS Asvini, Mumbai (4 Seats)
Institute of Naval Medicine, Mumbai (2 Seats)
Command Hospital (Air Force), Bangalore (13 Seats)
Institute of Aerospace Medicine Bangalore (7 Seats)”
7.7 Giving details of average annual intake in various Post Graduate
subjects, the Ministry furnished the following information:
General Medicine 14 Paediatrics 4
Dermatology 2 Radio diagnosis 7
Psychiatry 2 General Surgery 14
Anesthesia 10 Ophthalmology 2
Obstetrics & Gynecology 8 Ear Nose & Throat 2
Preventive & Social Medicine 4 Pathology 2
Biochemistry 1 Microbiology 1
Pharmacology 1 Anatomy 1
Physiology 1 Orthopaedics 1
7.8 On being asked to clarify that the total seats for post graduate
training are 143 while post graduate subjects and average annual intake
is 100, the Ministry stated:
“The seats available in AFMS institutes for PG courses are first
utilized for service officers based on the service requirement in
various specialities. These figures vary for different specialities
depending on officers proceeding on retirement/premature release
from service etc. and are approximately 100 per year. The remaining
seats are offered to foreign students, sponsored para military
doctors, Ex-SSC and civilians as per the existing Govt. policy.

53
The selection of service officers is based on a common admission
test (CAT-PG) held in Jan/Feb every year. Officers are detailed/
selected for PG courses based on merit-cum-choice for various
vacancies as per service requirement. There is no provision of any
residency in civil hospitals for Doctorate of Medicine (MD)/Master
Surgery (MS) courses.”
7.9 On being asked on number of post graduate doctor are
absorbed in Armed Forces hospital every year, the Ministry submitted:
“On an average 90-100 medical officers of AFMS complete the
Post Graduate (PG) training every year and are thereafter utilized
in various AFMS hospitals. About 10-15 PG qualified civilian
doctors are also recruited every year.”
7.10 On being enquired the reason for having only one post-
graduate seat in Orthopaedics since Armed Forces have state of art
facilities for joint replacement programme DGAFMS stated:
“MCI recognizes the Centre also. They visited the infrastructure.
When they visited AFMC they recognized for one seat. In the
meantime, they are also recognizing one seat in our R&R and
Base hospital. It is under process. Suppose if we get 120 seats,
then we will take officers according to our requirement. We will
give the rest of the seats to the civilian people who are available
in that area and they qualify. This is the thing that we follow.
Suppose we have 10 seats and my requirement is five, I will take
five service personnel and the remaining five goes to the civilian
doctors as per the laid down norms.”
7.11 The Committee note that AFMC imparts undergraduate
training with a total intake of 130 students (105 boys, 25 girls). The
Committee feel that in view of the large campus of AFMC and
available infrastructure, the Government should consider
augmentation of Under Graduate seats in AFMC to 200 to meet the
big demand for the course. The Committee, therefore, desire that a
proposal in this regard may be put to MCI for consideration.
7.12 The Committee further desire that Government should
increase the Post Graduate and super-specialisation seats in various
disciplines so that more medical officers of AFMS may acquire
specialization. Besides contributing to AFMS they will have better
job prospectus when released from defence services.

54
7.13 The Committee understand that a number of vacancies are
provided for AFMS Officers in non-military medical institutions for
PG courses. The Committee are constrained to note that the same
got subsequently discontinued in April 1998. The Committee stress
that the revival of this quota for PG seats in various civilian medical
colleges and PG training institutions will go a long way in fulfilling
the PG specialist requirement of the Armed Force since there is
always a shortage of PG qualified officers. The Committee further
desire that Ministry of Defence should revive this quota and try to
get more seats reserved for PG courses in various institutions for
AFMS officers.

CHAPTER VIII
MEDICAL RESEARCH
8.1 In response to Committee’s query about the procedure for
undertaking medical research in critical areas, the Ministry stated:
“(a) All medical research in the Armed Forces is carried out as
a tri-service entity under the aegis of the Defence Research
& Development Organisation and the Director General
Armed Forces Medical Services is the Chairman of the
Armed Forces Medical Research Committee. This Committee
comprising the three Directors General Medical Services from
the Army, Navy, Air Force respectively, senior scientists from
DRDO, as well as nominated experts from civil, meets each
year in the month of February, to discuss proposals
forwarded by medical officers from all the three services.
Selection of projects submitted by the research workers is
subjected to thorough discussion and scrutiny by the
Governing Council of the Armed Forces Medical Research
Committee before finally being approved.
(b) Since the Army Medical Corps is a tri-service organization
Medical officers are permitted to forward proposals for
research in all critical areas in various subjects. Selection of
a research project however largely depends on the
following:—
(i) Outcome—utility of the project in Armed Forces
(ii) Originality
(iii) Expertise in the field vis-a-vis the proposed project
(iv) Financial outlay—should not be entirely equipment
oriented.
(v) Facilities for carrying out research work should be
available at the place of posting of the research workers.
(vi) Whether ethical guidelines have been followed.
(vii) Whether the research project can be taken up as a multi
centric study.
All projects are chosen on their individual merit and no
separate allocation of funds is given to Army, Navy or Air
Force.
55

56
(c) The Armed Forces Medical Research Committee is also
responsible for monitoring and appraising the performance
effectiveness and progress of medical research projects
authorized thereby ensuring that work is undertaken as per
laid down guidelines.
8.2 On the query regarding availability of funds for undertaking
medical research, the Defence Secretary informed that the funding
comes from the DRDO.
8.3 When asked about the number of proposals submitted by
doctors in the last 5 years for undertaking medical research the number
of proposals sanctioned and time taken in sanctioning the proposals,
the Ministry submitted as under:—
“Year Proposal submitted Proposal approved
2002-03 93 56
2002-04 113 74
2002-05 135 85
2002-06 292 129
2002-07 246 159
Currently 5 months time is taken by expert group & by Technical
Committee for study and sanction the proposals.”
8.4 On a further query on the number of research papers of AFMS
doctors published/circulated globally or domestically, the Ministry
furnished the following:
The number of research papers published by authors from the
major institutions of Armed Forces (AFMC Pune, AH (R&R) Delhi,
INHS Asvini, Institute of Naval Medicine, Mumbai and Institute
of Aviation Medicine) in International journals and Indian journals
during the years 2005 and 2006 are given below:
Year No. of research papers No. of research papers
Published in Inter- published in the Indian
national journals journals
2004 159 68
2005 207 64
2006 31 33

57
8.5 When asked on no. of doctors who went abroad to take part
in conferences and to submit research papers in the last 5 years, the
Ministry stated:—
The number of doctors who went abroad to take part in conferences
and to submit research papers in the last five years:—
Year No. of doctors No. of doctors Total No. of
who went who have attended doctors who
abroad to conferences attended
submit research without submitting conferences
papers research papers
2002 06 04 10
2003 09 14 23
2004 19 10 29
2005 15 04 19
2006 05 05 10
8.6 The Committee appreciate the medical Research work being
done by the DRDO/DGAFMS and procedure for selection of research
projects and number of Indian Research Papers published in
International Journals. The Committee note that all medical research
in Armed Forces is carried out under the aegis of Defence Research
and Development Organisation. The Medical Research Committee
also includes senior scientists of DRDO. The Committee are of the
view that medical and life science research should not be placed
under DRDO as it is entirely different from strategic and Defence
Research work. DRDO should concentrate on Research work
pertaining to Defence Strategic Industry only and medical and life
science research work should be gradually detached from the purview
of the DRDO. This way strength of the DRDO and AFMS will
increase in their specialized and independent field.
8.7 The Committee are of the view that the Government should
encourage the fundamental and basic research work and for the
purpose senior doctors and research scholars should invariably be
sent to attend international seminars so that their exposure and
updated knowledge can be utilized for providing best services to
the AFMS. The Committee, therefore recommend that Ministry
should prepare a discreet policy in this regard.

CHAPTER IX
NURSING AND PARA-MEDICAL TRAINING
9.1 The Ministry of Defence, in regard to the nursing education
being imparted by the various nursing colleges in AFMS, has provided
the following details:
“There is one College of Nursing at AFMC Pune and seven Schools
of Nursing in AFMS. In the light of the recommendation of the
Indian Nursing Council (INC) all the schools of nursing are to be
converted to college of nursing by 2010. The nursing institutions
are as follows,
(i) Army Hospital (R&R)
(ii) Command Hospital (Western Command), Chandimandir
(iii) Command Hospital (Central Command), Lucknow
(iv) Command Hospital (Eastern Command), Kolkata
(v) Indian Naval Ship Hospital (INHS), Asvini Mumbai
(vi) Command Hospital (Air Force), Bangalore
(vii) Military Hospital Secunderabad
Training is being imparted in all the eight nursing institutions
including the Colleges of Nursing and has been recognized by the
Indian Nursing Council (INC). The following steps are being taken
to augment training:
(i) Procuring of simulated manikins for training
(ii) Installation of computer/internet systems
(iii) Updating of library with latest international journals &
periodicals
(iv) Updating of museum with models, charts, etc.
(v) Improving the physical facilities and infrastructure
(vi) Procuring of equipment for nursing arts lab and nutrition
lab
(vii) Updating of Medical Equipment scales for training
58

59
(viii) Improving clinical facilities in hospitals and urban rural
community.
The training imparted in College of Nursing and Schools of
Nursing is very effective and of a very high professional calibre.
It is not only recognized by the INC but also by the National
Accreditation Committee. The College of Nursing is one of the
best nursing colleges in the country.
9.2 When asked if there is any post graduate training for nurses
in AFMS, the Ministry informed:—
“At present no Post Graduate degree is being awarded for nursing
in AFMS. There is no proposal at present for the same.”
9.3 The Committee note that there is one college of Nursing at
AFMC Pune and seven schools of Nursing in AFMS. The Indian
Nursing Council (INC) has recommended that all the schools of
nursing be converted into college of nursing by 2010. The Committee
while appreciating the move desire that diploma courses conducted
by the schools should not be discontinued. The Committee are given
to understand that training being imparted in College of Nursing
and schools is very effective and of a very high professional calibre.
The Committee, however, are constrained to note that at present no
post graduate degree in nursing is being awarded by AFMS and
there is no proposal at present for the same.
9.4 The Committee also desire that Government should make
sincere efforts to introduce a post graduate degree course in the
College of Nursing. The Committee would like to be apprised of
the steps taken in this regard.
TRAINING TO PARA-MEDICAL PERSONNEL
9.5 About the types of courses and the quality of training available
for the para-medical staff, the Ministry of Defence has furnished the
following details:
(i) The PBOR (Personnel Below Officer Ranks) of the three
medical services undergo technical/professional courses at
the following service institutes/hospitals.
(a) AFMC Pune
(b) Army Hosp. (R&R) Delhi Cantt.
(c) Armed Forces Transfusion Centre, Delhi Cantt.

60
(d) Command Hospitals
(e) Zonal Hospitals
(ii) The following courses are being conducted regularly for
paramedics:—
(a) Radiographer course
(b) Lab Assistant course
(c) Lab Technician course
(d) Blood Transfusion Assistant course
(e) Pharmacist course
(f) Health Assistant course
(g) Speech Therapy and Hearing Aid course
(h) Dental Hygienist course
(i) Dental Operating Room Assistant course
(j) Dental Technician course
(k) Special Treatment Assistant course (Dermatology)
(l) Psychiatric Nursing Assistant course
(m) Operating Room Assistant course
(n) Physiotherapy Assistant course
(o) Nursing Assistant course
(p) Electroencephalography (EEG)/Electromyography (EMG)
Technician course
(q) Human Immunodeficiency Virus (HIV) infection and
biosafety course
9.6 When asked about the steps taken to improve the training to
para-medical staff the Ministry stated:
“Army
The following steps have been taken to improve the training:—
1. Creation of modern infrastructure & methodology
2. Intensive on the job training
3. Formal institutional training with validation

61
Navy
(a) In order to improve the professional acumen of medical
assistant their training within the Navy is being revamped
and all will become diploma holders in their specializations.
In-house add on Courses are being conducted for para
medical staff for training as Nuclear Medicine Technician,
Radio Immunoassay Technician, Dialysis Assistant,
Radiotherapy, Perfusion Technician. Case is being taken up
for diploma in physiotherapy from civil institutes.
(b) At present paramedical training is carried out separately by
the three services. A need has been felt that the level of
technical knowledge of the paramedical staff of the three
services should be standardized. Accordingly a case for
unified professional training of paramedics of all three
services in a central Paramedic Academy is under
consideration of the DGAFMS.
Air Force
(a) The Paramedical Board of Karnataka has approved the
affiliation of command Hospital, Air Force Bangalore/
Medical Training Centre (MTC) for conduct of diploma
courses in the following ten specialities. The first course
will commence from September/October, 2006.
Disciplines are as follows:—
(i) Diploma in Med Lab Tech.
(ii) Diploma in Med X-ray Tech.
(iii) Diploma in Health Inspector
(iv) Diploma in Med Records Tech
(v) Diploma in Operation Theatre Tech
(vi) Diploma in Ophthalmic
(vii) Diploma in Dialysis
(viii) Diploma in Physiotherapy
(ix) Diploma in Dental Mechanic
(x) Diploma in Dental Hygiene
(b) Training for Radiation Safety Officer (RSO) level III is also
being conducted at BARC Mumbai.

62
(c) Diploma in Speech Therapy is conducted by Ali Yavar Jung
National Institute for Handicapped at Delhi, Kolkata,
Hyderabad and Bhubaneshwar.”
9.7 In regard to the recognition of the courses being provided to
the para-medical staff, the Ministry has stated as under:
“DGAFMS has stated that for purpose of recognition of the courses
being imparted to the paramedical personnel, proposal of making
an ‘Armed Forces Medical University of Health Sciences’ as a
deemed to be university of Defence Medical Services has been
initiated. Armed Forces Medical College, Pune has been identified
as the node and the other 3 teaching AFMS institutions namely
the Army Hospital (R&R) Delhi Cantt. Indian Naval Hospital Ship
(INHS) Asvini, Mumbai and Command Hospital Air Force,
Bangalore as its satellite institutions. A core group of senior medical
officers has been earmarked from AFMC and the 3 teaching
institutions to identify/meet the requirements of University Grants
Commission (UGC) for making the deemed to be university and
to forward the necessary documents to UGC for early recognition”.
9.8 On the query regarding training being imparted to PBOR and
the commissioned officers so as to avail their services after retirement
the Ministry stated:—
“Officers and Personnel Below Officers Rank (PBOR) prior to their
release/retirement are given opportunities to upgrade their skill
through various training programme and refresher capsules. Short
Service Commissioned Officers are given a preferential opportunity
to do Diplomat National Board (DNB) and Post Graduation in
Army after release from service. It is also proposed to start a
diploma course for Nursing Assistants and other paramedical staff
which would enhance their qualifications and skills as well as
improve their post retirement job prospects. The ex-servicemen are
further preferentially utilized in ECHS polyclinics. After retirement
the services of Armed Forces Medical personnel may be utilized
as per existing policy as “reservists” in case required.”
9.9 The Committee note that at present Armed Forces’ para-
medical personnel are being imparted training as per requirement
of the three services. Though the curriculum is the same as per the
corresponding civilian medical establishment, these courses have not
been recognized with the result that para-medical staff are deprived
of getting benefits of their training post retirement as ex-servicemen.
The Committee, therefore, strongly desire that Government should

63
take up the matter at the highest level including the University
Grants Commission to convert Armed Forces Medical College and
the relevant institutions into a deemed university and bring all
training courses under its umbrella so that the same get recognition.
The Committee also desire that services of specialists and experts in
the field of medical science may be utilized by AFMS, even after
their retirement, on contract basis. For the purpose, if necessary,
Government may amend the existing rules framed under the relevant
Act.

CHAPTER X
DISASTER MANAGEMENT
10.1 AFMS has played a very major role in recent and past
disasters. They gave emergency life saving measures and carried out
life saving surgeries. In addition to that, they provided medical relief
materials. Their role in Latur and Bhuj earthquakes is well-known.
Their role in Tsunami, in the coastal areas and Andaman and Nicobar
is also well-known. During Hurricane Katrina, in the USA, AFMS
provided medical services to the USA. AFMS played a major role in
Jammu and Kashmir earthquake. We provided medical team and
medical stores in PoK also.
10.2 On the question whether the Disaster Management Committee
of AFMS is fully equipped with the latest technology to meet the
natural disasters and whether some specialized training courses have
been formulated for managing the disasters, the Ministry stated:
“A Disaster Management Cell under the Chairmanship of Director
General Hospital Services (Armed Forces) [DGHS (AF)] has been
established at DGAFMS, which will act as the nodal agency of the
Armed Forces Medial Services to provide swift medical relief
operations during disaster situations. The medical infrastructure of
all the three services will be activated and any medical unit can
be tasked to rush medical teams with adequate medicines and
stores to the affected areas for the immediate rescue and relief
operations in the shortest possible time. All hospitals and field
medical units have been equipped and personal have been trained
to meet any challenge during disaster, whether man made or
natural.”
10.3 Regarding specialized training in Disaster Management,
following is intimated:—
(a) Structured institutionalized training is conducted for MBBS
students during their 4
1/2 years curriculum at AFMC Pune,
to include didactic lectures/demos/workshops.
(b) The AFMS officers are imparted training in management of
natural disasters during Medical Officers Basic Course
(MOBC), Medical Officers Junior Command Course (MOJCC)
and Medical Officers Senior Command Course (MOSCC).
64

65
10.4 The Committee enquired about the response time & access to
technology equipment. The representative of AFMS during evidence
stated:—
“A word about the disaster management about which we are very
much concerned these days. The Disaster Management Committee
under the DGAFMS has been created. All services, medical units
have been equipped for disaster response of all types whether it
is a fire, earthquake or land slide etc. the disaster drills are
practiced weekly and fortnightly in all peripheral units and in the
hospitals and in the various stations. The disaster response time in
India is 1/2 hour to 2 hours. We have practiced it. We have
mobilized also. We demonstrated this during the last disaster and
for abroad it is 6 hours to 24 hours which happened during last
disaster in USA and PoK where AFMS rendered medicare.”
10.5 When the Committee wanted to know whether the AFMS has
separate doctors for disaster management, the DGMS explained:
“The system is that a medical officer is built in the system like
battalions are there. There is a medical officer moving with the
battalion. He is an integral part of that battalion. Similarly, if an
ambulance or a unit moves when we have a disaster, the doctor
and his infrastructure move without affecting the functioning of
the hospital. The number of doctors have been catered according
to the strength of the Armed Forces. So, wherever you call the
Armed Forces, the doctor would go and for your information, this
is only AMC which is going to the field with their RMO, who is
always with the troops even in the most forward areas.”
10.6 The Committee appreciate that AFMS plays a very major
role in providing medical care during disasters like earthquake,
Tsunami, etc. The Committee are happy to note that a disaster
management committee has been created under DGAFMS and all
service medical units have been equipped to meet disaster situations.
The disaster response time is less than 2 hours. The Committee,
however, understand that precious time is lost due to delay in
providing information and giving necessary orders to DGAFMS in
case of disasters. In order to avoid such delays, the Committee desire
that a mechanism should be evolved whereby such information is
provided to DGAFMS simultaneously so that AFMS machinery could
be mobilized forthwith. The Committee would like to be apprised
of the progress made by the Government in this regard.

CHAPTER XI
MEDICAL EQUIPMENT AND DRUGS
11.1 Procurement of medical equipment and drugs for the hospitals
of Armed Forces is the responsibility of DGAFMS. It is done by the
following agencies:—
— DGAFMS
— Medical Store Depots—
— Commandants and Commanding Officer of the hospitals
— Commanding Officer of the Electrical & Mechanical
engineering.
Medicines/vaccines are available in Medical stores in sufficient
quantity to meet the threat of such diseases.
11.2 About the functioning and management of various medical
stores under AFMS and the problems being faced, the Ministry has
stated as under:—
“There are four main depots under AFMS i.e. Armed Forces Medical
Stores Depot (AFMSD) Delhi Cantt., AFMSD Lucknow, AFMSD
Mumbai, AFMSD Pune and eight subdepots i.e.—37 Advanced
Medical Stores Depot (AMSD) at Udhampur, 38 AMSD at Bengdubi,
55 Forward Medical Stores Depot (FMSD) at Bhatinda, 56 FMSD
at Tejpur, 57 FMSD at Jodhpur, 58 FMSD at Guwahati, 59 FMSD
at Pathankot and 60 FMSD at Jalandhar.”
The functions and management of AFMSDs are as follows:—
(a) Procurement, stocking, issue and despatching of medical
stores and equipment to Medical, Dental, V eterinary and
Para-military units under their jurisdiction.
(b) Local purchase is effected under Commandant’s financial
powers through Tender Purchase Committee (TPC).
(c) To arrange procurement, packing and issue of medical
equipment and drugs for troops detailed to provide medical
cover under United Nations Missions such as Cambodia,
Somalia, Angola, Rwanda Sierra Leone, Ethiopia, Sudan, Op
Sahayata etc.
66

67
(d) To procure and issue medical stores for “OP SAHAYATA”
(Afghanistan) as and when demanded through MEA.
(e) To receive the returned stores from the dependent units
and carry out their conditioning and disposal.
(f) Arrange repair of medical equipment returned by dependent
units.
(g) Repair and servicing of x-ray and other electro medical
equipment of the dependent units at site and also through
Command Repair Cell (CRC).
(h) Issue of medical stores and equipment to various
mountaineering expeditions.
(i) Conduct courses connected with medical Store matters for:
(aa) Practical training to trainees of Pharma Class III Course.
(ab) Orientation course in Medical Stores Management.
(ac) Refresher course for store keepers.
(ad) Information Technology training in basics of computer
and application software.
(j) To procure and issue Expendable and non-expendable stores
for ECHS Polyclinics located all over India.
(k) Building up and issue of medical sets for various Field
Medical Units of the Army under instructions from the office
of the DGAFMS.
(l) Build up of War Maintenance Reserves stores (WMR) and
Adhoc Mob stores, viz. MTSPs (Mobile Technical Support
Platoons), Ambulance Trains and General Hospitals (TA).
11.3 The Procurement of medicine, drugs and medical equipments
is done under Defence Procurement procedure 2005 and Defence
Procurement Manual. Procurement of equipment is only done by the
Central Agency, i.e. O/O DGAFMS. However, drugs and consumables
are purchased by the Store holding installations, i.e., the Medical Stores
Depots and also by the user Medical units, i.e., the hospitals within
the delegated powers.
11.4 On the query of the Committee about the ratio of
indigenisation & import by central medical store the Ministry stated:
“The ratio of indigenous and import composition of medical stores
is 80:20 for drugs/consumables and 40:60 for medical equipment.”
11.5 When asked about the average time taken for procurement of
medicines drugs and medical equipment and time taken for

68
disbursement of these medicines & medical equipments to the hospital
and field units, the Ministry has furnished the following details:
“Average time taken for procurement of medicines/drugs and the
medical equipment ranges from 4 weeks to 9 months and 4 weeks
to 24 months respectively depending on the nature of the item,
level of competition, representations of the competing vendors need
for updation of specifications etc.
Time given for disbursement of these medicines and equipments
to hospitals and field units ranges from 15 days to 3 months,
depending on the emergent nature of the requirement of the item.”
11.6 On a further query as to how it is ensured that drugs do not
get expired:
“In order to ensure that high cost life saving drugs are brought in
time and kept safe from becoming expired, two steps are
undertaken:—
(a) At the time of placement of supply order, a clause is
incorporated in the supply order whereby the firm gives an
undertaking to replace unconsumed stocks three months
before expiry date free of cost.
(b) Medical stores in all medical units and Regiment Medical
Officers (RMOs) in non-medical units ensure regular
monitoring of the date of expiry of all such drugs and
ensure turnover/consumption accordingly.”
11.7 The Committee enquired about the delegation of power in
respect of procurement of medical equipment. The Ministry stated:—
“Delegated Financial powers of DGAFMS are under revision at
present. The proposal is yet to be approved by the Govt. However,
the existing powers and proposed powers are as under:—
Existing Powers Proposed Powers
Without In consultation Without In consultation
IFA with IFA IFA with IFA
12 3 4
Capital
Expenditures — Rs. 50 lakh — Rs. 2 crore
Revenue
Expenditures
(a) Scaled (Medical Rs. 5 lakh Rs. 1.50 crore Rs. 5 lakh Rs. 5 crore
Stores which have
been authorized
and included in
the Scale of an
unit)

69
12 3 4
(b) NIV (Not in Rs. 3 lakh Rs. 20 lakh Rs. 3 lakh Rs. 1 crore
Vocabulary)
these are the
items which are
not yet included
in the scale
(c) Rate Contract Nil Nil Nil Rs. 5 crore
(RC) for drugs
and consumables
11.8 The Committee note that procurement of Medical equipment
and medicines/drugs is being done under DPP-2005 and Defence
Procurement Manual. The average time taken for procurement ranges
from 4 weeks to 9 months in case of medicines/drugs and 4 weeks
to 24 months in case of medical equipments. Further a time period
of 15 days to 3 months is required for disbursement of the same to
the hospitals and field units. The Committee feel that in view of
the emergent requirements of the medicines/medical equipments that
the time taken for procurement & disbursement is very much on
higher side. They therefore desire that a quicker system including
fast track for procurement of medicine/drugs and medical equipment
be worked out so that emergent requirements are met in a short
time. The Committee further desire that proposal for revision of
delegated powers of DGAFMS should be approved and implemented
urgently.

CHAPTER XII
MEDICAL SERVICES FOR EX-SERVICEMEN
12.1 Ex-servicemen Contributory Health Scheme (ECHS) was made
operative from 1 April, 2003 to provide quality medical care to ex-
servicemen, pensioners and their dependents for all known diseases
through 227 ECHS Polyclinics to be established throughout the country
by 31 March, 2008. Outpatient facilities are provided at the polyclinics.
Those requiring advance diagnostic tests/hospitalization are sent to
the nearest Service Hospital. When there is no Service Hospital nearby
or the facility is not available in the Service Hospital, the patient is
referred to an empanelled facility.
12.2 On the working of the empanelled hospitals, the Ministry, in
its written note, furnished the following details:
“Civil Hospitals are being empanelled under ECHS to provide
quality specialized treatment to ECHS members and the
empanelment is done by Ministry of Defence on the
recommendations of Board of Officers who inspects the facilities
offered by a Hospital.
An ECHS member requiring specialized treatment which is not
available in ECHS Polyclinic or nearest Service Hospital is referred
to an outsourced, empanelled facility by ECHS Polyclinic. An ECHS
member is not required to make any payment to the Empanelled
Hospital for the authorized treatment. The treating hospital bills
the cost of treatment directly to ECHS as per memoranda of
Agreement.
During emergency (life/limb saving situation etc.), an ECHS
member is permitted to avail medical treatment from any private/
empanelled/Govt. Hospital. If during emergency a member is
admitted to an Empanelled Hospital no bill is paid by the member.
However, in case of admission in a non-empanelled hospital, a
member is required to clear the hospital bills and claim
reimbursement through nearest ECHS Polyclinic. Reimbursement
is restricted to CGHS rates.
So far, 498 hospitals have been empanelled with ECHS including
85 Central Government Health Scheme/Railways hospitals.”
70

71
12.3 Elaborating about the coverage of ECHS the Ministry of
Defence stated:—
“The membership of the Scheme is applicable for ex-servicemen
(ESM) pensioners/family pensioners only. At the time of launch of
Scheme, the strength of ESM pensioners including family pensioners
was approximate 16.5 lakhs with annual increase of approximate
65,000 pensioners. The membership of the Scheme is optional for
pre 31 March, 2003 retirees and compulsory for post 1 April, 2003
retirees. Till date approximately three lakh ESM pensioners
including family pensioners belonging to pre 31 March, 2003 have
become members of ECHS. 100% pensioners who have retired from
service w.e.f. 1 April, 2003 are compulsory members of ECHS and
their ECHS contribution is deducted at source and reflected in the
PPO. 100% eligible ESM pensioners are going to be benefited by
the Scheme and no one has been deprived of the benefit of the
Scheme.”
12.4 When asked if Government propose to review the existing
criteria for benefits of ECHS, the Ministry stated:—
“There is no proposal to undertake review of the Scheme to extend
the facilities to non entitled Ex-Servicemen.”
12.5 The Committee are constrained to note that the ECHS scheme
is applicable to pensioners/family pensioners only. The Committee
desire that coverage of ECHS should be expanded to include Ex-
Servicemen with a stipulated minimum period of service under its
purview. Since the ECHS is a contributory scheme, the Committee
fail to understand as to why this scheme is not extended to the
service personnel who are discharged from the Services for reasons
beyond their control by accepting suitable contribution from such
personnel. Also families of the soldiers who expired during the
operations should be brought under the ECHS.
The Committee understand that the families/dependents of the
soldiers/officers who die of natural causes, like cardiac arrest, etc.
while on duty are not entitled for additional compensation and
medical facilities as paid during operations. The Committee are of
the view that such deaths should also be treated at par with death
during military operations and desire that rules may be suitably
amended so the families/dependents of deceased get all the facilities,
including ECHS.

72
12.6 The Committee also understand that there is still a vast
number of Ex-Servicemen across the country staying in remote and
interior areas and are not in a position to avail the ECHS facilities.
The Committee desire that the polyclinic facilities should be set up
in those areas on priority basis so as to benefit this section of Ex-
Servicemen.
 N
EW D ELHI; BALASAHEB VIKHE PATIL,
28 July, 2006 Chairman,
6 Sravana, 1928 (Saka) Standing Committee on Defence.

MINUTES OF THE THIRTEENTH SITTING OF THE STANDING
COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE (2005-06)
The Committee sat on Monday, the 5 December, 2005 from
17.30 hrs. to 18.50 hrs. in Committee Room ‘B’, Parliament House
Annexe, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Shri Balasaheb Vikhe Patil— Chairman
M
EMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Suresh Chandel
3. Shri Thupstan Chhewang
4. Dr. K.S. Manoj
5. Shri Ganesh Prasad Singh
6. Ms. Ingrid Mcleod
Rajya Sabha
7. Shri R.K. Anand
8. Smt. N.P . Durga
9. Shri Janardan Dwivedi
10. Shri Anand Sharma
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri R.C. Ahuja — Joint Secretary
2. Shri D.R. Shekhar — Under Secretary
LIST OF WITNESSES OF MINISTRY OF DEFENCE
1. Shri Shekhar Dutt, Defence Secretary
2. Shri V .K. Misra, FA (DS)
3. Shri Ranjit Issar, AS (I)
4. Shri Anand Misra, JS (E)
5. Surg. Vice Admiral V .K. Singh, DGAFMS
73

74
6. Shri S.N. Misra, Addl. FA (M)
7. Maj. Gen. M. Srivastava, Addl. DGAFMS
8. Maj. Gen. J. Jayaram, Addl. DGAFMS (MR)
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the representatives of
the Ministry of Defence to the sitting of the Committee and invited
them to brief the Committee on the subject ‘Review of Medical
Education and Services in the Defence Sector’.
3. The representatives of the Ministry of Defence briefed the
Committee on various aspects of the subject through slide presentation
on matters like organisation, composition & role of AFMS, establishment
of DGAFMS, authorised and available manpower, total no. of hospitals
at command, zonal and other level, pool of specialists and status of
specialisation, medical education in Armed Forces & types of training
imparted, nursing education, strength of nursing staff, AFMS vis-a-vis
civil medical services vis-a-vis civil counterpart, status of DGAFMS,
role of AFMS in Disaster Management etc.
4. Thereafter the Hon’ble Chairman and Members of the Committee
put forth certain queries like adequacy of hospitals for Army, Navy
and Air Force personnel, availability of specialist facilities in hospitals,
upgradation/modernization of AFMS, training facilities for medical and
paramedical staff, imparting yoga training to cure diseases and reduce
tension among armed forces personnel, Ex-Servicemen Health Scheme,
status of DGAFMS vis-a-vis his civil counterpart and providing
appropriate rank to the nursing staff etc.
5. The representatives of the Ministry then replied to the queries
of the members.
6. A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept.
The Committee then adjourned.

MINUTES OF THE TWENTIETH SITTING OF THE STANDING
COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE (2005-06)
The Committee sat on Friday, the 30th January, 2006 from
14.00 hrs. to 16.30 hrs. in Committee Room ‘D’, Parliament House
Annexe, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Shri Balasaheb Vikhe Patil— Chairman
M
EMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Illiyas Azmi
3. Shri Thupstan Chhewang
4. Dr. K.S. Manoj
5. Shri Ganesh Prasad Singh
6. Shri Balashowry Vallabhaneni
Rajya Sabha
7. Smt. N.P . Durga
8. Shri Janardan Dwivedi
9. Shri Lalit Suri
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri R.C. Ahuja — Joint Secretary
2. Smt. Anita Jain — Deputy Secretary
3. Shri D.R. Shekhar — Under Secretary
List of non-official experts
1. Lt. Col. (Retd.) Inderjit Singh
2. Lt. Gen. Dr. B. Sadanand
List of Representatives of Ministry of Defence
1. Shri Shekhar Dutt, Defence Secretary
2. Shri V .K. Misra, FA (DS)
75

76
3. Shri Ranjit Issar, AS (I)
4. Shri Anand Misra, JS (E)
5. Shri S.N. Misra, Addl. FA (M)
6. Surg. Vice Admiral V .K. Singh, DGAFMS
7. Maj. Gen. J. Jayaram, Addl. DGAFMS (MR)
8. Maj. Gen. M. Srivastava, Addl. DGAFMS
2. At the outset, Hon’ble Chairman welcomed Lt. Col. (Retd.)
Inderjit Singh to the sitting of the Committee and requested him to
share his experience and put forth suggestions on the subject ‘Review
of Medical Education and Services in Defence Sector’.
3. In this connection, Lt. Col. (Retd.) Inderjit Singh underlined
certain important issues and submitted suggestions as detailed below:
(i) Ex-Servicemen Contributory Health Scheme (ECHS) is totally
inadequate as it deprives 60 per cent of the Ex-Servicemen
of the necessary medical facilities. The scheme is applicable
to pensioners only. The strength of entire hospital staff is
not adequate to meet the requirements.
(ii) Inadequate number of polyclinics in certain districts is also
an important issue. The doctors and the supporting staff
appointed are not adequate and their salary structure is not
favourable.
(iii) The registration forms for ECHS should be simplified and
the entire expenditure under this scheme should be taken
care of by the State Governments. In order to avail the
benefits, the Ex-Servicemen should not be required to fill
up any form. The discharge certificates should be considered
sufficient to enable the Ex-Servicemen to avail the benefits.
(iv) The Ex-Servicemen should not depend on the Army
hospitals only for medicines and other clinical tests. They
should be permitted to go for local purchase to meet their
requirements.
(v) Officers posted as Secretaries in the Boards should be the
serving military officers posted by the Medical Services
Branch of the Armed Forces to check unnecessary political
influences.
Then the Committee sought certain clarifications on the suggestions
submitted by him.
(The Witness then withdrew)

77
4. Thereafter, the Hon’ble Chairman welcomed Lt. Gen.
Dr. B. Sadanand to share his experience and put forth suggestions to
improve the medical education and services in the defence sector.
Lt. Gen. Dr. B. Sadanand submitted the following suggestions:
(i) The medical education system has given importance to only
specialists and super-specialists, whereas the paramedical
staff, the nursing staff are not given much importance.
(ii) Medical facilities at the field level in the Northern (except
Delhi) and Eastern sectors are inadequate. Therefore, there
is a need for the upgradation of 151/158 Base Hospitals in
the Eastern sector and 16 MH/92 Basic hospitals in the
Northern Sector.
(iii) So far as procurement of equipment and medicine for
DGAFMS is concerned, the DGAFMS must ensure the
quality of the products available and the products of only
major firms should be acceptable.
(iv) Most of the Ex-servicemen are from rural areas, whereas
the military hospitals and district hospitals are located at
district level. Despite their contribution, they are not getting
the best treatment possible. Therefore, they should be
permitted to report to the best hospital/nursing home
nearby.
(v) Zonal Hospitals should be upgraded to the level of
command Hospitals with all facilities.
(vi) Specialist centres allotted to the Command Hospitals are on
ad hoc basis. Due to this ad-hocism, medical officers, nursing
officers and paramedical staff, are taking up their tasks at
the cost of other peripheral units. Hence, this ad-hocism
must be stopped and there should be proper authorization.
(vii) The soldiers, sailors, ex-servicemen are being trained in
various subjects like physiotherapy pharmacy, lab-
technologies, without giving any degree or diploma. When
they become ex-servicemen they do not get benefits of this
training. Hence, the Armed Forces themselves should
establish institutions for these training courses so that the
persons trained may be given recognised degree/diploma.
(viii) Armed Forces Medical College may be considered as a
Deemed University so that it can establish more colleges
and maximum number of personnel below the officer rank
and other ranks may benefit.

78
(ix) There is need for more colleges for paramedical in various
subjects. The nursing colleges should start post-graduate
degree courses to assist all the super-specialists. Government
may give permission for study leave to the para medical
staff to undergo and acquire knowledge of latest equipment.
(x) There is need for improvement in the services of the field
medical units. At present, all the 88 field ambulances are
obsolete. They should function like mobile hospitals with
good facilities.
(xi) Administrative staff in the hospital, below the officer rank,
should be educated in hospital material management,
hospital finance, human resource management, hospitality,
catering management, etc. It should be made compulsory.
(The witness then withdrew)
5. The Hon’ble Chairman, then welcomed the representatives of
the Ministry of Defence to give evidence on the subject. The members
raised certain issues e.g. inadequacy of Ex-Servicemen Contributory
Health Scheme (ECHS) and its applicability to pensioners only, non-
functioning polyclinics in the States like Rajasthan, Uttaranchal and
North-Eastern States, inadequate infrastructure and manpower in such
polyclinics, steps being taken by the Ministry for providing mobile
medical facilities for the field military personnel as well as the civil
society residing there, steps being taken by the Ministry to recognise
the Armed Forces Medical College and other such organisations as
deemed Universities under UGC, etc. The members also desired
information on the number of doctors and supporting staff working in
the field hospitals/polyclinics and stressed the need of opening up
some more hospitals on the lines of Base and Command Hospitals.
6. The representatives, then, responded to the queries of the
members and on certain issues they assured the Committee to make
a review and send reply later on.
(The representatives then withdrew)
7. A verbatim record of the proceeding was kept.
The Committee then adjourned.

MINUTES OF THE TWENTY THIRD SITTING OF THE STANDING
COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE (2005-06)
The Committee sat on Friday, the 10 February, 2006 from 11.00 hrs
to 12.40 hrs. in Committee Room ‘G-074’, Parliament House Annexe,
New Delhi.
PRESENT
Shri Balasaheb Vikhe Patil— Chairman
M
EMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Thupstan Chhewang
3. Dr. C. Krishnan
4. Shri Raghuraj Singh Shakya
Rajya Sabha
5. Dr. Farooq Abdullah
6. Shri Janardan Dwivedi
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Smt. Anita Jain — Deputy Secretary
2. Shri D.R. Shekhar — Under Secretary
NAME OF NON-OFFICIAL E XPERT
Col. K.S. Bhimwal (Retd.), Medical Director, Rockland Hospital
2. The Committee could not take up the consideration and adoption
of draft Report on ‘Defence Public Sector Undertakings’ due to lack of
quorum. Hon’ble Chairman directed that the draft report might be
considered on 16th February, 2006. The Committee, however, decided
to hear the views of Col. K.S. Bhimwal (Retd.) on ‘Review of Medical
Education and Services in Defence Sector.’ He suggested the following
points:
(i) The relevance of the course content of medical education
should be close to the ground realities, especially for the
new recruits and officers of the AMC.
79

80
(ii) The training interventions like service courses are ill timed.
Administration oriented courses are early and not oriented
to higher commands.
(iii) Quality of instructors is poor. No defined process for their
selection.
(iv) Training aids are vintage, therefore they should be replaced
with modern machines.
(v) Training of paramedical staff is very rudimentary. If a person
trained as nursing assistant goes to the field area, he is
totally lost their.
(vi) Hardly anyone is trained in critical care, including Doctors
especially in Basic and Advanced life support. Critical care
skills of doctors and paramedical staff in basic & advanced
life support need improvement.
(vii) Doctors need to take study leave for advanced courses like
other armed forces personnel to go on courses abroad for
training.
(viii) Continued Medical Education Programme and other training
events should have live workshops with focus on training
part. Most CMEs are sponsored events costing lakhs of
rupees, which is a total waste.
(ix) Pr ofessional training should be provided after service
training.
(x) Post Graduate vacancies and the requirements needs proper
long term planning.
(xi) Super specialisation to doctors comes late, which is a loss
to the service.
(xii) Rank and administration appointments could be de-linked.
(xiii) Attachment of service doctors to civil hospital in some areas
may be explored.
(The witness then withdrew.)
A verbatim record of the proceeding was kept.
The Committee then adjourned.

MINUTES OF THE FORTIETH SITTING OF THE STANDING
COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE (2005-06)
The Committee sat on Thursday, the 11 May, 2006 from 15.00 hrs.
to 17.20 hrs. in Committee Room No. ‘G-074’, Parliament Library
Building, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Shri Balasaheb Vikhe Patil— Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Smt. Sangeeta Kumari Singh Deo
3. Shri Ramesh Jigajinagi
4. Shri S.D. Mandlik
5. Shri Ganesh Prasad Singh
Rajya Sabha
6. Shri Jai Prakash Aggarwal
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri S.K. Sharma — Additional Secretary
2. Smt. Anita Jain — Deputy Secretary
3. Shri D.R. Shekhar — Under Secretary
LIST OF REPRESENTATIVES FROM MINISTRY OF DEFENCE
1. Shri Shekhar Dutt, Defence Secretary
2. Shri V .K. Misra, FA (DS)
3. Dr. (Smt.) Rekha Bhargava, Addl. Secy. (B)
4. Shri A.K. Jain, Addl. Secy. (J)
5. Shri Bimal Julka, JS (G/Air)
6. Shri S.N. Misra, Addl. GA (M)
81

82
ARMED FORCES MEDICAL SERVICES
1. Surg. Vice Admiral V .K. Singh
2. Maj. Gen. Suresh Chandra, Addl. DGAFMS
3. Brig. T. Prabhakar, Dy. DGAFMS (Prov.)
4. Lt. Gen. L.P . Sabhotra, DGMS (Army)
5. Air Mshl. H.K. Maini, DGMs (Air)
6. Surg. Cmde B.S. Rathore, Offg. DGMS (Navy)
2. At the outset, the Committee expressed deep sorrow on the sad
demise of Shri Pramod Mahajan, M.P . and Member of the Standing
Committee on Defence on 3 May 2006 and the Chairman read out a
Resolution for conveying condolence message to the bereaved family
in that regard. The Chairman alongwith other members of the
Committee, officers of the Secretariat and the representatives of the
Ministry of Defence observed silence for a while as a mark of respect
to the departed soul.
3. Hon’ble Chairman, then, requested the representatives of the
Ministry of Defence to further brief the Committee on the subject
‘Review of Medical Education and Services in the Defence Sector’.
The representatives of the Ministry thereafter made a presentation
clarifying the questions sent by the Committee for obtaining written
replies from the Ministry.
4. During presentation, the DGAFMS clarified various issues viz.
upgradation of facilities in military hospitals and field units, setting
up of new hospitals in the border areas, enhancement of authorised
strength of Medical officers to meet functional deficiencies, discrepancies
in authorised and held strength of doctors and para-medical staff in
the hospitals, introduction of traditional medicine systems i.e. Ayurvedic
and Homoeopathic Systems in the military hospitals.
5. The Committee, inter-alia, also discussed coordination among
the hospitals of the three services in providing services to the defence
personnel, ex-servicemen and civilians in times of peace and
emergencies; and undertaking medical research in critical. The
Committee stressed the need for a separate fund for research activities.
The Committee further discussed in detail various other issues viz.
purchase of medicines and medical equipment, outbreak of contagious
diseases in various regions, threat of chemical weapons and adequate
training to contain the threat, medical training being imparted to para
medical staff, efforts for indigenisation of medical equipment etc. The

83
representatives of the Ministry replied to the queries raised by the
members. The Chairman asked the Ministry to furnish written replies
to certain issues which were raised in the meeting but not replied to.
The representatives then withdrew.
6. A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept.
The Committee then adjourned.

MINUTES OF THE FORTY-NINTH SITTING OF THE STANDING
COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE (2005-06)
The Committee sat on Friday, the 28 July , 2006 from 0930 hrs. to
1020 hrs. in Committee Room No. ‘139’, Parliament House Annexe,
New Delhi.
PRESENT
Shri Balasaheb Vikhe Patil— Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri A.V . Bellarmin
3. Dr. C. Krishnan
4. Dr. K.S. Manoj
5. Shri Raghuraj Singh Shakya
6. Shri Ganesh Prasad Singh
7. Shri Manvendra Singh
Rajya Sabha
8. Smt. N.P . Durga
9. Shri K.B. Shanappa
10. Shri Lalit Suri
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri R.C. Ahuja — Joint Secretary
2. Smt. Anita Jain — Deputy Secretary
3. Shri D.R. Shekhar — Under Secretary
2. At the outset, Hon’ble Chairman welcomed the Members to the
sitting of the Committee. The Committee, thereafter, considered the
draft report on ‘Review of Medical Education and Services in the
Defence Sector’ and adopted the same with some additions/
modifications as suggested by the Members.
84

85
3. The Committee then authorised the Chairman to finalise the
report with further minor modifications, if necessary, and to present
the same to the Parliament.
The Committee then adjourned.