3
STANDING COMMITTEE
ON DEFENCE
(2004-05)
FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA
MINISTRY OF DEFENCE
[Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations contained in the
1st Report of the Committee (Fourteenth Lok Sabha) on the Demands
for Grants of the Ministry of Defence for the year 2004-2005]
THIRD REPORT
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
April, 2005/Vaisakha, 1927 (Saka)


LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
April, 2005/Vaisakha, 1927 (Saka)
THIRD REPORT
STANDING COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE
(2004-05)
(FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA)
MINISTRY OF DEFENCE
[Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations contained in the
1st Report of the Committee (Fourteenth Lok Sabha) on the Demands
for Grants of the Ministry of Defence for the year 2004-2005]
Presented to Lok Sabha on 26.4.2005
Laid  in  Rajya Sabha  on 26.4.2005


C.O.D. No. 64
Price : Rs. 33.00
© 2005 BY LOK S ABHA S ECRETARIAT
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of
Business in Lok Sabha (Eleventh Edition) and Printed by Jainco Art India,
New Delhi-110 005.

CONTENTS
PAGE
COMPOSITION OF THE C OMMITTEE (2004-05) ............................................ (iii)
INTRODUCTION .............................................................................................. (v)
CHAPTER I Report ............................................................................. 1
CHAPTER II Recommendations/Observations which have been
accepted by the Government ................................... 26
CHAPTER III Recommendations/Observations which the
Committee do not desire to pursue in view  of
Government‘s replies .................................................. 50
C
HAPTER IV Recommendations/Observations in respect of
which replies of Government have not been
accepted by the Committee ...................................... 52
C
HAPTER V Recommendations/Observations in respect of
which final replies of Government are still
awaited ........................................................................... 63
Minutes of the Sitting ................................................ 70
A
PPENDIX
Analysis  of  Action  Taken  by  Government on the
Recommendations contained in the First Report of the
Standing Committee on Defence (Fourteenth Lok Sabha)
on the Demands for Grants of the Ministry of Defence
(2004-2005) ................................................................................... 72

COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE
ON DEFENCE (2004-05)
Shri Balasaheb Vikhe Patil— Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Churchill Alemao
3. Shri Iliyas Azmi
4. Shri A.V . Bellarmin
5. Shri Suresh Chandel
6. Shri Thupstan Chhewang
7. Smt. Sangeeta Kumari Singh Deo
8. Shri Milind Deora
9. Shri Bhupinder Singh Hooda
10. Shri Ramesh Jigajinagi
11. Shri Suresh Kalmadi
12. Dr. C. Krishnan
13. Ms. Ingrid Mcleod
14. Shri S.D. Mandlik
15. Dr. K.S. Manoj
16. Shri Raghuraj Singh Shakya
17. Shri Mahadeorao Shivankar
18. Shri Ganesh Prasad Singh
19. Shri Manvendra Singh
20. Shri Balashowry Vallabhaneni
21. Shri Dharmendra Yadav
Rajya Sabha
22. Shri R.K. Anand
23. Dr. Farooq Abdullah
24. Gen. (Retd.) Shankar Roy Chowdhury
(iii)

(iv)
25. Shri T.T.V . Dhinakaran
26. Smt. N.P . Durga
27. Shri Janardan Dwivedi
28. Shri Pramod Mahajan
29. Shri Mukhtar Abbas Naqvi
30. Shri Anand Sharma
31. Shri Lalit Suri
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri P .D.T. Achary — Secretary
2. Shri M. Rajagopalan Nair — Additional Secretary
3. Shri P .K. Bhandari — Director
4. Smt. Anita Jain — Deputy Secretary
5. Shri D.R. Shekhar — Under Secretary
6. Smt. Jyochnamayi Sinha — Committee Officer
7. Shri Nilendu Kumar — Senior Executive Assistant

(v)
INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairman, Standing Committee on Defence (2004-05) having
been authorised by the Committee to submit the Report on their behalf,
present this Third Report on Action Taken by the Government on the
recommendations contained in the First Report of the Committee
(Fourteenth Lok Sabha) on the Demands for Grants of the Ministry of
Defence for the year 2004-2005.
2. The First Report was presented/laid on Lok Sabha/Rajya Sabha
on 19 August, 2004. The Government furnished their replies indicating
action taken on the recommendations contained in the Report on
17 January, 2005. The Draft Report was considered and adopted by
the Standing Committee on Defence (2004-05) at their sitting held on
19 March, 2005.
3. An analysis  of action taken by the Government on
recommendations contained in the First Report of the Standing
Committee on Defence (Fourteenth Lok Sabha) is given in Appendix.
4. The Committee have expressed unhappiness over the replies
given by the Government regarding the supply of items of personal
use, including clothing by the soldiers serving in high altitude area
like Siachin have made for reaching recommendations.
5. The Committee have taken a serious note of the use of vintage
and obsolete mines leading to the casualties of our soldiers. The
Committee has made recommendations so that such incidents are not
repeated again.
6. For facility of reference and convenience, the observations/
recommendations of the Committee have been printed in thick type in
the body of the Report.
N
EW D ELHI; BALASAHEB VIKHE PATIL,
21 April, 2005 Chairman,
1 Vaisakha, 1927 (Saka) Standing Committee on Defence.

CHAPTER I
REPORT
The Report of the Standing Committee on Defence deals with action
taken by the Government on the recommendations/observations
contained in their First Report (Fourteenth Lod Sabha) on the Demands
for Grants of Ministry of Defence for the year 2004-2005 which was
presented to Lok Sabha/laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha on 19 August,
2004.
2. In the First Report (Fourteenth Lok Sabha), the Committee had
made 62 observations/recommendations on the following subjects:
Sl. No. Para No. Subject
 12 3
 1. 30, 31, 32 & 33 Defence Expenditure
 2. 40, 41, 42 & 43 Defence Modernisation Fund
 3. 47 to 52 Tenth Defence Plan
 4. 63 to 66 Defence Procurement Board
 5. 77 & 78 Chief of Defence Staff (CDS)
 6. 83 National War Memorial and War
Museum
 7. 88 to 90 Establishment of Indian National
Defence University (INDU)
 8. 98 to 101 Shortage of Army Personnel
 9. 105 Facilities to Ex-Servicemen—One Rank
One Pension
10. 109 to 111 Information and Electronic Warfare
11.1 16 to 120 Casualties in Operation Parakram
12. 125 & 126 Bharat Dynamics Limited

2
12 3
13. 133,134 & 135 Ordnance Factories
14. 141 & 142 Supply of Sub-Standard Ammunition
15. 152,153 & 154 Budgetary Support to Naval Dockyard
16. 161 & 162 Modernisation of Cost Guard
17. 170 to 173 Pr ocurement of Multi-role Fighter
Aircraft
18. 176 & 177 Aerospace Command
19. 178-181 Air Surveillance
20. 187 & 188 Development of Advanced Avionic
System
21. 192 & 193 Precision Guidance Capability
3. Action taken Notes have been received from the Government in
respect of all the recommendations/observations contained in the
Report. These have been categorised as follows:
(i) Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted
by Government:
Sl. No. 52-,63-66, 100-101, 125-126, 133-135, 141-142, 152-154,
161-162, 170-172, 173, 179-181, 187-188, 192-193
(ii) Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do
not desire to pursue in view of Government’s replies:
Sl. No. 77-78
(iii) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies
of Government have not been accepted by the Committee:
Sl. No. 30-33, 40-43, 47-51, 98-99, 116-120
(iv) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which final
replies of Government are still awaited:
Sl. No. 83, 88-90, 105, 109-111, 176, 177

3
4. The Committee will now deal with the action taken by the
Government on some of their recommendations as contained in
Chapter-1 of this report.
Defence Expenditure
Recommendation (Para No. 30-33)
5. The Committee noted that the Budget Estimates for the Defence
Services at Rs. 77,000 crore for the year 2004-2005 showed an increase
of 17.92 percent over the Budget Estimates of Rs. 65,300 crore and an
increase of 27.69 percent over the Revised Estimates of Rs. 60,300 crore
for the year 2003-2004. The increase had been mainly in Capital
expenditure which had increased from Rs. 20,953 crore (approx.) in
Budget Estimates in 2003-2004 to Rs. 33,483 crore (approx.) in Budget
Estimates in 2004-2005.
The Committee also noted that notwithstanding the higher
allocation the Minister of Defence had stated that his Ministry might
have to seek additional funds from the Ministry of Finance later in
the year. This had to be viewed in the context that the Ministry had
projected a requirement of Rs. 86,457 crore to Ministry of Finance for
providing for obligatory charges, essential maintenance needs,
committed liabilities and prioritised new schemes of the Defence
Services. The projections included an amount of Rs. 6,918 crore for
prioritised new schemes/projects. The Committee were informed during
the evidence that almost the entire amount allocated for Capital
expenditure would be spent on committed liabilities due to agreements
signed recently for procurement of defence equipments leaving only
about Rs. 1,000 crore for the new schemes/acquisitions.
The Committee were deeply concerned to note that not only the
amount available with the Ministry on account of Capital expenditure
after adjusting the committed liabilities was hardly adequate for taking
up any new projects/schemes but several schemes/projects which were
at various stages of finalisation would also have to be deferred.
The Committee had, therefore, recommended the Ministry to assess
the situation in the light of likely impact of reduced allocations on the
new schemes and ongoing acquisition proposals and approach the
Ministry of Finance for supplementary allocations at the earliest to
ensure that the modernisation plans and procurement of essential

4
equipments did not suffer or were delayed merely because of squeezing
of funds.
6. The Ministry, in their Action Taken reply has stated that:
“The modernisation of the defence forces is an ongoing process
and the Finance Minister in his budget speech has also stated that
the Government is determined to eliminate all delays in
modernisation of Defence Forces. Having regard to the trend of
defence capital expenditure in recent years, the allocation for
defence has been increased to Rs. 77,000 crore, as against Rs. 65,300
crore in BE 2003-04 which includes an allocation for capital
expenditure of Rs. 33,483 crore as against Rs. 20,953 crore in BE
2003-04. Ministry of Defence will also continue to progress
modernisation schemes up to the points where it needs financial
approval of the Government. If some delays on the part of the
suppliers or some slippage takes place, the Ministry would progress
new projects/schemes out of available allocation. The progress of
defence expenditure and the status of ongoing new schemes would,
however, also be kept under constant review during the financial
year and the Ministry of Finance would be approached for
additional fund, as and when required.”
Comments of the Committee
7. The Committee are not satisfied with the reply of the
Government. The Committee had expressed concern that the entire
amount allocated for capital expenditure would be spent over
committed liabilities due to agreements signed recently for
procurement of defence equipments leaving only about Rs. 1,000
crore which was hardly adequate for taking up new schemes/projects
which are at various stages of finalisation. The Committee had,
therefore, recommended the Ministry to approach the Ministry of
Finance for additional allocation so that modernization plan and
procurement of essential equipments did not suffer.
The Committee are unhappy to note that instead of approaching
the Ministry of Finance for supplementary allocation the Ministry
of Defence has felt contended to bank on delays on the part of
suppliers or some slippage taking place in already concluded
contracts so that Ministry could progress new projects out of available
allocation. This shows a casual approach on the part of Ministry to

5
pursue for higher allocation with the Ministry of Finance and goes
contrary to Government resolve to eliminate all delays in Defence
Modernisation.
The Ministry should assess their demand and formulate a long
term perspective plan and work out a schedule for upgradation/
modernisation of their hardware including procurement and
purchases adhering to the time schedule.
Defence Modernisation Fund
Recommendation (Para Nos. 40-43)
8. The Committee noted that during the last five years, i.e. from
1999-2000 to 2003-2004, substantial allocations amounting to Rs.
32,740.26 crore for Capital expenditure had lapsed due to non
fructification of the defence modernisation and procurement plans. The
Committee were conscious that the modernisation of the defence
services was a continuous process and the acquisition proposals which
did not or could not fructify in a financial year were processed/
finalised in subsequent years but felt that the ritual of approaching
the Ministry of Finance, every financial year, for re-allocation of lapsed
fund for the same project, was dilatory and completely redundant.
The Committee also felt that under-utilisation/non-utilisation of
allocations did not augur well for defence preparedess and seriously
undermined the capabilities of the Defence Forces. The Committee
had, therefore, in their earlier reports strongly recommended for the
creation of a non-lapsable Defence Modernisation Fund as one of the
measures to streamline the procurement procedures.
The Committee were informed subsequently that the Ministry of
Finance had in principle agreed to the creation of the Defence
Modernisation Fund which would be available for utilisation over the
coming three years.
The then Finance Ministry while presenting the Interim Budget,
2004-2005 also announced the setting up of a non-lapsable Defence
Modernisation Fund with a corpus of Rs. 25,000 crore to commit the
availability of adequate funds for the defence modernisation and
weapons systems acquisitions. The Ministry had however surprisingly
conveyed that no allocation for this fund had been made in General
Budget 2004-2005 and that the Government had yet to take a decision
to set up the said fund.

6
The Committee were extremely dismayed at this abrupt policy
reversal by the Ministry and expressed their deep anguish that a well
considered decision which was taken after a lot of deliberations had
been reversed without any justifiable reason. The Committee, therefore,
desired the Ministry to set up at once the Defence Modernisation Fund
with committed allocations for a period of five years as lapsing of
funds year after year had greatly hampered procurement of defence
equipments and the modernisation plans of the Defence Forces. The
progress of utilisation of funds needed to be closely monitored and
periodically reviewed with corrective action taken to ensure that the
objectives of the fund were fully achieved.
9. The Ministry, in their Action Taken Reply, has stated that the
modernisation of Defence Forces is an ongoing process and under-
utilisation of funds in a financial year does not result in dropping of
any proposal. In order to fully utilise the allocated funds, the progress
of Defence expenditure and status of various procurement proposals is
kept under constant review and follow up action, as necessary, is taken.
With a view to synergism efforts involved in procurement and to speed
up the decision making process a new procurement organisation has
been established to deal with acquisitions on capital account for the
Defence Services.
The primary concern, which was sought to be addressed with the
creation of Defence Modernisation Fund, was the assured availability
of funds for modernisation schemes of Defence Forces, which were
catered for in one year’s budget but did not materialise in that year.
The problems of adequacy or otherwise as also utilisation or otherwise
of annual capital budget can best be addressed by ensuring that Five
Year Defence Plan is firmed up before the commencement of Plan
period and Finance Ministry indicates broad annual break up
availability of funds for the five years at the beginning itself.
However, keeping in view the under utilisation of funds during
the past few years, the Standing Committee on Defence in their earlier
Reports had recommended creation of a non-lapsable Defence
Modernisation Fund and to expedite the formulation of modalities
and procedures for its operationalisation. The Ministry of Defence,
with the approval of Ministry of Finance, drew up a detailed accounting
procedure for operationalising the Defence Modernisation Fund and
sent the proposal for approval to the concerned authorities including
Comptroller & Auditor General of India.

7
It emerged while formulating the modalities for creation/
operationalisation of the Defence Modernisation Fund in consultation
with the concerned authorities that the unspent funds in the Defence
Modernisation Fund would not be automatically available to the
Ministry of Defence for utilisation in a subsequent financial year.
Ministry of Defence would be required to seek the approval of Ministry
of Finance and Parliament at the stage of Budget Estimates as well as
for any Supplementary Demands for Grants for utilisation of funds
out of Defence Modernisation Fund. This would imply that Ministry
of Defence would not be able to decide on its own about the utilisation
of the balance amounts in the Defence Modernisation Fund and would
necessarily have to take the approval of Ministry of Finance and
Parliament. Further, replenishment of such a Modernisation Fund would
also be limited by the overall availability of resources with the Ministry
of Finance in a financial year. In other words, the overall resource
constraints of the Ministry of Finance will have a decisive impact on
the amounts to be transferred to the Modernisation Fund and utilisation
of balances in the Fund. This has also been the experience in operating
other such funds.
In this backdrop, the utility of Defence Modernisation Fund in
addressing the issue of assured availability of funds will be rather
limited and hence the proposal is not being pursued further for the
present. However, the Ministry of Defence will continue to Strive to
ensure availability of funds commensurate with the needs of the
Defence Services for their modernisation programmes year after year.
Comments of the Committee
10. The Committee are not convinced by the reply of the
Government. The Committee note that Government has not favoured
the creation of Defence Modernisation Fund on the ground that the
utility of Defence Modernisation Fund in addressing the issue of
assured availability of funds would be rather limited since unspent
funds of Defence Modernisation Funds would not be automatically
available to the Ministry of Defence for utilization in subsequent
financial year and the Ministry of Defence would be required to
seek approval of Ministry of Finance and Parliament for its
utilization.
The Committee are of the strong view that the creation of DMF
is a matter of urgent necessity in the wake of ongoing modernisation
programme of defence forces. They feel that the utility of DMF can

8
be improved by making relevant changes in the rules for
operationalisation of the Fund so that the Ministry do not have to
seek approval of the Ministry of Finance/Parliament every year for
utilising money out of the fund, which the Parliament had approved
earlier. The Committee, therefore, strongly urge upon the Ministry
of Defence to reconsider the decision and process the creation of
DMF with suitably changed modalities in Consultation with the
Ministry of Finance so that the modernisation programme can be
carried forward smoothly at the desired pace without any need to
seek the Parliamentary approval again and again.
Tenth Defence Plan
(Para Nos. 47 to 52)
11. The Committee expressed their serious concern that despite
half of the plan period was over, the Tenth Defence Plan (2002-2007)
had not yet been finalized. The reasons for delay, as stated by the
Ministry was a lack of firm commitment from the Ministry of Finance,
even on revised projection made after a detailed review within the
Ministry of Defence and Service Headquarters. The Committee in their
earlier report had stressed upon the urgency to finalize and to put
into effect the Tenth Plan without further loss of time.
The Committee were not convinced with the sketchy reasons
advanced by the Ministry for delays and felt that the Ministry had
neither shown any urgency nor followed up with the Ministry of
Finance to get the firm commitment of funds to finalise the Plan. The
Committee were not happy with the planning mechanism in the
Ministry which had moved only at a snails’ pace and consequently
with no result even after the lapse of one more year, precipitating a
situation with no approved Defence Plan to speak of even in the third
year of the Plan period.
The Committee were surprised to note that the actual allocations
during first three years of the Tenth Defence Plan were much below
the projected requirements of Defence Services. The Committee were
constrained to visualize that reduced allocations vis-a-vis projections
might curtail even essential procurement and modernisation plans.
The Committee did not need to emphasize that yearly allocations
were no substitute for long term plan commitments and were therefore,
concerned that avowed objectives of the Plan would face severe set-
backs affecting the overall defence capabilities in case it was not
finalised immediately.

9
The Committee had, therefore, recommended that finalization of
the Tenth Defence Plan with committed allocations should be taken
up at the highest level with the Ministry of Finance so that the process
of the restructuring, upgradation and modernisation of Armed Forces
in the areas of infrastructure as well as equipment was carried forward,
thereby enhancing the defence capabilities at the desired pace.
The Committee also recommended that the Ministry should prepare
a 15 year road map with long term strategic vision for modernisation
and acquisition plans for Defence Services indicating the budgetary
support required therefore as to enable the Ministry of Finance to
appreciate the long term objectives concerning defence preparedness.
The Committee liked to be apprised of the progress made in this
regard within three months.
12. The Ministry in Their Action Taken reply have stated That:
“The Ministry of Defence has energetically pursued the allocation
of funds for defence in the Tenth Plan with the Ministry of Finance
with a view to bridging the gap between the projections made by
the Ministry of Defence and the availability of funds indicated by
the Ministry of Defence without affecting the country’s defence
preparedness. The projections of the Ministry of Defence for the
Tenth Defence Plan were reviewed thrice between March 2003 and
July 2004 bearing in mind the needs of defence modernization and
the likely constraints to the availability of funds for defence in the
Tenth Plan. The Ministry of Finance have now agreed in principle
to the latest projection made by the Ministry of Defence of
Rs. 4,18,101 crore. However, a firm indication of annual outlays
for the remaining two years of the 10th Plan has not yet been
given by the Ministry of Finance.
Meanwhile, in the absence of a formal approval of the allocation
for defence in the Tenth Plan, defence planning has been harmonized
with the allotments for defence in the annual budget of the
Government. Actual expenditures in 2002-2003 and 2003-2004 were
Rs. 55,662 crores and 60,300 crores respectively. An allocation of
Rs. 77,200 crores has been made in the Budget Estimate for 2004-2005
against a projection of Rs. 90,928 crores. About 11,000 crores additional
funds have been allocated beyond the Budget Estimate for the capital
head.

10
The projected expenditures in 2005-2006 and 2006-2007 are
Rs. 1,00,960 crores and 1,10,251 crores respectively.
While some compromises are inevitable in the absence of a formally
approved Plan, every effort has been made to ensure that the annual
budgets have been utilized in accordance with the Plan projections of
the Ministry of Defence and that any negative impact on ongoing
modernization, infrastructure development and procurements of
equipment is minimized. Ongoing projects and commitments have been
reviewed and prioritized so that the main objective of the Tenth Defence
Plan to carry forward the process of modernization of the Armed
Forces is not adversely affected keeping in mind the competing
demands for limited resources, and the requirements of funds for
committed liabilities and new schemes. A modest outlay of over
Rs. 950 crores has been made for new schemes for the Army. The
directions of the Raksha Mantri are that the Ministry of Defence should
continue to process new modernization schemes, and if need be,
additional funds can be sought for at the Revised Estimate stage.
As regards the planning process, the Government has taken a
number of measures to improve the structure, process and procedure
relating to defence planning based on the recommendations of Group
of Ministers on ‘Reforming the National Security System’. The
preparation of Long Term Plans, Five Year Defence Plans and Annual
Budgetary proposals have been brought under the newly established
Integrated Defence Staff (IDS) to bring about greater inter-service
coordination in planning. The IDS also interacts closely with Defence
(Finance) in the formulation of Plans and Budgets.
The Government has set up a Defence Acquisition Council headed
by the Raksha Mantri and consisting of Raksha Rajya Mantri (s), the
three Service Chiefs and Defence Secretary , Secretary (Defence Finance),
and Secretary (Defence Production) to assist the Raksha Mantri in taking
decisions in the totality of the new planning process, including capital
acquisitions and major modernization projects. The Government has
also set up a dedicated institutional structure for defence procurement,
the Defence Procurement Board, headed by the Defence Secretary for
acquisitions on the capital account. Planning processes have been
further tightened under budgetary pressures and the need to establish
greater synergy and jointness amongst the Armed Forces. This has
also necessitated greater coordination in planning and procurements
among the three services.

11
A draft Long-Term Integrated Perspective Plan ( LTIPP) covering
the 15-year period from the Tenth to the Twelfth Plan (2002-2017) was
formulated in June 2004 in consultation with the three services. Since
more than two years of the current Tenth Plan period have already
elapsed, a new approach paper has been made formulating a Long-
Term Integrated Perspective Plan (LTIPP) covering the period from
2007-2022. This Plan is expected to be finalized by the Integrated
Defence Staff by last quarter of 2005.
Comments of the Committee
13. The Committee express their serious concern that despite their
strong recommendation for an immediate finalisation of Tenth
Defence Plan with committed allocation, there has been little progress
with no firm Indication of annual outlays for the remaining 2 years
of Tenth Defence Plan by the Ministry of Finance. The Committee
understand now the Ministry of Finance has agreed to an outlay of
Rs. 4,18,000 crore in December, 2004. The Committee note with serious
concern that the Ministry has itself admitted that some compromises
are inevitable in the absence of formally approved plan and efforts
have been made to minimize any negative impact on the ongoing
modernization infrastructure development and procurement of
equipments. The Committee feel that it tantamounts to compromising
the security concerns of the nation. The Committee, therefore, desire
that the Government should immediately finalise the Tenth Plan
with firm indications of funds for the remaining years of Tenth
Plan without any delay so that the modernisation process can proceed
smoothly. The Committee expect the Ministry of Defence to fully
utilise the balance outlay in the remaining two years in the Tenth
Five Year Plan. The proposed plan may also be submitted to this
Committee for information. The Government should immediately
finalise the plan by making all out efforts to fully achieve the revised
targets, both physical and financial.
Chief of Defence Staff (CDS)
(Para Nos. 77 & 78)
14. The Committee noted that the Government had constituted a
Group of Ministers (GoM) in April 2000 to thoroughly review the
National Security System. One of the major recommendations of the
GoM was the establishment of the post of Chief of Defence Staff
(CDF). The recommendations of the GoM were approved by the
Government with the modification that before a view was taken on

12
the recommendations relating to the institutions of CDS, various
political parties might be consulted. The Committee were, however,
surprised to note that the Government had yet not come to any
decision on the post of CDS even after the lapse of more than three
years. The Committee liked to stress that the coordination and synergy
amongst the Armed Forces, Service Headquarters and the Ministry of
Defence was extremely vital for expeditious decision-making and also
for enhancing the capabilities of our Defence Forces. The existing
structure for higher defence management, viz. the Chiefs of Staff
Committee had not been able to optimally perform their role and
functions in bringing together and promoting coordination amongst
the Services. The Committee were constrained to observe that the
Ministry had learnt no lesson from the setbacks of Kargil and success
of India’s first Theatre Command, viz., Unified Andaman & Nicobar
Islands Command.
The Committee, therefore, liked the Ministry to urgently take a
view on the recommendations of the GoM to ensure the immediate
establishment of the Chief of Defence Staff.
The Ministry in their Action Taken Reply have stated that:
“While it is true that a decision on the institution of a CDS has
not yet been taken in view of the complexities and sensitivities
involved and the need for wider consultation with political parties,
a number of steps have been taken to achieve the basic objectives
behind the creation of such a post notably, to improve ‘jointness’,
synergy and coordination between the three Services, rationalize
planning and optimize expenditure on defence, strengthen the
higher defence management, and expedite decision-making. Pending
a decision on the creation of the post of Chief of Defence Staff
(CDS), an Integrated Defence Staff has been set up under the Chief
of Integrated Defence Staff to the Chiefs of Staff Committee (CISC)
to support the Chiefs of Staff Committee and its Chairman in the
optimum performance of its roles and functions, and bringing
together and coordinating several functions common to the Services.
Planning functions, including the formulation of Long Term and
Five Year Plans and Annual Budgets have been brought under the
Integrated Defence Staff. Tri-Service bodies promoting ‘jointness’
and ‘synergy’ among the Armed Forces have been set up like the
Defence Intelligence Agency (DIA), the Strategic Forces Command
(SFC) and the Andaman and Nicobar ‘Theatre’ Command.

13
Individual Service Headquarters have been re-designated and
integrated to the Ministry of Defence as part of the ‘Integrated
Headquarters of the Ministry of Defence’. These steps have brought
about a significant progress in promoting a culture of jointness,
and better coordination and synergy amongst the Armed Forces
and between the Armed Forces and the Ministry of Defence that
was demonstrated in the response and handling of rescue, relief
and rehabilitation efforts to deal with the December 26, 2004
Tsunami.
[MoD, OM No. H-11013/3/2004/d (Parliament) dated 17.1.2005]
Comments of the Committee
16. The Committee appreciate the coordination of Armed Forces
in the handling of the rescues and relief operations urgently
necessitated by the recent devastation caused by “Tsunami”. The
Committee further note that to improve synergy and coordination
between the three Services the Ministry have created a number of
institutions like Integrated Defence Staff, T ri-Service bodies like the
Defence Intelligence Agency (DIA), the Strategic Forces Command
and the Andaman & Nicobar Theatre Command to achieve the basic
objectives behind the establishment of the Chairman/Chief of
Defence Staff.
The Committee, however, in their First Report had expressed the
view that the existing structure of defence management has not been
able to optimally perform their role and functions in promoting
coordination amongst the Services and had therefore recommended
for immediate establishment of CDS. The Committee note that the
Government has not yet taken any decision in the institution of a
Chairman/Chief of Defence Staff because of its complex and sensitive
nature.
The post of Chairman/Chief of Defence Staff is very much
essential for better management of national security.
National War Memorial and War Museum
Recommendation (Para No. 83)
17. The Committee were constrained to note that despite their
repeated recommendations for early construction of a National War
Memorial and National War Museum, no progress had been made in
this regard. The Committee were surprised that though the matter

14
had been vigorously pursued at the Minister’s level, no site/land had
been indicated/allocated by the Ministry of Urban Development for
the purpose. The Committee, while expressing their displeasure at the
lackadaisical attitude of the Government in the construction of these
symbols of national pride had, recommended that a high-level Inter-
Ministerial Committee might be constituted immediately to identify a
suitable site for construction of these projects to enable the indebted
Nation to honour and pay its tribute to the sacrifice and sentiments
of thousands of martyrs who laid down their lives for the sake of
their motherland.
18. The Ministry in their Action Taken Reply have stated that:
“The issue relating to allotment of land for construction of National
War Memorial and National War Museum has been taken up with
the Ministry of Urban Development. However, the allotment could
not materialize. The Secretary, Ministry of Urban Development took
a meeting on 02-12-2004, in which the representatives from Ministry
of Defence, NDMC, Delhi Urban Arts Commission & CPWD were
called. The Secretary Urban Development indicated that a decision
would be taken after examining the new concept of National War
Memorial proposed by the Ministry of Defence. For construction
of National War Museum be advised the Ministry of Defence to
locate suitable land in Delhi Cantonment Area or elsewhere within
the National Capital Region.
As recommended by the Standing Committee on Defence, the
Cabinet Secretariat is being requested to constitute an Inter-
Ministerial High Level Committee to identify and allot suitable
land for construction of National War Memorial and National War
Museum.”
Comments of the Committee
18. The Committee are happy to note that the Ministry of Defence
has taken up the matter with the Cabinet Secretariat to constitute an
Inter-Ministerial High Level Committee to identify and allot suitable
land for construction of National War Memorial and National War
Museum. The Committee desire that the High Level Committee as
proposed may be constituted immediately to identify a suitable site
for construction of these symbols of national pride without any
further delay and the progress made in this regard should be reported
to the Committee.

15
Establishment of Indian National Defence University (INDU)
Recommendation (Para Nos. 88 to 90)
19. The Committee noted that the demand for setting up of a
Indian National Defence University (INDU) was under the consideration
of the consideration of the Ministry for the last two years as thorough
deliberations and analysis of a large number of issues was required.
The existing institutions like College of Defence Management, Defence
Services Staff College, National Defence Academy, National Defence
College, apart from three Services were to be consulted. The setting
up of the University also encompassed the structural changes required
to tackle The issues of integration of the course of studies in the
proposed University with the existing training methodologies and
systems in the Armed Forces.
The Committee felt that the fast changing world security scenario
and advancement in defence technology underlined the growing
importance of specialised defence studies and analysis in a professional
manner. The Committee, therefore, desired the Ministry to expedite
the setting up of the Indian National Defence University so that the
required number of defence and security experts were available to
assist the Ministry, defence institutions and allied industries in
formulating strategies and plans.
The Committee also desired that while setting up the University,
the Ministry should take measures so that cross discipline studies were
promoted. In the meantime, the Ministry also needed to ensure the
degree and certificates awarded by the various defence institutions
were universally recognised and the proposed University could meet
this requirement.
20. The Ministry in their Action Taken reply have stated that:
“The various recommendations given by the Committee on the
National Defence University (CONDU) are under examination in
the Government in consultation with the Ministry of Finance and
a detailed project report to this effect is under preparation. The
recommendations of the Committee include the establishment of a
number of new institutions and programmes within the Indian
National Defence University (INDU). Some of the existing
institutions like College of Defence Management (CDM), Defence
Services Staff College (DSSC), National Defence Academy (NDA)
and National Defence College (NDC) are proposed to be
incorporated into INDU.

16
The structural changes required to integrate course studies in INDU
with existing training methodologies and systems in the Armed Forces
would also be addressed.
The fact that the world over, ‘Defence studies’ is a faculty in many
established universities coupled with the sizeable costs involved in
setting up of the INDU as envisaged, present an alternative scenario
to the setting up of the INDU. The matter, thus, requires detailed
examination and deliberation on the various issues involved in which
the Ministry of Defence is at present engaged.
As per the existing norms, various Defence training institutions
are affiliated to universities which are universally recognized, and
degrees and diplomas are awarded on completion of training. For
instance the NDA, Khadakwasala is affiliated to the Jawaharlal Nehru
University (JNU), which awards BSc/ BA degrees to successful cadets.
Similarly, the Army War College (AWC), Mhow and Infantry School,
Mhow are affiliated to the Indore University which in turn awards
degrees/diplomas. Along the same line, DSSC, Wellington is affiliated
to the Madras University and Military College of Telecommunication
Engineering (MCTE), Mhow is affiliated to the JNU, which in turn
awards degrees on successful completion of the training courses.
Comments of the Committee
22. The Committee feel satisfied to note that the Ministry of
Defence has taken positive initiatives on the setting up of Indian
National Defence University (INDU), National Institute of Defence
and Strategic Studies and the detailed examination of the various
issues involved therein is in progress. The Committee, therefore,
strongly wish that the Ministry of Defence should finalise the norms
and modalities for setting up the INDU expeditiously in order to
streamline the specialised defence study and facilitate the Ministry
of Defence and the armed forces by providing inter disciplinary
professional expertise within a year or two. It is not a time
consuming process since all other facilities are existing. Human
resource development and upgradation of defence forces are closely
linked with the creation of this University. This can facilitate the
training for the officials and civilians in defence management.
Shortage of Army Personnel
Recommendation (Para No. 99)
23. The Committee were convinced that the prime reason for lack
of response to Short Service Commission was the bleak future which

17
awaited the trained and disciplined officers once they were discharged
barely after 5 years of service, with no prospects wholesoever either
in public or Private Sector. The Committee, therefore, strongly
recommended that to meet the shortage of officers in the immediate
future, the period of Short Service Commission should immediately be
raised from 5 years to 10 years subject to further extensions as per the
existing norms and rules. The Ministry should take all other measures
which might include more promotional avenues for Short Service
Commissioned Officers in their cadre, reservation and lateral transfer
to Public Sector Undertakings, Central Para Military Forces, Railways,
etc. and also pro-rata pension to officers who had tendered even
mandatory five years service, to attract the talented youth to our Armed
Forces.
24. The Ministry in Their Action Taken Reply have stated that:
“The tenure of Short Service Commissioned Officers in the Army
has been increased to 14 years from 10 years with effect from
31st March 2004. The revised turner will comprise of an initial
contractual service of 10 years and one extension of 4 years. A
Committee set up by the Government has also recommended
specific measures for Short Service Commissioned Officers, for
instance, Concessions in the Civil Service Examinations, lateral
induction into Central Para Military Forces, Public/Private Sectors
etc. These proposals are currently under the examination. There is
no proposal under consideration for Grant of pro-rata pension to
Short Service Commissioned Officers. However, Provision of lump-
sum terminal grant for Short Service Commissioned Officers, as
recommended by the Committee, is under examination.
Comments of the Committee
25. The Committee are pleased to note that the tenure of initial
contractual service for the Short Service Commission Officers (SSC)
in the Army has been increased to 10 years with an additional
extension of 4 years. The Committee hope that this will attract more
talented youth to SSC. The Committee further note that the
Committee set up the Government has also recommended specific
measures for SSC for instance concessions in Civil Service
Examination, lateral induction into Central Para Military Forces
Public/Private Sector etc. which are being examined by Government.
The Committee desire the Government to take an early decision on

18
these recommendations. The Committee also desire that such officers
should be imparted specialised trainings in various fields of their
choice so that they can get suitable assignments after they are
released from the service. The Committee desire that Government
should bear all expenses for such courses.
Information and Electronic Warfare
Recommendation (Para Nos. 109 to 111)
26. The Committee noted that information warfare was assuming
a key role in the operation of hi-tech weapons and to achieve strategic
and tactical superiority. The Committee also noted that the Directorate
for Information Warfare, under an Additional Director General was
created in August 2003 as part of the Military Operations Directorate
of the Army Headquarters. The functions of the Directorate for
Information Warfare included formulating policy and guidelines on all
aspects of Information Warfare and monitoring its implementation in
the Army. The Committee felt that the Information Warfare had a very
vital role in the operations of Air Force and Navy as well. Therefore,
the Committee recommended that this Directorate should be a tri-
Service body while coordinating closely with the Ministry of Home
Affairs and intelligence agencies so that information received from
them could be effectively utilised not only against the enemies from
outside but also against insurgent groups operating in the country.
The Committee also noted that Electronic Warfare systems had
been deployed effectively in Low Intensity Conflict operations in
J & K and North-Eastern parts of the county. The Committee further
noted that Electronic Counter—Counter Measures systems were highly
sophisticated electronic equipments. The indigenous development and
Manufacture of Electronic Counter Measures and Electronic Counter—
Counter Measures systems started late in India and, therefore, high
levels of sophistication had not been achieved in this field.
The Committee desired that the acquisition and deployment of
Electronic Warfare and Electronic Counter—Counter Measures should
be given high priority and steps must be taken for their indigenous
development.
27. The Ministry in their Action Taken Reply have stated that:
The HQ Integrated Defence Staff (IDS) is working in the direction
of the Standing Committee’s viewpoint regarding a tri-services body
on Information Warfare. A Directorate of Information Warfare &

19
Information Technology has been formed in the HQ IDS to take up
the issues of Information Warfare (IW) at tri-service level. A Joint
Information Warfare doctrine has been formulated by this Directorate
to serve as the base document for IW activities. A Defence Information
Warfare Agency (DIWA) is also being raised by HQ IDS with the
approval of the Chiefs of Staff Committee, to look after the strategic
and other IW needs of the three Services.
The Electronic Warfare (EW) systems are technology intensive
systems. The sophisticated technology involved in hardware/software
is not easily accessible . The difficulty in obtaining the desired level of
sophisticated equipment and the advantages associated with its
indigenous production, encouraged research and development in the
field.
The programmes, SAMYUKTA for the Army and SANGRAHA for
the Navy, were launched by the Defence Research & Development
Organisation (DRDO) for development of credible indigenous EW
capability. SAMYUKTA was launched in 1994 and is expected to be
completed in November 2005. Similarly, Project SANGRAHA which
was sanctioned in 1995 for the Navy is expected to be completed in
June 2005. The long gestation period of these projects can be attributed
to the complexity involved in first-time development of the systems.
These complex systems have to be interactive and require prolonged
cycle of about 15-20 years to develop and these systems are multi-
Platform and have distributed architecture involving very high
integration of various hardware components. The development of
electronic modules itself is extremely time consuming. The integration
of the separate modules would also require changes in platform design.
Therefore, the initial development of the hardware and their integration
to produce such a high end system is difficult to achieve. This difficulty
is also compounded by the reluctance of advanced nations of supply
electronic equipment used in the development of the hardware. The
imposition of US sanctions also adversely affected the availability of
critical electronic components.
Besides the hardware element, another area that India has to
develop is in the area of sophisticated software that is required to run
the systems. This development is also very time consuming. The
software development standards in regard to military equipment are
more rigorous than in commercial application. The software integration
forms a major challenge in such a system which has hardware from

20
multiple vendors including those that are indigenous and imported.
Some of the reasons for delay are also attributable to the lack of
comprehension of the users requirements, translation of domain
knowledge into software development and multiplicity of agencies
involved in development of software.
As desired by the Committee, high priority has been accorded for
acquisition of Electronic Warfare (EW) and Electronic Counter—Counter
Measures (ECCM). Towards this end, programme SAMYUKTA was
launched in 1994 for indigenous Electronic warfare capabilities for the
army. Its probable date of completion is November, 2005. In order to
meet the operational requirement especially of tactical EW variants, a
two pronged approach has been adopted i.e., developing and fielding
of indigenous EW system and as an interim measure import EW
equipment to meet the immediate requirement so as to fill the existing
voids. Based on the EW philosophy and other factors like mobility
requirement, type of terrain, nature of operations and operational
conditions, the EW systems variants for the Army required to be
produced indigenously till the end of the 12th Plan have been planned.
Similarly, the indigenous EW project for the Navy, ‘SANGRAHA’ was
sanctioned in 1995. The project envisages development and production
of EW equipment, for all the three dimensions ( i.e., air, surface and
sub-surface). As regards Air Force a large number of indigenously
developed Radar Warning Receivers and Jammers have been fitted on
our aircraft fleet. The DRDO laboratories have also initiated projects
for development of improved versions of Radar Warning Receivers,
missile approach warning system and laser warning system.
Comments of the Committee
28. Keeping in view the importance of acquisition and indigenous
development of high level Electronic Counter Measures and Electronic
Counter—Counter Measures system which are in nascent stage, the
Committee had desired that the Ministry should accord priority to
their indigenous development. In this connection, the Committee
are happy to note that the programmes, SAMYUKTA for the Army
and SANGRAHA for the Navy have been launched by the DRDO
for development of credible indigenous Electronic Warfare capability
and are expected to be completed in the year 2005. However the
Committee also note various reasons, outlined by the Ministry,
responsible for the delay in the completion of the projects and the
difficulties in acquiring the critical electronic components from

21
advanced nations. Therefore, the Committee desire that the Ministry
should intensify R & D efforts to expedite the indigenous
development of state-of-the-art technology so as to acquire high level
sophistication in Electronic warfare. Meanwhile, the Government
should not hesitate to procure such advance surveillance equipment
from other countries to take care of the security interests of the
country while striving for their indigenous development.
Casualties in Operation Parakram
Recommendation (Para Nos. 116 to 118)
29. The Committee noted that during the period of ‘Operation
Parakram’ a total of 473 Army personnel were killed and 1,401
wounded including 60 killed and 142 wounded in mine laying
operations. The Defence Forces also suffered heavy losses in low
intensity conflict in J & K.
The Committee felt that a large number of lives could have been
saved if the soldiers were fully equipped with protective gears viz.
helmets, bullet proof jackets, etc. and provided with night vision
devices, communication sets and sensors.
The Committee, therefore, strongly recommended that our soldiers,
who faced extreme adverse climatic conditions ranging from hot
weather desert of Rajasthan to biting cold of Siachen, must be provided
the best available equipments in the world.
30. The Ministry in Their Action Taken Replies have stated that:
Over the last few years, there has been a marked improvement in
provision of better weapons and equipment, to the soldiers fighting
terrorism in Jammu & Kashmir and the North East such as state-of-
the-art small arms with night fighting sights, surveillance system,
specialist weapons, communication equipment and individual protective
gear. Details of the equipment and weapons are as follows:
(a) Communications and Surveillance: Adequate surveillance
systems based on various electro-optical, seismic, IR and
Magnetic detection technologies have been deployed in a
complementary manner to check infiltration and for counter
terrorist operations Some of the equipment deployed are
Unattended Ground Sensors, Battle Field Surveillance Radars,

22
Hand Held Thermal Imagers, Long Range Reconnaissance
and Observation System, Unmanned Aerial Vehicles.
(b) Specialist Weapons: Latest weapons inducted include Anti
Material Rifle, Under Barrel Grenade Launcher for AK-47
Rifle, Flame Thrower, Light Weight Rocket Launcher and
Automatic Grenade Launcher. These have substantially
augmented the combat potential of the Army in counter
terrorism and counter insurgency Operations.
(c) Protective Gear: Soldiers undertaking counter terrorist
operations have been provided with adequate individual
protective gear, which includes Bullet Proof Jackets and
Patkas. For mining/de-mining operations during Operation
Parakram, soldiers were provided anti mine boots, helmets
with visors and other protective clothing. Hydrema de-
mining vehicles were used extensively in de-mining and re-
proving operations.
Comments of the Committee
31. The Committee are happy to note that action has been
initiated by the Ministry of Defence on their observations and
recommendations made after their visit to Leh and other places in
Jammu & Kashmir. However, the Committee feel that these actions
initiated must bear fruit so that the soldiers in the field get their
due.
The Committee, during their visit to Leh, Siachen and other parts
of Jammu & Kashmir in October 2004, noticed that the soldiers
posted in these areas and also in the other hostile areas were supplied
with the uniform and other livery items of sub-standard quality. It
is understood that the Army authorities decide the norms and
specifications for these items. The Committee feel that due to the
faulty norms prescribed, these items are of sub-standard quality. The
authority deciding such norms should be investigated and the
responsibility should be fixed. The norms should be decided
scientifically and taking into consideration the environmental
conditions, so that the soldiers do not become the victim of casual
decisions. The Committee also feel that a high powered Committee
should be appointed to look into this matter and the concrete steps
taken after its recommendations may be communicated to the
Committee.

23
The Committee desire that these should constantly be reviewed
in future to avoid such things. If such instances are repeated strict
action should be taken against the concerned persons.
The Committee also note with concern that items of personal kit
for soldiers in high altitude operations are currently imported. The
Army has been conducting high altitude operations from 1962
onwards and yet till date there has been no domestic manufacture
of such items and import substitution policies have not yielded any
results.
The Committee desire that the Ministry of Defence should chalk
out a time bound import substitution programme for such personal
items so as to relieve the country from its dependence on imports
and avoid utilization of foreign exchange. Import should not be the
first choice as a matter of policy.
The Committee also desire that the medical facilities and
hospitals at Jammu, Leh, Srinagar and other places along the border
should be strengthened and closely monitored.
Use of defective and outdated mines
Recommendation (Para Nos. 119 & 120)
32. The Committee were shocked to note that outdated and
defective stock of mines with unworkable fuses were also put to use
during ‘Operation Parakram’ resulting in a large number of casualties
during the mine laying and demining operations. The Committee felt
that these casualties were entirely avoidable if the duly validated mines
alone were used and the required procedure with adequate safety
measures was followed. The Committee desired that the mine accidents
should be inquired into afresh and the responsibility fixed for the use
of outdated mines and disregard of laid down safety procedures.
The Committee also recommended that old and defective stock of
mines and fuses might be replaced immediately with modern, state-
of-the-art mines and latest excavation equipments for demining, for
use in future operations.
33. The Ministry in their Action Taken Reply have stated That:
“The Army remains consistent in its effort to equip the troop
appropriately, for operating effectively in all types of terrain and
warfare, and to that extent, the Standing Committee’s
recommendations at Para 101 are endorsed for implementation in
future plans.

24
Director General of Ordnance Services has laid down the
guidelines prescribing 10 years as the initial shelf life of
different categories of mines and fuses. These guidelines
further state that no stock will be declared unserviceable
merely because it is outdated but should continued to be
used till actual failure at Proof which implies that the stock
which has achieved the life of 10 years will be subjected to
technical examination by the Director General of Quality
Assurance and testing periodically by selecting the
prescribed number of random samples to be tested from
the batch manufactured on a particular date and only these
stock will be continued in service which pass this test. Also
if the visual condition shows any deterioration then the
mines and fuses will be condemned at any stage of their
life.
(ii) In accordance with these guidelines batches of mines which
are not defective are validated and declared serviceable on
the basis of the prescribed procedure and these stocks were
issued for mining the Indo Pak border during ‘Operation
Parakram’.
(iii) Despite all safety measures and prescribed procedures being
observed the various environmental, terrain and battle
related factors such as operational urgency, mines laid during
hours of darkness to prevent detection by the enemy, severe
fog and winter conditions, thick undergrowth and boggy
ground conditions, caused casualties and these factors were
beyond the control of the field formations.
(iv) No useful purpose will be served in conducting fresh
enquiries into the mine accidents during ‘Operation
Parakram’ since during this operation majority of the
accidents took place for reasons beyond the control of field
Commanders. Further, use of only those available mines
which were serviceable as per the extant norms was made.
(v) However, as an additional precautionary step the Army
Head Quarters and Ministry of Defence are examining the
technical implications involved in revision of the current
policy to fixing an outer limit to the shelf life of 15 years
for mines and 10 years for fuses. Also the financial
implications for the purchase and production of new mines
and fuses is being worked out, which are likely to be
substantial and may have to be undertaken in a phased

25
manner over a number of years. The latest technology in
mines and fuses and their cost will also be kept in view
before taking a final decision in the matter.
Old stock mines upto 1975 vintage have been sentenced as
“unserviceable” and are being disposed off, while proof
testing of mines of vintage 1976 to 1989 is under progress
by the Directorate General of Quality Assurance (DGQA).
For future operations, AHQ is considering the procurement
of a new family of state-of-the-art mines demining
equipment.”
Comments of the Committee
34. The Committee are unable to accept the reply of the Ministry
regarding following the prescribed guidelines in assessing the service
life of the mines. The Committee note that though the, Director General
of Ordnance Services has prescribed 10 years as the initial shelf life of
all categories of mines and fuses yet on the other hand the mines of
vintage 1976 to 1989 are still lying in the stock. The Committee note
that during ‘Operation Parakram’ a large number of our soldiers died
while laying mines in the border areas. It was noticed that the mines
used were of 1975 vintage, which had shelf life of 10 years. But it is
understood that these were certified by the office of Director General
of Quality Assurance and was declared fit to be used. The Committee
notic that during the ‘Operation Parakram’ a total of 375 Army
personnel were killed and 1401 were wounded. Out of this 60 were
killed and 142 were wounded in the mine laying operation alone. This
constitutes about 15 per cent of the casualties suffered by our Army
during this operation. The Committee have viewed this very seriously
and feel that this matter may be investigated and those found guilty
should be brought to books.
The Committee are of the firm belief that not only mines but also
use of other weapons and ammunition, which have crossed its shelf
life, should be discontinued. The practice of certifying it and using
beyond the shelf life should be discontinued with immediate effect,
because its use not only costs human lives, but also demoralises our
forces. The Committee also note that the inventory of the defence
forces is on the higher side, which has resultes into some management
problems, which leads to the use of obsolete stores. The Committee
strongly feel that the inventory should be professionally managed and
it should be strengthened. The steps taken in this regard may be
communicated to the Committee.

CHAPTER II
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN
ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT
Recommendation (Sl. No. 3, Para 52)
The Committee also recommend that the Ministry should prepare
a 15 year road map with long-term strategic vision to be updated
periodically for modernization and acquisition plans for Defence
Services indicating the budgetary support required therefore as to
enable the Ministry of Finance to appreciate the long-term objectives
concerning Defence preparedness. The Committee would have to be
apprised of the progress made in this regard within three months.
Reply of the Government
A draft Long-Term Integrated Perspective Plan (LTIPP) covering
the 15 year period from the Tenth to the Twelfth Plan (2002-2017) was
formulated in June 2004 in consultation with the three services. Since
more than two years of the current Tenth Plan period have already
elapsed, a new approach paper has been made formulating a Long-
Term Integrated Perspective Plan (LTIPP) covering the period from
2007-2022. This Plan is expected to be finalized by the Integrated
Defence Staff by the last quarter of 2005.
[MoD OM No. H-11013/3/2004/D (Parliament) dated 17.1.2005]
Comments of the Committee
(Please See Para 13 of Chapter-I)
Recommendation (Sl. No. 4, Para 63)
The Committee note that the Defence Procurement Board (DPB)
was set up primarily to oversee all activities relating to acquisition of
the defence equipments in the Capital Account in order to streamline
and expedite defence procurement procedures. The Committee have
been informed that the Defence procurement Board does not normally
deal with the cases under normal procedure but with the acquisition
26

27
of the urgently required items under the fast track procedure. The
Committee, however, note that out of 75 cases approved by DPB in
the last three years, contracts have been signed in only 51 cases
including 48 cases under fast track procedure. One third of the cases
are, therefore, still pending with the Ministry of Defence for
implementation.
Reply of the Government
Apart from dealing with cases of acquisition of urgently required
items under Fast Track Procedure, Defence Procurement Board (DPB)
also considers the acquisition/procurement cases under normal
procedure in following circumstances:—
(a) Single vendor procurement beyond RM’s powers ( i.e. beyond
Rs 50 crores).
(b) Cases above Rs. 20 crore requiring waiver/amendment to
‘essential’ Staff Qualitative Requirements after the issue of
Request For Proposal (RFP).
(c) Dispensation of Field Evaluation.
(d) Cases where the Technical Evaluation Committee has
recommended trials/procurement based on single vendor/
deviation of ‘essential’ parameters.
(e) Cases for additional requirement of equipment/systems in
excess of Rs. 20 crores, for which orders/contracts have
already been placed/concluded.
(f) Acquisition cases in which single vendor shall necessarily
emerge in respect of countries having strategic partnership
with India.
(g) Where deviations from procedures laid down in Defence
Procurement Procedure (DPP)-2002 occurs.
2. Out of 75 cases approved by DPB in the last three years,
contracts have been signed in 54 cases. The remaining 21 cases are at
various stages of processing and contracts are likely to be concluded
in these cases shortly.
[MoD, OM No. H-11013/3/2004/D (Parliament) dated 17.1.2005)

28
Recommendation (Sl. No. 4, Para 64)
The Committee are constrained to observe that though the DPB
has been mandated for such an important task for procurement of
urgently required defence items on Fast Track basis, it has miserably
failed to speed up the process and cut down the time taken, thereby
defeating the purpose for which it was set up. In fact, Defence
Procurement Board seems to have added one more tier in clearance of
defence proposals causing further delays in the procurement of defence
equipments.
Reply of the Government
Defence Procurement Board (DPB) functions under the Defence
Secretary and has Secretary (DP&S), Secretary (R&D), Secretary (Defence
Finance), Vice Chiefs of the three Services and Special Secretary
(Acquisition) as members. It oversees all activities related ‘Buy’ and
‘Buy and Make’ decisions of Defence Acquisition Council. It is
responsible for the coordination, supervision and monitoring of the
acquisition process. The DPB is assisted in its functioning by the
Acquisition Wing in the Department of Defence. It has an integrated
setup with officers from the Department of Defence, Finance Division
and Service Headquarters.
It would be seen from the above that DPB has provided a forum
for deciding policy matters specially related to procurement at one
place in a coordinated manner.
[MoD, OM No. H-11013/3/2004/D (Parliament) dated 17.1.2005]
Recommendation (Sl. No. 4, Para 65 & 66)
The Committee find that the tedious, cumbersome and time
consuming defence procurement procedures have been the bane of
defence budgetary exercise and despite the efforts made with good
intentions, the procedural delays could not be obviated to the desired
extent. The Committee, therefore, feel that the very nature of structural
and procedural aspects in acquisition and modernisation of defence
forces, and the stages involved therein requires a thorough study to
identify the bottlenecks and remedial measures needed to streamline
the system.

29
The Committee, therefore, recommend that a Study Group may be
constituted to examine the entire gamut of defence procurement
procedures and structures and suggest appropriate modifications.
Reply of the Government
In order to implement the provisions laid out in the new defence
procurement management structures and systems, a new Defence
Procurement Procedure-2002 (DPP-2002) was promulgated in December
2002 and made effective from 31st December 2002. This related to all
‘Buy’ decisions of more than Rs. 20 crores. This procedure was
subsequently amended in June 2003 and made effective from 30.6.2003
to include procurement on ‘Buy and Make through imported Transfer
of Technology’ and termed DPP-2002 (version June 2003).
2. As reported to the Standing Committee on Defence (2004-2005),
in all 75 proposals including 62 proposals under the fast track
procedure and 13 proposals under the normal procedure had been
approved by the Defence Procurement Board (DPB) between October
2001 and July 2004. An analysis of the data pertaining to the Fast
Track cases and normal cases approved by DPB during this period are
attached as Annexure I to III. Analysis of the 62 cases approved by
DPB under the Fast Track procedure would reveal that 79% of the
cases had been contracted. Deliveries in 63% of Contracted cases had
been completed and in 29% partially completed. Overall deliveries in
92% of cases contracted under the fast track procedure had been
completed or are underway.
3. Improvements in DPP-2002 (V ersion June 2003)
(i) The DPP-2002 (version June 2003) was a significant
improvement over the 1992 procedure. It simplified and cut
short the procedure that had to be followed as per DPP
(1992). While the 1992 procedure had envisaged multi-
layered steps, in DPP (2002) it was reduced to 9 steps.
(ii) While under DPP (1992), various acquisition stages could
only be taken in tandem, the 2002 procedure envisages
simultaneous/concurrent action in many areas. In addition,
DPP (2002) also contain provisions to undertake Fast Track
procurements. This provides the much needed operational
flexibility to the 3 Services to meet any warlike situation.

30
(iii) The duties of the Commercial Negotiations Committee
(CNC) were also streamlined. DPP-2002 (Version June 2003),
the present procedure, requires negotiation with only the
lowest bidder. This has significantly reduced the time
involved in the conclusion of contracts with vendors.
(iv) Standardization of Request For Proposal (RFP) also resulted
in the simplification of the procedure for the vendors.
(v) The present procedure finds place in the official website
(http://www.mod.nic.in) of the MoD. This assists potential
vendors to understand the technical and commercial
requirements and the process involved in the acquisition
process, apart from ensuring greater transparency.
(vi) The approvals from Acceptance of Necessity angle were
earlier taken on file This took anywhere from 3 to 12
months. Under DPP-2002 (Version June 2003), the approval
is given at a meeting chaired by additional Secretary .
(vii) The recommendation of the Technical Evaluation Committee
and joint Staff Evaluation had, hitherto, to be routed through
Department of Defence (DoD), MoD (Finance) before it was
approved by RM. These powers have now been delegated
to additional/Special Secretary (Acquisition) saving
considerable processing time in DPP-2002 (V ersion June
2003).
(viii) In the area of indigenisation, a provision for ‘Buy and Make’
and ‘Make’ through Transfer of Technology (providing for
acquiring the technology) is available in DPP-2002 (Version
June 2003).
(ix) The DPP-2002 (Version June 2003) provides for review after
two years.
4. Perceived Weaknesses in DPP-2002 (Version June 2003)
With the experience gained in the last two years, MoD has realized
there exist some problems that need to be resolved to further streamline
the process of acquisition. This has been necessitated due to the
realization that following would need to be done:—
(i) Compress time frame and delineate clear time frame at each
of acquisitions to ensure optimal utilization of capital budget
allocation.

31
(ii) Reduce time taken at the acceptance of ‘necessity’ stage.
(iii) Evolve a system of open tendering system for non-sensitive
security equipment.
(iv) Put in place a nodal mechanism for formulating joint QRs
for equipment of tri-service nature;
(v) Provide guidelines in regard to application of Discounted
Cash Flow (DCF) for evaluating offers with diferent payment
terms and involving cash flow over a period of time and
Exchange Rate Variation (ERV) in respect of Defence PSUs
in order to make procurement process more transparent and
objective.
(vi) Expedite processing of indents placed on Ordnance Factory
Board (OFB) and schemes entrusted to DRDO; and
(vii) Include “Off set” in RFP on case to case basis to avail of
direct benefits like technological transfer and exports, etc. &
integrity pact as part of Standard Conditions of Contract.
(viii) Selection and procurement of equipment, systems and
hardware, for fitment, integration and upgradation of
existing weapon platforms.
5. As provided in the DPP-2002, the Defence Procurement Procedure
is presently under review in the MoD to make it more streamline,
transparent and effective.
[MoD, OM No. H-11013/3/2004/D (Parliament) dated 17.1.2005]

ANNEXURE-I
ANALYSIS OF TIME TAKEN
CASES APPROVED UNDER FAST TRACK BETWEEN OCTOBER
2001 AND JULY 2004
Cases Contracts Contracts signed within Deliveries Deliveries Total
approved signed completed partially
completed
0-6 7-12 Over
months months 12
months
1. Army 50 37 14 11 12 21 13 34
2. Navy 7 7 6 0 1 5 1 6
3. Airforce 5 5 3 0 2 5 0 5
Total 62 49 23 11 15 31 14 45
(79%) (47%) (22%) (31%) (63%) (29%) (92%)
32

ANNEXURE-II
ANALYSIS OF TIME TAKEN
CASES APPROVED UNDER NORMAL PROCEDURE BETWEEN
OCTOBER 2001 AND JULY 2004
Cases Contracts Contracts signed within Deliveries Deliveries Total
approved signed completed partially
completed
0-6 7-12 Over
months months 12
months
1. Army 4 2 0 0 2 0 1 1
2. Navy 8 2 1 1 0 1 1 2
3. Airforce 1 1 0 1 0 0 0 0
Total 13 5 1 2 2 1 2 3
(38%) (8%) (15%) (15%) (20%) (40%) (60%)
33

ANNEXURE-III
ANALYSIS OF TIME TAKEN
CASES APPROVED UNDER FAST TRACK AND NORMAL
PROCEDURE BETWEEN OCTOBER 2001 AND JULY 2004
Cases Contracts Contracts signed within Deliveries Deliveries Total
approved signed completed partially
completed
0-6 7-12 Over
months months 12
months
1. Fast 62 49 23 11 15 31 14 45
Track
Procedure
2. Normal 13 5 1 2 2 1 2 3
Total 75 54 24 13 17 32 16 48
(72%) (44%) (24%) (31%) (60%) (30%) (89%)
34

35
Recommendation (Sl. No. 8, Para 100, 101)
The Committee are surprised and concerned to note the very poor
rate of induction of NCC Cadets in the Armed Forces. The Committee
were informed that most of the NCC Cadets lack communication skills
and exposure to activities that inculcate leadership qualities required
for the Services Selection Board (SSB) apart from being not familiar
with the specific details of the selection process. The Committee strongly
recommended that specialized training should be imparted to NCC
cadets in developing in them the communication skills and inculcating
leadership qualities, so that they can face the SSB more confidently
and become officers in the Armed Forces and their years spent in
NCC do not go waste. The Committee are of the view that the
potentials of Sainik Schools/Military Schools under State Governments,
spread all over the country-which could be a training ground for future
officers should be fully harnessed by providing them the necessary
support by Union Government for introduction of modern teaching
methodologies and better infrastructure.
The Committee also desire the Ministry to consider, in consultation
with the State Governments the promotion of studies of language of
the region, Hindi and English in addition to introduction of uniform
curriculum in these schools.
Reply of the Government
A large number of NCC Cadets are being inducted into the Army
through National Defence Academy (NDA), Khadakvasla, Indian
Military Academy (IMA), Dehradun, and Officers Training Academy
(OTA), Chennai. The analysis of the cadets undergoing training at
NDA, IMA and OTA reveals that a substantial number of the cadets
have received NCC training. In addition to the cadets joining the
Armed Forces through the NCC Special Entry Scheme, around 30.5%
of the cadets in NDA, 22.5% of the cadets in OTA, 47.2% cadets of the
OTA Women Special Entry Scheme and 9.5% cadets in IMA have
received NCC training . However, some shortfall has been noticed in
Direct Recruitment category of NCC ‘C’ certificate holders as the
performance of NCC cadets at the Services Selection Board (SSB) has
been below par because of their inability to exhibit their true potential
due to lack of knowledge of the selection procedures, at SSB. In order
to improve the potential of the Prospective candidates, and to
familiarize them with various testing techniques and tasks which they

36
would be required to undergo at various selection centers. Sanction of
the Government has been conveyed for commencement of SSB Training
Courses at NCC Officers Training Academy (OTA), Kamptee, and NCC
OTA, Gwalior. Two courses each are being conducted at NCC OTA,
Kamptee, and NCC OTA, Gwalior from the year 2003-04 onwards for
a duration of 10 days each. Six Cadets from each of the 16 NCC
Directorates spread all over the country participate in these Training
Courses. During these courses Cadets are given exposure to the
techniques of the SSB and personality development to enable them to
succeed in the SSB interviews. Apart from the centralized training
being carried out, NCC Units are also conducting NCC coaching classes
and personality development classes for the cadets especially in rural
areas to enable the cadets to face the SSB with confidence.
2. Further measures have been taken to improve the infrastructure,
automation, reforms in the admission tests, and to improve the welfare
of cadets and staff at Military Schools and to convert these schools
into centers of academic excellence.
3. As far as Sainik Schools are concerned it is mandatory for every
student to join the NCC while joining Sainik Schools. Adequate
emphasis is being laid on inculcating Officer Like Qualities (OLQs) in
all cadets. The curriculums of Sainik Schools are basically designed to
prepare a cadet to join NDA/Armed Forces. The selection rate of Sainik
Schools cadets in SSB has been very satisfactory.
4. In Sainik Schools apart from Hindi and English, the regional
language is also being taught.
[MoD, OM No. H-11013/3/2004/D (Parliament), dated 17.1.2005]
Recommendation (Sl. No. 13, Para 125)
The Committee note that Bharat Dynamics Limited (BDL) is the
only manufacturer of Missiles in India. The Committee are concerned
to note that the Components Production Division of BDL is lying idle
since March 2004 and that the BDL will also continue to face under
utilization of capacity for another two years till new projects are taken
up.
Reply of the Government
It has been the endeavour of the Government to ensure full capacity
utilization of the Bharat Dynamics Limited (BDL). As a step in this
direction BDL has been nominated as the nodal production agency for

37
production of Man Portable Air Defence System (MANPADS) (IGLA-
S) , Decoy C-303, Barak missile, Torpedo Takshak, Low Level Quick
Reaction Missile (LLQRM) and an agency to carry out refurbishment
and life extension of missiles already held on the inventory of the
Armed Forces.
[MoD, OM No. H-11013/3/2004/D (Parliament), dated 17.1.2005]
Recommendation (Sl. No. 13, Para 126)
The Committee recommend that the Ministry should take
immediate action to formulate a long-term plan so as to ensure that
Bharat Dynamics Limited get regular orders and the expertise
development and the state-of-the-art facilities in these centers of
excellence are gainfully utilized for the benefit of the nation. The
Committee also desire that the Ministry should explore the possibilities
of export of missiles to other countries so that the order book position
of the company always remains healthy.
Reply of the Government
Production in BDL is mainly dependent upon the orders pleased
by the Armed Forces on BDL of products manufactured by them on
transfer of Technology from overseas OEMs or DRDO. Early finalization
of the Armed Forces’ Perspective Plan will enable BDL to plan its
production schedule and ensure better utilization of installed capacity.
The Company is also exploring the possibilities of exporting its
products to other countries, both which are fully indigenously
developed and those produced under licence from overseas OEMs.
[MoD, OM No. H-11013/3/2004/D (Parliament), dated 17.1.2005]
Recommendation (Sl. No. 14, Para 133)
The Committee note that ordnance Factories cater to the
requirement of arms, ammunitions and clothing of defence forces which
is specialized, complex and poses unique challenges.
Reply of the Government
In addition to above items, Ordnance Factories also supply
weapons, armoured and transport vehicles and equipment to Defence
Forces.
[MoD, OM No. H-11013/3/2004/D (Parliament), dated 17.1.2005]

38
Recommendation (Sl. No. 14, Para 134)
The Committee further note that to harness the vast potential of
the private sector in terms of capital, infrastructure and trained
manpower, the Government in May 2001 decided to permit private
sector participation in the defence production and 26 percent Foreign
Direct Investment both subject to licensing. The Committee, therefore,
recommend that the time bound modernisation programme of Ordnance
Factories should be vigorously pursued and adequate financial
allocation earmarked therefore to make them competitive and at par
with the international standards.
Reply of the Government
The observations made by the Committee for time-bound
implementation of modernization programme have noted for
compliance. An estimated amount of Rs. 1804 Crs. has been projected
durring 10th plan period under New Capital (NC) and Renewal and
Replacement (RR), which is under consideration of the Government.
[MoD, OM No. H-11013/3/2004/D (Parliament), dated 17.1.2005]
Recommendation (Sl. No. 14, Para 135)
The Committee further recommend that the Ordnance Factory
Board should chalk out a comprehensive plan to increase its market
share in the domestic market by introduction of new products through
the Transfer of Technology route, development of new products,
including product upgrades through in-house Research & Development
with or without the help of other Defence Public Sector undertakings
and by entering into foreign collaborations, if required. The ordnance
Factory Board should also formulate a strategy to increase their exports
further. To effectively meet the challenges of the competitive
globalisation in Defence Sector, Ordance Factory Board needs to be
restructured by the induction of experts so as to make it a truly
professional body.
Reply of the Government
The observations made by the Committee have been noted for
compliance. A comprehensive plan for development of new products
and increasing market share in domestic as well as international market

39
will be drawn in due course. The recommendation of the Committee
for restructuring of the Board would be considered for implementation
keeping in view the recommendations or the various expert groups in
this regard. However, OFB already has representatives of users,
designing and inspection agencies and producers, who are experts in
their own areas.
[MoD, OM No. H-11013/3/2004/D (Parliament), dated 17.1.2005]
Recommendation (Sl. No. 15, Para 141)
The Committee are unhappy to note that ammunition worth
Rs. 352 crore manufactured by Ordnance Factory, Khamaria and
supplied to Army Units needs to be repaired/revalidated even after
the expiry of four years. The Ministry has also not given the reasons
for delay in repair/revalidation of the same. Again ammunition worth
Rs. 2.76 crore was declared unserviceable due to cavity in the filling
and detonators worth Rs. 7.39 crore have been found unserviceable
because of improper storage.
Reply of the Government
The deficiency noticed in the ammunition is not attributable to
manufacturing defects. In fact, these ammunitions were manufactured/
produced as per the laid down specifications, and were supplied after
inspection and Proof acceptance. However, modalities for revalidation/
repairs are being worked out in consultation with various agencies
under the Ministry of Defence.
[MoD, OM No. H-11013/3/2004/D (Parliament), dated 17.1.2005]
Recommendation (Sl. No. 15, Para 142)
The Committee strongly recommend that Ordnance Factories must
be more careful in manufacturing of ammunition as well as storage of
the same. They must modernise their facilities for manufacturing
ammunition and also adopt sophisticated storage facilities so that
ammunition of critical importance may not go waste.
Reply of the Government
The observations made by the Committee have been noted for
compliance.
[MoD, OM No. H-11013/3/2004/D (Parliament), dated 17.1.2005]

40
Recommendation (Sl. No. 16, para 152)
The Committee note that the Indian Navy presently has 143 ships
and submarines. The Defence Acquisition Council (DAC) had in March
2003 opined that the force levels should not fall below 140 ships and
submarines. Accordingly , the Navy had formulated a 15-Year
shipbuilding plan as a part of the Long Term Perspective Plan covering
10th ,11th and 12th Plan periods from 2002-2017. The Plan envisages
induction of 132 ships and 12 submarines.
Reply of the Government
A 15-Years Shipbuilding Plan has been prepared which emphasizes
construction of 132 ships and 12 submarines by the end of the XII
Plan period. ‘In-principle’ approval was accorded to the shipbuilding
planed of Navy by Defence Acquisition Council (DAC) to ensure that
our force levels did not fall below 140 ships. A 10-Years Shipbuilding
Plan has been prepared by the Navy covering the Xth an XIth Plan
period. This plan envisages induction of 79 ships and 4 submarines by
2012.
[MoD, OM No. H-11013/3/2004/D (Parliament), dated 17.1.2005]
Recommendation (Sl. No. 16, para 153)
The Committee are constrained to note that there is no definite
budgetary allocation for the 15-year shipbuilding plan which is very
crucial in maintaining the minimum required deterrent force level of
the Navy apart from being extremely vital for sustaining our Shipyards
which are grossly under-utilised at present.
Reply of the Government
Perspective planning such as 15 years Shipbuilding Plan is drawn
for the purpose of assessing requirements of funds and planning.
Budgetary allocation of funds is made annually by Ministry of Defence
keeping in view overall requirement of funds and its availability.
2. As regards the utilisation of capacity of Defence shipyards, if
may be mentioned that all yards are adequately loaded except Goa
Shipyard Limited (GSL). As on date the following naval projects are
being undertaken at defence Shipyards:—
(a) Mazagon Dock Ltd. (MDL) . Three ships of P-17 and three
ships of P-15A are under construction. Submarines under
P-75 are also planned to be constructed at MDL.

41
(b) Garden Reach Shipbuilders & Engineers (GRSE).  One ship
of P-16A, four ships of P-28, four Fast Attack Crafts (FACs)
and three Landing Ship Tanks (Large) [LSTs (L)] are under
construction.
(c) Goa Shipyard Limited (GSL).  At present no ship is under
construction at GSL. However, Extra Fast Attack Crafts
(XFACs), Off-shore Patrol Vessels (OPVs) and Mine Control
Measure Vessels (MCMVS) are planned to be constructed at
the yard. In addition, Coast Guard has placed orders for
one Advanced Off-shore Patrol Vessel (AOPV) and five
Patrol Vessels (FPVs).
[MoD, OM No. H-11013/3/2004/D (Parliament), dated 17.1.2005]
Recommendation (Sl.No. 16, para 154)
The Committee, therefore, recommend, that immediate steps should
be taken for allocation of funds for implementation of the Navy’s 15-
year shipbuilding plan to prevent any depletion of Naval strength and
for optimal and efficient utilisation of the Shipyards.
Reply of the Government
All efforts will be taken by Government to ensure that Naval
strength of ships does not fall below 140 at any point of time as
directed by Defence Acquisition Council and to ensure that adequate
funds are provided to Navy to maintain the aforesaid level.
[MoD, OM No. H-11013/3/2004/D (Parliament), dated 17.1.2005]
Recommendation (Sl.No. 17, para 161)
The Committee note that the Coast Guard currently has a force
level of 56 ships and 44 aircraft and to maintain its efficiency it is
necessary to provide the required budgetary support for the timely
replacement of aging ships/aircraft. The Committee are of the view
that to enable the Coast Guard to effectively look after the interest of
the country in maritime zones particularly in the territorial waters, it
is imperative to provide it with the most modern ships. Aircraft shore
infrastructure and advanced equipments and systems.

42
Reply of the Government
The Coast Guard has drawn up a Perspective Plan for the years
2002-17. In addition, it has also made a Development Plan to cover
the period 2002-07. According to these plans, the Coast Guard would
Modernize to increase their effectiveness. The modernization plans
include the phasing out of ageing ships/aircraft and the induction of
modern assets with advanced equipment and capabilities. The proposals
of the Coast Guard are designed to achieve these objectives and are
done under the Perspective Plan which is itself a document that has
been prepared taking into account Coast Guard’s defined roles and
the assets they would require to perform them.
[MoD, OM No. H-11013/3/2004/D (Parliament), dated 17.1.2005]
Recommendation (Sl.No. 17, para 162)
The Committee, therefore, desire that adequate budgetary support
should be provided to the Coast Guard to fully equip it with the
latest state-of-the-art equipments and systems to enable it to play its
role effectively as a supportive arm of the Indian Navy and fulfil its
functions as a protection force for safety of life and property at sea-
covering areas mandated under international maritime inventions.
Reply of the Gvoernment
Coast Guard is an independent organization of the Government
entrusted with the responsibility of protecting the national and other
maritime interest of India. The organisation has been equipped from
time to time with new kind of vessels/aircrafts to meet the specific
functional requirement. Modernization of vessels/aircrafts of Coast
Guard and suitable additions thereon are undertaken on a continuing
basis to prevent the vessels/aircrafts from technological obsolescence
and numerical reduction in order to enable the organization to
discharge its duties effectively.
[MoD, OM No. H-11013/3/2004/D (Parliament), dated 17.1.2005]
Recommendation (Sl.No. 18, paras 170-173)
The Committee note that the responsibilities of the Indian Air Force
are multifarious ranging form air defence of the nation to providing
reconnaissance, battlefield air strikes and counter air operations during

43
hostilities. The Committee are extremely concerned that the bulk of
the air fleet consists of ageing MIG series aircraft with only limited
fleet of modern multi-role combat aircraft, viz. Sukhoi-30 and Mirage-
2000. The Committee further note that the Light Combat Aircraft (LCA)
rechristened as ‘Tejas’ being indigenously designed and developed will
not be inducted before 2011.
Paragraph No. 171
The Committee feel that credible deterrence capabilities of Indian
Air Force has to be maintained in all circumstances to ensure air
superiority in the region.
Paragraph No. 172
The Committee, therefore, recommend that the Ministry should
strive to ensure that the induction plan of LCA is not delayed any
further. The Ministry should also take the required steps for securing
licensed production of Mirage-2000 apart from the periodic appraisal
of the existing fleet of multi-role strike aircraft to maintain their modern
and advanced world class capabilities.
Reply of the Government
All out efforts are being made to maintain credible deterrnce
capabilities of Air Force to ensure air superiority in the region not
only through acquisition of modern fighter aircraft but also through
acquisition of force multipliers like Aerostat Radar, Airborn Warning
and Control System, Unmanned Aerial Vehicle, Flight Refueling Aircraft
etc. Further, for the modernization of the IAF, upgrade programmes
like MiG 21 BIS Upgrade, MiG 27 upgrade and Navwass Jaguar
programme have been undertaken at Hindustan Aeronautics Limited.
Efforts are being made for the induction of the first production
version of Light Combat Aircraft (LCA) with initial operation clearance
(IOC), in March 2007 and final operation clearance (FOC) in March
2009. The induction of the first squadron in the Air Force is expected
by 2010-11.
Government have initiated steps for procurement of Medium Multi
Role Combat Aircraft (MMRCA). Necessary Qualitative Requirements
for the aircraft have been finalised.
[MoD, OM No. H-11013/3/2004/D (Parliament), dated 17.1.2005]

44
Pararaph No. 173
The Committee are also not happy with the misconceptions about
the functioning of the Ministry in general, and defence acquisitions in
Indian Air Force in particular. The Committee feels that there should
be more transparency in the functioning of the Ministry of Defence,
and misgivings, as and when arising in the general public, must be
clarified appropriately. The Committee, therefore, recommend that the
Public Relations Division of the Ministry should be adequately
strengthened and sensitized to be more proactive for presentation of
factual position in the correct perspective.
Reply of the Government
Based on the recommendations of the Group of Ministers on
“Reforming the National Security System”, the Government has taken
a number of measures to improve the structure, process and procedures
relating to defence procurement in order to ensure absolute probity in
defence procurements, and as much transparency as possible bearing
in mind compulsions of protection of information relating to certain
procurements in the interest of national security.
Procurements under the capital account are first approved in
principle by the Defence Acquisition Council headed by the Raksha
Mantri, and consisting of Raksha Rajya Mantri (S), the three Service
Chiefs and Defence Secretary amongst others to assist the Raksha
Mantri in the totality of the planning process. All procurement
proposals are routed through the Ministry of Defence to Defence
Procurement Board headed by the Defence Secretary, for scrutiny from
the point of view of necessity, economy , procedural propriety and
transparency. A Defence Procurement Procedure detailing the procedure
for procurement of defence equipment was adopted in December 2002.
The Procedure provides for objective and transparent criteria for defence
procurements and are accessible to the public. Both, the Procedures
and all Requests for Proposals (RFPs) for non-sensitive or non-classified
procurements, are posted on the web-site of the Ministry of Defence.
A presentation has already been made to the Committee on this. A
transparent procedure for the registration of authorized agents and
representatives of foreign firms marketing defence products has also
been in place since November 2001.
Capital acquisitions for all Services, including the Air Force, follow
the Defence Procurement Procedure. In addition, with effect from
September 2000, and in consultation with the Comptroller and Auditor
General of India (C&AG) and the Central Vigilance Commission (CVC),
the Government has institutionalized a procedure for mandatory and
time-bound scrutiny of all major defence deals exceeding Rs. 75 crores.

45
Details of all purchase, Procurement decisions and award of works of
value exceeding Rs. 75 crores are to be sent to the C&AG for scrutiny,
in the normal course within a month of such a decision having been
taken. Wherever necessary, a formal reference may be made to the
CVC by the Chief Vigilance Officer of the Ministry of Defence. Besides,
in accordance with standing instructions of the CVC, lists of contracts
valued above Rs. 2 crore are now being sent by the Air Force and
other concerned wings of the Ministry to the CVC on a quarterly
basis.
The Services do not interact directly with the media in regard to
procurement decisions. These are done through the Directorate of Public
Relations (DPR) of the Ministry of Defence. A series of steps are being
taken to strengthen and modernize the media activities of the DPR.
Interaction with the mass visual media, notably television, and use of
the internet, is being expanded, in addition to routine activities of the
Department though the print media, regional offices of the DPR, special
features and daily liaison with the media, including field visits by the
media to defence locations. Information relating to the Ministry of
Defence, including press Notes, reactions and releases, are regularly
put up by the Ministry of Defence on the web-sites of the Ministry of
Defence and the Press Information Bureau. Whenever misinformation
or misconceptions appear in the media, special briefings are also
arranged to clarify such misunderstandings subject to the constraints
of the need to protect classified information in the interest of national
security.
The effort to make the Ministry more proactive and responsive
vis-a-vis the media was visible in the positive coverage in the electronic
and print media of the role of the Armed Forces in the rescue, relief
and rehabilitation effort in aid of the civil authorities to deal with
recent December 26 Tsunami. The Ministry of Defence held media
briefings and issued press notes regularly as part of the Government
effort to inform the public of the progress of relief efforts to deal with
the calamity.
[MoD, OM No. H-11013/3/2004/D (Parliament), dated 17.1.2005]
Recommendation (Sl. No. 20, Paras 178-181)
In reply to a question on the development of Air Defence Shield,
the Ministry has stated that based on the analysis of the threat
perceptions, the IAF has provided an air defence shield which is
reviewed from time to time. High, Medium and Low level Radar cover
are provided by the IAF. The vast airspace of our country necessitates
a large number of sensor assets to encompass monitoring of air
activities from low altitude to high altitude. However, due to the

46
perceived threat, our air defence and most surveillance systems are
weighted towards the Western and Northern borders of the country.
The Committee note with serious concern that the vast geographical
territories of the country are having lopsided surveillance systems tilted
towards Western and Northern Borders. In the wake of emerging threat
perceptions from all sides, the monitoring mechanism of air activities
cannot be concentrated along just two sides of the international borders
of the country.
The Committee, therefore, recommend that the Ministry should
strive to install adequate number of sensors/radars all along the
international borders of the country so as to strengthen the surveillance
system of the nation.
The Committee further desire the Ministry to make serious and
sincere efforts to equip the Defence forces with military satellites with
high resolution camera to keep watch on the activities in the border
regions.
Reply of the Government
Radar deployment for air defence purposes is based on threat
perceptions, surveillance requirements and the need to monitor activities
of our neighbours. While it is desirable to have surveillance over the
entire Indian airspace, constraints of resources have inhibited this. Over
a period of time, the Indian Air Force (IAF) has established extensive
high level coverage of Indian airspace. Adequate medium level coverage
along the Western and Northern border exists. Airspace coverage in
Central and peninsula India is yet to be adequately catered for,
especially in terms of medium level and low level radar coverage.
Over the years, different categories of radars viz. high, medium
and low level radars have been acquired by the Air Force. Although,
these acquisitions have met the dynamic threat perceptions of the time,
there still exist a requirement for medium and low level radars.
Induction of different categories of radars are underway viz. Low
Level Light Weight Radars (LLLWR), Aerostat Radars, Central
Acquisition Radars (CAR), Airborne Warning and Control System
(AWACS) and Indra Radars. Other category of radar like the Low
Level Transportable Radars (LLTR) are planned for future inducation.
As per the recommendations of the Government Committee on
Airspace Management (GCAM), constituted under the directions of
the Group of Ministers, IAF has initiated steps towards integration of
surveillance assets with the Airports Authority of India (AAI). The

47
civil radars need to be networked on priority and once Integrated Air
Command and Control Systems (IACCS) is operational, the surveillance
data would be exchanged for efficient airspace management by IAF
and AAI. This matter is being pursued separately in the Inter
Ministerial Coordination Committee constituted by the Cabinet
Secretariat.
Satellite Based Surveillance (SBS) Programme has also been
launched to augment surveillance over the Indian airspace.
[MoD, OM No. H-11013/3/2004/D (Parliament), dated 17.1.2005]
Recommendation (Sl. No. 21, Paras 187-188)
The Committee note that Hindustan Aeronautics Limited (HAL)
has signed a contract of $ 33 million with M/s Israel Aircraft Industries
for design and development of Advanced Avionic Display System for
Advanced Light Helicopters. The contract does not envisage Transfer
of Technology on the ground of the high rate of obsolescence in the
avionics systems and the substantial investments required for setting
up the new product line. The Committee do not agree with the
contention of the Ministry and feel that in view of the trend of modern
warfare and resultant relevance of the application of state-of-the-art
electronic system, the HAL should also acquire latest technology so as
to enable the research agencies to develop similar indigenous avionics
systems and minimize the dependence on foreign vendors.
The Committee, therefore, strongly recommend that the Ministry
should put well conceived efforts to develop the Advanced Avionics
Systems indigenously, to effectively meet the challenges of new
emerging trends in modern warfare.
Reply of the Government
The Transfer of Technology (ToT) in the case of Integrated Avionics
Display System (IADS) would have involved:-
(a) Manufacturing Technologies for the Active Matrix Liquid
Crystal Displays (AMLCDs).
(b) Electronic Hardware
(c) Software & related Algorithm.
2. The vendors had not offered ToT for Active Matrix Liquid Crystal
Displays (AMLCD). The world over, AMLCDs are produced by very
few manufacturers in very large quantities due to economies of scale.
The technology is prone to very rapid obsolescence and would require
large infrastructural investments. The vendors who are in this business

48
offset the effect of obsolescence by volumes resulting out of the
worldwide requirement for a multiplicity of programmes and
applications. In the case of Advanced Light Helicopters (ALH), the
numbers of Avionics Systems sets required were only two hundred.
3. Consequently HAL has taken the following measures:-
(a) Establishing the Repair/Overhaul facilities for the AMLCD
and hardware to support the systems over the entire life
cycle. As a result of negotiations, the Repair/Overhaul
capability is acquired Free of Charge.
(b) Acquiring the Source Code for the System and application
Software. The source code for the software is supplied as
part of the deliverables. This would allow HAL to develop
the skills required to adapt and modify the software for
advanced avionics systems and Electronic Warfare
applications.
4. Keeping in mind the critical nature of the technologies, HAL
has taken the following steps for immediate and future requirements:-
(a) Development and production of Mission Computer jointly
with M/s DARE—a DRDO establishment (for SU-30, Jaguar
& MiG-27 aircraft).
(b) Head Up Display for Trainer Aircraft by Central Scientific
Instruments Organization (CSIO).
(c) Tactical Mission System for the Naval version of the ALH
through M/s Aeronautical Development Agency (ADA).
(d) Development of Multifunction Displays to meet programme
requirements, through Indigenous Vendors.
(e) With this integrated approach, HAL will acquired expertise
for the indigenous development and manufacture of
hardware & software required for Advanced Avionics
Systems.
[MoD OM No. H-11013/3/2004/D (Parliament) dated 17.1.2005]
Recommendation (Sl. No. 22, Paras 192-193)
The Committee note that BrahMos, a joint venture missile
developed by India and Russia is being equipped with the most
modern Precision Guidance Mechanism. The Committee also note that
NAG is being indigenously developed as anti-tank missile with a fire
and forget capability. The Committee find that though there are
continuous R & D efforts, the two missiles have still not reached the

49
induction stage. As a result, the Indian Armed Forces have not yet
been equipped with these modern systems which have affected its
defence capabilities.
Reply of the Government
(Text of the Reply)
BrahMos: Seven successful flight trials have been undertaken for
BrahMos Missile System being developed as a joint venture between
India and Russia. The Capability of the direct hit in the anti-ship role
has been demonstrated. Letter of Interest has been issued by Navy.
However, Production & supply orders has not yet been placed. If an
order is placed now, the delivery of the missile system can start after
12 months. Production set up has been established and production of
long lead sub-systems launched are awaiting Navy’s orders.
NAG: 53 flight tests have been undertaken proving various
subsystems and guided flights of NAG, the third generation anti-tank
missile with ‘fire and forget’ capability . The missile has hit the simulated
target several times directly in a guided mode. Missile will be ready
for user trials by end of 2004 after which it will enter that production
and induction phase. The production and delivery of missile
system will start 18 months from the date of placement of order by
the Army.
[MoD, OM No. H-11013/3/2004/D (Parliament), dated 17.1.2005]
The Committee, therefore, recommend that the development of
BrahMos and NAG missiles should be expedited so that same can be
inducted into the Armed Forces at an early date. The Committee further
desire that the Ministry should also put efforts to develop the Air
Force Version of these two missiles.
Reply of the Government
The Indo-Russian Joint Venture (JV) has completed the development
of anti-ship version of BrahMos missile. The land to land version is in
the development phase. For air launched missile with Sukhoi aircraft
(Su-30 MK-1), design effort has started.
Nag missile fitted in Advanced Light Helicopter (ALH) for Army
aviation is being developed and will be accelerated.
[MoD, OM No. H-11013/3/2004/D (Parliament), dated 17.1.2005]

CHAPTER III
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE
COMMITTEE DO NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE IN
VIEW OF GOVERNMENT REPLIES
Recommendation (Sl. No. 5, Para 77-78)
The Committee notes that the Government had constituted a Group
of Ministers (GoM) in April 2000 to thoroughly review the National
Security System. One of the major recommendations of the GoM was
the establishment of the Chief of Defence Staff (CDS). The
recommendations of the GoM were approved by the Government with
the modification that before a view is taken on the recommendations
relating to the institution of CDS, various political parties may be
consulted. The Committee are however, surprised to note that the
Government has yet not come to any decision on the post of CDS
even after the lapse of more than three years. The Committee would
like to stress that the coordination and synergy amongst the Armed
Forces, Service headquarters and the Ministry of Defence is extremely
vital for expeditious decision-making and also for enhancing the
capabilities of our Defence Forces. The existing structure for higher
defence management, viz. the Chiefs of Staff Committee have not been
able to optimally perform their role and functions in bringing together
and promoting coordination amongst the Services. The Committee are
constrained to observe that the Ministry has learnt no lesson from the
set-backs of Kargil and success of India’s first theatre Command, viz.
Unified Andman & Nicobar Islands Command.
The Committee would, therefore, like the Ministry to urgently take
a view on the recommendation of the GoM to ensure the immediate
establishment of the Chief of Defence Staff.
Reply of the Government
While it is true that a decision on the institution of a CDS has not
yet been taken in view of the complexities and sensitivities involved
and the need for wider consultation with political parties, a number
of steps have been taken to achieve the basic objectives behind the
creation of such a post, notably, to improve ‘jointness’, synergy and
50

51
coordination between the three Services, rationalize planning and
optimize expenditure on defence, strengthen the higher defence
management, and expedite decision-making. Pending a decision on
the creation of the post of Chief of Defence Staff (CDS), an Integrated
Defence Staff has been set up under the Chief of Integrated Defence
Staff to the Chiefs of Staff Committee (CISC) to support the chiefs of
Staff Committee and its Chairman in the optimum performance of its
roles and functions, and bringing together and coordinating several
functions common to the Services. Planning functions, including the
formulation of Long Term and Five Year Plans and Annual Budgets
have been brought under the Integrated Defence Staff. Tri-Service bodies
promoting ‘jointness’ and ‘synergy’ among the Armed Forces have
been set up like the Defence Intelligence Agency (DIA), the Strategic
Forces Command (SFC) and the Andaman and Nicobar ‘theatre’
Command. Individual Service Headquarters have been re-designated
and integrated to the Ministry of Defence as part of the ‘Integrated
Headquarters of the Ministry of Defence’. These steps have brought
about a significant progress in promoting a culture of jointness, and
better coordination and synergy amongst the Armed Forces and
between the Armed Forces and the Ministry of Defence that was
demonstrated in the response and handling of rescue, relief and
rehabilitation efforts to deal with the December 26, 2004 Tsunami.
[MoD, OM No. H-11013/3/2004/D (Parliament), dated 17.1.2005]
Comments of the Committee
(Please See Para 16 of Chapter-I).

CHAPTER IV
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF
WHICH REPLIES OF GOVT. HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED
BY THE COMMITTEE
Recommendation (Sl. No. 1, Para 30-33)
The Committee note that the Budget Estimates for the Defence
Services at Rs. 77,000 crore for the year 2004-05 show an increase of
17.92 per cent over the Budget Estimates of Rs. 65,300 crore and an
increase of 27.69 per cent over the Revised Estimates of Rs. 60,300
crore for the year 2003-2004. The increase has been mainly under
Capital expenditure, which has increased from Rs. 20,953 crore (approx.)
in Budget Estimates in 2003-2004 to Rs. 33,483 crore (approx.) in Budget
Estimates in 2004-2005.
[MoD, OM No. H-11013/3/2004/D (Parliament), dated 17.1.2005]
The Committee also note that notwithstanding the higher allocation
the Minister of Defence has stated that his Ministry may have to seek
additional funds from the Ministry of Finance later in the year. This
has to be viewed in the context that the Ministry had projected a
requirement of Rs. 86,457 crore to the Ministry of Finance for obligatory
charges, essential maintenance needs, committed liabilities and
prioritized new schemes of the Defence Services. The projections
included an amount of Rs. 6,918 crore for prioritized new schemes/
projects. The Committee were informed during the evidence that almost
the entire amount allocated for Capital expenditure will be spent on
committed liabilities due to agreements signed recently for procurement
of defence equipments leaving only about Rs. 1,000 crore for the new
schemes/acquisitions.
The Committee are extremely concerned that not only the amount
available with the Ministry on account of Capital expenditure after
adjusting the committed liabilities is hardly adequate for taking up
any new projects/scheme but several schemes/projects which are at
various stages of finalisation would also have to be deferred.
52

53
The Committee, therefore, recommend the Ministry to assess the
situation in the light of likely impact of reduced allocations on the
new schemes and on-going acquisition proposals and approach the
Ministry of Finance for supplementary allocations at the earliest to
ensure that the modernization plans and procurement of essential
equipments do not suffer or are delayed merely because of squeezing
of funds.
Reply of the Government
The modernization of the defence forces is an ongoing process
and the Finance Minister in his budget speech has also stated that the
Government is determined to eliminate all delays in modernization of
Defence Forces. Having regard to the trend of defence capital
expenditure in recent years, the allocation for defence has been
increased to Rs. 77,000 crore, as against Rs. 65,300 crore in BE
2003-04 which includes an allocation for capital expenditure of
Rs. 33,483 crore as against Rs. 20,953 crore in BE 2003-04. Ministry of
Defence will also continue to progress modernization schemes up to
the point where it needs financial approval of the Government. If
some delays on the part of the suppliers or some slippage takes place,
the Ministry would progress new projects/schemes out of available
allocation. The progress of defence expenditure and the status of
ongoing/new schemes would, however, also be kept under constant
review during the financial year and the Ministry of Finance would
be approached for additional funds, as and when required.
[MoD, OM No. H-11013/3/2004/D (Parliament), dated 17.1.2005]
Comments of the Committee
(Please See Para 7 of Chapter-I of the Report)
Recommendation (Sl. No. 2, Para 40-43)
The Committee note that during the last five years, i.e. 1999-2000
to 2003-2004, substantial allocations amounting to Rs. 32,740.26 crore
for Capital Expenditure has lapsed due to non-fructification of the
Defence Modernisation and procurement plans. The Committee are
conscious that the modernization of the defence services is a continuous
process and the acquisition proposals which do not or cannot fructify
in a financial year are processed/finalized in subsequent years but
feel that the ritual of approaching the Ministry of Finance, every

54
financial year, for re-allocation of lapsed fund for the same project, is
dilatory and completely redundant. The Committee also feel that under-
utilisation/non-utilisation of allocations do not augur well for Defence
preparedness and seriously undermine the capabilities of the Defence
forces. The Committee had, therefore, in their earlier reports strongly
recommended for the creation of a Non-Lapsable Defence
Modernisation Fund as one of the measures to streamline the
procurement procedure.
The Committee were informed subsequently that the Ministry of
Finance had in principle agreed to the creation of the Defence
Modernisation Fund which would be available for utilisation over the
coming three years.
The then Finance Minister while presenting the Interim Budget,
2004-05 also announced the setting up of a Non-Lapsable Defence
Modernisation Fund with a corpus of Rs. 25000 crore to commit the
availability of adequate funds for the defence modernization and
weapon systems acquisitions. The Ministry has, however, surprisingly
conveyed that no allocation for this fund has been made in the General
Budget 2004-05 and that the Government has yet to take a decision to
set up the said Fund.
The Committee are extremely dismayed at this abrupt policy
reversal by the Ministry and express their deep anguish that a well
considered decision which was taken after a lot of deliberations has
been reversed without any justifiable reason. The Committee would,
therefore like the Ministry to set up at once the Defence Modernisation
Fund with commited allocation for a period of five years as lapsing
of funds year after year has greatly hampered procurement of defence
equipments and the modernization plans of the Defence forces. The
progress of utilization of fund should be closely monitored and
periodically reviewed with corrective action taken to ensure that the
objectives of the Fund are fully achieved.
Reply of the Government
The modernization of Defence Forces is an ongoing process and
under utilization of funds in a financial year does not result in dropping
of any proposal. In order to fully utilize the allocated funds, the
progress of Defence expenditure and status of various procurement

55
proposals is kept under constant review and follow up action, as
necessary, is taken. With a view to synergise efforts involved in
procurement and to speed up the decision making process, a new
procurement organisation has been established to deal with acquisitions
on capital account for the Defence Services.
2. The primary concern, which was sought to be addressed with
the creation of Defence Modernisation Fund, was the assured
availability of funds for modernization schemes of Defence Forces,
which were catered for in one years’ budget but did not materialize
in that year. The problems of adequacy or otherwise as also utilization
or otherwise of annual capital budget can best be addressed by
ensuring that Five year Defence Plan is firmed up before the
commencement of Plan period and Finance Ministry indicates broad
annual break up of availability of funds of the five years at the
beginning itself.
3. However, keeping in view the under utilization of funds during
the past few years, the Standing Committee on Defence in their earlier
Reports had recommended creation of a Non-lapsable Defence
Modernisation Fund and to expedite the formulation of modalities
and procedures for its operationalisation. The Ministry of Defence,
with the approval of Ministry of Finance, drew up a detailed accounting
procedure for operationalising the Defence Modernisation Fund and
sent the proposal for approval to the concerned authorities including
Comptroller & Auditor General of India.
4. It emerged while formulating the modalities for creation/
operationalisation of the Defence Modernisation Fund in consultation
with the concerned authorities that the unspent funds in the Defence
Modernisation Fund would not be automatically available to the
Ministry of Defence for utilization in a subsequent financial year.
Ministry of Defence would be required to seek the approval of Ministry
of Finance and Parliament at the stage of Budget Estimates as well as
for any Supplementary Demands for Grants for utilization of funds
out of Defence Modernisation Fund. This would imply that Ministry
of Defence would not be able to decide on its own about the utilization
of the balance amounts in the Defence Modernisation Fund and would
necessarily have to take the approval of Ministry of Finance and
Parliament. Further, replenishment of such a Modernization Fund would
also be limited by the overall availability of resources with the Ministry
of Finance in a financial year. In other words, the overall resource

56
constraints of the Ministry of Finance will have a decisive impact on
the amounts to be transferred to the Modernisation Fund and utilization
of balances in the Fund. This has also been the experience in operating
other such funds.
5. In this backdrop, the utility of Defence Modernisation Fund in
addressing the issue of assured availability of funds will be rather
limited and hence the proposal is not being pursued further for the
present. However, Ministry of Defence will continue to strive to ensure
availability of funds commensurate with the needs of the Defence
Services for their modernisation programmes year after year.
[MoD, OM No. H-11013/3/2004/D (Parliament), dated 17.1.2005]
Comments of the Committee
(Please See Para 10 of Chapter-1)
Recommendation (Sl. No. 3, Para 47)
The Committee express their serious concern that despite half of
the plan period having already elapsed, the Tenth Defence Plan (2002-
2007) has not yet been finalized. The reason for delay, as stated by the
Ministry, was a lack of firm commitment from the Ministry of Finance,
even on revised projections made after a detailed review within the
Ministry of Defence and Service Headquarters. The Committee had in
their earlier report, stressed upon the urgency to finalize and put into
effect the Tenth Plan without further loss of time.
The Committee are not convinced with the sketchy reasons
advanced by the Ministry for delays and feel that the Ministry had
neither shown any urgency nor followed up with the Ministry of
Finance to get the firm commitment of funds to finalize the Plan. The
Committee are not happy with the planning mechanism in the Ministry
which has moved only at a snail’s pace and consequently with no
result even after the lapse of one more year, precipitating a situation
with no approved Defence Plan to speak of even in the third year of
the Plan period.
The Committee are surprised to note that the actual allocations
during first three years of the Tenth Defence Plan are much below the
Projected requirements of Defence Services. The Committee are
constrained to visualize that reduced allocations vis-a-vis projections
may curtail even essential procurement and modernization plans.

57
The Committee need not emphasize that yearly allocations are no
substitute for long term plan commitments and therefore, concerned
that avowed objectives of the Plan will face severe setbacks affecting
the overall defence capabilities in case it is not finalized immediately.
The Committee, therefore, recommend that finalization of the Tenth
Defence Plan with committee allocations should be taken up at the
highest level with the Ministry of Finance so that the process of
structuring, upgradation and modernization of Armed Forces in the
areas of infrastructure as well as equipment is carried forward, thereby,
enhancing the Defence capabilities at the desired pace.
Reply of the Government
The Ministry of Defence has energetically pursued the allocation
of funds for defence in the Tenth Plan with the Ministry of Finance
with a view to bridging the gap between the projections made by the
Ministry of Defence and the availability of funds indicated by the
Ministry of Defence without affecting the county’s defence
preparedness. The projections of the Ministry of Defence for the Tenth
Defence Plan were reviewed thrice between March 2003 and July 2004
bearing in mind the needs of defence modernization and the likely
constraints to the availability of funds for defence in the Tenth Plan.
The Ministry of Finance have now agreed in principle to the latest
projection made by the Ministry of Defence of Rs. 4,18,101 crore.
However, a firm indication of annual outlays for the remaining two
years of the 10th Plan has not yet been given by the Ministry of
Finance.
Meanwhile, in the absence of a formal approval of the allocation
for defence in the Tenth Plan, defence planning has been harmonized
with the allotments for defence in the annual budgets of the
Government. Actual expenditures in 2002-2003 and 2003-2004 were
Rs. 55,662 crores and 60,300 crores respectively. An allocation of
Rs. 77,2000 crores has been made in the Budget Estimate for 2004-2005
against a projection of Rs. 90,928 crores. About 11,000 crores additional
funds have been allocated beyond the Budget Estimate for the capital
head.
The projected expenditures in 2005-2006 and 2006-2007 are
Rs. 1,00,960 crores and 1,10,251 crores respectively. Secretary (Defence
Production) to assist the Raksha Mantri in taking decisions in the
totality of the new planning process, including capital acquisitions and
major modernization projects. The Government has also set up a
dedicated institutional structure for defence procurement, the Defence
Procurement Board, headed by the Defence Secretary for acquisitions
on the capital account. Planning processes have been further tightened

58
under budgetary pressures and the need to establish greater synergy
and jointness amongst the Armed Forces. This has also necessitated
greater coordination in planning and procurements among the three
services.
[MoD, OM No. H-11013/3/2004/D (Parliament), dated 17.1.2005]
Comments of the Committee
(Please See Para 13 of Chapter-1)
Recommendation (Sl. No. 8, Para 98-99)
The Committee are extremely concerned to find the nearly
28 precept shortage at officers’ level in the Army. The reasons for the
shortage as stated by the Ministry is that Short Service Commission is
not attractive enough to the talented youth due to lack of promotional
avenues and the difficult service conditions, though the image projection
campaign of the Army has had some impact. The Committee further
note that the Working Group on reduction in Colour Service and lateral
transfer of personnel in their report has suggested of lateral transfer
of personnel from Army to Central Para Military Forces. The Committee
would like the Government to take an early decision on the report so
that the slide in the officers’ cadre can be arrested.
Reply of the Government
A Committee set up in the Ministry of Defence has examined this
issue and submitted its report which is under consideration of the
Government . The Committee recommended , inter alia upgradation of
appointments, time based promotion in non-select ranks, measures to
increase attractiveness of Short Service Commission etc.
Transfer of Army personnel to Central Para Military Forces,
envisages transfer of personnel below officer rank only. The draft report
of the Working Group was examined by the Government and certain
issues relating to protection of seniority, utilization of training capacity
and other issues were examined. The Ministry of Home Affairs has
submitted its recommendations to the Cabinet Secretariat for
consideration of the Apex Committee headed by Cabinet Secretary .
[MoD, OM No. H-11013/3/2004/D (Parliament), dated 17.1.2005]
Paragraph No. 99
The Committee are convinced that the prime reason for lack of
response to Short Service Commission is the bleak further which awaits
the trained and disciplined officers once they are discharged barely
after 5 years of service, with no prospects whatsoever either in Public

59
or Private Sector. The Committee, therefore, strongly recommend that
to meet the shortage of officers in the immediate future, the period of
Short Service Commission should immediately be raised from 5 years
to 10 years subject to further extensions as per the existing norms and
rules. The Ministry should take all other measures which may include
more promotional avenues for Short Service Commission Officers in
their cadre, reservation and lateral transfer to Public Sector Undertaking,
Central Para Military Forces, Railways, etc. and also prorata pension
to officers who have tendered even mandatory five years service, to
attract the talented youth to our Armed Forces.
Reply of the Government
The tenure of Short Service Commissioned Officers in the Army
has been increased to 14 years from 10 years with effect from
31st March 2004. The revised tenure will comprise of an initial
contractual service of 10 years and one extension of 4 years. A
Committee set up by the Government has also recommended specific
measures for Short Service Commissioned Officers, for instance,
concessions in the Civil Service Examinations, lateral induction into
Central Para Military Forces, Public-Private Sectors etc. These proposals
are currently under the examination There is no proposal under
consideration for grant of Prorata pension to Short Service
Commissioned Officers. However, provision of lump-sum terminal grant
for Short Service Commissioned officers, as recommended by the
Committee, is under examination.
[MoD, OM No. H-11013/3/2004/D (Parliament), dated 17.1.2005]
Comments of the Committee
(Please See Para 25 of Chapter-1)
Recommendation (Sl. No. 11, Para 116-120)
The Committee note that during the period of ‘Operation Parakram’
a total of 473 Army personnel were killed and 1,401 wounded including
60 killed and 142 wounded in mine laying operations. The defence
forces also suffered heavy losses in low intensity conflict in J&K.
Reply of the Government
The Text of the para is based on the inputs provided as mentioned
in para 95 of this very Report and does not call for any Action Taken
Statement.
[MoD, OM No. H-11013/3/2004/D (Parliament), dated 17.1.2005]
Comments of the Committee
(Please See Para 31 of Chapter-1)

60
Paragraph No. 117
The Committee feel that a large number of lives could have been
saved if the soldiers were fully equipped with protective gears viz.
helmets, bullet proof jackets, etc. and provided with night vision
devices, communication sets and sensors.
Reply of the Government
Over the last few years, there has been a marked improvement in
provision of better weapons and equipment, to the soldiers fighting
terrorism in Jammu & Kashmir and the North East such as state-of-
the-art small arms with night fighting sights, surveillance system.
specialist weapons, communication equipment and individual protective
gear. Details of the equipment and weapons are as follows:—
(a) Communications and Surveillance. Adequate Surveillance
systems based on various electro-optical, seismic, IR and
magnetic detection technologies have been deployed in a
complementary manner to check infiltration and for counter
terrorist operations. Some of the equipment deployed are
Unattended Ground Sensors, Battle Field Surveillance Radars,
Hand Held Thermal Imagers, Long Range Reconnaissance
and Observation System, Unmanned Aerial vehicles.
(b) Specialist Weapons.  Latest weapons inducted include Anti
material Rifle, Under Barrel Grenade Launcher for AK 47
Rifle, Flame Thrower, Light Weight Rocket Launcher and
Automatic Grenade Launcher. These have substantially
augmented the combat potential of the Army in counter
terrorism and counter insurgency operations.
(c) Protective Gear.  Soldiers undertaking counter terrorist
operations have been provided with adequate individual
protective gear, which includes Bullet Proof Jackets and
Patkas. For mining, de-mining operations during Operation
Parakram, soldiers, were provided anti mine boots, helmets
with visors and other protective clothing. Hyderema
de-mining vehicles were used extensively in de-mining and
re-proving operations.
[MoD, OM No. H-11013/3/2004/D (Parliament), dated 17.1.2005]
Comments of the Committee
(Please See Para 31 of Chapter-1)

61
Paragraph No. 118
The Committee, therefore, strongly recommend that our soldiers
who face extreme adverse climatic conditions ranging from hot weather
desert of Rajasthan to biting cold of Siachen must be provided the
best available equipments in the world.
Reply of the Government
The Army remains consistent in its effort to equip the troop
appropriately, for operating effectively in all types of terrain and
warfare, and to that extent, the Standing Committee’s recommendations
at Para 101 are endorsed for implementation in future plans.
[MoD, OM No. H-11013/3/2004/D (Parliament), dated 17.1.2005]
Comments of the Committee
(Please See Para 31 of Chapter-1)
Paragraph No. 119
The Committee are shocked to note that outdated and defective
stock of mines with unworkable fuses were also put to use during
‘Operation Parakram’ resulting in a large number of casualties during
the mine laying and de-mining operations. The Committee feel that
these casualties were entirely avoidable if the duly valid mines alone
were used and the required procedure with adequate safety measures
was followed. The Committee desire that the mine accidents should
be enquired into afresh and the responsibility fixed for the use of
outdated mines and disregard of laid down safety procedures.
Reply of the Government
Director General of Ordnance Services has laid down the guidelines
prescribing 10 years as the initial shelf life of different categories of
mines and fuses. These guidelines further state that no stock will be
declared unserviceable merely because it is outdated but should
continue to be used till actual failure at proof which implies that the
stock which has achieved the life of 10 years will be subjected to
technical examination by the Director General of Quality Assurance
and testing periodically by selecting the prescribed number of random
samples to be tested from the batch manufactured on a particular date
and only these stocks well be continued in service which pass this
test. Also if the visual condition shows any deterioration then the
mines and fuses will be condemned at any stage of their life.
(ii) In accordance with these guidelines batches of mines which
are not defective are validated and declared serviceable on the basis
of the prescribed procedure and these stocks were issued for mining
the Indo-Pak border during ‘Op. Parakram’.

62
(iii) Despite all safety measures and prescribed procedures being
observed the various environmental, terrain and battle related factors
such as operational urgency, mines laid during hours of darkness to
prevent detection by the enemy, severe fog and winter conditions.
thick undergrowth and boggy ground conditions, caused casualties
and these factors were beyond the control of the field formations.
(iv) No useful purpose will be served in conducting fresh enquiries
into the mine accidents during ‘Op. Parakram’ since during this
operation majority of the accidents took place for reasons beyond the
control of field Commanders. Further, use of only those available mines
which were serviceable as per the extant norms was made.
(v) However, as an additional precautionary step the Army Head
Quarters and Ministry of Defence are examining the technical
implications involved in revision of the current policy to fixing an
outer limit to the shelf life of 15 years for mines and 10 years for
fuses. Also the financial implications for the purchase and production
of new mines and fuses is being worked out which are likely to be
substantial and may have to be undertaken in a phased manner over
a number of years. The latest technology in mines and fuses and their
cost will also be kept in view before taking a final decision in the
matter.
[MoD, OM No. H-11013/3/2004/D (Parliament), dated 17.1.2005]
Comments of the Committee
(Please See Para 34 of Chapter-1)
Paragraph No. 120
The Committee also recommend that old defective stock of mines
fuses may be replaced immediately with modern, state-of-the-art mines
and excavation equipments for de-mining, for use in future operations.
Reply of the Government
Old stock mines upto 1975 vintage have been sentenced as
“unserviceable” and are being disposed off, while proof testing of mines
of vintage 1976 to 1989 is under progress by the Directorate General
of Quality Assurance (DGQA). For future operations, AHQ is
considering the procurement of a new family of state-of-the-art mines
and de-mining equipment.
[MoD, OM No. H-11013/3/2004/D (Parliament), dated 17.1.2005]
Comments of the Committee
(Please See Para 34 of Chapter-1)

CHAPTER V
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH
FINAL REPLIES OF GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED
Recommendation (Sl. No. 6, Para 83)
‘The Committee are constrained to note that despite their repeated
recommendations for early construction of a National War Memorial
and National War Museum, no progress has been made in this regard.
The Committee are surprised that though the matter had been
vigorously pursued at the minister’s level, no site/land has been
indicated/allocated by the Ministry of Urban Development for the
purpose. The Committee, while expressing their displeasure at the
lackadaisical attitude of the Government in the construction of these
symbols of national pride, recommend that a high level Inter-Ministerial
Committee may be constituted immediately to identify a suitable site
for construction of these projects or enable the indebted Nation to
honour and pay its tribute to the sacrifice and sentiments of thousands
of martyrs who laid down their lives for the sake of their motherland.’
Reply of the Government
The issue relating to allotment of land for construction of National
War Memorial and National War Museum has been taken up with the
Ministry of Urban Development. However, the allotment could not
materialize. The Secretary , Ministry of Urban Development took a
meeting on 02-12-2004, in which the representatives from Ministry of
Defence, NDMC, Delhi Urban Arts Commission & CPWD were called.
The Secretary Urban Development indicated that a decision would be
taken after examining the new concept of National War Memorial
proposed by the Ministry of Defence. For construction of National
War Museum he advised the Ministry of Defence to locate suitable
land in Delhi Cantonment Area or elsewhere within the National
Capital Region.
As recommended by the Standing Committee on Defence, the
Cabinet Secretariat is being requested to constitute an Inter-Ministerial
High Level Committee to identify and allot suitable land for
construction of National War Memorial and National War Museum.
[MoD, OM No. H-11013/3/2004/D (Parliament), dated 17.1.2005]
63

64
Comments of the Committee
(Please See Para 18 of Chapter-I)
Recommendation (Sl. No. 7, Para 88-90)
The Committee note that the demand for setting up of a Indian
National Defence University (INDU) is under the consideration of the
Ministry for the last two years as thorough deliberations and analysis
of a large number of issues is required. The existing institutions like
College of Defence Management, Defence Services Staff College.
National Defence Academy, National Defence College, apart from three
Services need to be consulted. The setting up of the University also
encompasses the structural changes required to tackle the issues of
integration of the course of studies in the proposed University with
the existing training methodologies and systems in the Armed Forces.
The Committee feel that the fast changing world security scenario
and advancement in defence technology have underlined the growing
importance of specialized defence studies and analysis in a professional
manner. The Committee would, therefore, like the Ministry to expedite
the setting up of the India National Defence University so that the
required number of defence and security experts are available to assist
the Ministry, Defence institutions and allied industries in formulating
strategies and plans.
The Committee also desire that while setting up the University,
Ministry should take measures so that cross discipline studies are
promoted. In the meantime, the Ministry should ensure that the degree
and certificates awarded by the various defence institutions are
universally recognized.
Reply of the Government
The various recommendations given by the Committee on the
National Defence University (CONDU) are under examination in the
Government in consultation with the Ministry of Finance and a detailed
project report to this effect is under preparation. The recommendations
of the Committee include the establishment of a number of new
institutions and programmes within the Indian National Defence
University (INDU). Some of the existing institutions like College of
Defence Management (CDM), Defence Services Staff College (DSSC),
National Defence Academy (NDA), and National Defence College
(NDC) are proposed to be incorporated into INDU.

65
2. The structural changes required to integrate course studies in
INDU with existing training methodologies and systems in the Armed
Forces, would also be addressed.
3. The fact that the world over, ‘Defence studies’ is a faculty in
many established universities coupled with the sizeable costs involved
in setting up of the INDU as envisaged, present an alternative scenario
to the setting up of the INDU. The matter, thus, requires detailed
examination and deliberation on the various issues involved in which
the Ministry of Defence is at present engaged.
4. As per the existing norms, various Defence training institutions
are affiliated to universities, which are universally recognized, and
degrees and diplomas are awarded on completion of training. For
instance, the NDA, Khadakwasala is affiliated to the Jawaharlal Nehru
University (JNU), which awards BSc/BA degrees to successful cadets.
Similarly, the Army War College (AWC), Mhow and Infantry School,
Mhow are affiliated to the indore University which in turn awards
degrees/diplomas. Along the same line, DSSC, Wellington is affiliated
to the Madras University and Military College of Telecommunication
Engineering (MCTE), Mhow is affiliated to the JNU, which in turn
awards degrees on successful Completion of the training courses.
[MoD, OM No. H-11013/3/2004/D (Parliament), dated 17.1.2005]
Comments of the Committee
(Please See Para 22 of Chapter-I)
Recommendation (Sl. No. 9, Para 105)
The Committee are happy to note that a new Department to look
after Welfare of Ex-Servicemen is being set up. The Committee in their
various reports have been recommending for providing One Rank One
Pension to Ex-Servicemen in a fixed time frame. The Committee are,
however, constrained to note that Inter-Ministerial Committee
constituted by the Government to examine this issue has still not given
is report. It shows that Government is not serious to implement this
long standing demand of Ex-Servicemen resulting in disillusionment
of old defence pensioners who have served the country in the most
demanding circumstances. The Committee strongly recommend that
an early decision may be taken on the matter and ‘One Rank One
Pension’ be implemented without further loss of time.

66
Reply of the Government
The demand for One Rank One Pension has been persistently raised
by the Organisations of Ex-Servicemen at different fora in the past. It
was considered but not recommended by the Fourth and the Fifth
Central Pay Commissions. The Inter-Ministerial Committee, set up by
the Department of Pensions & Pensioners’ Welfare (DP&PW),
deliberated upon this issue and submitted its report to the Government
on 24.09.2004, This Committee did not favour grant of ‘One Rank One
Pension’ keeping in view the administrative, financial and legal
imprecations as well as its likely repercussions on the civil side.
However, to further liberalise the pensionary benefits of Personnel
Below Officer Rank (RBOR), the Committee recommended grant of
modified parity based on maximum of the pay in the revised scales
introduced with effect from 01.01.1996. The report of the Committee
has been accepted by Ministry of Defence.
[MoD, OM No. H-11013/3/2004/D (Parliament), dated 17.1.2005]
Recommendation (Sl. No. 10, Para 109-111)
“The Committee note that information warfare is assuming a key
role in the operation of hi-tech weapons and to achieve strategic and
tactical superiority. The Committee also note that the Directorate for
Information Warfare, under an Additional Director General was created
in August 2003 as part of the Military Operations Directorate of the
Army Headquarters. The functions of the Directorate for Information
Warfare include formulating policy and guidelines on all aspects of
Information Warfare and monitoring its implementation in the Army.
The Committee feel that the Information Warfare has a very vital role
in the operations of Air Force and Navy as well. Therefore, the
Committee recommend that this Directorate should be a tri-Service
body while coordinating closely with the Ministry of Home Affairs
and intelligence agencies so that information received from them can
be effectively utilised not only against the enemies from outside but
also against insurgent groups operating in the country”.
The Committee also note that Electronic Warfare systems have been
deployed effectively in Low Intensity Conflict operations in J&K and
North Eastern parts of the country. The Committee further note that
Electronic Counter—Counter Measures systems are highly sophisticated
electronic equipments. The indigenous development and manufacture

67
of Electronic counter Measures and Electronic Counter—Counter
Measures systems started late in India and, therefore, high levels of
sophistication have not been achieved in this field.
The Committee desire that the acquisition and deployment of
Electronic Warfare and Electronic Counter—Counter measures should
be given high priority and steps must be taken for their indigenous
developments.
Reply of the Government
The HQ Interested Defence Staff (IDS) in working in the direction
of the Standing Committee’s viewpoint regarding a tri-Services body
on Information Warfare. A Directorate of Information Warfare &
Information Technology has been formed in the HQ IDS to take up
the issues of Information Warfare (IW) at tri-service level. A Joint
Information Warfare doctrine has been formulated by this Directorate
to serve as the base document for IW activities. A Defence Information
Warfare Agency (DIWA) is also being raised by HQ IDS with the
approval of the Chiefs of Staff Committee, to look after the strategic
and other IW needs of the three Services.
The Electronic Warfare (EW) systems are technology intensive
systems. The sophisticated technology involved in hardware/software
is not easily accessible. The difficulty in obtaining the desired level of
sophisticated equipment and the advantages associated with its
indigenous production, encouraged research and development in the
field.
The programmes. SAMYUKTA for the Army and SANGRAHA for
the Navy, were launched by the Defence Research & Development
Organisation (DRDO) for development of credible indigenous EW
capability. SAMYUKTA was launched in 1994 and is expected to be
completed in November 2005. Similarly, Project SANGRAHA which
was sanctioned in 1995 for the Navy is expected to be completed in
June 2005. The long gestation period of these projects can be attributed
to the complexity involved in first-time development of the systems.
These complex systems have to be interactive and require prolonged
cycle of about 15-20 years to develop and achieve maturity.

68
These systems are multi-platform and have distributed architecture
involving very high integration of various hardware components. The
development of electronic modules itself is extremely time consuming.
The integration of the separate modules would also require changes in
platform design. Therefore, the initial development of the hardware
and their integration to produce such a high end system is difficult to
achieve. This difficulty is also compounded by the reluctance of
advanced nations of supply electronic equipment used in the
development of the hardware. This position of US sanctions also
adversely affected the availability of critical electronic components.
Besides the hardware element, another area that India has to
develop is in the area of sophisticated software that is required to run
the systems. The development is also very time consuming.
The software development standards in regard to military equipment
are more rigorous than in commercial application. The software
integration forms a major challenge in such a system which has
hardware from multiple vendors including those that are indigenous
and imported. Some of the reasons for delay are also attributable to
the lack of comprehension of the users requirements. Translation of
domain knowledge into software development and multiplicity of
agencies involved in development of software.
As desired by the Committee, high priority has been accorded for
acquisition of Electronic Warfare (EW) and Electronic Counter—Counter
Measures (ECCM). Towards this end, programme SAMYUKTA was
launched in 1994 for indigenous Electronic Warfare capabilities for the
army. Its probable date of completion is November, 2005. In order to
meet the operational requirement especially of tactical EW variants, a
two pronged approach has been adopted i.e., developing and fielding
of indigenous EW system and as an interim measure import EW
equipment to meet the immediate requirement so as to fill the existing
voids. Based on the EW philosophy and other factors like mobility
requirement, tube of terrain, nature of operations and operational
conditions, the EW systems variants for the Army required to be
produced indigenously till the end of the 12th plan have been planned.
Similarly, the indigenous EW project for the Navy, ‘SANGRAHA’ was
sanctioned in 1995. The project envisages development and production
of EW equipment, for all the three dimensions ( i.e. air, surface and
sub-surface). As regards Air Force a large number of indigenously
developed Radar Warning Receivers and Jammers have been fitted on
our aircraft fleet. The DRDO laboratories have also initiated projects

69
for development of improved versions of Radar Warning Receivers,
missile approach warning system and laser warning system.
[MoD, OM No. H-11013/3/2004/D (Parliament), dated 17.1.2005]
Comments of the Committee
(Please See Para 28 of Chapter-I)
Recommendation (Sl. No. 19, Para 176-177)
The Committee are unhappy to note that despite their
recommendations in the 7th and 19th Reports ((13th Lok Sabha) for
the development of an Aerospace Command, no initiative has yet been
taken by the Ministry. Considering the futuristic scenario of space
warfare, the Committee would like to stress the immense importance
and potential of space technology in modern air defence system.
The Committee, therefore, desire that it is necessary not only to
take measures to protect the national assets in space but it is equally
important also to have the strategic preparation to counter any threat
from the outer space. The Committee, while appreciating the
Government stand for preventing arms race in outer space, also feel
that India should always be prepared for any threat that may emanate
from space. The Committee, therefore, recommend that the development
of Aerospace Command must be examined expeditiously by the Air
Headquarters and concrete steps be taken to set up the Command
earliest.
Reply of the Government
The Government remains fully committed to taking all necessary
steps to safeguard the nation’s security including threats emanating
from outer space. It is in the process of examining all aspects related
to an Aerospace Command.
[MoD, OM No. H-11013/3/2004/D (Parliament), dated 17.1.2005]
N
EW D ELHI; BALASAHEB VIKHE PATIL,
19 March, 2005 Chairman,
28 Phalguna, 1927 (Saka) Standing Committee on Defence.

MINUTES OF THE NINETEENTH SITTING OF THE STANDING
COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE (2004-05)
The Committee sat on Saturday , the 19 March 2005 from 1600 hrs.
to 1730 hrs. in Committee Room No. ‘C’, Parliament House Annexe
New Delhi.
PRESENT
Shri Balasaheb Vikhe Patil— Chairman
M
EMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Churchill Alemao
3. Shri Iliyas Azmi
4. Shri A.V . Bellarmin
5. Shri Milind Deora
6. Dr. C. Krishnan
7. Dr. K.S. Manoj
8. Shri Manvendra Singh
Rajya Sabha
9. Smt. N.P . Durga
10. Shri Janardan Dwivedi
11. Shri Anand Sharma
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri P .D.T. Achary — Secretary
2. Shri P .K. Bhandari — Director
3. Smt. Anita Jain — Deputy Secretary
4. Shri D.R. Shekhar — Under Secretary
70

71
2. At the outset Chairman welcomed the Members to the sitting of
the Committee. The Committee then considered the Draft Action Taken
Report on the recommendations contained in First Report of the
Committee (14th Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants of the Ministry
of Defence for the year 2004-05. The Committee thereafter took up the
Draft Action Taken Report on the recommendations contained in the
Twentieth Report (13th Lok Sabha) on ‘Welfare of Servicemen and Ex-
Servicemen’.
3. The Members suggested certain additions/modifications/
amendments for incorporating in the two draft Reports. The draft
Reports with some modifications were then adopted by the Committee.
4. The Committee authorized the Chairman to finalise the Reports
in the light of further discussions and consequential changes for their
presentation to Parliament.
The Committee then adjourned.

72
APPENDIX
ANALYSIS OF THE ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON
THE RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE FIRST REPORT
OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE (FOURTEENTH
LOK SABHA) ON THE DEMANDS FOR GRANTS OF THE
MINISTRY OF DEFENCE FOR THE YEAR 2004-2005
Percentage
of Total
(i) Total number of recommendations 62
(ii) Recommendations/Observations which have 30 48%
been accepted by Government
(vide recommendations at Sl. No. 52, 63-66,
100-101, 125-126, 133-135, 141-142, 152-154,
161-162, 170-172, 179-181, 187-188, 192-193
(iii) Recommendations/Observations which that 2 3%
Committee do not desire to pursue in view
of Government’s replies
Para No. 77-78
(iv) Recommendations/Observations in respect of 20 32%
which Government’s replies have not been
accepted by the Committee
(vide recommendations at Sl. No. 30-33, 40-43,
47-51, 98-99, 116-120
(v) Recommendations/Observations in respect of 10 16%
which final replies of Government are still
awaited
83, 88-90, 105, 109-111, 176-177