STANDING COMMITTEE
ON DEFENCE
(2012-2013)
FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA
MINISTRY OF DEFENCE
[Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations/observations contained in the
Fifteenth Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) on ‘Demands of Grants (2012-2013)’]
NINETEENTH REPORT
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
April, 2013/Vaisakha, 1935 (Saka)
19

NINETEENTH REPORT
STANDING COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE
(2012-2013)
(FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA)
MINISTRY OF DEFENCE
[Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations/observations
contained in the Fifteenth Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) on
‘Demands for Grants (2012-2013)’]
Presented to Lok Sabha on 29.4.2013
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 29.4.2013
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
April, 2013/Vaisakha, 1935 (Saka)

C.O.D. No. 129
Price : Rs. 107.00
© 2013 B Y L OK S ABHA S ECRETARIAT
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of
Business in Lok Sabha (Fourteenth Edition) and printed by National Printers,
New Delhi-110 028.

(i)
CONTENTS
PAGE
COMPOSITION OF THE C OMMITTEE (2012-2013) ......................................... (iii)
INTRODUCTION .............................................................................................. (v)
CHAPTER I Report ................................................................................. 1
CHAPTER II Recommendations/Observations which have been
accepted by the Government ......................................... 37
CHAPTER III Recommendations/Observations which the Committee
do not desire to pursue in view of Government
replies ................................................................................. 84
C
HAPTER IV Recommendations/Observations in respect of which
replies of the Government have not been accepted
by the Committee and which require reiteration ...... 85
C
HAPTER V Recommendations/Observations in respect of which
final replies of the Government are still awaited ...... 96
ANNEXURES
I. Minutes of the Fourteenth Sitting of the Standing
Committee on Defence held on 17 April, 2013 ............ 98
II. Analysis of Action Taken by the Government on
the recommendations contained in the Fifteenth
Report  of the Standing Committee on Defence
(Fifteenth Lok  Sabha) ..................................................... 100

COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE
(2012-13)
Shri Raj Babbar — Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
*2. Shri Satpal Maharaj
3. Shri Sameer Bhujbal
**4. Shri Adhir Chowdhury
5. Shri Kamal Kishor ‘Commando’
6. Shri R. Dhruvanarayana
7. Shri Varun Gandhi
8. Shri P. Karunakaran
9. Shri Mithilesh Kumar
10. Shri Sidhant Mohapatra
#11. Shri Inder Singh Namdhari
12. Shri Saugata Roy
13. Shri Asaduddin Owaisi
14. Shri A.T. Nana Patil
15. Shri C.R. Patil
16. Smt. M. Vijaya Shanthi
@17. Shri Madan Lal Sharma
18. Smt. Mala Rajya Laxmi Shah
19. Shri Mahabali Singh
20. Rajkumari Ratna Singh
21. Shri Uday Singh
(iii)
*ceased to be a member w.e.f. 02.11.2012.
**ceased to be a member w.e.f. 22.10.2012.
# ceased to be a member w.e.f. 13.12.2012.
@ ceased to be a member w.e.f. 09.01.2013.

(iv)
##22. Shri Virbhadra Singh
23. Shri R. Thamaraiselvan
24. Vacant
25. Vacant
26. Vacant
Rajya Sabha
27. Shri Pankaj Bora
28. Shri Naresh Gujral
29. Shri Prakash Javadekar
30. Shri Hishey Lachungpa
31. Shri Mukut Mithi
32. Shri Mukhtar Abbas Naqvi
33. Dr. E.M. Sudarsana Natchiappan
34. Shri C.M. Ramesh
35. Shri T.K. Rangarajan
36. Shri Devender Goud T.
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Dr. R.K. Chadha — Additional Secretary
2. Shri R.K. Jain — Joint Secretary
3. Shri D.S. Malha — Director
4. Shri Sanjeev Sharma — Additional Director
5. Shri Rahul Singh — Committee Officer
6. Smt. Rekha Sinha — Executive Assistant
## ceased to be a member w.e.f. 01.01.2013.

INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairman of the Standing Committee on Defence (2012-2013),
having been authorised by the Committee to submit the report on their
behalf, present this Nineteenth Report on Action Taken by the Government
on the recommendations/observations contained in the Fifteenth Report
(Fifteenth Lok Sabha) on ‘Demands for Grants (2012-2013)’, relating to
the Ministry of Defence.
2. The Fifteenth Report was presented to Lok Sabha and laid on
the Table of Rajya Sabha on 30 April, 2012. The Ministry of Defence
furnished their Action Taken Notes on 15 November 2012.
3. The draft action taken report was considered and adopted by
the Committee at their sitting held on 17 April 2013.
4. For facility of reference and convenience, Recommendations/
Observations of the Committee have been printed in bold letters in the
Report.
5. An analysis of Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations contained in the Fifteenth Report
(Fifteenth Lok Sabha) of the Committee is given at Annexure.
N
EW DELHI;  RAJ BABBAR,
23 April, 2013 Chairman,
03 Vaisakha, 1935 (Saka) Standing Committee on Defence.
(v)

CHAPTER I
REPORT
This Report of the Standing Committee on Defence deals with action
taken by the Government on the recommendations/observations contained
in the Fifteenth Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants
(2012-13), which was presented to Lok Sabha and laid in Rajya Sabha on
30.04.2012.
2. The Committee’s Fifteenth Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) contained
50 recommendations/observations on the following aspects:—
Para No. Subject
12
1 Controversial media report about the movement of
troops
2, 3, 4 and 5 General Defence Budget
6 and 7 Committed Liabilities
8 Outcome Budget of the Ministry
9 Finalization of Long Term Plans
10, 11 and 12 Advanced strategy of the Ministry with regard to
procurements
13 and 14 Blacklisting of some of the companies
15, 16, 17 and 18 Management of Defence Land
19 and 20 Budgetary Allocation for Army
21, 22 and 23 The critical shortages of armaments with Army
24 Shortage of Officers in Army
25, 26 and 27 Bullet Proof Jackets
28, 29 and 30 National Cadet Corps
31 and 32 Lateral induction of Ex-servicemen in Central Para
Military Forces and State Police Forces
33, 34 and 35 On line Canteen and Credit Card Facilities for Ex-
Servicemen

2
12
36 and 37 Analysis of the allocations made during the Eleventh
Plan as well as during the year 2012-13 for Air Force
38 and 39 Shortage of Aircraft with the Air Force
40, 41, 42, 43 and 44 Accidents in Air Force and the issue of deficiency
of trainer aircraft and simulators in Air Force
45 Damage to aircraft due to weather conditions
46 Shortage of Officers in Air Force
47 Electrical Air Field Lightening System in the
remaining Air Fields
48 Budgetary allocations for Navy
49 Indigenization of Ships
50 Surface Platforms
51 Married accommodation for Officers and Staff of
Navy
52, 53, 54 and 55 Defence Research and Development Organization
(DRDO)
56, 57 and 58 Defence Public Sector Undertakings
59 Ordnance Factories.
3. Action Taken Replies have been received from the Government
in respect of all the recommendations/observations contained in the Report.
These replies have been examined and the same have been categorized
as follows:—
(i) Recommendations/observations, which have been accepted
by the Government (Please  see Chapter II):—
Para Nos. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 13, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19,
20, 21, 22, 23, 24, 28, 29, 30, 31, 38, 39, 40, 41, 42, 43, 44, 45,
46, 49, 51, 52, 53, 54, 56, 58, 59
(42 Recommendations)
(ii) R ecommendations/observations, which the Committee do not
desire to pursue in view of the replies of the Government
(Please see Chapter III):—
Para No. Nil
(Nil Recommendation)

3
(iii) Recommendations/observations in respect of which replies
of the Government have not been accepted by the Committee
and which require reiteration (Please  see Chapter IV):—
Para Nos. 6, 12, 25, 26, 27, 32, 33, 34, 35, 36, 37, 47, 48, 55
(14 Recommendations)
(iv) Recommendations/observations in respect of which final
replies of the Government are still awaited (Please  see
Chapter V):—
Para Nos. 14, 50, 57
(03 Recommendations)
4. The Committee desire the Ministry’s response to their
comments made in Chapter-I of this Report be furnished to them at
the earliest and in any case not later than six months of the presentation
of this Report. The Committee desire that the final reply in regard to
the paragraphs, namely, for which interim replies have been sent i.e.
14, 50 and 57 be intimated to them at the earliest but definitely with
the furnishing of action taken statement on this report.
A. General Defence Budget
Recommendation (Para No. 2)
5. The Committee had recommended as under:—
“The Committee note that Budget Estimates (net) for the
year 2012-13 are for Rs. 1,93,407.29 crore which comprises of
Rs. 1,13,828.66 crore as revenue outlay and Rs. 79,578.63 crore as
capital outlay against the RE allocations of Rs. 1,70,937 crore of the
previous year. Although there is an increase in the Defence budget
in absolute term, the analysis of the data with regard to the growth
of Defence budget indicates that the percentage growth during the
Eleventh Plan which was highest during the year 2008-09 and 2009-
10 i.e. 24.59% and 24.13% respectively declined to 8.70% during the
year 2010-11. The percentage growth slightly improved during the
year 2011-12 to 10.91% and the estimates for the year 2012-13
indicates the growth of 13.15%. If the Defence expenditure as
percentage of GDP is taken into consideration, again the growth
is declining since the year 2009-10. During the year 2009-10 the
growth was 2.20% which declined to 1.92% during the year 2011-12

4
as per the Revised Estimates and the allocations at Budget Estimates
stage of 2011-12 indicates the growth as 1.90%. The Defence
expenditure as the percentage of total Central Government
expenditure as such has declined from 13.84% to 2009-2010 to
12.97% as per the Budget Estimates of 2012-13. The Defence
expenditure as compared to some of the European and neighbouring
countries, the data of which was made available to the Committee
by the Ministry indicates that the Defence expenditure as percentage
of GDP in India is lowest as compared to U.S., China, France, U.K.,
Russia and Pakistan. Moreover, the military expenditure as
percentage of GDP in all these countries excepting Pakistan is
increasing over the years.”
6. The Ministry in its action taken reply has stated as under:—
“The Ministry has been making all efforts to ensure that adequate
funds are made available by the Ministry of Finance to meet the
requirement of the Defence Services.
Beginning with an allocation of Rs. 96,000.00 crores at the beginning
of the 11th Plan, the allocation has increased to Rs. 1,93,407.29 crores
in 2012-13.”
7. The Committee note although the Ministry has mentioned that
it is making all efforts to ensure that adequate funds are made available
by the Ministry of Finance to meet the requirement of the Defence
Services but it has not spelt out explicitly as to what efforts it is making
or whether any concrete action plan has been put in place for the
increase in allocations for the purpose in the future. Therefore, the
Committee reiterate their recommendation that keeping in view the
increasing trend of military expenditure of neighbouring countries.
India should also expand the size of allocations it made to Defence
Budget so that Indian forces are fully equipped with modern weaponry.
B. General Defence Budget
Recommendation (Para No. 4)
8. The Committee had recommended as under:—
“The Committee’s examination further indicates that there is huge
variation in BE Estimates, BE Allocations, RE Estimates and RE
Allocations during each year of the Eleventh Plan. Not only that
there are gaps between the projected and the allocated outlay. Each
of the services is getting allocations that are lesser to the projections

5
during each of the year. The Committee observe that there has been
slight variations in the Revenue Capital ratio during Eleventh Plan.
During the year 2008-09 the Revenue Capital ratio was
55:45 as the Capital ratio was maximum during the year 2008-09
which declined to 39 during the year 2009-10. Again the Capital
ratio has slightly improved to 42% during the year 2011-12. During
the year 2012-13 the estimated Capital ratio is 41. The Committee
find from the aforesaid Revenue Capital ratio analysis that the
Government has not been able to match the Capital ratio of 45 of
the year 2008-09.
The Committee may like to emphasize that India is surrounded by
difficult neighbours and as such there is an urgent need to allocate
adequate outlay to the Services, particularly for the Capital schemes.
Moreover, as has been observed by the Committee there are huge
gaps between the required and the existing force levels, armaments,
equipment, aircrafts, etc., the details of which have been given in
the Service-wise examination. Besides, the modernization
programmes of the Services, Ordnance Factories, DPSUs are going
on for which substantial allocations are required. On the Research
front there is an urgent need to give more emphasis so as to attain
the level of self-sufficiency in defence procurements.”
9. The Ministry in its action taken reply has stated as under:—
“The allocation made for the Defence Services has been less than
the projected requirement. Nevertheless, the allocation has increased
steadily from Rs. 96000.00 crores in the beginning of the 11th Plan
to Rs. 193407.29 crores in the beginning of the 12th Plan. Within
the overall increase, the capital allocation has grown from
Rs. 41922.00 crores to Rs. 79578.63 crores in 2012-13.”
10. The Committee note that the Ministry has not shown any
commitment to increase the capital ratio in comparison to revenue ratio
for the forces, therefore, the Committee reiterate their earlier
recommendation to increase outlay, particularly capital outlay to the
forces so that procurement of equipment, aircraft, etc. do not suffer.
C. Committed Liabilities
Recommendation (Para No. 6)
11. The Committee had recommended as under:—
“The projected allocations of the Ministry for the year 2012-13 for
the Services indicates that substantial portion of the allocations are

6
earmarked for the Committed Liabilities leaving marginal scope
for New Schemes. The Committee are concerned to note that as
per the position of actual allocation of outlay by the Ministry of
Defence out of total Capital Modernization Budget 2012-13 of
Rs. 66032.24 crore, Rs. 54839.91 crore have been allocated for
Committed Liabilities thus leaving only Rs. 5520.82 crore for the
New Schemes. The Committee find that the proposed acquisitions
of the Services particularly of Air Force are highly Budget intensive.
The Committee fail to understand how the Ministry of Defence
would meet all capital requirements of the Services particularly in
the context of the modernization programmes as well as gaps
between the required and the existing capabilities as examined in
detail in the later part of the Report. The Committee express grave
concern on allocating the meager outlay for new schemes and would
like the Ministry to clarify the position in this regard. Besides,
since the allocations for the Services are the immediate strategic
requirement, the requisite allocations to the Ministry of Defence
for the Capital segment should be made available so that the
proposed acquisitions of the Services do not suffer. Moreover besides
meeting the committed liabilities adequate outlay should be
allocated for the New Schemes so as to enable the Services to bridge
the gaps between the required and the existing capabilities. The
Committee strongly recommend that their concerns in this regard
should adequately be conveyed to the Ministry of Finance and
Cabinet Secretary.”
12. The Ministry in its action taken reply has stated as under:—
“The concerns of the Committee have been conveyed to the Cabinet
Secretary as also the Secretary, Department of Expenditure, Ministry
of Finance.”
13. After gleaning through the reply of the Ministry, the
Committee feel that their recommendation has not adequately been
dealt with. The reply furnished by the Ministry is cryptic and does
not reveal the details. Moreover it appears to be a casual reply. Had
the Ministry been serious on the issue, it could have provided the
details of the contents of letters sent to the Cabinet Secretary and the
Secretary, Department of Expenditure. The Committee would like to
know from the Ministry exactly what were the contents of
correspondence undertaken with the Cabinet Secretary and the
Secretary, Department of Expenditure, Ministry of Finance along with

7
the dates of conveyance. They would also like to know the details of
the exercise undertaken by the Ministry while finalizing the proposals
for the year 2013-14. The Committee would like to have the segregation
of the moneys earmarked for the new schemes. It goes without
saying that the committed liabilities also include the recurring
expenditure.
D. Outcome Budget of the Ministry
Recommendation (Para No. 8)
14. The Committee had recommended as under:—
“The Committee have consistently been recommending the Ministry
to prepare Outcome Budget and lay the same in Parliament
alongwith the Demands for Grants. Even when the issue is pursued
year after year, the Ministry has not been able to prepare the
Outcome Budget document. What is more disturbing is the fact
that the Ministry is not keeping the assurance given during each
year in this regard. The Committee have now been informed that
the Outcome Budget documents for the identified organizations
for the year 2012-13 were ready in time. However upon examination
it was felt that the same need to be refined further.
The Committee have been apprised that all the allocations of the
Ministry are under the non-plan segment and as such are not subject
to scrutiny by Planning Commission. The Committee may again
like to emphasize that Outcome Budget is an important document
to ensure Executive accountability to Parliament. Not only that the
achievements of the Ministry are scrutinized by virtue of being
quantified by this important document.
The Committee observe from the aforesaid scenario that the delay
on the part of the Ministry is just to avoid Parliamentary scrutiny
as well as the public scrutiny thereto Outcome Budget being a public
document. Not only that the schemes are not covered by the rigorous
Zero Based Budgeting exercise being done by planning Commission,
the reasons being whole Defence allocation as non-plan, not subject
to the scrutiny by the Planning Commission. The Committee again
reiterate their recommendation and would like the Ministry to prepare
Outcome Budget at least from the year 2013-14 onwards. Not only
that the Ministry of Defence should explain in details the rationale of
allocating all the outlays of the Ministry of Defence under the non-Plan
segment. The concrete result oriented measures in this regard should
be taken and the Committee apprised accordingly.”

8
15. The Ministry in its action taken reply has stated as under:—
“The Ministry has been taking steps to implement the concept of
Outcome budgeting. As a part of this, Outcome Budget documents
for the year 2012-13 were prepared by the Naval Dockyards, DG
NCC and DG MAP. The Ministry is also making attempts to identify
more organisations that can be brought under the ambit of outcome
budgeting. It is proposed to place the Outcome Budget for NCC,
MAP before Parliament for financial year 2013-14.
In so far as issue of the allocations for Ministry of Defence being
provided under the Non-Plan segment is concerned it may be stated
that Plan allocation is essentially expected to realise the development
potential of the economy’s productive capacities. Thus it is typically
the development/welfare oriented schemes that are classified as
plan expenditure and subject to scrutiny by the planning
Commission. In so far as Ministry of Defence is concerned, the
expenditure relates to an essential service of the Government and
is distinct from the development/welfare oriented schemes falling
under the Planning Commission. However, the fact that Defence
Capital outlay is funded under the Non-Plan segment, should not
in any manner be taken to convey a lack of planning in prioritizing
and projecting of expenditure. Infact, Capital Acquisition
expenditure, which accounts for over 80% of the capital outlay, is
as per the Services Capital Acquisition Plan which is a subset of
the Five Year Plan which in turn is a part of the 15 year Long Term
Integrated Perspective Plan (LTIPP).
The fact that Defence Budget is entirely non-plan budget and is
therefore not subject to scrutiny by the Planning Commission, should
not be taken to mean that the basic tenets of Zero based budgeting
are not being adhered to by the Ministry. Budgetary projections are
finalized by the Ministry/SHQs after rigorous scrutiny within the
Services Headquarters and at various levels in the Ministry, within
the ceilings fixed by the Ministry of Finance.”
16. The Committee take note of the fact that the Ministry is
moving in the direction to implement the concept of outcome budgeting.
They have been informed that outcome budget documents for the year
2012-13 have been prepared by the naval Dockyard, Directorate General,
NCC (DGNCC) and Directorate General, Married Accommodation
Project (DGMAP). The Ministry has intimated that they are making
efforts to identify more organizations so that they can be brought under
the purview of outcome budgeting. The Committee are concerned to

9
note that out of the total outreach of the organization under the Ministry
of Defence, only three organizations have prepared the outcome budget
documents. As such they would like to know whether the outcome
budgets for NCC, MAP and Naval Dockyard have been placed before
the Parliament or not. They would also like that all the organizations
within the Ministry should commence preparation of outcome budget
document and lay them in the Parliament at the earliest available
opportunity.
E. Advanced strategy of the Ministry with regard to procurements
Recommendation (Para No. 12)
17. The Committee had recommended as under:—
“The Committee further observe that the aforesaid suggested
mechanism would not only curtail the time required for defence
acquisitions but would also help in indigenization process. Once
the requirement of the Services is identified, the cases with regard
to ‘Make’ category can be culled out and preparations can be started.
Not only that the involvement of Defence Public Sector
Undertakings, Ordnance Factories and even the Private Sector in
this process of acquisitions would lead to the path of self-reliance.
Moreover, if the perspective long-term  plan for our PSUs and
Ordnance Factories is prepared, these companies can be held
accountable on delivery of indigenization process. The Committee
further observe that preparation of the databank of acquisitions
and the long-term plan in this regard can further pace up our R&D
requirement. The integrated approach by the PSUs, Ordnance
Factories and Private Sector, DRDO and premier Research
institutions as well as the technical institutions can help in finding
out solutions for difficult technologies and lead us to the path of
self-reliance. The Committee strongly recommend that the concrete
initiatives on the suggested lines should be taken by the Ministry
and the Committee informed accordingly. Moreover, the Committee
feel that the existing FDI limit with regard to defence production
need to be revisited.”
18. The Ministry in its action taken reply has stated as under:—
“The recommendation made by the Committee to provide a thrust
to indigenization process and self-reliance through the suggested
mechanism has been noted. In this connection, it is submitted that
the Defence Production Policy notified in Jan. 2011, interalia ,
provides that based on the approved LTIPP, equipment/weapon

10
systems/platforms required for 10 years and further down the line
will by and large be developed/integrated/made within the country.
The policy also provides that in order to synergise and enhance
the national competence in producing state-of-the-art defence
equipment/weapon systems/platforms within the pricelines and
timliness that are globally competitive, all viable approaches such
as formulation of consortia, joint ventures and public private
partnership, etc., within the Government approved framework will
be undertaken. The acemedia, research and development institutions
as well as technical and scientific organizations of repute will be
involved for achieving this objective.”
19. The Committee note that the reply of the Ministry is silent
on the operative part of the recommendation of the Committee. The
Committee would, therefore, like to know the specific initiatives taken
by the Public Sector Undertakings, Ordnance Factory Board, Private
Sector, Defence Research and Development Organization/other premier
research institutions on the thrust they have given to the Research and
Development and by when the country could expect the tangible
outcome so that the indigenous technology can be developed to obviate
large scale export of defence products. The reply is conspicuously silent
on the issue of increasing the FDI limit in the defence production. The
Committee recommend that timely action should be taken in this regard
and in order to give fillip to the self-reliance, this limit should be
enhanced under intimation to the Committee.
F. Blacklisting of some of the companies
Recommendation (Para No. 13)
20. The Committee had recommended as under:—
“The Committee find that CBI had reported against six companies
and these companies have been blacklisted for ten years. With the
blacklisting of these companies, a difficult situation has arisen due
to technology being rare and with few manufacturers internationally.
For example, on the issue of procurement of L-70 gun replacement,
according to Army the best gun is made by Rhine metals Air Defence
(RAD), Zurich and the said company is one of the blacklisted
companies. Further, the problems with regard to tanks ammunitions
have further compounded due to blacklisting of IMI, Israel. The
Committee observe that the blacklisting of the companies ultimately
result into blacklisting of the rarest technologies and the solutions
in this regard need to be found. One such solution is to give more

11
focus to defence R&D in an integrated approach involving DRDO,
premier Research institutions, Defence PSUs, Ordnance Factories,
premier academic technical institutions and private sector
enterprises in the R&D process so as to find our own solutions to
the rarest available technologies as well as in manufacturing quality
defence products at competitive prices. The Committee may like
to emphasize that investigations with regard to the blacklisted
companies should be expedited so that it reaches to the logical
conclusion and the offenders are penalized which would be a
deterrent for others. More emphasis on pre CVC vetting of defence
procurements can be another mechanism to address the aforesaid
issue.”
21. The Ministry in its action taken reply has stated as under:—
“While blacklisting of some companies sometimes results in non-
availability of rarest technologies but at the same time it provides
an opportunity for indigenous development of critical technologies
and act as deterrent for others against indulging in unethical
practices in business dealings.
Ordnance Factories, DPSUs have been undertaking R&D activities
on their own as well as they are working in tandem with DRDO
on many projects. The report of the Kelkar Committee on review
of Defence Procurement Procedure had recommended an integrated
approach involving Users, Ministry of Defence and the Industry
in the ‘Make’ procedure. The recommendations of the Committee
have been accepted by the Government for implementation.
The investigations with regard to blacklisted companies are further
being carried out by CBI and necessary action shall be taken in
accordance with law and as per the decision of the Court of Law.
In so far as defence procurements are concerned, an elaborate
mechanism already exists as outlined in Defence Procurement
Procedure for maintaining highest degree of probity and public
accountability, transparency in operations, free competition and
impartiality. The DPP is also amended from time to time keeping
in tune with contemporary practices and to facilitate defence
procurements in a logical and transparent manner. Thus the need
for an additional layer of check through pre CVC vetting of defence
procurements is not felt.”
22. The Committee have noted that although the Ministry have
taken sufficient measures on their part through an elaborate mechanism

12
for maintaining highest degree of probity and public accountability,
transparency in operations, free competition and impartiality yet scams
do surface without any break. The Committee are of the view that pre-
CVC vetting of defence procurement could avoid murky transactions
in defence deals to take place. The Committee are of the view that in
the absence of such policy it would lead to blacklisting of companies,
which will result in devoidance of critical technology to the country.
Therefore, pre-CVC vetting may be considered by the Ministry of
Defence.
G. Development of infrastructure on the borders
Recommendation (Para No. 18)
23. The Committee had recommended as under:—
“The Committee understand that the issue of funding for strategic
roads and required rail infrastructure on our borders is another
area which need to be addressed immediately. The Secretary during
the course of deliberations has apprised that Railways is not being
provided any additional allocation by the Planning Commission
for upgrading rail infrastructure on our borders. There are technical
issues involved. The total outlay of Defence being non-plan, outlay
for additional rail road infrastructure cannot be provided from the
Planning Commission. The Committee deplore the aforesaid
position whereby the issue of allocation of outlay for our strategic
needs is struck due to the aforesaid bureaucratic hurdles. The
Committee strongly emphasize that the issue need to be taken
immediately at the highest level. The Cabinet Secretary, prime
Minister’s Office (PMO), the Finance Ministry should be conveyed
the concerns of the Committee adequately. The Committee also
desire that feasibility to fund the border roads through Pradhan
Mantri Gram Sadak Yojana (PMGSY) should also be looked into.
The adequate outlay for construction of the requisite infrastructure
which includes strategic roads, rail, tunnels, etc. should be ensured
by coordination between the various Ministries and the intervention
at the highest level. Besides, The Committee may also like to
emphasize that the rail tracks should be constructed after taking
specifications from and in consultation with the Army so that there
is no compromise on the issue of speed of the trains. The Committee
would like to hear about the concrete initiatives taken in this regard
followed by the positive results.”

13
24. The Ministry in its action taken reply has stated as under:—
“(a) At present there is no constraint of funds for construction
of Strategic Roads by Border Road Organisation (BRO). Earlier
the fund allocation to BRO was inadequate. The scenario has
changed and sufficient funds are being allocated now. There
is no need for funding border roads through PMGSY.
(b) Ministry has taken up the funding of Strategic Railway
projects with Cabinet Secretariat to intervene in the matter
by asking Planning Commission or Ministry of Finance to
make available dedicated non-lapsable funds to Railway Board
for development of fourteen (14) Strategic Railway lines.
The alignment of Strategic Railway lines by army commands
has been done in consonance with respective Regional Railway
Boards.”
25. The Committee are happy to note that at present there is no
constraint of funds for construction of Strategic Roads by Border Road
Organisation and sufficient funds are being allocated for the projects.
The Committee expect that these projects initiated by the Ministry in
consonance with Railways be completed in stipulated timeframe so
that movement of defence personnel and general public to the border
areas become easy and hassle free.
H. Budgetary allocation for Army
Recommendation (Para No. 19)
26. The Committee had recommended as under:—
“The Committee note that the Army has been allocated
Rs. 77327.03 crore against the projection of Rs. 83861.62 crore during
the year 2012-13 under the revenue section. Under the capital section
the Army during the said year has been allocated Rs. 19237.80
crore against the projection of Rs. 28234.60 crore. If the analysis
of the Army outlay in terms of committed outlay and new schemes
is done, the Committee find that the projected requirement for
capital modernization budget for the year 2012-13 was Rs. 15407.84
crore. The share of committed liability in the projected capital
modernization budget is Rs. 5552.63 crore. For new schemes the
projected requirement is Rs. 9855.21 crore. However, based on the
actual allocation of funds by the Ministry of Finance, the total
allocation for capital modernization budget for Army is 13724.14

14
crore out of which Rs. 5552.63 crore is for committed liabilities
thus leaving only Rs. 2500 crore for new schemes. Moreover, the
Committee are unable to comprehend how the proposed initiatives
of the Ministry to decentralize financial delegation of power thereby
increasing the limit to Rs. 150 and 200 crore would help the
respective chiefs in meeting the gaps with the meagre allocation
provided for the new schemes. With regard to capital revenue ratio
in connection with Army, the data furnish ed by the Ministry
indicates that the said ratio is moving more towards revenue
segment. During the year 2008-09 the capital revenue ratio was
27:73 which reached to the level of 23:77 during the year 2011-12
and the projections for 2012-13 are 20:80.”
27. The Ministry in its action taken reply has stated as under:—
“The capital allocation to Army has increased steadily from
Rs. 11634.18 crore in the beginning of the 11th Plan to Rs. 19237.80
crore in 2012-13. However, owing to a substantial pay and allowance
component, the revenue allocation accounts for a high share of the
overall budget.
Notwithstanding the same, the requirement of the Army for
additional funds under the capital segment shall be reviewed during
the course of the year and based on the pace of utilisation of
allocated funds and the progress of new schemes, additional funds
as required shall be sought from the Ministry of Finance at the
appropriate budgetary stage.”
28. The Committee note that revenue expenditure has surpassed
the capital expenditure in the Army. The Ministry has not given any
assurance of any kind on the increase of share in capital allocation,
the Committee, reiterate their earlier recommendation to provide more
allocation in capital segment so that modernisation of Army may not
be hampered.
I. Bullet Proof Jackets
Recommendation (Para Nos. 25 to 27)
29. The Committee had recommended as under:—
“The Committee during the course of examination of Demands for
Grants 2009-10 had noted that there was deficiency of 186168 units
of Bullet Proof Jackets. Even when the approval of Defence
Acquisition Council was obtained on 19.10.2009 for purchase of the

15
requisite number of BPJs during the Eleventh Plan, the issue of
purchase of desired BPJs is still fraught with various complications.
The Committee understand during the course of deliberations on
Demands for Grants of this year that the Ministry is confronting
with some problems on issue of RFP. RFP was issued initially on
3rd March, 2011 however, due to problems envisaged during
conduct of ballistic trials RFP was retracted on 9th December, 2011.
Now, the suitable amendments are being made in the GSQR and
fresh RFP would be issued.”
30. The Ministry in its action taken reply has stated as under:—
“Request for Proposal (RFP) for procurement of 1,86,138 Bullet
Proof Jackets (BPJ) was prepared and issued on 03.03.11. Techno
commercial offers from six vendors were received on 27.07.2011.
However, the RFP had to be retracted on 09 December 2011 due
to technical problems envisaged during ballistic trials. Subsequently,
the GSQR was amended and approved by GSEPC on 11.04.2012.
New RFP would be issued after procedure for trial Methodology
is finalized.
31. The Committee had recommended as under:—
“Another issue consistently been raised by the Committee is the
weight of the Bullet Proof Jackets. When the issue was raised in
the Seventh Report on Demands for Grants 2009-10, the Ministry
in the Action Taken Note had stated that the weight of the BPJ is
incremental from less than 4 Kgs to a maximum of 11.5 Kgs based
on level of threat. To substantiate the point of view of the Ministry,
the Committee have been informed in the Action Taken Note that
the soldier is not required to wear the BPJ at its maximum weight
under low threat levels. Even when the proposals have been
approved by DAC, the Ministry is confronting with RFP issues.
Initial RFP was retracted way back on 9th December 2011 due to
some problem and till date fresh RFP has not been issued. The
Committee express unhappiness over the way the procurement of
such an important life saving items required for forces is being
delayed.”
32. The Committee had recommended as under:—
“The Committee deplore the way the Ministry has dealt with the
issue of weight of BPJs whereby it has been stated that the soldier
is not required to wear the BPJs at its maximum weight under low

16
threat levels. The Committee strongly recommend that at least now
the initiatives should be taken to fast track the purchase of BPJs.
Besides it should be ensured that the BPJs are of low weight and
of world class quality.”
33. The Ministry in its action taken reply has stated as under:—
“RFP for procurement of Bullet Proof Jackets is under preparation
and is likely to be issued shortly. GSQRs have been amended to
provide the best Bullet Proof Jackets available to soldiers of the
Indian Army.”
34. The Committee are astonished to find that despite the existing
deficiency of 186138 Bullet Proof Jacket units leading to risking the
life of as many soldiers and officers, the Ministry has yet not taken
any concrete steps to procure Bullet Proof Jackets (BPJs) and
procurement of the same is still at preparation of RFP stage. Therefore,
the Committee recommend that new Request for Proposal (RFP) should
be immediately issued so that this life saving item should be procured
urgently. While issuing the RFP, it should also be ensured that light
weight BPJs of world class quality should only be procured.
J. National Cadet Corps
Recommendation (Para No. 30)
35. The Committee had recommended as under:—
“The Committee further find from the information furnished by
the Ministry that few NCC cadets are joining the services as officers.
During the year 2011 only one NCC cadet joined the Navy as officer.
In Air Force none of the NCC cadet joined. In case of Army the
data has not been furnished separately for NCC cadets joining as
officers.
The Committee further observe that various initiatives to NCC ‘C’
Certificate holders in joining the Services are being taken as per
the Government’s policy. To NCC ‘C’ Certificate holders,
Government provides reserv ations in recruitment to the Armed
Forces and a certain weightage of marks in para military
organizations. 64 vacancies in IMA, Dehradun, 100 vacancies in
Officers Training Academy (OTA), Chennai, 12 vacancies in Naval
Academy, Ezhimala and 10 vacancies in Air Force Academy,
Dundigal are reserved per year for NCC ‘C’ Certificate holders.
Further for entry into OTA, Chennai, Naval Academy, Ezhimala
and Air Force Academy, Dundigal, NCC ‘C’ Certificate holders are

17
exempt from the written examination. The Committee understand
from the aforesaid position that the NCC Cadets are not joining
the services inspite of weightage given to them in recruitment to
the Armed Forces as officers, the details of which have been given
above. The Committee understand that perhaps very few NCC
cadets are getting NCC ‘C’ Certificate. To understand the situation
the Committee would like to be apprised about the data with regard
to the NCC cadets getting ‘C’ Certificate. The Committee would
also like the Ministry and Services to analyse the reasons for NCC
cadets not being able to join as officers in the services so as to
understand the aforesaid scenario.”
36. The Ministry in its action taken reply has stated as under:—
“The National Cadet Corps conducts ‘ A’ Certificate Examination
for Junior Division/Wing NCC Cadets and ‘B’ & ‘C’ Certificate
Examination for the Senior Division/Wing NCC Cadets. In the year
2011-12, a total of 81,440 ‘C’ Certificates were issued to cadets who
qualified for it.
To NCC ‘C’ Certificate holders, Government provides reservation
in recruitment to the Armed Forces. Out of a total of 1617 seats
available in various military training academies, around
180 vacancies per year are reserved for NCC ‘C’ Certificate holders
for NCC Entry Schemes in various Military Academies. Out of this,
about 125 – 140 are joining various Military Academies for training
to become officers against the vacancies reserved for NCC ‘C’
certificate holders as per breakup given below:—
Sl. No. Year IMA OT A Navy Air Force Total
(a) 2009 30 81 03 02 116
(b) 2010 29 100 28 02 159
(c) 2011 37 74 04 11 126
However, the NCC Entry Scheme vacancies remain undersubscribed
due to the following reasons:—
(i) Out of the sanctioned NCC cadet strength of 13.4 lakh almost
60% (8.4 lakh) of the NCC cadets are from Junior Division/
Wing (not holding ‘C’ Certificates) and do not necessarily
join the Armed Forces except NDA. Of the balance 40%
(5 lakh), about 27% (1.35 lakh) are girl cadets and they
normally do not opt for Armed Forces except a few. The
strength of Senior Division (SD) NCC cadets is 3.65 lakh out

18
of which the NCC cadets in the second year of NCC who
are eligible to appear in NCC ‘C’ certificate examination is
approximately 1.82 lakh. Out of this, about 55% appear for
‘C’ Certificate examination, it not being a compulsory
examination. Therefore, on an average 80% - 85% (80000 –
85000) pass NCC ‘C’ Certificate examination and are eligible
to join Armed Forces under NCC Entry Scheme.
(ii) Most of NCC cadets, being from Arts stream, are not eligible
to join Navy and Air Force where the QRs are science stream.
(iii) M any NCC Cadets having A, B and C Certificates also apply
for joining Armed Forces in the open Category. As far as
such candidates are concerned, a total of about 175 join the
various academies in the open category. Therefore, a total of
300 cadets annually join the Armed Forces inclusive of
C- Certificate holders which is a fairly large number.
(iv) Candidates are eligible to apply for various entry schemes
in training academies in the last year of their college or after
completing their graduation. NCC curriculum, however, is
only for two years and most of the Senior Division cadets
complete it in second year. There is thus one year’s gap
between completion of NCC training and ex-NCC cadets
applying for Armed Forces. Resultantly, these candidates
cannot be given pre-SSB training as they cease to be NCC
cadets.”
37. The Committee contemplated over various reasons submitted
by the Ministry of Defence for not filling up the vacancies reserved
for NCC cadets. While other reasons seem convincing, but one of the
reasons given is that candidates are eligible to apply for various entry
schemes in training academies in the last year of their college or after
completing their graduation appears to be intriguing. While NCC
curriculum is only for two years and most of the Senior Division cadets
complete it in second year leaving one year’s gap between completion
of NCC training and ex-NCC cadets applying for Armed Forces, these
candidates cannot be given pre-SSB training as they cease to be NCC
cadets. The Committee desire that on the line of reduction of period
of training from 3 to 2 years for NCC ‘C’ certificate holders, pre-SSB
training should also be given to ex-NCC cadets who are in their final
year of graduation so that NCC cadets get fair chance in direct entry
scheme and vacancies existing in this cadre be filled.

19
K. Lateral induction of Ex-Servicemen in Central Para Military Forces
and State Police Forces
Recommendation (Para No. 32)
38. The Committee had recommended as under:—
“The Committee observe that the service personnel retiring at
younger age are a great asset to the country. There is an urgent
need to use the services of these trained workforce by deploying
them in Central Para Military Forces (CPMFs) and other Central
Police Organizations (CPOs) in line with the recommendations made
by the various Pay Commissions as consistently been recommended
by the Standing Committee. Besides, providing re-employment to
the service personnel, the Lateral Induction Programme would
curtail the training bill of the Central and State Governments for
deploying of the new recruits which need extensive training.
Moreover, pension bill of the Union Government can also be
curtailed. The Committee fail to understand the delay in taking
decision with regard to lateral induction of ESM in (CPMFs), (CPOs)
and State Police Forces in the line of the aforesaid observations.
The Committee strongly recommend that the early decision in this
regard should be taken. Besides, the Joint Recruitment Board
comprising representatives of CPOs and Defence Forces
Headquarters that would jointly select officers/men who would
render 7 years services in Defence Forces to be followed by lateral
shift to CPOs would also be constituted expeditiously to address
the issue of lateral induction.”
39. The Ministry in its action taken reply has stated as under:—
“Lateral induction of serving personnel into Central Armed Police
Forces (CAPFs) was a key recommendation of the Kargil Review
Committee, GoM on Reviewing National Security System and the
5th and 6th Central Pay Commissions. In the wake of the GOM
Report on ‘Reforming the National Security System’ wherein
considerable emphasis was laid on keeping a young profile of the
Army in peak combat effective state capable of meeting the
challenges of future conflict, a Working Group under the
Chairmanship of the then Adjutant General, Army Hqrs. with Joint
Secretary (Police), Ministry of Home Affairs (MHA), Representatives
of Central Armed Police Forces (CAPFs) and National Security
Council Secretariat as Members, was constituted to work out the
modalities for reducing the colour service and laterally transfer
Army personnel to CAPFs.

20
The Working Group submitted its Report in March, 2002. The Report
envisaged lateral transfer of army personnel into CAPFs after
7 years of colour service in the Army. The Report of the Working
Group was not signed by the representatives of the MHA as the
proposed lateral transfer was not acceptable to them.
A meeting was taken by the Home Secretary on 2nd November,
2006. As per the decision taken in the meeting, a Committee under
the Chairmanship of Director General, Border Security Force was
constituted to work out the modalities for such transfer.
MHA submitted the report of DG BSF to the Cabinet Secretariat
in February, 2011 with a copy endorsed to this Ministry. The
recommendations in the Report were in respect of re-employment
of ex-servicemen and no recommendation was made for lateral
transfer of armed forces personnel in CAPFs.
After submission of Report of DG BSF as stated above, a meeting
was held in Cabinet Secretariat on 29.11.2011, which was attended
by representatives MHA/CAPFs, DoP&T and Deptt. of Expenditure
besides MoD/AHQ. Cabinet Sectt. have desired that MHA and MoD
may explore and examine options for achieving lateral transfers
from the Army to CAPFs whereby Army personnel are incentivized
to join and the interests of resident CAPFs are protected. This is
being examined in consultation with MHA and Army HQ.”
40. The Committee note that working group under the
Chairmanship of the then Adjutant General, Army Hqrs. with Joint
Secretary (Police), Ministry of Home Affairs (MHA), Representatives
of Central Armed Police Forces (CAPFs) and National Security Council
Secretariat as Members, was constituted to work out the modalities for
reducing the colour service and laterally transfer Army personnel to
CAPFs. However till date no action has been taken by the Government
since the Working Group submitted its Report in March, 2002, therefore,
the Committee recommend that this issue should be resolved at the
earliest to pave the way for lateral transfer of Ex-servicemen in Central
Para Military Forces (CPMFs)/CAPFs to keep the profile of Army young.
L. Canteen Stores Department
Recommendation (Para Nos. 33-35)
41. The Committee had recommended as under:—
“The Committee find that the turnover of CSD has grown to over
4500 times in the recent years and it is serving more than 16 million

21
people with 34 Area Depots and 4500 Unit-Run-Canteens (URCs),
the CSD serves the services in all the parts of the country—from
Ladakh in the North, Tamil Nadu and Kerala in the South, Nagaland
in the East, Rajasthan in the West and even Port Blair. CSD caters
not just to the services personnel and their families but also to
GREF, NCC Units at Group HQ level, TA units, CDA’s staff,
Ordnance factories, Embarkation HQs, Civilians paid from Defence
estimates and Para-military forces under operational/administrative
control of the Army.
42. The Ministry in its action taken reply has stated as under:—
“Observations of the committee have been noted.”
43. The Committee had recommended as under:—
“The Committee appreciates the work done by CSD to the service
personnel and to the employees of other related services. The
Committee, after taking into the views of the Ex-Servicemen who
reside in far flung and difficult areas, desire that mobile canteen
facilities which was available to them should be re-instated. The
Committee desire that keeping in view the advent of new technology
and internet, on-line canteen facilities to Ex-Servicemen should be
started at the earliest and modalities in this regard should be
finalised before presentation of next year’s Demands for Grants.”
“The Committee also recommended that Credit Card facilities on
the line of Kisan Credit Card should also be started for
Ex-Servicemen, who find difficult to carry cash to canteens.”
44. The Ministry in its action taken reply has stated as under:—
“Due to automation of Unit Run Canteens (URCs) by introduction
of Canteen Inventory Management Software (CIMS) and Smart Card,
operation of Mobile canteen facilities has become perilous and also
uneconomical, and therefore, this facility has been restricted.
Online Canteen facilities and credit card transactions on the lines
of Kisan Credit Card form part of the overall futuristic concepts
being considered with respect to Canteen Stores Department. Credit
card facilities are available in many URCs in major cities/towns.
Complete information on CSD including items available/being
introduced at various depots is available on the CSD website.”

22
45. The Committee are not satisfied with the reply furnished by
the Ministry. The main essence of their recommendation was to provide
canteen services to the Ex-Servicemen residing in the far-flung hilly
areas of the country. It is the duty of the Minister to consider the ways
and means to provide facility to such residents. They accordingly
recommend that the Government should come out with modalities to
implement the Committee’s recommendation and they, therefore, in
unequivocal terms re-iterate that mobile canteen facility which were
available in the past should be resorted forthwith. The Minisrty may
consider any other mode to help this group of ex-servicemen.
M. Analysis of the allocations made during the Eleventh Plan as
well as during the year 2012-13 for Air force
Recommendation (Para Nos. 36 and 37)
46. The Committee had recommended as under:—
“The Committee find that the allocations made to Air Force during
each year of the Eleventh Plan and for the year 2012-13 are lesser
than the projections both under the Revenue and the Capital Head.
Under the Revenue Head during the year 2012-13 the allocations
have been made for Rs. 17705.81 crore against the projections of
Rs. 19887.73 crore. Similarly, under the Capital Head Rs. 30514.45
crore have been allocated against the projections of Rs. 36950.52
crore. The analysis of the data furnished by the Ministry further
indicates that the allocations to Air Force for Capital Modernization
Budget are quite lesser to the projections made. Out of the total
projections of Rs. 34165 crore, Rs. 28533 crore have been allocated
as per the actual allocation made by the Ministry of Finance. What
is more disturbing is the fact that out of Capital Modernization
Budget 2012-13 to the tune of Rs. 28533 crore, Rs. 26433 crore have
been allocated for the committed liabilities thus leaving only
Rs. 2100 crore i.e. lesser than 10% of the total capital outlay. The
Committee understand that various acquisitions related to capital
modernization of Air Force are in pipeline, the details of which
have been given in the later part of the Report. Moreover, there
are gaps between the required and the existing Air Force fleet. The
obsolescence of the Air Force fleet including the trainer aircraft is
another area of concern.
47. The Ministry in its action taken reply has stated as under:—
“Efforts have been made by the Ministry to meet the requirements
of the Services within the overall allocation provided by the Ministry

23
of Finance. Notwithstanding the same, the requirement of the Air
Force for additional funds shall be reviewed based on the progress
of new and on-going schemes. Additional requirement of funds
shall be projected to the Ministry of Finance as and when the need
arises.”
48. The Committee had recommended as under:—
“The Committee may further like to highlight that Air Force has
acknowledged during the course of deliberations that shortfall in
revenue allocation would eventually compromise operational
preparedness since legacy system require more maintenance. With
regard to shortfall under the capital budget, the Committee have
been informed that it would slow down modernization, delay in
induction of important equipments and resultant asymmetry in
capability with respect to threat perception. The Committee strongly
emphasise that the country cannot afford further delays in the
proposed acquisitions keeping in view the urgency of the matter.
The Committee as such strongly recommend that the adequate
outlay as per the requirement of Air Force under both Capital and
the Revenue Heads should be made available to Air Force. The
additional requirements may be made available during the course
of Revised Estimates stage as well as through supplementary
grants.”
49. The Ministry in its action taken reply has stated as under:—
“Efforts have been made by the Ministry to meet the requirements
of the Services within the overall allocation provided by the Ministry
of Finance. Notwithstanding the same, the requirement of the Air
Force for additional funds shall be reviewed based on the progress
of new and on-going schemes. Additional requirement of funds
shall be projected to the Ministry of Finance as and when the need
arises.
As submitted under para 36, efforts to secure adequate funds from
the Ministry of Finance to ensure desired level of preparedness by
the Air Force, shall be made by the Ministry, if warranted by the
pace of utilisation of funds and progress of new schemes during
the year.”
50. In opinion of the Committee, the reply of the Ministry that
additional requirement of funds shall be projected to the Ministry of
Finance as and when the need arises appears to be casual and routine
in nature. Keeping in mind the fact that only Rs. 2100 crore have been

24
left for new schemes during the financial year 2012-13 and also that
shortfall under the Capital Budget would slow down modernization,
lead to delay in induction of important equipments and resultant
asymmetry in capability with respect to threat perception. The
Committee in their 15th Report had strongly recommended for provision
of adequate outlay under both Capital and Revenue Heads to Air Force.
However instead of giving the details of latest expenditure and
requirement status of the IAF as well as the amount that the Ministry
plans to provide to Air Force during RE stage or through supplementary
Grants, the Ministry has simply assured of projecting additional fund
requirements to the Ministry of Finance as and when the need arises.
The Committee, in this case, reiterate their earlier
recommendation to provide adequate funds to Air Force during the
course of RE stage as well as through supplementary grants and the
same may be intimated to the Committee at the time of furnishing
Action Taken Statements.
N. Shortage of aircraft with the Air force
Recommendation (Para Nos. 38 and 39)
51. The Committee had recommended as under:—
“The Committee note that the IAF presently has 34 fighter squadrons
against Govt. sanctioned strength of 42 squadrons. The number of
fighter squadrons is likely to reduce further to 31 during the 12th
Plan period. The representative of the Ministry during the course
of oral evidence further apprised the Committee that by the end
of 14th Plan Air Force aim to reach 40 to 42 Squadrons. The
Committee have been informed that life span of aircraft is defined
in terms of Total Technical Life (TTL) and the normal technical life
of MiG Aircraft ranges from 15 to 40 years from different variants.
The details furnished with regard to fighter aircraft indicates that
most of the aircraft are more than 30 years old. The analysis of the
information furnished by the Ministry further reveal that
MIG-23MF, MIG-23 BN and MIG-25 have stopped flying. T-69/69B
(Trainer), T-75 (BIS) and (BISON), T-77 (BADAL) T-96 (TRISHUL)
are already 40 or more than 40 years old MIG-27, MIG 29 have
more than 25 years of life. Similarly, Mi-25/35, Mi-8 and Mi-17
helicopters are more than 29 years old. The analysis of the data
furnished by the Ministry indicates that the number of fighter
aircraft due for retirement after completion of their technical life
far exceeds the rate at which their replacements can be inducted

25
in the IAF. The different variants of MiG-21s and MiG-27s are being
phased out during the 12th and 13th Plan period and these are
planned to be replaced with Su-30 MKI, Medium Multi Role Combat
Aircraft (MMRCA), Light Combat Aircraft (LCA) and Fifth
Generation Fighter Aircraft (FGFA). It is very much apparent that
the induction process has not been commensurate with the de-
induction process.”
52. The Ministry in its action taken reply has stated as under:—
“The IAF is presently at a critical stage of its capability building
with a large number of projects at various stages of implementation.
The capability building of IAF includes induction of state of the
art modern equipment and also up gradation of the existing aircraft
and systems to boost their operational capabilities and ensure
operational relevance.
A number of procurements are in the pipeline that would enable
increasing the strength of combat squadrons to the desired level
to meet the security challenges. The planned induction of fighter
aircraft include Medium Multi Role Combat Aircraft (MMRCA),
Light Combat Aircraft (LCA), Fifth Generation Fighter Aircraft
(FGFA) and Additional Su-30 MKI. The Medium Multi Role Combat
Aircraft (MMRCA) proposal is at the stage of Contract Negotiation
and induction of the aircraft is planned between 03 to 11 years after
signing of the contract. The Government has entered into an
agreement with the Russian government to jointly develop a Fifth
Generation Fighter Aircraft (FGFA). The FGFA induction in the IAF
is expected from the 13th Plan onwards. With these inductions, the
IAF is likely to reach the strength of 45 squadrons by the end of
the 15th Plan.”
53. The Committee had recommended as under:—
“The Committee are concerned to note the huge gap between the
required and existing strength of Squadrons with the Air Force.
The gap in this regard would be to the extent of 11 Squadrons
during the Twelfth Plan. What is more worrying is the fact that
our fighter aircraft fleet is quite old and is on the verge of phasing
out. Even if the proposed acquisitions are in order and by the
stipulated timeframe, the country would reach to the requisite level
of fleet i.e. 42 Squadrons by the end of the Fourteenth Plan. The
Committee understand from the aforesaid position that the Air
Force capabilities have reached to the level of criticality. There is

26
an urgent need to ensure that at least now our acquisitions are to
be put on the fast track mode. The required Government support
by way of providing requisite allocations and ensuring timely
finalization of the proposals should be provided to the Air Force
so as to address the critical issue of gaps in the Air Force fighter
aircraft fleet.”
54. The Ministry in its action taken reply has stated as under:—
“The IAF has been allotted 28533 crore under the Capital
Acquisitions for the financial year 2012-13. Adequate funds will be
provided to meet the modernization and fleet replenishment
requirements of the IAF.”
55. The Committee during the examination of DFG 2012-13 were
perturbed to note that out of Rs. 28533 crore allocated to Air Force for
modernization, Rs. 26,433 crore have been allocated for Committed
liabilities thus leaving only Rs. 2100 crore for new schemes i.e. less
than 10 per cent of the outlay. The Committee observe that meager
allocations on one hand and depleting strength of squadron on the
other hand highlight inadequate planning and criticality as was pointed
out in the 15th Report of the Committee. As such the Committee desire
that the Ministry should provide details of budgetary allocations
provided to Air Force under ‘Modernization Head’ and also specifically
against ‘New Schemes’ through supplementary grants or additional
grants at the time of furnishing Action Taken Statements.
O. Accidents in air force and the issue of deficiency of trainer aircraft
and simulators in Air force
Recommendation (Para Nos. 40 to 44)
56. The Committee had recommended as under:—
“The Committee during the course of examination of Demands for
Grants of the previous year had observed that out of 946 MiG
aircraft, 476 MiG aircraft i.e. more than 50 per cent had met with
accidents.
The existing strength of trainer aircraft and simulators as furnished
by the Ministry indicates that out of 434 trainer aircraft inducted
which include HPT 32, Kiran and Hawks, 255 are presently available.
The data furnished further indicates that except the Hawks, the

27
remaining training aircrafts are very old. HPT 32 has life of
28 years and Kiran has already completed 39 years of life.”
57. The Ministry in its action taken reply has stated as under:—
“ A contract has been signed on 24 May, 2012 to procure 75 Basic
Trainer Aircraft from M/s. Pilatus. The aircraft are expected to be
delivered from January, 2013 to November, 2015. Further additional
40 Hawks contract for IAF, are expected to be delivered from
2013 to 2016.”
58. The Committee had recommended as under:—
“The aforesaid scenario reveals critical deficiency of the trainer
aircraft. With regard to simulators, out of 46 simulators, 16 are not
operational due to grounding/undergoing phasing out process
which leaves the availability to just 30 simulators. The aforesaid
critical deficiency of trainer aircraft and simulators is resulting into
inadequate training to fighter pilots leading to loss of life of the
trained pilots which is a great loss to the families and the country
as a whole. What has added to the criticality on the issue of trainer
aircraft is grounding of HPT32 after the fatal accident since
31st July, 2009 resulting into the situation whereby Indian Air Force
does not have a basic trainer aircraft. So far as the issue of
procurement of the basic trainer aircraft is concerned, the Committee
understand that the procurement process started in the year 2009
but due to various technicalities and some anonymous and some
actual representations from one of the losing vendors resulted into
delay in acquisition of the trainer aircraft.”
59. The Ministry in its action taken reply has stated as under:—
“Simulators
The procurement of simulators is now part of the contract for
procurement of all trainer aircraft viz., the Advanced Jet Trainer,
the Intermediate Jet Trainer and the Basic Trainer Aircraft. These
Simulators are scheduled to be commissioned by the financial year
2016-17.
Basic Trainer Aircraft
The contract for the procurement of 75 Basic Trainer Aircraft (BTA)
from M/s. Pilatus, Switzerland was signed on 24 May 2012. As per

28
the contract, the delivery of the first aircraft was scheduled in August
2013 and the deliveries were to be completed by August 2016.
However, delivery of the first aircraft is now expected by January
2013 and the last aircraft by November 2015.
An additional 106 Basic Trainer Aircraft are proposed to be designed
and developed by M/s. Hindustan Aeronautics Limited.”
60. The Committee had recommended as under:—
“With regard to the existing position, the Committee have been
apprised that contract acquisition with regard to Pilatus PC-7
Mark-II with the manufacturer has been done. When asked about
the expected delivery, the Committee have been informed that this
is one of the widely used aircraft elsewhere in the world and the
manufacturer would start delivery Pilatus PC-7 Mark-II in 18 months
onwards.”
61. The Ministry in its action taken reply has stated as under:—
“The contract for the procurement of 75 Basic Trainer Aircraft (BTA)
from M/s. Pilatus, Switzerland was signed on 24 May 2012. As per
the latest status, delivery of these aircraft are expected to commence
from January 2013.”
62. The Committee had recommended as under:—
“The Committee have further been apprised that in the absence of
the basic trainer aircraft, Kiran aircraft are being presently used for
training of pilots at stage I, fighter pilots at stage-II are under trainee
flying instructors. Further, it has emerged during the course of
deliberations that the training requirement on basic training the
course of deliberations that the training requirement on basic trainer
aircraft are being compensated by increasing the training hours at
stage-II and simulators. The Committee further note that with the
phasing out of HPT 32 now the remaining trainer aircraft are Kiran
and Hawks. Out of 234 Kiran aircraft inducted so far only 81 aircraft
are presently available. Not only that the Kiran aircraft was inducted
in 1973 and as such may be having life of 39 years. Contract for
additional 40 Hawks aircraft have been signed on 23 July, 2010 and
the aircraft would be inducted between July, 2013 to March, 2016.”
63. The Ministry in its action taken reply has stated as under:—
“ A total of 66 Hawk Advanced Jet Trainer have already been
delivered to the IAF. Further, a contract for additional 40 Hawk

29
aircraft was signed with M/s. Hindustan Aeronautics Limited in
2010 and delivery of these additional aircraft is scheduled to be
completed by 2016.”
64. The Committee had recommended as under:—
“The Committee conclude from the aforesaid scenario that the Air
Force has reached to a critical stage with regard to trainer aircraft
and simulators. The grounding of HPT 32 and the ageing of Kiran
aircraft has further worsened the situation thereby compromising
the training requirement of our pilots. The Committee are of the
firm view that there is an urgent need to address the aforesaid
issue immediately. The option of having aircraft on lease from the
countries where we have signed the contract as well as sending our
pilots to the manufacturer country from which we are buying trainer
aircraft emerged as option during the course of deliberations by
the Committee. The Committee emphasize that all these options
need to be explored by the Air Force as well as the Ministry of
Defence. Moreover, all the support by way of outlay should be
provided by the Government. Not only that it should be ensured
that the procurement procedures are put on fast track by addressing
the various hurdles encountered at various stages so as to ensure
that the Air Force at any cost get the Pilatus PC-7 Mark-II aircraft
by the December next year as stated by the representative of Air
Force during the course of deliberations so as to address the urgent
and immediate need of Basic Trainer for Air Force.”
65. The Ministry in its action taken reply has stated as under:—
“The contract for procurement of 75 Basic Trainer Aircraft (BTA)
from M/s. Pilatus of Switzerland was signed on 24 May 2012.
Training of IAF Flying Instructors is now scheduled to commence
from 15 November 2012 and the delivery of the first aircraft is
expected in January 2013. In view of the contract that has since
been finalized, the lease option is no longer required.”
66. The Committee find that the induction of 75 Basic Trainer
Aircraft (BTA) from M/s. Pilatus is to begin from Jan, 2013. In this case
the Committee desire that in the Action Taken Statements, the Ministry
should inform the Committee about the number of Trainers inducted
till then. The Committee would also like to know the status of training
of IAF flying instructors which as per the information given by the
Ministry, was scheduled to commence from 15 November 2012. Also,
the Committee hope that the Ministry would ensure timely delivery
of 40 Hawk aircraft, signed with M/s. Hindustan Aeronautics Limited

30
in 2010, whose delivery is scheduled to start from July 2013 and the
Committee be informed accordingly.
P . Electrical air field lightening system in the remaining Air fields
67. The Committee had recommended as under:—
“The Committee have been apprised that out of 52 air operational
fields, 10 air fields do not have static electrical Air Field Lightening
System (AFLS). During the course of deliberations of Demands for
Grants of the previous year, the Committee had been apprised that
out of 52 operational bases, 8 air field bases do not have electrical
field lightening and regular night operations are not undertaken
from these places. The Committee fail to understand how the
number of air fields not having electrical Air Field Lightening system
can increase from 8 to 10. The Ministry should furnish the
clarification in this regard. Besides, urgent initiative should be taken
to ensure the electrical Air Field Lightening System in the remaining
air fields so that regular night operations can be undertaken from
all the existing air fields.”
68. The Ministry in its action taken reply has stated as under:—
“In addition to the eight airfields without airfield lighting system
(since the last reply given), Air Force Station Phalodi got
operationalised during 2010 which does not have airfield lighting
system. Further, during the Tsunami in 2004, Airfield lighting system
got washed away at Car Nicobar. Case is now being processed for
re-installation of electrical airfield lighting system at Carnicobar
through an alternate vendor. Installation of Airfield lighting system
(AFLS) at all airfields is being undertaken under the Modernization
of Airfield Infrastructure (MAFI) Project.”
69. The Committee have been given to understand that the
Airfield at Car Nicobar has been washed away due to Tsunami in the
year 2004. Here, the Committee fail to understand that how come the
electric system of Airfield at Car Nicobar was functional at the time
of examination of DFG (2011-12) when the reason for its inoperability
during examination of DFG 2012-13 has been apparently given as
washing away of electric system due to Tsunami of 2004. The Committee
would like the Ministry to throw light on this in the Action Taken
Statements. Moreover, the Committee also find it regretful that even
after a lapse of a period of almost eight years, the electric system of

31
Airfield at Car Nicobar could not be restored and would like to be
informed about the specific reasons as to why the said electric system
could not be made functional in eight years. The Committee as such
strongly recommend that the electric system at Car Nicobar air field
should be put back without any further delay of time and also that
the operationalisation of electric system of other Airfields may also be
carried out on priority basis so that optimum use of Airfields could
be made in future.
Q. Budgetary allocations for Navy
Recommendation (Para No. 48)
70. The Committee had recommended as under:—
“The Committee observe from the data furnished by the Ministry
that Navy including Joint Staff is being allocated outlay both under
Revenue and Capital segments lesser than projections during each
of the year of Eleventh Plan. During the year 2012-13, Rs. 12548.02
crore under Revenue segment have been allocated against the
projections of Rs. 15836.71 crore. Under the Capital segment too,
Navy including Joint Staff has been allocated lesser than the
projections. During the year 2012-13, Rs. 24766.42 crore have been
allocated under the Capital head against the projections of
Rs. 28643.19 crore. As in the case of Army and Air Force, substantial
part of the allocations has been allocated to committed liabilities
thereby leaving marginal allocation for the new schemes. As per
the actual allocation of funds by the Ministry of Finance for Capital
Modernization Budget 2012-13, Navy has been allocated just
Rs. 720.82 crore out of the total allocation of Rs. 23252.71 crore.
The information furnished by the Ministry reveal that likely major
inductions of Navy during the year 2012-13 are Aircraft Carrier,
Frigates, offshore patrol vessel and survey catamarans. The
Committee fail to understand how Navy would meet the outlay
required for the new acquisitions with less than 5 per cent of the
total allocations. The Committee as such strongly recommend that
the adequate outlay of Navy should be made available so that the
new acquisitions as well as the proposed acquisitions do not suffer
for want of resources.”
71. The Ministry in its action taken reply has stated as under:—
“Within the overall allocation provided by the Ministry of Finance,
priority has been given to providing adequate funds to meet
the committed liabilities. However, based on the utilisation of

32
funds and the progress of schemes, both new and on-going,
additional funds shall be sought from the Ministry of Finance as
required.”
72. The Committee in their 15th Report had pointed out that
meeting the requirements of new acquisitions with less than 5 per cent
of the total allocations is difficult for the Committee to understand
especially when major inductions for Navy are lined up for the year
2012-13 which include Aircraft Carrier, Frigates, offshore patrol vessel
and survey catamarans. In this regard, the Committee had strongly
recommended that adequate outlay to Navy should be made so that
the new acquisitions as well as the proposed acquisitions do not suffer
for want of resources. However, the reply of the Ministry that priority
has been given to providing adequate funds to meet the committed
liabilities lucidly exposes the outlook of the Ministry that it is presently
interested in maintenance of the current work force and not in
technological augmentation and updation of the service. In this regard,
the Committee strongly desire that the Ministry should lay equal
emphasis on technological advancements, newer acquisitions and
overall development of Navy so that the service gears up for any
challenge in the future. Accordingly passable financial allocations
should be provided by the Government to Navy and the Committee
would like to know the amount earmarked for Navy during Revised
Estimates stage and by way of supplementary and additional grants.
R. Surface Platforms
Recommendation (Para No. 50)
73. The Committee had recommended as under:—
“The Committee understand that the long awaited Aircraft Carrier,
Gorshkov is scheduled to be induced in Indian Navy by December,
2012. The revised cost of Vikramaditya, after re-negotiations, is
2330 MUSD which includes costs towards Refit and Modernisation
of the Ship, Logistic Support for ten years, Training of Ship’s crew
and yard personnel, infrastructure, Service to Indian Specialists,
trials and Documentation. The Committee hope that the Navy
would at last get the Gorshkov Aircraft Carrier during the
targeted year i.e. 2012-13 after extended deadlines resulting into
huge cost overruns. The commissioning of Gorshkov would address
one of the major area to some extent i.e. Aircraft Carrier for the
country.”

33
74. The Ministry in its action taken reply has stated as under:—
“INS Vikramaditya is scheduled to be delivered to Indian Navy in
December, 2012, subj ect to pending trials being completed.”
75. The Ministry has replied that INS Vikramaditya has been
scheduled to be delivered to Indian Navy in December, 2012, subject
to pending trials being completed. The Committee would like to know
whether INS Vikramaditya has been delivered on time and if not then
what are the reasons for delay and also the subsequent schedule of
delivery.
S. Defence Research and Development Organization (DRDO)
Recommendation (Para No. 53)
76. The Committee had recommended as under:—
“The Committee has consistently been expressing concern over the
attrition of scientists from DRDO. The number of scientists who
left DRDO had shown a declining trend since 2009 which was
attributed due to enhancement in salary with Sixth Pay Commission
revision. This trend has reversed during 2011 when 86 scientists
have left DRDO against the number of 63 and 65 during the year
2009 and 2010 respectively. The existing authorization as per
Government orders in 2001 has stated as 33442. Projected
requirement up to 12th plan has been given as 4966. Again the No.
of immediate critical requirement has been given as 1316 which
was to be filled during 11th plan but now would be carried out
to 12th plan.”
77. The Ministry in its action taken reply has stated as under:—
“The effect of increase in salary of DRDO scientists due to
implementation of recommendation of 6th Central Pay Commission
has been gradually declining from 2009. As a result, attrition rate
is increasing. DRDO has been making all efforts to arrest any
attrition of scientists by granting various incentive packages besides
creating excellent work culture at laboratories and amenities in
residential complexes, deputing scientists for higher academic and
professional qualifications, allowing participation in national and
international conferences, symposia, seminars, etc., awarding
talented and deserving scientists on National Science Day, National
Technology Day, etc.

34
The DRDO’s manpower authorization (as per Government order
in 2001) was 33442. This includes scientific, technical and allied
cadres. This manpower was sufficient for carrying out R&D
activities. Over the past few years, due to changed threat perception,
DRDO has been assigned some major R&D work to meet the present
and future security challenges. DRDO’s additional projected
manpower requirements up to 12th Plan was 4966 (including 2776
Scientists and 169 Works Officers). However, based on the advise
of Ministry of Finance, additional manpower requirement being
projected now is confined to the “immediate and unavoidable critical
requirements” only to cater for the ongoing projects being carried
forward to 12th Plan. Thus, DRDO has projected an additional
requirement of 1316 posts (including 1260 Scientists and 56 Works
Officers) as immediate and unavoidable critical requirements to
the Government”.
78. The Committee are given to understand that DRDO has
projected requirement of 1316 posts (including 1260 Scientists and
56 Works Officers) as immediate and hence they want that every effort
should be made to unavoidable critical requirements to the Government
should be filled at the earliest so that this premier research organisation
do not face manpower crunch so as to continue working in developing
indigenously technology to make the country self-reliant.
T. Defence Research and Development Organization (DRDO)
Recommendation (Para No. 55)
79. The Committee had recommended as under:—
“With regard to Kaveri engine the Committee has been informed
that two important milestones of Kaveri project have been
successfully achieved:— Completion of Official Altitude Testing
(OAT) for 73 hours at Central Institute of Aviation Motors (CIAM),
Russia. Flying Test Bed (FTB) trials for 55 hours with IL-76 aircraft
conducted at Gromov Flight Research Institute (GFRI), Russia that
it is planned to commercial flight trials for technology demonstration
of Kaveri Engine with LCA Tejas Mk-I in 3 year time.
The Committee find that after almost 30 years of work of DRDO,
the Tejas could be made operational. And now the Kaveri Engine
is facing lot of difficulties. The Committee hopes that DRDO would
take urgent initiatives to address the various difficulties being
encountered and the Kaveri Engine would be put into operation.
The Committee may also like to recommend that more initiatives

35
with regard to R&D in strategic areas by DRDO need to be taken
to make the country self-reliant under the core technologies required
for our Defence projects.”
80. The Ministry in its action taken reply has stated as under:—
“Kaveri engine project w as sanctioned in 1989 with an estimated
cost of Rs. 383 crore and Probable Date of Completion (PDC) was
1996. Due to enhanced scope and demand of the situation, the cost
was enhanced to Rs. 2839 crore The expenditure incurred so far
in Kaveri engine project is approx. Rs. 1950 crore against financial
ceiling of Rs. 2105 crore. A proposal has been approved by Hon’ble
Raksha Mantri for continuation of Kaveri engine project with
extension of PDC by 48 months from the date of approval given
by the Cabinet Committee on Security (CCS) with an additional
cost of Rs. 595 crore Thus the estimated cost would be
Rs. 2700 crore (2105 crore present ceiling + 595 crore proposed
enhanced cost). The proposal has been put up for approval of CCS.
DRDO has already taken initiative to address and resolve various
technical and technological difficulties. LCA, Tejas, requires 90kN
thrust class engine to meet its operational requirement, whereas,
Kaveri engine does not fully meet this requirement. Therefore, it
has been decided to use variants of Kaveri engine to power
unmanned Air Vehicle and also for marine applications.
Since the thrust requirement of LCA has been enhanced to 90kN,
Kaveri engine will be utilized only for “Technology Demonstration”
in LCA, Tejas Mk-I with spin off benefits.”
81. The Committee are surprised to find that the Kaveri Engine
project which was sanctioned way back in 1989 has not seen the light
of the day. There has been a tremendous cost overrun from Rs. 383
crore to Rs. 2105 crore cost of which Rs. 1950 crore have already been
incurred. The Committee are given to understand that the continuation
of project has received the approval from Hon’ble Raksha Mantri with
an additional cost of Rs. 595 crore. The Committee are of the view that
the sheer lack of coordination among the users and the developers is
quite evident in this project. That is why the project is allowed to be
lingered on for such a long period and without getting an expected
outcome. Meanwhile, there is a question mark as to its efficacy. It has
been stated by the Ministry that Kaveri Engine does not meet the
operational requirement and that is why it has augmented the thrust
requirement of LCA, Tejas and Kaveri engine will be utilized only for

36
technology demonstrations in Tejas , Mk-I with spin off benefits. In
the light of the above the Committee, after considering that an huge
amount has been incurred on the project, want this Ministry to make
all out efforts to clear every hurdle in the way of Kaveri Engines so
that it is optimally utilized for technology demonstration in LCA within
stipulated time. They may like to be apprised of the developments in
this regard from time to time.

37
CHAPTER II
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS, WHICH HAVE BEEN
ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT
Recommendation (Para No. 1)
Before the examination of Demands for Grants 2012-13 was taken
into consideration by the Committee at the sitting held on 4th April, 2012
some Members of the Committee raised the issue of controversial reporting
of Army exercise held in foggy weather during January, 2012 by a leading
Newspaper. The Defence Secretary at the sitting assured to place the
detailed factual position at the next sitting of the Committee to be
convened on 9th April, 2012. The Secretary accordingly at the sitting held
on 9th April, 2012 submitted the factual position before the Committee,
the details of which have been given in Part 1 of the Report. As per the
details furnished by the Secretary, the movement of troops was purely
for training purposes aimed at refining the mobilization drills and ensuring
operational preparedness of the Army despite adverse weather conditions.
On the issue of seeking Ministry of Defence’s permission or Intimating
to Ministry of Defence about such movement, he also substantiated that
to the best of his knowledge there is no such Government order. As
stated by the Secretary media report was based on wrong inferences,
surmises and conjectures and is strongly dismissed.
The Committee while taking note of the satisfactory explanation
given by the Defence Secretary regret the reporting by a leading
newspaper, particularly when it relates to the routine exercises of the
troops for ensuring the operational preparedness.
Reply of the Government
It is evident from the report of the Committee, that no
recommendations/observations have been suggested by them for Ministry
of Defence. Hence the reply may please be treated as ‘NIL’.
Recommendation (Para No. 2)
The Committee note that Budget Estimates (net) for the year
2012-13 are for Rs. 1,93,407.29 crore which comprises of Rs. 1,13,828.66 crore

38
as revenue outlay and Rs. 79,578.63 crore as capital outlay against the
RE allocations of Rs. 1,70,937 crore of the previous year. Although there
is an increase in the Defence budget in absolute term, the analysis of the
data with regard to the growth of Defence budget indicates that the
percentage growth during the Eleventh Plan which was highest during
the year 2008-09 and 2009-10 i.e. 24.59% and 24.13% respectively declined
to 8.70% during the year 2010-11. The percentage growth slightly improved
during the year 2011-12 to 10.91% and the estimates for the
year  2012-13 indicates the growth of 13.15%. If the Defence expenditure
as percentage of GDP is taken into consideration, again the growth is
declining since the year 2009-10. During the year 2009-10 the growth was
2.20% which declined to 1.92% during the year 2011-12 as per the Revised
Estimates and the allocations at Budget Estimates stage of 2011-12 indicates
the growth as 1.90%. The Defence expenditure as the percentage of total
Central Government expenditure as such has declined from 13.84% in
2009-2010 to 12.97% as per the Budget Estimates of 2012-13. The Defence
expenditure as compared to some of the European and neighbouring
countries, the data of which was made available to the Committee by
the Ministry indicates that the Defence expenditure as percentage of GDP
in India is lowest as compared to U.S., China, France, U.K., Russia and
Pakistan. Moreover, the military expenditure as percentage of GDP in all
these countries excepting Pakistan is increasing over the years.
Reply of the Government
The Ministry has been making all efforts to ensure that adequate
funds are made available by the Ministry of Finance to meet the
requirement of the Defence Services.
Beginning with an allocation of Rs. 96,000.00 crores at the beginning
of the 11th Plan, the allocation has increased to Rs. 1,93,407.29 crores in
2012-13.
(Please see para No. 7 of Chapter-I of the Report)
Recommendation (Para No. 3)
The Committee have consistently been recommending in the reports
on Demands for Grants for increasing capacity of the Ministry for the
utilisation of outlay so as to justify the demand of higher allocation,
particularly under the Capital section. The Committee appreciate that
during the year 2010-11 the allocations earmarked have been utilized

39
fully. So far as the expenditure position of the Ministry during the year
2011-12 is concerned, the Ministry has furnished the details up to February,
2012 whereby the expenditure for the three Services ranges between
80 to 90% up to February 2012. The Committee hope that the outlay
earmarked for 2011-12 would have been fully utilized.
Reply of the Government
As per the March (Final) compilation received from CGDA, the
allocated funds have been utilised and as against a Revised Estimates
(RE) and Final Grant of Rs. 1,70,936.81 crores, the total expenditure
was Rs. 1,70,913.28 crores, which constituted 99.99% of RE and
Final Grant.
Recommendation (Para No. 4)
The Committee’s examination further indicates that there is huge
variation in BE Estimates, BE Allocations, RE Estimates and RE Allocations
during each year of the Eleventh Plan. Not only that there are gaps
between the projected and the allocated outlay. Each of the services is
getting allocations that are lesser to the projections during each of the
year. The Committee observe that there has been slight variations in the
Revenue Capital ratio during Eleventh Plan. During the year 2008-09 the
Revenue Capital ratio was 55:45. 45 as the Capital ratio was maximum
during the year 2008-09 which declined to 39 during the year 2009-10.
Again the Capital ratio has slightly improved to 42% during the year
2011-12. During the year 2012-13 the estimated Capital ratio is 41%. The
Committee find from the aforesaid Revenue Capital ratio analysis that
the Government has not been able to match the Capital ratio of 45% of
the year 2008-09.
The Committee may like to emphasize that India is surrounded by
difficult neighbours and as such there is an urgent need to allocate
adequate outlay to the Services, particularly for the Capital schemes.
Moreover, as has been observed by th e Committee there are huge gaps
between the required and the existing force levels, armaments, equipment,
aircrafts, etc., the details of which have been given in the Service-wise
examination. Besides, the modernization programmes of the Services,
Ordnance Factories, DPSUs are going on for which substantial allocations
are required. On the Research front there is an urgent need to give more
emphasis so as to attain the level of self-sufficiency in defence
procurements.

40
Reply of the Government
The allocation made for the Defence Services has been less than
the projected requirement. Nevertheless, the allocation has increased
steadily from Rs. 96000.00 crores in the beginning of the 11th Plan to
Rs. 193407.29 crores in the beginning of the 12th Plan. Within the overall
increase, the capital allocation has grown from Rs. 41922.00 crores to
Rs. 79578.63 crores in 2012-13.
(Please see para No. 10 of Chapter-I of the Report)
Recommendation (Para No. 5)
The Committee feel that there is an urgent need to build the Defence
capabilities to face any of the challenges including the worst scenario of
two front war. As such the Committee strongly recommend that the
requisite allocations should be made available to the Ministry of Defence
for their different programmes. Besides, the Ministry of Defence on their
part should also build capacities to utilize the allocated resources.
Reply of the Government
As submitted in response to recommendation No. 4, the allocation
for Ministry of Defence has increased significantly from Rs. 96000.00
crore in 2007-08 to Rs. 193407.29 crore in 2012-13. Nevertheless, the
Ministry shall continue to strive to seek allocations from the Ministry of
Finance, commensurate with the projected requirement of the Services.
Recommendation (Para No. 7)
The Committee during the course of deliberations on Demands for
Grants have been apprised that the year 2012-13 is being celebrated as
the Veteran Year. The Committee appreciate the aforesaid initiative of the
Ministry which is really a tribute to the Services rendered by the Defence
personnel and to their sacrifices made for the sake of the country. In this
connection, the Committee may like to highlight that the Committee in
the earlier reports have consistently been raising issues related to the
welfare of ex-servicemen and their families. Such issues include providing
extended pensionary benefits to the ex-servicemen leading to One Rank
one Pension, enhancing the financial assistance and providing facilities
like ECHS, Canteen Stores Department (CSD) canteen to World War I
and II veterans who retired pre-independence Period, maintaining the
date with regard to the benefits provided to war widows, reviewing the

41
financial and other benefits provided to them, providing facilities/
concessions in rail and air travel to Sena Medal awardees i.e. Sena/Nao/
Vayu, at par with the winners of police medals. The Committee strongly
recommended that the aforesaid recommendations should be implemented
during the current year, particularly when the year has been dedicated
to the veterans. The implementation of the recommendations of the
Committee would go a long way in recognizing the services rendered/
sacrifices made by the Defence veterans. The Committee also desire that
to commemorate veteran year, the Ministry should take initiatives to
release a stamp and a First Day Cover.
Reply of the Government
Following measures have been taken to improve the welfare of
Ex-servicemen/War Veterans:—
(a) The Government has set up a Committee under the
chairmanship of Cabinet Secretary to examine various aspects
relating to pay as well as pension related grievances of Armed
forces and Ex-Servicemen (ESM) in a time bound manner.
(b) World War veterans have been made entitled to the facility
of CSD Canteen.
(c) As regard the financial assistance to World War veterans, the
State Governments were requested to enhance the amount of
assistance to the minimum level of Rs. 3000 per month. Some
State Governments have responded positively. The matter is
being pursued with State Governments who are paying less.
(d) The Government has recently revised the rates of financial
assistance for various schemes under RMDF ( e.g. Penury
Grant, Education Grant, Disabled Children Grant), War
Memorial Hostels Grant for wards of ESM.
(e) Under PMSS, 4000 scholarships are being awarded to the
wards of ESM for pursuing higher professional courses. A
large section of ESM/dependents are availing benefits under
various schemes of RMDF every year.
(f) For collection/maintenance of data in respect of beneficiaries,
KSB/DGR have been requested to collect the same through
RSBs/ZSBs. The collection of data is a lengthy time consuming
exercise as registration with the ZSBs by the ESM/dependents
is voluntary.

42
(g) The concessions in rail/air travel are in place to recipients of
Gallantry Awards/Disabled officers/War widows.
(h) Ministry has intensified efforts to expand the network of
ECHS throughout the country. This facility has also been
extended to Indian Ex-servicemen settled in Nepal. In addition
to the existing 227 polyclinics, 73 new polyclinics have been
operationalised.
(i) To commemorate the Veterans Year, the Ministry has taken
up the matter with Department of Posts for release of a stamp
and a First Day Cover.
Recommendation (Para No. 8)
The Committee have consistently been recommending the Ministry
to prepare Outcome Budget and lay the same in Parliament alongwith
the Demands for Grants. Even when the issue is pursued year after year,
the Ministry has not been able to prepare the Outcome Budget document.
What is more disturbing is the fact that the Ministry is not keeping the
assurance given during each year in this regard. The Committee have
now been informed that the Outcome Budget documents for the identified
organisations for the year 2012-13 were ready in time. However, upon
examination it was felt that the same need to be refined further.
The Committee have been apprised that all the allocations of the
Ministry are under the non-Plan segment and as such are not subject to
scrutiny by Planning Commission. The Committee may again like to
emphasize that Outcome Budget is an important document to ensure
Executive accountability to Parliament. Not only that the achievements
of the Ministry are scrutinized by virtue of being quantified by this
important document.
The Committee observe from the aforesaid scenario that the delay
on the part of the Ministry is just to avoid Parliamentary scrutiny as well
as the public scrutiny thereto Outcome Budget being a public document.
Not only that the schemes are not covered by the rigorous Zero Based
Budgeting exercise being done by Planning Commission, the reasons being
whole Defence allocation as non-plan, not subject to the scrutiny by the
Planning Commission. The Committee again reiterate their
recommendation and would like the Ministry to prepare Outcome Budget
at least from the year 2013-14 onwards. Not only that the Ministry of
Defence should explain in details the rationale of allocating all the outlays

43
of the Ministry of Defence under the non-Plan segment. The concrete
result oriented measures in this regard should be taken and the Committee
apprised accordingly.
Reply of the Government
The Ministry has been taking steps to implement the concept of
Outcome budgeting. As a part of this, Outcome Budget documents for
the year 2012-13 were prepared by the Naval Dockyards, DG NCC and
DG MAP . The Ministry is also making attempts to identify more
organisations that can be brought under the ambit of outcome budgeting.
It is proposed to place the Outcome Budget for NCC, MAP before
Parliament for financial year 2013-14.
In so far as issue of the allocations for Ministry of Defence being
provided under the Non-Plan segment is concerned it may be stated that
Plan allocation is essentially expected to realise the development potential
of the economy’s productive capacities. Thus it is typically the
development/welfare oriented schemes that are classified as plan
expenditure and subject to scrutiny by the Planning Commission. In so
far as Ministry of Defence is concerned, the expenditure relates to an
essential service of the Government and is distinct from the development/
welfare oriented schemes falling under the Planning Commission.
However, the fact that Defence Capital outlay is funded under the Non-
Plan segment, should not in any manner be taken to convey a lack of
planning in prioritizing and projecting of expenditure. Infact, Capital
Acquisition expenditure, which accounts for over 80% of the capital outlay,
is as per the Services Capital Acquisition Plan which is a subset of the
Five Year Plan which in turn is a part of the 15 year Long Term Integrated
Perspective Plan ( LTIPP).
The fact that Defence Budget is entirely non-plan budget and is
therefore not subject to scrutiny by the Planning Commission, should not
be taken to mean that the basic tenets of Zero based budgeting are not
being adhered to by the Ministry. Budgetary projections are finalized by
the Ministry/SHQs after rigorous scrutiny within the Services
Headquarters and at various levels in the Ministry, within the ceilings
fixed by the Ministry of Finance.
Recommendation (Para No. 9)
The Committee have consistently been raising serious concern over
non-finalisation of long-term plans which have resulted into adhocism

44
in the planning process. The Tenth and Eleventh Plan could not be
finalized during the whole Plan period. There was considerable delay in
finalization of LTIPP 2012-27. The Committee appreciate that at last the
consistent pursuance has yielded results and LTIPP 2012-27 and Twelth
Plan have been approved by DAC. The Committee hope that with the
finalization of the Five Year Plan and the LTIPP 2012-27 the Ministry
would be in a better position to make the strategies to build the requisite
capabilities of the Services keeping in view the challenges.
Reply of the Government
The observations of the Committee have been noted for guidance.
(Please see para No. 16 of Chapter-I of the Report)
Recommendation (Para No. 10)
It has come out during the course of the deliberations on Demands
for Grants 2012-13 that there is shortage of ammunitions, aircraft,
armaments and artillery and other force level with our three Services.
The detailed examination in this regard has been undertaken in the later
part of the Report. The Committee understand that there are long
procurement procedures involved in acquisitions. Not only that there is
considerable delay in procurement leading to time and cost overruns.
The Committee during the course of deliberations have been
apprised that as per the existing financial delegation of powers, the three
Chiefs have the range of Rs. 50 crore. The issue of increasing the delegation
of financial powers in this regard to Rs. 150 or 200 crore was discussed
in the recent meetings with the Raksha Mantri as informed by the
representative of the Ministry during the course of deliberations. The
Committee consider that the aforesaid suggestion to increase the
delegation of financial powers of the three Chiefs merit consideration
and immediate decision in this regard should be taken which, to some
extent, would help to speed up acquisition/purchases, particularly, in the
context of Army where the acquisitions are smaller. Besides, urgent
initiatives need to be taken to simplify and speed up the procurement
procedure in consultation with the Services.
Reply of the Government
A proposal has been formulated and is being processed for the
approval of Competent Authority for enhancement of the financial powers

45
delegated to the Service HQrs. from Rs. 50 crore to Rs. 150 crore to
sanction capital acquisition proposals included in the Annual Acquisition
Plans of the three Services, as per the recommendation of the Standing
Committee.
The objective of Defence Procurement Procedure (DPP) is to ensure
expeditious procurement of the requirements of the Armed Forces in
terms of capabilities sought and timeframe prescribed by optimally
utilizing the allocated budgetary resources. The DPP is reviewed regularly
on the basis of experience gained during its implementation and feedback
received from the Services and other stakeholders. Some of the
amendments incorporated in DPP-2011 to expedite and streamline the
procurement process are as follows:—
• Indian Entity to undertake the absorption of Transfer of
Technology (ToT) for Maintenance to be pre-decided during
SCAPCHC and approved by DAC.
• Delegation of authority to Vice Chiefs of respective Services
for granting additional 30 days grace period (over and above
the existing provision of 15 days), for a vendor to produce
equipment for trials.
• Simplified procedure for the vendor to submit ‘Integrity Pact
and Bank Guarantee (IPBG)’ which is directly linked to the
validity of commercial offer.
• The erstwhile practice of a vendor submitting Performance
Bond and Warranty Bond combined into a ‘Performance-cum-
Warranty Bond’.
• A stringent monitoring mechanism instituted to ensure
pragmatic timeline is adhered to for each procurement case.
This envisages increased accountability at all levels.
• The Exchange Rate Variation (ERV) clause made applicable
to all Indian vendors when they compete with their foreign
counterparts under the “Buy Global” category, thus providing
a level playing field for DPSUs and Indian Private Sector
Companies.
• The scope of Offset Policy Guidelines expended to include
“civil aerospace”, “internal security” and “training aids”
within the ambit of eligible products and services for
discharge of offset obligations to provide a wide range of

46
offset opportunities to vendors participating in defence
procurements and encourage building up of indigenous
manufacturing capability in crucial areas.
• The existing Chapter-III on “Ship Building” revised to include
guidelines for shipbuilding on competitive as well as
nomination basis. Various clauses for strengthening of the
contracting mechanism, linking payments to stages of
construction for ships/yard crafts, including modular
construction included in the revised Chapter-III. These
changes have been incorporated to provide a level playing
field to the DPSU Shipyards and Private Sector and promote
indigenization for induction of ships, submarines and yard
crafts for the Indian Navy and Coast Guard.
Recommendation (Para No. 11)
Some important suggestions emerged during the course of the
deliberations to address the issue of delay in acquisitions. One such
suggestion was preparing a databank for the acquisition of our Services
to which the Secretary acknowledged that some start has been made on
the part of the Ministry. In this connection, the Committee may strongly
like to emphasize that some structured mechanism to have the databank
for the future acquisitions for our Services should be created by the
Ministry, particularly, when LTPP 2012—27 has now been approved. The
respective Services should be requested to prepare a long term inventory
with regard to their requirement and a databank should be prepared and
maintained by the Ministry in this regard. The aforesaid mechanism would
save much of the time that is involved in preparing the desired acquisitions
and then getting approvals.
Reply of the Government
In accordance with the provisions of Defence Procurement
Procedure (DPP)-2011, the acquisition of Weapon systems and equipment
for the Armed Forces flows from the Long Term Integrated Perspective
Plan (LTIPP). The current LTIPP spells out the capability desired to be
achieved by the Armed Forces over 15 years duration (2012—27). The
LTIPP is translated into specific assets to be acquired, in the form of
Services Capital Acquisition Plan (SCAP), covering a five year period.
From the SCAP, a list of equipment and weapon systems required
to be procured immediately is listed in the form of the Annual Acquisition

47
Plan (AAP). The AAP covers a period of 2 years and rolls over to the
next financial year. The AAP is prepared and prioritized in consonance
with the Budget allocation for capital acquisitions.
Thus, there exists an in built system for maintaining long-term and
short-term list of desired capital acquisitions for the Armed Forces. The
data base for capital procurements is maintained by each Service and is
being shared on an ‘as required’ basis between the three Services including
the Coast Guard. Collegiate vetting of capital acquisition proposals in
forums like SCAPCC, SCAPCHC, DPB and DAC provides full opportunity
for the Armed forces to exchange information at various stages of the
capital acquisition process.
Recommendation (Para No. 13)
The Committee find that CBI had reported against six companies
and these companies have been blacklisted for ten years. With the
blacklisting of these companies, a difficult situation has arisen due to
technology being rare and with few manufacturers internationally. For
example, on the issue of procurement of L-70 gun replacement, according
to Army the best gun is made by Rhine metals Air Defence (RAD), Zurich
and the said company is one of the blacklisted companies. Further, the
problems with regard to tanks ammunitions have further compounded
due to blacklisting of IMI, Israel. The Committee observe that the
blacklisting of the companies ultimately result into blacklisting of the
rarest technologies and the solutions in this regard need to be found. One
such solution is to give more focus to defence R&D in an integrated
approach involving DRDO, premier Research institutions, Defence PSUs,
Ordnance Factories, premier academic technical institutions and private
sector enterprises in the R&D process so as to find our own solutions
to the rarest available technologies as well as in manufacturing quality
defence products at competitive prices. The Committee may like to
emphasize that investigations with regard to the blacklisted companies
should be expedited so that it reaches to the logical conclusion and the
offenders are penalized which would be a deterrent for others. More
emphasis on pre CVC vetting of defence procurements can be another
mechanism to address the aforesaid issue.
Reply of the Government
While blacklisting of some companies sometimes results in non-
availability of rarest technologies but at the same time it provides an

48
opportunity for indigenous development of critical technologies and act
as deterrent for others against indulging in unethical practices in business
dealings.
Ordnance Factories, DPSUs have been undertaking R&D activities
on their own as well as they are working in tandem with DRDO on many
projects. The report of the Kelkar committee on review of Defence
Procurement Procedure had recommended an integrated approach
involving Users, Ministry of Defence and the Industry in the ‘Make’
procedure. The recommendations of the committee have been accepted
by the Government for implementation.
The investigations with regard to blacklisted companies are further
being carried out by CBI and necessary action shall be taken in accordance
with law and as per the decision of the Court of Law.
In so far as defence procurements are concerned, an elaborate
mechanism already exists as outlined in Defence Procurement Procedure
for maintaining highest degree of probity and public accountability,
transparency in operations, free competition and impartiality. The DPP
is also amended from time to time keeping in tune with contemporary
practices and to facilitate defence procurements in a logical and transparent
manner. Thus the need for an additional layer of check through pre CVC
vetting of defence procurements is not felt.
(Please see para No. 22 of Chapter-I of the Report)
Recommendation (Para No. 15)
The Committee are concerned to note that in continuation of the
grace irregularities reported with regard to defence land during the
previous years which include Adarsh and Sukna land cases, the year
2011-12 has not been free from such irregularities. Again, three
irregularities of land cases as per the information furnished by the Ministry
which include Case of B.No. 8A, Lothian Road, Pune, Srinagar – case
of issue of NOC and Jodhpur Case have been reported thus raising
question mark on the system of management of defence land. The
Committee have selected the subject ‘Management of Defence Land’ during
the year 2012-13 and is undertaking examination in consultation with
various stakeholders. The Committee may finalize their recommendations
after detailed deliberations. Here the Committee may like to strongly
recommend that the investigation in the Defence land issues should be

49
expedited and the offenders penalized which would be a deterrent to the
land Mafia which has eyes on the precious defence land.
Reply of the Government
The enquiry into the case of B.No. 8A, Lothian Road, Pune, has
been entrusted to CBI. The Srinagar-case relating to issue of NOC has
also been referred to CBI to enquire into the entire matter. In this case
one Defence Estates Officer and a SDO have been suspended and
investigation by CBI is under progress. As regards the Jodhpur case,
Ministry had constituted a Joint Survey team to conduct a survey of
Defence land at Jodhpur in a time bound manner. The report
submitted was considered by the Ministry and Director General of Defence
Estate has been further directed to submit a report on certain additional
points.
Recommendation (Para No. 16)
The Committee observe that whereas the Ministry of Defence has
recognized the need for development of infrastructure as well as
operational capabilities to achieve desired Defence preparedness,
particularly in the context of the huge undergoing infrastructure
construction activities of our neighboring countries including China, the
delay in forest and wild life clearances has been an impediment in this
regard. The Committee in the context of examination of the subject
“Construction of roads in border areas of the country” as well as during
the course of examination of Demands for Grants have consistently been
raising the issue of delay in forest and wildlife clearances. In spite of
the efforts being made by the Ministry to fast track the said clearances,
there are 12 Nos. of forest/wildlife cases pending for want of clearance
from Ministry of Environment and Forests for construction of Indo-China
Border Roads (ICBR) and 160 Nos. for other than ICBRs. The Committee
may again like to emphasize that the strategic infrastructure need special
dispensation with regard to forest/wild life clearances. The Ministry
accordingly should take up the matter with the State Governments and
Ministry of Environment and Forests so that the clearances are in place
followed by construction of roads within the stipulated timeframe.
Reply of the Government
Nodal officers of BRO at the Project/Task Force levels as well as
the MoEF and State Forest Department have been nominated and are in

50
regular liaison through various meetings to expedite Forest/Wildlife
clearance cases. The cases are closely monitored at higher level by holding
meeting at MoD with the nodal officers of concerned State Government.
A review meeting was held at MoD on 17.04.2012 under the Chairmanship
of Additional Secretary, MoD to expedite clearance of pending forest
clearance cases. The matter is regularly taken up with MoEF and State
Governments for expediting the pending forest clearances.This has yielded
positive results. With the constant close monitoring, out of total 99 cases
involved in 61 (ICBRs) roads, final approval has been accorded in
79 cases and 1st stage approval in 9 cases and only 11 cases are now
pending and are in progress at various stages. Similarly out of 160 Nos.
for other than ICBRs, at present 157 Nos. remain balance and are in
progress at various stages.
An Interlocutor y Application was filed for exemption of taking
Forest/Wildlife cases within the 50 Km. of International Border/LAC with
Hon’ble Supreme Court but it was turned down by the Hon’ble Supreme
Court vide Court Order dated 23.09.2011 in the light of the measures
taken by MoEF to expedite the Forest/Wildlife clearance cases being
adequate.
The first tentative Draft of the Strategic Border Infrastructure
(Development) Bill, 2011, with comments of the concerned stakeholders
was sent by MHA to Ministry of Law and Justice, who after examining
the same brought out the Second Working Draft of the Strategic
Border Infrastructure (Development) Bill, 2011. The Second Working
draft has been examined by MHA and the Draft Bill is being
fine-tuned.
Recommendation (Para No. 17)
The Committee from the information furnished by the Ministry
note that in respect of 6 tunnels on our borders, preparation of Detailed
Project Reports (DPR), carrying of feasibility study is under progress. In
addition Army has endorsed construction of 11 more tunnels in Arunachal
Pradesh, Sikkim and Jammu and Kashmir which could be taken up
subsequently. Besides 1 tunnel is under construction at Rohtang Pass on
Manali-Sarchu-Leh road and completion date is February 2015. The
Committee strongly recommend that all the desired initiatives should be
taken to fast track DPRs, feasibility study in respect of the aforesaid
tunnels which are at various stages of approval so that the construction
work can commence expeditiously.

51
Reply of the Government
Ministry has taken note of the concern/suggestion of the Committee
and necessary initiatives are being taken to fast track of DPRs and feasibility
study in respect of the tunnels which are in progress at various stages.
Further a Steering Committee (of MoD) is closely and regularly monitoring
the progress of Rohtang Tunnel (8.80 Km) and all efforts are being made
to complete it in stipulated time i.e Feb 2015. By 9 July 2012, 2.83 Km.
progress (heading) has been achieved.
Recommendation (Para No. 18)
The Committee understand that the issue of funding for strategic
roads and required rail infrastructure on our borders is another area
which need to be addressed immediately. The Secretary during the course
of deliberations has apprised that Railways is not being provided any
additional allocation by the Planning Commission for upgrading rail
infrastructure on our borders. There are technical issues involved. The
total outlay of Defence being non-plan, outlay for additional rail road
infrastructure cannot be provided from the Planning Commission. The
Committee deplore the aforesaid position whereby the issue of allocation
of outlay for our strategic needs is struck due to the aforesaid bureaucratic
hurdles. The Committee strongly emphasize that the issue need to
be taken immediately at the highest level. The Cabinet Secretary,
Prime Minister’s Office (PMO), the Finance Ministry should be conveyed
the concerns of the Committee adequately. The Committee also desire
that feasibility to fund the border roads through Pradhan Mantri Gram
Sadak Yojana (PMGSY) should also be looked into. The adequate outlay
for construction of the requisite infrastructure which includes strategic
roads, rail, tunnels, etc. should be ensured by coordination between the
various Ministries and the intervention at the highest level. Besides, The
Committee may also like to emphasize that the rail tracks should be
constructed after taking specifications from and in consultation with the
Army so that there is no compromise on the issue of speed of the trains.
The Committee would like to hear about the concrete initiatives taken
in this regard followed by the positive results.
Reply of the Government
(a) At present there is no constraint of funds for construction
of Strategic Roads by Border Road Organisation (BRO).Earlier
the fund allocation to BRO was inadequate. The scenario has

52
changed and sufficient funds are being allocated now. There
is no need for funding border roads through PMGSY.
(b) Ministry has taken up the funding of Strategic Railway
projects with Cabinet Secretariat to intervene in the
matter by asking Planning Commission or Ministry of Finance
to make available dedicated non-lapsable funds to Railway
Board for development of fourteen (14) Strategic Railway
lines.
The alignment of Strategic Railway lines by army commands has
been done in consonance with respective Regional Railway Boards.
(Please see para No. 25 of Chapter-I of the Report)
Recommendation (Para No. 19)
The Committee note that the Army has been allocated
Rs. 77327.03 crore against the projection of Rs. 83861.62 crore during the
year 2012-13 under the revenue section. Under the capital section the
Army during the said year has been allocated Rs. 19237.80 crore against
the projection of Rs. 28234.60 crore. If the analysis of the Army outlay
in terms of committed outlay and new schemes is done, the Committee
find that the projected requirement for capital modernization budget for
the year 2012-13 was Rs. 15407.84 crore. The share of committed liability
in the projected capital modernization budget is Rs. 5552.63 crore. For
new schemes the projected requirement is Rs. 9855.21 crore. However,
based on the actual allocation of funds by the Ministry of Finance, the
total allocation for capital modernization budget for Army is
13724.14 crore out of which Rs. 5552.63 crore is for committed liabilities
thus leaving only Rs. 2500 crore for new schemes. Moreover, the
Committee are unable to comprehend how the proposed initiatives of
the Ministry to decentralize financial delegation of power thereby
increasing the limit to Rs. 150 and 200 crore would help the respective
chiefs in meeting the gaps with the meagre allocation provided for the
new schemes. With regard to capital revenue ratio in connection with
Army, the data furnished by the Ministry indicates that the said ratio is
moving more towards revenue segment. During the year 2008-09 the
capital revenue ratio was 27:73 which reached to the level of 23:77 during
the year 2011-12 and the projections for 2012-13 are 20:80.
Reply of the Government
The capital allocation to Army has increased steadily from
Rs. 11634.18 crore in the beginning of the 11th Plan to Rs. 19237.80 crore

53
in 2012-13. However, owing to a substantial pay and allowance
component, the revenue allocation accounts for a high share of the overall
budget.
Notwithstanding the same, the requirement of the Army for
additional funds under the capital segment shall be reviewed during
the course of the year and based on the pace of utilisation of allocated
funds and the progress of new schemes, additional funds as required
shall be sought from the Ministry of Finance at the appropriate budgetary
stage.
(Please see para No. 28 of Chapter-I of the Report)
Recommendation (Para No. 20)
The Committee fail to understand how the Army would be able
to address the issue of critical shortages of armaments, the details of
which have been given in the light of the aforesaid scenario whereby
marginal allocations are being made for new schemes and the revenue
capital ratio is moving favourable towards revenue ratio over the years.
The Committee strongly feel that the issue of shortages of armaments
with Army at various fronts need immediate attention. As such the
adequate requirement for the proposed acquisitions of Army should be
made available to the Ministry of Defence during the year 2012-13. The
additional requirement of Army should be met by allocating outlay at
revised estimate stage/supplementary grants.
Reply of the Government
As submitted in reply to recommendation No. 19, the requirement
of the Army for additional funds under the capital segment shall be
reviewed during the course of the year and based on the pace of utilisation
of allocated funds and the progress of new schemes, additional funds
as required shall be sought from the Ministry of Finance at the appropriate
budgetary stage.
Recommendation (Para No. 21)
There are huge gaps between the sanctioned and the existing
machines with Army Aviation. If the sanctioned and the existing strength
is compared, there is shortage of 18 Cheetah, 1 Chetak, 76 Advance Light
Helicopter (ALH) and 60 Advance Light Helicopter (Weapons Systems
Integrated) (ALH-WSI) with Army Aviation. The deliberations have further

54
indicated that the tank ammunition is another critical area having
shortages. Certain problems are being faced with regard to getting
tanks ammunition. The deliberations with the representatives of
Army reveal that the problems with regard to tank ammunition
have further compounded due to blacklisting of IMI. The whole contract
with them has fallen through and other alternate routes are now being
activated.
Reply of the Government
The following is the updated information on sanctioned and existing
machines with Army Aviation:—
S.No. Category Sanctioned Existing Deficiency
(i) Cheetah 157 129 29
(ii) Chetak 56 55 01
(iii) Advanced Light Helicopter 85 53 32
(ALH)
(iv) Advanced Light Helicopter – 60 — 60
Weapons Systems Integrated
(ALH-WSI)
Commercial negotiations for procurement of 20 Cheetel helicopters
from M/s Hindustan Aeronautics Ltd. (HAL) have concluded and proposal
is being processed for financial approval.
Contracts have been signed with HAL for the supply of 85 ALH
and 60 ALH-WSI out of which 53 ALHs have already been delivered.
Entire delivery is expected to be completed by 2015-16.
Tank Ammunition
There is shortage of armament and tank ammunition. However, a
one-time purchase of 16,000 rounds of AMK-339 ammunition has
materialized and procurement action for additional 66,000 rounds with
Transfer of Technology (ToT) from Original Equipment Manufacturer
(OEM) for indigenous production is at an advanced stage. Of this 42000
rounds (FF) are likely to materialize by 2014, followed by balance 24000
rounds (CKD/SKD) and thereafter, indigenous annual production of 24000
rounds is planned over 10 years. Some quantity of INVAR and
KONKURS-M Anti Tank Guided Missiles (ATGMs) are also being
procured as FF and SKD/CKD kits.

55
Recommendation (Para No. 22)
The Committee are alarmed over the way the deficiencies have
been allowed to persist leading to criticality in the Army Aviation and
ammunition in the country as emerged during the course of deliberations.
Nevertheless, the Committee strongly emphasize that all the issues
confronting acquisitions should be addressed immediately. The Secretary
during the course of deliberations has informed that Budget is not a
problem. Notwithstanding the fact, the Committee may like to emphasize
that the desired allocations for acquisitions should be made available to
the Army. All the issues confronting delay in procurement should be
dealt to put the procurement procedures on fast track mode and with
decentralization of financial powers. The issue of gaps should be addressed
without any further delay and also within the stipulated timeframe.
Reply of the Government
The observations of the Committee have been noted. All efforts are
being made to ensure that the defence forces remain equipped with
modern weapon systems at all times. The capacity of Army Aviation is
being augmented as follows:—
Army Aviation
Commercial negotiations for procurement of 20 Cheetal helicopters
from M/s Hindustan Aeronautics Ltd. (HAL) have concluded and proposal
is being processed for financial approval.
Contracts have been signed with HAL for the supply of 85 ALH
and 60 ALH-WSI out of which 53 ALHs have already been delivered.
Entire delivery is expected to be completed by 2015-16.
The status of sanctioned and existing machines with Army Aviation
is as below:—
S.No. Category Sanctioned Existing Deficiency
(i) Cheetah 157 129 29
(ii) Chetak 56 55 01
(iii) Advanced Light Helicopter 85 53 32
(ALH)
(iv) Advanced Light Helicopter – 60 — 60
Weapons Systems Integrated
(ALH-WSI)

56
A proposal for replacement of Chetak and Cheetal helicopters is
also being progressed.
Availability of Ammunition
1. The Army has adequate quantity of most of the ammunition
based on Minimum Acceptable Risk Level (MARL). Only in case of some
items like 125 mm FS APDS tank ammunition, the holding is not at the
desired level for which remedial steps have been initiated. In case of
125 mm FSAPDS tank ammunition, 16,000 rounds (AMK – 339) have
been purchased. Procurement action for additional 66000 rounds of
AMK – 339 ammunition with Transfer of Technology (ToT) from Original
Equipment Manufacturer (OEM) for indigenous production is at an
advanced stage. Some quantity of Invar and Konkurs-M Anti-Tank
Guided Missiles (ATGM) are also being procured through import and
indigenous production. There is no criticality with regard to other tank
ammunitions.
2. Furthermore, following new ammunition is under procurement/
proposed to be procured:—
(a) Electronic fuzes.
(b) Bi-Modular Charge System (BMCS).
(c) Terminally Guided Munition (TGM) for 155 mm.
(d) Trajectory Correctible Munition (TCM) for 155 mm.
(e) Sensor Fuzed Munition (SFM) for 155 mm.
(f) Artillery Fired Medium Range Loitering Missile System.
3. The placement of indent on OFB under five year roll-on plan
has led to better planning by OFB which supplies most of the ammunition
to Indian Army. The current 5 year roll-on plan will end in 2013-14 and
Army has been asked to prepare the consolidated indent well in advance
for the next 5 years in consultation with OFB. Annual Provision Review
(APRs) in respect of ammunition are carried out by AHQ on yearly basis
and based on deficiency and as per long term requirement of Army, the
case is processed for provisioning. This is an ongoing process.
4. Budgetary Support for the planned procurements is provided
on ‘as required basis’.

57
Recommendation (Para No. 23)
Another area affecting the Army preparedness is requirements of
guns for our Army. The information furnished by the Ministry indicates
that the upgradation of Bofors gun is taking long time. The representative
of the Ministry during the cause of oral evidence acknowledged that
many years have passed after the transfer of technology case. Now, the
project has been given to Ordnance Factory Board. The Committee
disapprove the way the deficiency of gun systems has been allowed to
reach to the criticality. While deploring the situation, the Committee
strongly recommend that at least now the desired initiatives should be
taken by the Ministry of Defence and the Government. The procurements
should be put on fast track mode so that the criticality of ammunitions
with the Army is addressed within the stipulated timeframe. All the
support required for the acquisitions including the financial support
should be made available to the Ministry. The Committee may
also like to emphasize that the Standing Committee on Defence should
periodically be updated about the status of defence preparedness of the
country.
Reply of the Government
The views and observations of the Committee have been noted.
All necessary steps are being taken at Service HQ and MoD to
procure new gun systems for the Regiment of Artillery. Highlights of the
initiatives are as under:—
(a) MoD is currently in the process of placing an indent for
Qty. 114 Electronically Upgraded 155 mm 45 cal guns.
(b) Trials of 155 mm 52 cal Towed SP gun are scheduled in
December 2012/January 2013.
(c) Trials of 155 mm Tracked SP gun are scheduled in April/May
2013.
(d) Processes are under way for procuring the variants of
155 mm gun.
Necessary action has also been initiated for enhancing ammunition
holding by way of intimating OFB of further requirements and the
augmentation of production capacity required to match increase in Gun
holdings.

58
Recommendation (Para No. 24)
The Ministry has apprised that out of the sanctioned strength of
47762, the gap between the authorized strength as on 1.1.2012 in respect
of Officers (excluding AMC, ADC and MNS), is 10526. The aforesaid data
indicates that almost one-fifth of the total post of officers in the Army
are lying vacant. Accretions from time to time, tough selection procedures,
difficult service conditions coupled with perceived high degree of risk
involved in service career have been cited as the constrains for the shortage
of officers in Army. The Committee find that most of the reasons cited
by the Ministry for the shortage of officers are well within the control
of the Ministry which can be addressed. The Committee also note that
certain initiatives for sustained image projection and publicity campaign
to create awareness among the youth on the advantages of taking up a
challenging and satisfying career in Army are being undertaken. The
Committee feel that more such initiatives are required. Moreover, the
youth of the country can be motivated to join the Services by various
mechanisms which include lectures, seminars and programmes conducted
in various schools. Introducing a chapter on the challenging and satisfying
career of services in the school curriculum can be another initiative which
can motivate our youth to join the Services. The Ministry should take
up this issue with the Ministry of HRD at appropriate level. Moreover,
the Ministry has to increase the intake of students through NDA which
ultimately would address the issue of shortage of officers in Services. The
concrete initiatives on the suggested line should be taken so as to address
the problem of shortage of officers in the Army.
Reply of the Government
The Government have been taking continuous steps to make career
in Armed Forces more attractive. Some of the steps include substantive
promotion to the officers including those in Short Service Commission
(SSC) to the ranks of Captain, Major and Lieutenant Colonel after 2, 6
and 13 years of reckonable service respectively; increase in tenure of SSC
officers from 10 years to 14 years; upgradation of 750 posts of Lt. Colonel
to Colonel towards implementation of A.V . Singh Committee Report
(Phase-I); upgradation of 1896 additional posts in the ranks of Colonel,
Brigadier, Major General and Lieutenant General and their equivalents
in the other two Services towards implementation of A.V. Singh Committee
Report (Phase-II). Additional family accommodation through Married
Accommodation Project (MAP); implementation of recommendations of
the VI Central Pay Commission with improved pay structure etc. have
also made the Services more attractive.

59
Further, setting up of seven new Service Selection Boards (SSBs)
[2 for Army, 3 for Navy and 2 for Air Force] have been approved by the
Government which will enable expeditious selection of large number of
candidates for induction of officers into the Armed Forces and will thus
help in reducing shortage of officers.
The Army have also undertaken sustained image projection and
publicity campaign to create awareness among the youth on the advantages
of taking up a challenging and satisfying career. Awareness campaigns,
participation in career fairs and exhibitions, advertisements in print and
electronic media, motivational lectures in schools, colleges are also some
of the other measures in this direction. Besides above, NCERT and some
State Boards have published a single page colour motivational cum
informative advertisement on cover page of school text books. Further,
NCERT has published a supplementary book ‘The Indian Army – A
Glorious Heritage’ written by Col. Amitabh Negi, containing motivational
cum informative write-up for students of different age groups. The
supplementary book is eye catching with a view to attracting young
students to serve in Armed Forces as career option. As regards introducing
a chapter on the challenging and satisfying career in Armed Forces in
the school curriculum, the matter has been taken up with Ministry of
Human Resource Development.
With regard to the suggestion of the Committee regarding increasing
the intake in NDA, it is informed that the intake capacity of the NDA
has been enhanced from 1800 cadets to 1920 cadets by raising an additional
squadron.
Recommendation (Para No. 28)
The Committee observe that presently, there is no proposal under
consideration of the Government to increase the intake of the NCC cadets
to the Armed Forces. On the present sanctioned strength and the number
of schools/colleges inducted into NCC and those waitlisted institutions
during the last three years, the Ministry has stated that the sanctioned
NCC cadet strength is approximately 13.4 lakh cadets. Since the training
curriculum for the cadets is two years, 50% of the total strength of the
Corps join and leave every year. Therefore, approximately a strength of
6.5 to 6.8 lakh cadets are turned over every year.
The information furnished by the Ministry further indicates that
the huge number of institutions are dropped out of NCC list. During the

60
year 2009, 158 institutions were dropped. During the year 2010 again 132
institutions were dropped. Further during the year 2011, 112 institutions
were dropped. Not only that a large number of institutions have been
kept under the waitlisted position. The data of waitlisted institutions
indicates that their number is growing. During the year 2011, 6782
institutions were under waitlisted position against the number 6339 during
the previous year.
The aforesaid scenario clearly indicates that more and more
institutions want to be inducted into NCC. The Committee feel that
there is a need to increase the intake into NCC so as to address the
problem of waitlisted institutions. Perhaps there is a need to increase
the capacity for NCC training. The Committee recommend that the
Ministry should look into the matter so that the waitlisted institutions
are inducted into NCC, particularly when objective of NCC is to
prepare the leaders of tomorrow into disciplined and patriotic
citizens.
Reply of the Government
The Government has sanctioned the expansion for NCC by two
lakh additional cadet strength that will increase the total strength of NCC
cadets from 13 lakh to 15 lakh by the year 2015. The expansion plan has
commenced from the year 2011-12. It will be completed in five phases
with 40,000 students getting enrolled each year in the NCC. This expansion
will not only have additional institutions being allotted NCC, it also
includes waitlisted institutions to be inducted wherever such schools/
colleges are located in the area.
Recommendation (Para No. 29)
The Committee would also like to be apprised about the reasons
for the institutions being dropped from the NCC list as informed to the
Committee by the Ministry during the course of deliberations.
Reply of the Government
NCC is withdrawn/dropped from institutions due to non-availability
of adequate number of students, non-availability of eligible teachers to
be appointed as Associate NCC Officers (ANOs), non-availability of parade
ground and administrative infrastructure etc.

61
Recommendation (Para No. 30)
The Committee further find from the information furnished by the
Ministry that very few NCC cadets are joining the services as officers.
During the year 2011 only one NCC cadet joined the Navy as officer.
In Air Force none of the NCC cadet joined. In case of Army the data
has not been furnished separately for NCC cadets joining as officers.
The Committee further observe that various initiatives to NCC ‘C’
Certificate holders in joining the Services are being taken as per the
Government’s policy. To NCC ‘C’ Certificate holders, Government provides
reservations in recruitment to the Armed Forces and a certain weightage
of marks in para military organizations. 64 vacancies in IMA, Dehradun,
100 vacancies in Officers Training Academy (OTA), Chennai, 12 vacancies
in Naval Academy, Ezhimala and 10 vacancies in Air Force Academy,
Dundigal are reserved per year for NCC ‘C’ Certificate holders. Further
for entry into OTA, Chennai, Naval Academy, Ezhimala and Air Force
Academy, Dundigal, NCC ‘C’ Certificate holders are exempt from the
written examination. The Committee understand from the aforesaid
position that the NCC Cadets are not joining the services inspite of
weightage given to them in recruitment to the Armed Forces as officers,
the details of which have been given above. The Committee understand
that perhaps very few NCC cadets are getting NCC ‘C’ Certificate. To
understand the situation the Committee would like to be apprised about
the data with regard to the NCC cadets getting ‘C’ Certificate. The
Committee would also like the Ministry and Services to analyse the reasons
for NCC cadets not being able to join as officers in the services so as
to understand the aforesaid scenario.
Reply of the Government
The National Cadet Corps conducts ‘ A’ Certificate Examination
for Junior Division/Wing NCC Cadets and ‘B’ &‘C’ Certificate Examination
for the Senior Division/Wing NCC Cadets. In the year 2011-12, a
total of 81,440 ‘C’ Certificates were issued to cadets who qualified
for it.
To NCC ‘C’ Certificate holders, Government provides reservation
in recruitment to the Armed Forces. Out of a total of 1617 seats available
in various military training academies, around 180 vacancies per year are
reserved for NCC ‘C’ Certificate holders for NCC Entry Schemes in various
Military Academies. Out of this, about 125 – 140 are joining various

62
Military Academies for training to become officers against the vacancies
reserved for NCC ‘C’ certificate holders as per breakup given below:—
Sl. No. Year IMA OT A Navy Air Force Total
(a) 2009 30 81 03 02 116
(b) 2010 29 100 28 02 159
(c) 2011 37 74 04 11 126
However, the NCC Entry Scheme vacancies remain undersubscribed
due to the following reasons:—
(i) Out of the sanctioned NCC cadet strength of 13.4 lakh almost
60% (8.4 lakh) of the NCC cadets are from Junior Division/
Wing (not holding ‘C’ Certificates) and do not necessarily
join the Armed Forces except NDA. Of the balance 40%
(5 lakh), about 27% (1.35 lakh) are girl cadets and they normally
do not opt for Armed Forces except a few. The strength of
Senior Division (SD) NCC cadets is 3.65 lakh out of which
the NCC cadets in the second year of NCC who are eligible
to appear in NCC ‘C’ certificate examination is approximately
1.82 lakh. Out of this, about 55% appear for ‘C’ Certificate
examination, it not being a compulsory examination.
Therefore, on an average 80% – 85% (80000 – 85000) pass
NCC ‘C’ Certificate examination and are eligible to join Armed
Forces under NCC Entry Scheme.
(ii) Most of NCC cadets, being from Arts stream, are not
eligible to join Navy and Air Force where the QRs are science
stream.
(iii) Many NCC Cadets having A, B and C Certificates also
apply for joining Armed Forces in the open Category. As
far as such candidates are concerned, a total of about
175 join the various academies in the open category.
Therefore, a total of 300 cadets annually join the Armed Forces
inclusive of ‘C’ Certificate holders which is a fairly large
number.
(iv) Candidates are eligible to apply for various entry schemes
in training academies in the last year of their college or after
completing their graduation. NCC curriculum, however, is
only for two years and most of the Senior Division cadets
complete it in second year. There is thus one year’s gap
between completion of NCC training and ex-NCC cadets

63
applying for Armed Forces. Resultantly, these candidates
cannot be given pre-SSB training as they cease to be NCC
cadets.
(Please see para No. 37 of Chapter-I of the Report)
Recommendation (Para No. 31)
The Department of Ex-Servicemen Welfare was created on 22nd
September, 2004 with the objective to give focused attention to the welfare
programmes for ex-servicemen and their dependents including pensionary
benefits, re-employment and rehabilitation. As per the Ministry of Defence
official website, approximately 60,000 service personnel are retired/
released every year at a comparatively younger age. At the time of
retirement, majority of service personnel are at an age where they have
numerous unfinished family and other social responsibilities which
necessitates taking up a second occupation.
The Committee has in their earlier reports recommended for
lateral transfer of Ex-Servicemen (ESM) into Central Para Military
Forces or State Police Forces. The Fifth Pay Commission had also
recommended to increase in percentage of Posts reserved for retired
service personnel in Group ‘C’ and ‘D’ in CPOs to 25 per cent by
lateral transfer. The Fifth Pay Commission had also suggested setting
up a join recruitment board comprising representatives of CPOs and
Defence Forces Headquarters that would jointly select officers/men
who would render 7 years service in Defence Forces to be followed
by lateral shift to CPOs. The Sixth Pay Commission also in their report
had recognized the need for lateral induction of Ex-Servicemen into
Central Para Military Forces (CPMFs) and other Central Police
Organizations (CPOs).
Reply of the Government
Lateral induction of serving personnel into Central Armed Police
Forces (CAPFs) was a key recommendation of the Kargil Review
Committee, GoM on Reviewing National Security System and the 5th &
6th Central Pay Commissions. In the wake of the GoM Report on
‘Reforming the National Security System’ wherein considerable emphasis
was laid on keeping a young profile of the Army in peak combat effective
state capable of meeting the challenges of future conflict, a Working Group
under the Chairmanship of the then Adjutant General, Army Hqrs. with

64
Joint Secretary (Police), Ministry of Home Affairs (MHA), Representatives
of Central Armed Police Forces (CAPFs) and National Security Council
Secretariat as Members, was constituted to work out the modalities for
reducing the colour service and laterally transfer Army personnel to
CAPFs.
The Working Group submitted its Report in March, 2002. The Report
envisaged lateral transfer of army personnel into CAPFs after 7 years of
colour service in the Army. The Report of the Working Group was not
signed by the representatives of the MHA as the proposed lateral transfer
was not acceptable to them.
A meeting was taken by the Home Secretary on 2nd November,
2006. As per the decision taken in the meeting, a Committee under the
Chairmanship of Director General, Border Security Force was constituted
to work out the modalities for such transfer.
MHA submitted the report of DG BSF to the Cabinet Secretariat
in February, 2011 with a copy endorsed to this Ministry. The
recommendations in the Report were in respect of re-employment of
ex-servicemen and no recommendation was made for lateral transfer of
armed forces personnel in CAPFs.
After submission of Report of DG BSF as stated above, a meeting
was held in Cabinet Secretariat on 29.11.2011, which was attended by
representatives MHA/CAPFs, DoP&T and Deptt. of Expenditure besides
MoD/AHQ. Cabinet Sectt. have desired that MHA and MoD may explore
and examine options for achieving lateral transfers from the Army to
CAPFs whereby Army personnel are incentivized to join and the interests
of resident CAPFs are protected. This is being examined in consultation
with MHA and Army HQ.
Recommendation (Para No. 38)
The Committee note that the IAF presently has 34 fighter squadrons
against Government sanctioned strength of 42 squadrons. The number
of fighter squadrons is likely to reduce further to 31 during the 12th Plan
period. The representative of the Ministry during the course of oral
evidence further apprised the Committee that by the end of 14th Plan
Air Force aim to reach 40 to 42 Squadrons.
The Committee have been informed that life span of aircraft is
defined in terms of Total Technical Life (TTL) and the normal technical

65
life of MiG Aircraft ranges from 15 to 40 years from different variants.
The details furnished with regard to fighter aircraft indicates that most
of the aircrafts are more than 30 years old. The analysis of the information
furnished by the Ministry further reveals that MiG-23MF, MiG-23BN
and MiG-25 have stopped flying. T-69/69B (Trainer), T-75 (BIS) and
(BISON), T-77 (BADAL), T-96 (Trishul) are already 40 or more than 40
years old, MiG-27, MiG-29 have more than 25 years of life. Similarly,
Mi-25/35, Mi-8 and Mi-17 helicopters are more than 29 years old.
The analysis of the data furnished by the Ministry indicates that
the number of fighter aircrafts due for retirement after completion of
their technical life far exceeds the rate at which their replacements can
be inducted in the IAF. The different variants of MiG-21 and MiG-27s
are being phased out during the 12th and 13th Plan period and these
are planned to be replaced with Su-30 MKI, Medium Multi Role Combat
Aircraft (MMRCA), Light Combat Aircraft (LCA) and Fifth Generation
Fighter Aircraft (FGFA). It is very much apparent that the induction process
has not been commensurate with the de-induction process.
Reply of the Government
The IAF is presently at a critical stage of its capability building
with a large number of projects at various stages of implementation. The
capability building of IAF includes induction of state of the art modern
equipment and also upgradation of the existing aircraft and systems to
boost their operational capabilities and ensure operational relevance.
A number of procurements are in the pipeline that would enable
increasing the strength of combat squadrons to the desired level to meet
the security challenges. The planned induction of fighter aircraft include
Medium Multi Role Combat Aircraft (MMRCA), Light Combat Aircraft
(LCA), Fifth Generation Fighter Aircraft (FGFA) and Additional
Su-30 MKI. The Medium Multi Role Combat Aircraft (MMRCA) proposal
is at the stage of Contract Negotiation and induction of the aircraft is
planned between 03 to 11 years after signing of the contract. The
Government has entered into an agreement with the Russian Government
to jointly develop a Fifth Generation Fighter Aircraft (FGFA). The FGFA
induction in the IAF is expected from the 13th Plan onwards. With these
inductions, the IAF is likely to reach the strength of 45 squadrons by the
end of the 15th Plan.
(Please see para No. 55 of Chapter-I of the Report)

66
Recommendation (Para No. 39)
The Committee are concerned to note the huge gap between the
required and the existing strength of Squadrons with the Air Force. The
gap in this regard would be to the extent of 11 Squadrons during the
Twelfth Plan. What is more worrying is the fact that our fighter aircraft
fleet is quite old and is on the verge of phasing out. Even if the proposed
acquisitions are in order and by the stipulated timeframe, the country
would reach to the requisite level of fleet i.e. 42 Squadrons by the
end of the Fourteenth Plan. The Committee understand from the
aforesaid position that the Air Force capabilities have reached to the
level of criticality. There is an urgent need to ensure that at least now
our acquisitions are to be put on the fast track mode. The required
Government support by way of providing requisite allocations and
ensuring timely finalization of the proposals should be provided to the
Air Force so as to address the critical issue of gaps in the Air Force
fighter aircraft fleet.
Reply of the Government
The IAF has been allotted 28533 crore under the Capital Acquisitions
for the financial year 2012-13. Adequate funds will be provided to meet
the modernization and fleet replenishment requirements of the IAF.
(Please see para No. 56 of Chapter-I of the Report)
Recommendation (Para No. 40)
The Committee during the course of examination of Demands for
Grants of the previous year had observed that out of 946 MiG aircraft,
476 MiG aircraft i.e. more than 50 per cent had met with accidents.
The existing strength of trainer aircraft and simulators as furnished
by the Ministry indicates that out of 434 trainer aircraft inducted which
include HPT 32, Kiran and Hawks, 255 are presently available. The data
furnished further indicates that except the Hawks, the remaining training
aircrafts are very old. HPT 32 has life of 28 years and Kiran has already
completed 39 years of life.
Reply of the Government
A contract has been signed on 24 May, 2012 to procure 75 Basic
Trainer Aircraft from M/s Pilatus. The aircrafts are expected to be

67
delivered from January, 2013 to November, 2015. Further additional
40 Hawks contract for IAF, are expected to be delivered from 2013
to 2016.
(Please see para No. 67 of Chapter-I of the Report)
Recommendation (Para No. 41)
The aforesaid scenario reveals critical deficiency of the trainer
aircraft. With regard to simulators, out of 46 simulators, 16 are not
operational due to grounding/undergoing phasing out process which
leaves the availability to just 30 simulators. The aforesaid critical
deficiency of trainer aircraft and simulators is resulting into inadequate
training to fighter pilots leading to loss of life of the trained pilots
which is a great loss to the families and the country as a whole. What
has added to the criticality on the issue of trainer aircraft is grounding
of HPT 32 after the fatal accident since 31st July,2009 resulting into
the situation whereby Indian Air Force does not have a basic trainer
aircraft. So far as the issue of procurement of the basic trainer aircraft
is concerned, the Committee understands that the procurement
process started in the year 2009 but due to various technicalities
and some anonymous and some actual representations from one of
the losing vendors resulted into delay in acquisition of the trainer
aircraft.
Reply of the Government
Simulators
The procurement of simulators is now part of the contract for
procurement of all trainer aircraft viz., the Advanced Jet Trainer, the
Intermediate Jet Trainer and the Basic Trainer Aircraft. These Simulators
are scheduled to be commissioned by the financial year 2016-17.
Basic Trainer Aircraft
The contract for the procurement of 75 Basic Trainer Aircraft (BTA)
from M/s Pilatus, Switzerland was signed on 24 May 2012. As per the
contract, the delivery of the first aircraft was scheduled in August 2013
and the deliveries were to be completed by August 2016. However,
delivery of the first aircraft is now expected by January 2013 and the last
aircraft by November 2015.

68
An additional 106 Basic Trainer Aircraft are proposed to be designed
and developed by M/s Hindustan Aeronautics Limited.
(Please see para No. 67 of Chapter-I of the Report)
Recommendation (Para No. 42)
With regard to the existing position, the Committee have been
apprised that contract acquisition with regard to Pilatus PC-7 Mark-II
with the manufacturer has been done. When asked about the expected
delivery, the Committee have been informed that this is one of the widely
used aircraft elsewhere in the world and the manufacturer would start
delivery Pilatus PC-7 Mark-II in 18 months onwards.
Reply of the Government
The contract for the procurement of 75 Basic Trainer Aircraft (BTA)
from M/s Pilatus, Switzerland was signed on 24 May, 2012. As per the
latest status, delivery of these aircraft are expected to commence from
January, 2013.
(Please see para No. 67 of Chapter-I of the Report)
Recommendation (Para No. 43)
The Committee have further been apprised that in the absence of
the basic trainer aircraft, Kiran aircraft are being presently used for training
of pilots at stage I, fighter pilots at stage II are under trainee flying
instructors. Further, it has emerged during the course of deliberations
that the training requirement on basic trainer aircraft are being
compensated by increasing the training hours at stage II and simulators.
The Committee further note that with the phasing out of HPT 32 now
the remaining trainer aircraft are Kiran and Hawks. Out of 234 Kiran
aircraft inducted so far only 81 aircraft are presently available. Not only
that the Kiran aircraft was inducted in 1973 and as such may be having
life of 39 years. Contract for additional 40 Hawks aircraft have been
signed on 23 July, 2010 and the aircraft would be inducted between
July,2013 to March,2016.
Reply of the Government
A total of 66 Hawk Advanced Jet Trainer have already been delivered
to the IAF. Further, a contract for additional 40 Hawk aircraft was signed

69
with M/s Hindustan Aeronautics Limited in 2010 and delivery of these
additional aircraft is scheduled to be completed by 2016.
(Please see para No. 67 of Chapter-I of the Report)
Recommendation (Para No. 44)
The Committee conclude from the aforesaid scenario that the Air
Force has reached to a critical stage with regard to trainer aircraft and
simulators. The grounding of HPT 32 and the ageing of Kiran aircraft
has further worsened the situation thereby compromising the training
requirement of our pilots. The Committee are of the firm view that there
is an urgent need to address the aforesaid issue immediately. The option
of having aircraft on lease from the countries where we have signed the
contract as well as sending our pilots to the manufacturer country from
which we are buying trainer aircraft emerged as option during the course
of deliberations by the Committee. The Committee emphasize that all
these options need to be explored by the Air Force as well as the Ministry
of Defence. Moreover, all the support by way of outlay should be provided
by the Government. Not only that it should be ensured that the
procurement procedures are put on fast track by addressing the various
hurdles encountered at various stages so as to ensure that the Air Force
at any cost get the Pilatus PC-7 Mark-II aircraft by the December next
year as stated by the representative of Air Force during the course of
deliberations so as to address the urgent and immediate need of Basic
Trainer for Air Force.
Reply of the Government
The contract for procurement of 75 Basic Trainer Aircraft (BTA)
from M/s Pilatus of Switzerland was signed on 24 May, 2012. Training
of IAF Flying Instructors is now scheduled to commence from
15 November, 2012 and the delivery of the first aircraft is expected in
January, 2013. In view of the contract that has since been finalized, the
lease option is no longer required.
(Please see para No. 70 of Chapter-I of the Report)
Recommendation (Para No. 45)
It has come out during the course of deliberations that one Phalcon
was grounded for some time at Agra. The Ministry in this regard has
elaborated that due to a gale in May, 2010, small pebbles and dust particles

70
got ingested into the engines of one of the AWACS aircraft. To rule out
any damage to the engines due to Foreign Object Damage (FOD), one
AWACS was not flown between 07 Ma y, 2010 to 25 August, 2010 while
it was being examined thoroughly. The three suspected engines were
replaced with new engines and one engine was cleared after thorough
examination. The three engines were subsequently restored by IAF by
removing the pebbles and dust particles in February, 2011. The Committee
observe that Air Force has already limited capacities and there is an
urgent need to take care about the maintenance of our aircraft, particularly
in the extreme weather conditions so as to avoid the situation of temporary
grounding of any of the aircraft due to extreme weather conditions. The
Committee observe that the aforesaid recommendation of the Committee
need immediate attention from the Ministry/Air Force.
Reply of the Government
Further the measures mentioned in the para, IAF has constructed
three hangers for safe protection of these high value assets at its parent
base and it is ensured that AWACS are parked inside these hangers at
all times, except when required for operations. Additional measures also
include constant review of weather at operating bases with an option to
ferry out AWACS, in case adverse weather is anticipated. The original
cloth blankings have also been replaced by OEM with fibre glass based
hard blankings. Additional set of blankings have also been procured for
off base operations.
Recommendation (Para No. 46)
The Committee have consistently been expressing concern over the
shortage of officers/pilots in Air Force. As per the information furnished
by the Ministry the existing shortage is 422. The Committee have been
informed that various initiatives like introduction of Fast Track Selection
all around the country, participation in fairs/exhibitions, advertisements
in print and electronic media, motivational lectures in schools, colleges,
visuals/signages all over the country at strategic locations have contributed
towards reducing the shortage of officers. The Committee emphasize that
the initiatives being taken need to be continued more emphatically so
as to enable Air Force to address the issue of shortage of officers.
Reply of the Government
The shortage of officers in IAF has reduced from 1342 in 2010 to
1082 in 2011 and 420 as on 01 January, 2012.

71
The proactive steps taken by IAF to reduce the shortage of officers
such as introduction of Fast Track Selections (FTS) all around the country,
participation in career fair/exhibitions, advertisements in print and
electronic media, motivational lectures in schools, colleges, visuals/
signages all over the country at strategic locations etc. has yielded results.
The entire selection process has been simplified with the introduction of
the Air Force Common Admission Test (AFCAT) for all non-UPSC
entries. With this, a candidate eligible for all branches need to apply
only once during each selection cycle. The IAF career website
www.career.airforce.nic.in  is also being upgraded to enable online
e-applications from the selection cycle commencing in June, 2012.
Induction has been progressively increased to utilize the full
training capacity at all training establishments. Exits have been rationalised
to insure that operational effectiveness is maintained and large scale
erosion of expertise in the officer cadre is obviated. These steps
have resulted in positive fill rates. It is expected that the implementation
of the Ajay Vikram Singh Committee report along with the above
mentioned efforts would help in reducing shortages in the officer cadre
at the earliest.
Recommendation (Para No. 49)
The Committee during the course of deliberations have been
appraised that 44 ships at present are under construction in the various
shipyards of the country. With regard to indigenization content, the
Committee have been appraised that there are three segments under
which the process of indigenization can be elaborated. The first part
comprises of hull and associated equipments under which the country
has reached to the level of 90 per cent of self-reliance and
indigenization. With regard to second part which comprises of
propulsion machinery like engine generators etc., the indigenization
has reached to the level of 60 per cent for staff. The third part is the
fight component which comprises of weapons and sensors, and in
this area 30 per cent indigenization level has been reached. The
Committee while appreciating the initiatives taken with regard to
indigenization of our ships construction process would like
the Ministry/Navy to continue the efforts so that total self sufficiency
even in the critical part i.e.  weapons and sensors is achieved
within the stipulated timeframe by the concerted efforts of DRDO,
PSUs and other ship building companies both under private and public
sector.

72
Reply of the Government
In order to achieve greater “Self Reliance” and evolve from a
“Buyer’s Navy” to a “Builder’s Navy”, Ministry of Defence through
Defence Shipyards and Indian Navy, including participation from Indian
Private Shipyards has made concerted efforts to support indigenous
shipbuilding.
The defence shipyards have undertaken comprehensive
modernization programme through project based funding and internal
accruals to develop state of the art infrastructure capabilities.
The Indian Navy has also identified the need for strong design
support to indigenous shipbuilding programmes and has nurtured and
developed in-house warship design capabilities. India’s first indigenous
warship was commissioned in 1961. As on date 111 warships have been
constructed at DPSU shipyards, and presently, 43 ships and submarines
are on order from public and private sector shipyards in India.
In order to provide a fillip to indigenous design and R&D in
shipbuilding activities, the Ministry has setup the “National Institute for
Research and Development in Defence Shipbuilding”, which has been
registered as a society under the relevant act in November, 2010. It works
through a Governing Body headed by the Raksha Mantri and an Executive
Committee headed by the Director-General of the Institute.
As per the broad classification of the equipment and machinery
fitted on board ships three categories based on the vital functions of
‘float, move and fight’ have been identified. The analysis of these categories
indicates that while adequate self-reliance has been achieved in the first
two categories, there is scope for improvement in the ‘fight’ category. The
current indigenous content of the three categories of warship equipment
is given below:—
Categorization Indigenous Import
Content Content
Float (Hull and Associated equipment) 90 10
Move (Propulsion Machinery) 60 40
Fight (Weapon and Sensors) 30 70
This above mentioned data also formed part of the presentation
given to the SCOD on 04 April, 2012. In view of the large percentage

73
of import content in ‘fight’ component viz. weapon and sensors, it is
intended to focus efforts in increasing the indigenous content in this area
in the coming years.
Details of efforts made towards indigenization of weapon and
sensors are placed at Annexure ‘ A’.
Annexure ‘A’
INDIGENISATION OF WEAPONS AND SENSORS
Details of efforts made towards indigenization of weapons and
sensors are as follows:—
(a) Kavach. Kavach chaff system has been indigenized by OFB
as the standard chaff system being fitted onboard Indian Naval
ships.
(b) SR SAM. Efforts are being made by DRDO through foreign
collaboration to jointly develop SR S AM (with Active Seeker
Technology) in India. Post successful development, missiles
are envisaged to be indigenously produced by BDL,
Hyderabad to meet the requirement of Indian Navy and
Indian Air Force.
(c) P21/22 SSM Loaders.  Efforts are being made by DWE for
indigenization of P21/22 SSM Loaders.
(d) 12.7 mm and 127 mm Guns. 12.7 mm and 127 mm guns are
being inducted with ToT to OFB and BHEL respectively.
(e) SSR (Radar). SSR are being planned for procurement under
‘Buy and Make’ Indian procedures. The radar is also being
considered for fitment on P17A and P15B ships.
(f) VSHORADS (Very Short Range Air Defence System). Joint
case for VSHORADS under ‘Buy and Make’ with ToT to BDL
is under progress and is at FET stage.
(g) Humsa-NG Sonar. Humsa-NG is the fourth generation Sonar
after the successful production of first indigenous Sonar
APSOH. This has been nominated for all capital ships that
are being built indigenously. Feasibility of upgrading the
system to Humsa-4G is also being explored by NPOL/DRDO.
Humsa-NG is also being procured as replacement for the
existing Sonars of INA.

74
(h) USHUS. This sonar has been designed as replacement of the
Russian MGK 400 onboard EKM class of submarines. This
has been fitted onboard five EKM platforms.
(i) Indigenous Rocket Launcher (IRL). IRL as a replacement for
RBU 6000 is being manufactured by M/s L&T. Firing trials
of prototype launchers were completed successfully in March,
12. This system is nominated for fitment onboard P15A, P28,
CASW, P15B and P17A.
(j) ASW Rockets. All ASW Rockets and fuses have been
indigenized.
(k) IAC MOD C. Indigenous ASW FCS has been developed by
NSTL with M/s BEL as Production Agency. Six system
(03 each) for P15A and P28 have been delivered. The system
has also been nominated for fitment onboard P15B, P17A,
CASW Ships and for Delhi Class Mid Life Update.
(l) Maareech. The project was sanctioned in August 03 with
August 05 as Probable Date of Completion (PDC). First
production grade system has been fitted onboard Ganga and
UETs are likely to commence post monsoon. If successful the
system will be inducted onboard, P17, P15A, P28, Talwar,
Talwar follow on and Delhi Class.
(m) ALTAS. Advance Light Towed Array Sonar (ALTAS) project
has been sanctioned in April 12 with probable date of
completion of 48 months.
(n) Mines. Processor Based Ground Mine (PBGM), Processor
Based Moored Mine (PBMM), Processor Based Exercise Mine
(PBEM), Processor Based Advanced Exercise Mine (PBAEM)
and Light Weight Mine (LWM) have been developed with
assistance of NSTL.
(o) Torpedoes. The Navy has signed a contract with BDL for
induction of 25 indigenously developed light weight torpedo
TAL Mk-I. In addition, development of one each, Advance
Heavy Weight Torpedo (Varunastra) and Advance Light
Weight Torpedo (ALWT), by NSTL is in progress and will
be inducted into the Navy after completion of User Evaluation
Trials (UETs).

75
Recommendation (Para No. 51)
The Committee during the Study visit to Goa during the year 2011
had observed that the Married Accommodation provided to the Officers
and staff of Navy was in a dilapidated condition. The Committee find
from the information furnished by the Ministry that during the year
2012-13, the allocations for Navy Married Accommodation Project is
Rs. 202.83 crore against the allocation of Rs. 153 crore as per previous
year Revised Estimates allocation. The Committee recommend that
adequate allocation for Married Accommodation Project of Navy should
be provided. The Committee may further like to emphasize that the
position of married accommodation provided to Officers and staff of
Navy including at Goa should be reviewed and necessary action taken
particularly when the sorry state of affairs in this regard has been brought
to the knowledge of the Ministry after getting the feedback through the
on-site inspection during the Study visit of the Parliamentary Committee
on Defence. More so, the system to get the feedback about the satisfaction
level of Officers and staff with regard to married accommodation provided
at various locations should be developed which would help our service
personnel particularly the personnel deputed at the difficult locations to
live in a dignified accommodation.
Reply of the Government
The dilapidated building observed by the Standing Committee on
Defence, during study visit to Goa in the year 2011, was inside the Defence
Civilian Residential Area at Varunapuri, Vasco, Goa. The said building
was unoccupied and undergoing major repairs since September 2009.
Major repairs to the building had been undertaken under Annual
Major Works Programme(AMWP) 2008-09 as “ Reconstruction of Defence
Civilian and Sailors Married Accommodation at GNA” at an estimated
cost of Rs. 104.71 lakhs. The provisional date of completion of the project
was 31st march, 2011. The repairs to the said building have been
completed.
During the year 2012-13, the budgetary allocation for Navy Married
Accommodation Project is Rs. 202.83 crore against the allocation of
Rs. 153 crore as per previous year Revised Estimates Allocation. The
funds are for new construction of Married Accommodation at various
Naval Stations being executed by Director General Married
Accommodation Project. Adequate allocations of funds are being made

76
for Married Accommodation Project of the Navy in consonance with the
progress of work on ground.
The system of feed back about the satisfaction level of Officers and
Staff with regard to Married Accommodation provided at various locations
already exists within the framework of the organisation, by which regular
inspections and maintenance are carried out at specified intervals. The
extensive repairs to certain number of buildings are carried out in
staggered manner to cause least inconvenience to the occupants.
Recommendation (Para No. 52)
The Committee observe that Defence Research and Development
Organization (DRDO) are not being allocated outlay as per their
projections. As informed by the Secretary R&D during the course of
deliberations DRDO was allocated Rs. 10,014 crore against the projection
of Rs. 14,848 crore during the previous year and during this year i.e.
2012-13 out of the proposed allocation of Rs. 14,463 crore DRDO has
been allocated Rs. 10,635 crore. The trend of allocating lesser than the
projected outlay is consistent during each of the year of Eleventh Plan
and 2012-13 under Revenue and Capital section. Percentage share of
allocation of capital outlay for DRDO out of the total Defence Budget
was 3.11% during the year 2010-11 which has declined to 2.82% during
the year 2011-12. With regard to the percentage of expenditure on Defence
R&D in relation to GDP , the Committee find that during the year 2010-
11 the percentage is 0.13% which reached to the level of 0.09% during
the year 2011-12. Curiously the Committee desired to know about the
percentage of GDP on Defence R&D in China and the Committee have
been informed that 2.5% of GDP in China is spent on R&D. The
information furnished by the Ministry further indicates that there are
many ongoing projects costing Rs. 100 crore and above with DRDO which
include Multi Mission Radar, Setting up a Seakeeping and Maneuvering
Basin (SMB), Development of Advanced Light weight Torpedo,
Programme on NBC Defence Technologies, Development of Dual Colour
Missile Approach Warning System for Fighter Aircraft, Development of
D-29 System (Internal EW System for MiG-29 Upgrade Aircraft).
The Committee, therefore, strongly recommend that the adequate
outlay to DRDO should be provided so that the important strategic projects
being taken by the premier Defence Research and Development
Organisation are not affected due to want of resources. The adequate
allocation for DRDO as recommended by the Committee should be made

77
available to DRDO, keeping in view the fact that more emphasis on R&D
would result in our lesser dependence on imports with regard to our
requirement for our Services which include the strategic requirement.
Reply of the Government
Efforts have been made by the Ministry to meet the budgetary
requirements of DRDO to the extent possible within the overall allocation
provided by the Ministry of Finance. Nevertheless, additional requirement
of funds shall be reviewed and projected to the Ministry of Finance as
required.
Recommendation (Para No. 53)
The Committee has consistently been expressing concern over the
attrition of scientists from DRDO. The number of scientists who left DRDO
had shown a declining trend since 2009 which was attributed due to
enhancement in salary with Sixth Pay Commission revision. This trend
has reversed during 2011 when 86 scientists have left DRDO against the
number of 63 and 65 during the year 2009 and 2010 respectively. The
existing authorization as per Government orders in 2001 has stated as
33442. Projected requirement up to 12th plan has been given as 4966.
Again the No. of immediate critical requirement has been given as 1316
which was to be filled during 11th plan but now would be carried out
to 12th plan.
Reply of the Government
The effect of increase in salary of DRDO scientists due to
implementation of recommendation of 6th Central Pay Commission has
been gradually declining from 2009. As a result, attrition rate is increasing.
DRDO has been making all efforts to arrest any attrition of scientists by
granting various incentive packages besides creating excellent work culture
at laboratories and amenities in residential complexes, deputing scientists
for higher academic and professional qualifications, allowing participation
in national and international conferences, symposia, seminars, etc.,
awarding talented and deserving scientists on National Science Day,
National Technology Day, etc.
The DRDO’s manpower authorization (as per Government order
in 2001) was 33442. This includes scientific, technical and allied cadres.
This manpower was sufficient for carrying out R&D activities. Over the

78
past few years, due to changed threat perception, DRDO has been assigned
some major R&D work to meet the present and future security challenges.
DRDO’s additional projected manpower requirements up to 12th Plan
was 4966 (including 2776 Scientists and 169 Works Officers). However,
based on the advise of Ministry of Finance, additional manpower
requirement being projected now is confined to the “immediate and
unavoidable critical requirements” only to cater for the ongoing projects
being carried forward to 12th Plan. Thus, DRDO has projected an
additional requirement of 1316 posts (including 1260 Scientists and 56
Works Officers) as immediate and unavoidable critical requirements to
the Government
(Please see para No. 76 of Chapter-I of the Report)
Recommendation (Para No. 54)
The aforesaid position indicates that DRDO is finding constraints
in filling up even the critical vacancies. More and more scientists are
leaving this prestigious Defence Research Organization which has further
added to this problem. The analysis of the data with regard to attrition
of scientists further indicates that perhaps the favourable impact of the
pay revision due to Sixth Pay Commission Recommendations has gone
and the attrition rate during the year 2011 has again shown increasing
trend. The Committee would like DRDO/Ministry of Defence to study
the aforesaid scenario. Nevertheless, all the desired initiatives to fill up
the critical vacancies as well as to address the issue of attrition should
urgently be taken up by the Ministry/DRDO to ensure the effective
functioning of this prestigious organization.
Reply of the Government
As regards, the issue of attrition of DRDO scientists, it is about 1%
of the total authorization of scientists. DRDO is constantly keeping a
watch on the attrition level of scientists and taking all necessary remedial
measures. In this connection, various steps have been taken by the DRDO
to arrest the attrition of scientists and also to attract talented scientists
in DRDO.
Recommendation(Para No. 56)
The Committee find from the information furnished by the Ministry
that the profit of all the DPSUs is on the increasing trend since the year

79
2008-09. However, in case of BEML and MDNL, the profits have declined
since 2008-09. The Committee would like the Ministry/DPSUs to explain
the reasons for decline of profit of these important DPSUs.
Reply of the Government
There has been a decline in the profit of BEML since, 2008-09.
However, the main reason for decline in profit is a significantly high
increase in employee remuneration after the company signed the wage
settlement agreement with the workers and implemented the government
guidelines for revised pay of the officers (an increase of Rs. 152 crores).
Apart from above profit has also declined due to increase in interest cost,
additional provision for doubtful debts and advances, excise duty
provision for stock of finished goods etc.
Mishra Dhatu Nigam Limited - MDNL has remained as a profit
making PSU since more than 10 years. From 2008-09 onwards, the profit
is showing only an increasing trend. The performance of MDNL for the
last 5 years is as follows:
(Rs. in Crores)
Year Turnover Profit Before Tax Profit After Tax
(PBT) (PAT)
2007-08 255.01 54.95 35.54
2008-09 309.11 62.90 41.06
2009-10 371.21 67.67 44.62
2010-11 417.87 75.18 50.42
2011-12 509.01 98.50 68.45
Recommendation (Para No. 58)
The Committee note that the complaints have been received during
each of the last three years regarding the product delivery by HAL, BEL
and MIDHANI. For HAL the customers have expressed concern over
time overruns in some of the major projects. Regarding BEL also
complaints were received regarding delay in completion of projects and
for MIDHANI, the complaints were on account of cracks on bars, excessive
bands, surface defects, UT defects after forging and under size items etc.
The Committee express serious concern over delay in various major
projects which would have resulted in the cost escalation of the project.
The committee would like to be apprised of the effect of time overruns
on the overall cost size of the various projects. Besides, the committee

80
would may also like to recommend that the penalty clause for the delay
in the agreement should be in-built so as to address the issue of delay
in completion of various major projects.
Reply of the Government
I. HAL
In respect of Hawk, Su-30 MKI and ALH there is time
overrun but there is no cost overrun. The reasons for time overrun are
as follows:—
(a) Su-30 MKI
The Su-30 MKI aircraft is an advanced combat aircraft which
was in its development stage when the inter governmental
agreement was concluded in October, 2000. The development
process was completed later than as envisaged in 2000, causing
delay in the supply of aircraft. Protocol on completion of
design and development activities was signed only in
Dec. 2008. Electronic warfare evaluation could only be completed
in March 2010, as Radar and Electronic warfare performance
was not satisfactory. There was an average delay of three
plus years in design and development phase of Su-30 MKI
aircraft which had an impact on all subsequent deliveries.
(b) Hawk AJT
The delay in delivery of Hawk by HAL was due to receipt
of defective components, jigs and fixtures from the foreign
manufacturer M/s BAES on whom liquidated damages of
6.5 Million GBP were levied. The time taken in replacement
of defective parts and machinery supplied (BAES had
supplied around 115 types of defective components for Ph-
II build) was generally around three to four months and thus
it delayed the programme.
(c) ALH (Dhruv)
One of the main reasons for delay in the ALH programme
was the engine. The French Turbomeca engine used in the
trials could not meet the weight and height requirements of
the Services. Hence a higher power engine named ‘Shakti’
was co-developed by HAL and Turbomeca. This development
effort delayed the programme by two years.

81
Mk-I and Mk-II ALHs were produced using Turbomeca
engines and Mk-III Dhruvs are being manufactured
with Shakti engines. This migration to a new engine caused
further delays as all systems had to be integrated with the
new engine.
The issues pertaining to these projects have been addressed and
Aircraft production to meet the customer requirement is underway. The
contracts for these projects have been signed with a provision of penalty
clause.
In respect of IJT, cost revision is sought to cater for unanticipated
Design activities due to numerous design changes/modifications based
on flight test. Cost escalation, Exchange Rate Variation and Statutory
levies have also added to the cost overrun. The project does not have
penalty clause/exit clause. However, this design project is being regularly
reviewed by the project Steering Committee and High Powered
Committee.
II. BEL
The on-time delivery of the company for last three years on an
average is around 80%. Even though the improvement initiatives like
implementation of SAP (ERP application), usage of latest Project
Management tools, Process improvements, structured review mechanism
etc., ensure thrust on timely delivery, it is inevitable that some of the
projects get delayed. These projects are mainly large complex systems
and the reasons for delay is due to concurrent engineering, change in
user requirement/specifications to incorporate additional features, site
readiness etc.
All the contracts signed between BEL & MoD are Fixed Price
contracts based on negotiated prices firmed up prior to signing of contract.
Considering the above, any delay in completion of projects does not lead
to cost escalation for MoD unlike Cost Plus contracts. Further, all the
contracts are invariably covered by Liquidated Damage (LD) clause
whereby a penalty of 0.5% per week upto 5%/10% max. of contract value
is levied by the customer.
III. MIDHANI
Rejection noticed was mainly for two items supplied to Metal Steel
Factory (MSF) Ichapur, namely, (1) MDN 172 slugs and (2) MDN 172

82
breech rings. The reasons for rejection and remedial steps taken are given
below:—
In connection with supply of MDN 172 slugs, Ultrasonic defect/
porosity were noticed in MSF during inspection.
As Midhani supplies the slug in remelted and post heat treated
condition, there is no scope of carrying out any Ultransonic inspection
at supply stage because cast structure does not show any ultrasonic
indication. Only chemical analysis is carried out to ensure the
compositional homogeneity. So occurrence of any random and unforeseen
ultrasonic defects porosity cannot be ensured at this stage.
After receiving the complaint of ultrasonic defect and porosity
during inspection at MSF, Midhani has carried out a detailed study and
concluded that the defects were due to slag entrapment from the
refractories/hot tops used during primary melting and hot topping of the
ingot. Accordingly, the specification of consumables was modified and
processing parameters were rescheduled. Following the revised practice,
more than 60 nos. of slugs have been processed and supplied to MSF,
which were found to be defect free.
In connection with MDN 172 breech rings, MSF requested Midhani
to supply 9 tons ingots. As melting capacity of Arc furnace is limited
i.e. 5T, Midhani took a developmental order from MSF by utilizing Arc
furnace and VIR furnace together for making a combination heat of 10T
on trial basis. The electrodes, after combination heat was remelted and
post remelting heat treatment was carried out. As ultrasonic inspection
cannot be carried out on Ingot stage, occurrence on any random and
unforeseen UT defect or cracks inside the ingot could not be ensured.
Only chemical analysis was done to ensure compositional homogeneity.
After trial forging, ultrasonic defects were noticed in the final
product. The origin of the defects was analysed at Midhani and it was
observed that the ultrasonic defects were due to slug entrapment during
combination of liquid metal from two furnaces and casting into the ingot.
As ultrasonic testing could not be carried out on ingot, the defects went
un-noticed.
The processing parameters were again carefully studied and melting
schedule in both the furnace were modified and intermittent slag removal
during melting was introduced to avoid slag entrapment.

83
Accordingly 3 heats have been supplied to MSF. Production trials
at MSF have been carried out and results were found to be satisfactory.
Recommendation (Para No. 59)
The Committee find from the information made available by the
Ministry that meagre allocations are being made to R&D by the Ordnance
Factories. During the year 2010-11, only Rs. 39.95 crore was allocated for
R&D. The Committee strongly recommend that more emphasis need to
be given to R&D by Ordnance Factories so as to ensure indigenization
of the products manufactured by the Ordnance Factories as per the Services
requirements.
Reply of the Government
OFB is primarily a production organisation and earlier mandate
to OFB for R&D was limited to process and product improvement.
However, in the recent past their financial powers to undertake R&D
have been significantly enhanced enabling them to expand their activities
in development of new products and product upgrades. Since Defence
R&D is a very complex field, with long gestation period therefore the
result of above initiative may take same time to yield result. OFB is in
the process of augmenting infrastructure to facilitate R&D activities. In
this direction, 12 Ordnance Development Centres, mandated to work in
generic Defence products, have been opened. In addition, to develop a
talent pool, technical experts are being given training in the field of
Defence products design/development in Defence Institutes of repute,
both abroad as well as in India.
For 2012-13, OFB has projected an expenditure of Rs. 70 crore on
R&D which is substantially higher than the allocation in the past years.

84
CHAPTER III
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS, WHICH THE COMMITTEE
DO NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE
REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT
- NIL -

85
CHAPTER IV
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH
REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN
ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE AND WHICH
REQUIRE REITERATION
Recommendation (Para No. 6)
The projected allocations of the Ministry for the year 2012-13 for
the Services indicates that substantial portion of the allocations are
earmarked for the Committed Liabilities leaving marginal scope for New
Schemes. The Committee are concerned to note that as per the position
of actual allocation of outlay by the Ministry of Defence out of total
Capital Modernization Budget 2012-13 of Rs. 66032.24 crore Rs. 54839.91
crore have been allocated for Committed Liabilities thus leaving only
Rs. 5520.82 crore for the New Schemes. The Committee find that the
proposed acquisitions of the Services particularly of Air Force are highly
Budget intensive. The Committee fail to understand how the Ministry
of Defence would meet all capital requirements of the Services particularly
in the context of the modernization programmes as well as gaps between
the required and the existing capabilities as examined in detail in the
later part of the Report. The Committee express grave concern on allocating
the meager outlay for new schemes and would like the Ministry to clarify
the position in this regard. Besides, since the allocations for the Services
are the immediate strategic requirement, the requisite allocations to the
Ministry of Defence for the Capital segment should be made available
so that the proposed acquisitions of the Services do not suffer. Moreover
besides meeting the committed liabilities adequate outlay should be
allocated for the New Schemes so as to enable the Services to bridge the
gap between the required and the existing capabilities. The Committee
strongly recommend that their concerns in this regard should adequately
be conveyed to the Ministry of Finance and Cabinet Secretary.
Reply of the Government
The concerns of the Committee have been conveyed to the Cabinet
Secretary as also the Secretary, Department of Expenditure, Ministry of
Finance.
(Please see para No. 13 of Chapter-I of the Report)

86
Recommendation (Para No. 12)
The Committee further observes that the aforesaid suggested
mechanism would not only curtail the time required for defence
acquisitions but would also help in indigenization process. Once the
requirement of the Services is identified, the cases with regard to ‘Make’
category can be culled out and preparations can be started. Not only that
the involvement of Defence Public Sector Undertakings, Ordnance
Factories and even the Private Sector in this process of acquisitions would
lead to the path of self-reliance. Moreover, if the perspective long-term
plan for our PSUs and Ordnance Factories is prepared, these companies
can be held accountable on delivery of indigenization process. The
Committee further observe that preparation of the databank of acquisitions
and the long-term plan in this regard can further pace up our R&D
requirement. The integrated approach by the PSUs, Ordnance Factories
and Private Sector, DRDO and premier Research institutions as well as
the technical institutions can help in finding out solutions for difficult
technologies and lead us to the path of self-reliance. The Committee
strongly recommend that the concrete initiatives on the suggested lines
should be taken by the Ministry and the Committee informed accordingly.
Moreover, the Committee feel that the existing FDI limit with regard to
defence production need to be revisited.
Reply of the Government
The recommendation made by the Committee to provide a thrust
to indigenization process and self-reliance through the suggested
mechanism has been noted. In this connection, it is submitted that the
Defence Production Policy notified in Jan 2011, inter-alia, provides that
based on the approved LTIPP, equipment/weapon systems/platforms
required for 10 years and further down the line will by and large be
developed/integrated/made within the country. The policy also provides
that in order to synergise and enhance the national competence in
producing state-of-the-art defence equipment/weapon systems/platforms
within the pricelines and timliness that are globally competitive, all viable
approaches such as formulation of consortia, joint ventures and public
private partnership, etc., within the Government approved framework
will be undertaken. The acemedia, research and development institutions
as well as technical and scientific organizations of repute will be involved
for achieving this objective.
(Please see para No. 19 of Chapter-I of the Report)

87
Recommendation (Para No. 25)
The Committee during the course of examination of Demands for
Grants 2009-10 had noted that there was deficiency of 186168 units of
Bullet Proof Jackets. Even when the approval of Defence Acquisition
Council was obtained on 19.10.2009 for purchase of the requisite number
of BPJs during the Eleventh Plan, the issue of purchase of desired BPJs
is still fraught with various complications. The Committee understand
during the course of deliberations on Demands for Grants of this year
that the Ministry is confronting with some problems on issue of RFP. RFP
was issued initially on 3rd March, 2011 however, due to problems
envisaged during conduct of ballistic trials RFP was retracted on 9th
December, 2011. Now, the suitable amendments are being made in the
GSQR and fresh RFP would be issued.
Reply of the Government
Request for Proposal (RFP) for procurement of 1,86,138 Bullet Proof
Jackets (BPJ) was prepared and issued on 03.03.11. Techno commercial
offers from six vendors were received on 27.07.2011. However, the RFP
had to be retracted on 09 December 2011 due to technical problems
envisaged during ballistic trials. Subsequently, the GSQR was amended
and approved by GSEPC on 11.04.2012. New RFP would be issued after
procedure for trial Methodology is finalized.
(Please see para No. 34 of Chapter-I of the Report)
Recommendation (Para No. 26)
Another issue consistently been raised by the Committee is the
weight of the Bullet Proof Jackets. When the issue was raised in the
Seventh Report on Demands for Grants 2009-10, the Ministry in the Action
Taken Note had stated that the weight of the BPJ is incremental from
less than 4 Kgs to a maximum of 11.5 Kgs based on level of threat. To
substantiate the point of view of the Ministry, the Committee have been
informed in the Action Taken Note that the soldier is not required to
wear the BPJ at its maximum weight under low threat levels. Even when
the proposals have been approved by DAC, the Ministry is confronting
with RFP issues. Initial RFP was retracted way back on 9th December
2011 due to some problem and till date fresh RFP has not been issued.
The Committee express unhappiness over the way the procurement of
such an important life saving items required for forces is being delayed.

88
Recommendation (Para No. 27)
The Committee deplore the way the Ministry has dealt with the
issue of weight of BPJs whereby it has been stated that the soldier is not
required to wear the BPJs at its maximum weight under low threat levels.
The Committee strongly recommend that at least now the initiatives
should be taken to fast track the purchase of BPJs. Besides it should be
ensured that the BPJs are of low weight and of world class quality.
Reply of the Government on Para Nos. 26 and 27
RFP for procurement of Bullet Proof Jackets is under preparation
and is likely to be issued shortly. GSQRs have been amended to provide
the best Bullet Proof Jackets available to soldiers of the Indian Army.
(Please see para No. 34 of Chapter-I of the Report)
Recommendation (Para No. 32)
The Committee observe that the service personnel retiring at
younger age are a great asset to the country. There is an urgent need to
use the services of these trained workforce by deploying them in Central
Para Military Forces (CPMFs) and other Central Police Organizations
(CPOs) in line with the recommendations made by the various Pay
Commissions as consistently been recommended by the Standing
Committee. Besides, providing re-employment to the service personnel,
the Lateral Induction Programme would curtail the training bill of the
Central and State Governments for deploying of the new recruits which
need extensive training. Moreover, pension bill of the Union Government
can also be curtailed. The Committee fail to understand the delay in
taking decision with regard to lateral induction of ESM in (CPMFs), (CPOs)
and State Police Forces in the line of the aforesaid observations. The
Committee strongly recommend that the early decision in this regard
should be taken. Besides, the Joint Recruitment Board comprising
representatives of CPOs and Defence Forces Headquarters that would
jointly select officers/men who would render 7 years services in Defence
Forces to be followed by lateral shift to CPOs would also be constituted
expeditiously to address the issue of lateral induction.
Reply of the Government on Para No. 32
Lateral induction of serving personnel into Central Armed Police
Forces (CAPFs) was a key recommendation of the Kargil Review

89
Committee, GoM on Reviewing National Security System and the 5th &
6th Central Pay Commissions. In the wake of the GoM Report on
‘Reforming the National Security System’ wherein considerable emphasis
was laid on keeping a young profile of the Army in peak combat effective
state capable of meeting the challenges of future conflict, a Working Group
under the Chairmanship of the then Adjutant General, Army Hqrs with
Joint Secretary (Police), Ministry of Home Affairs (MHA), Representatives
of Central Armed Police Forces (CAPFs) and National Security Council
Secretariat as Members, was constituted to work out the modalities for
reducing the colour service and laterally transfer Army personnel to
CAPFs.
The Working Group submitted its Report in March, 2002. The Report
envisaged lateral transfer of army personnel into CAPFs after 7 years of
colour service in the Army. The Report of the Working Group was not
signed by the representatives of the MHA as the proposed lateral transfer
was not acceptable to them.
A meeting was taken by the Home Secretary on 2nd November,
2006. As per the decision taken in the meeting, a Committee under the
Chairmanship of Director General, Border Security Force was constituted
to work out the modalities for such transfer.
MHA submitted the report of DG BSF to the Cabinet Secretariat
in February, 2011 with a copy endorsed to this Ministry. The
recommendations in the Report were in respect of re-employment of
ex-servicemen and no recommendation was made for lateral transfer of
armed forces personnel in CAPFs.
After submission of Report of DG BSF as stated above, a meeting
was held in Cabinet Secretariat on 29.11.2011, which was attended by
representatives MHA/CAPFs, DoP&T and Deptt. of Expenditure besides
MoD/AHQ. Cabinet Sectt. have desired that MHA and MoD may explore
and examine options for achieving lateral transfers from the Army to
CAPFs whereby Army personnel are incentivized to join and the interests
of resident CAPFs are protected. This is being examined in consultation
with MHA and Army HQ.
(Please see para No. 40 of Chapter-I of the Report)
Recommendation (Para No. 33)
The Committee find that the turnover of CSD has grown to over
4500 times in the recent years and it is serving more than 16 million

90
people with 34 Area Depots and 4500 Unit-Run-Canteens (URCs), the
CSD serves the services in all the parts of the country-from Ladakh in
the North, Tamil Nadu and Kerala in the South, Nagaland in the East,
Rajasthan in the West and even Port Blair. CSD caters not just to the
services personnel and their families but also to GREF, NCC Units at
Group HQ level, TA units, CDA’s staff, Ordnance factories, Embarkation
HQs, Civilians paid from Defence estimates and Para-military forces under
operational/administrative control of the Army.
Reply of the Government
Observations of the comm ittee have been noted.
(Please see para No. 45 of Chapter-I of the Report)
Recommendation (Para No. 34)
The Committee appreciates the work done by CSD to the service
personnel and to the employees of other related services. The Committee,
after taking into the views of the Ex-Servicemen who reside in far flung
and difficult areas, desire that mobile canteen facilities which was available
to them should be re-instated. The Committee desire that keeping in
view the advent of new technology and internet, on-line canteen facilities
to Ex-Servicemen should be started at the earliest and modalities in this
regard should be finalised before presentation of next year’s Demands
for Grants.
Recommendation (Para No. 35)
The Committee also recommended that Credit Card facilities on
the line of Kisan Credit Card should also be started for Ex-Servicemen,
who find difficult to carry cash to canteens.
Reply of the Government on Para Nos. 34 and 35
Due to automation of Unit Run Canteens (URCs) by
introduction of Canteen Inventory Management Software (CIMS) and
Smart Card, operation of Mobile canteen facilities has become
perilous and also uneconomical, and therefore, this facility has been
restricted.
Online Canteen facilities and credit card transactions on the lines
of Kisan Credit Card form part of the overall futuristic concepts being

91
considered with respect to Canteen Stores Department. Credit card
facilities are available in many URCs in major cities/towns.
Complete information on CSD including items available/being
introduced at various depots is available on the CSD website.
(Please see para No. 45 of Chapter-I of the Report)
Recommendation (Para No. 36)
The Committee find that the allocations made to Air Force during
each year of the Eleventh Plan and for the year 2012-13 are lesser than
the projections both under the Revenue and the Capital Head. Under the
Revenue Head during the year 2012-13 the allocations have been made
for Rs. 17705.81 crore against the projections of Rs. 19887.73 crore.
Similarly, under the Capital Head Rs. 30514.45 core have been allocated
against the projections of Rs. 36950.52 crore. The analysis of the data
furnished by the Ministry further indicates that the allocations to Air
Force for Capital Modernization Budget are quite lesser to the projections
made. Out of the total projections of Rs. 34165 crore, Rs. 28533 crore
have been allocated as per the actual allocation made by the Ministry
of Finance. What is more disturbing is the fact that out of
Capital Modernization Budget 2012-13 to the tune of Rs. 28533 crore,
Rs. 26433 crore have been allocated for the committed liabilities thus
leaving only Rs. 2100 crore i.e. lesser than 10% of the total capital outlay.
The Committee understand that various acquisitions related to capital
modernization of Air Force are in pipeline, the details of which
have been given in the later part of the Report. Moreover, there are gaps
between the required and the existing Air Force fleet. The obsolescence
of the Air Force fleet including the trainer aircraft is another area of
concern.
Reply of the Government
Efforts have been made by the Ministry to meet the requirements
of the Services within the overall allocation provided by the Ministry of
Finance. Notwithstanding the same, the requirement of the Air Force for
additional funds shall be reviewed based on the progress of new and
on-going schemes. Additional requirement of funds shall be projected to
the Ministry of Finance as and when the need arises.
(Please see para No. 50 of Chapter-I of the Report)

92
Recommendation (Para No. 37)
The Committee may further like to highlight that Air Force has
acknowledged during the course of deliberations that shortfall in revenue
allocation would eventually compromise operational preparedness since
legacy system require more maintenance. With regard to shortfall under
the capital budget, the Committee have been informed that it would slow
down modernization, delay in induction of important equipments and
resultant asymmetry in capability with respect to threat perception.
The Committee strongly emphasise that the country cannot afford
further delays in the proposed acquisitions keeping in view the
urgency of the matter. The Committee as such strongly recommend
that the adequate outlay as per the requirement of Air Force under
both Capital and the Revenue Heads should be made available to
Air Force. The additional requirements may be made available during
the course of Revised Estimates stage as well as through supplementary
grants.
Reply of the Government
As submitted under para 36, efforts to secure adequate funds from
the Ministry of Finance to ensure desired level of preparedness by the
Air Force, shall be made by the Ministry, if warranted by the pace of
utilisation of funds and progress of new schemes during the year.
(Please see para No. 50 of Chapter-I of the Report)
Recommendation (Para No. 47)
The Committee have been apprised that out of 52 air operational
fields, 10 air fields do not have static electrical Air Field Lightening System
(AFLS). During the course of deliberations of Demands for Grants of the
previous year, the Committee had been apprised that out of 52 operational
bases, 8 air field bases do not have electrical field lightening and regular
night operations are not undertaken from these places. The Committee
fail to understand how the number of air fields not having electrical Air
Field Lightening system can increase from 8 to 10. The Ministry should
furnish the clarification in this regard. Besides, urgent initiative should
be taken to ensure the electrical Air Field Lightening System in the
remaining air fields so that regular night operations can be undertaken
from all the existing air fields.

93
Reply of the Government
In addition to the eight airfields without airfield lighting system
(since the last reply given), Air Force Station, Phalodi got operationalised
during 2010 which does not have airfield lighting system. Further, during
the Tsunami in 2004, Airfield lighting system got washed away at
Car Nicobar. Case is now being processed for re-installation of electrical
airfield lighting system at Car Nicobar through an alternate vendor.
Installation of Airfield Lighting System (AFLS) at all airfields is being
undertaken under the Modernization of Airfield Infrastructure (MAFI)
Project.
Recommendation (Para No. 48)
The Committee observe from the data furnished by the Ministry
that Navy including Joint Staff is being allocated outlay both under
Revenue and Capital segments lesser than projections during each of the
year of Eleventh Plan. During the year 2012-13, Rs. 12548.02 crore under
Revenue segment have been allocated against the projections of
Rs. 15836.71 crore. Under the Capital segment too, Navy including Joint
Staff has been allocated lesser than the projections. During the year 2012-
13, Rs. 24766.42 crore have been allocated under the Capital head against
the projections of Rs. 28643.19 crore. As in the case of Army and Air
Force, substantial part of the allocations has been allocated to committed
liabilities thereby leaving marginal allocation for the new schemes. As
per the actual allocation of funds by the Ministry of Finance for Capital
Modernization Budget 2012-13, Navy has been allocated just Rs. 720.82
crore out of the total allocation of Rs. 23252.71 crore. The information
furnished by the Ministry reveal that likely major inductions of Navy
during the year 2012-13 are Aircraft Carrier, Frigates, offshore patrol
vessel and survey catamarans. The Committee fail to understand how
Navy would meet the outlay required for the new acquisitions with less
than 5 per cent of the total allocations. The Committee as such strongly
recommend that the adequate outlay of Navy should be made available
so that the new acquisitions as well as the proposed acquisitions do not
suffer for want of resources.
Reply of the Government
Within the overall allocation provided by the Ministry of Finance,
priority has been given to providing adequate funds to meet the committed
liabilities. However, based on the utilisation of funds and the progress

94
of schemes, both new and on-going, additional funds shall be sought
from the Ministry of Finance as required.
(Please see para No. 72 of Chapter-I of the Report)
Recommendation (Para No. 55)
With regard to Kaveri engine the Committee has been informed
that two important milestones of Kaveri project have been successfully
achieved:— Completion of Official Altitude Testing (OAT) for 73 hours
at Central Institute of Aviation Motors (CIAM), Russia. Flying Test Bed
(FTB) trials for 55 hours with IL-76 aircraft conducted at Gromov Flight
Research Institute (GFRI), Russia that it is planned to commercial flight
trials for technology demonstration of Kaveri Engine with LCA Tejas
Mk-I in 3 year time.
The Committee find that after almost 30 years of work of DRDO,
the Tejas could be made operational. And now the Kaveri Engine is facing
lot of difficulties. The Committee hopes that DRDO would take urgent
initiatives to address the various difficulties being encountered and the
Kaveri Engine would be put into operation. The Committee may also like
to recommend that more initiatives with regard to R&D in strategic areas
by DRDO need to be taken to make the country self-reliant under the
core technologies required for our Defence projects.
Reply of the Government
Kaveri engine project was sanctioned in 1989 with an estimated
cost of Rs. 383 crore  and Probable Date of Completion (PDC) was 1996.
Due to enhanced scope and demand of the situation, the cost was enhanced
to Rs. 2839 crore.  The expenditure incurred so far in Kaveri engine
project is approx. Rs. 1950 crore  against financial ceiling of Rs. 2105
crore. A proposal has been approved by Hon’ble Raksha Mantri for
continuation of Kaveri engine project with extension of PDC by 48 months
from the date of approval given by the Cabinet Committee on Security
(CCS) with an additional cost of Rs. 595 crore. Thus the estimated cost
would be Rs. 2700 crore  (2105 crore present ceiling + 595 crore  proposed
enhanced cost). The proposal has been put up for approval of CCS.
DRDO has already taken initiative to address and resolve various
technical and technological difficulties. LCA, Tejas, requires 90kN thrust
class engine to meet its operational requirement, whereas, Kaveri engine

95
does not fully meet this requirement. Therefore, it has been decided to
use variants of Kaveri engine to power unmanned Air Vehicle and also
for marine applications.
Since the thrust requirement of LCA has been enhanced to 90kN,
Kaveri engine will be utilized only for “Technology Demonstration” in
LCA, Tejas Mk-I with spin off benefits.
(Please see para No. 77 of Chapter-I of the Report)

96
CHAPTER V
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH
FINAL REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED
Recommendation (Para No. 14)
The Committee further note that some of the retired defence officers
work with the private sector and act as a middleman for the defence
procurement. The Committee understands that the prescribed period as
per service conditions forbidding Armed Forces officers joining Private
Sector was earlier two years which has now been reduced to one year.
The Committee are of the strong view that the aforesaid period need to
be increased to five years for the officers of the rank of Brigadier and
above, and their equivalents which would certainly help in addressing
the issue of blacklisting of technologies. The urgent initiatives in this
regard should be taken by the Ministry and the Committee informed
accordingly.
Reply of the Government
As far as the recommendation No. 14 of the 15th Report of Standing
Committee on Defence is concerned it is stated that the matter is under
examination in consultation with all concerned.
Recommendation (Para No. 50)
The Committee understand that the long awaited Aircraft Carrier,
Gorshkov is scheduled to be induced in Indian Navy by December, 2012.
The revised cost of Vikramaditya, after re-negotiations, is 2330 MUSD
which includes costs towards Refit and Modernisation of the Ship, Logistic
Support for ten years, Training of Ship’s crew and yard personnel,
infrastructure, Service to Indian Specialists, trials and Documentation.
The Committee hope that the Navy would at last get the Gorshkov Aircraft
Carrier during the targeted year i.e. 2012-13 after extended deadlines
resulting into huge cost overruns. The commissioning of Gorshkov would
address on of the major area to some extent i.e. Aircraft Carrier for the
country.

97
Reply of the Government
INS Vikramaditya is scheduled to be deliv ered to Indian Navy in
December, 2012, subj ect to pending trials being completed.
(Please see para No. 72 of Chapter-I of the Report)
Recommendation (Para No. 57)
The Committee find from the information made available by the
Ministry that meager allocations are being made to R&D by the Ordnance
Factories. During the year 2010-11, only Rs. 35.95 crore was allocated for
R&D. The Committee strongly recommend that more emphasis need to
be given to R&D by Ordnance Factories so as to ensure indigenization
of the products manufactured by the Ordnance Factories as per the Service
requirement.
Reply of the Government
The information is being collected and will be made available later.
N
EW DELHI;  RAJ BABBAR,
23 April, 2013 Chairman,
03 Vaisakha, 1935 (Saka) Standing Committee on Defence.

98
ANNEXURE I
MINUTES OF THE FOURTEENTH SITTING OF THE STANDING
COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE (2012-13)
The Committee sat on Wednesday, the 17th April, 2013 from
1500 hrs. to 1530 hrs. in Committee Room ‘C’, Parliament House Annexe,
New Delhi.
PRESENT
Shri Raj Babbar — Chairman
M
EMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Kamal Kishor ‘Commando’
3. Shri R. Dhruvanarayana
4. Shri P. Karunakaran
5. Shri Mithilesh Kumar
6. Shri Saugata Roy
7. Shri C.R. Patil
8. Smt. Mala Rajya Laxmi Shah
9. Shri Mahabali Singh
10. Shri Uday Singh
Rajya Sabha
11. Shri Naresh Gujral
12. Shri Mukut Mithi
13. Dr. E.M. Sudarsana Natchiappan
14. Shri C.M. Ramesh
15. Shri T.K. Rangarajan

99
SECRETARIAT
1. Dr. R.K. Chadha — Additional Secretary
2. Shri R.K. Jain — Joint Secretary
3. Shri D.S. Malha — Director
4. Shri Sanjeev Sharma — Additional Director
2. *** *** *** *** ***
3. *** *** *** *** ***
4. The Committee then took up the draft Report on ‘The Action
Taken by the Government on the recommendations/observations contained
in the Fifteenth Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants
(2012-2013)’ for consideration and adoption. The Committee adopted the
report without any modification.
5. *** *** *** *** ***
6. The Committee then authorized the Chairman to finalise the
above Draft Report in the light of the factual verifications and security
vetting of the report as received from the Ministry and present both the
reports to the House on a date convenient to him.
The Committee then adjourned.
*** Not related with the matter.

100
ANNEXURE II
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS CONTAINED IN
THE FIFTEENTH REPORT (FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA)
ON ‘DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2012-2013)’
(i) Total number of recommendations: 59
(ii) Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted by
Government:
Para Nos. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 13, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20, 21,
22, 23, 24, 28, 29, 30, 31, 38, 39, 40, 41, 42, 43, 44, 45, 46, 49, 51,
52, 53, 54, 56, 58, 59
Total : 42
Percentage : 71
(iii) Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do not desire
to pursue in view of Government’s replies:
Para No. Nil
Total : Nil
Percentage : 0%
(iv) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of
Government have not been accepted by the Committee:
 Para Nos. 6, 12, 25, 26, 27, 32, 33, 34, 35, 36, 37, 47, 48, 55
Total : 14
Percentage : 24
(v) Recommendations/Observations in  respect of which final replies of
Government are still awaited:
Para Nos. 14, 50, 57
Total : 03
Percentage : 05

“All Parliamentary Publications including DRSC Reports are 
available on sale at the Sales Counter, Reception, Parliament House 
(Tel. Nos. 23034726, 23034495, 23034496), Agents appointed 
by Lok Sabha Secretariat and Publications Division, Ministry 
of Information and Broadcasting, CGO Complex, Lodhi Road, New 
Delhi (Tel. Nos. 24367260, 24365610) and their outlets. The said 
information is available on website ‘www.parliamentofindia.nic.in’.
The Souvenir Items with logo of Parliament are also available at Sales 
Counter, Reception, Parliament House, New Delhi. The Souvenir 
items with Parliament Museum logo are available for sale at Souvenir 
Shop (Tel. No. 23035323), Parliament Museum, Parliament Library 
Building, New Delhi. List of these items are available on the website 
mentioned above.”