STANDING  COMMITTEE  ON
DEFENCE
(2010-2011)
FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA
MINISTRY OF DEFENCE
[Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations/Observations contained
in the Sixth Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants of the
Ministry of Defence for the Year 2010-2011]
NINTH REPORT
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
December, 2010/Agrahayana, 1932 (Saka)
9

NINTH REPORT
STANDING COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE
(2010-2011)
(FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA)
MINISTRY OF DEFENCE
[Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations/Observations
contained in the Sixth Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) on Demands for
Grants of the Ministry of Defence for the Year 2010-2011]
Presented to Lok Sabha on 10.12.2010
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 10.12.2010
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
December, 2010/Agrahayana, 1932 (Saka)

C.O.D No. 119
Price : Rs.   85.00
© 2010 B Y L OK S ABHA S ECRETARIAT
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of
Business in Lok Sabha (Fourteenth Edition) and printed by National Printers,
New Delhi-110 028.

(i)
CONTENTS
PAGE
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (2010-2011) ....................................... (iii)
INTRODUCTION ........................................................................................... (v)
CHAPTER I Report ............................................................................... 1
CHAPTER II Recommendations/Observations which have been
accepted by the Government ........................................ 27
CHAPTER III Recommendations/Observations which the Committee
do not desire to pursue in view of Government’s
replies ............................................................................... 45
C
HAPTER IV Recommendations/Observations in respect of which
replies of Government have not been accepted by the
Committee ....................................................................... 54
C
HAPTER V Recommendations/Observations in respect of which
final replies of Government are still awaited ............ 72
APPENDIX
Minutes of the Third sitting of the Standing  Committee
 on Defence (2010-11) held on 6.12.2010 ...................... 78
Analysis of Action Taken by the Government on
the Recommendations contained in the Sixth
Report of the Standing Committee on Defence
(Fifteenth Lok  Sabha) ................................................... 80

COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE
(2010-2011)
Shri Satpal Maharaj — Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Harish Choudhary
3. Shri Kamal Kishor ‘Commando’
4. Shri H.D. Devegowda
5. Shri Varun Gandhi
6. Dr. Sucharu Ranjan Haldar
7. Shri Kapil Muni Karwariya
8. Shri Bhaskar Rao Patil Khatgaonkar
9. Shri Asaduddin Owaisi
10. Prof. Prasanna Kumar Patasani
11. Shri A.T. Nana Patil
12. Shri C.R. Patil
13. Shri Amarnath Pradhan
14. Shri C. Rajendran
15. Shri J. Ramesh
16. Shri M. Rajamohan Reddy
17. Shri Baju Ban Riyan
18. Shri Kalyan Singh
19. Shri Mahabali Singh
20. Rajkumari Ratna Singh
(iii)

(iv)
Rajya Sabha
21. Shri Munquad Ali
22. Shri Avinash Rai Khanna
23. Prof. P .J. Kurien
24. Shri Mukut Mithi
25. Shri Mukhtar Abbas Naqvi
26. Shri T.K. Rangarajan
27. Shri Birender Singh
28. Shri Ram Kripal Yadav
29. Shri M.V . Mysura Reddy
30. Shri Naresh Gujral
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri T.K. Mukherjee — Joint Secretary
2. Smt. Sudesh Luthra — Director
3. Smt. Jyochnamayi Sinha — Deputy Secretary

INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairman of the Standing Committee on Defence (2010-2011),
having been authorised by the Committee to submit the report on their
behalf, present this Ninth Report on ‘ Action Taken by the Government
on the recommendations/observations contained in the Sixth Report
(Fifteenth Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants (2010-2011)’ relating to the
Ministry of Defence.
2. The Sixth Report was presented to the Lok Sabha on 15 April,
2010 and laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha on the same day. The Ministry
furnished their Action Taken Notes on all the Recommendations/
Observations contained in the Sixth Report on 27 September, 2010.
3. The Report was considered and adopted by the Committee at
their sitting held on 6 December, 2010.
4. For facility of reference and convenience, Recommendations/
Observations of the Committee have been printed in bold letters in the
Report.
5. An analysis of Action Taken by Government on the
Recommendations/Observations contained in the Ninth Report
(Fifteenth Lok Sabha) of the Committee is given at Annexure-II.
N
EW DELHI;  SATPAL MAHARAJ,
9 December, 2010 Chairman,
18 Agrahayana, 1932 (Saka) Standing Committee on Defence.
(v)

CHAPTER I
REPORT
This Report of the Standing Committee on Defence deals with action
taken by the Government on the recommendations/observations contained
in their Sixth Report on ‘Demands for Grants 2010-2011’, which was
presented to Lok Sabha and laid in Rajya Sabha on 15.04.2010.
2. The Committee’s Sixth Report contained observations/
recommendations on the following aspects:—
Para No. Subject
(1) (2)
1 and 2 Analysis of the overall allocation of the Ministry of Defence for
the year 2010-11 vis-a-vis performance of the Ministry during the
year 2009-10 in the context of Demands for Grants
3 to 5 Revenue Budget
6 to 8 Defence Procurement Policy (DPP)
9 Indigenisation in Defence Production
10 Married Accommodation Project
11 Outcome Budget
12 Early Finalization of Long Term Integrated Perspective Plan
(LTIPP) and Eleventh Plan
13 Zero Based Budgeting
14 One Rank One Pension
15 Sukna Land Scam
16 and 17 Security of the Defence Network
18 and 19 Budgetary Allocation for Army
20 and 21 Shortage of Officers in Army
22 Recruitment Rallies for Jawans
23 Light Weight Bullet Proof Jackets and Shoes, Helmets etc. to
Defence Personnel
24 Cash Support to Gallantry Awards Winners and their Families

2
25 to 27 Benefits to Ex-Servicemen, War Widows and Disabled
Soldiers
28 Ordnance Factories
29 Border Roads Organization
30 and 31 Allocation of Funds to Indian Air Force
32 Shortage of Officers in Indian Air Force
33 Light Combat Aircraft (LCA)
34 and 35 Accidents of Aircraft in Air Force
36 Modernization of Airfield Infrastructure (MAFI)
37 Replacement of Obsolete Radars
38 and 39 Allocation of Funds to DRDO
40 Rama Rao Committee Report
41 to 43 Analysis of Naval Budget
44 Manpower Shortage in Navy
45 Modernization of Indian Navy
46 Hindustan Shipyard Limited
47 Joint Staff
48 Modernization of Coast Guard Organization
49 Coastal Surveillance
3. Action taken replies have been received from the Government
in respect of all the recommendations/observations contained in the Report.
These replies have been examined and categorized as follows:—
(i) Recommendations/observations, which have been accepted
by the Government (Please  see Chapter II):—
Para Nos. 7, 8, 9, 16, 17, 18, 19, 21, 23, 24, 26, 32, 40, 41, 42,
43, 45, 47, 48 and 49
(20 Recommendations)
(ii) Recommendations/observations, which the Committee do not
desire to pursue in view of the replies of the Government
(Please see Chapter III):—
Para Nos. 13, 27, 33, 35 and 46
(05 Recommendations)
(1) (2)

3
(iii) Recommendations/observations in respect of which replies
of the Government have not been accepted by the Committee
and which require reiteration (Please  see Chapter IV):—
Para Nos. 4, 10, 11, 14, 15, 20, 22, 28, 29, 31, 34, 36, 37, 38,
39 and 44
(16 Recommendations)
(iv) Recommendations/observations in respect of which final
replies of the Government are still awaited (Please  see
Chapter V):—
Para Nos. 1, 2, 3, 5, 6, 12, 25 and 30
(08 Recommendations)
4. The Committee desire that the Ministry’s response to their
comments made in Chapter-I and final replies to the recommendations
mentioned in Chapter-V of this Report be furnished to them at the
earliest and in any case not later than six months of the presentation
of this Report.
5. The Committee will now deal with the action taken by the
Government on some of their recommendations in the succeeding
paragraphs.
A. Curbing of wasteful Expenditure
Recommendation (Paragraph No. 4)
6. The Committee had recommended as under:—
“The Committee were informed that the examination of the
Comprehensive Report of Defence Expenditure Review Committee,
to curb wasteful expenditure is still going on in the Ministry of
Defence. As the recommendations of the said Committee will have
far reaching implications and will definitely reform various policies
of the Ministry to bring economy in its expenditure, the Committee
once again recommend to complete the task urgently under
intimation to them.”
7. The Ministry in its action taken reply, has stated as under:—
“Examination and implementation of the recommendations,
considered acceptable and implementable, has been entrusted to
officers of the level of Joint Secretary in the Ministry of Defence

4
and Defence Finance. This exercise is time consuming as it
involves consultation with the Services and other Departments.
However, wherever, considered feasible, action has already
been initiated on the basis of the recommendations of the
Committee.”
8. The Committee are perturbed to note that despite their
continuous pursuance, the process of examination and implementation
of the recommendations of the Defence Expenditure Review Committee
Report relating to curbing of wasteful expenditure is still underway.
The Committee have been informed that the task of examination and
implementation of the recommendations considered acceptable and
implementable has now been entrusted to officers of the level of Joint
Secretary in the Ministry of Defence and Defence Finance. Wherever
feasible action has already been initiated. The Committee would
like to be apprised of the recommendations accepted and implemented
so far as well as their impact. The Committee observe that considerable
time has already lapsed since the report in this regard was made.
As such the argument of the Ministry that the exercise is time
consuming is not acceptable. While expressing concern over the delay
in implementation of the recommendations in this regard, the
Committee again emphasize to complete the task within the stipulated
time frame.
B. Married Accommodation Project
Recommendation (Paragraph No. 10)
9. The Committee had recommended as under:—
“The Committee note that Married Accommodation Project (MAP)
has been launched to meet the deficiencies of married
accommodation that is to the tune of 28,099 dwelling units as on
2001. The aforesaid project would be undertaken in four phases.
The Committee in their 30th Report on Married Accommodation
in Defence and Allied services had observed that there was
considerable delay in execution of Phase-I which would be followed
by the subsequent phase. The Committee find that due to the
shortage of married accommodation, the Defence personnel have
to stay away from their families for a long period of time. In view
of this, the Committee again emphasize that all the Phases of the
Married Accommodation Project should be completed within a
stipulated time frame so that the Defence personnel including those
staying in the difficult areas like Jammu and Kashmir and Northern
Eastern Areas can stay with their families.”

5
10. The Ministry in its action taken reply, has stated as under:—
“The Married Accommodation Project (MAP) undertaken by
MoD envisages construction of 1,98,881 Dwelling Units (DUs)
for the three Services in four Phases at an estimated cost of
Rs. 17,357.97 crore. As per the approval of Cabinet Committee on
Security, the period of Phase-I of the project was from 2002-03 to
2005-06. It may however be mentioned that the organization of
Director General, MAP , was sanctioned in May 2002 with the
responsibility of project implementation. MAP envisaged
construction activity of huge proportions spread all over the country.
This was a new concept for the armed forces. Hence, the initial
start of the project was delayed. However, after the initial gestation
period, there has been significant progress.
A total of 46385 DUs have been completed so far. Construction of
the dwelling Units has been delayed due to land transition, land
litigation and cancellation of contract cases. Probable Date of
Completion (PDC) for Phase-II is 31st March, 2012. With all systems
in place and experience of Phase-I, it is expected that work of
Phase-II will be completed in time.”
11. Keeping in view the plight of Defence Personnel and their
family members, due to shortage of Married Accommodation, the
Committee in their various reports have been recommending to
complete all the phases of Married Accommodation Project within a
stipulated time frame. The Committee are distressed to note that even
then against the target of 1,98,881 Dwelling Units (DUs) for the three
Services in four phases, the Ministry could complete 46385 DUs during
phase-I which works out to 23.32% only. While deploring the tardy
pace of work, the Committee strongly feel that the basic needs of
housing for the Armed Forces Personnel are not going to be fulfilled.
The Committee, therefore, would like to reiterate their earlier
recommendation to take all out efforts to complete the task without
any further delay.
C. Outcome Budget
Recommendation (Paragraph No. 11)
12. The Committee had recommended as under:—
“The Committee in their 29th and 35th reports (Fourteenth Lok
Sabha) had recommended that the Ministry should identify the
areas and organizations for which the Outcome Budget could be

6
prepared and present the same to Parliament at least from the
year 2009-10. However, Outcome Budget was not presented for
the year 2009-10. The Committee were expecting that at least
the Ministry would now prepare Outcome Budget for the
year 2010-11. However, the Committee are again disappointed to
note that the same has not been done by the Ministry. The Ministry
has now stated that orders have been issued on 18.2.2010 to renew
the efforts by getting Outcome Budget prepared in respect of
National Cadet Corps (NCC) and the Married Accommodation
Project (MAP). The Committee feel that some of the other areas
like ordnance factories, PSUs, Naval Dockyards and depots and
some other selected establishments should be identified and the
Outcome Budget 2011-12, presented to Parliament for the year on
a pilot basis followed by the comprehensive Outcome Budget in
the coming years.”
13. The Ministry in its action taken reply, has stated as under:—
“It has been decided to attempt Outcome Budget in respect of
Naval Dockyards also. However, the Ministry of Defence is of
the view that it may not be appropriate to place the Outcome
Budgets in the public domain or present them to the Parliament
till sufficient experience is gained to ensure that quality and contents
of the Outcome Budgets have reached an acceptable level of
excellence.”
14. The Committee find that pursuant to their recommendation,
the Ministry has agreed to attempt Outcome Budget in respect of Naval
Dockyards besides National Cadet Corps(NCC) and the Married
Accommodation Project (MAP) as communicated during the course of
examination of Demands for Grants. The Committee are, however,
distressed to find that the Ministry is not inclined to place the Outcome
Budget in the public domain and present to Parliament till sufficient
experience is gained to ensure that quality and contents of the Outcome
Budget have reached an acceptable level of excellence. The Committee
observe that Outcome Budget of various Ministries/Departments of
the Union Government are being prepared and laid on the table of the
House as per the instructions of the Ministry of Finance/Planning
Commission. As such preparation of Outcome Budget by the Ministry
of Defence is not a new thing. Moreover, the Committee fail to
understand how the experience would be gained by the Ministry
without placing it in public domain and presenting to Parliament.
Document is placed in the public domain as soon as it is presented
to Parliament and the excellence can only be achieved through public
scrutiny and their suggestions. The Committee, therefore, while

7
reiterating their earlier recommendation would like the Ministry to
start the practice of presenting the Outcome Budget at least of the
selected items from the year 2011-2012 onwards.
D. One Rank One Pension
Recommendation (Paragraph No. 14)
15. The Committee had recommended as under:—
“The Committee find that ex-servicemen are demanding One Rank
One Pension which implies that uniform pension be paid to the
Armed Forces personnel retiring in the same rank with the same
length of service irrespective of their date of retirement and any
future enhancement in the rates of pension to be automatically
passed on to the past pensioners. In this context, a Committee
headed by Cabinet Secretary was constituted which submitted its
report on 30 June, 2009. On the issue of One Rank One Pension,
the Ministry has stated that the Committee headed by Cabinet
Secretary did not find it administratively feasible to recommend
One Rank One Pension. The Ministry also elaborated that the
concept of One Rank One Pension was not accepted by Fourth and
Fifth Central Pay Commissions, inter-ministerial Committee, 2003
and GoM set up in January, 2005 due to administrative, financial
and legal reasons. As stated by the Ministry, acceptance of the
principle of One Rank One Pension has substantial implications
estimated at Rs. 8000-9000 crore per annum. Not only that the
Supreme Court on the issue of grant of ‘One Rank One Pension’
has also claimed that ‘OROP’ is not tenable. From the aforesaid
position, the Committee conclude that One Rank One Pension has
not been accepted by the Government. However, the pensionary
benefits of ex-servicemen including disabled ex-servicemen have
considerably been improved by implementation of seven
recommendations of the Committee. While noting the aforesaid
position the Committee urge that the Government should again
consider the issue of one rank one pension in holistic manner so
that large number of ex-serviceman can be benefited and also ensure
that the various benefits provided to the ex-servicemen due to
implementation of the recommendation of the Committee headed
by the Cabinet Secretary along with the arrears if any, are paid
expeditiously.”
16. The Ministry in its action taken reply, has stated as under:—
“The Committee set up under the Chairmanship of Cabinet Secretary
to look into the issue of One Rank One Pension and related issues

8
did not recommend its acceptance for various reasons. However,
keeping in view the spirit of the demand, the Committee made
several recommendations which have been accepted and
Government orders to implement the recommendations have been
issued on 30.10.2009, 19.1.2010, 20.1.2010 and 8.3.2010.
2. Various steps have been taken to ensure expeditious
implementation of these orders: (i) A notice was published in
prominent national and regional newspapers on 12.3.2010 intimating
all concerned about the issue of Government orders in respect of
the seven recommendations. (ii) The orders have also been placed
on the website of Comptroller General of Defence Accounts.
(iii) Ministry of Defence have been closely coordinating with
Ministry of Finance to ensure expeditious revision of pension by
the banks; Ministry of Finance have issued instructions to all
concerned Chief Managing Directors/Chief Executive Officers of
public and private sector banks to do the needful in a time-bound
manner. (iv) This Department has also requested all Chief Secretaries
to instruct District Collectors to regularly review the progress made
in this regard at their level.
17. The Committee note that pursuant to their recommendation,
a number of steps have been initiated by the Ministry to ensure
expeditious implementation of several recommendations of the
Committee set up under the Chairmanship of Cabinet Secretary which
would result in improvement in pensionery benefits of ex-servicemen
including disabled ex-servicemen. However, the Government is not
inclined to reconsider the issue of One Rank One Pension as suggested
by the Committee. The Committee again emphasize that even after
implementation of the aforesaid several recommendations, the demand
of One Rank One Pension still persists. As such, the Committee would
like to reiterate their earlier recommendation to consider the issue of
One Rank One Pension in holistic manner so that a large number of
ex-servicemen are benefitted.
E. Sukna Land Scam
Recommendation (Paragraph No. 15)
18. The Committee had recommended as under:—
“The Committee find that recently a lot of controversies with regard
to the use of Defence Land have been reported in the media

9
including the latest Sukna land scam which involved the matter
regarding issue of No Objection Certificate by Army for setting up
educational institution with residential facility in the land which
belong to State Government of West Bengal. On the suggestion of
the Committee to have a regulator for huge defence estates in the
country which emerged during the deliberations the Ministry was
of the view that the existing system was adequate and there was
no need of a separate regulator. The Committee are of the strong
view that land scams such as Sukna land scam affects the image
of Army and the Defence services as a whole and as such it is
utmost necessary that the country should have the fool proof system
to regulate the Defence estates. In spite of internal mechanism to
regulate the Defence estates such incidents are happening. As such
the Committee recommend that their suggestion of having an
independent regulator should be considered by the Ministry
positively and the Committee apprised accordingly about the action
taken in this regard.”
19. The Ministry in its action taken reply, has stated as
under:—
“The management of defence land is governed by the
provisions of Cantonments Act, 2006, Cantonment Land
Administration Rules, 1937 and Acquisition, Custody and
Relinquishment etc. of Military Lands in India Rules, 1944. Ministry
has also issued instructions from time to time for better and
effective management of Defence land. The existing framework
mentioned above contains adequate provisions for management of
Defence Lands”.
20. The Committee disapprove the way the Ministry has tried to
sidetrack one of their important recommendations for having an
independent regulator for defence land. Even when various land scams
such as, Sukna Land Scam and Adarsh Housing Scam are being
reported, the Ministry consider the existing framework as adequate for
management of defence land. The Committee strongly emphasize that
reporting of such land scams affects the overall image of the armed forces
and as such there is an urgent need to look into the issues related to
management of defence land. As such, the Committee would like to
reiterate their earlier recommendation to have an independent regulator
in this regard. An urgent action should be taken and the Committee
apprised accordingly.

10
F. Shortage of officers in Army
Recommendation (Paragraph No. 20)
21. The Committee had recommended as under:—
“The Committee have been apprised that the existing shortage of
officers in Army is 11,456. Various steps to meet the shortage are
being taken by the Ministry which include sustained image
projection and publicity campaign, participation in career fairs and
exhibitions, advertisements in print and electronic media, counseling
and motivational talks in schools, colleges and NCC camps etc. The
Committee feel that all these are steps in the right direction and
need to be taken in a more effective way. Besides the Committee
find that there is an urgent need to give more attention to the
National Cadet Corps whose main objective is to groom the youth
into disciplined and patriotic citizens. The Committee while
debating the issue during the course of the deliberations had the
feeling that the desired focus in this regard is not being given. The
basic impediment being faced in this regard as elaborated by
the representative of the Ministry is shortage of supervisory staff
which primarily have to be provided by the three services. In this
connection, the Committee recommend that the Ministry can
think of having a pool of officers from Ex-servicemen. The retired
officers of the three services, can be inducted into the aforesaid
pool.”
22. The Ministry in its action taken reply , has stated as under:—
“Besides awareness campaigns, participation in career fairs and
exhibitions, advertisements in print and electronic media,
motivational lectures in schools and colleges, continuous and
sustained steps have been taken, aimed at reducing shortage of
officers in the Armed Forces which include improving their service
conditions, career progression, implementation of recommendations
of VI Central Pay Commission with substantial improvements in
pay and allowances, Married Accommodation Project (MAP) for
augmenting housing facilities, liberalized provisions for grant of
leave etc.
The National Cadet Corps as the largest uniformed youth
organization is committed to groom NCC cadets to become
disciplined and patriotic citizens of India. They constitute an
important pool for intake of officers in the Armed Forces. While
imparting training to these NCC cadets, special emphasis is also
being given to motivate and assist NCC cadets to join the Armed

11
Forces as officers. Some of the measures in this direction are as
under:—
(a) Increase in number of NCC cadets vacancies at Officer
Training Academy, Kamptee for Service Selection Board
Courses.
(b) Seven days Service Selection Board training to Associate NCC
officers who in turn train NCC cadets during institutional
training.
(c) Conduct of Special Annual Training Camp at Directorate
level and attachment with Army/Navy/Air Force for selected
cadets.
(d) Increase in Republic Day Banner competition points to
Directorates for number of cadets joining Armed Forces
Academies.
(e) Incentives to Commanding Officers who ensure maximum
enrolment in the Armed Forces.
(f) Service Selection Board type obstacle course is being fabricated
at HQ DG NCC camp to impart practical training for Service
Selection Board.
(g) Special coaching course at HQ DG NCC for selected cadets
to appear for Service Selection Boards.
As regards Committee’s recommendation to have a pool of officers
of ex-servicemen from the three Services to make up the existing
deficiency of officers, provisions already exist for re-employment
of retired officers in Army and Navy.
23. The Committee take note of the various initiatives taken by
the Ministry to make good the shortage of officers in armed forces.
With regard to the suggestion of the Committee, to have a pool of
officers of ex-servicemen to overcome the shortage of supervisory staff
in NCC training, the Ministry has stated that provisions already exist
for re-employment of retired officers in Army and Navy for the purpose.
The Ministry’s admission of shortage of supervisory staff during the
course of oral evidence, indicates that the retired officers are not
interested in joining the supervisory staff for NCC training. The
Committee would like to be apprised about the reasons for the
disinterest of retired officers of Army and Navy in this regard. The
Committee would also like to be apprised the specific reasons for not
making provisions for retired officers of Air Force and Coast Guard
Organisation for re-employment in this regard.

12
G. Recruitment Rallies for Jawans
Recommendation (Paragraph No. 22)
24. The Committee had recommended as under:—
“The Committee note that the rallies for the purpose of recruitment
of Jawans in the Armed Forces are being conducted in various
places to meet the shortage of personnel in armed forces. In this
connection, the expenditure with regard to tent, light refreshment
etc. is being borne by the District Administration. Due to the
financial burden, the district administration sometimes do not show
interest because of the expenditure involved in this regard. As such,
the Committee strongly recommend that all the expenditure
involved in conducting recruitment rallies should be borne by the
Ministry of Defence and allocation for the purpose should separately
be earmarked in the outlay of the Ministry of Defence. The
Committee also recommend that for such rallies, wide publicity
should be given through mass media, wall posters and village
panchayats of that area.”
25. The Ministry in its action taken reply, has stated as under:—
“Open rallies for the purpose of recruitment of Jawans are generally
carried out in Non Military Stations where the army has limited
or no resources. Rallies are planned and conducted after having
coordinated all details with State Civil Administration and the
District Civil Authorities. Special emphasis is given to provision
of infrastructure, security and administrative backup. The
involvement of States in recruitment process is a must to ensure
that they feel themselves as part of the recruiting process and
contribute to the national cause. Considering the magnitude of the
arrangement also, the task is not feasible without the active
involvement and support of the Local Administration. Expenditure
involved is not much but the effect is tremendous both on the Civil
Administration and the public.
After detailed coordination with civil authorities the publicity is
carried out through both print and electronic media. Vigorous media
campaign has been continuing to project the image of the Army.
The Army has been making a concerted effort at publicity through
a series of measures as under:—
(i) Awareness campaign are regularly organized by the recruiting
officials in various Colleges and Schools to attract the youth
to opt for Army as a career;

13
(ii) Recruiting/publicity stalls are also established alongwith air
shows, tattoo programs, publicity material like handouts are
also distributed free of cost at such rallies and in various
schools;
(iii) NCERT books from States of Haryana, Assam, Mizoram,
Himachal Pradesh and Maharashtra are carrying
advertisements about the Indian Army;
(iv) Grass root publicity has been achieved by inserting all
information about the Army in log books being circulated in
all Schools and Colleges across the Country;
(v) Information Parks have been opened in all Headquarters
Recruiting Zones and Army Recruiting Offices displaying
information pertaining to recruitment of Officers and
Personnel Below Officer ranks;
(vi) Adequate publicity is resorted to in the print media and TV
from time to time. Various magazines carry detailed
information about details to join the Army;
(vii) Interactive Voice Response System (IVRS) are being installed
with all Headquarter Recruiting Zones to enable candidates
to seek information regarding various recruitment procedures
and rallies;
(viii) An interactive website ( joinindianarmy.nic.in ) has been
redesigned;
(ix) A non syllabus book on Army has been introduced in NCERT
syllabus from class IX to XI this year i.e. 2010 session. From
session 2011 a chapter in Social Studies book is planned to
be included in class IX to XI;
(x) Adequate publicity is ensured both through print and visual
media just before the forms are required to be filled for various
entries and also for Recruitment Rallies; and
(xi) Motivational lectures are conducted in schools and colleges
across the country by serving as well as retired officers on
Army as a career.”
26. The Ministry in the Action Taken Note has emphasized for
the involvement of State Governments and local administration in
arrangement of rallies organized for the purpose of recruitment of
jawans in the armed forces. The Committee while making the earlier
recommendation, had never the intention to not to involve the State
Governments or local bodies in this regard. The Committee had

14
observed that due to financial burden, the district administration
sometimes do not show interest because of the expenditure involved
in this regard and as such, had recommended that the expenditure
involved in conducting rallies, should be borne by the Ministry of
Defence and allocation for the purpose should separately be earmarked
in the outlay of Ministry of Defence. The Ministry has not taken the
recommendation of the Committee in the right perspective and avoided
the issue. Moreover, the Ministry itself has admitted that the
expenditure in this regard is not more. As such, there are no reasons
to put financial burden on the district administrations. As such the
Committee would like the Ministry to reconsider their recommendation
and provide specific allocation for the purpose in the outlay of the
Ministry of Defence.
H. Support to Families of Gallantry Award Winners
Recommendation (Paragraph No. 24)
27. The Committee had recommended as under:—
“The Committee note that cash support being provided by the
Government to the Gallantry Awards Winners and their families
has not been revised since a long time and are getting only Rs. 1500
for Shaurya Chakra to the maximum of Rs. 3000 for Paramveer
Chakra. Although these soldiers have fought wars with the enemies
and laid down their lives solely to defend their motherland and
never thought of any monetary consideration in lieu of their bravery,
it is the duty of the nation to show its gratitude towards them by
honouring them suitably. As the Government is looking into the
matter to raise the amount of different gallantry awards, the
Committee strongly recommend that there should be a decent
increase in the monthly amount being given to these awardees”.
28. The Ministry in its action taken reply, has stated as under:—
“ A proposal for enhancement of monetary allowances attached to
Gallantry Awards has been taken up.”
29. The Committee are happy to note that a proposal for
enhancement of monetary allowances attached to Gallantry Awards
has been taken up as Gallantry Award Winners and their families are
getting only Rs. 1500 for Shaurya Chakra to the maximum of Rs. 3000
for Paramveer Chakra. The Committee desire that this matter should
be decided by the Government on priority basis and the Committee
may be apprised of the enhancement of monetary allowance to the
different categories of personnel.

15
I. Border Roads Organization
Recommendation (Paragraph No. 29)
30. The Committee had recommended as under:—
“Committee has observed that the main hurdle in construction of
Border roads is the forest clearance and wild life clearance as stated
by the representative of the Ministry. To address the problem, at
the level of Cabinet Secretary, periodic meetings are being taken
and Sub-Committee has been formed in the Ministry under the
chairmanship of Additional Secretary . Representatives of various
Central and State level Departments concerned will also meet in
15 days. The Committee while appreciating the aforesaid mechanism
would like to strongly recommend that all the desired allocation
should be made for the border roads on a priority basis.
The Committee has emphasized that the Border Roads should be
given top most priority on the issue of forest and wild life clearance
and these clearances should be accorded in a time bound manner
so that these roads are constructed expeditiously.”
31. The Ministry in its action taken reply, has stated as
under:—
(1) Status of Forest/Wild Life clearance is enclosed as
Appendix ‘ A’ .
(2) Status of Forest/Wild Life clearance as on April 10 is enclosed
as Appendix ‘B’.
(3) Actions taken by BRO is enclosed as Appendix ‘C’.
32. While analyzing the data with regard to the forest clearance
as indicated in the action taken note, the Committee find that the
position is not satisfactory. Out of 304 ICBR and Non ICBR cases
(as on April, 2010) only 99 cases could get final clearance. The Committee
have analyzed the various aspects related to forest and wild life
clearances for the Border Roads in detail and made various
recommendations in their 8th Report on ‘Construction of Roads in
border areas of the country.’ The Committee hope that the Government
would take the requisite action as suggested in the report. Here the
Committee may like to emphasize that there is a need for fast track
procedures as Border Roads are required for strategic reasons and the
issue is of the security of the nation. As such all the initiatives should
be taken so that the construction of Border Roads is not affected due
to the procedural hurdles.

16
J. Adequate allocation to Air Force
Recommendation (Paragraph No. 31)
33. The Committee had recommended as under:—
“The examination of the data provided by the Ministry with regard
to the financial performance during the first three years of
Eleventh Plan indicates that there is under-spending during each
of the year. Such under spending was Rs. 3427.79 crore during
2007-08, Rs. 855.90 crore during 2008-09. During the year 2009-10,
if the financial performance is seen in the light of the expenditure
position upto February, 2010, there was under spending to the tune
of Rs. 6435.36 crore. The Committee have however been informed
during the course of oral evidence that all the allocations provided
during the year 2009-10 have been utilized. While recommending
for adequate resources to Air Force, the Committee would also like
to emphasize that the resources made available to Air Force should
be effectively utilized so that the Ministry of Defence can present
their case effectively to the Ministry of Finance for getting the
adequate allocations. The Committee would also like to recommend
that the position of expenditure met and under-spending of the
outlay during a year, item-wise, should be indicated in all the Budget
documents so as to have a clear position of the performance of
various projects during a given year.”
34. The Ministry in its action taken reply, has stated as under:—
“The observations of the Committee have been brought to the notice
of the Ministry of Finance and the Air HQrs.
As regards the recommendation that the position of expenditure
met and under-spending of the outlay during a year item-wise
should be indicated in all the Budget documents so as to have a
clear position of the performance of various projects during a given
year, it is submitted that the Budget document for a particular year
is printed some time in February every year for being presented
to the Parliament. Since the document is printed before the close
of the financial year, it is not possible to indicate the status of
actual expenditure of the current year in the Budget document.
However, the Budget document shows the status of actual
expenditure of the preceding year, the BE and the RE for the current
year and the BE for the ensuing year. These details are given in
respect of each Minor Head in the Budget document.”

17
35. The main focus of the recommendation of the Committee
was to address the under-utilization of financial resources allocated to
Air Force. The Ministry of Defence has not replied to this aspect in
the action taken reply. Not only that the Ministry has not bothered to
indicate the status of utilization of outlay during the years 2009-2010
and 2010-2011. While expressing unhappiness over the way the Ministry
has addressed to their recommendations, the Committee again
emphasize to take all the initiatives so that the allocation made for
Air Force is meaningfully utilized. The Committee should also be kept
apprised of the status of expenditure in this regard.
K. Accidents of Aircraft in Air Force
Recommendation (Paragraph No. 34)
36. The Committee had recommended as under:—
“The Committee note with concern that as many as 74 accidents
involving Indian Air Force aircraft have so far taken place.
41.89 per cent of accidents were due to technical defects and
44.59 per cent were due to human failure and 6.76 per cent due
to bird hits. The Committee note that the various initiatives being
taken by Air Force to reduce aircraft accidents include invigoration
of Aviation Safety organization, streamlining of accidents/incident
reporting procedure, analytical studies and quality audits of the
aircraft fleets to identify vulnerable areas and institute remedial
measures. From the data provided with regard to the reasons
for accidents the Committee find that most of the accidents i.e.
44.59 per cent are due to human failure. In this regard, the
Committee find that proper training of the pilots can play an
important role. The Committee’s examination has revealed that
Air Force is facing problem in respect of trainer aircraft and
Simulators. Due to some problems basic trainer aircraft i.e. HPT-32 has
been grounded. The Committee have been informed during the course
of deliberation that Air Force has adequate number of Kiran
Simulators. The Committee’s examination has further revealed that
Air Force is facing problem with regard to upgradation of Kiran
Simulators. From the aforesaid scenario it is apparent that Indian
Air Force is facing problems in respect of trainer aircraft and
simulators. The Committee strongly recommend that all the steps
should be taken to acquire/upgrade the trainer aircraft and
simulators so that adequate training is provided to pilots which
would definitely result in reduction of accidents due to human

18
failure. Besides adequate allocations should be provided for the
proposed acquisitions/upgradations so that these projects do not
suffer due to lack of resources”.
37. The Ministry in its action taken reply, has stated as under:—
“The flying training in the IAF is structured in three stages
(i.e. Basic stage, Intermediate stage and Advanced stage) during
which the training is pitched in a manner to ensure complete and
proper development of a trainee in each stage and produce a mature
and a competent aviator. In place of grounded HPT-32 aircraft, IAF
is utilizing Kiran Mk 1/1A aircraft for basic stage training. During
intermediate stage training, trainees are introduced to more
demanding exercises on specific aircraft of the respective streams
(i.e. by Chetak helicopter and Dornier Aircraft DO-228 etc.). During
advanced stage of training, trainees are exposed to the advanced
exercises in each stream (i.e. by Kiran Mk-II/Hawk Mk-132 aircraft,
Mi-8 helicopter, Avro and AN-32 aircraft.)
To upgrade Kiran Simulators, IAF have procured 9 Cockpit
Procedure Trainers (CPT) and 9 Procedure Practice Platforms (PPP)
for Kiran Mi I/II aircraft. All devices have been installed and are
being utilized as an integral part of flying training at respective
Field Training Establishments.
Acquisitions/upgradation of the trainer aircraft and simulators
In order to further enhance the quality of training, adequate
simulators like Synthetic Training Equipments (STEs) and Computer
Aided Learning Systems (CALS) for all modern state-of-the-art
trainer aircraft with compatible mission planning/debriefing
modules are also being inducted. Emphasis is being laid on
proportionate training on the ground based simulators in all aspects
and roles of flying. Simulators training is embedded in the training
syllabus at all the training establishments. The various simulators
(i.e. HPT-32 and Kiran Simulators, Hawk Simulators, IJT Simulators,
Navigation Simulators and Transport Aircraft Simulators) are
already being updated in the IAF to impart training in Flying
Training Establishments and Ground Training Establishments.
Modernisation of Training centres and training equipment in the
IAF is an ongoing process aimed at improving the quality of training
being imparted at all the IAF training establishments. Efforts are
regularly being made to upgrade the training systems in IAF so
as to provide a contemporary training environment to the trainees
and thoroughly prepare them for easy absorption into the
operational environment of the IAF.”

19
38. The Committee’s main concern in the recommendation was
the increasing number of accidents due to human failure. As such, the
Committee had emphasized to provide proper training to pilots. The
Committee had also recommended that adequate allocation should be
provided for the purpose of acquisition and upgradation of trainer
aircrafts and simulators. The Ministry in the action taken reply has
nowhere responded to the amount allocated for the said purpose. The
Committee, therefore, desire the Ministry to furnish the information
related to allocation made for this purpose and expenditure incurred
thereof.
L. Modernization of Airfield Infrastructure (MAFI)
Recommendation (Paragraph No. 36)
39. The Committee had recommended as under:—
“The Committee note that the proposal of modernization of Airfield
Infrastructure (MAFI) project Phase-I comprising thirty-one Indian
Air force Airfields is to be concluded within three and a half years
of signing of the contract. The proposal is presently at the stage
of commercial discussion stage and currently progressing on
schedule. The Committee further note that based on the experience
gained during Phase- I implementation, the requirements in respect
of Phase-II of balance (Indian Air force, Army , Navy, Coast Guard,
etc.) Airfields will be consolidated and the modernization process
will be initiated. The time required for completion of Phase-II will
also be approximately three and a half years. As Air Force requires
airfields from strategic point of view, the Committee emphasize
that commercial negotiations for Phase-I and also of Phase-II projects
be completed expeditiously within a fixed time frame. The
Committee should be kept apprised of the progress made in this
regard.”
40. The Ministry in its action taken reply, has stated as under:—
“Modernization of Airfield Infrastructure (MAFI) Project aims to
modernize navigational aids at all the airfields. 30 airfields are
included in Phase-I and remaining airfields will be included in
Phases-II of the MAFI Project. The Contract Negotiation Committee
(CNC) for MAFI Phase-I has been completed. The case will now
be progressed for obtaining the approval of the Cabinet Committee
on Security (CCS).”

20
41. Keeping in view the strategic importance of airfields the
Ministry had informed the Committee during the course of examination
of DFG (2010-2011) that the requirements in respect of Phase-II of
modernization of airfields would be consolidated and the
modernization process initiated. However, in the action taken reply,
the Ministry has submitted the progress with regard to Phase-I i.e. the
Contract Negotiation Committee has been constituted and the case
would now be progressed for obtaining the approval of Cabinet
Committee on Security. The Ministry’s reply is silent in regard to
Phase-II of Modernization of airfields as assured by them. The
Committee, therefore, desire the Ministry to respond to the above part
of the recommendation and wish to stress upon for their expeditious
completion.
M. Acquisition of Radars
Recommendation (Paragraph No. 37)
42. The Committee had recommended as under:—
“The Committee find that the proposal for replacement of radars
was held up during 1996-97 and 1997-98 due to lack of budgetary
support. However, it actively progressed thereafter and CCS
approval was accorded on 15 January 2002. The existing radars
were functional and used by the IAF with restrictions on flying
activity during adverse weather conditions. From the information
provided by the Ministry, the Committee find that IAF is
maintaining 12 High Power Radars. Besides, the acquisitions for
more radars are in pipeline. In addition, 8 radars are being
developed by DRDO. The Committee strongly recommend that all
the steps should be taken to ensure that there is no delay in
acquisition of radars which are in pipeline and adequate allocation
is ensured for the purpose.”
43. The Ministry in its action taken reply, has stated as under:—
“During the Financial Year 1996-97, the funds available for
modernization (Capital Schemes) was Rs. 3175 crores (RE). The
actual expenditure was Rs. 3164 crores. During the Financial Year
1997-98, the funds available was Rs. 3972 crores while the actual
expenditure was Rs. 3962 crores. While the funds were utilized for
various modernization projects of the IAF, orders for two Medium
Power Radars could not be placed. The Government is fully
cognizant of the need to augment the air defence assets of the IAF.
Towards this end, procurement of various systems and equipment

21
have been approved and are at various stages of induction. These
include the Airborne Warning And Control System (AWACS)
aircraft, Medium Power Radars, Low Level Transportable Radars,
Low Level Light Weight Radars and Rohini Radars. In addition,
the Defence Research and Development Organisation is developing
different categories of radars to meet the air defence requirements
of the IAF. On induction of these systems, the air defence
requirement of the IAF will be fulfilled.”
44. During examination of Demands for Grants 2010-2011, the
Committee had found that the proposal for replacement of radars was
held up due to lack of budgetary support. Therefore, they had
recommended for expeditious replacement of radars. The Ministry has
not addressed to the aforesaid issue raised in the recommendation.
The Committee would like the Ministry to fix a time schedule for
acquisition of radars as suggested and inform the committee accordingly.
N. Allocation of Funds to Defence Research and Development
Organisation
Recommendation (Paragraph No. 38)
45. The Committee had recommended as under:—
“The allocation for Defence Research and Development Organization
for the year 2010-11 is Rs. 9809.72 crore. i.e. 6.25% of the overall
defence budget. From the allocation and expenditure trend, it is
observed that since 2007-08, the utilization is less than the allocation.
The percentage allocation to DRDO has been reduced from 6.74%
to 6.25%. The aforesaid trend of declining percentage of allocation
and under utilization of allotted amount is a matter of serious
concern. The Committee also note that the Ministry has given
priority to develop system to meet challenges of terrorism and low
intensity conflicts and taken various steps to strengthen long
gestation period of major projects, LCA, Kaveri Engines, Unmanned
Combat Aerial Vehicles, Airborne Early Warning and Control System
and Arjun Tanks. The Committee, therefore, strongly recommend
that the Ministry should fully utilize the allocation as provided to
them and seek additional amount at RE stage and complete the
R&D programme in time to enhance the defence modernization.
The Committee during the course of deliberations have been
informed that after the civil-nuclear deal, in some areas with regard
to the export control in DRDO, there have been some improvement.
But there are some laboratories like the missile laboratories which
are affected by the export controls. The Committee have also been

22
informed that Government is having discussions with the advanced
countries in this direction to make sure that the benefits of these
deals are given across the board. Appreciating the efforts of the
Ministry, the Committee desire them to pursue this matter of
national importance expeditiously.”
46. The Ministry in its action taken reply, has stated as under:—
Percentage of allocation to Deptt. of Defence R&D w.r.t. overall
Defence Budget
(Rs. in crore)
Year Defence Defence R&D % rise in % of R&D
Expenditure Expenditure  Defence R&D Budget to the
Budget w.r.t. overall Defence
previous year  Budget
2007-08 91680.00 6104.55 - 6.66
2008-09 114223.00 7694.55 26.05 6.74
2009-10 (RE) 136264.00 8514.81 10.66 6.25
2010-11 (BE) 147344.00 9808.72 15.20 6.66
Defence R&D Budget when compared to total Defence Budget
indicate the decline in percentage because of overall quantum of
increase in Defence Budget. However, Defence R&D Budget has
increased in absolute terms. Ministry of Finance (MoF) and Ministry
of Defence (MoD) has always allocated additional funds, when
required by Deptt. of Defence R&D.
Utilization of Budget provisions in r/o Defence R&D
(Rs. in crore)
Year Defence Defence   %age Funds
R&D (MA)  R&D Utilization  lapsed to
(Actuals) Government
2007-08 6256.81 6104.55 97.57 152.26
2008-09 7737.64 7694.55 99.44 43.09
2009-10 8514.81 8317.27 97.68 Under
[upto Mar.’ process of
2010 (Pre.)] Compilation
All out efforts will be made to utilize the allocations in full and
additional funds, if required, would be sought at later stage.”

23
47. In response to the recommendation of the Committee for full
utilization of the allocation provided for Research and Development
Programme and to seek additional amount at RE stage, the Ministry
has stated that it has taken all out efforts to utilize the allocation and
seek additional fund at a later stage. The Ministry has not addressed
the part recommendation of the Committee whereby it was emphasized
to pursue the matter regarding lifting of export control post civil-nuclear
deal in some of DRDO Laboratories particularly the missile laboratories
with the advanced countries. The Committee would like categorical
response of the Ministry in this regard.
O. Rama Rao Committee Report
Recommendation (Paragraph No. 39)
48. The Committee had recommended as under:—
“The Committee note that the Ministry has completed the
deliberations on the recommendations of Rama Rao Committee for
restructuring of DRDO and the Report will be submitted to the
Minister in this month for his considerations. The Committee expect
the Ministry to complete the task at the earliest under intimation
to them.”
49. The Ministry in its action taken reply, has stated as under:—
“Independent Review Committee headed by Dr. P . Rama Rao had
submitted its report to the Government on 5th March, 2008. The
report was processed by the Committee headed by Defence Secretary
to like into the responses and suggestions made by various
stakeholders on the recommendations of Dr. P . Rama Rao Committee.
The action on the implementation of the recommendations accepted
by the Government is still under process which may take some
more time. The Parliamentary Standing Committee on Defence
would be informed after implementation is completed.”
50. The Ministry in the action taken note has apprised the
Committee that the Report of Independent Review Committee headed
by Dr. P . Rama Rao relating to restructuring of DRDO, has been
examined by the Committee headed by the Defence Secretary and
approved by Hon’ble Raksha Mantri on 12 May, 2010. The Ministry
has further informed that the action on the implementation of the
recommendations accepted, is still under process and need more time.
The Committee are perturbed to note the stand of the Ministry that
the Standing Committee on Defence would be informed about the

24
recommendations and the status of implementation only after the
implementation is complete. The Committee observe that even when
some of the recommendations made by Dr. P . Rama Rao Committee
are being reported in media and even referred to by an expert during
the course of deliberations of the Committee, the Ministry is not
furnishing the information to the Parliamentary Standing Committee
on one pretext or the other. The Committee disapprove the way, the
Ministry has been addressing to the issue and would like them to
furnish the details of the recommendations as well as the
recommendations which have been accepted by the Government to
implement (barring the classified matters) for the information of the
Committee. Besides, the Committee emphasize to implement the
recommendations of Dr. P . Rama Rao Committee within a stipulated
time frame which would definitely result in the effective functioning
of DRDO.
P . Modernization of Indian Navy
Recommendation (Paragraph No. 44)
51. The Committee had recommended as under:—
“The Committee note that maritime security includes the exclusive
maritime zones admeasuring 2 million sq. km. area which is
regularly kept under vigil by the Coastguard and Navy. For effective
patrolling and keeping a vigil on such a large sea area, there is
an urgent need to have adequate number of ships and aircrafts. In
this connection, the Committee find that the emergency Committee
of the Cabinet had accepted a force level of 138 ships for the Indian
Navy in 1964. Even after the expiry of 46 years, the country is still
to get 138 ships. The present strength of naval fleet is only 129.
Further the Committee find that the Government had approved a
30 year long term submarine plan in 1999 which entails indigenous
construction of 24 modern conventional submarines by 2030. The
Six Scorpene Submarines which were earlier scheduled to be
delivered to Navy from 2012 till 2017, one each in one year, has
been delayed and first submarine will be commissioned only in
2015. The Ministry has acknowledged that induction of submarine
has not kept pace with the de-induction schedule. In addition, the
aircraft carrier Gorshkov which was due for induction in August,
2008 is not likely to be delivered by Russia in December, 2012. The
aircraft modernization plan also includes MiG 29K, Long Range
Maritime Reconnaissance Aircraft, Kamov 31, TU 142, IL 38 and
Dornier. The aforesaid scenario of the force level in Navy indicates
that there are huge delays in procurement of ships and aircrafts.

25
It is a matter of concern that the country could not achieve a force
level that was accepted by Cabinet 46 years back in 1964. Since then
a lot of challenges particularly in the field of naval security have
emerged particularly in the aftermath of November 2008 terrorist
attacks in Mumbai. The Committee strongly recommend that there
is an urgent need to find out the reasons for delay in acquisitions
and take adequate steps which include streamlining the acquisition
process. Besides the Committee would also like to emphasize that
the adequate outlay should be provided for the modernization plans
of Indian Navy.”
52. The Ministry in its action taken reply, has stated as under:—
“Delays sometimes occur in defence projects due to several reasons
such as insufficient and limited vendor base, non conformity of
their offers to the Request for Proposal (RFP) conditions, field trials,
complexities in contract negotiations, limited indigenous capability
and long lead time for indigenization etc. Further the market for
state-of-the-art defence equipment and platforms being
circumscribed by denial regimes, limited availability of required
type of material, complexities in construction and manufacturing
involving integration of large number of systems, assemblies and
sub-assemblies also cause delays.
To counter systemic and institutional delays, procedures and process
are continuously refined on the basis of experience gained during
the implementation of projects. There are also contractual provisions
for penalties against delays in project implementation.
The matters relating to time and cost overrun are examined at
appropriate level. Provisions have been incorporated in the Defence
Procurement Procedure for Review Committees and monitoring
teams suitably empowered to ensure timely execution of projects
at appropriate level.
In order to further streamline defence procurement procedures,
action has since been initiated to review the DPP 2008
(Amendment 2009).
Adequate funds are provided for modernization plan of the
Navy.
Further, keeping in mind the Mumbai terrorist attack, various new
equipments are proposed to be procured and inducted in order to
strengthen the Coastal Surveillance system. These include Radars,
Automatic Identification Systems, associated displays and

26
networking equipment for the Coastal Radar, Fast Interceptor Crafts
(FICs), Vessels and aircraft, setting up of Integrated Underwater
Defence and Surveillance System at various naval harbours, Coastal
Anti-Submarine Warfare ships and Long Range Acoustic Devices.”
53. The Committee find that although the Ministry has
acknowledged that there is delay in acquisition of defence projects,
specific reasons for delay in this regard have note been indicated in
the action taken note. A general reply stating several common reasons
like insufficient and limited vendor base, complexities in contract
negotiation etc. has been furnished. The Committee found that there
are huge gaps between the authorization level and present strength of
Naval fleet which include submarines, ships, aircrafts, etc. The
Committee emphasize to find out the reasons for delay on case to case
basis and take the corrective action so as to ensure that acquisition are
timely in place.

27
CHAPTER II
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS, WHICH HAVE BEEN
ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT
Recommendation (Paragraph No. 7)
The Committee during the course of deliberations have been
apprised that the long delays in Defence acquisition systems occur due
to several reasons such as limited vendor base, non conformity of the
offers to the RFP conditions, field trials, complexity in contract
negotiations, limited indigenous capability and long lead time for
indigenization etc. The Ministry has apprised that there is a provision
under DPP whereby RIF has to be issued for complex systems to find
out the kind of vendors available in the country as well as internationally.
The Committee find that the aforesaid system is not sufficient particularly
in the areas where single vendor or few vendors are available. There is
an urgent need to play a proactive role by the Ministry in this regard.
The Ministry should evolve a structured mechanism for market research
whereby a team of experts can be appointed for the purpose. Such a
system would definitely solve the problem of the single vendor/few
vendors in the specific technology and would help to contain the long
delays in acquisitions.
Reply of the Government
Structured mechanism has been introduced in Para 14 Chapter-1
of DPP 2008 (Amendment 2009) wherein, it is mandatory to post Request
for Information (RFI) on MoD website by Service HQ/and by
corresponding with maximum manufacturers. Additional inputs are
obtained from Defence Attaches, internet and defence journals/magazines/
exhibitions and previously contracted cases in such category . The inputs
so obtained should result in the form of a compliance table of Service
Qualitative Requirement’s vis-à-vis technical parameters of equipments
available in the world market, in as much details as feasible. The Draft
Service Qualitative Requirements (SQR) is circulated by the Service
Headquarters to all concerned agencies and Directorates which will also
be represented on the Staff Equipment Policy Committee (SEPC). Prior
to according approval to the SQR, the Staff Equipment Policy Committee
(SEPC) assesses that it would result in a multi vendor situation, if a
single vendor situation is likely then the reasons for formulation of such

28
SQR is recorded. Such cases are debated in the Services Capital Acquisition
Plan Categorization Higher Committee (SCAPCHC) meeting while seeking
‘ Acceptance of Necessity’ (AoN) and approved by Defence Acquisition
Council (DAC)/Defence Procurement Board (DPB).
Recommendation (Paragraph No. 8)
The Committee would also like to recommend that the urgent steps
should be taken by the Ministry to ensure transparency and accountability
in Defence acquisitions. The provisions in this regard should be contained
in the DPP itself. The Committee urge that the action on the suggested
line should be taken by the Ministry.
Reply of the Government
There are following provisions in the DPP to ensure transparency
and accountability:—
(i) Mandatory issue of Request for Information (RFI) in all
procurement cases to provide advance information and to
facilitate wide vendor base.
(ii) Sharing of information with Indian Industry by bringing out
a public version of perspective document outlining the
technology perspective and capability road map covering a
period of 15 years which would be widely publicized and
made available on MoD website.
(iii) Consultation/interactions with the representative of Industry
Associations in pre-categorization meetings in all procurement
cases. Vendors to be given advance information before the
issue of Request For Proposal (RFP) in all procurement cases
excepting those for security sensitive products. This
information given on MoD Website would provide them a
lead time for preparation of their offers in response to the
RFP .
(iv) All verbal communications with the vendors during the course
of trials have to be confirmed in writing.
(v) The result of technical/trial evaluations along with reason(s)
for disqualification has also to be intimated to vendors after
the acceptance of technical/staff evaluation reports.
(vi) A trial methodology has to be given in the RFP for advance
information of the vendors. Trials directive framed by the
Services has to be issued in conformity with the trial
methodology.

29
(vii) A more broad based and multidisciplinary trial team is
constituted for cases involve transfer of where equipment is
being procured for more than one service or if it technology.
(viii) Technical Ov ersight Committee has also been mandated to
provide oversight on the adopted trail methodology during
trials vis-à-vis trial methodology given in the RFP and the
trial directives.
(ix) Independent Monitors are appointed in consultation with the
Central Vigilance Commission for inquiring any complaint
received by the Buyer with regard to violation of the Integrity
Pact. The report of the enquiry, if any, made by the
Independent Monitors shall be submitted to the head of the
Acquisition Wing of the Ministry of Defence, Government of
India for appropriate decisions in the matter keeping in view
the provision of the pact.
(x) An integrity Pact needs to be signed between Ministry of
Defence and the bidders for schemes exceeding Rs. 100 crore,
irrespective of the value of the commercial bids submitted
by bidders. In the subject RFP , the vendor is required to
sign and submit pre-contract Integrity Pact (IP) and also
deposit Earnest Money Deposit (EMD). This would be
submitted in a separate envelop clearly marked as ‘IP and
EMD’ at the time of submission of technical and commercial
offers.
Recommendation (Paragraph No. 9)
The Committee note that during the year 2008-09 to buy capital
goods from foreign sources, Army had spent Rs. 1832.25 crore, Navy,
Rs. 4054.49 and Air Force Rs. 4270.24 crore. The total amount spent was
Rs. 10,156.98 crore. The Committee in their earlier reports have repeatedly
emphasized on the need for achieving self-reliance in Defence production
by strengthening R&D in Defence sector. The Committee in this regard
may like to highlight the recommendations of the 13th Finance
Commission as given under:—
“We (the Thirteenth Finance Commission) are of the view that there
exist considerable scope to improve the quality and efficiency of
Defence expenditure through increased Private Sector engagement,
import substitution and indigenization, improvements in procedures
and practices and better projects management, within the parameters
of Government of India’s Policy. Efforts in this direction will further
expand the fiscal space available for Defence spending.”

30
While appreciating the fact that there is an urgent need to use the
capacity of Defence Public Sector Undertakings and Ordnance Factories
optimally primarily for meeting the urgent operational procurements of
the three services, the equipments from foreign countries. As such the
Committee recommend that concerted action should be taken for the
involvement of private sector in line with the recommendation of the
13th Finance Commission.
Reply of the Government
The recommendation of the Committee is noted.
It is stated that Government has taken several steps to involve
private sector in Defence sector within the parameters of Government’s
policy. Apart from opening of Defence sector to 100% Private participation
with FDI upto 26%, both subject to licensing, since May 2001, and
introduction of offsets in our procurement procedures, introduction of
“BUY and MAKE INDIAN” category of procurement last year is expected
to lead to Joint Ventures between Indian companies and foreign companies
with transfer of technology.
Recommendation (Paragraph No. 16)
The Committee during the course of deliberations have been
apprised that the Government has constituted a Committee under the
Cabinet Secretary to look into the matter relating to Cyber Security
with regard to strategic data being maintained in computers by the
Defence Services. The Committee have also been apprised that
the Secretaries of various concerned Ministries including the Defence
Ministry and Department of Information and Technology are
members of this Committee. The Committee note that the aforesaid
mechanism is a step in the right direction. Besides all the initiatives
should be undertaken by involving various technical agencies like
C-DoT and cyber experts in the country to ensure the fool proof security
of the Defence data being maintained in computers and servers by the
Defence Services.
Reply of the Government
The Government is aware of the likelihood of our vast information
technology being subjected to Cyber Attacks and is ensuring adequate
defensive measures. Crisis Management Plan is being prepared for dealing
with any contingency in Cyber Space. Armed Forces have undertaken
number of initiatives in the field of research, training, development of
cyber tools, formulation of cyber doctrine and collaboration with cyber
experts to enhance and ensure security of critical information

31
infrastructures and cyber networks. Armed Forces are collaborating with
leading national agencies involved in security of networks and systems
in the country. Coordination with agencies such as National Technical
Research Organisation (NTRO), National Informatics Centre and
Computer Emergency Response Team-India (CERT-IN), Centre for
Development of Telematics (CDOT), Centre for Development of Advance
Computing (CDAC) and other private industries is done to keep abreast
with technology and activities undertaken by these agencies to ensure
cyber security. Strict isolation of internal network from internet/any other
network are ensured. Government regularly conduct Computer Security
Audits to ascertain the Safety and Security of information. Stringent
measures have been put in place to prevent loss of strategic data residing
on the PCs and Servers. Strict directives are in place to ensure that no
official/sensitive data documents are stored on Internet machines. Strategic
data is not being stored on computers. Army Cyber Security Establishment
(ACSE) has expertise to carry out regular as well as random checks to
assess vulnerability of cyber assets and render requisite advice thereto.
Government has already developed expertise, technologies and products
in the field of encryption, traffic analysis, gateway solution, application
level security etc.
Recommendation (Paragraph No. 17)
The Committee further find that security over the years is becoming
a multi functional area of specialization which includes terrorism,
information warfare in space and communication network etc. In view
of this, all the desired initiatives should be taken by the Ministry to
enhance the capabilities of the Armed Forces in dealing with
unconventional conflict scenario which include inter alia  asymmetric
warfare, low intensity warfare, cyber warfare etc. through imparting
proper training to the Armed Forces as well as by taking all other desired
initiatives.
Reply of the Government
Joint Doctrines for Sub Conventional Operations and Information
Warfare have already been promulgated. Training on Cyber Forensics,
Lead Auditor and other niche areas of information security have been
conducted to enhance the information security skills of the Defence forces.
Computer security audit is regularly undertaken to check the data
security not only in standalone machine, but also in machines connected
with Internet. Security Office has been issuing security instructions from
time to time for cyber security to the environment. A team of computer
experts from all the Service Headquarters and Ministry of Defence has

32
also been constituted for conducting cyber audit of the computers in
the offices located in Defence Headquarters security zone. An added
impetus has been accorded for training of personnel to counter
asymmetric threat and some of the products/technologies developed for
Armed Forces is being customized for Low Intensity Conflict (LIC)
operations. Cyber Warfare being a component of Information Warfare is
being addressed in a holistic manner under the overall ambit of
Information Warfare.
Recommendation (Paragraph No. 18)
Budgetary Allocation for Army
From the data furnished by the Ministry it is seen that Army HQs
projected a demand of Rs. 61,322 crore for 2010-11 under Revenue head,
while, it was allocated only Rs. 55,828 crore, which is Rs. 5,494 crore less
than the amount demanded for. Even the amount allocated in the
current BE is Rs. 1,424 crore less than the previous year BE (2009-10) of
Rs. 57,252 crore. The Committee note that there is apparent gap between
the projected and the allocated outlay under the revenue segment in
certain important heads like ECHS, works, transportation and stores. In
view of the aforesaid position, the Committee strongly recommend that
the additional requirement of Rs. 7748 crore which includes 5494 crore
under the Revenue head and Rs. 2254 crore under the Capital head should
be provided so that the major activities under the Revenue head and the
acquisitions under the Capital head are not affected due to shortage of
resources.
Reply of the Government
The observation of the Committee has been brought to the notice
of the Ministry of Finance.
Recommendation (Paragraph No. 19)
The Committee find from the data made available to them there
was underspending to the tune of Rs. 2663.02 crore during the year 2008-09
under the Capital head. During the year 2009-10, the expenditure under
the Capital head is Rs. 8855.67 crore out of the allocation of
Rs. 17992.64 crore upto 28th Feb. 2010. While recommending for the
outlay as projected by the Army , the Committee emphasize that all the
initiatives should be taken to ensure that the resources made available
under Capital head are effectively utilized to enable the Army to present
their case for the enhanced allocations. The Committee should be kept
apprised about the initiatives in this regard.

33
Reply of the Government
The observations of the Standing Committee have been
communicated to the Army Headquarters. They have assured of vigorous
monitoring of the pace of expenditure and timely reappropriation of
funds to ensure utilization of the allocation under the Capital budget.
Recommendation (Paragraph No. 21)
The Committee would also like to emphasize that on the one hand,
the Government needs the services of some of the officers of the three
services which could not be spared due to already continuing shortage
of these officers, on the other hand, it is also a fact that NCC training
would definitely help the three Services in solving the problem of shortage
of officers. In view of this, the Committee are of the firm view that there
is an urgent need to enroll more schools and colleges both Government
and private for NCC. The Committee would also like to recommend that
the Ministry should undertake a survey to know the percentage of number
of NCC students who have actually joined the three services. Besides,
the impact of the implementation of the recommendations of the
Sixth Pay Commission on recruitment of officers in Army should also
be watched.
Reply of the Government
Presently, around 6100 Government and private institutions
comprising 3800 schools and 2300 colleges are placed in the waiting list
seeking NCC coverage. Government is working on a proposal for increase
in authorized NCC cadet strength by 2 lakh cadets over a period of
5 years. During the last three years viz. 2007-09, a total of 423 cadets have
joined the Armed Forces Academies for officers. Besides, a total of
5977 NCC Certificate holders have been recruited as Personnel Below
Officer Rank (PBOR) in Army. The implementation of the
recommendations of the Sixth Central Pay Commission with substantial
improvements is expected to make the Services more attractive. A positive
swing, in this regard, has been observed.
Recommendation (Paragraph No. 23)
Light Weight Bullet Proof Jackets and Shoes, Helmets etc to Defence
Personnel.
The Committee in the First Report had strongly recommended to
purchase the deficient quantity of the bullet proof jackets i.e. 1,86,138
units through fast track procedure. The Ministry in the action taken reply
has stated that based on revised GSQR approval of the Defence Acquisition

34
Council (DAC) has been obtained in October 2009 for procurement of
Quantity 3,53,765 BPJs and quantity 1,86,168 BPJs to be procured in the
11th Army Plan. Presently, vetting of Request for Proposal (RFP) is in
progress. Same will be issued to Indian vendors shortly and the
procurement is likely to fructify soon. The Committee again emphasize
that while procuring bullet proof jackets, shoes and helmets for the soldier,
it should be ensured that these are light weight and of international
standard so that it does not affect that agility and mobility of soldier in
war like situations as well as during counter insurgency operations,
particularly in unfriendly terrains and mountainous region etc.
Reply of the Government
In the vetting of the GSQR of the bullet proof jackets and ballistic
helmets; the Army HQs are keeping the advice of the Standing Committee
on Defence in view to ensure that the soldier’s equipment is of latest
technology and international standard as per the operational/terrain
requirements prevailing in the country.
Recommendation (Paragraph No. 24)
Support To Families Of Gallantry Awards Winners
The Committee note that cash support being provided by the
Government to the Gallantry Awards Winners and their families has not
been revised since a long time and are getting only Rs. 1500 for Shaurya
Chakra to the maximum of Rs. 3000 for Paramveer Chakra. Although
these soldiers have fought wars with the enemies and laid down their
lives solely to defend their motherland and never thought of any monetary
consideration in lieu of their bravery, it is the duty of the nation to show
its gratitude towards them by honouring them suitably. As the Government
is looking into the matter to raise the amount of different Gallantry Awards,
the Committee strongly recommend that there should be a decent increase
in the monthly amount being given to these awardees.
Reply of the Government
A proposal for enhancement of monetary allowances attached to
Gallantry Awards has been taken up.
Recommendation (Paragraph No. 26)
The Committee again emphasize that besides maintaining data of
the war-widows, pensioners, the Committee feel that there is an urgent
need to disseminate the information about the various benefits being
given to them. In this regard, the Government can disseminate information

35
through print and electronic media. The mechanism of meetings of Gram
Sabha can also be used to disseminate the information in this regard.
Reply of the Government
The observations of the Committee regarding dissemination of
information relating to various benefits have been noted, and action is
being taken to have ESM related information disseminated through
DD and AIR. A MOU has been entered into with Doordarshan (DD) for
production and telecasting of programmes for educating ESM and their
dependants about various welfare schemes in vogue and place in
perspective their role/potential in the nation’s life. Information about
welfare schemes extended by both Central and State Governments is also
available with Rajya/Zila Sainik Boards (RSBs/ZSBs) in booklet form. This
information is also available on DGR and KSB’s websites.
The use of electronic and print media for dissemination of
information to the beneficiaries is being undertaken by the AG’s Branch
as well as Directorate General Resettlement (DGR). DGR publishes
periodicals like Sainik Punarvas and News Flier which provide relevant
information and these publications have a wide circulation.
The Rajya and Zila Sainik Boards will also be requested to interact
with Gram Sabha in the villages under their jurisdictions for dissemination
of information relating to welfare of ex-servicemen.
Recommendation (Paragraph No. 32)
Shortage of Officers in Indian Air Force
As per the information made available by the Ministry, against the
sanctioned strength of Air Force officer i.e. 12183, the present strength
is 10840, thus the shortage being of 1343 officers. In case of Persons
Below Officer Rank (PBOR), the sanctioned strength is 131174 and the
present strength is 125763, the shortage being 5411 as on March 2010.
The Committee find that various initiatives are being taken by the
Government to meet the shortage of officers and PBOR. Such initiatives
include participation in career fair, exhibitions, advertisement in print
and electronic media, motivational lectures in schools, colleges, visuals/
singnages all over the country at strategic locations. Besides, the
Government has recently started short service Commission for fighter
pilots. Initially it was only for women officers. The Committee note with
satisfaction that there is positive impact of implementation of Sixth Pay
Commission’s recommendations and qualified doctors, engineers and
those employed in MNCs have started joining the Air Force directly into
the flying job. The Committee note that the steps initiated by the

36
Government are in the right direction and hope that the initiatives would
result in meeting the shortage of pilots, other officers and PBOR in
Air Force. Besides, the Committee would also like to recommend that
the impact of the recommendations of Sixth Pay Commission should be
carefully watched.
Reply of the Government
The shortages of personnel in the IAF are regularly monitored. It
has been observed that the shortages of personnel at all levels have been
steadily decreasing over the last few years. The modification in policy
to enable men also eligible for entry into the flying branch has had a
positive effect. The impact of the recommendations of the Sixth Pay
Commission is also being closely monitored in this context.
Recommendation (Paragraph No. 40)
Analysis of Naval Budget
The Committee note that the allocations at BE stage exclusively to
Navy during the year 2010-11 are for Rs. 19625.79 crore against the
projections of Rs. 23825.57 crore. The gap between the projected allocation
and BE during 2010-11 is Rs. 4481 crore i.e. Rs. 2881 crore under the
capital head and Rs. 1600 crore under the revenue head. The additional
requirement under capital head i.e. gap between the projected outlay and
BE is to the tune of Rs. 2760 crore for modernization and Rs. 121 crore
for land and works. Similarly under the revenue head, the additional
requirement to the tune of Rs. 1600 crore is needed for enhanced P&A
and travel entitlements; prevailing inflation and fuel costs; increase in
cost of tariffs and raw materials; and increased cost of maintenance and
spares. The analysis of the data provided by the Ministry further indicates
that the Navy’s share of budgetary allocations to the total Defence Budget
is decreasing over the years. The percentage share in this regard
which was 17.45 per cent during the year 2007-08 has decreased to
13.32 per cent during 2010-11. If the aforesaid trend is seen separately
for revenue and capital head, the data indicates that under the revenue
head, the aforesaid share has declined from 12.03 per cent during the
year 2007-08 to 9.48 per cent during the year 2010-11. Under the Capital
head, the said share has decreased from 24.43 per cent to 18.89 per cent
during the aforesaid period. The Committee further note that the overall
long-term maritime capability plan includes ships, submarines and
aircrafts which are very crucial for the preparedness of Navy. As such
the Committee strongly recommend that the Navy should be provided
allocations during the year 2010-11 as per their projections. The additional
requirements of Rs. 4481 crore i.e. Rs. 2881 crore under the capital head
and Rs. 1600 crore under the revenue head as stated above should be

37
made available to the Navy so that the modernization programme of
Navy is not effected due to non-availability of resources.
Reply of the Government
The observation of the Committee has been brought to the notice
of the Ministry of Finance.
Recommendation (Paragraph No. 41)
While recommending for allocations to Navy as per their
requirements, the Committee observe that additional requirements are
being made available to Navy whenever there are new and important
projects in the pipeline as stated by the representative of Navy. On the
one hand, representative of the Navy has submitted before the Committee
that sustained budgetary support is necessary to realize the envisaged
force level, on the other hand, the Governments policy of making the
allocation of funds when asked for at the Revised Estimates stage has
been defended by the Ministry. While appreciating the fact that the
additional demands of Navy are considered favourably by the Government
and due priority is given to Defence, the Committee feel that there is
an urgent need to provide adequate allocations at BE stage itself. Providing
the required allocation at RE stage lead to adhocism in the various plans
of the Government. Moreover, as stated by the representative of Navy,
sustained budgetary support is necessary to realize the envisaged force
level. In view of this, the Committee feel that Navy as well as the Ministry
of Defence need to project their allocations forcefully before the
Government so that adequate allocation is made available to them at the
BE stage itself particularly when there is no scope for compromise on
the issue of Defence allocation.
Reply of the Government
The observation of the Committee has been brought to the notice
of the Ministry of Finance.
The Ministry of Defence has been making, and will continue to
make, earnest efforts to secure allocation from the Ministry of Finance
as per the projections of the Services, including Navy, and other
Departments.
Recommendation (Paragraph No. 42)
The Budgetary allocation for Navy is contained in Demand No. 23
of the Ministry of Defence which also includes the Budget for Joint Staff.
While indicating the trend of increase/decrease in naval budget over the

38
years, the combined data is given in various Budget documents which
do not truly reflect the trends of allocations exclusively for Navy. As such
the Committee strongly recommend that the allocations for Navy and
Joint Staff should separately be indicated in future in the Budget
documents so as to understand the increase/decrease in allocations
separately for both.
Reply of the Government
1. The Defence budget document, viz., the Defence Services
Estimates, contains six Demands for Grant. Five of these Demands are
related to the revenue budget of the Army, Navy, Air Force, DGOF and
the Defence R&D, while the sixth Demand is related to the Capital Outlay
in respect of all the Services and Departments. The revenue budget of
Joint Staff is included in the Demand for Grant for Navy. Within the
Demand for Grant for Navy also, budgetary allocation for Joint Staff is
made separately under a distinct Minor Head. The revenue budgetary
allocation is shown as follows in the Demand for Grant for Navy in the
Defence Services Estimates:
Minor Head 112 – Joint Staff
Sub-head
(A) – Pay and Allowances of Service Personnel
1. Officers
2. Other Ranks
3. DSC Personnel
(B) – Pay and Allowances of Civilians
1. Officers
2. Others
3. Industrial Estt.
4. Overtime allowances
(i) Others
(ii) Industrial Estt.
5. Payment of casual/daily rated labour
6. Pay and allowances of civilians MES Estt.
7. Medical Treatment

39
(C) – Miscellaneous Expenses
(D) – Transportation
(E) – Stores
(F) – Expenditure on Works
2. In so far as the capital budget is concerned, it is included as a
distinct Minor Head in the Demand for Grant for Capital Outlay on
Defence Services, which, as mentioned earlier, includes the capital outlay
of all the Services and Departments.
3. It would thus be evident that the budgetary allocation for Joint
Staff is already being shown distinctly in the budget document (Defence
Services Estimates).
Recommendation (Paragraph No. 43)
Manpower Shortage in Navy
“The Committee note that the Indian Navy is suffering from
shortage of manpower. There is shortage of 1439 officers and
7183 sailors as per the information made available to the Committee.
As stated in the written note during the year 2009 a record number
of 534 officers were inducted. Besides, Navy is expecting good
induction in Navy due to revised pay package provided after the
implementation of the Sixth Pay Commission. The Committee
recommended that the favourable impact of the implementation of
the Sixth Pay Commission’s recommendation on induction of
manpower in Navy should be watched carefully. Besides, the
Committee would also like to recommend that NCC Naval Wing
should be further strengthened so that more and more sailors could
be recruited from the schools. Similarly, more officers can be
inducted from the college wing. Besides the recent salaries and
allowances as well as post-service benefits including pension
provided to sailors and officers with the implementation of the
Sixth Pay Commission as well as the adventurous nature of service
in Navy should be widely publicized through print and electronic
media. In rural areas, publicity should be given through exhibitions
and audio visual techniques. The Committee hope that all these
initiatives would help Navy in meeting the shortfall. The Committee
would also like to recommend that a deadline should be fixed to
feel the gap between the sanctioned and existing strength of officers
and PBOR.”

40
Reply of the Government
Impact of Sixth Central Pay Commission
1. Post enhancement of pay and allowances of service personnel
by the Sixth Pay Commission, the volunteer response to various entries
of officers and sailors has increased. As a result, the intake of personnel
has been enhanced.
Recruitment Publicity
2. The Navy has already launched image Projection Campaigns
to popularize the service through electronic and print media, as
follows:—
(a) Advertisements on TV News Channels.
(b) Advertisements in popular magazines.
(c) Hoardings in major cities across the country.
(d) Bus panel advertisements in 16 States.
(e) Ticker/Scroll advertisements on TV News Channels.
3. Actions taken with regard to recruitment publicity are, as
follows:—
(a) The Navy is carrying out focused motivation publicity in
various schools and colleges where lectures are organized by
teams of Naval Officers. In these lectures , the adventurous
nature of the profession is brought out.
(b) Special publicity stalls/counseling centres are being set up
at various Exhibitions/Career Job Fairs in the country.
(c) The Navy celebrates the first week of December every year
as the Navy Week. This opportunity is taken to develop a
connect with the population of our country. As part of the
celebrations, the following activities are undertaken:—
(i) Ships and establishments are thrown open to
general public to give them an insight of the life in the
Navy.
(ii) V isits of School/College students are organized on
board Naval ships to educate them on the career
opportunities.

41
(iii) Visits by Naval ships are organised to small and medium
ports of the country to facilitate visit by the local
population who normally do not get this opportunity.
(iv) Medical Camps are organized at remote locations to make
the Navy conspicuous and popular.
(v) Navy Melas are organized to increase popularity of the
service.
(d) Publicity material like calendar, diaries, pamphlets, posters
and blowups etc. are being distributed to approximately 8000
Schools/Colleges, Sainik Schools, local institutions by
respective Commands and NCC units.
(e) The Navy Aerobatic Team, “Sagar Pawan”, consisting of Naval
aircraft is being deputed to various stations to enthuse the
youth take up Navy as a profession.
(f) A multimedia ‘C D’ on career opportunities in the Indian Navy
has been distributed to 2000 schools/colleges/NCC units all
over India.
(g) Navy is carrying out Image Projection Campaigns (IPCs)
through advertisements on TV News Channels and Bus Panel
hoardings every year.
(h) A movie on Navy, ‘Mission Navy’ was produced and screened
on famous National Geographic Channel, for popularizing
the service amongst youth. In addition, one documentary on
Navy titled; ‘Power Packed Force for a strong Nation’ was
screened on Doordarshan in December 2009.
Deadline for Making up the Shortages
4. The Navy plans the induction of personnel through ten years
Induction Plans in respect of all Branches/Trades of officers and sailors.
The Induction Plans factors the training capacity of ab initio  and
downstream training institutions. Efforts are made to avoid cyclic
variations in recruitment, which have adverse implications from HRD
point of view. As regarding sailors, Navy has planned to reduce the
shortages to the intended 5% by end 2011.
5. Sufficient impetus has been given by the Navy on recruitment
publicity and motivation drives in various schools and colleges of the
country. The shortage of officers in the Navy is expected to come down
to 5% by 2018 by meeting the planned annual induction targets.

42
Recommendation (Paragraph No. 45)
Hindustan Shipyard Limited
The Committee appreciate that the Government has transferred
Hindustan Shipyard Limited (HSL) under the Ministry of Shipping to
the Department of Defence Production, Ministry of Defence by way of
amendment of the Allocation of Business Rules on 23rd February 2010.
The Committee hope that with the shipyard coming under the Ministry
of Defence, the issue of National Security requirement of building strategic
vessels for Indian Navy would be adequately addressed. The Navy would
be in a better position to monitor the pace of ships under construction.
Not only that the amount spent in hiring charges for vessels would also
be saved.
Reply of the Government
The transfer of Hindustan Shipyard Limited (HSL) to the Ministry
of Defence will strengthen the naval line of defence by utilizing the
capacity and capability of the Yard for building vessels of various types
for the Indian Navy. Considering the strategic location and lay out of
Hindustan Shipyard Limited, Ministry of Defence will be utilizing HSL
for building strategic vessels and naval ships/vessels to augment the fleet
of Indian Navy and Coast Guard.
Since the Yard has been transferred to the Department of Defence
Production, Ministry of Defence will be in a better position to monitor
the pace of ships under construction.
Recommendation (Paragraph No. 47)
Modernization of Coast Guard Organisation
The Committee note that the BE for 2010-11 for Coast Guard
Organization has been fixed at Rs. 1100 crore which is same as RE of
2009-10. From the information made available, the Committee find that
at present Coast Guard Organization has 27 stations in coastal States and
Coast Guard is planning to set up 14 new stations. The establishment
of Coastal Radar Chain, Automatic Identification System, National
Command Control Communication and Intelligence (NCCCI) Network
and Fitment of Tracking Transponders on all vessels, are other planned
projects to meet threats. Besides modernization of coast guards is also
going on and interceptor boats, speed boats and other vessels are to be
acquired. As such the Committee strongly recommend that adequate

43
allocation should be provided to Coast Guard Organization during the
year 2010-11 so that the aforesaid projects do not suffer for want of
resources. Besides keeping in view the threat from the sea particularly
after the Mumbai attacks it should be ensured by the Government that
the various projects, new stations and other modernization Plans are
completed within a definite time frame. The Committee should also be
kept informed about the progress made in this regard.
Reply of the Government
Post 26/11, there was a major impetus given for acquisition of
additional surface and air platforms security and surveillance of the
maritime Zones of India and accordingly the budget allocation have
been increased in the Financial Year 2010-11 to the tune of Rs. 1100 crore
under Capital Head as against the budgetary allocation of
Rs. 921.33 crore in the Financial Year 2009-10. Out of the budgetary
allocation of Rs. 1100 crore, expenditure to the tune of Rs. 195.04 crore
has since been met up to June, 2010.
The requirement for additional funds for Coast Guard would be
projected, if necessary, in due course.
After the Mumbai attacks, a total of 14 contracts under capital
acquisition were concluded during 2009-10 for the Coast Guard. Four
contracts are expected to be completed during 2010-11. Some more cases
are being progressed.
Recommendation (Paragraph No. 48)
“The Committee note that numerous agencies are handling coastal
security issues directly or indirectly. To ensure integrated approach
in this regard various steps have been taken by the Government.
To quote a few, Joint operational exercises are taking place on regular
basis between Navy , Coast Guard, Coastal States and others to check
the effectiveness of the systems and continuous review and
monitoring mechanism of coastal security have been established by
involving various including the State/UT authorities. In addition
to this, to coordinate and effectively monitor the implementation
of various decisions, the Government has constituted National
Committee on strengthening Maritime and Coastal Security against
threats from the sea with Cabinet Secretary and Secretaries of other
related Ministries and Chief Secretaries of Coastal States and UTs
and Director, IB, Director, Coast Guard as members. The Committee
feel that all these steps are in the right direction and should be
continued.”

44
Reply of the Government
1. The ongoing actions are enumerated in succeeding paragraphs.
2. Conduct of Coastal Security Exercise  A number of exercises on
the Western and Eastern seaboard have been conducted by the Indian
Navy in close coordination and participation from the Coast Guard, State
Marine Police, Port authorities, Customs, Immigration and Fisheries
authorities. The exercises are being conducted at regular intervals along
the Coastal States and Union Territories. Steps that are needed to be
taken for improving coordination between various agencies is reviewed
during each exercise debrief. Thirty two Coastal security exercises and
twenty two Coastal security operations held in 2009/2010.
3. Strengthening Maritime and Coastal Security (NCSMCS)
Three meetings of the National Committee on strengthening
Maritime and Coastal securing against threats from the Sea have
been held so far. The Committee is chaired by Cabinet Secretary .
It also includes, Chief of Naval Staff and Defence Secretary, Home
Secretary and Secretaries of other related Ministries and
Chief Secretaries of Coastal States and UTs, Director IB, Director
Coast Guard. Recently Secretary Revenue and Chairman CBEC have
also been included as members of the Committee.

45
CHAPTER III
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS, WHICH THE COMMITTEE
DO NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE
REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT
Recommendation (Paragraph No. 13)
Zero Based Budgeting
The Committee observe that the Ministry of Defence do not feel
the need to follow Zero Based Budgeting as a tool for Defence planning.
Earlier, the Committee were informed that due to complexity and size
of the Defence services, it was not possible. Now to the surprise of the
Committee, the Ministry has changed its stand. The Committee have now
been informed that the entire Defence Budget being non plan budget is
not subject to any scrutiny by the Planning Commission. While agreeing
to the fact that the allocations made to the Ministry of Defence are entirely
under non-plan head, the Committee find that almost 40 per cent of the
allocations are under the capital segment. Not only that, under the revenue
segment also the substantial part of the allocations are utilized for
maintenance and repairs of assets under the three services and the
headquarters. As such the exercise of Zero Based Budgeting is more
required in case of Ministry of Defence. As such the Committee are not
inclined to accept the plea of the Ministry that the Zero Based Budgeting
exercise is not necessary since the allocations are under the non-plan
budget. The Committee strongly emphasize that the Ministry should
adhere to Zero Based Budgeting in future.
Reply of the Government
It is respectfully submitted that the Ministry of Defence does not
hold the view that zero based budgeting as a tool for estimation of
budgetary requirement has no utility . In reply to Question No. 4 of the
list of Questions sent by the Standing Committee on Defence in September
2009, the Ministry had stated as follows:—
“Being a part of the Union Budget, the instructions issued by the
Ministry of Finance are followed while preparing the Defence

46
budget. The complexity and size of the Defence Services do not
permit every function and activity to be subjected to a Zero-based
comprehensive examination every year in the context of budget
formulation. However, the underlying principle of ZBB is followed
while preparing the five year and annual acquisition and
procurement plans.”
A further query was raised by the Standing Committee on this
issue by way of Question No 44 of the supplementary list of
Questions. The query was why the Ministry of Defence should
treat itself as an exception when other Ministries of the Government
of India are preparing their budget on the basis of the Zero based
budgeting concept. In response to this, the Ministry had stated that
the Ministry of Defence, with whom the matter had been taken up,
had intimated that the Zero based budgeting exercise is being done
by the Planning Commission and that the entire defence budget
being non-plan budget is not subject to any scrutiny by the Planning
Commission.
It would thus be evident that the Ministry has not stated that it
does not feel the need to follow Zero Based Budgeting as a tool
for Defence planning. The statement that the entire Defence Budget
being non-plan budget is not subject to any scrutiny by the Planning
Commission was in the context of the query of the Standing
Committee as to why should the Ministry of Defence treat itself
as an exception when other Ministries of the Government of India
are preparing their budget on the basis of the Zero based budgeting
concept. The Ministry of Defence does not interact with the Planning
Commission in regard to the Defence Budget, as Defence Budget
is a non-plan one. However, as already submitted, the underlying
principle of ZBB is followed while preparing the five year and
annual acquisition and procurement plans.
The position explained above notwithstanding, instructions have
been issued to the Services and other Departments that while
preparing the RE 2010-11 and BE 2011-12, the on-going schemes
(both under Revenue and Capital) should be subjected to scrutiny
based on the concept of zero-based budgeting.
Recommendation (Paragraph No. 27)
The Committee further note that sometimes there are grievances
of war-widows and disabled pensioners with regard to various facilities
being provided to them. Besides, they may also have some queries related

47
to these benefits. In this regard, the Committee through a question have
asked the comments of the Ministry on a toll free number for the purpose
of grievance redressal of war-widows and disabled soldiers. The Ministry
in an insensitive manner has flatly refused to consider the suggestion of
the Committee. The Committee are of the firm view that a toll free number
would definitely help these categories of persons. As such, the Ministry
should consider the suggestion and take the desired action.
Reply of the Government
The varied nature of individual complaints which require to be
addressed at the level of Zila/Tehsil/Panchayat may not be able to be fully
tackled by a toll free number system. The steps already being taken by
the Department to disseminate such information through electronic modes
and the availability of information at ZSB level, obviate the need to install
a toll free number. A computerized grievance redressal mechanism for
ESM is being developed and should be in place in the near future. In
view of the foregoing, the Government is of the considered view that
providing a toll free number may not be necessary.
Recommendation (Paragraph No. 33)
Light Combat Aircraft (LCA)
The Committee during the course of examination of Demands
for Grants of the previous year had noted that LCA project was
sanctioned in the year 1983 with the original cost of Rs. 560 crore. The
first phase of the project was completed on 31st April 2004 with the cost
of Rs. 2188 crore which include rough estimates of Rs. 560 crore. The
sanctioned cost of the second phase was Rs. 3301.87 crore and probable
date of completion was 31 December 2008. The Ministry has further
informed that in November 2009, sanction has been accorded for
continuing full scale engineering development of LCA till 31st December
2018 with an additional cost of Rs. 5302.98 crore. The various trials have
been completed and cross wind take off and landing has also been carried
out successfully. The initial operational clearance is scheduled to be
completed by December 2010. With regard to engine Tejas, the Committee
during the course of examination of Demands for Grants of the previous
had been informed that Tejas was running into serious problems and
option of either to import an engine or persist with the Kaveri were being
explored. The Committee have now been informed that the final position
to import suitable engine in place of Kaveri engine is taken. Request for
proposal in this regard has been floated and RFP response received.

48
Technical evaluation of the offers received is under progress. With regard
to the relevance of technology particularly when 27 years have passed
since the LCA project was sanctioned in 1983, the representative of DRDO
apprised to the Committee that LCA has all the features of the fourth
generation aircraft which is available in the world. From the aforesaid
position, the Committee conclude that this is a very sorry State of affairs.
Even when 27 years have passed since LCA was sanctioned, it has still
to see the light of the day. The Committee emphasise that the various
problems being faced with Tejas engine should be sorted out expeditiously.
The Tejas should be commissioned expeditiously either by choosing the
option of importing the engine or persisting with Kaveri. All the desired
steps should be taken so that Tejas is operational by the stipulated
time-frame and there is no further cost excalation.
Reply of the Government
The programme of indigenous development of Light Combat
Aircraft (LCA) had been initiated in August 1983 with the Government
sanction of an interim development cost of Rs. 560.00 crore. This sanction
was to initiate the programme and carry out Project Definition Phase
(PDP). After completing the PDP , the report was submitted to Government
and proposal to build 07 prototypes was made. The Government of India
split the programme into Technical Development Phase and Operational
Vehicle Development Phase. The Full Scale Engineering Development
Programme Phase-I (LCA FSED Phase-I) was sanctioned in April 1993
at a cost of Rs. 2188 crore (including the interim sanction of Rs. 560 crore
given in 1983). The scope of FSED Phase-I was to demonstrate the
technologies so that a decision could be taken to build operational
proto-vehicles at a later stage. LCA FSED Phase-I was completed on
31 March, 2004. While Phase-I programme was in progress, the
Government decided to concurrently go ahead with the build of
operational proto vehicles. The scope of FSED Phase-II was to build three
prototypes of operational aircrafts including a trainer and also to build
the infrastructure required for producing 08 aircrafts per year and build
eight Limited Series Production (LSP) aircrafts. Government sanctioned
FSED Phase-II of the programme at a total cost of Rs. 3301.78 crore on
20 November, 2001. The Phase-II programme has been split into two
phases namely, Initial Operational Clearance (IOC) and Final Operational
Clearance (FOC). Standard of preparation of operational aircraft was
finalized in 2004 with changes in weapons, sensors and avionics to meet
the IAF requirements and overcome obsolescence (Original design was
made in 1990s). This contributes to additional time and revised cost for
Phase-II.

49
Governing body of ADA in its 41st meeting held on 22 November,
2007 had detail review of the Programme and deliberated on
achievements  vis-à-vis objectives of LCA FSED Phase-II programme
and recommended the extension of FSED Phase-II likely date of
completion till 31 December, 2012 (IOC by December, 2010 and FOC by
December, 2012) with GE-F404-IN20 Engine and to develop and
productionise the Mark 2 variant of Tejas aircraft and also recommended
the constitution of Cost Revision Committee to assess additional
requirement of funds.
The need for extension of PDC for LCA FSED Phase-II was due
to:—
• Complexity of the system design and very high safety
standards lead to extensive testing to ensure flight safety.
• Incorporating the configuration changes (for example
R60 close Combat Missile (CCM) was replaced by R73E CCM
which required design modifications) to keep the aircraft
contemporary
• Due to non-availability of indigenous ‘Kaveri Engine’ design
changes were carried out to accommodate GE404 engine of
USA.
• Change in the development strategy of Radar and associated
changes on the aircraft.
• Major development activity of Avionics was undertaken in
order to make aircraft contemporary, which took time but
yielded results (for example, development of obsolescence
free open architecture avionics system).
• US sanctions imposed in 1998 also led to delay in importing
certain items and developing alternate equipment, since
vendors identification and development to production cycle
took time.
The need for revision of FSED Phase-II fund sanction was mainly
due to:—
• To neutralize the effect of inflation/delivery point cost against
the sanctioned level at 2001 and the increase in manpower
cost of HAL.

50
• To meet the programme management expenditure due to
extended time line till December 2012.
• Maintain and operate 10-15 aircraft for four years upto
2012.
• To maintain and upgrade the design, development and test
facilities upto 2012, in keeping with modern technology .
• To complete the activities which were not costed in the
original estimates.
Cost Revision Committee after careful consideration of the
projections made and taking into account the increase in the cost of
material, manpower, additional activities to complete the IOC and FOC,
maintenance of facilities and expanded scope of the programme etc.,
recommended additional fund of Rs. 2475.78 crore for completing FSED
Phase-II activities with PDC Dec. 2012, Rs. 2431.55 crore for developing
Tejas Mark 2 with alternate engine (LCA FSED Phase-III Programme) and
Rs. 395.65 crore for Technology Development Programme (Total additional
funds of Rs. 5302.98 crore). Recommendations of the Cost Revision
Committee was accepted by Government and in November 2009, sanction
was accorded for continuing Full Scale Engineering Development of LCA
till Dec. 2018 with an additional cost of Rs. 5302.98 crore.
LCA (Tejas) Programme is progressing satisfactorily as per schedule
mutually agreed with IAF to meet their requirements. Flight Test phase
on nine Tejas aircrafts to obtain IOC for Tejas, which is mandatory for
induction of Tejas into IAF is in advanced stage. Establishment of Tejas
production facilities for the production rate of eight aircrafts per annum
is progressing concurrently with development activities. On 31 Mar 2006,
IAF has executed the contract with HAL for production of 20 Tejas aircraft
(series production) powered by GE-F404-IN20 engines in IOC
configuration and production activities are in progress. Follow on order
of another 20 aircraft is in an advanced stage of negotiation between IAF
and Hindustan Aeronautics Limited (HAL). The issue of Kaveri engine
has been delinked temporarily from Tejas Production Programme and
use of Kaveri engine on Tejas will be considered after successful
completion of mandatory development tests on engine. Initial batch of
Tejas production aircraft (Tejas Mk-1) will be integrated with GE-F404-
IN20 engines and will be inducted into IAF progressively from Jan. 2011
onwards. Development of Tejas Mk-2 with alternate imported foreign
engine (LCA FSED Phase-III) to improve aircraft performance has been
launched concurrently with LCA FSED Phase-II programme.

51
In addition to the weekly reviews conducted at ADA and
the Governing Body and Annual General Body Meetings, the
Honourable Raksha Mantri has set up Special Review Committees with
the Chief of Air Staff reviewing the programme once every quarter and
Deputy Chief of Air Staff reviewing every month to ensure that the
objectives of Tejas Programme are achieved without any further cost and
time overrun.
Recommendation (Paragraph No. 35)
The Committee in their first report had strongly recommended
that life extension of fighter aircraft should not go beyond a certain years
and not more that one life extension be recommended. While reiterating
their earlier recommendation, the Committee would like to recommend
that the strategy of life extension of existing fleet should be reconsidered
in the light of the recommendation made by the Committee. The decision
taken in this regard should be communicated to the Committee
accordingly.
Reply of the Government
In respect of MiG-21 aircraft the life extension was given on the
basis of review by Russian Original Equipment Manufacturer (OEM).
DGAQA, DRDO, HAL and IAF after full scale fatigue testing (FSFT).
Currently calendar life extension study on MiG-21 Bison airframe from
35 years to 40 years is in progress.
In respect of MiG-27 upgraded aircraft, the feasibility study on
Total Technical Life (TTL) is in progress.
The MiG-29 aircraft is presently undergoing upgrade under a
contract with RAC MiG. The life of the aircraft is being extended to 3500
hrs./40 years. The life extension is being provided by the OEM of the
aircraft after undertaking the full scale fatigue testing on their own aircraft.
No further extension is planned on the MiG-29 aircraft.
Recommendation (Paragraph No. 46)
Joint Staff:  Utilisation of Additional Funds Allocated for
FY 10-11.
(a) Reasons for enhancement of Joint Staff Budget for the
FY 10-11.
(b) Effective utilization of the enhanced budgetary allocations.
(c) Restructuring of Joint Staff.
(d) Need for evaluation of the functioning of HQ IDS.

52
Reply of the Government
Budgetary Allocations to Joint Staff
1. Though there is a substantial enhancement under capital head,
the net increase in the Joint Staff Budget for the FY 10-11 under revenue
head is only marginal. The details of BE allocations for FY 10-11 need
to be seen in comparison with the RE allocations for FY 09-10, rather than
standard practice of comparison with the BE figures of the preceding FY,
since it was only at the RE stage during FY 09-10 that the additional
allocations to meet the 6th CPC recommendations were made.
A comparative table is as under:—
(All figures in crores )
Sl. No. Type RE (09-10) BE (10-11) Addl.
Allocation
for FY
10-11
(a) Revenue
(i) Sub Head A-B 699.41 751.37 51.96
   (Pay and Allces.)
(ii) Sub Head C-F 269.75 291.65 21.90
Total (a) 969.16 1043.02 73.84
(b) Capital      — 276.11 798.70 522.59
2. Revenue: Above table reveals the following:—
(a) There is a net enhancement of only Rs. 73.86 crores, of which
Rs. 51.96 cr shall be absorbed by pay and allowances itself
on account of new raisings under HQ SFC and accretions
under ANC.
(b) The net enhancement of expenditure other than pay and
allowances is only Rs. 21.90 crore which shall be barely
enough to meet the inflationary trends. Infact, in real terms
this does not amount to any growth under sub head C-F.
3. Capital: Under the Capital Heads, there is a net increase of
Rs. 522.59 crore, primarily to cater for the acquisition and works
requirements arising due to the following:—
(a) New raisings under HQ SFC.
(b) Accretions under ANC.
(c) Modernisation of ADG SI.
(d) Infrastructure growth of Tri Service Training Establishments.

53
Restructuring of Joint Staff/Evaluation of Joint Staff Organisations
Following the directive stipulated in the Government letter of 2001
on creation of HQ Integrated Defence Staff, the organizational review
was taken up in 2008 in two parts — internal and external review.
After a detailed study by college of Defence Management the internal
review was completed in December 2009 and implemented. Report has
been submitted to MoD, based on which an external review will be
ordered.

54
CHAPTER IV
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH
REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN
ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE AND
WHICH REQUIRE REITERATION
Recommendation (Paragraph No. 4)
The Committee were informed that the examination of the
Comprehensive Report of Defence Expenditure Review Committee, to
curb wasteful expenditure is still going on in the Ministry of Defence.
As the recommendations of the said Committee will have far reaching
implications and will definitely reform various policies of the Ministry
to bring economy in its expenditure, the Committee once again
recommend to complete the task urgently under intimation to them.
Reply of the Government
Examination and implementation of the recommendations,
considered acceptable and implementable, has been entrusted to officers
of the level of Joint Secretary in the Ministry of Defence and Defence
Finance. This exercise is time consuming as it involves consultation with
the Services and other Departments. However, wherever, considered
feasible, action has already been initiated on the basis of the
recommendations of the Committee.
Recommendation (Paragraph No. 10)
Married Accommodation Project
The Committee note that Married Accommodation Project (MAP)
has been launched to meet the deficiencies of married accommodation
that is to the tune of 28,099 dwelling units as on 2001. The aforesaid
project would be undertaken in four phases. The Committee in their
30th Report on Married Accommodation in Defence and Allied service
had observed that there was considerable delay in execution of
Phase-I which would be followed by the subsequent phase. The Committee
find that due to the shortage of married accommodation, the Defence
personnel have to stay away from their families for a long period of time.
In view of this, the Committee again emphasize that all the Phases of

55
the Married Accommodation Project should be completed within a
stipulated time frame so that the Defence personnel including those staying
in the difficult areas like Jammu and Kashmir and North Eastern Areas
can stay with their families.
Reply of the Government
The Married Accommodation Project (MAP) undertaken by MoD
envisages construction of 1,98,881 Dwelling Units (DUs) for the three
Services in four Phases at an estimated cost of Rs. 17357.97 crore. As per
the approval of Cabinet Committee on Security , the period of Phase-I of
the project was from 2002-03 to 2005-06. It may however be mentioned
that the organization of Director General, MAP, was sanctioned in
May 2002 with the responsibility of project implementation. MAP
envisaged construction activity of huge proportions spread all over the
country. This was a new concept for the armed forces. Hence, the initial
start of the project was delayed. However, after the initial gestation period,
there has been significant progress.
A total of 46385 DUs have been completed so far. Construction
of the dwelling units has been delayed due to land transition, land
litigation and cancellation of contract cases. Probable Date of Completion
(PDC) for Phase-II is 31st March, 2012. With all systems in place and
experience of Phase-I, it is expected that work of Phase-II will be completed
in time.
Recommendation (Paragraph No. 11)
Outcome Budget
The Committee in their 29th and 35th reports
(Fourteenth Lok Sabha) had recommended that the Ministry should
identify the areas and organizations for which the Outcome Budget could
be prepared and present the same to Parliament at least from the
year 2009-10. However, Outcome Budget was not presented for the
year 2009-10. The Committee were expecting that at least the Ministry
would now prepare Outcome Budget for the year 2010-11. However, the
Committee are again disappointed to note that the same has not been
done by the Ministry. The Ministry has now stated that orders have been
issued on 18.2.2010 to renew the efforts by getting Outcome Budget
prepared in respect of National Cadet Corps (NCC) and the Married
Accommodation Project (MAP). The Committee feel that some of the
other areas like ordnance factories, PSUs, Naval Dockyards and depots
and some other selected establishments should be identified and the
Outcome Budget 2011-12, presented to Parliament for the year on a pilot
basis followed by the comprehensive Outcome Budget in the coming
years.

56
Reply of the Government
It has been decided to attempt Outcome Budget in respect of Naval
Dockyards also. However, the Ministry of Defence is of the view that it
may not be appropriate to place the Outcome Budgets in the public
domain or present them to the Parliament till sufficient experience is
gained to ensure that quality and contents of the Outcome Budgets have
reached an acceptable level of excellence.
Recommendation (Paragraph No. 14)
One Rank One Pension
The Committee find that ex-servicemen are demanding One Rank
One Pension which implies that uniform pension be paid to the Armed
Forces personnel retiring in the same rank with the same length of service
irrespective of their date of retirement and any future enhancement in
the rates of pension to be automatically passed on to the past pensioners.
In this context, a Committee headed by Cabinet Secretary was constituted
which submitted its report on 30 June, 2009. On the issue of One Rank
One Pension the Ministry has stated that the Committee headed by Cabinet
Secretary did not find it administratively feasible to recommend One
Rank One Pension. The Ministry also elaborated that the concept of One
Rank One Pension was not accepted by Fourth and Fifth Central Pay
Commissions, inter-ministerial Committee, 2003 and GoM set up in
January, 2005 due to administrative, financial and legal reasons. As stated
by the Ministry, acceptance of the principle of One Rank One Pension
has substantial implications estimated at Rs. 8000-9000 crore per annum.
Not only that the Supreme Court on the issue of grant of ‘One Rank One
Pension’ has also claimed that ‘OROP’ is not tenable. From the aforesaid
position, the Committee conclude that One Rank One Pension has not
been accepted by the Government. However, the pensionary benefits of
ex-servicemen including disabled ex-servicemen have considerably been
improved by implementation of seven recommendations of the Committee.
While noting the aforesaid position the Committee urge that the
Government should again consider the issue of one rank one pension in
holistic manner so that large number of ex-servicemen can be benefited
and also ensure that the various benefits provided to the ex-servicemen
due to implementation of the recommendation of the Committee headed
by the Cabinet Secretary along with the arrears if any, are paid
expeditiously.
Reply of the Government
The Committee set up under the Chairmanship of Cabinet Secretary
to look into the issue of One Rank One Pension and related issues did

57
not recommend its acceptance for various reasons. However, keeping in
view the spirit of the demand, the Committee made several recommendations
which have been accepted and Government orders to implement the
recommendations have been issued on 30.10.2009, 19.1.2010, 20.1.2010
and 8.3.2010.
Various steps have been taken to ensure expeditious
implementation of these orders: (i) A notice was published in prominent
national and regional newspapers on 12.3.2010 intimating all concerned
about the issue of Government orders in respect of the seven
recommendations, (ii) The orders have also been placed on the website
of Controller General of Defence Accounts, (iii) Ministry of Defence have
been closely coordinating with Ministry of Finance to ensure expeditious
revision of pension by the banks; Ministry of Finance have issued
instructions to all concerned Chief Managing Directors/Chief Executive
Officers of public and private sector banks to do the needful in a time-
bound manner, and (iv) This Department has also requested all Chief
Secretaries to instruct District Collectors to regularly review the progress
made in this regard at their level
Recommendation (Paragraph No. 15)
Sukna Land Scam
The Committee find that recently a lot of controversies with regard
to the use of Defence Land have been reported in the media including
the latest Sukna land scam which involved the matter regarding issue
of No Objection Certificate by Army for setting up educational institution
with residential facility in the land which belong to State Government
of West Bengal. On the suggestion of the Committee to have a regulator
for huge Defence estates in the country which emerged during the
deliberations the Ministry was of the view that the existing system was
adequate and there was no need of a separate regulator. The Committee
are of the strong view that land scams such as Sukna land scam affects
the image of Army and the Defence services as a whole and as such it
is utmost necessary that the country should have the fool proof system
to regulate the Defence estates. In spite of internal mechanism to regulate
the Defence estates such incidents are happening. As such the Committee
recommend that their suggestion of having an independent regulator
should be considered by the Ministry positively and the Committee
apprised accordingly about the action taken in this regard.
Reply of the Government
The management of defence land is governed by the provisions of
Cantonments Act, 2006, Cantonment Land Administration Rules, 1937

58
and Acquisition, Custody and Relinquishment etc. of Military Lands in
India Rules, 1944. Ministry has also issued instructions from time to time
for better and effective management of Defence land. The existing
framework mentioned above contains adequate provisions for
management of Defence Lands.
Recommendation (Paragraph No. 20)
Shortage of Officers in Army
The Committee have been apprised that the existing shortage of
officers in Army is 11,456. Various steps to meet the shortage are being
taken by the Ministry which include sustained image projection and
publicity campaign, participation in career fairs and exhibitions,
advertisements in print and electronic media, counseling and motivational
talks in schools, colleges and NCC camps etc. The Committee feel that
all these are steps in the right direction and need to be taken in a more
effective way. Besides the Committee find that there is an urgent need
to give more attention to the National Cadet Corps whose main objective
is to groom the youth into disciplined and patriotic citizens. The
Committee while debating the issue during the course of the deliberations
had the feeling that the desired focus in this regard is not being given.
The basic impediment being faced in this regard as elaborated by the
representative of the Ministry is shortage of supervisory staff which
primarily have to be provided by the three services. In this connection,
the Committee recommend that the Ministry can think of having a pool
of officers from Ex-servicemen. The retired officers of the three services,
can be inducted into the aforesaid pool.
Reply of the Government
Besides awareness campaigns, participation in career fairs and
exhibitions, advertisements in print and electronic media, motivational
lectures in schools and colleges, continuous and sustained steps have
been taken, aimed at reducing shortage of officers in the Armed Forces
which include improving their service conditions, career progression,
implementation of recommendations of VI Central Pay Commission with
substantial improvements in pay and allowances, Married Accommodation
Project (MAP) for augmenting housing facilities, liberalized provisions
for grant of leave etc.
The National Cadet Corps as the largest uniformed youth
organization is committed to groom NCC cadets to become disciplined
and patriotic citizens of India. They constitute an important pool for
intake of officers in the Armed Forces. While imparting training to these

59
NCC cadets, special emphasis is also being given to motivate and assist
NCC cadets to join the Armed Forces as officers. Some of the measures
in this direction are as under:—
(a) Increase in number of NCC cadets vacancies at Officer
Training Academy, Kamptee for Service Selection Board
Courses.
(b) Seven days Service Selection Board training to Associate NCC
officers who in turn train NCC cadets during institutional
training.
(c) Conduct of Special Annual Training Camp at Directorate level
and attachment with Army/Navy/Air Force for selected cadets.
(d) Increase in Republic Day Banner competition points to
Directorates for number of cadets joining Armed Forces
Academies.
(e) Incentives to Commanding Officers who ensure maximum
enrolment in the Armed Forces.
(f) Service Selection Board type obstacle course is being fabricated
at HQ DG NCC camp to impart practical training for Service
Selection Board.
(g) Special coaching course at HQ DG NCC for selected cadets
to appear for Service Selection Boards.
As regards Committee’s recommendation to have a pool of officers
of ex-servicemen from the three Services to make up the existing deficiency
of officers, provisions already exist for re-employment of retired officers
in Army and Navy .
Recommendation (Paragraph No. 22)
Recruitment Rallies for Jawans
The Committee note that the rallies for the purpose of recruitment
of Jawans in the Armed Forces are being conducted in various places to
meet the shortage of personnel in armed forces. In this connection, the
expenditure with regard to tent, light refreshment etc. is being borne by
the District Administration. Due to the financial burden, the district
administration sometimes do not show interest because of the expenditure
involved in this regard. As such, the Committee strongly recommend
that all the expenditure involved in conducting recruitment rallies should
be borne by the Ministry of Defence and allocation for the purpose should
separately be earmarked in the outlay of the Ministry of Defence. The

60
Committee also recommend that for such rallies, wide publicity should
be given through mass media, wall posters and village panchayats of that
area.
Reply of the Government
Open rallies for the purpose of recruitment of Jawans are generally
carried out in Non Military Stations where the army has limited or no
resources. Rallies are planned and conducted after having coordinated
all details with State Civil Administration and the District Civil Authorities.
Special emphasis is given to provision of infrastructure, security and
administrative backup. The involvement of States in recruitment process
is a must to ensure that they feel themselves as part of the recruiting
process and contribute to the national cause. Considering the magnitude
of the arrangement also, the task is not feasible without the active
involvement and support of the Local Administration. Expenditure
involved is not much but the effect is tremendous both on the Civil
Administration and the public.
After detailed coordination with civil authorities the publicity is
carried out through both print and electronic media. Vigorous media
campaign has been continuing to project the image of the Army. The
Army has been making a concerted effort at publicity through a series
of measures as under:—
(i) Awareness campaign are regularly organized by the recruiting
officials in various colleges and schools to attract the youth
to opt for Army as a career;
(ii) Recruiting/publicity stalls are also established alongwith Air
shows, tattoo programs, publicity material like handouts are
also distributed free of cost at such rallies and in various
schools;
(iii) NCERT books from States of Haryana, Assam, Mizoram,
Himachal Pradesh and Maharashtra are carrying
advertisements about the Indian Army;
(iv) Grass root publicity has been achieved by inserting all
information about the Army in log books being circulated in
all school and colleges across the country;
(v) Information Parks have been opened in all Headquarters
Recruiting Zones and Army Recruiting Offices displaying
information pertaining to recruitment of Officers and
Personnel Below Officer ranks;

61
(vi) Adequate publicity is resorted to in the print media and TV
from time to time. Various magazines carry detailed
information about details to join the Army;
(vii) Interactive Voice Response System (IVRS) are being installed
with all Headquarter Recruiting Zones to enable candidates
to seek information regarding various recruitment procedures
and rallies;
(viii) An interactive website (joinindianarmy.nic.in) has been
redesigned;
(ix) A non-syllabus book on Army has been introduced in NCERT
syllabus from class IX to XI this year i.e. 2010 session. From
session 2011 a chapter in Social Studies book is planned to
be included in class IX to XI;
(x) Adequate publicity is ensured both through print and visual
media just before the forms are required to be filled for various
entries and also for recruitment rallies;
(xi) Motivational lectures are conducted in schools and colleges
across the country by serving as well as retired officers on
Army as a career.
Recommendation (Paragraph No. 28)
The Committee note that besides expenditure on annual depreciation
under the head Renewal and Replacement, Ordnance Factories have the
investment plans for modernization and capacity augmentation. The
Investment proposals of Rs. 388.89 crore for T-72 variants, Rs. 47.73 crore
for Mine Protected Vehicles are being progressed. The Committee also
noted that due to limited availability of vendors (world wide) for supply
of the explosives manufacturing and automatic explosives filling plant,
the investment plan could not be finalized. During the oral evidence,
a representative of the Ministry informed the Committee that due to one
vendor situation to supply plant and machinery, the modernization of
Ordnance Factories is not coming through. On the issue of exports,
representative of the Ministry himself admitted that currently, the capacity
itself is a constraint and the ordnance factories have not really been able
to meet the requirement of the Defence forces in full. The Committee,
after taking into consideration these facts and the current State of health
of Ordnance Factories, recommended that the growing needs of armament
for internal security as well as Defence should be met through optimum
utilization of available infrastructure/machinery and manpower. To achieve
the objective, these factories should be restructured and re-oriented. The

62
Committee are of the view that they could also turn to be major foreign
exchange earners, if capacity enhancement and modernization can be
done.
Reply of the Government
(a) The production capacities in Ordnance Factories have been
created to meet the projected requirement of Armed Forces.
These are being upgraded based on the requirement projected
by Armed Forces from time to time. Recently, Army has
projected a long term requirement in respect of ammunition
and armoured vehicles. Since the requirement projected now
is substantially higher, the augmentation of production
capacities is being planned in line with the requirement.
(b) The modernization of Ordnance Factories has been an ongoing
process over the previous years. However, it has been decided
that this may be taken up more comprehensively. OFB has
deputed two teams of technical experts to study the production
facilities in other countries so that the modernization plans
can be drawn up keeping in view the modern machines and
processes.
(c) Long term requirements of weapons and ammunition of MHA
(Ministry of Home Affairs) are also taken into account while
augmenting the production capacities.
(d) After meeting the requirement of Defence Forces and MHA,
the available spare capacities, if any, are utilized for meeting
the requirement of civil sector or export.
Recommendation (Paragraph No. 29)
Border Roads Organization
The Committee note that on the issue of augmentation of the defence
structure of India’s border, the Ministry has taken a holistic view and
three plans viz. (i) LTPP Priority-I considering of 130 roads of total length
4881 kms with probable date of completion (PDC) 2012; (ii) Long Term
Perspective Plan (LTPP) Priority-II considering of 255 roads of total length
10104 kms.; and (iii) 73 roads with total length of 3678 kms on
Indo-China Borders have been prepared. The main hurdle in construction
of Border roads is the forest clearance and wild life clearance as stated
by the representative of the Ministry . To address the problem, at the level
of Cabinet Secretary, periodic meetings are being taken and Sub-Committee
has been formed in the Ministry under the Chairmanship of Additional
Secretary. Representatives of various Central and State level Departments

63
concerned also meet once in 15 days or so. The Committee while
appreciating the aforesaid mechanism would like to strongly recommend
that all the desired allocation should be made for the border roads on
a priority basis. Besides, the Committee emphasise that Border Roads
should be given top most priority on the issue of forest and wild life
clearance and these clearances should be accorded in a time bound manner
so that these roads are constructed expeditiously.
Reply of the Government
1. Status of Forest/Wild Life clearance is enclosed as
Appendix ‘ A’.
2. Status of Forest/Wild Life clearance as on April, 10 is enclosed
as Appendix ‘B’.
3. Actions taken by BRO is enclosed as Appendix ‘C’.
Recommendation (Paragraph No. 31)
The examination of the data provided by the Ministry with regard
to the financial performance during the first three years of Eleventh Plan
indicates that there is under-spending during each of the year. Such under-
spending was Rs. 3427.79 crore during 2007-08, Rs. 855.90 crore during
2008-09. During the year 2009-10, if the financial performance is seen in
the light of the expenditure position upto February, 2010, there was under-
spending to the tune of Rs. 6435.36 crore. The Committee have however
been informed during the course of oral evidence that all the allocations
provided during the year 2009-10 have been utilized. While recommending
for adequate resources to Air Force, the Committee would also like to
emphasize that the resources made available to Air Force should be
effectively utilized so that the Ministry of Defence can present their case
effectively to the Ministry of Finance for getting the adequate allocations.
The Committee would also like to recommend that the position of
expenditure met and under-spending of the outlay during a year
item-wise should be indicated in all the Budget documents so as to have
a clear position of the performance of various projects during a given year.
Reply of the Government
The observations of the Committee have been brought to the notice
of the Ministry of Finance and the Air HQrs.
As regards the recommendation that the position of expenditure
met and under-spending of the outlay during a year item-wise should
be indicated in all the Budget documents so as to have a clear position

64
of the performance of various projects during a given year, it is submitted
that the Budget document for a particular year is printed some time in
February every year for being presented to the Parliament. Since the
document is printed before the close of the financial year, it is not possible
to indicate the status of actual expenditure of the current year in the
Budget document. However, the Budget document shows the status of
actual expenditure of the preceding year, the BE and the RE for the
current year and the BE for the ensuing year. These details are given in
respect of each Minor Head in the Budget document.
Recommendation (Paragraph No. 34)
The Committee note with concern that as many as 74 accidents
involving Indian Air Force aircraft have so far taken place. 41.89 per cent
of accidents were due to technical defects and 44.59 per cent were due
to human failure and 6.76 per cent due to bird hits. The Committee note
that the various initiatives being taken by Air Force to reduce aircraft
accidents include invigoration of Aviation Safety organization,
streamlining of accidents/incident reporting procedure, analytical studies
and quality audits of the aircraft fleets to identify vulnerable areas and
institute remedial measures. From the data provided with regard to the
reasons for accidents the Committee find that most of the accidents i.e.
44.59 per cent are due to human failure. In this regard, the Committee
find that proper training of the pilots can play an important role. The
Committee’s examination has revealed that Air Force is facing problem
in respect of trainer aircraft and simulators. Due to some problems basic
trainer aircraft i.e. HPT-32 has been grounded. The Committee have been
informed during the course of deliberation that Air Force has adequate
number of Kiran Simulators. The Committee’s examination has further
revealed that Air Force is facing problem with regard to upgradation of
Kiran Simulators. From the aforesaid scenario it is apparent that Indian
Air Force is facing problems in respect of trainer aircraft and simulators.
The Committee strongly recommend that all the steps should be taken
to acquire/upgrade the trainer aircraft and simulators so that adequate
training is provided to pilots which would definitely result in reduction
of accidents due to human failure. Besides adequate allocations should
be provided for the proposed acquisitions/upgradations so that these
projects do not suffer due to lack of resources.
Reply of the Government
The flying training in the IAF is structured in three stages (i.e. Basic
stage, Intermediate stage and Advanced stage) during which the training
is pitched in a manner to ensure complete and proper development of
a trainee in each stage and produce a mature and a competent aviator.

65
In place of grounded HPT-32 aircraft, IAF is utilizing Kiran Mk 1/1A
aircraft for basic stage training. During intermediate stage training, trainees
are introduced to more demanding exercises on specific aircraft of the
respective streams ( i.e. by Chetak helicopter and Dornier Aircraft
DO-228 etc.). During advanced stage of training, trainees are exposed to
the advanced exercises in each stream ( i.e. by Kiran Mk-II/Hawk Mk-132
aircraft, Mi-8 helicopter, Avro and AN-32 aircraft.)
To upgrade Kiran Simulators, IAF have procured 9 Cockpit
Procedure Trainers (CPT) and 9 Procedure Practice Platforms (PPP) for
Kiran Mi I/II aircraft. All devices have been installed and are being utilized
as an integral part of flying training at respective Field Training
Establishments.
Acquistions/upgradation of the trainer aircraft and simulators
In order to further enhance the quality of training, adequate
simulators like Synthetic Training Equipments (STEs) and Computer Aided
Learning Systems (CALs) for all modern state-of-the-art trainer aircraft
with compatible mission planning/debriefing modules are also being
inducted. Emphasis is being laid on proportionate training on the ground
based simulators in all aspects and roles of flying. Simulators training
is embedded in the training syllabus at all the training establishments.
The various simulators ( i.e. HPT-32 and Kiran Simulators, Hawk
Simulators, IJT Simulators, Navigation Simulators and Transport Aircraft
Simulators) are already being updated in the IAF to impart training in
Flying Training Establishments and Ground Training Establishments.
Modernisation of Training centres and training equipment in the
IAF is an ongoing process aimed at improving the quality of training
being imparted at all the IAF training establishments. Efforts are regularly
being made to upgrade the training systems in IAF so as to provide a
contemporary training environment to the trainees and thoroughly prepare
them for easy absorption into the operational environment of the IAF.
Recommendation (Paragraph No. 35)
The Committee in their first report had strongly recommended
that life extension of fighter aircraft should not go beyond a certain years
and not more than one life extension be recommended. While reiterating
their earlier recommendation, the Committee would like to recommend
that the strategy of life extension of existing fleet should be reconsidered
in the light of the recommendation made by the Committee. The decision
taken in this regard should be communicated to the Committee
accordingly.

66
Reply of the Government
In respect of MiG-21 aircraft the life extension was given on the
basis of review by Russian Original Equipment Manufacturer (OEM).
DGAQA, DRDO, HAL and IAF after full scale fatigue testing (FSFT).
Currently calendar life extension study on MiG-21 Bison airframe from
35 years to 40 years is in progress.
In respect of MiG-27 upgraded aircraft, the feasibility study on
Total Technical Life (TTL) is in progress.
The MiG-29 aircraft is presently undergoing upgrade under a
contract with RAC MiG. The life of the aircraft is being extended to
3500 hrs./40 years. The life extension is being provided by the OEM of the
aircraft after undertaking the full scale fatigue testing on their own aircraft.
No further extension is planned on the MiG-29 aircraft.
Recommendation (Paragraph No. 36)
Modernization of Airfield Infrastructure (MAFI)
The Committee note that the proposal of modernization of Airfield
Infrastructure (MAFI) project Phase-I comprising thirty-one Indian Air
Force airfields is to be concluded within three and a half years of
signing of the contract. The proposal is presently at the stage of
commercial discussion stage and currently progressing on schedule. The
Committee further note that based on the experience gained during
Phase-I implementation, the requirements in respect of Phase-II of balance
(Indian Air Force, Army, Navy, Coast Guard, etc.) Airfields will be
consolidated and the modernization process will be initiated. The time
required for completion of Phase-II will also be approximately three and
a half years. As Air Force requires airfields from strategic point of view,
the Committee emphasize that commercial negotiations for Phase-I and
also of Phase-II projects be completed expeditiously within a fixed time
frame. The Committee should be kept apprised of the progress made in
this regard.
Reply of the Government
Modernisation of Airfield Infrastructure (MAFI) Project aims to
modernize navigational aids at all the airfields. 30 airfields are included
in Phase-I and remaining airfields will be included in Phase-II of the
MAFI Project. The Contract Negotiation Committee (CNC) for MAFI
Phase-I has been completed. The case will now be progressed for obtaining
the approval of the Cabinet Committee on Security (CCS).

67
Recommendation (Paragraph No. 37)
The Committee find that the proposal for replacement of radars
was held up during 1996-97 and 1997-98 due to lack of budgetary support.
However, it actively progressed thereafter and CCS approval was
accorded on 15 January 2002. The existing radars were functional and
used by the IAF with restrictions on flying activity during adverse weather
conditions. From the information provided by the Ministry, the Committee
find that IAF is maintaining 12 High Power Radars. Besides, the
acquisitions for more radars are in pipeline. In addition, 8 radars are
being developed by DRDO. The Committee strongly recommend that all
the steps should be taken to ensure that there is no delay in acquisition
of radars which are in pipeline and adequate allocation is ensured for
the purpose.
Reply of the Government
During the Financial Year 1996-97, the funds available for
modernization (Capital Schemes) was Rs. 3175 crores (RE). The actual
expenditure was Rs. 3164 crores. During the Financial Year 1997-98, the
funds available was Rs. 3972 crores while the actual expenditure was
Rs. 3962 crores. While the funds were utilized for various modernization
projects of the IAF, orders for two Medium Power Radars could not be
placed. The Government is fully cognizant of the need to augment the
air defence assets of the IAF. Towards this end, procurement of various
systems and equipment have been approved and are at various stages
of induction. These include the Airborne Warning And Control System
(AWACS) aircraft, Medium Power Radars, Low Level Transportable
Radars, Low Level Light Weight Radars and Rohini Radars. In addition,
the Defence Research and Development Organisation is developing
different categories of radars to meet the air defence requirements of the
IAF. On induction of these systems, the air defence requirement of the
IAF will be fulfilled.
Recommendation (Paragraph No. 38)
Allocation of Funds to DRDO
The allocation for Defence Research and Development Organization
for the year 2010-11 is Rs. 9809.72 crore. i.e. 6.25% of the overall defence
budget. From the allocation and expenditure trend, it is observed that
since 2007-08, the utilization is less than the allocation. The percentage

68
allocation to DRDO has been reduced from 6.74% to 6.25%. The aforesaid
trend of declining percentage of allocation and under utilization of allotted
amount is a matter of serious concern. The Committee also note that the
Ministry has given priority to develop system to meet challenges of
terrorism and low intensity conflicts and taken various steps to
strengthen long gestation period of major projects, LCA, Kaveri
Engines, Unmanned Combat Aerial Vehicles, Airborne Early Warning
and Control System and Arjun Tanks. The Committee, therefore,
strongly recommend that the Ministry should fully utilize the
allocation as provided to them and seek additional amount at RE stage
and complete the R&D programme in time to enhance the defence
modernization.
The Committee during the course of deliberations have
been informed that after the civil-nuclear deal, in some areas with
regard to the export control in DRDO, there have been some
improvement. But there are some laboratories like the missile laboratories
which are affected by the export controls. The Committee have also been
informed that Government is having discussions with the advanced
countries in this direction to make sure that the benefits of these deals
are given across the board. Appreciating the efforts of the Ministry, the
Committee desire them to pursue this matter of national importance
expeditiously.
Reply of the Government
Percentage of allocation to Deptt. of Defence R&D w.r.t. overall
Defence Budget:
(Rs. in crore)
Year Defence Defence R&D % rise in % of R&D
Expenditure Expenditure Defence R&D Budget to the
Budget w.r.t. overall Defence
previous year  Budget
2007-08 91680.00 6104.55 - 6.66
2008-09 114223.00 7694.55 26.05 6.74
2009-10 (RE) 136264.00 8514.81 10.66 6.25
2010-11 (BE) 147344.00 9808.72 15.20 6.66
Defence R&D Budget when compared to total Defence Budget
indicate the decline in percentage because of overall quantum of increase
in Defence Budget. However, Defence R&D Budget has increased in

69
absolute terms. Ministry of Finance (MoF) and Ministry of Defence (MoD)
has always allocated additional funds, when required by Deptt. of
Defence R&D.
Utilization of Budget provisions in r/o Defence R&D:
(Rs. in crore)
Year Defence Defence   %age Funds
R&D (MA)  R&D Utilization  lapsed to
(Actuals) Government
2007-08 6256.81 6104.55 97.57 % 152.26
2008-09 7737.64 7694.55 99.44 % 43.09
2009-10 8514.81 8317.27 97.68 % Under
[upto Mar.’ process of
2010 (Pre.)] Compilation
All out efforts will be made to utilize the allocations in full and
additional funds, if required, would be sought at later stage.
Recommendation (Paragraph No. 39)
Rama Rao Committee Report
The Committee note that the Ministry has completed the
deliberations on the recommendations of Rama Rao Committee for
restructuring of DRDO and the Report will be submitted to the Minister
in this month for his considerations. The Committee expect the Ministry
to complete the task at the earliest. The development in this regard should
accordingly be communicated to the Committee.
Reply of the Government
Independent Review Committee headed by Dr. P . Rama Rao had
submitted its report to the Government on 5th March, 2008. The report
was processed by the Committee headed by Defence Secretary to look
into the responses and suggestions made by various stakeholders on the
recommendations of Dr. P . Rama Rao Committee. The same was approved
by Hon'ble Raksha Mantri on 12 May 2010. The action on the
implementation of the recommendations accepted by the Government is
still under process which may take some more time. The Parliamentary
Standing Committee on Defence would be informed after implementation
is completed.

70
Recommendation (Paragraph No. 44)
Modernization of Indian Navy
The Committee note that maritime security includes the exclusive
maritime zones admeasuring 2 million sq. km. area which is regularly
kept under vigil by the Coastguard and Navy. For effective patrolling
and keeping a vigil on such a large sea area, there is an urgent need to
have adequate number of ships and aircrafts. In this connection, the
Committee find that the emergency Committee of the Cabinet had
accepted a force level of 138 ships for the Indian Navy in 1964. Even
after the expiry of 46 years, the country is still to get 138 ships. The
present strength of naval fleet is only 129. Further the Committee find
that the Government had approved a 30 year long term submarine plan
in 1999 which entails indigenous construction of 24 modern conventional
submarines by 2030. The Six Scorpene Submarines which were earlier
scheduled to be delivered to Navy from 2012 till 2017, one each in one
year, has been delayed and first submarine will be commissioned only
in 2015. The Ministry has acknowledged that induction of submarine has
not kept pace with the de-induction schedule. In addition the aircraft
carrier Gorshkov which was due for induction in August, 2008 is not
likely to be delivered by Russia in December, 2012. The aircraft
modernization plan also includes MiG 29K, Long Range Maritime
Reconnaissance Aircraft, Kamov 31, TU 142, IL 38 and Dornier. The
aforesaid scenario of the force level in Navy indicates that there are huge
delays in procurement of ships and aircrafts. It is a matter of concern
that the country could not achieve a force level that was accepted by
Cabinet 46 years back in 1964. Since then a lot of challenges particularly
in the field of naval security have emerged particularly in the aftermath
of November 2008 terrorist attacks in Mumbai. The Committee strongly
recommend that there is an urgent need to find out the reasons for delay
in acquisitions and take adequate steps which include streamlining the
acquisition process. Besides the Committee would also like to emphasize
that the adequate outlay should be provided for the modernization plans
of Indian Navy.
Reply of the Government
Delays sometimes occur in defence projects due to several reasons
such as insufficient and limited vendor base, non-conformity of their
offers to the Request For Proposal (RFP) conditions, field trials,
complexities in contract negotiations, limited indigenous capability and
long lead time for indigenization etc. Further the market for state-of-the-
art defence equipment and platforms being circumscribed by denial
regimes, limited availability of required type of material, complexities in

71
construction and manufacturing involving integration of large number
of systems, assemblies and sub-assemblies also cause delays.
To counter systemic and institutional delays, procedures and process
are continuously refined on the basis of experience gained during the
implementation of projects. There are also contractual provisions for
penalties against delays in project implementation.
The matters relating to time and cost overrun are examined at
appropriate level. Provisions have been incorporated in the Defence
Procurement Procedure for review committees and monitoring teams
suitably empowered to ensure timely execution of projects at appropriate
level.
In order to further streamline defence procurement
procedures, action has since been initiated to review the DPP 2008
(Amendment 2009).
Adequate funds are provided for modernization plan of the
Navy.
Further, keeping in mind the Mumbai terrorist attack, various new
equipments are proposed to be procured and inducted in order to
strengthen the Coastal Surveillance system. These include Radars,
Automatic Identification Systems, associated displays and networking
equipment for the Coastal Radar, Fast Interceptor Crafts (FICs), Vessels
and aircraft, setting up of Integrated Underwater Defence and Surveillance
System at various naval harbours, Coastal Anti-Submarine Warfare ships
and Long Range Acoustic Devices.

72
CHAPTER V
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH
FINAL REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT
ARE STILL AWAITED
Recommendation (Paragraph No. 1)
The Committee note that the Budget Estimates (net) for the year
2010-11 are for Rs. 147344 crore which include Rs. 87344 crore as revenue
outlay and Rs. 60,000 crore as capital expenditure. The allocations made
at BE stage during 2010-11 are far less than the projections made by the
three services. The additional allocations sought by the Ministry during
2010-11 as compared to the BE of 2009-10 are to the tune of Rs. 30352.02 crore
whereas the actual enhancement in BE 2010-11 is just Rs. 5641 crore. The
Committee during the course of examination of Demands for Grants
have been informed that the Government is taking steps to ensure that
the capabilities of the Armed Forces are enhanced in a well planned and
integrated manner. Such measures include the induction of equipment
and platforms, the strengthening of infrastructure and induction and
deployment of skilled manpower. The Committee further observe that
the exercise carried out late last year to review the projections for the
remaining two years of the Eleventh Plan resulted in the figures that
entail growth of 35.96 per cent and 17.13 per cent respectively under
capital segment for the years 2010-11 and 2011-12 over the BE of 2009-10.
The Ministry has further apprised that under the revenue segment, the
revised projections resulted in a growth of 12.58 per cent over BE of
2009-10 for the remaining two years. Not only that, the Ministry of Finance
has indicated growth rate of 6.5 per cent under the revenue segment on
the higher base of RE 2008-09 and BE 2009-10. Under Capital segment
growth rates for the remaining two years of the Plan period have been
indicated as 15.55 per cent and 15.12 per cent respectively, resulting in
overall growth rate of 10 per cent. The additionality of just Rs. 5641 crore
as provided ruing 2010-11 as compared to BE of previous year is just
3.8 per cent which apparently is far less than projections as well as the
indicated growth rate by the Ministry of Finance. Not only that, the
Ministry has informed that the allocations lesser than the projections
would necessitate thinner spread of allocations over various budgetary
heads resulting into compromises under various important heads
including Defence modernization. The Committee find that India is

73
surrounded by the difficult neighbours and it is of utmost importance
for the country to build the deterrent capabilities to safeguard the nation.
In view of this the Committee strongly recommend that the allocations
made by the Ministry of Finance should be commensurate to the
projections made by the Ministry of Defence. As such the additionality
sought by the Ministry for the year 2010-11 should be made available
to the Ministry of Defence so that the modernization plan of the services
do not suffer for want of resources.
Reply of the Government
The observation of the Committee has been brought to the notice
of the Ministry of Finance.
Recommendation (Paragraph No. 2)
With regard to the performance of the Ministry in the context of
financial achievement during the year 2009-10, the Committee find that
68 per cent of the expenditure was made during the first three quarters
thus leaving 31.78 per cent of the allocation in the last quarter of the year.
The spending of substantial part of the allocations during the last quarter
of the year is the general trend with the Ministry. The Committee are
concerned to note that when the issue was raised during the course of
oral evidence, the Defence Secretary stated that this was the case with
almost all the Ministries. The Committee do not appreciate the way the
trend of utilization of the substantial allocations in the last quarter was
defended by the Ministry. In this context the Committee may like to
highlight that the outlay of Rs. 141703 crore provided at BE stage during
the year 2009-10 was reduced to Rs. 136264 crore at RE stage. There was
a reduction of Rs. 7,000 crore under the Capital Section. The trend of
utilization clearly indicates that the cut may be imposed keeping in view
the pace of expenditure during the first six months of the year. The
Committee strongly recommend that the allocations provided at Budget
Estimates stage should not be reduced at RE stage particularly under the
capital section. While recommending for not imposing cut at RE stage,
the Committee would also like the Ministry to ensure utilization of
resources in a phased manner during the year so that the Ministry can
present their case effectively at the Revised Estimates Stage to avoid
substantial reduction of outlay.
Reply of the Government
The observation of the Committee concerning non-imposition of
cut at the RE stage has been brought to the notice of the Ministry of
Finance.

74
The observation of the Committee regarding utilization of resources
in a phased manner during the year has also been communicated to the
Services Headquarters and other Departments.
Recommendation (Paragraph No. 3)
The Committee note that Revenue Capital Ratio has been improving
towards the capital side. The average ratio was 74:26 during IX Plan.
During X Plan, the average ratio was 64:36. In the XI Plan, during the
year 2007-08 the ratio 59:41, in 2008-09, the ratio was 64:36, in 2009-10
the ratio 65:35, during 2010-11 (BE) it is 59:41. The increase in 2008-09
and 2009-10 is largely due to salary increase and one time payment of
arrears due to implementation of Sixth Central Pay Commission’s
recommendation. While appreciating the trend of improvement in
the revenue capital ratio more towards capital side barring the
years 2008-09 and 2009-10 due to implementation of Sixth Pay
Commission’s recommendations, the Committee once again desire the
Ministry to find out ways and means to avoid wasteful expenditure in
order to provide more resources for capital modernization programme
and their maintenance and repair.
Reply of the Government
The observations of the Standing Committee have been
communicated to the Services and other Departments. It is also
submitted that with the allocations being generally less than the
projections, there is an awareness on the part of the Services and
Departments to utilize the available resources judiciously . The Integrated
Financial Advice System also ensures that the expenditure proposals are
closely scrutinized before these are sanctioned by the Competent Financial
Authorities.
Recommendation (Paragraph No. 5)
Further, the Committee observe from the broad classifications
of revenue budget that the allocation under the store and equipment
i.e. Rs. 21479 crore at BE 2009-10 has been reduced to Rs. 18674 at
RE stage. The reduction is of Rs. 2805 crore. In the BE 2010-11, the
allocation made is Rs. 20084 crore, in comparison to BE 2009-10 it is
less than Rs. 1395 crore. As stores and equipment are of paramount
importance, reduction in the allocation will have an adverse impact on
the modernization programme. Therefore, the Committee recommend
that adequate budgetary allocation should be provided at RE stage under
this Head.

75
Reply of the Government
The observation of the Committee has been brought to the notice
of the Ministry of Finance.
Recommendation (Paragraph No. 6)
Defence Procurement Policy (DPP)
From the information furnished by the Ministry with regard to
various acquisitions in Navy and Air Force, the Committee find that
there are considerable delays under various projects having a great impact
on the cost of the project. To quote a few, the aircraft carrier Admiral
Gorshkov was to be delivered in August, 2008, now the delivery has been
rescheduled to December, 2010 and the cost of the project has increased
from USD 974 million to USD 2330 million. The other such projects are
scorpenes, nuclear submarines in Navy, Advance Jet Trainer, Tejas and
Kaveri Engine, Hawk in Air Force. During the course of the deliberations,
the Secretary apprised that under Defence Procurement procedure every
activity has been clearly marked out and a complex and large acquisition
takes about 29 months. The Committee note that inspite of clear cut
provisions of the period of every activity under DPP , the acquisitions are
taking much longer period as stated above. The Committee are concerned
to know that inspite of considerable delays in acquisition, the stand of
the Defence Service that ‘the change in guidelines would not really help
to that extent’ is not understandable. The Committee are of the firm view
that there is an urgent need to further streamline the acquisition
procedures so as to avoid long delays in acquisitions.
Reply of the Government
Defence Procurement Procedure (DPP) is reviewed annually. The
DPP-2008 (Amendment 2009) is being reviewed presently with a view
to further streamline the acquisition procedure. The aspect of long delays
is being focused in the current review.
Recommendation (Paragraph No. 12)
Early Finalisation of Long Term Integrated Perspective Plan (LTIPP)
and Eleventh Plan.
(a) The Committee have repeatedly been recommending to
finalise the Long Term Integrated Perspective Plan (LTIPP).
Till date, the LTIPP has not been finalized.
(b) Now the Ministry has stated that the Plan is in the final stage
of preparation. The Committee are constrained to observe

76
the way Long Term Plans are being drawn by the Ministry
particularly when it relates to the security of the nation.
(c) While expressing unhappiness over the adhocism in the
planning process. The Committee would like to strongly
recommend that at least now the LTIPP should be finalized
without any further delay.
Reply of the Government
Long Term Integrated Perspective Plan (LTIPP) is formulated
by HQ IDS and approved by Chairman Defence Acquisition Council
i.e. Hon’ble Raksha Mantri, LTIPP for the period 2002-17 is in vogue
at present. It was approved by the Defence Acquisition Council in
June 2006.
To work out the next LTIPP , covering the period 2012-2027, Service
HQs are finalizing their LTIPPs and on receipt, HQ IDS will crystallize
the LTIPP for 2012-27 after due approval by the DAC.
Recommendation (Paragraph No. 25)
Benefits to Ex-Servicemen, War Widows and Disabled Soldiers
The Committee while examining the Demands for Grants of the
previous year had noted that the Government has not maintained any
data with regard to war-widows and disabled soldiers who had laid
down their lives and disabled pensioners who had lost their limbs to
safeguard their nation, even though certain benefits are being provided
to them. The Ministry in the action taken note has stated that action is
in progress for getting the data of disabled/war disabled pensioners. The
Committee again emphasize that urgent action in this regard should be
taken and the data made available on the internet. The data may also
be furnished for the information of the Committee.
Reply of the Government
As a result of concerted efforts made by this Ministry, some data
in respect of disabled/war disabled pensioners has been received and the
same is as under:—
Disabled War Disabled
Pensioners Pensioners
Navy 1996-2008 1393 -
Air Force (2003-OS) PBOR (1996-2008) Officers 5189 191
Army (1951-2009) 64746 5822
Efforts are in progress to collect more information.

77
Recommendation (Paragraph No. 30)
Allocation Of Funds To Indian Air Force
The Committee observe that there are gaps in the projected outlay
and sanctioned outlay of Air Force during the year 2010-11. Under the
revenue section against the projected BE of Rs. 17483.60 crore, sanctioned
BE is Rs. 15210.73 crore, leaving a gap of Rs. 2272.87 crore. Similarly
under the capital segment against the projected BE of Rs. 31667.56 crore,
the sanctioned BE is Rs. 25251.72 crore, the gap being Rs. 6415.84 crore.
The trend of percentage allocation to Air Force out of the total Defence
Budget during the last three years of Eleventh Plan indicates that the
allocation under the revenue head has declined from 10.62 per cent during
the year 2007-08 to 10.1 per cent during 2009-10. Under the capital segment,
the aforesaid percentage was 17.53 per cent during the year 2007-08 which
increased to 18.25 per cent during the year 2008-09. However during the
year 2009-10 it has declined considerably to 14.19 per cent. Keeping in
view the fact that the acquisitions for some of the aircrafts like Advance
Jet Trainers, Advance Light Helicopters and Flight Re-fuelling Aircrafts
are in the pipeline, the Committee strongly recommend that additional
requirement particularly under the capital head i.e. to the tune of
Rs. 6415.84 crore should be made available to Air Force so that the
important projects do not suffer for want of resources.
Reply of the Government
The observation of the Committee has been brought to the notice
of the Ministry of Finance.
N
EW DELHI;  SATPAL MAHARAJ,
9 December, 2010 Chairman,
18 Agrahayana, 1932 (Saka) Standing Committee on Defence.

78
MINUTES OF THE THIRD SITTING OF THE STANDING
COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE (2010-11)
The Committee sat on Monday, the 6th December, 2010 from
1500 to 1600 hrs. in Committee Room ‘B’, Parliament House Annexe,
New Delhi.
PRESENT
Shri Satpal Maharaj — Chairman
M
EMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Harish Chaudhary
3. Shri Kamal Kishor ‘Commando’
4. Dr. Sucharu Ranjan Haldar
5. Shri Bhaskar Rao Patil Khatgaonkar
6. Prof. Prasanna Kumar Patasani
7. Shri A.T. Nana Patil
8. Shri C.R. Patil
9. Shri C. Rajendran
10. Shri M. Rajamohan Reddy
11. Shri Baju Ban Riyan
12. Rajkumari Ratna Singh
Rajya Sabha
13. Shri Avinash Rai Khanna
14. Prof. P .J. Kurien
15. Shri Mukut Mithi
16. Shri T.K. Rangarajan
17. Shri Birender Singh
18. Shri M.V . Mysura Reddy

79
SECRETARIAT
1. Shri T.K. Mukherjee — Joint Secretary
2. Smt. Sudesh Luthra — Director
3. Smt. Jyochnamayi Sinha — Deputy Secretary
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the members to the sitting
of the Committee.
3. *** *** *** *** ***
4. During the course of deliberations, the Members pointed out
that as per the action taken notes the Government has not agreed to some
of the recommendations made by the Committee in Sixth report. The
convincing reasons for not agreeing to the recommendations were also
not given in the action taken notes. On the recommendation made by
the Committee to have an independent regulator for management of
Defence Land, the Government did not pay heed to the recommendation
even when Sukna Land Scam and now Adarsh Land Scam are being
reported. The Committee expressed serious concern over the way the
Ministry has addressed to the recommendations. While agreeing to
the comments made in the report, the Committee decided that
Hon’ble Chairman should address a letter to Hon’ble Minister of Defence
expressing the concerns of the Committee in this regard.
5. The Committee then considered and adopted the draft Report
on ‘ Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations/observations
contained in the Sixth Report of the Standing Committee on Defence
(Fifteenth Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants (2010-11), with slight
modifications at Para No. 11 contained in Chapter-I of the Report.
6. The Committee, then, authorized the Chairman to finalize the
above draft report and present the same to the House on a date convenient
to him.
The Committee then adjourned.

80
APPENDIX
ANALYSIS OF THE ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON
THE RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS CONTAINED
IN THE SIXTH REPORT OF THE STANDING
COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE
Percentage
of Total
1. Total number of recommendations 49
2. Recommendations/Observations which have
been accepted by the Government
Para Nos. 7, 8, 9, 16, 17, 18, 19, 21, 23, 24, 26, 19 39
32, 40, 41, 42, 43, 45, 47 and 48
3. Recommendations/Observations which the
Committee do not desire to pursue in view
of the replies of the Government
Para Nos. 13, 27, 33, 35 and 46 05 10
4. Recommendations/Observations in respect
of which replies of the Government have not
been accepted by the Committee and which
require reiteration
Para Nos. 4, 10, 11, 14, 15, 20, 22, 28, 29, 31, 16 33
34, 36, 37, 38, 39 and 44
5. Recommendations/Observations in respect of
which final replies of the Government are
still awaited
Para Nos. 1, 2, 3, 5, 6, 12, 25 and 30 08 16