1 
 
  
 
22 
    STANDING COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE 
(2013-2014) 
 
(FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
MINISTRY OF DEFENCE 
 
THREAT PERCEPTION AND PREPAREDNESS OF THE FORCES 
INCLUDING INCURSION ON BORDERS,  COORDINATION MECHA NISM 
WITH THE CENTRAL ARMED POLICE FORCES AND BORDER 
CONNECTIVITY THROUGH ROAD, AIR AND RAIL  
 
TWENTY-SECOND REPORT 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
 
NEW DELHI 
 
18 February, 2014/ Magha, 1935 (Saka)  

2 
 
 
 
TWENTY- SECOND REPORT 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE 
(2013-2014) 
  
(FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
MINISTRY OF DEFENCE 
 
THREAT PERCEPTION AND PREPAREDNESS OF THE FORCES 
INCLUDING INCURSION ON BORDERS,  COORDINATION MECHA NISM 
WITH THE CENTRAL ARMED POLICE FORCES AND BORDER 
CONNECTIVITY THROUGH ROAD, AIR AND RAIL  
 
    Presented  to  Lok  Sabha  on 18.02.2014 
Laid  in  Rajya  Sabha  on 18.02.2014.  
 
 
 
 
  
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
 
NEW DELHI 
18 February, 2014/ Magha, 1935 (Saka)  
 
 


3 
 
 
CONTENTS  
                                                                                                        PAGE                     
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE 2013-14......................................(iv) 
INTRODUCTION.......................................................................................(vi) 
REPORT 
PART I 
CHAPTER  I    Introductory …………………………………………………..1 
 
CHAPTER II    Threat Perception and incursion on bo rders……………..7  
(a) Role  of Indian Army 
(b) Role of Indian Air Force- Role of HAL 
(c) Role of Indian Navy 
(d) Role of Indian Coast Guard Organisation 
(e) Role of DRDO 
 
CHAPTER III       Coordination……………………………………………….40 
(a) Coordination  with CAPFs 
(b) Intra  Agency Coordination 
 
CHAPTER IV  Border connectivity through Road, Rail and Air………..46 
 
PART-II 
Observations/Recommendations…………………………………………….66 
APPENDICES 
 
 
ANNEXURE Cummulative Progress of 27 ITBP Roads……………….10 3 
Minutes of the sitting of the Committee on Defence held  
on 9.10.2013, 21.10.2013 and 17.02.2014…………………...…………117  

4 
 
 
  
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE (2013-14) 
 
Shri Raj Babbar   -  Chairman 
 
Lok Sabha 
 
2. Shri Sameer Bhujbal 
3. Shri Kamal Kishor  `Commando’ 
4. Shri R. Dhruvanarayana 
5. Shri Varun Gandhi 
6. Shri P. Karunakaran  
7. Shri Mithilesh Kumar 
8. Shri Sidhant Mohapatra 
9. Smt. Mala Rajya Laxmi Shah 
10. Shri Asaduddin Owaisi 
  
  
  
  
11. Shri A.T. Nana Patil 
  
12. Shri C.R. Patil 
13. Shri Amarnath Pradhan 
14.  Prof. Saugata Roy 
15. Smt. M. Vijaya Shanthi 
16. Shri Mahabali Singh 
17. Rajkumari Ratna Singh 
18. Shri Uday Singh 
19. Shri R. Thamaraiselvan  
20. Vacant 
21. 
 
Vacant 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
22. Shri Pankaj Bora 
23. Shri Naresh Gujral 
24. Shri Prakash Javadekar 
25. Shri Ashwani Kumar 
26. Shri Hishey Lachungpa 
27. Shri Mukut Mithi 
28. Shri Mukhtar Abbas Naqvi 
29. Shri C.M. Ramesh 
30. Shri T.K. Rangarajan 

5 
 
31. Shri Devender Goud T. 

6 
 
 
SECRETARIAT  
 
1. Dr.  R.K. Chadha  - Additional Secretary 
2. Shri R.K. Jain  - Joint Secretary 
3. Shri D.S. Malha   - Director 
4. Shri Sanjeev Sharma  - Additional Director 
5. Shri Rahul Singh - Under Secretary 
 

7 
 
INTRODUCTION  
 
I, the Chairman of the Standing Committee on Defenc e (2013-14), 
(Fifteenth Lok Sabha) having been authorized by the  Committee to submit the 
Report on their behalf, present this Twenty-second report on ‘Threat Perception 
and preparedness of the Forces including incursion on borders, coordination 
mechanism with the Central Armed Police Forces and Border Connectivity 
through Road, Air and Rail'. 
2.  The Committee took evidence of the representati ves of the Ministry of 
Defence, three Services, Border Roads Organization,  Ministry of Home Affairs, 
Ministry of Railways and Airports Authority of India on the subject on 09 October, 
2013 and Ministry of Defence, three Services, Borde r Roads Organization and 
Railways again on 21 October, 2013. 
3.  The Draft Report was considered and adopted by the Committee at their 
sitting held on 17 February, 2014. 
4.  The Committee wish to express their thanks to t he officers of the Ministry of 
Defence, three Services, Border Roads Organisation,  Ministry of Home Affairs, 
Ministry of Railways and Airports Authority of Indi a for appearing before the 
Committee and furnishing the material and informati on which the Committee 
desired in connection with the examination of the subject. 
5. For facility of reference and convenience, the r ecommendations/observations 
of the Committee have been printed in bold letters in the body of the report. 
 
 
 
New Delhi;                                                Raj Babbar 
17 February, 2014 
                          Chairman  
28 Magha, 1934 (Saka)                   Standing Co mmittee on Defence  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

8 
 
REPORT 
 
PART I 
 
CHAPTER I 
 
INTRODUCTORY 
 
The Committee have been given to understand that In dia’s security 
challenges are multifarious and are compounded by t he instability in our 
neighbourhood.  Today, very few countries of the world face the range of security 
challenges as India does.  Besides the conventional  threats that emanate from 
our immediate neighbours, terrorism by state sponso red non-state actors, 
proliferation of weapons of mass destruction, cyber -terrorism, piracy, illicit trade 
in small arms and trans-national drug trafficking p ose potent threats to India’s 
security.  
 
1.2 India has land frontiers extending more than 15 ,500 kilometres and 
maritime boundaries  of about 7500 Km overlooking t hree major shipping lanes. 
The country is strategically located vis-a-vis both continental  Asia and the Indian 
Ocean Region.  The geographical and topographical d iversity, especially on the 
land borders which we share with our neighbouring c ountries, poses unique 
challenges to our armed Forces. India's peninsular dimension places  it adjacent 
to one of the most vital sea lanes of the world str etching from the Suez Canal 
and the  Persian Gulf to the Straits of Malacca thr ough which 55,000 ships and 
much of the oil from the gulf region transit each year. 
 
1.3 In the post cold war international scenario, th e 9/11 terrorist attack against 
the USA and terrorist strikes in many other parts o f the world have brought about 
greater international convergence on security issues and challenges.   

9 
 
Threat Perception and Defence Preparedness  
  
1.4  The committee understand that  India faces threats, externally & internally, 
on both conventional and non-conventional fronts.  Besides the conventional 
threats from Pakistan and China, the emergence of i deology linked terrorism, the 
spread of small arms and light weapons (SALW), the proliferation of WMD 
(Weapons of Mass Destruction), cyber terrorism, ins urgency and drug trafficking 
are some of the factors which link India's security  directly with the extended 
neighbourhood. However, China and Pakistan continue   to pose the major 
threats  to our security. 
 
1.5  India's Borders 
:  
 The Committee find that India shares borders with as many as seven 
countries – Pakistan, China, Bangladesh, Nepal, Bhu tan, Myanmar and Sri 
Lanka. Two of these countries have longstanding bor der dispute with India. 
Generally keeping in mind the security scenario Ind ia's threat perception lies in 
the following areas:- 
(i) Inadequate Defence Research:  The Committee understands that as 
per the defence spending as a percentage of GDP, In dia spends 
meagre of 2.5% on defence out of which meagre amoun t is directed 
towards research.       
(ii) Internal Security Threat/Role in peace time: Our defence forces 
have not only to be well prepared from external thr eat but also they 
have to counter internal security threats and also have a significant 
role to play in peace time such as natural calamiti es like floods, 
earthquakes and other disasters etc. 

10 
 
(iii) Obsolescence: Obsolescence of machines and equipments is 
perceived as general problem in our armed forces. T he situation is 
aggravated due to long delay in procurements and th eir 
replacements. Given to the vast subject matter, eac h and every case 
has not been brought out in detail in this report.  
   
1.6  China:  The rise of China is posing a serious strategic ch allenge to 
India.  Several developments in China like enhancem ent of military capabilities 
through its modernization programme, development of  infrastructure along the 
India-China border (especially in Tibet), expansion  of roads and railways 
opposite Arunachal Pradesh, inroads into the Indian Ocean Region and adoption 
of high technology – especially Nuclear, Space and Missile capabilities – are 
affecting the strategic balance between the two cou ntries.  Besides, China is 
increasingly playing a significant role in developi ng infrastructure of military 
significance in the countries bordering India and i n the Indian Ocean Region 
(IOR). 
 
1.7 Pakistan 
:  Pakistan remains the principal national security threat to India in 
all military dimensions.  Pakistan continues to be embattled with sectarian 
violence and several Non State actors are based and  operate with near impunity 
in the country. Federally Administered Tribal Areas  (FATA) and North-West 
Frontier Province (NWFP)  remain the epicentres of terrorist activity with rising 
indices of violence.  The expanding footprints of e xtremist and terrorist 
organizations in Pakistan and their linkages with t errorist activities in J&K pose a 
clear threat to India’s security.  Regardless of th e internal political dynamics in 
Pakistan, the Pakistani army remains fixed to impla cable hostility to India as a 
fundamental strategic principle.  Pakistan’s expand ing nuclear weapons 

11 
 
inventory, developing Missile Programme and continu ed support to terrorist 
organization operating against India, will continue  to pose significant challenges 
to our security. 
 
1.8 The Ministry has informed the Committee that in  the backdrop of the above 
threat perception, defence preparedness is ensured by the three services 
through a mix of border management/development, act ive deployment and 
deployment of forces in peace time locations. Our a rmed Forces must be 
prepared for a full fledged war with 'Offensive' capability against adversaries. Our  
Defence forces must develop capabilities, in the lo ng run, to flight a multi front 
war and simultaneously, they  should be prepared to  deal with an externally 
sponsored low intensity  internal threat. In view o f the developments in the 
country's nighbourhood, the Army, the Air Force & t he Navy have devised 
operational plans in keeping with the country's ove rall policies. These plans are 
suitably  calibrated from time to time based upon a n assessment of the nature 
and extent of the threat. 
 
1.9 The Committee take note of the fact that the mo dernisation of the forces is 
an ongoing process.  The modernisation efforts of t he individual services are 
based upon their respective doctrines and the requi rement of equipment, 
mobility, manpower and training requirements. Moder nisation & induction of 
equipment is ensured through a balance of procurement from foreign ventures as 
well as indigenous efforts including by the DRDO, D efence PSUs, and ordnance 
factories.  Replenishment & replacement of equipmen ts is a planned process 
undertaken in consultation with original equipment manufacturers as well as 
other routes including Joint Ventures.  These effor ts extend across the spectrum 

12 
 
of conflict and factor in the likely scenarios base d upon the directions envisaged 
in the Raksha Mantri’s Operational Directives.  Lon g term and medium term 
plans in tune with these directives are also prepar ed and reviewed by the forces 
in order to consolidate and project the budgetary r equirements for the armed 
forces holistically. Internal procedures such as th e Defence Acquisition Council, 
the Defence Procurement Procedure and Defence Procu rement Manual are also 
in place to facilitate such efforts. Infrastructure  to support the new inductions of 
equipment and manpower is also monitored on a regular basis.  
 
1.10 In view of the developments in the country’s n eighbourhood, the Army, the 
Air Force & the Navy have devised operational plans  in keeping with the 
country’s overall policies.  These plans are suitab ly calibrated from time to time 
based upon an assessment of the nature and extent of the threat.  
 
Issues relating to Border 
 
1.11 The Committee note that our border with Pakist an consists of 2313 Km of 
International Border (IB), 772.1 Km of Line  of Control (LC) in J&K and 121 Km of 
Actual Ground Position Line (AGPL) also in J&K. The ceasefire agreed to in 2003 
along the International Border (IB), Line of contro l (LoC) and Actual Ground 
Position Line (AGPL) with Pakistan came into effect  from the intervening night of 
25-26 November of that year.   The Ministry has inf ormed that the deployment of 
the Army on our border with Pakistan is adequate an d based upon a realistic 
threat perception. The response of the Army has bee n and will continue to be 
firm and effective in the future also. While  provo cations by Pakistan cannot be 
ruled out, it is our resolve  that our response sho uld be to retaliate in a manner 
that will deter Pakistan from such actions.  

13 
 
1.12 With regard to the Border with China, the Comm ittee were informed that   
the total length of Line of Actual Control (LAC) be tween India and China is 3488 
Km and is manned by army and Indo  Tibetan Border P olice(ITBP). There is no 
commonly delineated Line of Actual Control (LAC) be tween India and China.  
Due to differing perceptions of LAC, transgressions  do occur.  Government 
regularly takes up any violation along  the LAC wit h the Chinese side based on 
established mechanisms  under the Agreement on Main tenance of Peace and 
Tranquillity along the LAC (1993) and Agreement on Confidence Building 
Measures (CBMs)  in the Military Field along the LA C (1996) and Protocol on 
Modalities for the Implementation of  CBMs in the Military Field along  the LAC in 
the India-China Border areas signed in April, 2005.  Further, India-China 
Agreement on Establishment of  a Working Mechanism for Consultation and 
Coordination  (WMCC) on India-China Border Affairs was signed in New Delhi  in 
January, 2012 to deal  with important border affair s related to maintaining peace 
and tranquillity in  the India- China Border Areas.  

14 
 
 
CHAPTER II  
 
THREAT PERCEPTION AND INCURSION/TRANSGRESSION  
 
 The Committee have learnt that incursions/transgre ssions by the 
neighbouring countries specially difficult  and unf riendly neighbours having a 
history of hostile attitude  towards  our nation as sumes significance in relation to 
countering threat perception.   The Committee took serious note of the continued  
incursions/transgressions on our borders taking pla ce over the years. Such 
threats have been emanating mainly from two countri es i. e. Pakistan and 
People's Republic of China.  In the opinion of the Committee our country is 
passing through a difficult phase as she has to counter such threats in the normal 
course.  The Army is conducting counter-infiltratio n/counter terrorism operations 
in the peace time also in districts of J&K state an d North-East States/districts 
declared as disturbed. Another challenge is the mod ernisation of our defence 
forces not only to keep pace with the newly emergin g technologies but also to 
enhance efficiency level of our defence personnel. In the years to come, the role 
of Army, Air Force, Navy and Coast Guard, Defence R esearch Establishments, 
Defence Production Units and all other concerned or ganisations will always be 
paramount in achieving their objectives mentioned a bove.   The subsequent 
paragraphs of this  report  throw light on the func tioning of these organisations, 
challenges faced by them and proposed improvements in accomplishing their 
well defined objectives. 
 

15 
 
2.1  Keeping in view the prevailing security scenar io in South Asian region, the 
Committee wanted to know the  level of defence prep aredness of the forces. In 
this regard, in a written reply, the Ministry stated as under: 
'Keeping in view the evolving security scenario in the South Asian Region, 
our own defence strategy and plans are being contin uously reviewed. Our 
infrastructure development, force accretions and mo dernization plans are 
being implemented in consonance with our threat per ception which takes 
into account, inter alia, the capabilities of force s of our neighbouring 
nations. Required steps are continuously being take n to strengthen and to 
optimize our force structure and capabilities to meet all eventualities.' 
 
Shortage of Officers and Jawans in the forces and availability of equipment  
 
2.2 The Committee felt that the first and foremost requirement for 
strengthening of the forces was to have the optimum  number of manpower as 
well assets on which they could rely. Accordingly, the Committee desired to know 
the factual position on both these issues. Replying  to a query in this connection,  
the Ministry submitted the following information: 
' 
 Army Navy 
Air Force              
(as on 31.10.2013) 
 Officers Other 
Ranks 
Officers Sailors Officers Airmen 
Authoriz 
ed 
Strength 
52859 1150191 10457 
(as on 
31.3.12) 
63433 
(as on 
31.3.12) 
12605 134338 
Held 
Strength 
43475 
(as on 
1.7.13) 
1129630( 
as on 
1.7.13) 
8896 
(as on 
31.10.13) 
51608 
(as on 
31.10.13) 
11946 130664 
 
In order to address the shortage of officers and ja wans in the Armed 
Forces, Government has taken a number of measures t o encourage the 
youth to join the Armed Forces, including conduct o f recruitment rallies, 
media campaign etc.  Further, Government has taken various steps to 
make armed forces jobs attractive for youngsters.  These include 
implementation of the recommendation of the VI Cent ral Pay Commission 
with improved pay structure, additional family acco mmodation through 
Married Accommodation Project and improvement in pr omotion prospects 
in the Armed Forces.   

16 
 
 
Further, force accretion of the Armed Forces and de velopment of their 
combat capabilities to tackle the entire spectrum o f security challenges is 
an ongoing process dictated primarily by capabiliti es to be achieved, threat 
perceptions, prevailing external strategic security  environment and 
emerging technologies. The Armed Forces periodicall y review the security 
challenges based on threat perception and undertake  necessary updation 
in the warfare doctrines. Necessary emphasis is als o being given by the 
Armed Forces to developing greater jointness among them.  Government is 
taking necessary measures to ensure that the Armed Forces are 
appropriately equipped to tackle the range of chall enges. The force 
accretion programme is being pursued in accordance with the Long Term 
Integrated Perspective Plan and the 12 th  Defence Plan (2012-17). 
 
Induction of the equipment including tanks, aircraf t, aircraft carrier etc. in 
the inventories of the Armed Forces is an ongoing p rocess which are 
reviewed from time to time and necessary steps take n.  Further details 
regarding holdings cannot be divulged in the interest of national security.' 
 
Role of Indian Army 
 
2.3 Indian Army plays a major role in tackling the threat being faced by India. 
Explaining the perceived threats being faced by Ind ia, a witness during the 
presentation informed that the threat encompassed i n four broad areas viz.  
conventional war : China & Pak  - Territorial disputes, Proxy war/Internal Security 
Threats: J&K & North East Border States, Non Contac t Warfare and Nuclear 
Warfare.  He also stated that the strength of Pakis tan Army stood at 0.52 million 
whereas that of China stood at 2.3 million. When as ked about the strength in  
numerical terms, the witness  intimated as under: - 
 
"Sir, you must realize that it is a 12 lakh strong Army.  Most of the troops, at 
some times or the other, are deployed in very sensitive duties.  They are all 
living in all parts of India including the remote v illages, thus enduring 
security of all personnel and their families a problem ". 
 

17 
 
Incursions on the borders and internal threats  
 
2.4 The Committee wanted to know the factual positi on on the repeated 
incursions/infiltrations on the western border incl uding the recent incidents and 
the efforts undertaken by the Army in countering th e same. Replying to the 
queries,   the then Vice Chief of Army Staff stated as under:- 
 
"Firstly, about the Keran operation, we had given a de tailed presentation.  We 
have nothing to add though there are certain things in the media today.  Our facts 
remain the same and that is, the operation finished on 8 th  (October) and we 
had eight terrorists  killed, seven bodies recovere d, one could not be 
recovered because it was on the LC and 59 weapons w ere recovered.  
There is a media report telling about the extended operation till 15 th 
(October 2013), I would like to just tell about the  tactical aspects that these 
operations on the LC are on-going process.  It takes place 24X7 and that is 
where the troops are deployed there and they contin uously carry out 
patrolling, ambushes, flushing out the militants an d whenever there is a 
contact then they surround and kill them.  This is part of an on-going thing 
and it is a continuous process throughout the year ". 
 
2.5 When asked about maintaining the peace and tran quillity in the sensitive 
states of J&K and North East, the witness stated: 
 
"About the Samba incident, we did not discuss it la st time. A lot has been 
coming in the papers with large number of expert op inions.  As stated 
earlier, I am not in a position to comment as an in quiry is due because any 
statement by me here would influence the ongoing inquiry.  But I would like 
to tell something on ground so that the House is qu ite aware of it.  The 
tactical part of it is that all over the world, a d etermined military group may 
sometimes succeed in breaking the security cordon a s you have seen all 
over the world, as it happened in the unit in Samba.  
  
We need to continuously upgrade our security to pre vent such type of 
operations and take these militants as and when the y strike.  That is what 
we intend doing from this inquiry, that is to impro ve our systems.  I think, a 
few days back there was an article that tanks were used and we have fired 

18 
 
this thing, and all these happened.  After being in itially surprised, the unit 
took immediate measures with whatever they had at t heir disposal at that 
time because it is the immediate reaction that matt ers.  Again I will come 
down to the facts.  The fact was that all three mil itants were killed and we 
also suffered causalities.  We are learning from th is operation and we will 
try and improve our security measures".   
 
 
2.6 Specifically on the Technical Support Division and the military intelligence 
the Committee during oral evidence were informed as under: 
 
"Sir, you had also asked about the Technical Suppor t Division and the 
military intelligence.  It is a sensitive subject a gain.  But I would like to just 
tell the House that it was the Board of Officers to  audit the accounts and 
functioning of the MIF funds, which is a normal pra ctice with all accounts 
and all organizations".   
  
 
2.7 The Committee were also informed  that certain  disturbed areas  have 
been identified in the North East,  where 78 insurgent active groups are operating 
in seven States. As a result, some of the areas are  disturbed and some have 
Chinese linkages too.    Throwing light on the operational preparedness to handle 
these challenges the Committee were given to unders tand that army is 
operationally prepared to meet all challenges,  ope rational training conducted at 
all levels, efforts being made to make up voids in 
weapons/equipment/ammunition, capability developmen t and modernisation as 
per long term integrated perspective plan and infra structure development is also 
being undertaken.   

19 
 
 
  
2.8 In this regards, the then Vice Chief of Army, w hile agreeing with the 
suggestions of the Committee    stated as under:- 
"We had some very good comments from our Hon. Membe rs .............. that 
is, improvement of our operational capability vis-à-vis  China, securing our 
maritime boundary, enhancing our air strike capabil ity, comments on the 
nuclear deterrence with reference to article of Mr.  Garekhan, need to 
enhance our infrastructure along our northern borde rs etc.  These are very 
welcome points, and I am sure that these will help all of us that is, the 
PMO, MoD and Army to take note of these suggestions  and improve our 
security concerns. 
 
Similarly, the Hon. Member ......... had given out some very valuable 
suggestions on improvement of procurement policies,  control and audit of 
intelligence funds, handling of POWs and the capabi lity development, 
which are most welcome. They are noted with very po sitive approach and 
will help us in refining our policies further.   
  
There are certain cases which have come in the rece nt past about the 
officer-men relationship. Sir, I would like to tell  you that the Army 
Commanders’ Conference is going on, and I have just  absented myself 
from there.  All these issues are discussed there very seriously.  This is the 
problem which is engaging the attention of all our time.   
  
We have had some incidents. In general we see it as  a result of many 
factors, that is, the socio-economic changes where the aspirations of the 
soldiers for improved quality of life and education  for his children and 
families commensurate with the type of job he is do ing, the stress and 
strain of tough military life, shortage of officers  in the unit resulting in 
diminishing contact between the leader and the led are some of the factors 
that we have identified.  We have found some of the  short and long-term 
measures to address these problems".  
 

20 
 
2.9  During examination of Demands for Grants 2013- 14  in regard to  Cease 
Fire Violations  across the border with Pakistan, T he Committee was  intimated 
through a written reply that : 
'During the years 2009 to 2013, there were a total of 240 of ceasesfire 
Violations across Indo Pak Border.'  
 
Role of Indian Air Force 
 
   
2.10 The Committee were informed that Indian Air Fo rce comprises of five 
commands namely western air  command, south western  air command, central 
air command, southern air command and eastern air c ommand. In addition to 
that there is one training command   and one mainte nance  command.  The 
security challenges of Air Force mainly lies in the   areas of nuclear war, 
conventional war, localised conflict, out of area o perations, sub conventional  
operations, counter terrorism and insurgencies. Besides these,  some peace time 
challenges/responsibilities  include  UN  peace enf orcement , humanitarian 
assistance to neighbours and  disaster relief. 
2.11 Roles and responsibilities of Air Force includ e: 
WAR TIME 
 
• Counter Air  Operations 
• Counter Surface Force Operations 
• Air Defence   
• Maritime Operations 
• Intelligence /Surveillance/Recce 
• Air TPT Operations 

21 
 
• Strategic  Operations 
• Space Operations 
PEACE TIME  
 
• Air Defence 
• Intelligence /Surveillance/Recce 
• Air Maintenance 
• Humanitarian Assistance and Disaster Relief (HADR) 
• Training 
 
2.12 The Committee, during the course of examinatio ns, identified the following 
areas of concern with which the IAF is grappling:- 
A. 
 Trainer Aircraft    
 
2.13 The Committee wanted to know about the Basic T rainer Aircraft   for  
training purposes, during oral evidence, it was informed that :- 
"Sir, with regard to induction of the Pilatus PC-7 Mk-II Basic Trainer 
Aircraft, IAF had a requirement of 181 Basic Traine rs to be able to 
undertake the requisite flying training for inducti on of all Armed Forces 
including Coast Guards.  We were planning to make t hese 181 aircraft 
through HAL and to replace the then existing HPT 32 . But because of the 
spate of accidents and the poor safety record of th e aircraft, it was decided 
to ground the aircraft in September, 2009.  Thus th ere came a void in our 
ability to train pilots; and we were forced to swit ch to all jets training, which 
is not normally resorted to. Therefore, the Air For ce was granted 
permission to buy 75 Trainers outright from the glo bal market; and 106 
were to be made by HAL. 
  
In this 75, PC-7 emerged as the L1; and the contract was signed.  The RFP 
had asked  for a  delivery schedule   of 18 months.   Finally, the vender had 

22 
 
agreed to 15 months with an acceptance  to   accele rate the delivery 
schedule further.  We finally signed the contract o n 24 th  May, 2012.  Of 
course, PC-7 was delivered seven months later in February.  We were able 
to commence  the first course on PC-7 on 1 st  July this year. Till now, we 
have already got 20 aircraft.   We have flown  more  than 3,500 hours on 
these aircraft.  These were inducted in a staggered  manner and they have 
done more than 5,500 landings. The aircraft is holding quite well. 
  
The core issue is that the Air Force cannot afford to have two trainers for 
the same stage of basic flying training  because it  will involve two sets of 
instructors, two sets of technical personnel, two s ets of technical 
infrastructure, two sets of simulators and two supp ly and logistic chain 
management.  It will bring in a non-standardization in the training as to how 
do I choose which boy and girl will fly the PC-7, w hich girl and boy will fly 
the other aircraft, whichever HAL develops. It is r ight now termed as HTT-
40." 
 
2.14 Another representative  of Air Force apprised the Committee on basic 
trainer as under:- 
"So, it is not a very healthy situation for us to h ave two Trainers for the 
same stage and associate it with the risk factor of  when HAL will develop 
because we know the history of HAL aircraft develop ment and delays, and 
things that happen.  So, it leaves the Air Force ha nging about for its basic 
training.  The core of any foundation is the youngs ters who get trained and 
get inducted. But if that itself is down, it create s a problem for us. So, we 
are keen to continue to induct the PC-7.  So, the V ice-Chief had written a 
letter to the Chairman, HAL   that ‘we seek your support to manufacture the 
PC-7 under licence.’  We are buying 75 and the rest  we will make under 
licence so that we continue to have the same Traine r. But the HAL is not in 
agreement with that". 
 
 
2.15 On the basic trainer Kiran, the  then Vice Chi ef of Air Staff informed the 
Committee as under:- 
 
"As far as the Kirans are concerned, since the HPT- 32 was grounded and 
we did not have a basic trainer and we used the Kiran for both basic as well 

23 
 
as intermediate, so we used up the hours in an acce lerated manner. So, 
the first Kirans start retiring from end of this ye ar. Four Kirans are due to 
retire this year. Thereafter, the retirement continues. " 
 
 
2.16 On the procurement of Intermediate Trainer Air craft, a representative of 
Indian Air Force apprised the committee as under;- 
 
"The intermediate Jet Trainer is a separate program me.  We are talking of 
splitting the Basic Training into two parts itself.  .....Sir, the Intermediate Jet 
Trainer was given sanction by CCS in 1999 to replace the Kiran, which was 
used for the intermediate training. At that time, w e had initiated the project 
giving HAL a lead time of at least 15 years to be a ble to produce it. But, 
what has happened is that the first prototype did fly in 2004. T0+60 was the 
project time line. I would like to bring to your no tice that HAL routinely 
seeks T0+60 timeline for developing any aircraft, w hich no other aircraft 
manufacturer in the world can manage. Thereafter, w e keep seeking 
extensions of timeline and extension in the D&D cos ts. It is with all projects 
across the board." 
 
 
2.17 On the developing and producing the Advanced J et Trainer, the  then Vice 
Chief of Air Staff informed the Committee as under:- 
  
"While the first prototype did fly in 2004, the fir st extension was taken for 
the PDC to 2007, then to 2009, then to 2010 to 2011  and now it is 2013. 
But, in 2013, after a gap of nine years of the firs t prototype flying, finally 
HAL has gone for a consultancy with BAES. It is because their aircraft does 
not stall and you, therefore, cannot enter the spin , which is one of the most  
important training maneuvers at the intermediate st age. Now, the PDC for 
the IOC remains revised to December 2013 and in our  assessment it is 
likely to go to December 2014, which is  also unlik ely. But it will happen in 
steps. " 
 
 

24 
 
2.18 In a written note on the status of Advanced Je t Trainer (AJT) Hawk and its  
indigenous production of the same in HAL, Bangalore , the Ministry informed as 
under:-  
'The initial contract for procurement of 66 AJT i.e Hawk Mk-132 was signed 
on 26 March 2004 with BAES, UK. Under this contract , BAES, UK was to 
deliver 24 Hawk MK-132 aircraft in flyaway conditio n and 42 Hawk Mk-132 
aircraft were to be manufactured by HAL Bangalore u nder license. 
Indigenous production of AJT in HAL, Bangalore has also started. HAL has 
supplied 42 indigenously produced Hawk Mk-132 aircr aft under the first 
contract and five more aircraft under another contr act signed with HAL for 
59 Hawk Mk-132 (40 for IAF and 19 for IN) on 23 July 2010.' 
 
B. 
 Squadron Strength of IAF  
2.19 During the oral evidence the Committee desired  to know how the 
Indian Air Force is going to achieve targeted  stre ngth of 42 squadrons, a 
representative of Air Force apprised the Committee as under:- 
"You are right 42 is an ideal figure; and we need t o work towards getting 
this 42. Insofar as the collusive threat is concern ed, the collusive threat is 
very likely in case China starts the operations.  I f we are engaged with 
Pakistan, China may not pose  a collusive threat.  But Pakistan is certainly 
going to raise the level in case we engage with Chi na. In regard to our 
engagement with China, you know that we had a polic y of dissuance and 
now we have a policy of deterrence.  We are quite f ocused on tackling with 
China.  Collusive threat will be difficult to tackl e but we are prepared for it.  
We have made plans in case of Contingency-III." 
 
 
2.20 In reply to a question regarding phasing out p rogramme of the MiG series 
aircraft in general and MiG-21 in particular and ac quisition of new aircraft to 
replace them so that squadron strength is maintaine d, the Ministry submitted as 
under: 
'The IAF has over the years operated various types of MiG aircraft which 
include the MiG-21, MiG-21F, MiG-21FL, MiG-21M, MiG-21MF, MiG-21Bis, 

25 
 
MiG-21Bison (the upgraded version of MiG-21Bis), Mi G-23MF, MiG-23BN, 
MiG-25, MiG-27 Upgrade and MiG-29. The MiG-21, MiG- 21F, MiG-21MF, 
MiG-23MF, MiG-23BN and MiG-25 have been phased out.  All existing MiG 
series aircraft are planned to be phased out in a gradual manner from 2014 
to 2025.  The MiG-21FL is being phased out in Decem ber 2013.  The MiG-
21M and MiG-21Bis will be phased out in 2019, the M iG-27 will be phased 
out in 2020 and the   MiG-21Bison will be phased ou t in 2025.  The MiG-29 
is being upgraded and the upgraded MiG-29 aircraft would continue to 
operate up to the 15 th  Plan period.' 
 
C. 
 Acquisitions  
2.21 The acquisition of new aircraft planned to rep lace the MiG series are at 
various stages of procurement as given below:- 
 
(a) ‘Rafale’ Medium Multi Role Combat Aircraft (MMRCA) - The 
Negotiation for the procurement of 126 x Rafale aircraft is in progress. 
  
(b) Light Combat Aircraft (LCA) - The LCA is presently undergoing 
flight trials towards certification to Initial Oper ational Clearance (IOC) 
standards, which is likely to be completed by the e nd of 2013.  The 
production of LCA in IOC configuration is progressi ng simultaneously and 
the first LCA is expected to be supplied by HAL to IAF in middle of 2014. 
The Final Operational Clearance (FOC) certification  is predicted by 
December 2014 after which production in the FOC con figuration will 
commence. 
 
(c) Fifth Generation Fighter Aircraft (FGFA)-   The R & D Phase 
contract for the FGFA programme is under negotiations.  
 
(d) Additional Su-30 MKI - A contract for 42 more Su-30 MKI 
aircraft was signed on 24 December, 2012 and induct ion of these aircraft 
are expected to be completed by 2019-20. 
 

26 
 
2.22 The Committee desired to know the latest posit ion in regard to procurement 
of Rafale aircraft from France and the  time lines in this regard, the Ministry 
replied as under:  
'The MMRCA contract negotiations with M/s Dassault Aviation are in its 
final phase. The main contract will be thereafter s igned after approval by 
the Cabinet Committee on Security (CCS)'.  
 
2.23 The Committee were further informed that:- 
`The IAF will have 13 Su-MKI Squadrons by the end o f the 12th  Five year 
Plan. Even with the induction of Su-30 aircraft, th e number of fighter 
squadrons will continue to remain around  34, as  a gainst the  authorised 
strength of 42.' 
D. 
 Development of LCA  
2.24 On the development of LCA, a representative of  Air Force informed the 
Committee as under :- 
 
"As regards LCA, the design is Indian, but the comp onents that are being 
installed on the LCA are not all Indian. We have a large number of 
components, which are being sourced from foreign sources because we do 
not have the capacity or the capability to manufact ure them in India as of 
now....The delivery of LCA is likely to commence fr om the middle of next 
year. The Initial Operational Clearance (IOC) date is 30 November this 
year. It may slip by a month or two, and the Series  Production Aircraft SP-I 
is scheduled around June-July of 2014. This will be the first induction. 
 
When we talk about IOC, it is to achieve this certification for the LCA. Once 
the first two aircrafts come into the Air Force, we  will be starting user 
evaluation trials and whatever are the shortfalls w ill be overcome in a 
period of time after the induction. " 
 
LTIPP 
 
 

27 
 
2.25 The Committee desired to know about the weapon isation of aircraft and 
Long Term Perspective Plan of Indian Air Force. A r epresentative of Air Force 
informed the Committee as under:- 
"We have a long term perspective plan which is made  for three Plan 
periods – 15 years. From that flows our acquisition . Now, we have the 
LTIPP because after formation of Hqs. IDS, we have integrated the 
perspective plans of all the three Services, which is called long term 
integrated perspective plan and it has been approve d by the DAC. That 
governs our capability building and the acquisition flows from that plan.  
 
When we buy an aircraft, all these aircraft are bas ed on our requirement. 
We call it service qualitative requirement. So, for  the Medium Multi Role 
Combat Aircraft, MMRCA, we had 660 service qualitat ive requirement. The 
request for proposal to initiate the procurement wa s issued to six leading 
manufacturers of the world. There was nobody except those six, other than 
China, who manufacture aircraft. We had invited par ticipation from all 
fighter manufacturers of the world and six aircraft  participated in the 
competition of which two cleared – the Euro Fighter and the RAFAEL – and 
the other four failed in various SQRs. Out of the Euro Fighter and RAFAEL, 
RAFAEL was the L1 and that is why it was chosen as per the procedure. " 
 
 
2.26 The Committee again desired to know how Air Fo rce arrived at a decision 
to buy  MMRCA of such and such specification and ty pe of Aircraft suits the 
Country. A representative of Air Force  apprised the Committee  as under:- 
 
"That is done by the Ops Branch. Ops Branch carries  out certain analysis 
of what our adversaries have. After that, there is a quality check which is 
held where everybody from maintenance, from plans, what can be 
procured, attend. It is cleared by the Vice Chief o f the Air Staff. It is put up 
to him saying that this is the capability that is c oming across, this is the 
draw down that is going to happen because our aircr aft have to retire. We 
have still fine aircraft which were produced in 196 0s and are maintaining 
them quite well and effectively. Once a decision is  taken that these are our 
requirements – this decision is taken regardless of  what is available – the 
Request for Information is sent so that somebody me ets these 
requirements. Then the Plans Branch takes up the jo b of procuring this 

28 
 
equipment for us. So, the development of SQRs which  is a very complex 
process is done with int. inputs, that is done with  the current state of 
adversaries.  
 
We do not spend much money in getting what we want.  Currently we could 
have bid for F-22 or B-2 which are one of the costl iest aircraft. We do not 
need that. We bid ourselves against our adversaries  in the northern front 
and our national objectives as to what the Governme nt wants us to do and 
then we decide on these aircraft." 
 
 
 2.27 The Committee wanted to know how the  threat perception is analysed by 
the Air Force, the  then Vice Chief of Air Staff informed the Committee as under:- 
"First of all, the threat perception has to be analysed. What is our threat, be 
it from the western side or eastern side? Based on the threat and the 
capability of the adversary, we make out our requir ement. We have to 
match them or be better than them. 
So, that is how we make out what our requirements are. Once we make out 
our requirements to challenge the adversaries, now we build up our 
operational capabilities. It means that I should be  able to match him or be 
better than him and win a war or conflict. When we do that, we do a 
technical scan of entire weapon ranges, aircraft av ailable in the world. Like 
he mentioned, we ask for the information. Then, obv iously, all the 
companies will give us the information. Then, we se e what are the basic 
qualities that will meet our requirement. Then, we float the REP which is 
done through the MoD. It is done in a consultative manner. So, the 
procedure is perfectly alright, to my mind. There i s nothing wrong with the 
procedure. I think, it is a well proven one. Our ac quisition procedure, to my 
mind, is one of the best in the world." 
 
2.28 On the  weaponisation, a representative of Min istry apprised the Committee 
as under: 
 
"Sir, you asked whether we take technological advan cement into 
consideration or not. Certainly ‘yes’. There is no doubt that whenever we 
zero in ultimately on the specification, that is on  the basis of threat 
perception, on the basis of what our adversaries are doing and on the basis 
of the technological advances that have come to our  knowledge. There is 

29 
 
no doubt about that. We always try to go in for an equipment which is 
technology-agnostic as well as vendor-agnostic." 
 
Vice Chief of Air Staff further added:  
 
"Sir, with regard to your question regarding weapon isation, I would like to 
inform that when we buy any fighter aircraft, besid es its agility, its 
performance in manoeuvres etc. – we call it flight envelope – it must carry 
good weapon systems, like missiles, bombs and PGMs so that it can 
perform multiple roles, multiple tasks  like it cou ld do air-to-air combat and 
shoot down aircraft in the air and could take on ta rgets in the ground with 
stand-off ranges. All this weaponisation is part of  the project. For example, 
when we acquire Jaguar, we also know what type of w eapons it can carry 
and whether they will meet our requirements. Based on our requirements, 
we order those weapons." 
 
2.29 On achieving desired  capabilities  and whethe r would the  Air Force  
procured all those things, Vice Chief of Air Staff informed the Committee as 
under;- 
"Sir, we look at the capability. What capability do  I want? If my adversary 
has got something, I should have better than that. Whatever is provided in 
the technology scan, we make out our QRs for that a nd accordingly, 
acquire the appropriate weapon which can be integra ted with this platform 
in this aircraft. 
 
........Our Plan is already ready up to 2027, and t he entire requirement has 
been projected in it. As of now, what we have got is not adequate and it will 
build up to full force capability by 2027. Here, mo re means whatever has 
been planned up to 2027, those figures are with the  Ministry and that is 
adequate for us by 2027." 
 
Another representative of Air Force informed as under:- 
" We have a Plan up to 2027. We are not procuring a ll of them in 2016 and 
saying that we want more. It is a gradual calibrated procurement over these 
years up to 2027. The Plan has been made and is ava ilable with the 
Ministry, and the procurement is as per that Plan. So, it is not that we want 
something more than what is in that Plan. It is as per that Plan that has 
been made up to 2027." 

30 
 
 
Radar Coverage 
 
 
2.30  On the issue of Radar Coverage in the country , in a written note, the 
Ministry informed as under:- 
 
`Presently, IAF has adequate radar coverage at medi um and high levels 
(except  for central India) for detecting,  identif ying and initiating suitable 
action against enemy aircraft.  As mandated by Grou p of Ministers and by 
the Tyagi Committee, IAF is in the process of building up its radar coverage 
at all levels on a pan-India basis. DRDO is develop ing a Ballistic Missile 
Defence System in coordination with the Services. 
 
IAF has planned induction of different types of rad ars in Long Term 
Integrated Perspective Plan (LTIPP) 2012-27.' 
 
2.31 During oral evidence, the Committee desired to  be informed about the 
preparedness and modernisation of Indian Air Force in relation to fast changing 
modernisation of Pakistan and China. A representative of IAF clarified as under:-  
 
"Sir, you rightly pointed out that China and Pakist an are modernizing quite 
fast. We are monitoring through internal sources an d thorough open 
literature, everything that Pakistan and China do. We have already in place 
thorough plans to counter their acquisitions. Every thing that China does, 
everything that Pakistan does, gets known to us thr ough our  internal 
sources. We keep a check on them. We try to build u p commensurate 
capabilities. This build up of capabilities is a co ntinuous process. Like, we 
have the issue of long lead times, long gestation p eriod – it happens in all 
air force acquisitions all over the world. Everywhe re the acquisition takes 
time. So, it is not as if we are lagging behind Chi na or we are lagging 
behind Pakistan. Our acquisitions are also taking p lace a pace. If they go 
through as planned, we have no reason to worry".  
 
Issues relating to HAL 
 

31 
 
2.32 The Committee wanted to know the track record of HAL in designing and 
manufacturing the basic and intermediate trainer ai rcraft.  In this connection the  
Ministry informed vide a written note as under: 
 
`HAL as a design agency has the required expertise and capability to 
design a state of the art basic trainer and provide  sufficient provision for 
upgrade and modifications based on requirements. Historically all the Basic 
Trainer aircraft for the Indian Air Force like HT-2  and HPT 32 have been 
designed, developed, manufactured and supported by HAL.  
 
The first Basic Trainer Aircraft (BTA) of IAF, HT-2  was designed and 
developed by HAL in the early 1950s and more than 1 60 aircraft were 
supplied to IAF. This was followed by design and de velopment of HPT 32 
aircraft in 1970s and 143 aircraft were delivered b y HAL. The HPT-32 
aircraft during its service life of three decades h as logged in more than 
4,00,000 flying hours and has trained more than 4000 pilots.  
The stage II training requirement of IAF are also m et by HAL produced 
Kiran MK  I / IA / II aircraft . A total no of 252 Kiran aircraft were produced 
by HAL during 1960’s -1980’s. 
These aircrafts of Indian Air Force (IAF) which are  Designed and 
Developed by HAL have served IAF well over the past  few decades. The 
aerobatic “Suryakiran” display fleet is the outstan ding example for 
capability in the field. In addition to de novo des igns, HAL has also 
integrated new weapons & systems on existing military aircraft.  
Based on above experience HAL has taken up design &  development of 
Intermediate Jet Trainer (IJT) with superior perfor mance and improved 
training effectiveness to replace the ageing fleet of Kiran aircraft being used 
to provide Stage-II training to IAF pilots. In rece nt past, HAL has only 
sought consultancy of BAe towards speedy resolution  of Stall & Spin 
characteristics of IJT to achieve the operational c learance. During the last 
two years some of the important milestones towards IOC such as sea level 
flying, Night flying, High altitude trails, Weapon integration and trials have 
been completed.  
 

32 
 
HAL has also taken up the design & development of B asic ab-initio trainer 
(HTT-40) aircraft to replace the HPT-32 basic train ers and to meet the 
primary training requirements of Indian defence ser vices without any 
consultancy support towards major design efforts. P ending govt approval 
HAL has completed the following activities and is g oing ahead with the 
project from its internal resources:- 
 
− Preliminary Design  
− Wind Tunnel model design, Fabrication & testing 
− Full scale Mock up  
− Technical specifications of all LRUs & systems  
− Issue of Tenders for all Major systems & LRUs 
− Initiation of Part fabrication 
Activities are in progress with the objective of first flight of prototype aircraft 
targeted by mid 2015." 
 
2.33 Taking note of the inordinate delays in the de livery of the basic and 
intermediate trainer aircraft, the Committee wanted  to know from HAL   the 
reasons of the delays.  The Committee felt that in the absence of required 
number of trainer aircraft the Indian Air Force per formance level is bound to be 
compromised. When asked about the present status of  intermediate IJT trainer, 
Ministry of Defence  through a written reply intimated as under:- 
'The present status of development of IJT by Hindus tan Aeronautics 
Limited (HAL)  is that all activities required for Initial Operational Clearance 
(IOC) have been completed except for refinement of Stall characteristics 
and spin Testing. Stall Testing is currently  progr essing on two aircraft is 
being prepared to hasten up the  spin tests. Simult aneously, the armament 
trials  which are required for Final Operational Cl earance is progressing on 
two aircrafts.' 

33 
 
 
2.34 Asked specifically  about the reasons as to wh y HAL  engaged a foreign 
consultancy from after nine years since the first p rototype was flown, the Ministry 
intimated through a written reply  as under:- 
'In April 2011 there was a CAT 1 accident on one Pr ototype aircraft during 
Stall testing. The steering committee of IJT consis ting of members from 
MoD, IAF, certifying agencies & HAL during its 9th meeting held in 3rd 
June 2011, decided that it will be beneficial to ob tain consultancy from a 
reputed aircraft design house which is well experie nced in such testing 
considering that stall & spin testing of an aircraf t is an iterative process in 
any aircraft programme. Accordingly consultancy was  sought from BAe 
system which has already experienced similar proble ms & solved them 
during the development of HAWK to mitigate risk involved in spin and stall. 
 
This consultancy is exclusively for support to refi ne the stall characteristics 
and assist in a limited way in conducting spin test s on the aircraft in the 
most efficient manner for speedy resolution. Being highly technology 
intensive field consultancy with leading aerospace agencies is not an 
unusual phenomenon. '   
 
 
2.35 On the reasons behind non development of capab ilities of designing a 
trainer aircraft after being involved in manufactur ing of aircraft for over 60 years, 
The Ministry clarified through a written note:- 
 
'HT-2 aircraft was the first indigenously designed aircraft by HAL in early 
1950’s.  Since then HAL has indigenously designed 1 4 aircraft including 2 
helicopters. Out of 14 indigenous aircraft, 12 are fixed wing aircraft, ranging 
from basic piston Trainers to the frontline combat aircraft (HT-2, 
PUSHPAK, KRISHAK, MARUT, MARUT Trainer, KIRAN MK-1, BASANTH, 
AJEET, KIRAN MK-II, HPT-32, AJEET TRAINER, HTT-34, and LCA). In 
addition to de novo designs, the Centre has also in tegrated new weapons 
& systems on existing military aircraft. Currently,  in respect of trainer 
aircraft development ARDC-HAL is engaged in design & development of 
Basic ab-initio trainer (HTT-40) aircraft to replace the HPT-32 basic trainers 
and completion of IJT development program'.  

34 
 
 
2.36 Citing the crash of IJT after flying for sever al years,  the Committee wanted 
to know whether HAL identified  the flaw in its des ign which led to the accident 
and what was the outcome of enquiry. On the query the Ministry informed :- 
 
'During the stall testing, the aircraft went into a n attitude from which it was 
not recoverable. The court of inquiry concluded tha t the cause for it not 
being recoverable was excessive flexing in the prim ary flight control 
circuits.  Subsequent to this accident, HAL not onl y redesigned the entire 
primary flight control circuits of IJT to increase the stiffness, but also 
decided to install the Anti-Spin Parachute system which will help the pilot to 
recover the aircraft under any condition, jointly w ith the certification 
agencies and IAF'. 
 
2.37 The Committee's research revealed that HAL sig ned a contract with NPO-
Saturn of Russia for the Design and development of AL-55i engine for the IJT 
with a scope to license manufacture up to 1000 AL-5 5i engines at HAL Koraput.  
The Total Technical Life (TTL) of the AL-55i engine s was envisaged to be 3600 
Hours with a Time Between Overhaul (TBO) of 1200 Ho urs.  However, the 
contract for 12 Limited Series Production IJT does not specify any engine life 
while the contract for 73 Series Production IJT spe cifies an engine life of only 
300 Hours to be progressively increased to 3600 Hou rs without a defined 
timeline.   
 
2.38 In this respect, the Committee wanted  to know   how HAL had designed an 
aircraft without finalizing the details of the engi ne and whether it    amounted  to 
the IJT project becoming a hostage to the limitatio ns of the AL-55i engines.  On 
this observation and query the Ministry informed the Committee :- 
'The IJT programme was started with a proven off th e shelf engine 
LARZAC 04H20 from M/s Snecma, France.  The need for  higher powered 

35 
 
engine was identified for improved performance and was concurred by the 
Steering Committee comprising IAF, CEMILAC, DGAQA, HAL and MoD 
after a pre-qualification evaluation of possible ve ndors, the growth version 
of LARZAC to be developed by Snecma and the AL55I t o be developed by 
NPO Saturn, Russia were identified as the suitable engines for the IJT.  
The Selection was done on Techno-commercial evaluat ion.  The technical 
evaluation was carried out by Committee consisting of specialists from IAF, 
CEMILAC and HAL. The commercial evaluation was also  carried out by 
Committee consisting of specialists of IAF, HAL and  MoD.   The 
development of engine is being regularly monitored by the Steering 
Committee comprising of IAF, CEMILAC, DGAQA, HAL an d MoD.  The life 
building of any engine during development involves extensive bench tests 
and so, is time consuming.  The assignment of 300 h ours of initial life of 
AL55I engines (which is the starting point for comm encing the delivery of 
IJT aircraft to IAF) has already been completed.  A s per the Protocol 
between HAL and Russian team, milestone for the lif e extension of 1200 
hrs by 2015 and full file by 2018 has been indicated by the Russian side. 
  
It is noteworthy that the newly developed AL55I eng ine was introduced into 
the Prototype aircraft only after sufficient confid ence of the Airframe & 
systems were obtained with a proven LARZAC engine, Moreover, before 
integrating this engine on IJT, more than 100 hours  of bench tests and 
flight testing on Flying Test Bed (MiG-AT) were carried out to ensure safety 
of the engine operation'. 
  
2.39  In order to understand whether HAL was unable to co rrectly estimate the 
costs and developmental effort for such a simple ai rcraft that the estimated five 
years for delivery has not been achieved even after 14 years and the project cost 
tripled during this period. The Committee enquired as to how many times HAL 
has obtained piecemeal extensions for the PDC and upward revision of D&D cost 
since the beginning of the IJT programme. To this the MoD submitted as under: 
  
'Initial sanction obtained in 1999 was in the conte xt of an off the shelf 
engine and avionics as it existed at that period of  time. In 2004 revision 
was sought considering that a higher thrust engine has to be developed & 
certified on IJT. Similarly many avionics equipments had to be developed to 

36 
 
avoid obsolescence during development of the aircra ft. Further to this a 
revision has been sought and accorded in June 2013 to factor in Exchange 
rate variations, escalation, additional efforts & M aterials for Resolution of 
problems faced during development.  In total, HAL s ought extension 5 
times for the IJT programme so far. 
 
HAL has always provided optimistic estimate of proj ect time line & cost 
based on knowledge/ experience gained in successful  development 
projects. However each new development project, hav ing its own 
complexities and unique features/requirements, is i nherent with certain 
amount of risk & uncertainty. As explained in the a bove para, change of 
engine, Incident on prototype aircraft, Redesign of  control circuit and 
factors such as Exchange rate variations and escala tion are main reasons 
for increase in the project cost'.  
 
2.40 With respect to intermediate  Jet trainer,  th e Committee found  that the 
delay in induction of IJT being developed by HAL ha s compelled IAF to continue 
operating Kiran fleet for another five years.   whi le replying to the query of the 
Committee  in this regard the Ministry informed as under:-  
 
'Kiran Mk I/IA and Kiran Mk II are designed and man ufactured by HAL.  
Kiran Mk I/IA is powered by Viper engine and are re paired/overhauled by 
IAF.Kiran Mk II is powered by Orpheus 70105 Engine  which are  
manufactured under Licence by HAL and presently rep aired/overhauled by 
HAL.  The IAF has been using Kiran aircraft from 1980s.  
 
The current Total Technical Life of the aircrafts w ould make the aircrafts 
available up to 2017 with the assessed flying patte rn. Current fleet size of  
Kiran aircraft is 116. Phase out of Kiran Aircraft starts from 2013-14. HAL 
being the Designer and the OEM will endeavorsupport  to the Kiran fleet. 
However engineand avionics are of concernbecause of  obsolescence of 
spares. HAL is working on alternative vendors and i ndigenization route to 
solve the issue'. 
 
2.41  The Committee desired to know the reasons  as  to why HAL has declined 
to licence produce the Basic Trainer Aircraft throu gh Transfer of Technology 

37 
 
when this option will be cheaper and also meet the timeline requirements of IAF 
and whether HAL realized the consequences of an Air  Force operating two types 
of basic trainer aircraft for the same stage of bas ic flying training.  While replying 
to the above query the MoD through written reply furnished :-   
'HAL is going ahead with the development of indigen ous BTA HTT-40 with 
its internal resources. Considering the benefits of  indigenous aircraft, HAL 
has declined the proposal for license manufacture of PC7 Mk II. 
 
HAL has informed that use of two types of aircraft for basic flying training is 
an operational matter and HAL cannot offer any comm ent on this issue. 
However, in order to reduce the gap, HAL has based its cockpit design 
around the architecture of the buy category aircraf t. The Pilot vehicle 
interface has a very high degree of commonality inc luding that of the 
external vision angles. Key aircraft systems like p ower plant, escape 
system etc., are also being aligned to maintain com monality between both 
the trainers'. 
 
 
2.42 The Committee asked whether it is a fact that HAL is proposing to develop 
HTT-40 which is so much more expensive than an impo rted aircraft purchased 
by IAF leading to DG (Acquisition) of MoD not accep ting the Detailed Project 
Report submitted by HAL for design and development of HTT-40. To this MoD 
informed as under:- 
  
'The revised Detailed Project Report submitted by H AL for the HTT-40 BTA 
Project is yet to be approved by DG(Acquisition).  HAL has informed the 
Ministry that indigenous designed HTT-40 aircraft being developed by HAL is 
less expensive compared to the imported BTA on life  cycle cost basis.  HAL 
is going ahead with development of indigenously BTA  HTT-40 with its 
internal resources'. 
 
 
2.43 Gleaning through the information supplied by t he Ministry, the Committee 
found that the flight testing and certification of IJT was to be completed by June 

38 
 
2004 but the same was revised to December, 2013. Th e reasons for this delay 
were stated to be  design and development of AL-55i  engine, which was chosen 
as the power plant for IJT  and contracted to Russi a. Due to major design and 
development issues in Russia, the flight-worthy eng ines were received in Feb 09 
(delay of 2 years). As a result of strength test, r einforcement of structure to build 
in higher margin was  carried out. Flight Control S ystem (FCS) had also been 
redesigned to improve the rigidity in Rudder, Eleva tor and aileron circuits. The 
incident on prototype PT-1 affected the flight evaluation activity.  
 
 
The HAL finally informed that all efforts were bein g made for achieving Final 
Operation Clearance (FOC) by December 2014 and prod uction of the aircraft 
would commence immediately thereafter. However, the  Committee were not 
intimated of any probable or planned dates for fina l induction of Intermediate Jet 
Trainer (IJT) to the forces. 
 
R&D Expenditure of HAL 
 
 
2.44 When asked about the investments and achieveme nts made by HAL to 
enhance indigenous capability with respect to strat egic and critical aerospace 
technologies till date. The Minister inter-alia  informed as under:- 
`HAL is spending around 6-8% of its sales turnover towards R&D of aircraft, 
helicopters and associated systems and technologies for self reliance.  
 
The details on R&D Expenditure for the last 3 years is furnished below. 
 
Particulars 2010-
11 2011-12 2012-13 
R&D Expenditure 
(Rs. in crores)  987 968 1949 
 

39 
 
2.45 The Committee desired to know about the ratio and amount of imported 
and indigenous material utilized for production and  repair activities.  The Ministry 
in its reply has stated: 
 
`HAL has reported that the ratio of Indigenous and Imported material 
utilized for production and repair activities is around 15% and 85% by value 
respectively.'  

40 
 
 
 
Role of Indian Navy and Coast Guard Organisation 
 
 
2.46 The Committee learnt that Indian Navy has been  designated as the 
authority responsible for overall maritime security , which include coastal security 
and offshore security. The Indian Coast Guard has b een additionally designated 
as the authority responsible for coastal security i n territorial waters including 
areas to be patrolled by the Coastal Police. The Di rector General Coast Guard 
has been designated as Commander  Coastal Command w ho is responsible for 
overall coordination between Central and State agencies in all matters  relating to 
Coastal Security.  
 
2.47 During a presentation given before the Committ ee, representatives of Navy 
informed about the threats at sea which are Traditi onal/Conventional as well as 
sub-conventional. It was further informed that arou nd 100 warships from 20 
countries operate in Indian Ocean Region. Indian Na vy has to take operational 
Patrols to check piracy and safeguard International  Maritime Boundary Line, 
Exclusive Economic Zone, Sea Lines of Communication  as part of Coastal 
Security. Other maritime tasks include disaster rel ief, maritime search & rescue, 
pollution response and protection of offshore asset s. The Committee were 
informed that the role of Indian Navy and Coast Gua rd Organisation assume 
great significance bearing that 80% of our energy r equirements imported and 
over 90% of our trade moves on foreign bottoms. Mor eover, every seventh 
seafarer is an Indian, 90% of India's trade by volu me and 77% by value is 
transported over the seas.  The Committee were appr ised that the Indian Navy 
had apprehended 120 pirates. As part of maritime se curity, Indian Navy 

41 
 
commenced deployment of warships in the Gulf of Ade n in Oct 2008, 39 Indian 
Navy ships have been deployed till Oct, 2013 and 25 91 ships escorted (300 
Indian flagged vessels ) with over 19,660 Indian seafarers onboard. So far Indian 
Navy ships have  prevented 40 Piracy attempts in th e Gulf of Aden and Arabian 
Sea. 
 
2.48 The Committee were also informed that in order  to achieve fool proof 
coastal security across all coastal boundaries of the country, the arrangements of 
Navy  include National AIS   Chain with 74 stations, coastal radar Chain  of 4 6 
Static radars, State Maritime  Boards, Additional C oast Guard Stations, Sagar 
Prahari Bal(SPB) with 1,000 personnel, 80 Fast Inte rceptor Craft (FIC) and  23 
Immediate Support Vessels (ISVs) of which 6 are lik ely to be commissioned 
shortly. Other initiatives include CSS Phase-II for  capability enhancement of 
marine police,  Biometric ID cards for fishermen,  vessels and transponders for 
sub-20m boats, create awareness regarding National Maritime Domain involving 
legislative sanction through Coastal Security Bill.  During the course of 
deliberations, Committee found that there are many Statekholders operating in 
Indian maritime domain which include  Indian Navy, ICG, state and district 
Administration, Marine Police, Central Indian Security Force (CISF), State Police, 
Intelligence agencies, Port Trust, Fisheries depart ment, Ministry of Environment 
and Forest (MoEF), Ministry of External Affairs (Mo EA), Ministry of Shipping 
(MoS) etc. 
 
Safety of Indian Waters 
 
 
2.49 Security of Indian water is of utmost importan ce like that of Army and Air 
Force not only during war but in peace time also. s afeguarding maritime 

42 
 
boundaries of about 7500 kms is a Himalayan task. T he Committee were 
perturbed to learn that in spite of full-fledged op erations of Indian Navy and 
Coast Guard in place, being supported by other orga nisation, a foreign ship 
loaded with huge ammunitions reached our shores. On the issue, 
representatives of Ministry of Defence submitted as under: 
 
“Sir, on the aspect related to the incident with re gard to the Seaman Guard 
Ohio, the ship as was mentioned entered Kochi harbo ur. At that  point in 
time, it was inspected by the Coast Guard and it did not have illegal  guards 
on board, nor did it  have illegal arms and ammunit ion on board and that is 
why, clearance was given by the Coast Guard at that  point in time for this 
particular vessel to enter."  
 
 
2.50  The Committee were informed by the officials of Coast Guard Organisation 
that each weapon could fire upto three-four kilomet res and around 5000 
ammunition were there in the ship. In this connecti on, the representatives of 
Coast Guard Organisation  further  added as under:-  
 
“Sir, if I may just submit, having arms and ammunit ions on a merchant ship 
and entering an Indian port with arms and ammunitio n is permitted. There 
is a system called Pre Arrival Notification System (PANS). If a merchant 
ship is visiting any port in India and has some arm s which, as was brought 
out earlier, have to be locked up in a safe place, which is the ship’s 
armoury.  But he can enter with prior notification.   At present, the legal 
requirement is only prior notification.  So, when t he ship entered the 
harbour, in August, the pre arrival notification in formation supplied by the 
ship was verified by various agencies and it was found to be correct.  Ships 
which are carrying guards and arms and ammunition c an enter Indian 
ports.  We have taken up a proposal recently becaus e this is an issue 
being handled by the Ministry of Shipping.   We hav e taken up a proposal 
recently that instead of Pre Arrival Notification S ystem, we should move 
away to Prior Approval System, not just notificatio n system.  That is our 
point of view.  We have taken up that point of view  that it should be prior 
approval of Indian Government because for implement ing that, we do not 
need any concurrence from any other agency.  For ha ving these armouries 

43 
 
and having these privately manned security companie s, the International 
Maritime Organisation has issued a set of guidelines.  Similarly the Ministry 
of Shipping in India has also issued a set of guide lines.  But these are only 
guidelines.  The armouries are not required to be r egistered with any 
agency.  The people they are employing are not verifiable.  So, once again, 
we have taken up with the Ministry of Shipping that this issue of just having 
guidelines is not adequate.  If there are some security companies which are 
going to be in this business, they need to be regis tered companies with the 
international bodies so that they are regulated.  A t present, it is not a 
regulated sector.   
 
Sir, this aspect is covered under the Coastal Secur ity Bill which has been 
drafted by the Navy and is under consideration with the Ministry of Defence 
at this point in time.  There is also certain empowerment under the Maritime 
Zones of India Act which is also under consideratio n.  So we have 
recommended some measures to be taken and these are  under 
consideration with the Ministry of Defence." 
 
Effective coordination mechanism 
 
 
 
2.51 During the course of deliberations, the Commit tee noted that there is need 
for appropriate mechanism for coordination among va rious agencies operating in 
maritime domain.  On this concern, the representati ve of Ministry of Defence 
deposed as under:- 
 
"Certainly, there are a large number of agencies wh ich are operating in the 
maritime domain ranging from the State level agenci es as well as the 
central agencies, offshore explorations support mer chant shipping the 
Coast Guard and  the Intelligence agencies. All the se require coordination  
between  the Maritime agencies.  This aspect about  the requirement for a 
Maritime Commission or any other agency which will coordinate these 
particular activities is certainly a matter  of imp ortance and   needs to be 
looked into. This is a serious situation and it is an area of concern that we 
should have these armed guards as well as the weapo ns close to our 
territory.  There is an international agency which looks after the issues 
related to piracy and there are certain internation al norms which are 
created.  It is our intention and we have conveyed this.  Also there is 

44 
 
another aspect that we have raised some legislation in terms of the Coastal 
Security Bill which has been drafted by the Navy.  That is also being looked 
at by the Ministry of Defence at this point in time . We have also had an 
aspect relating to empowering the naval officers an d the Coast Guard 
officers with greater powers under the Maritime Zon es of India Act.  
Nonetheless, I would like to also emphasise one sma ll point that the 
inspection is not done unilaterally by the Coast Gu ard.  There are four-five 
authorities, the Customs, the Immigration, the Dire ctorate of Revenue 
Intelligence (DRI).  Everybody comes on board.  The re is a group or team 
which has been doing inspection. 
 
 
2.52 The representative further stated: 
 
"The second question that the hon. Member raised is what we are doing as 
far as the international agencies are concerned.  F or having these 
armouries and having these privately manned securit y companies, the 
International Maritime Organisation has issued a se t of guidelines.  That is 
why the concern that has been raised, genuinely we also share the same 
concern that the floating armouries which are unreg ulated at sea are a 
matter of serious concern. Sir, basically there are  three issues.  The first is 
that of providing such kind of security services.  As per the international 
law, this is permissible.  That is why these 40 ser vice providers are 
providing the service of providing the security gua rds and the arms for 
checking the piracy.   
 
Secondly, regarding violations of our own rules and  regulations, certainly, 
this particular ship had violated rules and regulat ions of the country.  That 
is why the crew as well as the ship has been appreh ended and we are 
taking up appropriate action.  
  
The third is the national security which is the pri me concern.  It is because 
of these service providers and because of our threa t perception and 
because of our adversary, it is very necessary to k eep an eye on all such 
activities.  As the Vice Chief has said, prior appr oval, the set of guidelines 
are only some form of guidance.  We got to have a l ittle stricter law which 
will ensure that no such service provider is infrin ging upon the national 
security.” 
  
 

45 
 
 
 
Expeditious installation of Radars 
 
 
 
2.53 During study visit of the Committee to Andaman & Ni cobar Islands in 
February, 2013 the Committee found that there were some environmental issues 
regarding radar in Nicobar Islands. When the Commit tee desired to know its 
present status, the representatives of ICG replied as under:- 
 
“Sir, four radars as part of the Coastal Security Scheme Phase I were to go 
on the Andaman & Nicobar Islands.  One of them was at an Island called 
Narcondam Island. Narcondam Island is strategically  very important 
because it is in the Andaman sea, almost 130-140 mi les from our nearest 
island and about 50-60 miles from the other side.  But, unfortunately that 
has not got the Government approval. We have identified different location.  
We were asked to do an alternate site study which w as in consultation with 
the Directorate General of Lighthouse and Light shi ps, Navy as well as the 
Coast Guard.  So we have identified alternate location.  It is not as good as 
this because this was a standalone island. Naval ba se requirement in the 
A&N Islands is certainly a necessity and as the Hon . Members are aware, 
we have a tri-service command there.   We need amphibious forces and as 
part of the Maritime Capability  Perspective plan o f the Navy, we have 
planned these amphibious forces.  As part of our pl an, we also have plans 
to induct larger ships and helicopters  for amphibi ous operations . China 
has been undertaking various activities in its area  of interest like South 
China Sea and in recent years, it has also deployed  naval ships in the Gulf 
of Aden as part of its anti-piracy operations. The Indian Navy is gearing 
itself up, in accordance with the Maritime Capabili ty Perspective Plan, for 
induction of assets in terms of ships, submarines, aircraft and the 
equipment to take on the maritime challenges and th e security threats 
which emanate as a threat to our maritime interests in the region." 
  
Safety of Vessels 
 
 

46 
 
2.54 On the issue of sinking of Sindhurakshak in Au gust, 2013, the Committee 
desired to know about the findings of investigation s and cause of the disaster.  
Since Russia was involved in renovating and building of that ship, the Committee 
raised the concern as to why Russians have not been  allowed to be involved in 
it’s inspection.  To, this the representative of Mi nistry of Defence   stated before 
the Committee as under:- 
“Sir, the cause of the accident is under investigation.  Whatever is known is 
indicated that this is on account of some explosion  with the ammunition 
which the submarine was carrying at that point in t ime.  The submarine is 
still under water.  It is yet to be salvaged and on ly after the submarine is 
salvaged, can the entire theme be established with certainty, the exact 
cause.  With regard to allowing the Russians on boa rd, the submarine is 
submerged under water so it is not that we can perm it anybody to go on 
board in terms of diving, when the submarine is act ually salvaged and it 
brought back on surface, if there is any requiremen t that we need 
assistance from any agency then they will be permitted."  
 
2.55 In this connection, the Committee were further  apprised that for salvaging 
the submarine, specialised equipments are required.   The international agencies 
have already, according to the stage, assessing the  situation and the process of 
tendering is in progress.  The Western Naval Comman d is carrying out this as 
soon as possible to ensure that the contract is awa rded so that thereafter the 
submarine can be salvaged and this is being done wi th the help of the 
international agencies and with the approval of the  Ministry of Defence. It is of 
utmost importance for the Navy to ensure that the exact cause is ascertained and 
the Board of Enquiry, which is being constituted in the Western Naval Command, 
will do this.   
 
2.56 The Committee were concerned to know about the  kind of measures being 
taken to safeguard our other submarines at other pl aces. While addressing the 
concern of the Committee, the representatives of Na vy informed that whatever 

47 
 
measures were required to be taken to ensure that a ll the precautionary 
measures are put in place have already been ordered  to all the submarines of 
the Indian Navy to see that the requisite precaution is taken. 
 
International cooperation and goodwill 
 
 
2.57 The Committee wished to be enlightened upon th e international 
cooperation and exercises being undertaken by India n Navy. In this regard, the 
MoD apprised the Committee as under: 
“As far as exercises are concerned, the Indian Navy  regularly have 
exercises with the United States Navy as part of th e Malabar series of  
exercises, with the French Navy as part of the Varu na series of exercises, 
with the Russian Navy as part of the Indira series of exercises, and with the 
Royal Navy as part of the Konkan Series of Exercise s. In addition, we also 
have passage exercises with other friendly Navies i n the region. With our 
immediate neighbours, we also have the coordinated patrols which are 
being carried out with Indonesia, with Thailand, an d, recently, with 
Myanmar as well.” 
 

48 
 
 
 
CHAPTER – III 
 
A. COORDINATION  WITH CENTRAL ARMED POLICE FORCES  
 
 
The Committee wanted to know the forces responsible  for 
governing/protecting borders of the country at vari ous locations. In this regard, 
the Ministry of Defence through a written note informed the Committee as under:  
'1.  India – Pak Border 
 
The Army is responsible for guarding bordes of the country along the  
Actual Ground Position Line (AGPL), Line of Control  (LoC) and part of the 
International Boundary (14.5 Km.) in the State of J&K. BSF under the aegis 
of the MHA is responsible for guarding Indo-Pak Bor der along the 
remaining International Boundary (IB). 
2.  India – China Border 
 
Border management of India-China border though mand ated to ITBP 
is being carried out by Army and ITBP. 
 
3. India – Nepal Border  
 Sashastra Seema Bal (SSB) is the designated border guarding force 
responsible for guarding the India – Nepal border. 
 
4. India – Myanmar Border 
 
 Assam  Rifles is the designated border guarding force resp onsible for 
guarding the India – Myanmar border. 
 

49 
 
 
5.  India – Bhutan Border 
   
 SSB is the designated border guarding force responsible for guarding 
the India – Bhutan border. 
6.  India – Bangladesh Border 
  
Border Security Force under the aegis of MHA is the  designated 
Border Guarding Force responsible for guarding the India – Bangladesh 
Border'. 
 
3.2  Given the border-wise length details which is protected by our Central 
Armed Police Forces, the Ministry has informed that Border Security Force (BSF) 
is mandated as the  Border  Guarding  Force  for th e following borders  (i)  Indo-
Pak  border   (2297.5 km out of total 2312 km); (ii) LoC in J&K (under operational 
control of Army-237.20 km out of length 772.1 km) a nd (iii) Indo-Bangladesh 
border (total border of 4096.7 km).   Sashastra  Se ema  Bal (SSB)  is the Border 
Guarding  force  for  both  the  Indo-Nepal Border and Indo-Bhutan Border. Indo-
Tibetan Border Police (ITBP) is the Border Guarding  Force responsible for 
guarding of 3488 km of Indo-China borders.  Assam R ifles is responsible for 
guarding the Indo-Myanmar border. India and Myanmar  share international 
border of 1631.34 km adjoining the North-Eastern St ates of Arunachal 
Pradesh(506.18 km), Nagaland(213.40 km), Manipur(40 0.13 km) and 
Mizoram(511.63 km). 
 
3.3 The Committee were informed that as  per the Ministry of Home Affairs’ 
order dated 22.03.2011,   Central Reserve Police Fo rce (CRPF), Border Security 
Force (BSF), Central Industrial Security Force (CISF), Indo Tibetan Border Force 
(ITBP) and Sashastra Seema Bal (SSB) have been cate gorized as Central 

50 
 
Armed Police Force (CAPFs). Earlier these forces we re called Central Para 
Military Forces (CPMFs). These forces are under adm inistrative as well as 
operational jurisdiction of MHA. In addition, Assam  Rifles and National Security 
Guard (NSG) are other Armed Forces of the Union. Wh ile NSG is under the 
administrative and operational jurisdiction of MHA,  Assam Rifles is under 
administrative jurisdiction of MHA but under the op erational jurisdiction of 
Ministry of Defence. MHA on 26/05/2011 has conveyed  sanction for raising of 
one Marine Coy in BSF for guarding the coastal area  between Medi and Jakhau 
in  the State of Gujarat. Later on, as per the approval of the MHA, one BSF IB Bn 
has been converted into the Marine Bn and the same Bn is operationalised  w.e.f. 
31.03.2012 and deployed to man the area between Med i & Jakhau. Total area 
covered by the Bn is 85 Km. 
 
3.4 The Committee wanted to know about the coordina tion mechanism existing 
between various services/agencies involved in secur ing the country. While 
replying to the above point, the Ministry of Defenc e intimated that  in view of the 
existing internal security threats, the Army is pre sently conducting Counter 
Infiltration/Counter-Insurgency/Counter-Terrorism Operations in J&K / North East 
(NE). In order to coordinate and synergize efforts of all the Security Force, 
Unified Headquarter Mechanism is existing in J&K as  well as NE. required 
coordination and planning is effected through the U nified Headquarter 
Mechanism which comprises of Core Group, Strategic Group and Operational 
Group, meetings. At functional/tactical level, civi l military liaison conferences are 
held. At Army Headquarters, fortnightly meetings ar e organized with ITBP and 
Intelligence Bureau. The intelligence sharing is th rough Multi agency Centre as 
well as Subsidiary Multi Agency Centre.  
 

51 
 
3.5  The Committee desired to know about the streng th of various Central 
Armed Police Forces. In this regard, the Ministry o f Home Affairs furnished the 
following information:  
'The strength of these CAPFs as on 31.10.2013 is as under:-  
 
Force Present Strength 
CRPF 283630  
BSF 239909  
ITBP 74368  
CISF 119647  
SSB 73250  
TOTAL 790804  
 
3.6 On the issue of  inter dependency, the Committe e  were intimated by the 
Ministry of Home Affairs through a written reply th at there is no interdependency 
between CAPFs on Defence forces for equipment /ammu nition/ infrastructure  
etc. or vice-versa. However, CAPFs are procuring so me of the arms, 
ammunitions, equipment, clothing etc from the Ordnance Factory Board / Ministry 
of Defence on payment basis. Similarly there is no interdependency between 
CAPFs and Defence Forces for training. However, new ly recruited Assistant 
Commandants of CAPFs are sent on Army attachment im mediately after their 
Foundation Course for Counter Insurgency / Anti Nax al Operation training with 
Army. 
 
3.7 On the modus operandi of deployment of forces t he Committee were 
informed by the Ministry of Home Affairs through a written reply as under: 
 
'The State Governments are primarily responsible fo r countering internal 
disturbances, terrorists and naxalite activities. H owever, the Central Armed 
Police Forces (CAPFs) are made available to the Sta te Governments to 
assist them in discharging this responsibility.   I n view of the nature of their 
duties, the CAPFs work in close coordination with t he State Governments. 

52 
 
Their services are placed at the disposal of the St ate Governments to aid 
the civil authorities whenever they are deployed ei ther for the maintenance 
of law and order or on internal security duties.  
 
Similarly, border guarding CAPFs namely BSF, ITBP a nd SSB are 
deployed along the international border. However, e ven for the border 
guarding duties, CAPFs have to work in close coordi nation with local State 
Police Forces to act against illegal activities of smuggling, human 
trafficking, arms trafficking, drugs trafficking, i llegal migration and other 
such criminal activities. Any accused apprehended b y these forces has to 
be handed over to State Police Forces which are empowered under the law 
of the land to register a case under the relevant law and take further action.  
The Government of India in consultation with State Governments notify the 
areas within which a border guarding Force will exe rcise certain powers of 
search, seizure, arrest etc.  
 
Even CISF deployed for the security of Central Unit s / Installations has to 
report to State Police regarding any theft or crime  which may take place 
inside their premises. The State Police Force then registers the case and 
carry out further investigations'. 
 
3.8  On the coordination front, the Committee were informed as given: 
 
'The CAPF commanders at field level and also at adm inistrative / 
operational level operate in tandem with the field Police Units for 
maintaining  law & order. The Zonal IGPs and IGPs o f the CAPF have 
perfect coordination mechanism in place for conduct ing joint anti-terrorist 
operations or law & order management'. 
  
3.9 The Committee took note of the difficult role a nd responsibilities being 
undertaken by CAPF personnel.   In this context, th e Committee wished to know 
about the factual position as regard to some news p aper reports that CAPF 
jawans are fed and paid poorly.  In reply to this  query,  the Committee were 
intimated as under:  
'This is not correct.  The Government acknowledges and appreciates the 
difficult role and responsibilities being shouldere d by the CAPFs. However, 

53 
 
the different cadres/services have different Recrui tment Rules, service 
conditions and nature of duties, and accordingly th e different incentives in 
the form of allowances/special allowances etc. are given. The CAPFs, 
apart from enhanced casual leave and earned leave a re also given special 
allowances/risk allowances during their postings in  the inhospitable and 
difficult terrain. Following are some of the allowa nces applicable to the 
Force officers and personnel depending upon their d eployment, place of 
postings, responsibilities/ duties and other terms and conditions- Field area 
allowance, Highly Active Field Area allowance, CI(o ps) Allowance, High 
Altitude allowance, Detachment allowance, Uncongeni al Area Allowance, 
Peace Area Allowance, Ration Money Allowance, Unifo rm Allowance, Kit 
Maintenance Allowance, Special Duty Allowance, Spec ial Compensatory 
Allowance and  Remote Locality Allowance'. 
 
3.10 They were further apprised that majority of th ese allowances are not 
granted to other Central Government civilian employees. Special Duty Allowance, 
Special Compensatory Allowance and Remote Locality Allowance are, however, 
available to civilian employees also. The Forces are therefore, duly compensated 
for their hard area postings, risk exposures, speci al duties etc. It is also stated 
that the force personnel do not remain posted in th e hard areas for long and their 
place of posting is changed alternatively between h ard and soft/static stations as 
per the prescribed tenure policy.  

54 
 
 
CHAPTER-IV  
 
BORDER CONNECTIVITY THROUGH ROAD, RAIL AND AIR  
 
The issue of poor connectivity and inadequate infra structure  in the 
strategically important regions  of bordering areas  have been repeatedly raised 
by the Committee especially in the light  of the fa ct that China has been rapidly 
ramping up its network of roads, bridges, rail line s   and air bases on the other 
side of the LAC.  
 
4.2  With regard to border wise connectivity, the Commit tee desired to know 
about the length of roads envisaged to be construct ed by the Ministry in border 
areas including details regarding kilometers of roa d length planned, sanctioned 
and completed so far in different border areas of t he country. To this specific 
query of the Committee, the officials of Ministry o f Defence and Ministry of Home 
Affairs furnished written replies as given in subsequent paras. 
 Indo China Border 
   
 
4.3  The Committee  found that  the total length of Indo -China Border is 3488 
km. ITBP is deployed all along Indo-China border fr om Karakoram pass in 
Ladakh to Jeehap La in Arunachal Pradesh.  Accordin g to the information 
furnished by Ministry of Defence, the following roads are under progress: 
Sr 
No  
BRO 
Project  
Responsibility of construction/ improvement 
of roads by Projects of BRO (Km)  
Percentage progress of 
construction under various 
packages  
(a)  Himank  2090  83%  
(b)  Deepak  1050  79%  
(c)  Vartak  2270  72%  
(d)  Arunank  2211  85%  
(e)  Brahmank  1200  96%  
(f)  Udayak  1430  99%  

55 
 
(g)  Swastik  1290  35%  
(h)  Shivalik  1530  76%  
 
4.4 The Committee wished to know  about the measure s taken to elevate  the 
poor condition of infrastructure on Indo-China Bord er. In this regard, Ministry of 
Home Affairs informed as under: 
'To redress the situation arising out of lack of in frastructure along Indo-
China Border, the Government has decided to undertake construction of 73 
roads of operational significance along Indo-China border in Phase I. Out of 
these 73 roads, 46 roads are GS roads being constru cted by Ministry of 
Defence and 27 roads measuring 805 kms at an estima ted cost of Rs. 
1937 crores, are being funded by MHA for the effect ive movement of ITBP. 
Presently along the Indo-China Border construction of 27 ITBP Priority 
roads are under progress and completion of these ro ads will connect 26 
more BOP’s of ITBP increasing the number of connect ed BOP’s to 94.  
Besides 36 roads have been endorsed by DGMO for con struction in 
Phase-II of ITBP Priority roads.  The work for construction of these 27 ITBP 
roads has been assigned to BRO (15 roads), CPWD (8 roads), NPCC (2 
roads) and HPPWD (2 roads). As on 30.11.2013, 3 roa ds have been 
completed; and work is in progress on 24 roads. For mation cutting has 
been completed for 576 kms and surfacing 263Kms. 43 % ITBP Border Out 
Posts are connected by road and 57 % not connected.  On the Indo-China 
Border, border roads are being constructed by CPWD,  NPCC & Himachal 
Pradesh PWD.'  
 
Proposed roads along Indo-China Border in Phase II 
 
 
4.5 The Committee were further apprised by Ministry  of Home Affairs that there 
is a proposal for infrastructure development under phase-II as given below: 
 
'ITBP has furnished a comprehensive proposal for pr oviding connectivity to 
all the Border out Posts. A comprehensive proposal received from ITBP 
was sent to Ministry of Defence for operational Clearance.   
 
Ministry of Defence has examined the ITBP proposal in consultation with 
Army Headquarters. Construction of 36 roads have be en endorsed for 
construction by ITBP/MHA, 11 roads are included in the Army’s GS road 

56 
 
Long Term Perspective Plan. 3 roads have not been e ndorsed for 
construction. Process is being started for seeking approval for construction 
of 36 roads in Phase II. 
 
ITBP has now intimated additionally 73 roads for co nstruction in Phase II 
up to the patrolling points. Ministry of Defence ha s been requested to 
endorse these roads.' 
 
4.6 The Committee wanted to know whether any inadeq uacies and difficulties 
have been faced due to the poor network of road, ra il and airports and whether a 
sound infrastructure would minimize incursion bids from China.  They also 
wanted to know the details of the assessment in thi s regard. The Committee 
were informed through a written reply as under : 
 
'Despite lack of adequate infrastructure along the Northern Borders and 
other mobility/deployment related factors, the army  has been effective in 
monitoring Peoples Liberation Army (PLA) activities and maintaining peace 
and tranquility along the Line of Actual Control.  Our infrastructure 
development, force accretions and modernization is being implemented in 
consonance with our threat perception to secure our  borders.  Steps, as 
required, have been initiated for strengthening and  optimizing our force 
structure to cater for the threats envisaged along the Northern borders. 
 
Transgressions do occur along the Indian-China bord er due to differing  
perception of Line of Actual Control (LAC) and both  sides patrolling up to 
their respective perceptions.  To resolve these iss ues, there is a well 
established system for exchange of information and projecting any 
differences through border personnel meetings or fl ag meetings between 
the military personnel from the two sides, wherein they are guided by 
provisions of Border Peace and Tranquility Agreemen t (1993), Confidence 
Building Measures in Military Field (1996) and Border Defence Cooperation 
Agreement (2013)'. 
 
4.7 When enquired whether Indian side was handicapp ed in countering 
incursions bids due to poor network of roads, rail or airports/helipad etc., the 
Ministry clarified through a written note as under : 

57 
 
 
'Our Armed Forces are fully seized of the security needs of the country.  
Our defence strategy and doctrines are being consta ntly refined keeping in 
view the changing security paradigm in our immediat e and extended 
neighbourhood, and the world at large.  Despite lac k of adequate 
infrastructure along the Northern Borders and other  mobility/deployment 
related factors, the Army has been effective in mon itoring PLA activities 
and maintaining peace and tranquility along the Line of Actual Control.  Our 
infrastructure development, force accretions and mo dernization is being 
implemented in consonance with our threat perceptio n to secure our 
borders.  Steps, as required, have been initiated f or strengthening and 
optimizing our force structure to cater for the thr eats envisaged along the 
Northern borders.  The areas along LAC are being ke pt under surveillance 
by regular patrolling by troops and other aerial, o ptronic and electronic 
means'. 
 
  
4.8 Throwing light on the operational significance in border areas along Indo-
China border the Committee were informed in a written note: 
"The difficult terrain and relatively thin habitati ons has resulted in 
inadequate development of infrastructure in these r egions.  This 
inadequacy of infrastructure is most visible in the  lack of road connectivity 
up to the border or in areas close to it.  Settleme nts in the border areas as 
well as a large number of border out posts of the s ecurity forces are not 
connected by road.  The inadequacy of road links, t hus, has both security 
as well as economic/developmental implications and adversely affects our 
ability to effectively manage one of the most sensitive borders. 
 
The lack of development on our side is in sharp con trast to infrastructure 
developments on the Chinese side.  China has, over a period of time, 
undertaken large-scale road construction in Tibet a nd developed a network 
of highways in Tibet, to which are linked feeder/ar terial roads.  Roads-
heads on the Chinese side have been advanced very c lose to the Line of 
Actual Control; and many of the border passes are n ow connected by road 
on the Chinese side." 
 
 
4.9 The Committee were dismayed to learn that the c umulative progress of 27 
ITBP roads showed a very dismal picture. Out of 27 proposed roads only 1 is 

58 
 
completed so far.  In case of 11 roads, the Committ ee have been given to 
understand that they are behind schedule and revise d Detailed Project Reports 
were still awaited.  Only 1 road has been completed  so far and for 15 the target 
dates have been indicated.  These details are conta ined in Annexure – 1 of the 
Report.   
 
Indo Nepal Border  
 
4.10 With respect to Indo Nepal Border, the Committ ee  found that the total 
length of the Indo-Nepal Border is 1751 km. The sta tus of roads on this border, 
as informed by the Ministry of Defence is  as under:  
(a) Hirak 534.00 41% 
(b) Swastik 1290 35% 
 
4.11 The committee observed that the condition of B orders Pillars(BP) which 
demarcate   the boundary line between India and Nep al  is deplorable.  The   
status of the Border Pillars (demarcating the border) are as under:- 
 
Border  Total 
B/P 
Damaged 
 Missing  Good 
condition 
Indo-Nepal 
Border 
6286 
 1273 1397 3616 
 
 
4.12 The Committee were further intimated by Minist ry of Defence that 
Government of India has approved construction and up gradation of 1377 kms of 
roads along the Indo-Nepal border in the State of U ttar Pradesh (640kms), Bihar 
(564 kms) and Uttrakhand (173 Kms). The constructio n work of road is being 
carried by the State PWDs. State-wise details of th e status of approval etc is as 
under: 
 

59 
 
State Length 
in kms 
Total cost/ rate 
approved by CCS 
DPRs approved by TC/HLEC 
Uttar 
Pradesh 
640  Rs. 1621cr. @ 
2.53 cr. Per km 
248.23 kms have been 
approved by TC/HLEC. 
Further DPRs for 324 kms 
approved by TC on 23.7.2013. 
HLEC has directed to 
reexamine the enhanced costs. 
Bihar 564 Rs. 1702 cr. @ 
Rs. 3.02 cr. Per 
km 
HLEC has approved the 552.30 
kms, which is the required 
length. 
Uttrakhand  173 
kms 
Rs. 530 cr. @ 
3.06 cr. Per km 
12 kms DPRs approved by 
TC/HLEC. Further DPRs for the 
balance roads are under 
consideration by TC. 
 
Indo Bhutan Border 
 
 
4.13 The total length of the Indo-Bhutan Border is 699 km. The status of road 
projects ongoing in this border area of the country  is as given below:  
 
(a) Swastik 1290 35% 
(b) Dantak 268 90% 
  
4.14 The Border Roads are being constructed by Stat e PWD. The constructions 
of Border Road is under progress, except in Assam. Status of the Border Pillars 
(demarcating the border) are as under:- 
 
Border  Total 
B/P 
Damaged  Missing  Good 
condition 
Indo-Bhutan 
Border 
 
1861 
 457 542 862 
 
4.15 The Committee were also apprised that Governme nt has approved 
construction of 313 Km of border roads along Indo-B hutan border at a cost of 

60 
 
Rs.1259 crore.  The construction work of these road s is to be completed over a 
period of five years commencing from 1 st  April, 2011. The construction work will 
be executed by Assam State Public Works Department.   The work on these 
roads is held up due to the State Government’s relu ctance to bear the cost of 
land acquisition and statutory expenses. State Govt. is exploring the possibility of 
funding the land acquisition cost through Departmen t of North Eastern Region 
(DONER).The construction work of roads on both the Indo-Nepal and Indo-
Bhutan Borders are being carried out by the concerned State PWDs. 
 
Indo Pak Border 
 
 
4.16 Length of the Indo-Pak border is 2300.16 km (i ncluding 10.5 km of being 
manned by Army). The Committee came to know that a composite scheme for 
the construction of fencing, flood lighting, roads (covering a length of 340 km), 
like roads (covering a length of 190 km) and 70 Border Out Posts along Indo-Pak 
border in Gujarat sector from BP No. 921 to 1135 wa s approved by the CCS in 
January, 2000. Works in this sector were targeted t o be completed in five years. 
However, the project implementation got delayed on account of various factors 
like, cost and time overrun, unprecedented floods i n 2003 & 2006, hostile 
weather conditions in Rann areas, limited availabil ity of resources, increase in 
scope of works, up gradation of technical specifica tions as recommended by the 
CRRI etc. At present, 261.28 km of border roads hav e been constructed along 
with 166.25 km of link roads. In Punjab, constructi on of 610 km and in Rajasthan 
construction of 1207.42 km of lateral and axial roa d in the border area is under 
active consideration of the  Ministry of Home Affairs. 
 

61 
 
4.17   The position in regard to road projects being undertaken on this frontier, as 
intimated by Ministry of Defence is placed below: 
  
(a) 
 Chetak 4050 82% 
(b)  Sampark 2665 89% 
(c)  Beacon 2145 74% 
(d)  Vijayak 2045 59% 
 
 
Indo Bangladesh border  
4.18 Length of Indo-Bangladesh border is  4096.7 km .  The Committee were 
given to understand that in order to prevent illega l immigration and other anti-
national activities from across the border. Governm ent of India has sanctioned 
erection of fencing and construction of roads in tw o phases, along Indo-
Bangladesh border. The Phase-I project has been com pleted. The Phase-II 
works began in 2000. Phase-II works commenced in 20 00 and were targeted to 
be completed by March 2012. However, due to various  problems (like land 
acquisition, public protest, fencing within 150 yar ds of international border, 
statutory clearances, bilateral issues with Bangladesh etc.), the works have been 
spilled over. Accordingly, approval of Cabinet Comm ittee on Security has been 
obtained for completion of these projects by 31.03.2014. The Government has 
accorded both priority and greater focus to the wor k of completion of fencing 
along the Indo-Bangladesh Border. The cost sanction ed by CCS for fencing and 
roads is Rs. 4383.69 cr. The Status of construction of border roads is as under: 
PHASE-I PHASE-II TOTAL (PH.I + PH.II) Name of 
State Sanctioned Completed Sanctioned Completed Sanctione d Completed 
W.Bengal 1770.00 1616.57 0.00 0.00 1770.00 1616.57 
Assam 186.33 176.50 102.42 82.56 288.75 259.06 
Meghalaya  211.29 211.29 320.00 152.54 531.29 363.83 
Tripura 545.37 480.51 637.00 511.87 1182.37 992.38 
Mizoram 153.40 153.06 481.30 282.27 634.70 435.33 
Total 2866.39 2637.93 1540.72 1029.24 4407.11 3667. 17 
 

62 
 
4.19 The Committee were also informed that construc tion work of border, road 
along Indo-Pakistan and Indo-Bangladesh Border is b eing undertaken by 
C.P.W.D, NBCC, NPCC, EPIL, APWD, TPWD. However main tenance of border 
road is being carried out by CPWD. 
4.20 In regard to the status of connectivity throug h Rail, Road & Air in Indo-Pak 
and Indo-Bangladesh border areas, the Ministry of H ome Affairs informed  as 
under: 
States Rail Road Air 
Indo-Pak Border 
Jammu Limited Good Jammu Airport 
Punjab Good Good Amritsar Airport 
Rajasthan Limited Limited  Nil 
Gujarat Poor Limited  Bhuj Airport 
Indo-Bangladesh Border 
W. Bengal Good Good Kolkata, Bagdogra & 
Coochbehar Airports 
(Chartered flights only) 
Assam Poor Limited  Nil 
Meghalaya  Poor Poor Nil 
Tripura Limited Poor Agartala Airport 
Mizoram Poor Poor Nil 
 
Indo Myanmar Border  
 
4.21 It came to the knowledge of the Committee that  the total length of Indo-
Myanmar Border is 1643 km. The complete border is u nder developed, remote 
and devoid of roads and tracks. Along in the Myanma r Border the road, rail 
conditions in the North Eastern States are in a poo r state. The subject matter is 
more closely related to States Govts. However, ther e is a comprehensive 

63 
 
proposal for creation of border infrastructure alon g Indo-Myanmar border which 
envisages construction of new roads/up gradation of  existing, helipads and 
helibases in the State of Manipur, Nagaland, Mizora m and Arunachal Pradesh. 
Assam Rifles is the Border Guarding Force along the  Indo-Myanmar border. 
Assam Rifles has informed that there are 76 Company  Operating Bases 
(COBs)/Border Out Posts (BOPs) along Indo-Myanmar border, of which, 56 have 
moderate connectivity and the remaining 20 have very poor connectivity. 
 
4.22 The Ministry in this regard further informed a s under: 
 
'To address connectivity/infrastructure issue, ther e is a comprehensive 
proposal for creation of infrastructure involving c onstruction of 4585 km of 
roads, 113 helipads and 02 helibases along Indo-Mya nmar border during 
the period 2013-25 in two phase. The construction o f 1417 km roads, 56 
helipads and 02 helibases are to be undertaken in P hase I (2013-18) at an 
estimate cost of Rs. 3303 crores and the remaining 3168 km roads and 57 
helipads in Phase II (2018-23) at an estimated cost of Rs. 4812 crores. 
 
At part of the process, a Pre-feasibility-Report (P ER) is required to get the 
in-Principal-Approval (IPA) of Planning Commission and EFC clearance. 
Accordingly, action is being taken to commission th e Pre-feasibility study 
through CPWD'. 
 
4.23 When asked that in addition to repairing of Si ngle lane roads in sensitive 
hill areas of North-East, whether any new alternati ve roads/corridors have been 
planned to reduce dependence on old corridor, the M inistry of Defence stated as 
under:-  
'The states of North East are connected through two  trunk routes i.e.              
NH-52 which runs North of the Brahmaputra and NH-32  which runs South 
of the Brahmaputra. These provide alternate connect ivity to North East. All 
other routes take off from these axes. For connecting  Sikkim, in addition to 
the traditional axis through Sevok-Rambi-Teesta-Ran gpo-Ranipaul 
Gangtok,  an alternate axis through Bagrakot-Alagar h Rhenok-Rorathang-
Ranipul is under planning. For connecting  Tawang i n Kameng District of 

64 
 
Arunachal Pradesh, in addition to the Balipara-Char dwar-Tawang 
alignment, an alternate alignment is under construc tion namely Orang-
Shergaon-Kalakthang-Rupa-Tenga'. 
 
4.24 The Committee wanted to know about the methods  of  movement  and 
patrol  in tough locations where there is  lack of adequate connectivity 
infrastructure which include terrains like Karakoram pass in Ladakh region  to the 
Jechap La in Arunachal Pradesh, Indo-Pak Borders in  North-West and Myanmar 
Border in East as well as desert areas of Rajasthan  and Gujarat. To this query, 
the Ministry of Home Affairs vide a written reply stated as under:- 
'For operational movements, patrol along the LoC de tails may be obtained 
from MoD since BSF is deployed in LoC under operati onal control of Army. 
However the methods adopted for patrolling in Indo- Pak border and in 
desert areas of Rajasthan and Gujarat are OP, Foot Patrolling, Camel 
mounted patrolling, Vehicle patrolling, Khura Check ing patrol, Zero line 
patrol, Fence Checking patrol, Night patrol, Night Ambush and Boat 
patrolling. 
   
SSB is deployed along Indo-Nepal Border & Indo-Bhut an Border and has 
established its 58 high altitude Border Out Posts i n the States of 
Uttarakhand, West Bengal, Sikkim and Arunachal Prad esh.  In Arunachal 
Pradesh, SSB has 17 high altitude Border Out Posts.   In Tawang area of 
Arunachal Pradesh, SSB is providing guides to army patrolling parties as 
and when requested by the Army authorities. 
Assam Rifles is manning 1631 Indo-Myanmar Border. I t conducts all patrol 
on foot and on an average 700 patrol per month are conducted by the 
troops along the Indo-Myanmar borders to dominate the border effectively. 
ITBP patrol move on foot in most of the border area'. 
 
4.25  The Committee were keen to know whether any problem s/difficulties were  
faced by the Ministry/departments in construction o f border roads.  The following 
information was furnished by Ministry of Defence in relation to the above query:  

65 
 
'The problems being faced in construction of roads in the border region are 
as under:-  
(a) Lack of stone quarries from State Govts. 
(b) Delay in Forest/ Wild life cases and Environment Clearance  
(c) Land Acquisition  
(d) High altitude areas resulting in reduced efficiency. 
(e) Limited working season. 
(f) Heavy rainfall. 
(g) Shortage of labour. 
(h) Shortage of equipment and skilled manpower. 
(i) Inadequate Heavy lift Air Lift support by IAF. 
 
The issues regarding shortage of labour, lack of stone quarries and law and 
order problems have been taken up with the State Go vernment for 
resolution. The problems faced  by BRO in acquisiti on of land for 
construction of roads in border area are as under:-  
(a) Joint survey for acquisition of land and forest cle arance takes 
inordinate time. 
(b) Fixing and disbursement of payment to affected parties gets delayed,  
resulting in avoidable litigation. 
 (c)  Land records are not mutated in favour of BRO. Litigation by affected 
parties. 
  
In order to resolve these problems, regular interac tion is carried out by the 
Units of BRO with the local District/Revenue/State authorities. Chief 
Secretaries of States have also been requested to c onstitute Empowered 
Committees under their Chairmanship with Secretarie s of other concerned 
Departments of State as members, to improve coordin ation and to resolve 
the issues affecting progress of BRO’s works'. 
 
4.26 With regard to provision of air lift facility to BRO to move the machine and 
material at construction sites by IAF/Army, the Com mittee wanted to know the 
position of the Ministry. The Ministry submitted as under:- 

66 
 
'Air lift to BRO for shifting of stores, manpower V ehicle/Equipment/Plant 
and other construction material is being provided b y Indian Air Force. 
Details of air effort provided by IAF in last five years is tabulated below.  
While full cooperation is being extended by IAF, th ere is a considerable 
shortfall which affects construction activity.  
          
Year Fixed Wing Rotary Wing 
 Demanded Allotted Materialized Demanded Allotted Materialized 
2009-10 1000 900 890.91 2880.0 505.00 506.38 
2010-11 1150 1700 972.06 4054.01 929.00 678.73* 
2011-12 1100 1100 1259.33 1923.00 1213.00 413.89** 
2012-13 1150 750 1031.00 1031.00 805.00 419.00 
2013-14 1130 750 1610.00 1610.00 1010.00 202.2(upto  28.11.13 
* 205.085 MT through PHHL        ** 7.4675 MT through PHHL' 
 
4.27 When the Committee asked whether any dedicated  air service for BRO has 
been envisaged by the Ministry to speed up the cons truction process and in this 
context  or whether help from private operators is planned to be taken, the 
Ministry informed that presently no  dedicated air service is envisaged  for BRO 
work, however, a proposal has been received from BR O for inviting Expression 
of Interest for hiring of heavy lift helicopter fro m private agencies and same is 
under consideration.  
 
Border connectivity through Rail 
 
 
4.28 The Committee were informed by Ministry of Rai lways that Ministry of 
Defence approached the Railway Board for expanding the connectivity through 
rail on the border areas of the country specially t hose having critical importance. 
Ministry of Defence has given a list of 14 strategi c lines which are required for 
improving the defence preparedness in Border Area.  Initially, these 14 lines 
were identified by Ministry of Defence on 11.11.201 0 for survey and feasibility 

67 
 
study along with assigned priority. Later on revise d list with changed priority was 
forwarded to Ministry of Railways for further action on 04.12.2012.   
 
4.29 Surveys for these 14 lines (in order of priori ty intimated by Ministry of 
Defence) are either in progress or have been completed.   
 
The detail status is as under:- 
S. 
No. Survey  Estimated  
Cost  
 (in Cr)  
ROR  Remarks  
Murkongselek-Pasighat new 
line  (30.617 km)   
165.82  - 8.02%  Work included in Budget 
2011-12 as “quid-pro-quo” 
to the defence funded Sakri-
Nirmali project of ECR.  
Final location survey taken 
up.  
Pasighat-Tezu-
Parasuramkund new line 
(127.95 Km)  
2550.71  - 8.28%  Survey Completed. Report 
under examination  
1 
Parasuramkund-Rupai new 
line (97.80 Km)  
 
1289.31  - 6.51%  CCEA Note processed for 
full funding by Ministry of 
Finance, but the proposal 
not supported by Ministry of 
Finance & Planning 
Commission.  
2 Misamari-Tawang new line 
(378 km)   
19108  
 
- 10.35%  Report under examination.  
3 North Lakhimpur-Along-
Silapather new line (248 km) 
 
11158  - 6.51%  Letter has been sent to M/o 
Defence for providing fund. 
Reply awaited.  
4 Patti-Firozpur new line (25 
km)  
147  - 7.67%  Included in Railway Budget 
proposals 2013-14 subject 
to necessary approval.  
5 Jodhpur-Jaisalmer doubling 
(290 km)  
1032   -0.02%  Report under examination.  
6 Pathankot-Leh new line  (400 
km)  
- - Survey has been taken up 
by Northern Railway. Likely 
to be completed by 
December, 2014.  
7 Tanakpur-Begeshwar new 
line (155 km)  
2791  - 1.16%  CCEA Note processed for 
full funding by Ministry of 
Finance, but the proposal 
not supported by Ministry of 
Finance & Planning 
Commission.  
8 Jammu-Akhnoor-Poonch 
new line (223 km)  
13613  - 4.61%  CCEA Note processed for 
full funding by Ministry of 
Finance, but the proposal 

68 
 
S. No. Survey  Estimated  
Cost  
 (in Cr)  
ROR  Remarks  
not supported by Ministry of 
Finance & Planning 
Commission.  
9 Dehradun-Uttarkashi new 
line (90 km)  
- - Survey in progress and 
expected to be completed 
by March, 2014.  
10  10a  Rishikesh-Karanprayag 
new line (125 km)  
4295  - 6.34%  Project sanctioned and work 
is in progress.  
 10b  Karanprayag-Chamoli 
new line (35 km)  
  Survey in progress and 
expected to be completed 
by March, 2014.  
11  Anupgarh-Chittorgarh-
Motigarh-Bikaner new line 
(155 km)  
707  - 7.24%  Updated report under 
examination.  
12  Tanakpur-Jauljivi new line  
(90 km )  
- - Survey in progress and 
expected to be completed 
by Dec, 2013.  
13  Jodhpur-Agolai-Shergarh-
Phalsund new line (116 km)  
429  - 8.04%  Letter sent to State Govt. for 
cost sharing in Aug. 2012.  
No response received.  
14  Srinagar-Kargil-Leh new line 
(430 km)  
- - Survey included in Budget 
announcement 2013-14. 
Preliminary activities taken 
up.  Likely to be completed 
by March, 2015.  
 Total estimated cost of 
projects (where survey 
completed)  
55831   
 
 
4.30  The Committee wanted whether the Railways have any planning to expand 
their network to the areas not hitherto covered spe cially in the border areas, 
North-Eastern States and other hill and mountainous  terrains. Details on the 
above issue were  submitted by the Ministry of Railways as below: 
 
'Indian Railways have already taken up 12 National Projects which are 
important from strategic point of view in Jammu & K ashmir and North-
Eastern Sector.  One project viz. Kumarghat-Agartal a has already been 
completed while the remaining 11 are in progress.  In all these National 
Projects, 25% cost is being borne by Ministry of Ra ilways and remaining 
75% is provided by Govt. of India as additionality.   However, funding level 

69 
 
of these lines needs to be increased for their fast er completion.  No further 
strategic lines can be taken up by Ministry of Rail ways unless these are 
fully funded by Ministry of Defence or Ministry of Finance.  As Ministry of 
Railways have a huge throw forward of  Rs. 1.78 lakh crore of ongoing New 
Line, Gauge Conversion and Doubling projects and li mited availability of 
resources.  In view of the heavy backlog of sanctio ned projects, Ministry of 
Railways will be able to take above 14 strategic lines only if it is fully funded 
by either Ministry of Defence or Ministry of Financ e.  Since these lines are 
highly unremunerative so Ministry of Railways will be incurring operation 
losses on these lines.  In addition to bearing capi tal cost of construction, 
the operational losses on these lines should also b e reimbursed by either 
Ministry of Defence or by Ministry of Finance'.  
 
 
4.31 The Committee wished to know whether any inter national rail corridors 
have been proposed which would also include India.  The Ministry of Railways 
through a written reply  as under:- 
 
'In the past a total of 11 surveys were conducted p roviding connectivity to 
neighbouring countries.  Out of these, 4 works have been included which 
are presently in progress The details are as under: 
 
(a) Gauge conversion of Jayanagar to Bijalpura and its extension up to 
Bardibas as new line fully funded by Ministry of External Affairs. 
(b) Agartala- Akhaura new line fully funded by Ministry of External Affairs. 
(c) Jogbani-Biratnagar(Nepal) new line fully funded by Ministry of External 
Affairs. 
 
(d) Gauge conversion of part section i.e. Gonda-Bahraic h of Gonda-
Bahraich-Mailani-Sitapur-Lucknow including Nanpara- Nepalganj 
funded by Govt. Of India.  
 
4 nos. of surveys for providing connectivity to Bhu tan were completed in 
2007-08, the cost of which is presently under updation in Railways. 

70 
 
 
3 nos. Of surveys, are in progress. Further decisio n on these will be taken 
once the surveys are completed and report examined in the Ministry and 
decision regarding funding of these new lines by ME A or otherwise is 
decided. However in case of Hashimara-Phuentsholing  new line survey, 
Principal Chief Conservator of Forests (PCCF)/West Bengal has refused 
permission to carry out the survey in view of Buxa Tiger Reserve falling in 
the alignment.  Therefore, this survey is proposed to be dropped'. 
 
4.32 The Committee  asked whether any request been received by the Railways 
to connect Sikkim by Rail with the adjoining plains , the Ministry of Railways  
submitted as under:- 
 
'In order to provide connectivity to Sikkim, a new line project from Sivok to 
Rangpo has been sanctioned.  The cost of construction of 44.39 Km of new 
line projects is 3380.58 Crore.  The project has be en given to IRCON for 
execution. Preliminary activities have been taken u p.  Forestry clearances 
for carrying out final location survey have recently been obtained'. 
 
 
4.33 The Committee were wanted to be informed on te chnological knowhow and 
availability of R&D facilities with Indian Railways  for laying the lines on the hills 
and mountainous terrain and in case of   lack of te chnology, whether the 
Railways consider partnership with internationally renowned railways. To this 
concern of the Committee,  Ministry of Railways furnished the following reply :- 
 
'Yes, Ministry of Railways have got adequate techno logical know-how and 
experience for laying of railway lines in hilly and  mountainous regions such 
as Himalayas. Indian Railways are executing large number of such projects 
in hilly region of J&K, Himachal, Uttarakhand and N orth Eastern States.  
Wherever required, Indian Railways engages renowned  consultants for 
seeking specific technological inputs. Indian Railw ays have successfully 
executed Jammu-Udhampur new line which is under ope ration since 2005, 
Qazigund-Baramulla new line was commissioned in 200 8-09 & Qazigund-

71 
 
Banihal involving longest transportation tunnel (11  Km) across Pir Panjal 
hills in 2013'.   
 
 
 
4.34 With regard to the matter of handicaps/limitat ions being faced by the 
Ministry of Railways in laying of railway-lines in and along the borders areas, the 
Ministry of Railways stated that major handicaps be ing faced by Ministry of 
Railways in laying of railway lines in and along th e borders areas is availability of 
financial resources as has been mentioned in reply to aforesaid points, Ministry 
of Railways is finding it difficult even to finance  the ongoing sanctioned projects.   
In absence of any assured funding either from Minis try of Defence or Ministry of 
Finance, Ministry of Railways will be unable to take up any of the strategic lines . 
 
 
4.35 The matter of funding/financial implications, as submitted by Ministry of 
Railways   were enquired with the Ministry of Defen ce.   The Ministry of Defence 
stated that Ministry of Railway has sought addition al funds for construction of 
these lines.  The issue of provisioning of funds fo r construction of these railway 
lines has been under active consideration of the Go vernment and Empowered 
Committee on Border Infrastructure (ECBI) headed by  Cabinet Secretary.  ECBI 
has recommended that Finance Secretary, Secretary ( Planning Commission), 
Chairman (Railway Board) and Deputy NSA will hold a  separate meeting 
expeditiously to resolve the issue of funding of Na tional and Strategic Railway 
Lines.  
 
4.36 Keeping in view, the fast pace developments ta king place in China side in 
regard to Railways, the Committee wanted to know th at how does Indian 
Railways figure while comparing the Railway system in China.  To this query, the 
Ministry of Railway simply stated : 

72 
 
 'No such details regarding railway system in China  is available'. 

73 
 
 
Border connectivity through Air 
 
 
4.37 The Ministry has informed the Committee that C hinese airfields are all 
located at high altitude (13,000-15000). Due to the  nature of the Tibetan plateau 
(flat and level), it has been feasible for China to  construct long runways at all 
these airfields. However, the key to rapid mobiliza tion of Chinese forces is the 
road connectivity across TAR and specifically, road  connectivity from airfields in 
TAR to the LAC. Similar connectivity does not exist in Ladakh.  
4.38 It was also informed that Transport aircraft a irlift over 24,000 T of men and 
material annually from Chandigarh  to ALGs in Ladak h; whilst, helicopters airlift 
around 4700 T annually to forward helipads in J&K. In the North-East, IAF 
undertakes around 2000 T by helicopters. IAF has so ught development of Kargil 
and Nyoma ALGs into full-fledged airfields. The fea sibility of a new ALG at 
Padam (south west of Leh) is being examined. In Aru nachal Pradesh, ALGs at 
Mechuka, Vijaynagar, Tuting, Passighat, Walong, Zir o, Along and  Tawang are 
being developed for fixed wing aircraft  and helicopters. Being located in different 
river valleys, these ALGs would be utilized for rap id mobilization of Indian forces 
to forward locations.  
Advanced Landing Grounds 
 
4.39 On the construction  of Advanced Landing Groun ds, the Ministry  informed  
the Committee as under:- 
 

74 
 
`The existing Advanced Landing Grounds (ALGs) are b eing developed to 
facilitate sustained operations by fixed wing aircr aft and helicopters and 
contract for 6 ALGs have been awarded.' 
  
4.40 In this connection, during oral evidence, a re presentative of Air Force 
informed the Committee as under:- 
"As far as airfields are concerned, Nyoma and eight  other ALGs 
programmes have been sanctioned already and we are going to get these 
ALGs constructed. There are problems at some of the se airfields because 
of high altitude of 17,000 feet and to get equipmen t there and to get a 
contractor to follow the full process before awarding this contract might take 
a while." 

75 
 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS  
 
The Committee while taking note of the threats, bot h conventional 
and modern, being faced by India from her difficult  neighbours in the form 
of repeated incursions and transgressions coupled w ith 
infiltrations/insurgencies,  selected the subject ' Threat Perception and 
preparedness of the forces including incursion on b orders, coordination 
mechanism with Central Armed Police Forces and Bord er connectivity 
through Road, Air and Rail' for examination in order to give comprehensive 
outlook of the security scenario prevailing in the country.  Given the nature 
of issues coming under the purview of this subject,  the Committee have 
taken a   selected view in their inquiry   by avoid ing the routine issues 
which have been generally covered in other Reports of the Committee.  The 
findings of the Committee are brought out in the su ccessive paragraphs of 
this Report. 
  
2. The threats  perceived by India are not only due  to the reasons stated 
above, India's slow pace in keeping herself abreast  of the technological 
and infrastructural advancement in comparison to ou r territorial 
neighbours, especially China is equally responsible .  Be it the issues 

76 
 
relating to borders, non-demarcation of Line of Act ual Control, limited 
connectivity through Rail, Road and Air, ambivalent  claims in our defence 
production,   inadequate delivery in Research and D evelopment, lack of 
oversight mechanism on the part of Administrative D epartments, etc., 
require  substantial improvement and achieving stip ulated targets with in a 
time frame and avoiding cost escalations.  
 
3. The Committee find that keeping in view the evol ving security 
scenario in the South Asian Region, the Ministry is  continuously reviewing 
its Defence strategy and plans.  Also, the accretio n and modernization 
plans are stated to be implemented in consonance wi th our threat 
perception.  While taking note of the submission ma de by the Ministry, the 
Committee feel that this reply is routine in nature  and does not reveal in 
detail the specific steps initiated, progressed and  achievements made 
thereto.  The reply that steps are continuously bei ng taken to strengthen 
and to optimize the force structure and capabilitie s is quite vague. The 
Committee, therefore, recommend  in no uncertain  t erms, that detailed 
defence strategy along with the plans which are bei ng reviewed and 
comprehensive details which are being reviewed, fin ality accomplished in 
any area on all infrastructural developments, etc. as mentioned above be 
intimated to them at the earliest.  The Committee w ould like to glean 

77 
 
through this information and guide a trajectory to be taken so that the 
threats could be effectively  countered.  The Commi ttee would like to 
extend all desired help to the Ministry and complem ent and supplement its 
efforts in achieving these common objectives.   
Truncated Defence Force Strength 
 
4. The Committee are dismayed to learn that against  the satisfactory 
picture given by the Ministry, the three forces are deficient in its strength of 
officers. The strength of other ranks, Sailors and Airmen are also short 
than the authorised strength. Against the sanctione d strength of 52,859, 
the held strength of officers in the Army is 43,475 . It is apparent that the 
Army is a truncated force having a recorded shortag e of 9,384 officers.  
Similarly, in the other ranks the Army short of 20, 561 personnel.  Likewise, 
the Navy is short of 1,561 officers and 11,825 Sail ors. The position of Air 
Force is relatively eased, though they also have a shortage of 659 Officers 
and 3,674 Airmen. In the opinion of the Committee n o force can perform 
effectively unless they have the requisite numbers.   India is a fast 
developing country which does not have dearth of ta lent.  A wide network 
of Sainik Schools already exists, which is suppleme nted by Rashtriya 
Military School and Rashtriya Indian Military Colle ge. The Committee fail to 
understand the existing shortage in spite of numero us entry schemes. 

78 
 
They, therefore, recommend that a scientific study be conducted   to find 
out the optimum number of force needed also the met hodology, as to how 
this shortage could be tackled in the minimum presc ribed period.  On the 
obverse, increasing the number of officers is very essential specially when 
China has a sizeable Army of 2.3 million and Pakistan has 0.52 million.  Our 
strength of Army is just 1.2 million which is a dis couraging figure given to 
conventional warfare. The Committee feel and leave it to the discretion of 
the forces whether the system of selection for entr y of officers be also 
reviewed in order to enable them to find the right talent.  
Strength of equipments  
5. The Committee's examination remains inconclusive  and no 
recommendation can be made in regard to the authori sed and held 
strength of equipments including Tanks, Aircraft Ca rriers etc. The Ministry 
has simply informed the Committee that induction of  these assets in the 
inventories of the armed forces is an ongoing proce ss and further details 
regarding holdings cannot be divulged in the intere st of national security. 
The Committee do not want to press the Ministry on divulging the exact 
numbers of these equipments but atleast, in the nor mal course they 
expected that some kind of trend should be made ava ilable to them 
alongwith the efforts being made to match the optim um numbers.  It goes 

79 
 
without saying the role of the Committee and the Mi nistry are 
complementary to each other.  There is no contradic tion  of any objective 
between the two. At this stage, they would like the  Ministry to amplify their 
information on the lines desired above while sendin g the action taken 
notes. 
Role of Indian Army 
 
6. Another disquieting feature has surfaced during the course of 
Committee's examination of the subject. Our defence  forces, especially 
Army has certain extraneous duties to perform, whic h are not related to its 
primary responsibilities. Though these duties assume great significance as 
far as the security of the country is concerned, th e Committee have every 
reason to believe that insurgent activities are a f orm of proxy war 
instigated by neighbouring countries against our na tion to destabilize 
peace, tranquility and growth. It is astonishing to  find that as many as 78 
insurgent active group have been earmarked in one State of the North East. 
Our neighbouring countries are espousing  a form of  perennial and subtle 
war in which a substantial amount of operational pr eparedness is 
absolutely essential. The factual position on the r epeated 
incursions/infiltrations on the western border are the recent examples 
where our Army also suffered losses. In the Karen a nd Samba Sectors, our 

80 
 
Army was engaged to dissuade militant groups coming  from Pakistan who 
were successful in the  breaking our security cordons. The incidents which 
happened in the  border areas where the terrorists not only inflicted 
casualties  on the Armed Forces but  Police Personn el as well. The 
Committee are not oblivious of  the fact that sever al times not only these 
infiltrators but also the regular Pakistan Army has  blatantly  broken the 
rules of engagement in an inhuman manner. To quote another example of 
belligerence and unbridled aberration by Pakistan, during the years 2009-
2013 a total of 214 cases of ceasefire violations w ere recorded across the 
Indo-Pak Border.  
 Weighing all the pros and cons of the insurgent ac tivities taking place 
on our borders, the Committee recommend that Army s hould not supplant 
the responsibility of the Central Armed Police Forc es like Border Security 
Force but supplement all that is required.   As str ong and modern Army is 
the need of the hour which should have optimum oper ational and strike 
capabilities to face any aggression by the enemies.   The Committee would 
like to see our Army having  a fine balance of teet h and tail ratio and finest 
officer/men relationship.  All the required help sh ould be extended by the 
Ministry to the Army in terms of finance and infras tructure so that it 
becomes a force to reckon with.  Checking infiltrat ions is not the sole 

81 
 
responsibility of the Army but concerted efforts ha ve to be made by the  
other concerned Ministries like Ministry of Home Af fairs. The Committee 
also recommend that the Military Intelligence Netwo rk especially  the 
Signal Intelligence should be strengthened and made  state-of-the-art to  
oversee the movements of the insurgent groups befor e intruding  into  
borders rather than combating them on our soil.  Th e Committee also 
recommend that gathering intelligence inputs from l ocal population and 
through modern equipment should be shared by Army a nd CAPFs so that 
any kind of movement be monitored and corrective ac tion taken by the 
responsible agency.     
Role of Research Establishments and other organisations 
 
7. The Committee further recommend that the Researc h Establishments 
working for the forces should either develop the mo st sophisticated 
projects/products in achieving this objective or by  acquiring the 
technologies from the countries where such projects are in use.   
8. The role of Ministry of External Affairs in cont aining the anti- India 
sentiments, particularly in our neighbouring countr ies  is also very 
important. They should present propitious condition s for diplomatic talks 
at all times and address the issues such as handlin g of prisoners of wars 
(POW) and taking up the issues relating to ceasefir e violations at the 

82 
 
highest possible level. Such confidence building me asures would result in 
a  cordial atmosphere which would definitely reduce  the hostile activities  
like infiltrations.  The Committee would desire the  Ministry also indulge in 
serious dialogue with the international community s o that pressure could 
be exerted on the neighbours to dissuade from such nefarious activities. 
This exercise should not be limited only to our nei ghbours on the western 
side but also with our neighbour in the North-East. 
 
9. It is astonishing that a large number of insurge nt groups are active in 
the North-East States and it only reflects the lack  of effective co-ordination 
between  the State, Central Armed Police Force and Military Intelligence.   
The Committee desire that besides tackling the host ile activities on the 
borders, CAPFs should be made fully empowered with  the latest 
technology and search powers to deal with the insur gent groups and Army 
should be gradually devoid of internal security dut ies.  Efforts in this 
regard should be communicated to the Committee with in three months of 
presentation of this Report. 
Role of Indian Air Force 
 
10. The role of Indian Air Force in securing our bo rders through air is  
equally important.  It has numerous challenges to a ddress both during the 

83 
 
war as well as peace time, like  Counter Air  Opera tions, Counter Surface 
Force Operations, Air Defence, Maritime Operations,  
Intelligence/Surveillance/Recce, Strategic  Operati ons, Space Operations, 
Air Defence, Intelligence/Surveillance/Recce, Air M aintenance, High 
Availability Disaster Recovery (HADR), Training etc .  To carry out these 
roles and responsibilities the first and foremost requirement, in the opinion 
of the Committee is to achieve the optimum number of squadrons which as 
authorized strength stands at 42.  The Committee ar e surprised to learn 
that against this authorized strength the held stre ngth is  only 34 which 
means that the force  is short of eight  squadrons.   What can be more 
baffling to the Committee than the fact that Air Fo rce has informed that 
even after inclusion of 13 Su-MKI squadrons by the end of 12 th  Defence 
Five Year Plan, i.e 2012-2017, the number of squadr ons would continue to 
be the same.  The reasons for this scenario  is sta ted to be the phasing out 
of MiG series of aircraft.  In the opinion of the C ommittee, this apparently 
shows lack of foresight amongst the decision makers .  The Committee 
have every reason to believe that had advance plann ing being done, 
resources augmented in a timely fashion and concerted efforts undertaken, 
the Air Force would have the squadron strength of 4 2 by the end of 2017.  
The Committee at this stage cannot but recommend th at the phasing out 

84 
 
programme should be implemented as planned in order  to minimize losses 
to the man and machinery and hasten up the acquisit ion of new aircraft as 
planned.  In regard to acquisition, the Committee a re very particular about 
the ‘Rafale’ Medium Multi Role Combat Aircraft (MMR CA) about which they 
recommend that negotiations should be completed at the earliest, 
procurement to be accelerated and every effort be m ade to avoid any kind 
of delay.   
Inordinate delay in induction of Light Combat/other Aircraft 
 
11. Likewise, the Committee recommend that the Ligh t Combat Aircraft 
(LCA) be inducted in the Forces as per the given dates besides maintaining 
and the flight operation clearance expeditiously.  The Committee also 
recommend in unequivocal terms that Research and De velopment 
activities should be given a fillip by the Defence production side/Defence 
Research and Development Organisation so that depen dence on foreign 
sources be minimized and complete self-reliance is achieved within a well 
defined period.  If required, more areas be opened to private vendor base 
within India as is the case in the leading aircraft manufacturing countries of 
the world.   
 

85 
 
12. The Committee would  also like to have complete  details in regard to 
the achievements made so far for the Research and D evelopment phase 
contract for the Fifth Generation Fighter Aircraft (FGFA).  Such details 
should pronounce the dates when negotiations starte d and by when it was 
likely to be finalized.  The Committee are satisfie d to learn that a contract 
for 42 more Su-30MKI aircraft was signed on 24 Dece mber 2012 and 
induction of these aircraft were expected to be com pleted by 2019-20.  In 
this addition to the Force, the Committee would lik e to see a scenario  
where no time and cost escalations take place and t he contract proceeds 
within the dates specified above.  The Committee wo uld also like this be 
monitored on quarterly basis by an officer of the M inistry not below the 
rank of Additional Secretary.  
 
Procurement Procedure 
 
13. Although the Ministry has informed the Committe e that the 
procurement procedure adopted by the Indian Air For ce is one of the best 
in the world,  the Committee find that considerable  delays do take place in 
procurement and final induction of the machines in the Air Force. The 
Committee desire that red tapism, if any, avoided a nd best use of the  
procurement procedures be made.  All the items plan ned in the Long Term 

86 
 
Integrated Perspective Plan (LTIPP) 2012-2027 shoul d move at  the desired 
pace scrupulously.  This would help in countering t hreat perception and 
enhancing operational capabilities of the Indian Ai r Force against its 
adversaries.  
Role of DRDO 
 
14. Also,  the Committee recommend that the ballist ic missile defence 
system which is being developed by DRDO should not hang up in 
bottlenecks and the set deadlines be met.  The rada r coverage at all levels 
on a pan India basis be built up within the set  ti meframe and induction 
should proceed as planned in the Long Term Integrat ed Perspective Plan.  
The Committee would  in no way appreciate any delay s on one ground or 
the other as had happened in many DRDO product deli veries in the past, to 
quote one specific instance of Kaveri Engine. 
Development of Trainer Aircraft/Issues relating to HAL 
 
15.  One of the most important aspects in which Ind ian Air Force is found 
to be lacking is acute shortage of trainer aircraft of all three categories, viz . 
basic, intermediate and advance. The  Committee fee l that training of pilots 
is the vital requirement of any Air Force in the wo rld.   Unless we have the 
requisite number of trained pilots in all flying streams, all the paraphernalia 

87 
 
of the Air Force becomes redundant.  The Committee call upon the Ministry to 
take the necessary steps in this regard urgently. 
 
16. The Committee find that for basic training, Ind ian Air Force has a 
requirement of 181 basic trainer aircraft to replac e HPT-32  aircraft, therefore, Air 
Force was granted permission to buy Pilatus PC-7 Mk -II trainers outright from the 
global market and rest of them were to be produced by HAL. Meanwhile, HAL has 
started process of developing a new basic trainer a ircraft   termed as HTT-40, 
thereby forcing the Indian Air Force to have two se ts of basic trainer aircraft in 
near future. The situation becomes more critical wh en they have to maintain two 
sets of technical personnel, two sets of simulators  and two sets of supply and 
logistic chain management resulting in non standard ization in training. 
Therefore, the Committee recommend that the Ministr y should help the Indian Air 
Force to come out of this predicament and decide cl early which Basic Trainer 
Aircraft   to retain after the retirement of current basic trainer. 
 The Committee also recommend frequent and effectiv e coordination 
between Indian Air Force and Hindustan Aeronautics Limited should be ensured 
by way of constituting a Monitoring Committee so as  to enable the user i.e. 
Indian Air Force to have a better progress of HAL s ervice delivery and plan its 
own procurement policy. 
17. The Committee have been informed by the Ministr y that sanction  to 
develop Intermediate Jet Trainer was given by Cabin et Committee on Security 

88 
 
(CCS ) in 1999, wherein a lead time of 15 years was  given to HAL. However, in 
2013, after nine years of first prototype was flown  in 2004, HAL sought 
expertise of BAES after  the Steering Committee con sisting of members of 
Ministry of Defence, IAF, certifying agency and HAL  has decided in its 
favour. However, this resulted in exceeding their o riginal timeline by 9  
years and exhausting total development period of 23  years,  thereby, 
making   it very difficult  for Indian Air Force to  continue second stage 
training of pilots. The Committee, therefore, recom mend that various  
efforts be  made  either  to procure IJT  from fore ign sources or HAL may 
be impressed upon to adhere to the timelines given in  last extension. The 
Committee are also dismayed  over the fact that eve n after knowing well in 
advance about the ageing fleet of `Kiran' aircraft, the Ministry has not taken 
any effective steps to procure IJT, jeopardizing  t he life of young trainees. 
The Committee find that after this inordinate delay , Hindustan Aeronautics 
Limited has now given to understand that efforts ar e being made for 
achieving the Final Operational Clearance (FOC) by December 2014 which 
would eventually lead to production of aircraft. He nce, the Committee 
recommend that without compromising with safety fea tures, all out efforts 
should be made by all stake holders so that the tar geted date of December 
2014 is met and this project finally sees the light of the day. The Committee 

89 
 
would also like to be informed of the timelines as to when the production 
would actually start and induction would take place . The Committee would 
be failing in their duty, if they do not caution th e Ministry and HAL that in 
future no delays should take place. It goes without  saying that cascading 
effect of this caution should be applicable on all defence Public Sector 
Undertakings/Organisations including Ordnance Facto ry Board as well as 
the research organisations such as DRDO. 
 
18. The Committee's enquiry reveal that HAL signed a contract with NPO-
Saturn of Russia for the Design and development of AL-55i engine for the 
IJT with a scope to license manufacture up to 1000 AL-55i engines at HAL, 
Koraput.  In this respect, the Committee want the M inistry   to ensure that 
before designing an aircraft, the details of  the e ngine should  also be 
finalized otherwise, the project may  have to remai n  contented only with 
the available engine,  i.e. AL-55i.   
Insufficient indigenisation in HAL 
 
19. The Committee find from the information supplie d to them that the 
ratio of Indigenous and Imported materials utilized  for production and 
repair activities in HAL is around 15% and 85% by value respectively, which 
seems to be very meagre  in achieving self reliance  by the premier aircraft 

90 
 
manufacturing company. The Committee desire that HA L should look into 
this aspect also so that dependence on foreign countries can be reduced. 
Role of Indian Navy and Coast Guard  
Safety of Indian Water  
20. Coming to the part of the  Navy and  the Coast Guard, the 
Committee are perturbed to note that any foreign sh ip could enter Indian 
shores with sophisticated load of arms and ammuniti ons.  The Committee 
are worried to discover that the amount of floating    armours contained in 
the ship was approx, 5000 rounds of ammunition & so phisticated weapons 
where each weapon could fire a distance of 3-4 kilo metres.  In the opinion 
of the Committee, such a scenario is appalling espe cially when the country 
is fraught with threats and news of bomb blasts are  a frequent happening 
to internal security.  As such, the role of Navy an d Indian Coast Guard 
becomes very challenging and loaded with multifario us responsibilities.   
The Committee concur in totality that the present s ystem of prior 
notification needs to be changed expeditiously to Pre Approval Notification 
System (PANS).  Since all these aspects are covered  in the Coastal 
Security Bill which has been drafted by the Navy an d is under 
consideration at the Ministry of Defence, the Commi ttee recommend in 
unequivocal terms that the Bill should be proceeded  with utmost priority  

91 
 
since it is concerned with the matter as serious as  coastal security vis-a-
vis  threat perception to our motherland and the innoce nt citizone.  It is 
needless to say that the steps initiated, progress made and finality reached 
in regard to the Bill be communicated to the Commit tee. Also, the 
Committee urge upon  the Indian Navy & Coast Guard Organisation, which 
are responsible for overall maritime security in th e  Indian Exclusive 
Economic Zone, take up the matter emphatically with  international 
community.  Since the subject is related to the  Mi nistry of Shipping, it is 
pertinent  for the Ministry of Defence to  impress upon Ministry of Shipping 
that mere guidelines are  not sufficient.  The secu rity companies in the 
business should be registered with international bo dies as the unregulated 
floating armouries in sea and their access to our c oastal regions are a 
matter of great concern.  
Effective coordination mechanism 
 
21. In accomplishing the objectives of maritime and  coastal security, the 
Committee also concur with the suggestion of the Mi nistry that Naval and 
Coast Guard Officers be delegated with more powers under the Maritime 
Zones of India Act which would enable them to take decisions  
expeditiously and help in checking the menace of tr ansgression. The 
responsibilities of other concerned Departments suc h as Customs, 

92 
 
Immigration and Directorate of Revenue Intelligence (DRI), in the opinion of 
the Committee also needs to be redefined.  Hence, t he Committee 
emphasize that  the Ministry of Defence take a befi tting decision while 
considering the legislation on empowerment of Navy and Coast Guard 
officials and officers of other organisations/departments.  
 
22. The Committee are  aware of many agencies funct ioning in coastal 
and ocean region falling under jurisdiction of the country. These include 
Indian Navy, Coast Guard Organisation, Ministry of Shipping, Customs 
Department, Marine Police, Ministry of Environment and Forest, 
Intelligence Agencies, offshore exploration departm ents etc. What the 
Committee would like that co-ordination between all  the maritime agencies 
should be very effective.  The Committee, as such, recommend that a 
Maritime Commission or any other  such agency shoul d be established so 
that the objectives could be met.  The role of Inte lligence Agencies is of 
vital importance and hence the Committee desire tha t intelligence sharing 
should be strengthened and be made state-of-the-art  in terms of 
infrastructure as well as equipments.   

93 
 
 
Expeditious installation of Radars 
 
 
23. The Committee are perturbed to note that the is sue regarding the 
establishment of radars in the Nicobar Islands has staggered and has not 
reached finality yet.  This issue needs to be addre ssed earnestly and 
expeditiously especially when our neighbour China h as been undertaking 
various activities in its areas of interest like South-China sea and deploying 
of naval ships in the Gulf of Eden as parts of its anti-piracy operations.  
During evidence,  the Committee desired to know abo ut the present status 
of installation of radar in Nicobar Islands, which matter had come  to their  
notice during their study visit to Andaman and Nicobar Islands in February, 
2013. Consistent with admission of naval officials,  the Committee 
comprehend that Narcondam island is  strategically very crucial because it 
is in the Andaman sea, almost 130-140 miles from ou r nearest island and 
about 50-60 miles from other side. The Committee we re dismayed to know 
that the radar project at Narcondum could not get G overnment approval 
and Navy was asked to look for an alternate locatio n. Subsequently, the 
Committee were apprised that Navy has identified an  alternate location 
though not strategically as befitting as the Standa lone Island. The 
Committee sense that Indian Navy is gearing up towa rds Maritime 

94 
 
Capability Perspective Plan and taking up maritime challenges along with 
security threats emanating from regional interests and such denials/delays 
will hamper the country's defence preparedness. Eve n in their 20th report 
on examination of demands for grants 2013-14, the C ommittee had 
categorically observed that due to such delays many important projects are 
hindered affecting overall development of surveilla nce network and 
operational preparedness of country's defence issue s. On this point, the 
Committee insist that  the Government should take i nitiatives/measures 
towards strengthening strategic needs of Defence. C onsequently, the 
Government may reconsider the project of installati on of naval equipment 
in Narcondum Island and environmental clearances be  aptly undertaken 
with the intention that strategic defence installat ions/establishments are 
not derailed. 
 
Safety of vessels 
 
24. The Committee deeply regret the sinking of INS Sindhurakshak along 
with all the men on board in August 2013. In this c ontext, the Committee 
were anxious and keen to know the causes of disaste r.  It is baffling for the 
Committee to find that this vessel had recently  re turned from Russia after 
servicing. How a vessel could meet a disaster of th is kind almost 
immediately after its maintenance.  The Committee l earn that the cause of 

95 
 
accident is under investigation. It is yet to be sa lvaged and only after the  
submarine is salvaged, can the actual cause of acci dent be established. 
The Committee also find that specialised   equipmen ts are required for 
salvaging the submarine and tendering is in process . The whole matter is 
being   dealt with by  the Western Naval Command. The Committee observe 
that it is of utmost importance for  the Navy to ascertain the exact cause  of 
accident as such incidents would be catastrophic and  adversely  affect the  
morale of naval personnel working on different vess els. The Committee 
recommend that requisite precautionary measures are  put in place to 
ensure safety of the  personnel on board and equipm ents placed on 
various submarines at different locations.   The Na vy should take all 
necessary steps  to obviate accidents in order to s afeguard the trained 
manpower and sophisticated machines.   
International cooperation and goodwill 
 
25.  The Committee are happy to learn that our Navy  is engaging  itself in 
exercises with  the Navies of friendly countries, which is a right step.  Such 
exercises not only enhance the capabilities of our force but also create an 
atmosphere of  goodwill and friendship.  They, ther efore, desire that more 
engagements of this nature be undertaken in future.    
 

96 
 
COORDINATION MECHANISM WITH CENTRAL ARMED POLICE FORCES  
26. The Committee find that there lies a very close  interaction between 
the Army and the Central Armed Police Forces (CAPF) . The Army is 
expressly responsible for guarding the borders alon g the Actual Ground 
Position Line and Line of Control which gets a back ing by the Border 
Security Force which guards the remaining internati onal boundary. 
Likewise, the Army is engaged with Indo-Tibetan Bor der Police in the 
border management of India – China border. In the r est of the borders like 
India – Nepal Sashastra Seema Bal, India – Myanmar Assam Rifles, India – 
Bhutan Sashastra Seema Bal and India – Bangladesh B order Security 
Force are engaged. They protect a vast boundary lin e stretching over 
thousands of kilometres. 
27.  The Committee also find that five Central Arme d Police Forces viz. 
CRPF, BSF, CISF, ITBP and SSB are under administrat ive as well as 
operational jurisdiction of Ministry of Home Affair s whereas, Assam Rifles 
is under the operational jurisdiction of Ministry of Defence. In executing the 
counter insurgency and counter terrorism operations  in Jammu and 
Kashmir and North East a Unified Headquarter mechanism exists in J&K as 
well as North East. The operations are presently co nducted by Army and at 
the Headquarter level fortnightly meetings are organised between ITBP and 

97 
 
Intelligence Bureau. The Committee feel that such a  multiplicity in 
coordination and planning and that too with several  forces is a feature to 
be relooked into. At the core level Army is playing  a very crucial role in 
guarding the Line of Control in the two difficult b orders. The Committee 
also do not understand why most of these forces are  under the 
administrative and operational jurisdiction of Mini stry of Home Affairs 
whereas Assam Rifles is operating under Ministry of Defence. Working with 
so many agencies for the same goal is bound to crea te confusion. The 
Committee therefore recommend that one single unifo rm command be 
established for effective and easy coordination bet ween Army and all the 
Central Armed Police Forces. As recommended in the earlier part of this 
report the Committee would also like that Army shou ld be absolved of 
border management responsibilities in a planned man ner and the various 
Central Armed Police Forces  should be trained to t ake over this difficult 
task. 
28.  The Committee also find that there is very limited interdependency 
between the Army and the Central Armed Police Forces. Expressly, there is 
no interdependency for equipment, ammunition, infra structure etc. and for 
training as well. Although at the field level, it i s stated, that zonal Inspector 
General of Police and their counterpart of CAPFs have perfect coordination 

98 
 
mechanism in place for conducting joint Anti-terror ist operations, the 
Committee have not been intimated the mechanism in place with the Army. 
The situation becomes all the more difficult when the Committee learnt that 
the State Governments are primarily responsible for  countering internal 
disturbances, terrorists and naxalites activities a nd as such the CAPFs 
work in close coordination with the State Governments. Even for the border 
guarding duties CAPFs have to work in close coordination with local police 
forces in tackling different illegal activities suc h as drugs, smuggling etc. 
 Once again the Committee find that more and more a gencies are 
clubbed in for the same function i.e. guarding the borders taking 
commands from the State Government officials, their  own commandants, 
other senior officers may become difficult for the forces at the ground 
level. The Committee strongly reiterate the recomme ndation that there 
should be uniformity of command and enhanced interd ependency between 
all the CAPFs. They should be trained on the lines of the Army in order to 
enable them to enhance their operational capabiliti es. The Committee 
would like a detailed note to be sent with Action T aken Notes on the 
interdependency on real operational front between t he Army, CAPFs and 
State Government officials and then the Committee would like to revisit this 
issue. Such a note should inter-alia contain the ta rgeted and actual 

99 
 
numbers of Army vis-a-vis CAPFs deployed on the bor ders, their 
communication methodology, Intelligence set up of e ach of the Central 
Armed Police Force and the information sharing between all the agencies.  
          
BORDER CONNECTIVITY 
 
29. It is disquieting for the Committee to note tha t no direct response has 
been given by the Ministry in regard to pin-pointed  query of the Committee 
as to what difficulties were faced by India due to poor network of road, rail, 
airports/helipads.  To this specific query, the Ministry has given a rhetorical 
reply that despite the lack of adequate infrastruct ure along the Northern 
borders, the Army has been effective in monitoring Peoples Liberation 
Army's activities along the Line of Actual Control.   The Committee do not 
agree with the contention of the Ministry in this r egard and they have every 
reason to believe that our development in regard to  road, rail and airport is 
slumber and behind schedules in all the aspects.  The Committee repudiate 
the claims of the Ministry that our infrastructure development is being 
implemented in consonance with our threat perceptio n.  The detailed 
analysis in this regard are contained in the successive paragraphs.  
 

100 
 
30. It is shocking to note that only one road out o f 27 ITBP roads is 
complete and as many as 11 roads are behind schedul e and not even the 
Detailed Project Reports have been finalized.  Out of these delayed roads, 2 
fall in Himachal Pradesh, 4 in Arunachal Pradesh,  2 in Uttrakhand and 3 
roads in Sikkim.  For 14 roads, the completion date are not too far and most 
of them are to be completed by March 2014, October 2014, December 2014, 
October 2015, March 2016, December 2016, etc.  This  is a scenario of the 
roads in progress which pertain only to the ITBP.   The Committee are very 
emphatic in their recommendation and desire that at  least now after their 
intervention, the Detailed Projects Report be final ized without any further 
loss of time.  They also recommend that the new dates should register very 
realistic targets in regard to the availability of finance, technology, 
manpower, etc.  The usual handicaps which have been referred in regard to 
other roads such as lack of environmental clearance , problems in land and 
acquisitions should be taken care in advance so tha t further delays do not 
occur.  If need be a high-level task force of the s enior most officers of the 
Ministry of Defence, Ministry of Home Affairs and R ailways be constituted 
to execute the land connectivity to the borders whi ch should monitor the 
progress on a monthly basis and report the shortcom ings in order to 
obviate them in a timely manner.  Here, the Committ ee also emphasize that 

101 
 
strict compliance should be made in regard to the 1 4 roads, the completion 
dates of which is not too far from now.  Any delays  that would come to the 
notice of the Committee would be abjured and taken seriously as this issue 
relates to a matter as high as 'Threat Perception' to the nation.  
 
31. The Committee now take a bird's eye view of oth er delays of border 
roads.  The Committee find that Ministry of Home Af fairs is candid in its 
admission before the Committee that 'lack of development on our side is in 
sharp contrast to infrastructure development on the  Chinese side' . The 
Committee have also taken a serious note of the con tention of the Ministry 
that China has over a period of time taken a large scale road construction 
and developed a network of highways which are also linked to feeder and 
arterial roads.  What can be more appalling for the  Committee to learn that 
many of border passes from China side are now conne cted by road.  The 
Committee are cautiously optimistic as to what would happen to our nation 
in case of any eventuality such as war specially wh en our side has a very 
dismal network of roads as well as rail connections  which could be 
effective in mobilizing man and machine.  
 Talking of the BRO projects a sorry figure depicts  that out of 8 Border 
Road Projects such as Himank, Swastik, Shivalik, etc. along the Indo-China 

102 
 
Border  none is hundred per cent complete.  The Com mittee also find that 
there is a network of agencies planning, executing and monitoring these 
road projects such as CPWD, National Project Constr uction Corporation 
(NPCC), State Public Works Department, Directorate- General (DGMO), 
concerned Ministries, etc. The Committee wonder how  a co-ordination 
mechanism is established between all these agencies .  Not going into the 
finer details of each and every road vis-à-vis proj ects, the Committee here 
recommend strongly that all the projects along Indo -China Border should 
be executed with a new zeal and they be completed a s planned.  The task 
force should monitor the progress of all the roads.   Also the Committee 
would like to be informed that the process which ha s been started for 
seeking approval for construction of 34 roads in Ph ase – II and additionally 
73 proposed by ITBP should be given approval/endors ement at the 
minimum possible time under intimation to the Commi ttee so that the ball 
can be set rolling for the projects of Phase – II. 
 
32. Gleaning through the replies of the Ministry, t he Committee find that 
the situation of the construction of roads in Indo- Nepal and Indo-Bhutan  
border is also a bane. On Indo-Nepal Border, the pe rcentage of completion 
of Hirak and Swastik is as low as 41 and 35 per cent respectively.  What can 

103 
 
be more disturbing than the fact that out of 6286 b order pillars, 1273 are 
damaged, 1397 missing and only 3616 are in good con dition.  The 
Government has, as informed to the Committee, given  approval and 
upgradation of 1377 kms of roads along this border which fall in three 
States – Uttar Pradesh, Bihar and Uttrakhand.   The  Committee are 
perturbed to note that out of 1377 kms, a part appr oval has been accorded 
through DPRs.  The Committee recommend that final a pproval be granted 
before the finalization of Action Taken Notes on th is Report and also the 
status of the work initiated be intimated to the Committee. 
 
33. On Indo-Bhutan Border, the Committee would like  to know first the 
reason why Swastik Project could be completed only 35 per cent and 
Dantak only 90 per cent.  They would like the dates since when these roads 
are pending and by when they would be finally compl eted.  Also what the 
Ministry are doing for 542 missing border pillars a nd 457 damaged pillars 
out of a total of 1861 pillars.  In the opinion of the Committee, whether 
these are executed by State Public Works Department  or there is a 
shortage of funds which is proposed to be met by De partment of North-
Eastern Regions (DONER), the final responsibility l ies with the Ministry of 
Defence as they are the one who have to secure our borders against any 

104 
 
odd.  The Committee are perplexed that the work is held on account of 
bearing the cost of land and as such recommend that  not only now, in 
future also before according final approval to any project all these issues 
should be sorted out before hand.  They fail to und erstand that why they 
have been intimated of one difficulty or the other when the projects have 
already been approved.   
 
34. The Indo-Pakistan Border in the opinion of the Committee is also very 
sensitive.  The Committee in this regard would like  to recommend that 
construction of 610 kms in Punjab and 1207.42 kms i n Rajasthan of lateral 
and axial road in this border area be given final a pproval in the shortest 
possible time which is stated to be pending under c onsideration of the 
Ministry. They also recommend that all the four roa d projects viz. Chetak, 
Sampark, Beacon and Vijayak be completed hundred pe r cent under 
intimation to the Committee.  Also the composite sc heme which is an 
appreciable scheme comprising of fencing flood ligh ting, construction of 
roads, connecting border out posts along Indo-Pak b order be completed 
within a fixed target as its accomplishment has ino rdinately been delayed 
on various accounts.  The Ministry should mull out a specific proposal on 
this scheme as it was approved by Cabinet Committee  on Security as early 

105 
 
as January 2000 with the initially proposed complet ion in five years.  The 
period of delay of almost nine years is a serious d elay and Committee 
would like to know why the cost and time overruns have taken place.   
 
35. In the Indo-Bangladesh Border, out of three pha ses, the Committee 
find neither Phase – 1 nor Phase – 2 could be completed.  Since approval of 
Cabinet Committee on Security for completion of the se projects by 
31.03.2014 has been accorded, the Committee hope an d recommend that 
these are completed by this new date and any lapse be intimated to the 
Committee. 
 
36. The Committee learn that on Indo-Myanmar Border  there is a 
comprehensive proposal for creation for border infr astructure which 
envisages not only construction of new roads upgrad ation of existing, 
helipads and helibases in the State of Manipur, Nag aland, Mizoram and 
Arunachal Pradesh.  Assam Rifles is the Border Guar ding Force along the 
Indo-Myanmar border.  Assam Rifles has informed tha t there are 76 
Company Operating Bases (COBs)/Border Out Posts (BO Ps) along Indo-
Myanmar bode, of which, 56 have moderate connectivi ty and the remaining 
20 have very poor connectivity. They also find that  there is a 

106 
 
comprehensive proposal involving construction of 45 85 km of roads, 113 
helipads and 02 helibases during the period 2013-20 25 in two phases.  The 
Committee are perturbed to note that the year 2013 has already elapsed 
and action is still being taken by the Ministry to commission the 
prefeasibility study through CPWD.  The Committee d eprecate the delay in 
commencement of this study and desire that it be co mpleted soon.  They 
would also like to have a complete picture on how t his project along with 
the cost and time lines in different sectors of this project.   
 
37. Again, for strengthening the connectivity in th e sensitive hill areas of 
North-East, the Committee recommend that planning o n the alternate 
access route through Bagrakot-Alagarh Rhenok-Rorath ang-Ranipul be 
completed within a defined period and the alternate  alignment, namely, 
Balipara-Chardar-Tawang which is under construction  be completed soon.  
Any obstacles being faced be communicated to the Committee so that they 
can find the right trajectory to be followed by the Ministry.   
 
38. The Committee do not share the contention of th e Ministry that in 
construction of border roads, the problems such as lack of stone quarries, 
delay in environmental clearances, land acquisition , shortage of labour are 

107 
 
faced.   The Committee would like to know that why these were not 
envisaged initially prior to starting of the work t han halting it mid-way due 
to such problems.  They recommend that these issues  may effectively be 
taken up with the Chief-Secretaries of various Stat es and also with the 
Ministries of Environment and Forests both at the C entre and States.   On 
the inadequate heavy air lift support by Indian Air  Force, the Committee 
take a serious view.  The Committee would like the reasons from the 
Ministry on the shortfalls on the air lift which af fects construction 
connectivity and also the remedial measures thereof .  In this regard,  the 
proposal of BRO for inviting expression of interest  from private agencies  
must be viewed very seriously by the Ministry and f ull support be given for 
fructifying this proposal.  
 
39.  What can be more disturbing to the Committee t han the fact that our 
nation is lagging behind in all areas of connectivi ty whether it be road, rail 
or air as far as our borders are concerned.  The picture of South-Asia is not 
very conducive for India.  In regard to rail connec tivity also our success is 
negligible.  Notwithstanding the fact that 14 lines have been earmarked and 
also prioritized, the actual achievement is nil.  T he Ministry of Railways 
have categorically stated that they would not be ab le to proceed with these 
14 lines unless it is fully funded either by the Mi nistry of Defence or 

108 
 
Ministry of Finance.  Railways has also stated that  these lines are highly 
unremmunerative and they would be incurring operati onal losses on these 
lines.  The committee have been given to understand  that the issue of 
provisioning of funds for construction of these Rai lway lines have been 
active consideration of the Government and Empowere d Committee on 
Border Infrastructure (ECBI) headed by Cabinet Secretary.  They also learnt 
that a recommendation has been made by the ECBI to hold a separate 
meeting to resolve the issue of funding between Fin ance Secretary, 
Secretary (Planning Commission), Chairman, Railway Board and Deputy 
National Security Advisor.  
 The Committee are baffled to learn that an issue s o serious as 
providing border connectivity through rail in the N orth-East Region and 
other strategic places is taking rounds on the bure auctaic tables.  The 
Committee in no uncertain words state that Ministry  of Finance, Ministry of 
Defence and Railway Board have erred in this decisi on making which is 
causing delays specially when 14 lines have been ea rmarked.  They are 
perhaps oblivious of the developments taking place across the borders 
which is not even a match with India to compare.  T he Committee 
emphatically recommend that the issue of funding be  resolved forthwith 
and if needed should be shared by all the three Min istries but it should be 

109 
 
materialized.  The Committee would not like to be i nformed of shifting of 
responsibilities on flimsy grounds as to who shall be spending the money 
but of the final via media that from where the mone ys have been finally 
earmarked.  Any delay in this regard would be viewe d very seriously by the 
Committee.  
 
40. The Committee would like the Ministry of Railwa ys to keep itself 
abreast  with the technological development taking place  in the field of 
railways specially regarding the high altitude  developments not only in the 
neighbouring countries like China but throughout th e world. Knowledge 
exchange in this era is no big task. Although it ha s been stated that 
Ministry of Railways possesses the required know ho w for executing these 
proposed 14 lines yet the Committee recommend that our railways lines in 
border areas should be the most sophisticated ones  so that the forces  do 
not face any difficulty and their accomplishments  are not compromised. 
This recommendation is applicable generally for the   purposes of road 
construction also where  project should be undertak en with the best 
available technology in the world. 
 
41. The importance of air connectivity in the borde rs cannot be left out 
even if we have a strong road and rail connectivity  in place. It is 

110 
 
encouraging  to learn  that substantial tonnage of material is lifted annually  
to advance landing grounds in Laddakh. The Committe e learn that 
feasibility  of a new Advanced Landing Ground (ALG)  at Padam (South 
West of Leh) is being examined. The Committee would  like to know 
whether more Advanced Landing Grounds are planned i n future. Apart 
from  completing the feasibility  study  for Padam expeditiously, the 
Committee recommend  that construction of Advanced Landing Grounds 
be done with pace so that the desired aim of air co nnectivity to border to 
transport men and machine may be achieved. Also at Nyoma and 8 other 
air fields construction activity should be started as sanctions have already 
being given.  They would also like to have the deta ils of all Advanced 
Landing Grounds which require upgradation along wit h their costs and 
time schedules. 
 
 Finally, the Committee are of the opinion that the  three pillars, 
namely, plan, budget and procurement on which the d efence preparedness 
of our country hings should get proper attention by  all stake holders viz. 
policy makers etc.  With respect to plan, the Commi ttee are of the view 
there should be no double thinking in formulating the plan in respect of our 
defence forces.  the policy makers should not hesit ate from taking any 
decision regarding formulation of plan and implementation thereon without 

111 
 
loss of time. In respect of Budget, the Committee a re of the firm view that 
the budget should not come in way of defence needs.  of the country. The 
Committee are anguished to note that only meagre am ount is being spent 
by India on our defence needs. And on Research and Development (R&D) 
we spend a fraction of it which is not desirable in the present scenario. 
 With regard to procurement, the Committee are of t he view that as 
soon as two other pillars, namely, plan and budget are in place there 
should be no hitch in procurement of armours etc. f or defence needs. The 
Committee have noted that defence procurement take an unwanted long 
time to fructify which is not acceptable to the Committee. 
 Hence, the Committee are of the view if the three pillars are taken care 
of well by the policy makers in coordinated way and  defined time frame 
only then the country could expect well planned and well equipped defence 
preparedness. 
 
 
 
NEW New Delhi;                                                Raj Babbar 
17 February, 2014 
                          Chairman  
28 Magha, 1934 (Saka)                    Standing Committee on Defence   

112 
 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE 
 
MINUTES OF THE SECOND SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
 
DEFENCE (2013-14)  
 
 
 The Committee sat on Wednesday, the 09 th  October, 2013 from 1500 hrs. to 1645 hrs. in 
Committee Room ‘G-074’, Parliament Library Building, New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
 
SHRI RAJ BABBAR   -  CHAIRMAN  
Lok Sabha 
 
2. Shri Kamal Kishor  `Commando’ 
3. Shri R. Dhruvanarayana 
4. Shri Mithilesh Kumar 
5. Shri Sidhant Mohapatra 
6. Smt. Mala Rajya Laxmi Shah 
7. Shri Asaduddin Owaisi 
  
  
  
  
8. Shri C.R. Patil 
9. Shri Mahabali Singh 
10. Rajkumari Ratna Singh 
  
11. Shri R. Thamaraiselvan  
  
  
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
12. Shri Pankaj Bora 
13. Shri Naresh Gujral 
14. Shri Prakash Javadekar 
15. Shri Ashwani Kumar 
16. Shri Mukut Mithi 
17. Shri Mukhtar Abbas Naqvi 
18. Shri C.M. Ramesh 

113 
 
19. Shri T.K. Rangarajan 
20. Shri Devender Goud T. 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Dr. R.K. Chadha   - Additional Secretary 
2. Shri R.K. Jain  -  Joint Secretary 
3. Shri. D.S. Malha   - Director  
4. Shri Sanjeev Sharma - Additional Director  
WITNESSES 
 
REPRESENTATIVES FROM THE MINISTRY OF DEFENCE 
 
  
1.  Shri R.K. Mathur, Defence Secretary 
2.  Shri Shankar Aggarwal, Addl. Secretary 
3.  Shri A.K. Bishnoi, Addl. Secretary  
4.  Dr. Satish V. Agnihotri, DG (Acq)  
5.  Shri Ravikant, Joint Secretary (G/Air) 
6.  Shri Ram Subhag Singh, JS(O/N) 
     7.  Shri Sanjeev Ranjan, Secretary, BRDB 
  
   8.   Lt. Gen. S.K. Singh, VCOAS 
      9.  V. Adm. R.K .Dhowan, VCNS 
10.  V. Adm. GirishLuthra, DG Naval Operations 
11.  Cmde. Sanjay J. Singh, PD, NO    
12.  Air Mshl. S. Sukumar, DCAS 
13.  Air Mshl. P.R. Sharma, AOP 
14.  Air Mshl. S.B. Deo, DG Air (Ops) 
15.  AVM S.B.P. Sinha, ACAS (Plans) 
16.  AVM A. Sengupta, ACAS (Works) 
17.  Lt .Gen. A.T. Parnaik, DGBR 
18.   Lt. Gen. Vinod Bhatia, DGMO 
      19.  Brig. Y.K .Joshi, DDG MO(A) 
  
 
REPRESENTATIVE FROM THE MINISTRY OF HOME AFFAIRS 
 
1. Shri Rakesh Singh, JS(Internal Security)  
 
REPRESENTATIVE FROM THE MINISTRY OF RAILWAYS 
 
1. Shri Manoj Krishna Akhouri, EDTT(F) 
 
REPRESENTATIVES FROM THE AIRPORT AUTHORITY OF INDIA  
 

114 
 
1. Shir Sudhir Raheja, Member (Planning) 
2. Capt. R. K. Malik, GM (Security) 
3. Shri P. K. Chadha, JGM (Operation) 
 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members. T hereafter the representatives of 
the Ministry of Defence were called in along with the representatives of Ministry of Home 
Affairs, Ministry of Railways and Airport Authority of  India. The Chairman then drew their 
attention to Direction 58 of the Directions by the Spe aker, Lok Sabha. The Chairman initiated 
the discussion and requested the representatives of the M inistry of Defence to brief the 
Committee on the Threat Perception, available resources with them and deficiency being faced 
in terms of equipment, technology and finance etc.  and  the issues  related with the border 
connectivity.  
 
3. After a brief opening of the subject by the Defenc e Secretary. A power point 
presentation was given by the representatives of Army giving details about the issues related 
to coordination mechanism between BSF, ITBP, SSB and Assam Rifles with Army,   present 
conventional, nuclear threats and prevailing condition on borders areas. Following the 
presentation, Members of the Committee raised various queries from officials of Ministry of 
Defence and Army regarding border and rail connectivity. 
 
4. The Committee members also raised issues  regarding f lushing out of terrorists from the 
Keren sector, teeth and tail ratio of army at present , lack of self-reliance of the Country in 
production of jackets for cold weather/high altitude ar ea, maritime security including nuclear 
submarine capability of naval forces, status of naval ex ercises, progress of technology in air 
strike capability, poor condition of roads after monsoon . The Committee members also desired 
that Vinod Bhatia Committee Report should be made a vailable to them. The Vice Chief of 
Army gave full account of the ongoing operation at Keren. 
 
5.  Some of the queries of Members were replied to by  the representatives of the Ministry.  
Hon'ble Chairman desired that other parts of the subj ect be discussed on a later date but 
before that written reply of the queries raised shoul d be available to the Committee prior to the 
next sitting on the subject.  

115 
 
 
 (Representatives then withdrew) 
 
  A copy of verbatim record of the proceedings has bee n kept. 
   
The Committee then adjourned. 

116 
 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE 
 
 
MINUTES OF THE THIRD  SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMI TTEE ON DEFENCE 
(2013-14)  
 
 The Committee sat on Monday, the 21 st  October, 2013 from 1130 hrs. to 1430 hrs. in 
Committee Room ‘G-074’, Parliament Library Building, New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
 
SHRI  RAJ BABBAR   -  CHAIRMAN  
 
LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri Sameer Bhujbal 
3. Shri R. Dhruvanarayana 
4. Shri P. Karunakaran 
 5. Shri Asaduddin Owaisi 
6. Shri Amarnath Pradhan 
 7. Prof. Saugata Roy 
8. Shri Uday Singh 
9. Shri Mahabali Singh 
10. Shri R. Thamaraiselvan 
 
         RAJYA SABHA 
 
 11.   Shri Naresh Gujral 
12. Shri Mukhtar Abbas Naqvi 
13. Shri T.K. Rangarajan 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Dr. R.K. Chadha   - Additional Secretary 
2. Shri R.K. Jain  - Joint Secretary 
3. Shri D.S. Malha  -  Director 
4. Shri Sanjeev Sharma - Addl. Director 
WITNESSES 
 
 Sl. No . Name and designation  
1.  Shri Shankar Aggarwal, Addl. Secretary 
2.  Shri AK Bishnoi, Addl. Secretary  

117 
 
3.  Dr.Satish V. Agnihotri, DG (Acq)  
4.  Shri Ravikant, Joint Secretary (G/Air) 
5.  Shri Ram Subhag Singh, JS(O/N) 
6.  Shri Sanjeev Ranjan, Secretary, BRDB 
7.  Lt Gen SK Singh, VCOAS 
8.  Lt Gen AT Parnaik, DGBR 
9.  Lt Gen Vinod Bhatia, DGMO 
10.  Lt Gen AnirudhaChakravarty, ADG MO 
11.  Brig YK Joshi, DDG MO (A) 
12.  Air Mshl Arup Raha, VCAS 
13.  Air Mshl S Sukumar, DCAS 
14.  Air Mshl PR Sharma, AOP  
15.  Air Mshl SB Deo, DG Air (Ops) 
16.  AVM SBP Sinha, ACAS (Plans) 
17.  AVM A Sengupta, ACAS (Works) 
18.  V Adm RK Dhowan, VCNS 
19.  V AdmGirishLuthra, DG Naval Operations 
20.  Cmde Sanjay J Singh, PD, NO   
21.  Col IK Jaggi, Dir (Resources) 
22.  Col Gautam Chauhan, Dir MO2 
23.  Col A Shukla, Dir MO 6 
24.  Shri Arunendra Kumar, Chairman Railway Board 
 
   2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Member s to the sitting of the Committee. 
Thereafter, the representatives of the Ministry of De fence, Air Force and AFMS were called in. 
The Chairman welcomed all the representatives to the si tting of the Committee. Defence 
Secretary invited the Committee to visit R&R hospital, Delhi or BASE Hospital, Delhi in order to 
review the condition of these Defence Hospitals. Therea fter, a presentation was given by Air 
Force on the subject. Subsequent to this, Members raised certain queries regarding low pilot to 

118 
 
cockpit ratio, Urgency to augment infrastructure, trainin g facilities and no. of pilots, need for 
improvement in accommodation and educational facilitie s etc., lackadaisical approach of HAL 
in connection with Intermediate Jet Trainer and lack o f proper contingency plan. The queries 
were replied to by the representatives and those which were not readily avialable were asked 
to be furnsihed later on. Thereafter, a presentation was given on Armed Forces Medical 
Services which was followed by certain queries by Members.  The queries were replied to by    
representatives. This was followed by a presentations on  Canteen Stores Department and 
resettlement. 
 
   (The Witnesses then withdrew) 
A  copy of verbatim record of the proceedings has been kept. 
 The Committee then adjourned. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

119 
 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE 
 
MINUTES OF THE TENTH SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
 
DEFENCE (2013-14)  
 
 
 The Committee sat on Monday, the 17 th  February, 2014 from 1500 hrs. to 1515 hrs. in 
Committee Room ‘C, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
 
SHRI RAJ BABBAR   -  CHAIRMAN  
 
Lok Sabha 
 
  
2. Shri Kamal Kishor  `Commando’ 
3. Shri R. Dhruvanarayana 
4. Shri Varun Gandhi 
5. Shri Mithilesh Kumar 
6. Shri Saugata Roy 
7.  Shri C.R. Patil 
8. Rajkumari Ratna Singh 
9. Shri Uday Singh 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
10. Shri Pankaj Bora 
11. Shri Naresh Gujral 
12. Shri Prakash Javadekar 
13. Shri Mukut Mithi 
14. Shri C.M. Ramesh 
15. Shri Devender Goud T. 
 
SECRETARIAT 
1. Dr. R.K. Chadha   - Additional Secretary 
2. Shri R.K. Jain  -  Joint Secretary 
3. Shri. D.S. Malha   - Director  
4. Shri Sanjeev Sharma - Additional Director 
5. Shri Rahul Singh   - Under Secretary  

120 
 
 
  
 
2. The Chairman welcomed the Members to the sitting of  the Committee.  The Committee,  
thereafter, took up for consideration the draft repor t on the subject ‘Threat perception and 
preparedness of the Forces including incursion on borders,  coordination mechanism with the 
Central Armed Police Forces and border connectivity through Road, Air and Rail’, and adopted 
the same, without any modification. 
3. The Committee then authorized the Chairman to fi nalize the report and present the 
same to the Parliament.  
4. ***** 
The Committee then adjourned. 
______________________________________________________________________ 
*****not related with the subject. 
 
 