1 
 
    
 
 
21212121    
STANDING COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE 
(2013-2014) 
 
(FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
MINISTRY OF DEFENCE 
 
 
 
[ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS CONTAINED IN THE SIXTEENTH REPORT 
(FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA) ON ‘CRITICAL REVIEW OF FUNCTIONING OF SAINIK 
SCHOOLS’] 
 
 
 
TWENTY-FIRST REPORT 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
 
12 February, 2014/  23 Magha, 1935 (Saka)  
 
 

2 
 
 
TWENTY-FIRST REPORT 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE 
(2013-2014) 
  
 
(FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
MINISTRY OF DEFENCE 
 
 
 
[ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS CONTAINED IN THE SIXTEENTH REPORT 
(FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA) ON ‘CRITICAL REVIEW OF FUNCTIONING OF SAINIK 
SCHOOLS’] 
 
 
 
 
 
Presented  to  Lok  Sabha  on 12.02.2014 
Laid  in  Rajya  Sabha  on 12.02.2014  
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
12 February, 2014/ 23 Magha, 1935 (Saka)  


3 
 
 
CONTENTS 
           PAGE. 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE(2013-14).……………………….....…….....4 
INTRODUCTION..…………………………………………………….….………...........6 
 
CHAPTER I Report…………………………………………………………………....7  
 
CHAPTER II Recommendations/Observations which have been   
 accepted by the Government………………………………………...26  
 
CHAPTER III Recommendations/Observations which the Commi ttee 
 do not desire to pursue in view of the replies of the  
 Government ………………………………….....................................35  
 
CHAPTER IV Recommendations/Observations in respect of wh ich  
 Replies of the Government have not been accepted by 
 The Committee and which require reiteration………………….…...36  
 
CHAPTER V Recommendations/Observations in respect of whi ch  
 Government have furnished interim replies…………………………41  
 
CHAPTER VI Recommendations/Observations in respect of wh ich  
 Final replies of the government are still awaited…………….….. ....42  
 
ANNEXURES 
 
 
ANNEXURE-I Incidents of bullying and ragging in Saini k Schools  
 during the last three years i.e. 2009-11……………………………44 
 
ANNEXURE-II Affidavit from Parents/Guardians at the ti me of  
 admission as well as start of new session………………………....46 
 
ANNEXURE-III Fresh set of Comprehensive guidelines/dire ctives  
 on maintaining of cadets’ discipline with the  
 approval of Hon’ble Raksha  Mantri………………………………...52 
 
APPENDIX 
 
 
APPENDIX I Minutes of the sitting of the Committee  
held on 21.10.2013 and 19.12.2013 ……….………………………..55-59  
 
APPENDIX II Analysis of Action Taken by the government on  
recommendations contained in the Sixteenth Report  
of the Standing Committee on Defence  
(Fifteenth Lok Sabha)…………………………………………………....60 
 
 
 

4 
 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE (2013-14) 
 
 
Shri Raj Babbar   -  Chairman 
 
 
LOK SABHA  
 
2. Shri Sameer Bhujbal 
3. Shri Kamal Kishor  `Commando’ 
4. Shri R. Dhruvanarayana 
5. Shri Varun Gandhi 
6. Shri P. Karunakaran  
7. Shri Mithilesh Kumar 
8. Shri Sidhant Mohapatra 
9. Smt. Mala Rajya Laxmi Shah 
10. Shri Asaduddin Owaisi 
  
  
  
  
11. Shri A.T. Nana Patil 
  
12. Shri C.R. Patil 
13. Shri Amarnath Pradhan 
14.  Prof. Saugata Roy 
15. Smt. M. Vijaya Shanthi 
16. Shri Mahabali Singh 
17. Rajkumari Ratna Singh 
18. Shri Uday Singh 
19. Shri R. Thamaraiselvan  
20. Vacant 
21. 
 
Vacant 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
 
22. Shri Pankaj Bora 
23. Shri Naresh Gujral 
24. Shri Prakash Javadekar 
25. Shri Ashwani Kumar 
26. Shri Hishey Lachungpa 
27. Shri Mukut Mithi 
28. Shri Mukhtar Abbas Naqvi 
29. Shri C.M. Ramesh 
30. Shri T.K. Rangarajan 
31. Shri Devender Goud T. 

5 
 
 
SECRETARIAT  
 
 
1. Dr. R.K. Chadha   - Additional Secretary 
2. Shri R.K. Jain  - Joint Secretary   
3. Shri D.S. Malha  - Director 
4. Shri Sanjeev Sharma - Additional Director 
5. Shri Rahul Singh  - Under Secretary 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

6 
 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
 
I, the Chairman of the Standing Committee on Defenc e (2013-14), having been 
authorised by the Committee to submit the report on t heir behalf, present this Twenty-First 
Report on ‘Action Taken by the Government on the recom mendations / observations 
contained in the Sixteenth Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha ) on Critical Review of Functioning 
of Sainik Schools’.  
2.  The Sixteenth Report was presented to Lok Sabha and  laid on the Table of Rajya 
Sabha on 22 August, 2012. The Ministry of Defence  fur nished their Action Taken Notes   
on  07 February, 2013.  
 
3. Having found the Action Taken Notes deficient in many  aspects, the Committee 
took oral evidence of the representatives of the Minist ry of Defence and Chief Secretaries 
of seven States viz 
. Arunachal Pradesh, Goa, Meghalaya, Mizoram, Sikkim,  Tripura and 
Uttar Pradesh on 21 October 2013 and sought clarificati ons on certain issues arising out 
of the action taken replies. 
 
4. The draft action taken  Report was considered and a dopted by the Committee at 
their sitting held on 19 December 2013.  
 
5.  The Committee wish to express their thanks to the of ficers of the Ministry of 
Defence and Chief Secretaries of seven States mentioned a bove for appearing before the 
Committee and furnishing the material and informati on which the Committee desired in 
connection with the examination of the subject.  
 
6. For facility of reference and convenience, Recommenda tions/ Observations of the 
Committee have been printed in bold letters in the Report.   
 
7. An analysis of Action Taken by the Government on the  
Recommendations/Observations contained in the Sixteenth R eport (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) 
of the Committee is given at Annexure.  
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI;                               RAJ BABBAR , 
10 February, 2014 
                                Chairman,       

7 
 
21 Magha (Saka)1935                         Standin g Committee on Defence 
 
CHAPTER – 1 
 
DRAFT REPORT 
 
 
 This report of the Standing Committee on Defence d eals with action taken by 
the Government on the recommendations/observations contained in the Sixteenth 
Report (15th Lok Sabha) on 'Critical Review of Func tioning of Sainik Schools', 
which was presented to Lok Sabha and laid in Rajya Sabha on 22.08.2012. 
 
2. The Committee's Sixteenth Report (15th Lok Sabha ) contained 13 
recommendations/observations on the following aspects :- 
Para No.  Subject 
1. Background of Establishment of Sainik Schools  
2. Performance/comparison of Sainik Schools with Ra shtriya Military 
School, Rashtriya Indian Military College 
3. Comparative Analysis of such schools internation ally 
4. Drop out rate 
5. NDA Course Strength 
6. Funding of Sainik Schools/Constraints/Regional I mbalance 
7. Issues related to land for setting up of Sainik Schools in various 
States and apportioning funds from MPLAD Scheme 
8. Constraints in manning Sainik Schools 
9. Admission of Girl Cadets 
10.  Creation of Data Bank 
11. Menace of Ragging 
12. Appearing for NDA Entrance to be made mandatory  
13. Conclusion 
3. Action Taken Replies have been received from the  Government in respect of 
all the recommendations/observations contained in t he Report.  The replies have 
been examined and the same have been categorised as follows :- 
(i) Observations/Recommendations of the Committee which hav e been 
accepted by the Government (please see Chapter II) : 
 
Para Nos. 1-2, 4, 5 (C), 8, 10, 11, 12-13  
(09 Recommendations) 

8 
 
 
 
 
(ii) Observations/Recommendations which the Committee d o not desire to 
pursue in view of the replies received from the Government: 
  
Para No. 9  
(01 Recommendation) 
 
(iii) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which re plies of Government 
have not been accepted by the Committee and which require reiteration: 
 
 
 Para Nos. 6 & 7 
(02 Recommendations) 
 
                                  
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which Govern ment have 
furnished interim replies: 
 
 Para No. 3  
(01 Recommendation) 
 
4. The Committee desire that the Ministry’s respons e to their comments made in 
Chapter 1 of this Report to be furnished to them at  the earliest and in any case not 
later than six months of the presentation of this R eport. Here, it may also be 
emphasised that the final replies in response to th e reply for which interim status 
(recommendation Para No. 3) has been communicated t o the Committee may also 
be furnished within the prescribed time frame.  
 
A. NDA Course Strength 
 
Recommendation (Paragraph No. 5) 
 
5. The Committee had, in their Sixteenth Report reco mmended as under:- 
 “Various issues discussed during the examination of the subject such as 
increasing the number of intake to the NDA, drop out rates, opening new schools 
etc. bears a direct correlation with the NDA course stren gth.  The NDA course 
strength, as informed by the Ministry to the Committee has remained more or less 
static.  The average seats available during the years 200 8-10 are 640.  These are 
filled by  the  cadets of Sainik Schools, Rashtriya Mil itary Schools, Rashtriya Indian 
Military College and general students from the entire  India.  The Committee also 
find from sifting the information made available to t hem that sanction for 16th 
Squadron at NDA has already been accorded which has e nhanced the capacity of 
NDA from 1800 cadets to 1920 cadets. The Committee also  find that proposal for 
raising 5th Battalion at NDA with 4 new Squadrons is u nder consideration.  The 

9 
 
Committee see this as a positive development and, theref ore, in unequivocal terms 
recommend that the proposal for raising 5th Battalio n should be considered as a 
priority and all clearances etc. should be obtained with in a timeframe.  The dual 
advantage of removing the shortage of officers and gi ving opportunities to the able 
and desirous candidates would be available once this Batt alion comes to fruition.   
The Committee would also like to be informed of the co rrect figures of NDA course 
strength as two figures submitted to the Committee and  brought out in the opening 
part of this paragraph contradict each other”. 
 
6. The Ministry, in its Action Taken Reply, has stated as under: 
“In regard to figures for course strength, it is to men tion that NDA Course is for 
three years.  Therefore, the total course strength for three years of NDA Course is 
1920 cadets i.e. enhanced capacity.  The figures of ann ual intake of about 640 
cadets are for admission to first year of the Course. 
The case for raising of 5 th  Battalion at NDA is at present with Ministry of Defence 
(Finance).  After ‘In Principle Approval’ for raising is accorded, the infrastructure for 
the same will take 4/5 years to come up at NDA”. 
 
7. The Committee have been apprised that the case f or raising of fifth Battalion 
at NDA is pending consideration with the Ministry o f Defence (Finance).  The 
Committee perceive this as a positive development h aving the right trajectory.  
Nevertheless, the Committee would also like to poin t out that their Report on the 
subject was presented on 22.08.2012 and while exami ning this subject the 
information regarding raising of the new Battalion was given to the Committee.  In 
the opinion of the Committee, the issue of 'in prin cipal approval' has inordinately 
been delayed as more than a year has already been e lapsed since the original 
Report on the subject was presented to Parliament.  The Committee would,  
therefore, like to be apprised of the reasons for t his delay and the efforts that have 
been made to expedite such approval along with the time line by which the same 
would be accorded.  The Committee also feel that pe riod of four to five years for 
building up the required infrastructure is elongate d keeping in view the availability 
of modern technology now-a-days.  The Committee als o desire that all possible 
eventualities be explored to complete the infrastructure in a much shorter period so 
that the benefits of raising the new Battalion could be availed of in a timely manner.   
 
B.  Funding of Sainik Schools/Constraints/Regional Imbalance 
 
Recommendation (Paragraph No. 6) 
 
 

10 
 
 
8. The Committee had recommended as under: 
“The Committee are dismayed to note that the entire scheme and gamut of funding 
pattern as envisaged for Sainik Schools has in fact dissuade d the States from 
taking pro-active part in opening up of the new school s.  The Committee took 
serious  note of this issue in various reports whereby it  was recommended that the 
entire funding of all Sainik Schools be made by the Ce ntral Government on the 
pattern of Kendriya Vidyalayas.  However, citing the B hagidari concept the Ministry 
was not agreeable to this suggestion. In addition to th e land, the entire capital 
expenditure such as buildings furniture educational equi pments, major portion of 
recurring expenditures, scholarships for domicile cadets  are mandated to be met 
by the State Governments.  As is evident, not many States/UTs are coming forward 
for establishing new Sainik Schools and even those who i nitiated the process did 
not take interest subsequently when they were intimat ed of their financial 
responsibilities.  It may not be out of place here to  emphasize that seven States 
and several Union Territories as mentioned in Part-I o f this Report have no Sainik 
Schools at all.  The Committee also note that the ben efits of this Bhagidari concept 
and the envisaged arrangements for tuition fee are al so not evenly spread out.  For 
instance, schools in few States such as Karnataka, Utta rakhand, Bihar and 
Haryana get handsome amount as scholarship and as a re sult parents of these 
schools have to pay less in fee whereas, the schools in Gujarat, Rajasthan, Assam, 
Jammu and Kashmir and Madhya Pradesh are not getting regular scholarships 
from their States and hence parents have to pay more.  Although, the Ministry have 
attempted to allocate Rs. 1 crore  to each Sainik School but the same has also not 
been actually disbursed as sufficient amount was not allocated in the budget for the 
current year.  The Committee are also perturbed to no te that out of the 11 requests 
received during the last five years from various States fo r opening new  Sainik 
Schools, only four proposals could be finalized and the proposal for the rest 
stumbled either on the ground of unsuitability of the  site proposed by the State 
Government as was the case of Sikkim and Jharkhand or when State Governments 
swayed away from sharing their financial obligations a s was the case in the States 
of Punjab and Uttarakhand.  Similarly, the proposal  for opening of new schools in 
Orissa, Madhya Pradesh and Andhra Pradesh has also not r eached the logical 
conclusion as the said State Governments have been requeste d to transfer the 
land, build the basic infrastructure and sign the Memora ndum of Agreement.  The 
Committee also observe that there is only one Sainik S chool in 'Ghora Khal' in 
Kumaun Mandal of Uttrakhand.  Since Kumaun and Gharw al Regions have been 
traditional recruitment grounds for the Armed Forces, the Committee recommend 
that all possibilities be looked into by impressing the State Government to open one 
more Sainik School in the Gharwal Mandal. 
 
The Committee conclude from the aforesaid scenario that the Sainik Schools 
have not been able to meet the main objective of setting up of these Schools that to 
remove regional imbalance in the officers cadres of the Armed Forces particularly 
when the most populous State of the country i.e. Uttar  Pradesh is not having even 
a single Sainik School.  Having taken note of all the shortcomings mentioned above 
the Committee recommend that in no uncertain words th e Ministry should revisit 
and rework the entire scheme of establishment of Sainik S chools vis-à-vis  
Bhagidari concept. Here the Committee may like to refe r to the fact acknowledged 
by the Secretary during the course of examination of Demands for Grants (2011-
12) whereby the Committee had been informed that th e expenditure of running 

11 
 
Sainik Schools in a year is just 50-60 crore.  The Commit tee as such would like to 
emphasize that Rs. 50 to 60 crore expenditure can easil y be borne by the Central 
Government.  As such the Committee would like to recomme nd that the entire 
funding for running and infrastructure of the Sainik S chools should be borne by the 
Central Government and as a Bhagidari, the State Gover nments may provide land 
for setting up these schools.  
To correct the regional imbalance the Committee may st rongly like to 
emphasize to amend the current guidelines within a tim eframe so that at least one 
school is established in each of the State/UTs either by taking suo-moto initiatives 
by the Central Government or on the proposal of the respective State 
Government/UT administration.  The Committee would li ke to see a situation 
whereby no State is left without a Sainik School especi ally the most populous State 
of Uttar Pradesh which at present has no Sainik School . Not only that the number 
of Sainik Schools in a State should be in proportion to  the population.  The most 
populous State of Uttar Pradesh which at present has no  Sainik Schools should 
have adequate number of Sainik Schools in proportion t o the population of the 
State.  They also recommend that the Ministry mulls a  new propitious guidelines so 
that this recommendation becomes operational at the ear liest possible span of 
time. The steps initiated in this regard should be moni tored at senior level in  the 
Ministry on monthly basis and the achievement made in t his regard be 
communicated to the Committee. 
 
The Committee find that some of the State Government s like Punjab have taken 
innovative measures to build and sustain capacity of the  students to compete in 
NDA/other entrance exams conducted to join the Defence Services.  The 
Committee recommend that the Ministry should study su ch initiatives and motivate 
the State Governments to replicate the best of the models in this regard”. 
 
9. The Ministry in its action taken reply, has stated as u nder: 
 
(A) Sainik Schools are established only on a request received from State 
Government/UTs as per the present dispensation.  As per present 
estimates, for establishing/raising a new Sainik School, Rs. 50-70 crore are 
required for basic infrastructure apart from the cost o f land.  Further, annual 
expenditure is also involved.  Therefore, the role of St ate Government in 
opening and running a Sainik School cannot be dispense d with.  As and 
when requests are received from State Governments/UTs, th ey are 
examined on merit and necessary action is taken in the matter. 
 
(B) State Governments provide scholarship to the cadets of S ainik Schools 
belonging to that State as per their own policy.  Ce ntral Government has no 
say in this regard. 
 
(C) An amount of Rs. 1 crore each to Sainik School, Imphal and Sainik School, 
Goalpara, Rs. 91 lakh to Sainik School, Chittorgarh and Rs. 75 lakh to Sainik 
School, Rewa were provided during the financial year 2 011-12 for 
infrastructure/modernization to the extent the funds could be made available.  
Efforts are being made to provide as much amount as possib le for 

12 
 
infrastructure/modernization to Sainik Schools during the  current financial 
year.  
 
(D) Eleven requests have been received during the last five yea rs from various 
State Governments for opening new Sainik Schools in thei r States.  Out of 
these, four proposals have since been finalized and new Sainik Schools 
have since been opened.  These are Punglwa in Nagalan d (02.04.2007), 
Kodagu in Karnataka (18.10.2007), Ambikapur in Chhati sgarh (15.08.2008) 
and Rewari in Haryana (02.04.2009). 
In the case of Sikkim, the State Government initially offered site at Ravangla on 
20.01.2005 which was found suitable by the Ministry o f Defence.  On 25.01.2008, 
the State Government informed that the proposal to start Sainik School at Ravangla 
is not feasible and an alternate site at Bojoghari was proposed.  In principle 
approval of Ministry of Defence was conveyed on 08.05.20 08 for opening the 
Sainik School at Bojoghari.  ON 25.07.2008, the State  Government informed that 
due to technical problems a new site has been identifie d at Namphing.  The same 
was not found suitable by this Ministry.  No further sit e has since been proposed by 
the State Government.  Ultimately, the matter has been treated as closed.  
 
The State of Punjab is already having a Sainik School a t Kapurthala.  In the year 
2007, the Chief Minister, Punjab requested the Raksha M antri to open one more 
Sainik School in the State.  He was informed  of the r esponsibilities and financial 
obligations of the State Government  for opening the  Sainik School. He was 
requested to forward the State Government’s willingness to accept these 
responsibilities and confirmation regarding willingness to meet all requirements. No 
further reference has  since been received from the State Government.  
 
 The State of Jharkhand is already having a Sainik Schoo l at Tilaiya. A 
proposal was received in the year 2007 for opening of   one more Sainik School in 
the State at Gumla. The site proposed  by the State Government was inspected  by 
officers from Ministry of Defence but the same was not fo und suitable. No further 
reference has been received from the State Government after May, 2008. 
 
The State of Uttarakhand is already having  a Sainik Sch ool at Ghorakhal. In the 
year 2010, the Chief Minister Uttarakhand requested th e Raksha Mantri to  open 
one more Sainik School in the State. He was informed  of the responsibilities  and    
financial obligations of the State Government  for op ening the Sainik School. He 
was requested to forward the State Government’s willin gness to accept these 
responsibilities and confirmation regarding willingness to meet all requirements. No 
further reference has since been received from the State Government. 
 
Recently, proposals have been received from the State Gov ernments of Orissa, 
Madhya Pradesh and Andhra Pradesh for setting up new  Sainik Schools in 
Sambalpur, Sagar and Chittoor districts respectively. Af ter  site inspection by 
officers of the Ministry, `in principle’ approval has bee n accorded for setting up of 
new Sainik Schools in these States. The State Governme nts have been requested 
to transfer the land, build up basic infrastructure and sign Memorandum of 
Agreement. Service Headquarters have been requested to give a commitment for 
sparing suitable service offices for the posts  of Principa l, Headmaster  and 

13 
 
Registrar. The construction of initial infrastructure req uired at  proposed school at 
Chittoor is at  advance stage and will start functionin g from the academic session  
2014-15. Matter relating to signing of  MoA and prop osed financial implication   of 
recurring expenditure for establishment of Sainik Sch ool at Sambalpur has already  
been taken up with the State Government of Orissa. 
 
(E) In regard to opening of Sainik School in the Garh wal Mandal of Uttarakhand, 
as soon as request is received from the State Government, the same would 
be examined on merit and necessary action will be taken in the matter.  
(F) As regards opening of Sainik School at Uttar Prade sh, it is intimated that  a 
proposal was sent to the State  Government in 2009. S tate Government has 
refused to accept the proposal.  
(G) In regard to opening of new Sainik Schools, once t he  State Government  
makes a commitment to provide suitable land, the requisite finance and MoA 
is  signed Ministry of Defence takes further action on th e proposal. Besides 
providing suitable  land  and signing of prescribed  Me morandum of 
Agreement, the State Government has to provide basic inf rastructure where 
the school can be opened. The  school starts functioning a s soon as the  
minimum requisite infrastructure is provided by the Sta te Government. 
Therefore, the role of State Government in  opening  and running a Sainik 
School cannot be dispensed with. No proposal to change the funding pattern 
or to establish at least one  Sainik Schools in each Stat e/UT is under 
consideration. 
(H) In regard to innovative measures taken by Punjab an d other State 
Governments  to  build and sustain capacity of the students  to compete in  
NDA/other entrance exams  conducted to join the Defence S ervices, this 
Ministry is not aware of such innovative measures. However , matter has 
been takes up with Government of Punjab on recent init iative  taken by 
them. On receipt of information from the Government o f Punjab, the same 
will be analysed and necessary action will be taken as deemed fit.  
 
10. Subsequently, the Committee considered it impera tive to seek further updated 
replies from the Ministry on establishing Sainik Schools in seven States viz Uttar Pradesh, 
Arunachal Pradesh, Goa, Meghalaya, Mizoram, Tripura a nd Sikkim where no Sainik 
School under the aegis of Sainik Schools society existed.   In this regard, the Ministry in 
their reply dated 16th August, 2013  informed the Committee as under :- 
"As per the present dispensation, Sainik Schools are establ ished on receipt of a 
specific request from the State Government.  In January, 2010, the Government of 
Uttar Pradesh had declined the proposal of setting up a Sainik School in 
Bundelkhand region of Uttar Pradesh.  However, keepin g in view the 
recommendations of the Standing Committee, the matte r was taken up again with 
the Government of Uttar Pradesh.  Now, on 23rd July, 2013, Ministry of Defence 
has received a proposal duly approved by the Chief Min ister of Uttar Pradesh for 
setting up of a Sainik Schools in district Mainpuri, Vill age Nauner, Tehsil Mainpuri.  
Further, to open Sainik Schools in other States which d o not have Sainik Schools, 
the matter has been taken up formally with the State Governments of Arunachal 
Pradesh, Goa, Meghalaya, Mizoram and Tripura to exam ine the possibility of 

14 
 
sending a suitable proposal for setting up a Sainik Scho ol in these States and to 
convey their decision in this regard at the earliest."  
 
11. The Committee was also provided a copy of the D.O. letter written by the Chief 
Secretary, Government of Uttar Pradesh to the then De fence Secretary which stated as 
under :- 
"The state of Uttar Pradesh proposes to open a second Sa inik School in district 
Mainpuri.  The size and population of the state of U ttar Pradesh justifies the 
requirement of a second Sainik School in the state to pr ovide an opportunity to the 
children of the rural population of the state to avail  of quality Public School 
education, as also to remove the regional imbalance in  the intake of the officer 
cadre of the Armed Forces, the latter being one of th e stated aims of the Sainik 
Schools in the country. 
The State government has earmarked 49 acres of land ava ilable in district 
Mainpuri, village Nauner, tehsil Mainpuri for the pro posed school.  An amount of 
Rs. 1.00 crore has also been provided in the budget for 2013-14 for the said 
school. 
The proposal has the approval of the Hon'ble Chief Minister of Uttar Pradesh. 
In view of the above, I request that the Sainik School S ociety, Ministry of Defence 
may kindly be asked to initiate action for the opening of the proposed Sainik School 
in district Mainpuri, Uttar Pradesh." 
 
12. Not satisfied with the updated written informatio n furnished by the Ministry, the 
Committee decided to take oral evidence of the repres entatives of the State Governments 
of Uttar Pradesh, Goa, Tripura, Arunachal Pradesh, M izoram, Sikkim and Meghalaya 
along with the representatives of the Ministry of Defence.   Except Uttar Pradesh and Goa, 
the representatives of the five States of North Eastern r egion of the country registered  a 
common problem of unavailability of land of the desir ed dimension and constraint of funds 
in their States which is hampering opening up of the Sainik Schools in these States.  The 
case of Uttar Pradesh has substantially progressed after the sixteenth report on the 
subject was presented to Parliament.  The representativ es of Goa showed a lackadaisical 
approach on the ground of lack of inclination on the p art of the students to join Armed 
Forces.  These issues have been brought out in the succeeding paragraphs.   
Uttar Pradesh  
13.  The Committee was informed by the Ministry that t he case of opening up of Sainik 
School in the district Mainpuri of U.P. is in the advan ced stage as land has already been 
earmarked by the State Governments and financial obliga tions have also been agreed to 
be met by the U.P. Government.  The site survey was carri ed out on 29 August, 2013 and 

15 
 
the site has been found suitable for the purpose. Now, the case was under process to 
grant in principle approval for setting up of the Sai nik School.  However, during oral 
evidence the Committee was informed of some financial co nstraint which the State 
Government has to face.  In this connection, the Secretary , Secondary Education stated 
before the Committee as under:- 
"We have the example of MHRD pattern. It is having two  templates. One template 
is Kendriya Vidyalayas and Navodaya Vidyalayas where 10 0 per cent funding is by 
MHRD. Another template is of the Sarva Shiksha Abhiyan  and Rashtriya 
Madhyamik Shiksha Abhiyan where the funding pattern is different. For the plain 
States, the ratio is 65:35, and for the North-Eastern and the Hill States, it is in the 
ratio of 90:10. That type of sharing pattern is alrea dy being adopted by MHRD and 
that can be followed in this case also. 
 
In U.P. previously also at may times proposals were moved  to open new Sainik 
School, but it could not be materialised because of the existing fund sharing 
pattern. If we plan to open a 600-cadet school, the la nd requirement is about 50 
acres. The cost of land depends on the area where we tak e it. It varies from Rs. 5 
crore to Rs. 10 crore. The construction cost comes to about Rs. 75 crore. So, on an 
average, for the opening of one Sainik School, the St ate Government has to spend 
about Rs. 80 crore to Rs. 90 crore. The MoD provides onl y three staff members. 
The contribution of MoD is only to do with the provisio n of three staff members 
along with payment of their salaries and provision of limited scholarships to the 
dependents of the Army Officers. To all other students, the scholarship is borne by 
the State Government. 
 
If you see the contribution of a State Government and of the Central Government, it 
is much skewed. It cannot be said that the State Governmen t will not take interest, 
if the State share part is decreased." 
 
14. The representative further candidly stated :- 
"Sir, if the funding pattern is being changed, we wil l come out and open more 
schools. The land is available with us."   
  
However, the representative of Ministry of Defence, on the issue of central support 
clarified :- 
"As far as the staff is concerned, it is not only three st aff members, but we also 
provide NCC staff and the PT staff, plus we do give gran t-in-aid for infrastructure 
development, plus 100 per cent additionality in pay a nd allowances after the Sixth 
Pay Commission recommendations is also provided by us. S o, we are giving them 
a little more than what UP thinks we are giving." 
 
Goa  
 

16 
 
15.  The Committee wanted to know the constraints being  felt by the State Government 
of Goa in opening up of the Sainik School in the Stat e.  In this connection, a 
representative of the State Government stated :- 
"Goa is one of the smallest States in the country. The total area is 3,200 square 
kilometres. In fact, it is smaller than some of the big d istricts of the country. Land is 
a scarce commodity over there. The population of Goa is less than 15 lakh, the 
basic Goan population. The per capita  income is very high. They have fairly settled 
life. Their mindset is not very inclined towards going  into military service. The 
peculiarity of Goa is that it is a single child norm soci ety. The couple who has one 
child, it is very difficult for them to let him/her go into it. Further, one single child 
means 50 per cent are girls and 50 per cent are boys. This is basically a boys’ 
institution. Therefore, it also becomes a problem.  
 
Secondly, Goa has its own Board of Education. If we se t up Sainik School, it is 
going to be under CBSE. We already have two Navoday a Vidyalayas, one Navy 
School and five Kendriya Vidyalayas over there. So, th ese eight Central institutions 
are already there which cater to the Central pattern of education. I feel that it is 
quite a huge number compared to the size and populatio n of Goa. Of course, we 
have discussed it with the Chief Minister of Goa. His vi ew is that we do not mind 
having a Sainik School over there. The only thing is t hat the land requirement is 
very high. It is about 38 acres and 49 acres for 300 stud ents and 600 students. 
Then, if the funding pattern is more rational, perhaps it would cut better ice. Most of 
the infrastructural funding is there with the  State G overnment, which constitutes 
major chunk of funding. The general maintenance is don e by the Central 
Government funding. Though we have some students, who ca n be counted on 
fingers, who are studying in the Sainik Schools. In 2013-14, we had an examination 
for the Sainik School, in which only nine students appea red. What we saw is that 
they are all from economically weaker sections of society. The well-off are not 
inclined and the economically weaker section students ar e inclined, but only nine 
students appeared. To give them incentive, the Goa Gover nment has announced 
Rs. 20,000 per annum  as scholarship also, but somehow we are not able to ge t 
that kind of response, though I will, of course, partl y say that there is some lack of 
awareness also which we need to work on. But I feel tha t Sainik School is still not 
an acceptable concept over there because the inclination to join the Armed Forces 
is not so much over there because they are all well sett led and the population is 
very small and there is single child norm. Therefore, it is really difficult to shake that 
thing and get this concept into picture." 
 
Agreeing with the contention of the representative of  State Government of Goa the 
witness from the Ministry said :- 
"Sir, the point is extremely well taken. We will defin itely apply our mind to this 
peculiar situation where we have a State and there i s not enough demand within 
the State.  We want to promote the setting up of Sai nik School there and promote 
participation for getting into the military." 
 
Tripura 
 

17 
 
16. Highlighting the concerns faced by the Government of Tripura the Chief Secretary 
submitted before the Committee as under :- 
"Sir, I feel that today people all over know the impo rtance of quality education. In 
Sainik School, there is no hard and fast rule that eve ry child should join the Army. 
We are getting stuck because of the funding pattern. The Committee has very 
clearly and categorically indicated in its recommendati on that the capital cost in 
setting up the infrastructure and recurring expenditur e should be met by the MoD. I 
am grateful to the Committee. We have discussed this at the State level. We are 
getting stuck largely because of funding. For example, in  the Ministry of HRD there 
is a similar structure called the Navodaya Vidyalaya. Yo u may kindly consider 
adopting the system similar to Navodaya Vidyalaya in Sainik School. To be precise, 
the cost of construction, maintenance, posting of teacher s, etc. is done by the 
Navodaya Vidyalaya Samiti. Similar system maybe follo wed in case of Sainik 
School and the responsibility of the State Government m ay be limited to provision 
of land. Please consider this thing."  
 
He also stated :- 
 
"So far as land is concerned, there is some constraint, bu t I think that the main 
thing is funding." 
 
The representative, in this connection further stated :- 
 
"Actually, 60 per cent of land in Tripura is forest are a. So, there is a problem of 
land. The existing model provides that for minimum 300  students we require 40 
acres of land. Why do we not go in for 20 acres of land ? I am asking this because 
most of the schools in Delhi are going vertical with some  supporting infrastructure 
like playground, swimming pool, etc. and 20 acre would be adequate.  
Secondly, in Tripura, we have got about 1,774 acres of land with the Army out of 
which they are occupying only 235 acres of land. So, w e have requested for giving 
part of the land, which is with the Army. A Sainik school can be set up there."  
 
The witness categorically informed the Committee that i f the Ministry comes 
forward to meet the capital cost and the recurring cost then most of the States would 
come forward to start a Sainik School.  
 
Arunachal Pradesh 
17. The representative of Arunachal Pradesh, while dep osing before the Committee 
brought out the common problem of lack of funding to start a Sainik School.  In this 
regard, he stated :- 
"We are grateful to the Ministry of Defence for making  correspondence on this 
issue. The matter is presently under the consideration of  the Cabinet. I have been 
directed by the hon. Chief Minister to convey that land will be provided by the State 
Government and there is no problem in that. However, a s other North-East States, 
we have the same issue of funding. We are a very small  State, population-wise, 
with a weak financial basis. No doubt, Arunachal Prades h has the largest border of 
1300 kilometres plus with three countries, and our yout h are very keen to join the 

18 
 
Army. As the hon. Member said, the tribals will get r epresentation. Our State is 80 
per cent tribal. The hon. Chief Minister has requested you that like in all other 
schemes where 90 per cent of the funds come from the Gover nment of India 
through the Planning Commission and ten per cent is bor ne by the State 
Government, similarly, the same pattern should be adop ted here also. It is only 
taking a cue from other schemes. If you adopt the same funding pattern, it will solve 
the problem for everyone and we are willing to set up Sainik Schools in our 
respective States." 
 
Mizoram  
 
18. The evidence tendered before the Committee by the  representative of the 
Government of Mizoram also highlighted the funds constrai nt being faced by the State in 
opening a Sainik School.  The witness said :- 
"Sir, I want to start by saying that there seems to b e a huge information gap 
between the Sainik School Society and the Government o f Mizoram. Here it is 
written that a request letter has been sent on 26 th  June, 2013 for setting up the 
school and the response of the State Government is awaite d.  The fact is that in 
2004, the Cabinet of Mizoram had approved the propo sal for setting up the school 
and we immediately sent that proposal to the Ministry .  In November 2004, the 
Sainik School Society had inspected this site and in 2005 , in principle approval for 
setting up of the sainik school in Mizoram was conveyed b y the MoD.  After that, 
we had submitted DPR etc.  MoD had then asked us whethe r the State 
Government will provide the infrastructure and we had no option as per the funding 
pattern and the architecture of the scheme.  The State  Government really wanted 
the Sainik Schools to come up.  We said that we will pro vide the funding.  After 
that, we set out to organise the funding. So, right now, the project is under 
implementation. The total cost of the project is about 100 crore. We have organised 
Rs. 50 crore with the DONER (Ministry of Development fo r North-Eastern Region) 
through NLCPR and remaining Rs. 50 crore, we have the commitment from the 13 th  
Finance Commission to provide us that money.  So, we a re going ahead with the 
implementation of this Project.  This slide actually giv es us a completely different 
picture about Mizoram.  
 
The second point is that as the hon. Committee in the 16 th  meeting, had  basically 
flagged certain issues.   These schools are meant to prov ide cadets for the NDA 
which then become officers in the Indian Army and als o even those who do not go 
through NDA because only 20 per cent of the Cadets go  to the NDA.  Many of the 
remaining 80 percent of the cadets also join the Army t hrough other channels.  
Therefore, it makes sense that this scheme is fully funde d by the Ministry of 
Defence.  That recommendation was made in the 16 th  Committee Report.  There is 
also a recommendation regarding exploring the option  of promoting the schools 
exclusively for girls.  I would like to submit that the  Ministry of Defence should 
consider seriously the recommendations of the Committee so that we can move 
forward.  The State Governments want to set up the sch ools but for want of money, 
they are not able to do so because there are conflicti ng demands.   Whatever their 
internal resources are, they are not enough to meet t he demands.  Then, it comes 
to implementing a projecting which is basically arisin g out of the Government of 
India policy that we should have the schools in the St ates so that we can have 

19 
 
balanced representation of Army cadets from all the St ates.  If that is the objective, 
I think it is the Central Government that should provide the funding." 
 
 
 
 
 
Sikkim 
19. The Chief Secretary of Government of Sikkim also bro ught forward the common 
problem of  scarcity of land and costs in opening up of a Sainik School in their State.  She 
said during evidence :- 
"The basic issue here is the establishing the Sainik Schoo ls is to ensure the 
representation of areas like Sikkim and the North Easte rn States into the 
mainstream and also in the Indian Army.  Perhaps, the  yardsticks that have been 
prescribed, we have to re-look and re-address because it i s a smaller State.   The 
State Sikkim is the latest entrant to the Union.  The f und constraint is there.  The 
topography of the State is such that when you requir e the land, there many 
impediments that comes in. Of course, the State has gone in and acquired the land.  
We are very grateful to the Ministry of Defence that t hey did sent a representatives 
but the prerequisites that they have prescribed is someth ing which is not available 
in the State of Sikkim.  They want flat land, proximit y to the major city.  If you 
compare us, then I think we are smaller to Goa also.  O ur population is almost 6.50 
lakhs. 
I think, the yardstick that is prescribed, will definitely  have to be revisited. You have 
been very kind to say that these conditionalities that have been prescribed will have 
to be a little different for the North Eastern State s. Our is a State in which we have 
been running from pillar to post because our people are very interested to get into 
the mainstream. We want our representation in the In dian Army. But because of 
these constraints, it is very difficult for us to achieve t his. As voiced by other States, 
the financial pattern also, the capital investment of Rs.50 crore for a small State like 
ours will be almost back-breaking. As already submitted,  we have so many 
commitments. We are in the seismic belt. The tremors of t he earthquake of 
September 11 that struck the State are still being felt . All these things will have to 
be taken with the right perspective when we prescribe t hese conditionalities. We 
have made available the land for sainik schools. It is very  unfortunate that the 
officers who visit are saying that it is not close to the  nearest rail heads. We do not 
have rail heads in Sikkim. We do not have railway lin e. It is in the State of West 
Bengal. So, conditionalities like this will really ha ve to be revisited. I submit to the 
hon. Chairman and the hon. Members that the small States like us could be given a 
little more re-look and revisiting the conditionalitie s which have been prescribed by 
the Ministry of Defence."  
 
Meghalaya 
20. Citing problems about the availability of land as i t is owned by communities in the 
State of Meghalaya and also constraint in mobilizing Rs. 50 to 60 crore, the Principal 
Secretary, Education informed the Committee as under :- 

20 
 
"Meghalaya is a hilly State. It is 86 per cent inhabi ted by tribals. There is huge 
unemployment and in parts of Meghalaya we do have insu rgency. The State 
Government is fully interested in setting up a sainik scho ol. The State Government 
has taken steps towards this and they have identified a p lot of land for that 
purpose. Let me tell you that all land in Meghalaya is owned by the community. The 
Government land is hardly available. We will have to acquire that land from the 
community. Since it is the traditional authorities who  own the land, therefore, 
instead of coercive method of acquisition, we normally g o ahead by having an 
agreement with them and then acquire it under the La nd Acquisition Act. We will 
have to spend money on land acquisition in any case. No w coming to the second 
aspect, when we have decided upon a plot of land which is about 45 minutes drive 
from our second largest town Tura in a place called Jonki para. If we start setting up 
the sainik school, we require about Rs.50 to Rs.60 crore st raightaway. As Mizoram 
has done, there could be a suggestion that we could ta ke it from DONER or 
NLCPR(Non Lapsable Central Pool of Resources) and othe rs. But as the Chief 
Secretary, Tripura has clarified, there are competing  priorities on the NLCPR. The 
North Eastern States have problems of infrastructure. A  lot of investment is 
required on infrastructure. If we take out money from NLCPR, we will be losing on 
some infrastructure aspect of development. Basically, our su bmission is that in 
case we are trying to bring all States on board, perha ps all those States which do 
not have a single sainik school, perhaps for them a specia l dispensation can be 
made by MOD and re-look at the sharing pattern can be done. For North East, I 
would say that all our normal plan assistance is received on 90:10 pattern. So, if we 
could have this pattern of 90:10 for this also, it wil l be nice. The State Government 
is hard pressed in bringing its share. Most of the Centra l schemes require you to 
bring your share. Even to avail, let us say, NRHM or JNNU RM we have to find 
money. If we have to find money also for sainik school s, that also is another 
burden. We are very keen to have this. But in case, we can have a revised 
dispensation, it will facilitate. That is our submission." 
 
21. After gleaning through the first set of reply f urnished by the Ministry the 
Committee can only infer that no serious efforts ha d been made to implement the 
recommendation of the Committee which was very spec ific and pin-pointed. 
However, when further updated replies were sought f rom the Ministry the scenario 
changed.  The Committee are happy to note that keep ing in view the 
recommendations of the Standing Committee, the matt er was taken up again with 
the Government of Uttar Pradesh for opening up a Sa inik School under the aegis of 
Sainik School Society.  During oral evidence the Co mmittee learnt that substantial 
progress has been made in this regard.  The Committ ee also came to know that the 
State Government could open more schools, if the fu nding pattern is changed.  In 
their opinion the cost of opening up a new school comes between Rs. 80 crore to 90 
crore, which is high in terms of its benefits to be  accrued to the State Government.  
The Committee in this regard recommend that the in-principle approval be accorded 
by the Defence Ministry forthwith and prompt and ti me bound action be initiated so 
that this recommendation of the Committee may see t he light of the day.  This will 

21 
 
certainly help in removing the regional imbalance i n the intake of officers in Armed 
Forces.  They would also like to be informed of the  subsequent developments 
which shall take place after presentation of this R eport.  The Committee would also 
like to recommend that the concerns of the represen tative of the UP Government 
may be given due consideration while amending the c urrent guidelines as has 
already been recommended by the Committee and have also been discussed in the 
subsequent paragraphs of this report.  
 
22. The Committee also took note from the written i nformation furnished by the 
Ministry that out of the remaining six States where  no Sainik School existed, the 
Ministry had taken up the matter formally with the State Governments of Arunachal 
Pradesh, Goa, Meghalaya, Mizoram and Tripura for exa mining the possibility of 
sending a proposal for setting up a Sainik School i n these States.  The Committee 
felt that the reply was mere rhetoric and did not g ive any substantial information 
whether the Sainik Schools would be opened in these  States or not.  The reply was 
conspicuously silent on amending the current guidel ines within a fixed time frame 
so as to remove the imbalance in opening of the Sai nik Schools.  It was also silent 
on taking suo-motto initiative by the Central Gover nment.  Keeping these facts in 
mind, the Committee, as already stated, took oral e vidence of the representatives of 
the State Governments of these seven States includi ng the State of Uttar Pradesh 
whole position has been discussed in the preceding paragraphs.    
 The Committee  were given to understand that the c ase of Goa is unique and 
does not fit in the current scheme of things.  The land in Goa is a scarcity as its 
total area is 3,200 sq. kms.  Funding is not an iss ue but being a single child society 
which is economically viable, the students are not inclined to join defence forces.   
This is completely a different scenario which came to the notice of the Committee. 
The constraint of land has been found to be a commo n issue between Goa and 
other five States of North-Eastern Region.  In this  case, the Committee would like to 
reiterate their earlier recommendation that action should be initiated under 
intimation to the Committee for amending the curren t guidelines which could not 
only empower the Central Government to take initiat ives suo-moto for opening up a 
school but also accommodate the special request fro m the States in regard to 
truncating the land size in case of scarcity of land .   In the opinion of the 
Committee, a thorough scrutiny should be done by th e Ministry for considering the 
State Governments proposal of opening up of a schoo l by providing the minimum 

22 
 
requirement of students and land as well.  Such a m ove will not only motivate Goa 
but other States too which find reference in later part of this Report. Here the 
Committee would recommend in emphatic terms that a joint exercise should be 
devised between the State Government and the Minist ry to raise awareness 
amongst the students, faculties and the parents on the importance of joining the 
defence forces through NDA and other entry streams.   This should be an on going 
exercise which may be amended from time to time.  I nitially, if the in take from Goa 
is found low the seats could be filled in from othe r States on all India basis or from 
the neighbouring States as the case may be. 
 
23.  A close scrutiny of the evidence tendered befo re the Committee by the 
representatives of State Governments of Tripura, Ar unachal Pradesh, Mizoram, 
Sikkim and Meghalaya in no uncertain words reveal a common problem being faced 
by them in opening up of a Sainik School in their r espective States.  The two 
problems viz. funding pattern including capital cost  and scarcity of land are 
hampering opening up of a Sainik School.  The Commi ttee, after weighing all the 
pros and cons recommend that a special package be c reated for these States by 
amending the current guidelines so that the Central  Government could take the 
initiative of arranging finance for them either from their own budgetary resources or 
through DONER (Ministry of Development for North-Eastern Region) /  NLCPR (Non 
Lapsable Central Pool of Resources).  Since these S tates are not against opening 
up of a Sainik School but lack funds to accomplish this objective, assistance of this 
nature would help not only these States but also pr otect the national interest of 
equitable in take of officers from all the regions of the country. In regard to land 
availability, serious consideration should be given  by the Ministry for reducing the 
size of the school which would, in turn, also reduce  the size of the land required.  
These States have a genuine problem of providing fl at land to the tune of about 50 
acres.  The unutilized land currently with the Army can be spared for this purpose.  
The Committee would like the Ministry to start the process in this regard by 
indulging these five States with serious persuasion.  The Ministry should repeatedly 
follow the issue with the respective Chief Secretar ies of these States and also 
device a pragmatic solution to this impasse as brou ght out above.  It is a high time 
that the guidelines should be revised as they were devised in the year 1961 and it is 
already over 50 years they have not been changed an d these North-Eastern States 
are suffering due to the rigid attitude of the Mini stry.  The smaller issues of 

23 
 
finalising the land site in Sikkim should also be t aken in the right earnest by the 
Ministry and the conditionalities too, should be revisited.  
[[ 
24. The request of Punjab, Jharkhand and Uttrakhand  should not be abandoned 
simply on the ground that 'no further reference has  been received from the State 
Government(s).'  This evidently proves that the Min istry is taking lackadaisical 
approach in the matter and has failed to appropriat ely reply on each of the cases.  
They expect the Ministry to write to the Chief Secretaries of these States bringing to 
their knowledge the concerns of this Committee and then wait for their response.  
The Committee believe that these States will respond positively.  
 
C. Issues related to land for setting up of Sainik Schools in various States and 
apportioning funds from MPLAD Scheme 
 
 
Recommendation (Paragraph No. 7) 
 
25. The Committee had recommended as under:- 
“The Committee note that the building for proposed S ainik School at Nalanda was 
to be constructed between 2003 and 2005. To the utter dismay of the Committee 
this has not happen even after an elapse of about seven  years. The main reason 
attributed for this delay is the unsuitability of the l and. The Committee also observe 
that now the suitable land has been earmarked and t he tender for the construction 
of the building was finalized in September, 2011 aft er which the construction of 
compound wall is in progress. Likewise, the Committee f ind that evident delay has 
taken place in the construction of the Sainik School at G opalganj in Bihar.  This 
delay, too took place due to unsuitable land provide d by the State Government and 
the onus  of land filling of the same was, technically taken  by it. The Committee 
deprecate the delays of such nature where problems surfa ced due to the 
unsuitability of land for setting up of Sainik School s.  Therefore, the Committee 
desire that if possible the surplus land from suitable ca ntonment areas be provided 
for Sainik Schools in  exchange of equal area of land fr om the respective State 
Governments.  This is all the more the reason for the C ommittee to believe that 
responsibilities of such nature  should be borne by the  Central Government  as  
these schools eventually  provide skilled, trained  and competent manpower for 
meeting  the precious Defence related human resource needs.  The Ministry should 
explore setting up of new Sainik Schools on the land don ated by the 
individuals/trusts etc.  
 
One avenue for fund raising for the infrastructural deve lopments of Sainik Schools 
could be apportioning funds from the Members of Parli ament Local Area 
Development Scheme.  The Member of Parliament is also p art of the Local Board 
of Administration where the school exists.  The Committee  have learnt that 
although requests were made during the years 2010 and 2 011 at the level of 
principles of Sainik  Schools for seeking such funds from MPLAD Scheme but only 
for one Sainik at Amravathi Nagar Rs. 5 lakhs were given .   The Committee may 
like to recommend that Members of Parliament may be a pproached through a 
much higher pedestal for apportioning funds for the S ainik Schools falling in their 

24 
 
constituencies. The Committee would like to be apprised of the initiatives taken in 
this regard.  
 
The Committee further note that largest area of land  for defence purposes has 
been acquired in Jaisalmer, a district in State of Raj asthan which is one of the 
desert districts of the country.  The Committee are const raint to note that having 
contributed extensively by way of providing land for de fence purposes only one 
Sainik School could so far be set up in Chittorgarh. T he Committee strongly 
recommend that the Ministry should take up urgent steps to set up Sainik Schools 
in desert areas in various States either by taking suo-mo to action on the part of the 
Central Government or initiating the proposal by the respective State 
Governments”.    
 
26. The Ministry in its action taken reply has stated as u nder: 
(A) Land for setting up of Sainik Schools 
The provision of land by the State Government is a pr e-requisite for opening of 
Sainik School. Due to training and operational requi rements of armed forces, it is 
not possible to spare land for Sainik Schools from the can tonment areas.  Land 
donated by the individuals/trusts etc. may result in und ue interference by such 
individuals/trusts in functioning of the Sainik School.  F urther, in such cases, 
scholarship and annual recurring expenditure will also  not be provided by the State 
Government. 
(B) Apportioning funds from MPLAD Scheme 
Requests have been made during the year 2009 at Raksha Rajya Mantri level and 
during years 2010 and 2011 at the level of Principals o f the Sainik Schools for 
apportioning funds from Member of Parliament Local A rea Development Fund.  
There has not been a very encouraging response.  However, such requests may be 
made again.  
 
(C) Opening Sainik Schools in desert areas 
As and when proposal is received from the State Governme nt the same would be 
examined and necessary action will be taken”.  
 
 
 27. The Committee take note of the fact that after entering into preliminary 
correspondence with the Ministry most of the States  back out.  The Committee can 
understand that the main reasons for their abandoni ng the idea are the 
unavailability of land and the scarcity of funds to  erect/run the school.  It is for this 
reason the Committee recommended that alternative r ecourses for providing land 
to the States be looked into including sparing the same from cantonment areas or 
by way of donations by individuals/trusts. The Comm ittee are not satisfied with the 
reply of the Ministry that due to operational requi rement of Armed Forces, it is not 

25 
 
possible to spare land for Sainik Schools.  They no w recommend that a study be 
conducted in all the existing cantonments so that a piece of land could be identified 
for this purpose specially in the States which are deprived of any Sainik Schools.  
The Committee are not oblivious of the fact that hu ndreds of acres of land of 
cantonments have been encroached upon by the civilians.  If the Sainik Schools are 
opened,  the property would remain with the dispens ation only and it would also 
help in checking the menace of encroachment.  Likew ise, due-diligence should be 
undertaken for exploring the possibilities, ab-init io, for seeking donation of land 
from reputed trusts, etc.  The Committee fail to understand why the individual/trusts 
would interfere  in the functioning of Sainik Schoo ls on the land donated by them if 
the strict guidelines are framed and they are apprised in advance.  
 
 For apportioning funds from MPLAD Scheme, the Comm ittee feel that no 
sincere efforts have been made by the Ministry foll owing the presentation of the 
Report in Parliament on 22 August, 2012.  The Commi ttee recommend that the 
matter be taken up again at all the available forum s including the Committee on 
MPLAD of Lok Sabha and writing/approaching the indi vidual Members from the 
constituencies having Sainik Schools  for apportion ing the funds.   The outcome 
may be intimated to the Committee in this regard.  

26 
 
 
CHAPTER II 
 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN  ACCEPTED BY THE 
GOVERNMENT 
 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 1 and 2) 
 
Background of Establishment of Sainik Schools 
 
 The scheme to establish Sainik Schools was introduced in  the year 1961 with the 
aim of bringing quality public school education within  the reach of common man, all round 
development of personality and to remove regional im balance in the officers' cadre of 
Armed Forces.  The Committee also find that prior to  establishment of such scheme there 
did exist five Rashtriya Military Schools and one Rashtri ya Indian Military College which 
have the same objectives as that of Sainik Schools. All th e three institutions are basically 
the nurseries which nurture cadets for entry into the co veted National Defence Academy.  
The examination of the subject  has revealed several an omalies in achieving the 
objectives for which the Sainik Schools were established and also that their performance 
has been below the expected levels.  Several lacunae have  surfaced on the issue of 
opening new Sainik Schools  during  the course of examin ation. Not only that the 
expansion of Sainik Schools  has proved to be a tardy pro cess whereby the States 
interested in opening of the new schools did not pursue  with their requests when the 
financial obligation on the part of the State Governm ents was conveyed.   The various 
recommendations/observations of the Committee emergin g out of the detailed 
deliberations on the subject have been enumerated in the succeeding paragraphs of the 
report. 
 
Performance/comparison of Sainik Schools with Rasht riya Military School, 
Rashtriya Indian Military College  
 
The Committee note that Sainik Schools were established  subsequent to the 
Rashtriya Military School and Rashtriya Indian Militar y College.  The Sainik Schools were 
established with the well defined aims and objectives a nd having a very sound 
organizational structure which flowed right from the Mi nistry of Defence at the apex level 
and Local Board of Administration at the ground leve l where these schools are situated.    
The significance of Sainik Schools can be attributed to  the fact that none other than the 
Raksha Mantri himself acts as the Chairman of the Board o f Governors of Sainik Schools.  
To consolidate and streamline the smooth functioning and  operations of Sainik Schools, 
they have been provided with three Service Officers fo r the posts of Principal, Head 
Master and Registrar as well as APTCC/NCC instructors in a ddition to the requisite skilled 
staff.  The Committee also note that these schools are d esigned in a well spread out land 
and have sophisticated facilities for imparting education  and other skills in making their 
cadets an able officer of Armed Forces in future. 
 
 Notwithstanding, the support extended by the Central and State Governments, the 
Committee are concerned to note the drooping perfor mance of Sainik Schools in 
comparison to Rashtriya Military Schools specifically in t erms of the intake in NDA.  The 
average intake in Rashtriya Indian Military College during the years 2008 to 2010 is 75% 
whereas in the Sainik Schools it is barely 20%.    It h as little edge over the Rashtriya 

27 
 
Military Schools where the percentage for the aforesa id period is 18.  Various reasons 
extended by the Ministry such as reservation in selectio n in Sainik Schools, less 
inclination in appearing for NDA after the Class XII C BSE Exams and lower intake in the 
August Exam when boys are in the schools, following a sem ester pattern in RIMC etc. fail 
to convince the Committee, particularly when the aforesa id areas are well within the 
domain of the Ministry/Sainik School and these constrain ts can be addressed by taking 
certain policy decisions.   The issue of lesser intake int o NDA in the August Exam as the 
students leave the school and are within the influence of parents as stated by the Ministry 
can be addressed by holding the students back in the schoo l after Twelfth Exam.  
Moreover, students of Sainik Schools appearing for NDA exam be made compulsory in 
line with the stipulated objective of setting up of Sch ools i.e. nurturing candidates for entry 
into NDA and feeling of patriotism be inculcated so t hat the cadets are motivated to join 
the Defence forces. 
 
 Since NDA is an independent examination conducted by t he UPSC the selection to 
which is purely based on merit, in the opinion of the Committee the numbers appearing for 
the examination whether those from Sainik Schools, RIMC or general category of students 
is not very significant.  What is more significant is improving the pass percentage of Sainik 
Schools in this regard.  For that the Committee believ e that the mental level and efficiency 
bar of the candidates is infact to be raised.   Althou gh there is no reservation in the intake 
of RIMC of any sort, yet there is no denying the fact  that inspite of the reservations the 
intake in Sainik Schools is through a very wide base.  Su ch intake is based purely on 
rigorous selection procedure.  Once selected, both the i nstitutions have the same level 
playing field and it is difficult to understand why the percentage wise intake Sainik Schools 
to NDA should be so low.   The Committee learn that to increase this percentage a 
programme of in-service training to the teachers is bein g implemented with the assistance 
of experts from the Services, National University of Edu cational Planning and 
Administration (NUEPA), National Council of Educational Research and Training (NCERT) 
and similar States run bodies. In this regard, the Comm ittee recommended that the 
outcome of such training imparted to the teachers should  be quantified in terms of the 
increased number of selection of cadets in the NDA and a lso the Ministry should not leave 
any stone unturned by exercising the requisite due diligence at least from now onwards so 
that the number of cadets selected for the NDA invariabl y goes up.   The Committee also 
desire that the outcome of such selection in the ensuing courses be communicated to 
them.  If required the Ministry should also take assistanc e from reputed management 
institutions by conducting a proper study in order to e nsure that the objectives of setting 
up of the Sainik Schools are fully met and results achie ved as per the expectations.  The 
Committee recommend that the composition of Board of  Directors of Sainik Schools 
should be reviewed so as to have representation from NDA , IMA retired Generals and 
eminent academicians.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
(A) Comparison between Sainik Schools and RIMC 
 
 
No easy comparison can be made for the following reasons:- 
 
(i) Selection procedures are different.  One or two boys per State are admitted in 
RIMC every six months.  Thus, RIMC always gets best boys of t he State.   On the other 
hand, in the case of Sainik Schools, 67% of seats are re served for boys from the State 
where the school is located.  25% seats are reserved for defence personnel and ex-

28 
 
servicemen.  Out of these quotas, there is reservation @ 15% and 7.5% respectively for 
SCs and STs. 
 
(ii) Secondly, RIMC students do not have to appear for CBSE  examination. Class XII 
examination of RIMC conducted by Directorate General of  Military Training is recognised 
by CBSE.  RIMC follows a semester pattern that allows t he student appear twice in NDA 
examination while in the school.  Students of RIMC get  more number of periods for 
preparation for the NDA.  Cadets of Sainik Schools appe ar for Class XII CBSE 
examination.  Their attention is shared between CBSE examination and NDA examination. 
 
(iii) The number of cadets appearing for NDA from RIMC and Sainik Schools is entirely 
different.  Every year about 50-60 students from RIMC appear for NDA examination 
whereas number of students appearing from Sainik Schools is about 900-1000. 
 
(iv) As regards holding the students back in the school after Tw elfth Exam, it is to 
submit that after appearing for CBSE class XII board exa mination in March the cadets 
leave the school to prepare and appear for various com petitive examinations like AIEEE, 
PMT, JEE etc. Further, the parents are not inclined to keep their wards in schools after 
twelfth examination. Thus, retaining the cadets after sch ooling is neither practical nor 
feasible.      
 
(B) Making it compulsory for Sainik Schools Cadets to appear at NDA: 
 
Provision already exists in the rules that all boys admit ted to Sainik Schools who 
are in receipt of any Govt. scholarships including Defence scholarship are required to avail 
all chances for the NDA Examination conducted by the UPSC .  They are required to 
appear for tests, interviews and medical examinations a t the Services Selection Board or 
other military institutions, training institutions, to  which they are asked to report.  If these 
conditions are not fulfilled or attempts are made to leave these institutions prematurely or 
there are wilful attempts on the part of such boys to u ndertake this as a procedural 
formality only, if detected the parents/guardians are required to refund the entire amount 
of scholarship enjoyed by such students. A bond to this e ffect is required to be executed 
by the parents/guardians at the time of admission of the cadet. 
 
(C) Improving NDA intake from Sainik Schools: 
 
 During 2008-2010 on an average, about 912 Sainik Scho ol cadets sat for the NDA 
examination every year for about 640 places; on the av erage about 186 got in.  Given the 
varied social and economic background of the cadets, it is q uite a satisfactory percentage.  
However, with a view to increase this percentage, an ela borate programme of in-service 
training to the teachers and competition oriented trai ning for the cadets is being 
implemented with the assistance of experts from the Service s and professional 
educational institutions/bodies like National Universit y of Educational Planning and 
Administration (NUEPA), National Council of Educational Research and Training (NCERT) 
and similar State run bodies.  In keeping with the spe cific aim of these schools, Service 
Selection Board (SSB) oriented training is also being provided using professional resource 
personnel.  The Ministry of Defence also provides trai ning grant for upgrading training 
infrastructure and skills.  Tuition fee actually paid in class XI & XII is reimbursed as 
incentive to the cadets joining NDA and Technical Entry. 
         

29 
 
 
 
 
(D)  Induction of representatives from NDA, IMA, retire d Generals and eminent 
academicians in Board of Governors of Sainik Schools: 
 
Vice Chiefs of staff or the PSOs dealing with educatio n in the three Defence 
Services; Director General, NCC; Chairman, Joint Trainin g Committee, Armed Forces 
Headquarters; four eminent educationists nominated by  the Chairman are already 
members in the Board of Governors, Sainik Schools.  
 
Recommendation (Para No. 4) 
 
 
Drop out rate  
 
The Committee on the issue of drop out rate of student s in Sainik Schools have 
initially been apprised that drop out rate was 20.22  per cent.  However, the data was 
modified at a later stage and it was intimated that t he drop out rate stood at 7 per cent 
annually.  Even if 7 per cent drop out rate is accepted,  the average number of seats that 
remained vacant during the last three years approximate ly comes to 514.  Although, the 
Committee have been intimated that several steps have been taken such as improving the 
academic efficiency of the cadets, convincing parents of the  advantages of overall 
balanced personality, strict medical check up at the intake  level etc. yet the Committee 
feel that the drop out rate should be brought to a ‘ nil’ level.  The seats which fall vacant 
after the cadets leave the schools midway remain vacant u ntil the next entrance 
examination is held.  This has a rippling effect as on th e one side the precious resources 
of the Government go waste due to idling of seats and o n the other side it truncates the 
prospective candidates intending to join the NDA course.   The Committee, therefore, 
recommend that this problem should be addressed on pri ority basis.  Not only that the nil 
drop out rate should be achieved within the stipulated  time frame by taking the desired 
corrective initiatives.  The Committee also recommend tha t the anomaly in the data 
furnished to the Committee with regard to drop out r ate should be reconciled and the 
correct figure be intimated to them. 
 
Reply of the Government 
   
The figure of 20.22 per cent is exaggerated. In fact, i n the oral evidence held on 
12.1.12 before the Standing Committee, ADG AE, DGMT  stated that the percentage of 
cadets who leave after class X is 20 – 22 in Sainik Schools.   After obtaining information 
from the Sainik Schools, it was found that the average drop out rate has been 7.34  per 
cent  in respect of all the classes.  The overall prescribed sanct ioned strength of cadets in 
a Sainik School remains the same. The vacancies including on account of drop outs are 
filled by admission in class VI and class IX in the next entrance examination.  
  
Cadets are withdrawn from Sainik Schools only in extrem e cases.  Cadets are 
motivated to join armed forces by way of motivational t ours to NDA, IMA, Naval Academy, 
interaction with Officers of armed forces, who are ex-st udents of Sainik Schools, 
psychologists etc.  However, cadets are withdrawn on following reasons which are beyond 
the control of Ministry:- 
 

30 
 
(a) Parents requests. However, before parents allow with drawing his child, 
efforts are taken by the school authorities to convince th e parents not to withdraw by way 
of advising good career and by way of penalty clause. 
 
(b) On disciplinary grounds. Only in extreme cases and to maintain good 
order/discipline, the cadets are withdrawn by the school authorities. 
 
(c) On medical grounds.  In some cases, due to some medic al deficiency, 
parents are allowed to withdraw his child as such medical  deficiency makes him ineligible 
for entry to NDA.  
Recommendation (Para No. 5) 
 
 
NDA Course Strength 
 
 
Various issues discussed during the examination of the subj ect such as increasing 
the number of intake to the NDA, drop out rates, open ing new schools etc. bears a direct 
correlation with the NDA course strength.  The NDA cours e strength, as informed by the 
Ministry to the Committee has remained more or less stat ic.  The average seats available 
during the years 2008-10 are 640.  These are filled by the cadets of Sainik Schools, 
Rashtriya Military Schools, Rashtriya Indian Military College and general students from the 
entire India.  The Committee also find from sifting the information made available to them 
that sanction for 16 th  Squadron at NDA has already been accorded which has e nhanced 
the capacity of NDA from 1800 cadets to 1920 cadets.  Th e Committee also find that 
proposal for raising 5 th  Battalion at NDA with 4 new Squadrons is under consi deration.  
The Committee see this as a positive development and, t herefore, in unequivocal terms 
recommend that the proposal for raising 5 th  Battalion should be considered as a priority 
and all clearances etc. should be obtained within a time frame. The dual advantage of 
removing the shortage of officers and giving opportuniti es to the able and desirous 
candidates would be available once this Battalion comes to  fruition. The Committee would 
also like to be informed of the correct figures of NDA  course strength as two figures 
submitted to the Committee and brought out in the op ening part of this paragraph 
contradict each other.   
Reply of the Government 
 
 In regard to figures for course strength, it is to mention that NDA Course is for three 
years. Therefore, the total course strength for three years of NDA Course is 1920 cadets i. 
e. enhanced capacity.  The figures of annual intake of  about 640 cadets are for admission 
to first year of the Course. 
 
 The case for raising of 5 th  Battalion at NDA is at present with Ministry of Defe nce 
(Finance).  After ‘In Principle Approval’ for raising is accorded, the infrastructure for the 
same will take 4/5 years to come up at NDA.  
 
(Please see Para 7 of Chapter I) 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 8) 
 
 
Constraints in manning Sainik Schools 
 
    
The Committee note with concern that the Ministry has n ot been able to meet the 
demand of manning the Sainik Schools.  The main constrai nt in this regard has been 
indicated as release of adequate number of serving office rs.  There has been no 

31 
 
proportionate increase in the number of serving officer s which remained static at 72 
although the number of Sainik Schools has gone up from 18 to 24.  In this connection, the 
Committee would like to emphasize that the requirement  of number of serving officers for 
Sainik Schools should be reviewed periodically and the requisite number of serving 
officers provided for the smooth and effective functioning of Sainik Schools. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Each Sainik School is having three service officers.  Thus,  when the number of 
Sainik Schools was 18, the number of service officers requi red was 54.  This number is 
now 72 for 24 Sainik Schools.  As on date, out of 72, 6 9 service officers are posted in 
Sainik Schools. The matter is regularly taken up by Sain ik Schools Society with the 
Service Headquarters so that the requisite number of ser ving officers is positioned for 
smooth and effective functioning of Sainik Schools.  
 
Recommendation (Para No. 10) 
 
 
Creation of Data Bank 
 
 
  The Committee find that on an average only about 2 0% of the Sainik Schools 
Cadets join the NDA.  On a specific query of the Commit tee as to how many students out 
of the remaining 80 percent subsequently join Defenc e Forces through different streams 
such as Officers Training Academy, Indian Military Academ y and Coast Guard etc. or 
other technical Branches, the Ministry in a vague mann er has stated that no such data is 
maintained.  Such a response from the Ministry on a vit al issue is unacceptable to the 
Committee.  The Committee have all reasons to believe  that a sizeable number of cadets 
would be joining the Armed Forces subsequent to leaving  the Sainik Schools and 
completing their graduation.  The specific data in thi s regard would not only help the 
Ministry in its future expansion plans of Sainik Schools bu t the value of money spent by 
the Central / State Governments would also be properly  quantified.  The country would 
also be benefited as the cadets already trained in Sain ik Schools who are a precious 
manpower resource would get the opportunity of joini ng the Armed Forces alongwith the 
recognition of their Sainik Schools.  The Ministry shoul d, therefore, follow the right 
trajectory and do the needful to start and maintain s uch a data bank.  One such 
suggestion in this regard could be incorporating of one  column depicting the background 
of Sainik School in the form which is filled for all en try streams in all the forces other than 
NDA. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
   
 The suggestion to incorporate one column depicting the background of Sainik 
School in the form filled for all entry streams in all  the forces other than NDA has been 
noted and the matter has been taken up with appropriate authorities for doing the needful. 
 
Recommendation (Para No.11) 
 
 
Menace of Ragging 
 
 
The Committee are dismayed to note that the Sainik Sch ools having such a high 
level of discipline and culture of Armed Forces are also n ot free from the menace of 
ragging.  As per the specific data furnished by the Min istry, a total of 11 incidents of 
ragging have been reported during the last three yea rs.  In once case, as highlighted by 

32 
 
the media a cadet left the school and his parents were  repeatedly asked to give in writing 
and explain why he left the school.  Eventually, the p arent of the boy wrote that his son 
has joined another school and have no complaint against  the school.  Not satisfied with 
these facts, the Committee would like the Ministry to t ake proactive approach in such 
cases surfacing in future and make every effort to retain the child who takes such step due 
to the fear and torture of ragging. 
  
 In another case which has much wider connotations as th e clippings of the horrific 
incident of ragging was released on all the major news channels, the Committee have 
been informed that the court of inquiry has already  submitted its report and after the 
examination, the Ministry has sent it back with some obser vations.  This incident occurred 
during November 2010.  The matter was not reported b y the victims to the school 
authorities at that time and the senior students responsi ble for the ragging passed out 
from the school in March 2011.  As informed to the Comm ittee the formal court of enquiry 
was constituted to look into the whole incident and spe cifically on the role of the school 
administration.  The Ministry has stated that the perpe trators would also be summoned 
during the enquiry.  The Committee in this regard de duce that administration of Sainik 
School at Tilaiya completely failed to check this incide nt.  Even if, the matter was not 
reported by the victims, the administration should have in the normal case used their own 
system of checks and balances to identify such incident an d should have taken 
appropriate remedial action.  
  
 The Committee believe that only 11 ragging cases in S ainik Schools have surfaced 
but there could be some more of this nature which could  not come to the fore.  While 
deploring the delay in pronouncement of the punishm ent on the guilty cadets, the 
Committee in unequivocal terms recommend that they be apprised of the findings of the 
court of enquiry as well as the observations made by the Ministry on that inquiry.  They 
would also like to know whether the perpetrators wer e called before the enquiry and what 
were the findings on the role of the school administrat ion as they believe that the 
administration of the school was assigned the ‘duties of ca re’ in which it failed.  The 
Committee would like to be apprised about the detail s of the enquiry and the penalty 
imposed in each of the aforesaid 11 cases. 
 
 The Committee understand that in the recent past vari ous colleges and technical 
institutions in the country have taken stringent measur es to curb the menace of ragging.  
While taking note of the initiatives being taken by Sa inik Schools in this regard, the 
Committee strongly recommend that the Ministry of Defe nce/Sainik Schools should study 
the best of the practices being taken in various colleges/ technical institutions and replicate 
the same in Sainik Schools so as to achieve the ‘nil’ le vel of ragging in these prestigious 
schools. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 
 There were 11 reported incidents of bullying and rag ging in Sainik Schools during 
the last three years i.e. 2009- 2011. Action taken on a ll these incidents including Tilaiya is 
placed at Annexure-I.  
 
 Based on the best practices adopted in colleges/technical  institutions, instructions 
have been issued to obtain an affidavit from Parents/Gu ardians at the time of admission 
as well as start of new session. A copy of the same is placed at Annexure-II . 
 

33 
 
 Principals of Sainik Schools are also briefed from time  to time during conferences, 
visit of Inspecting officers to motivate teachers and cadets and to adopt all necessary 
steps to prevent such incidents. 
      
  
  Though detailed guidelines on the subject already e xist, however keeping in view 
the opinion and recommendations of the Court of Inqu iry, fresh set of comprehensive 
guidelines/ directives on maintaining of cadets’ disciplin e have been issued with the 
approval of Hon’ble Raksha Mantri. A copy of the same is enclosed as Annexure-III .    
   
Recommendation (Para No. 12-13) 
 
 
Appearing for NDA Entrance to be made mandatory 
 
 
The Committee are happy to note that the Academic per formance of cadets in 
class Tenth and Twelfth has been satisfactory.   Neverthele ss, they are concerned to note 
from the deposition made before them that a large nu mber of students leave Sainik 
School after class Tenth.  It appears that so far no mech anism is in place for retaining 
these students till class Twelfth and then to make them a ppear for the NDA entrance 
examination.  Even if the candidates complete their full education from Sainik Schools, the 
pass percentage of candidates who appear for NDA entra nce while they are not in the 
school is low.  Notwithstanding the fact, several measures have been taken to motivate 
the candidates for appearing in the NDA entrance and also to improve their 
representation, the Committee can only infer that Sa inik Schools are used by many for 
availing the facilities of good education, extracurricul ar activities and overall development 
of personality.  Only relatively fewer and serious ones appear for the NDA entrance.  The 
Committee in this regard would like to recommend that  apart from returning of the 
scholarship money, which is currently the rule, more inn ovative measures should be 
thought of so that only the real aspiring students join  the Sainik Schools and after 
completion of class Twelfth they have to appear for the NDA entrance.  As stated in the 
earlier part of the report, appearing for NDA exam should be made mandatory.  Some kind 
of undertaking at the initial level of entrance would not be out of place. 
 
While concluding the Committee observe that there exists a large scope for further 
improvement of Sainik Schools.  The various recommenda tions made in the report which 
include spreading Sainik Schools evenly in all the States a nd UTs, starting intake of girls 
in Sainik Schools by taking certain policy initiatives, a ddressing the financial issues with 
the States/UTs, improving the infrastructure and trainin g facilities in these schools, if 
implemented would certainly go a long way in making these schools a significant nursery 
to nurture students not only for NDA exam but also for other streams of the Armed Forces.  
The improvement of the functioning of Sainik Schools wou ld ultimately help the Defence 
Forces in getting quality as well as adequate number o f officers for their forces and would 
certainly solve the problem of shortage of officers in the Services.  The Committee as 
such would like the Ministry to seriously consider the recommendations made in the report 
and implement the same within the stipulated time frame. 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 
 Provision already exists in the rules that all boys admi tted to Sainik Schools who 
are in receipt of any Govt. scholarships including Defence scholarship are required to avail 
all chances for the NDA Examination conducted by the UPSC .  They are required to 

34 
 
appear for tests, interviews and medical examinations a t the Services Selection Board or 
other military institutions, training institutions, to  which they are asked to report.  If these 
conditions are not fulfilled or attempts are made to leave these institutions prematurely or 
there are wilful attempts on the part of such boys to u ndertake this as a procedural 
formality only, if detected the parents/guardians are required to refund the entire amount 
of scholarship enjoyed by such students. A bond to this e ffect is required to be executed 
by the parents/guardians at the time of admission of the cadet. 

35 
 
 
CHAPTER III 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT DESIRE 
TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
 
 
Recommendation Para No. 9 
 
 
Admission of Girl Cadets  
 
 Admission of girl cadets to Sainik Schools is an important  issue which has drawn 
the attention of the Committee.  The Committee are happy to note that State Government 
of Madhya Pradesh has taken a very rightful and encour aging lead in sending a proposal 
for opening up a Sainik School exclusively for girls.  How ever, the proposal is not 
agreeable to the Ministry primarily on the ground th at there is no room for girls in the NDA 
course.  While substantiating their stand, the Ministry ha s added that there are limited 
streams hitherto opened for female officers in the thr ee Services.  The views of the 
Defence Secretary in this regard were candid as he went  on record stating ‘It is for 
Parliament to make a policy for that’.  Deeper scrutin y of the subject further reveal that 
certain developed countries such as USA has female officer s in combat duties as well.  In 
the opinion of the Committee, opening up of new stre ams is an inevitable situation which 
has to happen sooner or later.  The Committee in this regard would like to recommend 
that the Ministry should create necessary infrastructure for inducting the female officers for 
the new steams and pave the way for the intake of fem ale officers in the NDA course.  
Once such decision is taken, opening of Sainik Schools for girls will become a 
complementary process.  The Ministry should initiate the  steps for formulating a new 
policy in this regard and the Committee be kept informed. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 
 The primary aim of Sainik School is to prepare boys f or entry into National Defence 
Academy which presently admits only boys as per existing policy.  The cadets selected for 
undergoing training at NDA are granted permanent com missions after training at their 
respective finishing academies.  As per existing rule, wo men officers of the three services 
are commissioned only after Graduation/Post Graduation  by means of the Short Service 
Commission process.  Since all girl cadets entering the Se rvices at present are 
Graduates/Post Graduates, sustaining the motivation of th e girls to join the Services 
through their graduation after they finish at Saini k Schools may not be easy. The matter 
regarding grant of permanent commission to women office rs in Army is sub-judice before 
the Hon’ble Supreme Court. 
 
 Admissions of girls may be considered only after intake of  female officers in NDA is 
started. 

36 
 
 
 
CHAPTER IV 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH  REPLIES OF THE 
GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE AND WHICH 
REQUIRE REITERATION 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 6)  
  
Funding of Sainik Schools/Constraints/Regional Imbalance 
 
 
The Committee are dismayed to note that the entire sc heme and gamut of funding 
pattern as envisaged for Sainik Schools has in fact dissuade d the States from taking pro-
active part in opening up of the new schools.  The Comm ittee took serious note of this 
issue in various reports whereby it was recommended that the entire funding of all Sainik 
Schools be made by the Central Government on the patt erns of Kendriya Vidyalayas.  
However, citing the Bhagidari concept the Ministry was no t agreeable to this suggestion.  
In addition to the land, the entire capital expenditu re such as buildings furniture 
educational equipments, major portion of recurring exp enditures, scholarships for domicile 
cadets are mandated to be met by the State Governments.    As is evident, not many 
States/UTs are coming forward for establishing new Sain ik Schools and even those who 
initiated the process did not take interest subsequently when they were intimated of their 
financial responsibilities.  It may not be out of place here to emphasize that seven States 
and several Union Territories as mentioned in Part-I of this Report have no Sainik Schools 
at all.  The Committee also note that the benefits of  this Bhagidari concept and the 
envisaged arrangements for tuition fee are also not e venly spread out.  For instance, 
schools in few States such as Karnataka, Uttarakhand, Bihar  and Haryana get handsome 
amount as scholarship and as a result parents of these sc hools have to pay less in fee 
whereas, the schools in Gujarat, Rajasthan, Assam, Jammu an d Kashmir and Madhya 
Pradesh are not getting regular scholarships from their  States and hence parents have to 
pay more.  Although, the Ministry have attempted to allocate Rs.1 crore to each Sainik 
School but the same has also not been actually disbursed  as sufficient amount was not 
allocated in the budget for the current year.  The C ommittee are also perturbed to note 
that out of the 11 requests received during the last fi ve years from various States for 
opening new Sainik Schools, only four proposals could be  finalized and the proposal for 
the rest stumbled either on the ground of unsuitabilit y of the site proposed by the State 
Government as was the case of Sikkim and Jharkhand or whe n State Governments 
swayed away from sharing their financial obligations as was the case in the States of 
Punjab and Uttarakhand.  Similarly, the proposal fo r opening of new schools in Orissa, 
Madhya Pradesh and Andhra Pradesh has also not reache d the logical conclusion as the 
said State Governments have been requested to transfer the land, build the basic 
infrastructure and sign the Memorandum of Agreement.   The Committee also observe 
that there is only one Sainik School in ‘Ghora Khal’ i n Kumaun Mandal of Uttarakhand.  
Since Kumaun and Gharwal Regions have been traditiona l recruitment grounds for the 
Armed Forces, the Committee recommend that all possibili ties be looked into by 
impressing the State Government to open one more Sainik School in the Gharwal Mandal. 
  
The Committee conclude from the aforesaid scenario tha t the Sainik Schools have 
not been able to meet the main objective of setting u p of these Schools that to remove 
regional imbalance in the officers cadres of the Armed F orces particularly when the most 
populous State of the country i.e. Uttar Pradesh is not  having even a single Sainik School.  

37 
 
Having taken note of all the shortcomings mentioned ab ove the Committee recommend 
that in no uncertain words the Ministry should revisit an d rework the entire scheme of 
establishment of Sainik Schools vis-à-vis  Bhgidari concept.  Here the Committee may like 
to refer to the fact acknowledged by the Secretary dur ing the course of examination of 
Demands for Grants (2011-12) whereby the Committee ha d been informed that the 
expenditure of running Sainik Schools in a year is just 5 0-60 crore.  The Committee as 
such would like to emphasize that Rs.50 to 60 crore expend iture can easily be borne by 
the Central Government.  As such the Committee would li ke to recommend that the entire 
funding for running and infrastructure of the Sainik Schools should be borne by the Central 
Government and as a Bhagidari, the State Governments ma y provide land for setting up 
these schools.  
 
 To correct the regional imbalance the Committee may st rongly like to emphasize to 
amend the current guidelines within a timeframe so th at at least one school is established 
in each of the State/UTs either by taking suo-moto ini tiatives by the Central Government 
or on the proposal of the respective State Government/UT administration.  The Committee 
would like to see a situation whereby no State is left without a Sainik School especially the 
most populous State of Uttar Pradesh which at present h as no Sainik School.  Not only 
that the number of Sainik Schools in a State should be  in proportion to the population.  
The most populous State of Uttar Pradesh which at presen t has no Sainik Schools should 
have adequate number of Sainik Schools in proportion t o the population of the State.  
They also recommend that the Ministry mulls a new prop itious guidelines so that this 
recommendation becomes operational at  the earliest po ssible span of time.  The steps 
initiated in this regard should be monitored at senior  level in the Ministry on monthly basis 
and the achievements made in this regard be communicated to the Committee. 
 
 The Committee find that some of the State Governmen ts like Punjab have taken 
innovative measures to build and sustain capacity of the  students to compete in 
NDA/other entrance exams conducted to join the Defence Services.   The Committee 
recommend that the Ministry should study such initiativ es and motivate the States 
Governments to replicate the best of the models in this regard.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 
(A) Sainik Schools are established only on a request rece ived from State 
Government/UTs as per the present dispensation. At per present estimates, for 
establishing/raising a new Sainik School, Rs. 50-70 crore  are required for basic 
infrastructure apart from the cost of land.  Further, a nnual expenditure is also involved. 
Therefore, the role of State Government in opening a nd running a Sainik School cannot 
be dispensed with. As and when requests are received from State Governments/UTs, they 
are examined on merit and necessary action is taken in the matter. 
 
(B) State Governments provide scholarship to the cadets o f Sainik Schools belonging 
to that State as per their own policy. Central Government has no say in this regard.   
 
(C) An amount of Rs. 1 crore each to Sainik School, Imph al and Sainik School, 
Goalpara, Rs. 91 lakh to Sainik School, Chittorgarh an d Rs. 75 lakh to Sainik School, 
Rewa were provided during the financial year 2011-12  for infrastructure/ modernisation to 
the extent the funds could be made available. Efforts are being made to provide as much 
amount as possible for infrastructure/modernisation to Sa inik Schools during the current 
financial year. 
 

38 
 
(D)  Eleven requests have been received during the last five years from various State 
Governments for opening new Sainik Schools in their States.  Out of these, four proposals 
have since been finalised and new Sainik Schools have sin ce been opened.  These are 
Punglwa in Nagaland (02.04.2007), Kodagu in Karnata ka (18.10.2007), Ambikapur in 
Chhatisgarh (15.08.2008) and Rewari in Haryana (02.04.2009).   
 
       In the case of Sikkim, the State Government ini tially offered site at Ravangla on 
20.01.2005 which was found suitable by the Ministry of  Defence.  On 25.01.2008, the 
State Government informed that the proposal to start S ainik School at Ravangla is not 
feasible and an alternate site at Bojoghari was propos ed.  In principle approval of Ministry 
of Defence was conveyed on 08.05.2008 for opening the Sainik School at Bojoghari. On 
25.07.2008, the State Government informed that due to technical problems a new site has 
been identified at Namphing. The same was not found s uitable by this Ministry. No further 
site has since been proposed by the State Government. Ul timately, the matter has been 
treated as closed.  
 
       The State of Punjab is already having a Saini k School at Kapurthala.   In the year 
2007, the Chief Minister, Punjab requested the Raksha M antri to open one more Sainik 
School in the State. He was informed of the responsibilities and financial obligations of the 
State Government for opening the Sainik School. He was requested to forward the State 
Government’s willingness to accept these responsibilities an d confirmation regarding 
willingness to meet all requirements. No further refer ence has since been received from 
the State Government. 
 
         The State of Jharkhand is already having a Sa inik School at Tilaiya. A proposal 
was received in the year 2007 for opening of one more Sainik School in the State at 
Gumla. The site proposed by the State Government was ins pected by officers from 
Ministry of Defence but the same was not found suitable.  No further reference has been 
received from the State Government after May, 2008.  
 
           The State of Uttarakhand is already havin g a Sainik School at Ghorakhal.   In the 
year 2010, the Chief Minister, Uttarakhand requested t he Raksha Mantri to open one 
more Sainik School in the State. He was informed of th e responsibilities and financial 
obligations of the State Government for opening the S ainik School. He was requested to 
forward the State Government’s willingness to accept these  responsibilities and 
confirmation regarding willingness to meet all require ments. No further reference has 
since been received from the State Government. 
 
        Recently, Proposals have been received from th e State Governments of Orissa, 
Madhya Pradesh and Andhra Pradesh for setting up new  Sainik Schools in Sambalpur, 
Sagar and Chittoor districts respectively. After site inspection by officers of the Ministry, ‘in 
principle’ approval has been accorded for setting up of new Sainik Schools in these 
States. The State Governments have been requested to t ransfer the land, build up basic 
infrastructure and sign Memorandum of Agreement. Service  Headquarters have been 
requested to give a commitment for sparing suitable ser vice officers for the posts of 
Principal, Headmaster and Registrar. The construction of  initial infrastructure required at 
proposed school at Chittoor is at advance stage and will  start functioning from the 
academic session 2014-15.  Matter relating to signing of  MoA and proposed financial 
implication of recurring expenditure for establishment of Sainik School at Sambalpur has 
already been taken up with the State Government of Orissa. 
 

39 
 
(E) In regard to opening of Sainik School in the Gar hwal Mandal of Uttarakhand, as 
soon as request is received from the State Government, th e same would be examined on 
merit and necessary action will be taken in the matter. 
 
(F) As regards opening of Sainik School at Uttar Prade sh, it is intimated that a proposal 
was sent to the State Government in 2009. State Govern ment has refused to accept the 
proposal.    
  
(G) In regard to opening of new Sainik Schools, once t he State Government makes a 
commitment to provide suitable land, the requisite fin ance and MoA is signed Ministry of 
Defence takes further action on the proposal. Besides pro viding suitable land and signing 
of prescribed Memorandum of Agreement, the State Gove rnment has to provide basic 
infrastructure where the school can be opened.  The scho ol starts functioning as soon as 
the minimum requisite infrastructure is provided by the State Government. Therefore, the 
role of State Government in opening and running a Sa inik School cannot be dispensed 
with. No proposal to change the funding pattern or t o establish at least one Sainik School 
in each State/UT is under consideration. 
 
(H) In regard to innovative measures taken by Punjab an d other State Governments to 
build and sustain capacity of the students to compete in N DA/other entrance exams 
conducted to join the Defence Services, this Ministry is no t aware of such innovative 
measures. However, matter has been taken up with Governm ent of Punjab on recent 
initiative taken by them. On receipt of information f rom the Government of Punjab, the 
same will be analysed and necessary action will be taken as deemed fit. 
 
(Please see para 21-24 of Chapter I) 
 
Recommendation (Para  No. 7) 
 
 
 Issues related to land for setting up of Sainik Sc hools in various States and 
apportioning funds from MPLAD Scheme  
 
 The Committee note that the building for proposed S ainik School at Nalanda was to 
be constructed between 2003 and 2005.    To the utter  dismay of the Committee this has 
not happen even after an elapse of about seven years.  The main reason attributed for this 
delay is the unsuitability of the land.  The Committe e also observe that now the suitable 
land has been earmarked and the tender for the construct ion of the building was finalized 
in September, 2011 after which the construction of comp ound wall is in progress. 
Likewise, the Committee find that evident delay has ta ken place in the construction of the 
Sainik School at Gopalganj in Bihar.  This delay, too took place due to unsuitable land 
provided by the State Government and the onus of land filling of the same was, technically 
taken by it.  The Committee deprecate the delays of such nature where problems surfaced 
due to the unsuitability of land for setting up of Sai nik Schools.  Therefore, the Committee 
desire that if possible the surplus land from suitable can tonment areas be provided for 
Sainik Schools in exchange of equal area of land from the respective State Governments.  
This is all the more the reason for the Committee to believe that responsibilities of such   
nature should be borne by the Central Government as t hese schools eventually provide 
skilled, trained and competent manpower for meeting the precious Defence related human 
resource needs.  The Ministry should explore setting up of new Sainik Schools on the land 
donated by the individuals/trusts etc. 
 
 One avenue for fund raising for the infrastructural de velopments of Sainik Schools 
could be apportioning funds from the Members of Parlia ment Local Area Development 

40 
 
Scheme.  The Member of Parliament is also part of the Local Board of Administration 
where the school exists.  The Committee have learnt that  although requests were made 
during the years 2010 and 2011 at the level of princip les of Sainik Schools for seeking 
such funds from MPLAD Schemes but only for one Sainik at Amravathi Nagar Rs.5 lakhs 
were given.  The Committee may like to recommend that  Members of Parliament may be 
approached through a much higher pedestal for apporti oning funds for the Sainik Schools 
falling in their constituencies.  The Committee would l ike to be apprised of the initiatives 
taken in this regard. 
 
 The Committee further note that largest area of lan d for defence purposes has 
been acquired in Jaisalmer, a district in State of Ra jasthan which is one of the desert 
districts of the country.  The Committee are constraint t o note that having contributed 
extensively by way of providing land for defence purpos es only one Sainik School could 
so far be set up in Chittorgarh.  The Committee strong ly recommend that the Ministry 
should take up urgent steps to set up Sainik Schools in des ert areas in various States 
either by taking suo-moto action on the part of the C entral Government or initiating the 
proposal by the respective State Governments. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 
(A) Land for setting up of Sainik Schools  
The provision of land by the State Government is a p re-requisite for opening of Sainik 
School. Due to training and operational requirements of armed forces, it is not possible to 
spare land for Sainik Schools from the cantonment areas.  Land donated by the 
individuals/trusts etc. may result in undue interference by such individuals/trusts in 
functioning of the Sainik School.  Further, in such case s, scholarship and annual recurring 
expenditure  will also not be provided by the State Government.  
  
(B) Apportioning funds from MPLAD Scheme  
Requests have been made during the year 2009 at Raksha  Rajya Mantri level  and 
during years 2010 and 2011 at the level of Principals of  the Sainik Schools for 
apportioning funds from Member of Parliament Local Ar ea Development Fund.  There has 
not been a very encouraging response.  However, such requests may be made again.  
 
(C) Opening Sainik Schools in desert areas  
As and when proposal is received from the State Governme nt the same would be 
examined and necessary action will be taken. 
 
 (Please see para 27 of Chapter I) 

41 
 
 
 
 
 
CHAPTER V 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS / OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH GOVERNMENT 
HAVE FURNISHED INTERIM REPLIES  
 
Recommendation No. 3  
 
Comparative Analysis of such schools internationally 
 
 
Another area of concern as observed by the Committee is that even in this modern 
world where technology has shortened all distances, the M inistry has not bothered to 
undertake any comparative analysis of the functioning of Sainik Schools vis-à-vis such 
schools, if any, existing in foreign countries mainly deve loped countries. The Committee, 
therefore, recommend that a comparative analysis of the  institutions, if any, existing in the 
foreign countries be made and the outcome of the same be intimated to the Committee.  It 
is needless to say that advance practices of such internatio nal schools be replicated in 
Sainik Schools by taking the desired initiatives. 
 
Reply by the Government 
 
 
The scheme of Sainik Schools is unique and peculiar in nat ure. No 
school/institution of identical in nature has come across to  notice of this Ministry. 
Therefore, no comparative analysis could be carried out.    However, the matter has been 
taken up with Ministry of External Affairs to find out the existence of similar institutions in 
other countries so that further necessary action could be taken.   
 
 

42 
 
 
CHAPTER VI 
 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH  FINAL REPLIES OF 
THE GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED  
 
 
- Nil    - 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI;                       RAJ BABBAR, 
10 February, 2014 
                Chairman,  
21 Magha, 1935 (Saka)                  Standing  Co mmittee on Defence 

43 
 

44 
 

45 
 
                  
        Annexure-I 
(Refers to Reply to Para No. 11) 
  
S. 
No 
Name of 
Sainik 
School 
Date of 
incident 
Findings of the Court of Inquiry Action taken 
1. Kapurthala 7 th  August, 
2009 
A cadet of class IX was beaten by  four 
cadets of class XII on 7 th  August, 2009 
after lunch and again after games time on 
the same day outside dormitory.  
All the four cadets involved in the incident were 
withdrawn from the school.  
2. Satara 17 th  July, 2010  One cadet of class XII has been found 
guilty of manhandling cadets of class VIII, 
IX & X. 
The cadet involved in the incident was withdrawn 
from the school.  
3. Chittorgarh 29 th  Aug,2010 Four cadets were found guilty of inciting, 
assault of appointments which resulted in 
injuries to two cadets.    
All the four cadets involved in the incident were 
withdrawn from the school. 
4. Satara 10 th  Sept., 
2010  
One cadet of Class XI manhandled cadet 
one cadet of class VIII. 
A fine of Rs. 2,000/- was levied on the Cadet 
involved in the incident and an affidavit was 
obtained from his parents that repetition of such 
instance by the cadet in future will be punishable as 
per rules and Ragging Act.       
5. Chittorgarh 13 th  Sept., 
2010 
One cadet of class XI locked  a cadet in 
cupboard and hid key. 
The cadet involved in the incident was withdrawn 
from the School.   
6. Satara October, 2010 Two cadets were found guilty o f slapping 
to one cadet of class X and one cadet of 
class IX.      
A fine of Rs. 2,000/- was levied on the Cadets 
involved in the incident and an affidavit was 
obtained from their parents that repetition of such 
instance by the cadets in future will be punishable 
as per rules and Ragging Act. 

46 
 
7. Tilaiya November 
2010 
Allegations made through the media by 
cadet Shankar Khalko of being ragged by 
senior students are falls. The incident of 
mass punishment, belting and 
manhandling was an aberration and not a 
routine practice. The student 
appointments while carrying out 
punishments as corrective measures 
resorted to giving unauthorised 
punishment. Ex- cadet Anand Prakash 
and Ex-cadet Arvind Kumar are solely 
blameworthy for manhandling of junior 
cadets. School authorities and adm. staff 
of the school were not aware of the 
incident till it was aired in electronic 
media on 14 November, 2011.  
After examining the report of the court of inquiry, 
circulars have been issued to Sainik Schools in 
regard to discipline in the Schools.  Disciplinary 
action has been initiated against the then Principal, 
Headmaster and Registrar of the school for 
supervisory lapses.  Replies of the then Principal, 
Headmaster and Registrar of the school, in 
response to the show cause notices issued to them, 
have been examined and the matter is being taken 
up with concerned Service Hqrs. 
      In regard to the two cadets involved in the 
incident, it has been observed that SP, Koderma 
has already lodged an FIR against the two boys 
involved in the incident.  Case has been filed 
against them under the provisions of Juvenile Act in 
the Court of Law. 
8. Chittorgarh 29 th  Dec., 
2010  
Two cadets indulged in physical ragging 
of a junior cadet and forcing him to fetch 
beer from nearby village. 
The cadets involved in the incident were withdrawn 
from the school.   
9. Chittorgarh 16 th  March, 
2011 
Four cadets of class XII and one Cadet of 
class X were involved in group violence 
and indiscipline.   
The cadets involved in the incident were withdrawn 
from the school.  
10. Chittorgarh 17 th  March, 
2011  
One cadet of class XII was involved in 
physically assaulting of cadets of class X. 
He was administered a stern warning to be careful 
in future. 
11. Chittorgarh 21 st  and 22 nd   
December, 
2011 
Cadets of class IX and Class VII have 
been found involved in ragging/group 
clashes.  
Four cadets were withdrawn from the school.  Five 
cadets were suspended for one month and one 
cadet was suspended for 15 days. 

 
 
46 
 
 
Annexure-II 
 
(Refers to Reply to Para No. 11) 
 
2301 0600(Honorary Secretary)          No.30(7)/201 2/D(SSC)  
2301 5769(Under Secretary)                      Board of Governors 
2301 1498(Inspecting Officer)                     Sainik Schools Society 
2301 4731(Sainik Schools Cell)                                 Ministry of Defence 
                                            New Del hi. 
                       Dated the        August, 201 2 
 
To, 
The Principal 
All Sainik Schools. 
 
 
Subject :  Proactive measures to reinforce the concept of disc ipline in 
Sainik Schools – obtaining of affidavit from cadets  as well 
as parents/guardians in regard to anti ragging. 
  
 
 This is in continuation to this office letter of e ven No. dated 7 th  March, 
2012 on the above subject. 
 
2. It has been observed that though adequate rules and regulations on 
maintenance of discipline among cadets of Sainik Sc hools have already been in 
existence in Sainik Schools, however, keeping in vi ew the 
strictures/directives/guidelines passed by Supreme Court in the matter and to 
make the existing system more effective, it has bee n decided that an affidavit 
from the parent/guardian and an undertaking from ca det may be obtained with 
effect from the current academic session.  
 
3. Accordingly, one copy each of the affidavit and undertaking to be 
obtained from Parent/Guardian (at the time of admis sion of the cadet in the 
school) and from the Cadets (every year at the time  of start of new academic 
session) are enclosed. Affidavit may also be obtain ed from the parent/guardian 
of the cadets who are already studying in the school. 
 
4. All Principals are requested to take appropriate  action in the matter and a 
report in this regard may also be sent to this office. 
 
5. This has approval of Joint Secretary (Training).  
 
Encl: As above.  
 
(Prem Parkash) 
Under Secretary 
for Hony. Secy., Sainik Schools Society 

 
 
  
 
UNDERTAKING BY THE CADET  
 
1 _________________________  (full) name of student  with 
admission/registration/enrolment number) S/o D/o Sh ri/Smt. 
__________________, having been admitted to Sainik School 
__________________ am fully aware of what constitutes ragging. 
 
2) I am fully aware fo the penal and administrative  action that is liable to 
be taken against me in case I am found guilty of in dulging in or abetting 
ragging, actively or passively, or being part of a conspiracy to promote 
ragging. 
 
3) I hereby solemnly aver and undertake that  
 
 a) I will not indulge in any behaviour or act that  may be 
constituted as ragging. 
  
 b) I will not participate in or abet or propagate through any act of 
commission or omission any act that may be constituted as ragging. 
 
4) I hereby affirm that, if found guilty of raging,  I am liable for 
punishment without prejudice to any other criminal action that may be 
taken against me under any penal law or any low for  the time being in 
force. 
 
5) Declared this________ day of ___________ month o f __________ 
year.  
 
 
___________________ 
Signature of  deponent 
 
       Name       
VERIFACTION 
 
 
Verified that the contents fo this undertaking are true to the best of my 
knowledge and no part of the same is false and noth ing has been 
concealed or misstated therein. 
 
Verified at ________ (place) on this the ______ (da y) of ______ (month) 
_____ (year). 
________________ 
 
Signature of deponent 

 
 
  
 
47 
 
AFFIDAVIT BY PARENT/GARDIAN  
 
1. Mr./Mrs/Ms. ____________________________ (full n ame of 
parent/guardian) father/mother/guardian of, (full n ame of student with 
admission/registration/enrolment number), having be en admitted to Sainik 
School ________________________. 
 
2) I am fully aware of what constitutes ragging. 
 
3) I am also fully aware of the penal and administr ative action that is 
liable to be taken against my ward in case he is fo und guilty of indulging in 
or abetting ragging, actively or passively, or bein g part of a conspiracy to 
promote ragging. 
 
4) I hereby solemnly aver and undertake that 
 
a) My ward will not indulge in any behaviour or act  that may be 
constituted as ragging 
 
b) My ward will not participate in or abet or propa gate any act of 
commission or omission that may be constituted as ragging. 
 
5) I hereby accept that, if found guilty of ragging , my ward is liable for 
punishment without prejudice to any other criminal action that may be 
taken against me under any penal law or any law for  the time being in 
force. 
 
6) I hereby declare that my ward has not been expel led or debarred 
from admission in any institution in the country on  account of being found 
guilty of, abetting or being part of a conspiracy t o promote, ragging and 
further affirm that , in case the declaration is fo und to be untrue, the 
a d m i s s i o n  o f  w a r d  i s 
liable to be cancelled. Declared this ________day of ____________month 
of ___________ year. 
 
 
______________________ 
    Signature of deponent  
  Name : 
   Address : 
      
     Telephone/Mobile No : 

 
 
  
 
 
 
 
48 

 
 
  
 
VERIFICATION  
 
Verified that the contents of this affidavit are tr ue to the best of my 
knowledge and no part of the affidavit is false and  nothing has been 
concealed or misstated therein. Verified at (place)  on this the (day) of 
(month), (year).  
 
___________________ 
       Signature of deponent  
 
Solemnly affirmed and signed in my presence on this  the (day) of (month) 
(year) after reading the contents of this affidavit. 
 
 
 
OATH COMMISSIONERE 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
  
 
49 

 
 
  
 
 
AFFIDAVIT BY PARENT/GARDIAN 
 
 
1. Mr./Mrs/Ms. ____________________________ (full n ame of 
parent/guardian) father/mother/guardian of, (full n ame of student with 
admission/registration/enrolment number), having be en admitted to Sainik 
School ________________________. 
 
2) I am fully aware of what constitutes ragging. 
 
3) I am also fully aware of the penal and administr ative action that is 
liable to be taken against my ward in case he is fo und guilty of indulging in 
or abetting ragging, actively or passively, or bein g part of a conspiracy to 
promote ragging. 
 
4) I hereby solemnly aver and undertake that 
 
a) My ward will not indulge in any behaviour or act  that may be 
constituted as ragging 
 
b) My ward will not participate in or abet or propa gate any act of 
commission or omission that may be constituted as ragging. 
 
5) I hereby accept that, if found guilty of ragging , my ward is liable for 
punishment without prejudice to any other criminal action that may be 
taken against me under any penal law or any law for  the time being in 
force. 
 
6) I hereby declare that my ward has not been expel led or debarred 
from admission in any institution in the country on  account of being found 
guilty of, abetting or being part of a conspiracy t o promote, ragging and 
further affirm that , in case the declaration is fo und to be untrue, the 
a d m i s s i o n  o f  w a r d  i s 
liable to be cancelled. Declared this ________day of ____________month 
of ___________ year. 
 
 
______________________ 
    Signature of deponent  
  Name : 
   Address : 
      
     Telephone/Mobile No : 
 

 
 
  
 
 
50 

 
 
  
 
 
VERIFICATION 
 
 
Verified that the contents of this affidavit are tr ue to the best of my 
knowledge and no part of the affidavit is false and  nothing has been 
concealed or misstated therein. Verified at (place)  on this the (day) of 
(month), (year).  
 
___________________ 
       Signature of deponent  
 
Solemnly affirmed and signed in my presence on this  the (day) of (month) 
(year) after reading the contents of this affidavit. 
 
 
 
OATH COMMISSIONERE 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
  
                                                                 
51 

 
 
  
 
 
Annexure-III  
(Refers to Reply to Para No. 11) 
 
2301 0600(Honorary Secretary)          No.30(2)/201 2/D(SSC)  
2301 5769(Under Secretary)                     Board of Governors 
2301 1498(Inspecting Officer)                    Sainik Schools Society 
2301 4731(Sainik Schools Cell)                                Ministry of Defence 
                                                New  Delhi. 
                Dated the       August, 2012 
 
 
To, 
The Principal 
All Sainik Schools. 
 
 
Subject :  Directive of Sainik Schools Society on cadets discipline. 
 
  
 
 In continuation to this office letter of even No. Dated 28 th  March, 2012 
giving specific instructions on maintaining of cade ts discipline, the following 
additional directives are issued in order to furthe r augment the overall discipline 
in Sainik Schools. 
 
 
(I) Co-location of residential accommodation of Hou se Master / 
Hostel Supdt / Ward boys.  
 
 
 All Principals are requested to ensure that tat lea st one House Master 
resides along with the cadets in their hostel in or der to exercise constant 
supervision and to provide necessary guidance to ca dets. Additionally, one 
Hostel Supdt./Ward boy should also reside in each hostel so as to carry out their 
specific duties as well as assist the House Master in maintaining discipline at all 
times. In these schools were residential accommodat ion is not presently 
available, Principals shall made alternative arrang ements to ensure co-location 
of House Master / Hostel Supdt / Ward Boy on top pr iority. If considered 
necessary, additions/alterations may be carried out  in the cadets hostels to 
ensure co-location. 
 
 In these schools, where the number of Hostel Supdt s / Ward Boys is less 
in relation to number of cadets and Hostels, or the  hostels are widely dispersed, 
Principals shall fully involve the Junior teachers to carry out the job  of  House 
Master. They  would  also  oversee  the duties carr ied out by Hostel  Supdt / 
Ward boys in addition to their academic duties. All  hostels shall be properly 
supervised at all times.  
 
 
 

 
 
  
52 
(II) Effectiveness of Duty Master  
 
  
All Principals are requested to ensure that a Duty Master is assigned for 
each day and his duties are comprehensively specifi ed in the school Standing 
Orders. The duty master of the day shall visit each hostel at least ones during  
 
 
 
day and at irregular intervals during night to carr y out necessary checks. All 
occurrences of the day will be recorded in the spec ified Duty Master register. 
The register shall be put up every morning to the RR /HM and Principal for their 
scrutiny and further directions. 
 
(III) Communication facility for HM / Duty Master /  Hostel Supdt / 
Ward Boys.  
 
 
 All Principals shall ensure that the above staff me mbers are provided with 
suitable facility for speedy communication with the ir superior officers at all 
times. This is necessary to ensure speedy remedial action in case of violation of 
school discipline or any untoward incident. 
 
(IV) Selection and Powers of cadets holding School Appointments 
 
  
All Principals shall ensure that suitable cadets ar e chosen for school 
Appointments like School Captain / House Captain et c. Their specific duties and 
powers shall be clearly spelt out in the school Sta nding Orders issued by the 
Principals. This would include authority for cadets  fall in, corrective physical drill 
to be given to Junior cadets under supervision etc. all serving Defence personnel 
belonging to the NCC and Physical Instructors of AP TC should be fully utilized in 
implementing and supervising the task of all school  appointments and they shall 
by present for all organized PT parades and corrective drills.  
 
 (V) Counselling of Cadets 
 
 
 
 The Sainik Schools society is in the process of co nsidering appointment of 
regular counsellor of each school. In the interim p eriod, all Principals shall 
nominate teachers trained as counsellor at FDRC, se nior teachers etc. for 
regular counselling of cadets indulging in repeated  act of indiscipline. Details of 
such counselling should be duly recorded in the reg ister. Parents are to be kept 
informed of the indiscipline acts of their wards. 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
  
53 
 
(VI) Conduct of School Assembly 
 
 
  
Proper School Assembly shall be conducted daily and  suitable instructions 
/ guidelines on discipline should be given to the c adets from time to time by 
Principal, Headmaster and Registrar. The academic staff along with the NCC and 
APTC staff shall carry out the necessary check of c adets turn out, cleanliness 
and discipline before, during and after the assembly. 
 
(VII) Conduct of regular PTA meetings 
 
 
 
 All Principals shall insure regular conduct of Par ents Teacher meeting 
under the chairmanship of Principal / Headmaster. T he parent community 
should be actively co-opted and involved in assisti ng the school in maintaining 
overall discipline and correvtive action taken wher e ever required. Points put 
forward by the PTA members should be given due atte ntion and proceedings of 
all PTA meetings should be properly recorded in a r egister maintained for this 
purpose. 
 
2. The above directives are in addition to all stat utory guidelines and policy 
letters already issued by the Sainik Schools Societ y on Anti-ragging measures 
and maintenance of school discipline. All Principals are required submit quarterly 
compliance and Action Taken Report to the Hony. Sec.  by end of every June, 
September, December & March. 
 
3. Conclusion 
 
 
 
 Maintenance of School discipline and decorum is a very important 
component of training of Sainik Schools cadets and contributes to their overall 
personality development. All schools staff are requ ired expected to fully involve 
themselves in the above tasks and extend full co-op eration to the Principal, 
Headmaster & Registrar at all times.  
 
 
(Rabindra Prasad) 
Director (Training) & 
Hony. Secy., Sainik Schools Society 
Tele : 23010600  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
  
54 

 
 
  
STANDING COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE  
 
 
MINUTES OF THE FOURTH SITTING OF THE STANDING 
COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE (2013-14)  
 
 The Committee sat on Monday, the 21 st   October, 2013 from 1500 
hrs. to 1600 hrs. in  Committee Room ‘G-074’, Parliament Library Building, 
New Delhi. 
 
PRESENT 
 
SHRI  RAJ BABBAR   -  CHAIRMAN  
 
LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri Sameer Bhujbal 
3. Shri R. Dhruvanarayana 
4. Shri P. Karunakaran 
 5. Shri Asaduddin Owaisi 
6. Shri Amarnath Pradhan 
 7. Prof. Saugata Roy 
8. Shri Uday Singh 
9. Shri Mahabali Singh 
10. Shri R. Thamaraiselvan 
 
 RAJYA SABHA 
 
 11.   Shri Naresh Gujral 
12. Shri Mukhtar Abbas Naqvi 
13. Shri T.K. Rangarajan 
 
 
 SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Dr. R.K. Chadha   - Additional Secretary 
2. Shri R.K. Jain  - Joint Secretary 
3. Shri D.S. Malha  -  Director 
4. Shri Sanjeev Sharma - Addl. Director 
 
 
 
55 

 
 
  
WITNESSES 
 
 Sl. No . Name and designation  
1.  Shri Ranbir Singh, IAS, Resident Commissioner, 
Mizoram 
2.  Mr. Lalbiakzama, Joint Secretary, Home Department,  
Government of Mizoram 
3.  Shri P.K. Srivastava, Principal Secretary, Educati on, 
Meghalaya 
4.  Shri Ramesh Negi, Development Commissioner, 
Arunachal Pradesh 
5.  Mrs. Rinchen Ongmu, Chief Secretary, Sikkim 
6.  Shri Thomas Chandy, Principal Secretary, HRD, Sikkim 
7.  Shri N.K  Pradhan, Dy. Director, HRD, Sikkim 
8.  Dr. S.K. Panda, Chief Secretary, Tripura 
9.  Shri J.K. Sinha, Resident Commissioner, Tripura 
Bhawan, New Delhi 
10.  Shri Jitendra Kumar, Secretary, Education Department, 
U.P. 
11.  Shri Parimal Rai, IAS, Principal Secretary (WR), G oa 
 Representatives of the Ministry of Defence  
 
12.  Shri AK Bishnoi, Addl. Secretary 
13.  Shri Vikram Dev Dutt, Joint Secy. (Trg.) 
14.  Shri Saurabh Kumar, Dy. Secy. (Trg. & Cer.) & Hony . 
Secy., Sainik School Society 
15.  Gp. Capt. Surinder Singh, IO, Sainik School Societ y 
16.  Col Rajveer Singh, IO, Sainik School Society 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members  to the sitting of 
the Committee. Thereafter, the representatives of t he Ministry of Defence 
were called in along with the representatives of th e seven states where 
there is no Sainik School namely Mizoram, Tripura, Meghalaya, Arunachal 
Pradesh, Sikkim, Goa and Uttar Pradesh. The     representatives   of    the 
 
56 

 
 
  
 
seven States submitted their position on not having a Sainik School in their 
respective states. Members of the Committee posed v arious queries 
before the officials of Defence and representatives  of States which 
included funding pattern for Sainik Schools wherein  one of the 
representative suggested that funding pattern of Sa inik School should be 
on the lines of that of Navodaya Vidyalaya, availab ility of land in their 
States etc. The States from the North-East requested for enhanced central 
responsibility for opening up of Sainik School to w hich Committee gave a 
thorough consideration. The queries of Members were satisfactorily replied 
to by representatives of the Ministry and the states.  
(The Witnesses then withdrew) 
A  copy of verbatim record of the proceedings has been kept. 
   
The Committee then adjourned. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
57 

 
 
  
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE  
 
 
MINUTES OF THE SIXTH SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMIT TEE ON 
DEFENCE (2013-14)  
 
 
 The Committee sat on Thursday, the 19th December, 201 3 from 1500 hrs. to 
1645 hrs. in Main Committee Room, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
 
 
PRESENT 
 
 
SHRI  RAJ BABBAR   -  CHAIRMAN  
 
LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri Kamal Kishor  `Commando’ 
3. Shri Mithilesh Kumar 
4. Smt. Mala Rajya Laxmi Shah 
5. Prof. Saugata Roy 
6. Rajkumari Ratna Singh 
 
 RAJYA SABHA 
 
7. Shri Pankaj Bora 
8. Shri Prakash Javadekar 
9. Shri Ashwani Kumar 
10. Shri Mukut Mithi 
11. Shri C.M. Ramesh 
12. Shri T.K. Rangarajan 
 
 
 SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Dr. R.K. Chadha   - Additional Secretary 
2. Shri R.K. Jain  - Joint Secretary 
3. Shri D.S. Malha  -  Director 
4. Shri Sanjeev Sharma - Addl. Director 
5. Shri Rahul Singh  - Under Secretary 
 
 
 
 
 
 
58 

 
 
  
 
2.      At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Mem bers to the sitting of the 
Committee.  Thereafter, the Committee took up 21 st  report for consideration and 
adoption.  The report was adopted with minor amendments. 
 
  XXX  XXX  XXX  XXX  XXX  
 

 
 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  

 
 
  
XXX  XXX  XXX  XXX  XXX 
 
   
A  copy of verbatim record of the proceedings has been kept. 
 
 The Committee then adjourned. 
 
 
*Not related with the report 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
59 

 
 
  
 
 
APPENDIX II 
 
 
ANALYSIS OF THE ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS CONTAINED IN THE SIXTEENTH REPORT 
(FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA) ON ‘CRITICAL REVIEW OF FUNCTIONING OF SAINIK 
SCHOOLS’ 
 
 
1. Total number of recommendations          13 
 
2. Recommendations/Observations which have been  accepted b y the 
Government 
 
 Para Nos. 1-2, 4, 5 (C), 8, 10, 11, 12-13  
Total :      09 
Percentage:   69%    
 
3. Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do no t desire to  
pursue in view of the replies of the  Government  
 
Para No. 9  
Total :      01  
Percentage:     7% 
 
4. Recommendations/Observations in respect of which  Repli es of the  
Government have not been accepted by the Committee and which  
require reiteration 
 
 Para Nos. 6 & 7 
Total :       02  
Percentage:    15% 
 
5. Recommendations/Observations in respect of which  
 Government have furnished interim replies  
 
Para No. 3  
Total :        01   
Percentage:     7%   
 
6. Recommendations/Observations in respect of which  Final  replies  
of the government are still awaited 
 
-Nil- 
 
 
Total :    Nil  
Percentage:   0% 
 
 

 
 
  
60 