STANDING  COMMITTEE  ON
DEFENCE
(2010-2011)
FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA
MINISTRY OF DEFENCE
[Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations contained in the Thirty-Fourth
Report of the Committee (Fourteenth Lok Sabha) on “Human Resource Planning, Shortage
of Manpower, Infusion of Hi-Tech Training and Infrastructure for the Armed Forces”]
TENTH REPORT
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
March, 2011 /Phalguna, 1932 (Saka)
10

TENTH REPORT
STANDING COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE
(2010-2011)
(FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA)
MINISTRY OF DEFENCE
[Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations contained in the
Thirty-Fourth Report of the Committee (Fourteenth Lok Sabha) on
“Human Resource Planning, Shortage of Manpower, Infusion
of Hi-Tech Training and Infrastructure for
the Armed Forces”]
Presented to Lok Sabha on ..................
Laid in Rajya Sabha on  ......................
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
March, 2011 /Phalguna, 1932 (Saka)

C.O.D. No. 120
Price : Rs. 77.00
© 2011 BY LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of
Business in Lok Sabha (Fourteenth Edition) and printed by National Printers,
New Delhi-110 028.

(i)
CONTENTS
PAGE
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (2010-2011)......................................... (iii)
INTRODUCTION.............................................................................................. (v)
CHAPTER I Report................................................................................. 1
CHAPTER II Recommendations/Observations which have been
accepted by the Government......................................... 20
CHAPTER III Recommendations/Observations which the Committee
do not desire to pursue in view of Government’s
replies................................................................................. 47
C
HAPTER IV Recommendations/Observations in respect of which
replies of the Government have not been accepted
by the Committee............................................................. 51
C
HAPTER V Recommendations/Observations in respect of which
final replies of Government are still awaited............. 64
A PPENDIX
Minutes of the Fifth Sitting of the Standing
Committee on Defence (2010-11) held on 17 January
2011 ..................................................................................... 68
Analysis of Action Taken by the Government on
the Recommendations contained in the  34th Report
of the Standing Committee on Defence  (Fourteenth
Lok  Sabha)........................................................................ 70

COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE
(2010-2011)
Shri Satpal Maharaj — Chairman
M EMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Harish Choudhary
3. Shri Kamal Kishor ‘Commando’
4. Shri H.D. Devegowda
5. Shri Varun Gandhi
6. Dr. Sucharu Ranjan Haldar
7. Shri Kapil Muni Karwariya
8. Shri Bhaskar Rao Patil Khatgaonkar
9. Shri Asaduddin Owaisi
10. Prof. Prasanna Kumar Patasani
11. Shri A.T. Nana Patil
12. Shri C.R. Patil
13. Shri Amarnath Pradhan
14. Shri C. Rajendran
15. Shri J. Ramesh
16. Shri M. Rajamohan Reddy
17. Shri Baju Ban Riyan
18. Shri Kalyan Singh
19. Shri Mahabali Singh
20. Rajkumari Ratna Singh
(iii)

(iv)
Rajya Sabha
21. Shri Munquad Ali
22. Shri Avinash Rai Khanna
23. Prof. P.J. Kurien
24. Shri Mukut Mithi
25. Shri Mukhtar Abbas Naqvi
26. Shri T.K. Rangarajan
27. Shri Birender Singh
28. Shri Ram Kripal Yadav
29. Shri M.V. Mysura Reddy
30. Shri Naresh Gujral
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri T.K. Mukherjee —Joint Secretary
2. Smt. Sudesh Luthra —Director
3. Smt. Jyochnamayi Sinha —Deputy Secretary

INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairman of the Standing Committee on Defence (2010-2011),
having been authorised by the Committee to submit the report on their
behalf, present this Tenth Report on ‘Action Taken by the Government
on the recommendations/observations’ contained in the Thirty Fourth Report
(Fourteenth Lok Sabha) on Human Resource Planning, Shortage of
Manpower, Infusion of Hi-Tech Training and Infrastructure for the Armed
Forces.
2. The Thirty Fourth Report was presented to the Lok Sabha on
24 February, 2009 and laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha on the same day.
The Ministry furnished their Action Taken Notes on all the Recommendations/
Observations contained in the Thirty Fourth Report on 17 February, 2010.
3. The Report was considered and adopted by the Committee at
their sitting held on 17 January, 2011.
4. For facility of reference and convenience, Recommendations/
Observations of the Committee have been printed in bold letters in the
Report.
5. An analysis of Action Taken by Government on the
Recommendations/Observations contained in the Tenth Report
(Fifteenth Lok Sabha) of the Committee is given at Annexure-II.
N
EW DELHI;  SATPAL MAHARAJ,
17  January, 2011 Chairman,
27 Pausa, 1932 (Saka)Standing Committee on Defence.
(v)

CHAPTER I
REPORT
This Report of the Standing Committee on Defence deals with action
taken by the Government on the recommendations/observations contained
in the Thirty-fourth Report (Fourteenth Lok Sabha) on ‘Human Resource
Planning, Shortage of Manpower, Infusion of Hi-Tech Training and
Infrastructure for the Armed Forces’, which was presented to Lok Sabha
and laid in Rajya Sabha on 24 February, 2009.
2. The Committee’s Thirty-fourth Report (Fourteenth Lok Sabha)
contained thirty-eight observations/recommendations on the following
aspects:—
Para No. Subject
(1) (2)
1. Human Resource Planning in the Armed Forces
2. Assessment of Manpower
3. Persisting Shortage of Officers
4. to 7. Encouragement and Motivation
8. and 9. Recruitment Procedures
10. Pre-Induction Training
11. Pre-Induction Training Infrastructure
12. Reckoning of Training Period
13. Stipend during Pre-Induction Training
14. to 16. Management of Career
17. to 22. Working Conditions
23. and 24. Welfare Measures
25. and 26. Exit Policy
27. Welfare of the Ex-Servicemen
28. Induction of Ex-Servicemen
29. and 30. Civilian Manpower and Infrastructural Support

(1) (2)
31. and 32. Defence Research and Development Organization(DRDO)
33. Inadequate Training Infrastructure
34. Need to expedite e-learning
35. Delegation of power to service headquarters
36. Depleting strength of Field Firing Ranges
37. Training abroad
38. Long Term Training Plan
3. Action Taken Replies have been received from the Government
in respect of all the recommendations/observations contained in the Report.
These replies have been examined and the same have been categorized
as follows:—
(i) Recommendations/observations, which have been accepted
by the Government (Please see Chapter II):—
Para Nos. 1, 2, 3, 4, 6, 7, 9, 11, 12, 18, 19, 20, 21, 22, 23, 25,
26, 31, 32, 33, 34, 35 and 38.
(23 Recommendations)
(ii) Recommendations/observations, which the Committee do not
desire to pursue in view of the replies of the Government
(Please see Chapter III):—
Para Nos. 10, 16 and 37.
(03 Recommendations)
(iii)Recommendations/observations in respect of which replies
of the Government have not been accepted by the Committee
and which require reiteration (Please see Chapter IV):—
Para Nos. 5, 8, 13, 15, 17, 27, 28, 29 and 36.
(09 Recommendations)
(iv)Recommendations/observations in respect of which final
replies of the Government are still awaited (Please see
Chapter V):—
 Para Nos. 14, 24 and 30.
(03 Recommendations)
2

4. The Committee desire the Ministry’s response to their
comments made in Chapter-I and final replies to the recommendations
made in Chapter-V of this Report be furnished to them at the earliest
and in any case not later than six months of the presentation of this
Report.
5. The Committee will now deal with the action taken by the
Government on some of their recommendations in the succeeding
paragraphs.
A. Imparting pre-selection Services Selection Board (SSB) Oriented
Training
Recommendation (Paragraph No. 5)
6. The Committee had recommended as under:—
“The Committee also feel that it is equally important to
simultaneously initiate concrete steps for the larger involvement of
the three services for imparting pre-selection Services Selection
Board (SSB) oriented training in all schools and educational
institutions including technical education institutions by utilizing
the services of professionally qualified defence personnel so as to
supplement the governmental efforts in disseminating the defence
related information specially in those areas where such
infrastructure is weak, inadequate or non-existent.”
7. The Ministry in their action taken reply has stated as under:—
“Sainik Schools, spread across the country and NCC units operating
in Schools/Colleges across the country are engaged in imbibing
Military oriented training, physical fitness etc. among the students.
The training imparted by these organisations contributes in
spreading career awareness of students about the Armed Forces
and motivates them to take up Armed Forces as a career. These
schools are excellent feeder organisations for the defence forces.
Further, Rashtriya Military Schools are premier training
establishments of the defence services engaged in the pursuit of
imparting quality education and also preparing the students for a
career in the Armed Forces. The five Rashtriya Military Schools
located at Chail, Ajmer, Belgaum, Bangalore and Dholpur besides
providing State of the art educational facilities to the cadets are
also grooming them as future potential officers of the defence
services. To achieve this aim, the cadets are put through various
outdoor activities as well as SSB training capsules. Pre-SSB training
3

is a regular feature in Rashtriya Military Schools. The services of
both serving and retired Group Task Officers (GTOs) and
Psychologists are taken to develop the personality of the cadets,
inspire them by widening their knowledge base and equip them
adequately to face the Service Selection Board.”
8. To further supplement the Government’s efforts in
disseminating the defence related information where there is inadequate
infrastructure, the Committee had desired to impart pre-selection
service selection board oriented training in all schools and educational
institutions including technical education institutions. The Committee
are perturbed to note the cryptic reply that the needful is being done
through Sainik schools, NCC and Rashtriya Military Schools. The
Committee find that the aforesaid initiatives are inadequate. There is
an urgent need for military training in all schools and educational
institutions including technical intuitions. The recommendation of the
Committee when implemented would be having broader and wider
implications as it would create awareness and prepare the talented
youth to join armed forces. The Committee would therefore like to
reiterate their earlier recommendation to further extend training in all
schools, colleges and technical educational institutions.
B. Recruitment Procedures
Recommendation (Paragraph No. 8)
9. The Committee had recommended as under:—
“The Committee find that a number of procedures for recruitment
of permanent Commissioned and short service commissioned
officers through UPSC and Non-UPSC mode have been put in place
for entry in the combatant and other specialized and allied wings
of the three services in the armed forces. However, all the candidates
aspiring to become officers have to invariably under-go Service
Selection Board (SSB) tests having same format both the combat
and technical services. The Committee’s examination has brought
out that the format of SSB tests has not undergone any major changes
in the last three decades except that the process now involves two
stages in which the candidates are first screened on the basis of
psychological test and only those who qualify these tests are assessed
in the second stage. Although this system is stated to be scientific
enough to determine the suitability of a candidate for the armed
forces, the Committee have been informed during the evidence
that the present system of selection procedure has been examined
by a Committee appointed by the Chiefs of Staff and its report has
4

inter alia highlighted that the “procedures for selection are extremely
rigorous”. The Committee’s interaction with an ex-serviceman
having expertise in this field has also brought out that the selection
process in the SSB tests is negative in approach and the whole
exercise is directed towards finding enough reasons to reject a
candidate rather than carrying out an appraisal of his good traits
for selection. It has also been pointed out that the most of the
assessors hesitate to give clear-cut assessments and keep most of
the candidates as border liners implying thereby that the whole
selection process is unable to determine suitably of such candidates.
Even the Defence Secretary admitted during evidence that some
of these tests are rigorous and impracticable and require a “fresh
look”. These facts lends credence to the Committee’s view that the
SSB tests for selection of officers in the armed forces continue to
be based on antiquated practices and no serious attempt has
been made to adopt and implement the modern techniques of
selection. While emphasizing that there should not be any
compromise with the quality and traits required for serving the
Armed Forces, the Committee recommend that an exhaustive review
of the selection process through SSB tests should be undertaken
at the earliest and latest techniques available for selection of
candidates in an objective manner should be put in place to inspire
confidence among the candidates volunteering for a career in the
Armed Forces. Since a good number of youth coming from rural
background face considerable difficulties in communicating in
particular language, steps should also be taken to ensure that such
candidates are not subjected to language barriers while assessing
their suitability for the Armed Forces. Needless to say that language
and communication abilities of such selected candidate can be
improved to the desired level while imparting pre-induction
training to them.”
10. The Ministry in their action taken reply has stated as under:—
“The selection procedure adopted by the Service  Selection Boards
is scientific and is aimed at assessing the officer like qualities of
an individual. The ability of an individual to withstand physical
and mental stress is assessed to determine his/her suitability for
an Armed Force.
The selection process is designed to select a prospective candidate
to meet the service requirements. The procedure is centrally
standardized by Defence Institute for Physiological Research (DIPR),
New Delhi for all three services. The process has delivered results
and has stood the test of time.
5

The emphasis during the testing of verbal abilities is on
communication skills and not on a language in particular and as
long as a candidate is able to comprehend the instruction given
to him and act accordingly it is considered good enough. Fluency
in spoken English or knowledge of English is not a limiting factor
for a candidate during testing.
Keeping with the modern techniques of selection, which have
evolved, the changes in the socio-economic background and the
envisaged charges in the service requirement a project on
‘Comprehensive Selection System in Armed Forces’ has been taken
up by DIPR for evolving a new selection system based on cognitive
abilities.”
11. The Committee find that on the one hand a project on
comprehensive selection system in armed forces has been taken up by
DIPR for evolving a new selection system based on cognitive abilities
on the other hand the selection procedure adopted by the Service
Selection Boards is considered to be scientific and satisfactory. The
Committee are unable to comprehend the stand of the Ministry on the
issues raised in the recommendation. The Committee, therefore, while
reiterating their earlier recommendation, once again wish to emphasize
that the study by DIPR should be completed at the earliest and the
new selection system based on modern techniques of selection is put
in place.
C. Stipend during Pre-Induction Training
Recommendation (Paragraph No. 13)
12. The Committee had recommended as under:—
The Committee note that the cadets undergoing training before
induction as officers are not being paid any stipend except in the case
of graduate cadets who are reported to be paid a monthly stipend of
` 8,000/- during training. The Committee understand that all the cadets
taking pre-induction training for joining the armed forces in the officers’
cadre do not necessarily come from affluent background and they strongly
feel that there is an imperative need to extend appropriate financial
support on the basis of their educational qualifications so as to enable
them to meet out their pocket expenses as well as the expectations of
their family members. They, therefore, strongly recommended that all the
cadets undergoing pre-induction training at NDA or similar institutions
must be paid ` 10,000/- and the graduate entrants ` 15,000/- as monthly
stipend during the entire period of training before being commissioned
6

in the armed forces. The Committee also desire that the MoD should
take up this matter expeditiously with the Ministry of Finance at
the highest level and impress upon them the need for extending such
a benefit.
13. The Ministry in their action taken reply has stated as under:—
“Post VI Central Pay Commission (VI CPC), the fixed stipend to
cadets at IMA, OTA and Cadet Training Wings at CME, MCEME
and MCTE has been increased to ` 21,000/- per month. However,
the Commission did not recommend grant of a stipend in NDA
and similar training academies in view of the fact that no payment
is required to be made by Cadets to such training academies and
the training results in award of a degree and subsequent
employment in the Defence Forces.”
14. In order to extend appropriate financial support and motivate
the cadets, the Committee had recommended that all the cadets
undergoing pre-induction training at NDA or similar institutions should
be paid monthly stipend during the entire period of training before
being commissioned in the armed forces. The Ministry instead of taking
concrete measures in this regard has rejected the recommendation of
the Committee outrightly. The Ministry find that no payment is required
to be made to the cadets during the training period. The Committee
feel that extending appropriate financial support during the training
would be a small measure which would help the cadets in meeting
their daily expenses. Not only that the said initiative would also boost
the morale of the cadets. Therefore, the Committee wish to emphasize
to reconsider the issue.
D. Time Scale Promotion
Recommendation (Paragraph No. 15)
15. The Committee had recommended as under:—
“The Committee note that the substantive promotion upto the rank
of Lt. Colonel or equivalent in the three services is made by time-
scale on completion of the stipulated period of 13 years of reckonable
commissioned service. However, promotion of the officers to the
rank of substantive Colonel not promoted by selection is made
subject to their being fit, only after completion of 26 years of
reckonable commissioned service. The Committee’s examination has
brought out the rank structure in armed forces being of steep
7

pyramidal shape has little scope for the officers to climb up the
hierarchical ladder. The opportunities for their promotion are further
restricted because of limited availability of training facilities for
Higher Command Course. Needless to say that the officers not
selected for promotion or for Higher Command Course feel de-
motivated which ultimately results in adverse effect on the overall
efficiency of the armed forces. The Committee, therefore, desire
that in order to achieve the functional efficiency; combat
effectiveness; and to keep down the age profile of the brigade
commanders or equivalent in the three Services of armed forces,
the MoD should take appropriate measures to introduce a system
whereby the strength of permanent commissioned officers
vis-à-vis SSC Officers is gradually brought to level of 30 per cent
of the authorised strength in each of the three Services and the
time scale promotions upto the rank of Brigadier and equivalent
in all the Services are made by bringing in appropriate reduction
in the length of reckonable commissioned service so as to fulfil the
individual career aspirations as well as to keep the morale of
officers high. The Committee need hardly point out that such a
measure would have negligible financial implications consequent
upon implementation of new pay-bands in the armed forces
besides going a long way in keeping the rate of attrition at lower
levels.”
16. The Ministry in their action taken reply has stated as under:—
“The A.V. Singh Committee had recommended that the ratio of
Permanent Commissioned officers to Short Service Commissioned
officers should be brought down. The Cabinet has already granted
its approval ‘in principle’, to the reduction in the Permanent
Commissioned officers cadre and corresponding increase in the
support cadre (including Short Service Commission Officers).
Specific proposals in this regard, keeping in view the specific
requirements of the three Services, are being examined by the
Ministry.”
17. With regard to the recommendation of the Committee to
introduce the system of time scale promotions upto the rank of Brigadier
and equivalent in all the Services by bringing in appropriate reduction
in the length of reckonable commissioned service, the Ministry has
chosen not to respond to the issue. The Committee again emphasize
that the said initiative would certainly increase the functional efficiency
and keep the morale of the officer high. The Committee, therefore,
urge the Ministry to take expeditious action on the recommendation
of the Committee.
8

E. Working Conditions
Recommendation (Paragraph No. 17)
18. The Committee had recommended as under:—
“The Committee note that limited opportunities exist for promotion
of the officers in the armed forces due to steep rank structure. This
fact necessitates that fair and transparent systems are put in place
for allaying the fears in the minds of officers serving armed forces.
Although the constitution of Selection Boards for promotion is stated
to be fixed, the Committee understand that there is no fixed time
schedule for holding the meetings of such Boards in different
services. Undoubtedly, any delay in holding the meetings of such
boards may sometimes result in denial of promotion to the officers
otherwise eligible. During evidence, the Defence Secretary informed
the Committee that he would not like to hazard a guess on the
allegations made by those who are not promoted that the dates
were played with to rule them out and made a promise that he
would certainly look into this aspect. The Committee trust that the
Ministry would not only pay serious attention towards streamlining
the procedures in this regard but also ensure that the meetings of
all selection boards for promotions in different wings of the three
services are held at a regular interval of six months every year to
make selection for the posts anticipated in ensuing six months so
that not even a single deserving officer is deprived of his legitimate
right. Any deviation from the stipulated time schedule in holding
meetings of the selection boards for promotion should be viewed
seriously and appropriate action taken against those found
responsible.”
19. The Ministry in their action taken reply has stated as under:—
ARMY
“Selection Boards (SBs) for consideration of officers for promotion
to the select ranks are to be held once a year to make selection for
vacancies accruing in the ensuing ‘one’ calendar year. Presently,
two SBs are being held in a calendar year.
AIR FORCE
A streamlined procedure exists for conduct of Promotion
Boards. The Board is conducted between February to March every
year.
9

NAVY
The Navy conducts Promotion Boards on a yearly basis are based
on the anticipated vacancies of the entire year.”
20. The Committee are constrained to note that the Ministry
instead of taking expeditious action on their recommendation to hold
meetings of all Selection Boards for promotion in different wings of
the three services at a regular interval of six months every year, has
just reproduced the existing practice. As per the practice, in Air Force
and Navy, the Promotion Boards are conducted on a yearly basis. In
case of Army, Selection Board for promotion to the select ranks are
held once a year. The Committee would like to emphasize that holding
the meetings of Selection Boards regularly at the interval of six months
would ensure timely promotion to officers which would boost their
morale. The Committee while reiterating their recommendation would
like the Ministry to take expeditious action in this regard.
F. Exit Policy
Recommendation (Paragraph No. 25)
21. The Committee had recommended as under:—
“The Committee note that certain criteria have been laid down in
the three services for considering the request for pre-mature
retirement or resignation from the Services. The Committee’s
examination of the subject matter has revealed that such requests
from officers are considered on merit of the case and requirements
of the service. Undoubtedly, discretionary powers in such matters
result in discontentment among officers in a number of cases. The
Committee, therefore, stress that the Ministry of Defence should
lay down clear-cut, objective and well-defined policy guidelines in
this regard leaving no scope for arbitrary decisions. It should also
be ensured that cases of similar nature are treated in an equitable
manner.”
22. The Ministry in their action taken reply has stated as under:—
“Guidelines and mechanisms for considering requests for premature
retirement are already laid down for the three services. These are
applied uniformly and in an equitable manner.”
23. The Committee note that the guidelines and mechanisms for
considering requests for premature retirement are already laid down for
the three services. The Committee wish to stress that these guidelines
10

should be strictly adhered to without application of any discretion in
order to avoid discontentment among officers.
G. Welfare of the Ex-servicemen
Recommendation (Paragraph No. 27)
24. The Committee had recommended as under:—
“The Committee note that the Department of Ex-servicemen Welfare
has been created in 2004 under the Ministry of Defence to formulate
various policies and programmes for the welfare and resettlement
of ex-servicemen (ESM) in the country. According to the information
available with the Committee, this Department is assisted by
Kendriya Sainik Board (KSB) and Directorate General of
Resettlement (DGR). While the KSB lays down general policies for
the welfare of ESM and their dependants and also administers
welfare funds, the office of the DGR has been entrusted with the
responsibility of implementing schemes and programmes of the
Government for ESM which includes pre and post-retirement
training, re-employment, self-employment, etc. The Committee are
however, surprised to find that despite existence of such an elaborate
mechanism, there are a number of areas which require focussed
attention for dignified resettlement and rehabilitation of ESM.
Undoubtedly, there is an urgent and imperative necessity to address
the legitimate needs of ESM and the Committee strongly recommend
the following measures:—
(i) In order to enable ESM to derive their due benefits from the
welfare schemes formulated for them by the Government,
the Ministry of Defence should urgently devise a foolproof
mechanism for compulsory registration of all ESM with the
relevant Zila Sainik Boards which in turn should forward
such data to Rajya Sainik Boards and DGR for being
maintained at State and National levels. Needless to say that
complete and precise data on the number of ESM in the
various States and the country as a whole would be immense
use to the various agencies involved in formulating and
implementing policies and programmes being contemplated
for the welfare of ESM.
(ii)Based on the accurate data on ESM so available with DGR,
the Ministry should ensure adequate allocation of funds to
DGR for efficacious implementation of various schemes being
launched for welfare of ESM in the country.
11

(iii) In their 4th Report (14th Lok Sabha), the Committee had
reiterated their earlier recommendation for setting up of
‘National Commission on Ex-servicemen’. The Committee
have now been informed during oral deposition that the
proposal for establishing such a Commission has since been
cleared by the Raksha Mantri. The Committee trust that the
‘National Commission on Ex-servicemen’ with statutory
powers will be established soon so as to ensure accountability
of existing structure put in place for implementation of various
welfare schemes for ESM.
(iv) The Committee understand that the revised pension policy
being implemented as a sequel to the recommendations of
the Sixth Central Pay Commission continues to remain a
contentious issue between the Government and the ESM. The
Committee desire that appropriate and expeditious action
should be taken to resolve this issue in accordance with the
general principles of equity.
25. The Ministry in their action taken reply has stated as under:—
“(i) Process of computerisation has been started at Rajya Sainik
Board/State Hqrs. and Zila Sainik Boards/District Hqrs. level.
Funds for the same have also been released to all the State
Governments. Completion of computerisation is likely to take
time. Once the system is in place, computerised data at State
and District level would be available and the authorities may
be in a position to ensure compulsory registration.
(ii)Adequate funds are being provided to the Directorate General
(Resettlement) under the head ‘Training’ and the same are
being utilized for training of Officers as well as PBOR.
The welfare schemes for Ex-servicemen are being handled
by Kendriya Sainik Board, the funds for which are being
provided out of the Armed Forces Flag Day Fund (AFFDF).
In addition, various State Governments have their own
schemes for benefit of the Ex-Servicemen residing in the States.
(iii)The recommendation for setting up of ‘National Commission
on Ex-servicemen’ has been considered but has not been found
feasible as a number of bodies such as Directorate General
(Resettlement), Kendriya Sainik Board at the Centre and Rajya
Sainik Boards at the State level already exist to undertake
welfare schemes for Ex-servicemen and their families.
12

(iv) A Committee was set up under the Chairmanship of Cabinet
Secretary on the direction of PM to look into the issue of One
Rank and One Pension (OROP) and other related issues. The
following recommendations have been made to substantially
improve the pension of Personnel Below Officer Ranks (PBOR)
and Commissioned Officers:—
Personnel Below Officer Ranks
I. The proposal of Ministry of Defence to bring pre
10.10.1997 PBOR pensioners at par with post 10.10.1997
PBOR pensioners may be agreed to.
II. The proposal of the Ministry of Defence to reckon the
enhanced rate of classification allowance w.e.f. 1.1.2006
on notional basis for the purpose of calculation of pension
(as in the case of reckoning MSP for determination of
pension) may be agreed to.
III. In order to reduce the gap between pre and post 1.1.2006
PBOR pensioners, it is proposed to follow the principle
of the Award of Group of Ministers (GoM) of 2006 in
the following manner:—
(a) To reckon the pension of all pre 1.1.2006 PBOR
pensioners with reference to a notional maximum
in the post 1.1.2006 revised pay structure
corresponding to the maximum of pre-Sixth Pay
Commission pay scales as per fitment table of each
rank.
(b) Also to continue with the enhanced weightages
awarded by the GoM.
Commissioned Officers
IV. The proposal to remove the linkage of full pension with
33 years of qualifying service w.e.f. 1.1.2006 instead of
1.9.2008 in the case of Commissioned Officers may be
agreed to. A similar dispensation will have to be extended
to civilians who have retired between 1.1.2006 and
31.8.2008.
V. In order to address the issue of disparity in the pension
of pre and post 1.1.2006 pensioners at the level of
Lt. General/equivalent/Additional Secretary and equivalent
civilian categories, a separate pay scale starting at
13

` 67,000 and going up to ` 79,000 may be created and
all officers of the level of Lt. General/equivalent/
Additional Secretaries may be fixed in this scale. As a
result of this, the pension of pre 1.1.2006 Lt. Generals
will get fixed at ` 36,500 and those of Additional Secretary
at ` 33,500.
All Defence Pensioners
VI. It is proposed to agree to broad banding of percentage
of disability/war injury pension for pre 1.1.1996 disability/
war injury pensioners.
VII. It is proposed to remove the cap on war injury element
of pension in the case of disabled pensioners belonging
to Category E.
2. Government letter has already been issued on 30.10.2008
implementing the Committee’s recommendation Nos. (II)
and (IV).”
 26. The Committee are distressed to note that even after getting
clearance from Raksha Mantri for setting up of National Commission
for Ex-servicemen, the Ministry has declined to set up the Commission
on the plea that number of bodies are existing to undertake Welfare
Schemes for Ex-Servicemen and their families. As there is apparent
dissatisfaction among the Ex-servicemen, the Committee are of the
strong view that there is an urgent need for setting up of a commission
at the National Level. While reiterating their earlier recommendation
the Committee would like the Ministry to reconsider the
recommendation and set up the commission expeditiously.
The Committee have constantly been recommending in their
reports to consider the demands of Ex-servicemen for ‘One Rank One
Pension’ in a holistic manner. The Ministry in the action taken note
has again stated about the benefits extended to Ex-servicemen by
implementing the seven recommendations of the Committee set up
under the Chairmanship of Cabinet Secretary. The Committee again
emphasize that in spite of the benefits extended by implementing the
seven recommendations, the demand of ‘One Rank One Pension’ still
persists. As such the Committee would like to reiterate their
recommendation made in earlier Report to reconsider the issue of One
Rank One Pension, so that the demand of Ex-servicemen is met which
would boost the morale of the defence personnel.
14

H. Induction of Ex-servicemen
Recommendations (Paragraph No. 28)
27. The Committee had recommended as under:—
“The Committee understand that besides their primary responsibility
of protecting the territorial integrity, the services of the armed forces
personnel are often requisitioned to assist the civil authorities during
internal security problems and rescue/relief operations during
natural calamities. Considering the fact that a large number of
defence services personnel retiring at a comparatively younger age
well trained and experienced enough to handle problems of internal
security and natural calamities, the Committee are of the view that
it would be in the national interest that the Government devised
an appropriate scheme for inducting retiring armed forces personnel
as a distinct force on the lines of Central Paramilitary Forces
personnel (CPMF). The Committee are in no doubt that such a
scheme would not only address the problems being experienced
in lateral induction of Ex-servicemen in CPMF but also result in
substantial financial savings to the Government on recruiting
procedures, training and pension payments. It would also minimize
instances if frequent deployment of the armed forces for secondary
duties as the services of the distinct force having professional
experience would always be available to assist the civil Authorities.”
28. The Ministry in their action taken reply has stated as under:—
“The issue of lateral transfer of army personnel into Central
Paramilitary Forces (CPMFs) has been under dialogue with Ministry
of Home Affairs. The issue is yet to be resolved. The VI Central
Pay Commission, in their report, have also recommended a scheme
of lateral transfer of defence personnel to Central Police
Organisations/Defence civilian organizations after rendering
7-17 years service in the defence, with a view to, inter-alia, provide
lifetime employment to defence personnel. However, as per decision
of the Government on the recommendations of the VI CPC
as contained in the Ministry of Finance Resolution dated
No. 1/1/2008-IC dated 29th August, 2008, the recommendation
related to lateral shift of Defence Personnel to Central Para Military
Forces will be examined separately. The recommendation for
inducting retiring armed forces personnel as a distinct force for
civil duties on the lines of CPMFs.”
15

29. The Committee in their earlier reports have been recommending
for lateral induction of Armed Forces Personnel into Paramilitary Forces.
However, as the matter is still under consideration at various Ministerial
level and it is time consuming, the Committee had desired for evolving
a scheme for inducting retiring Armed Forces Personnel as a distinct
force on the lines of Central Paramilitary Forces. The Committee are
distressed to note that instead of addressing the matter the Ministry, has
simply stated that there is no proposal for inducting retiring armed
forces personnel as a distinct force for civil duties. In view of immense
benefits by creating a distinct force, the Committee desire the Ministry
to re-consider the issue.
I. Civilian Manpower and Infrastructural Support
Recommendation (Paragraph No. 29)
30. The Committee had recommended as under:—
“The Committee note that civilian manpower and infrastructural
support to the services Headquarter office of inter-services
organizations under the Ministry of Defence are provided by the
office of the Chief Administrative Officer (CAO). While the office
of CAO is responsible for providing administrative cover to the
civilian personnel so employed including various categories of
Armed Forces Headquarter (AFHQ) civilian cadres, the Committee
are surprised to find that the proposals regarding cadre restructuring
etc., of AFHQ civil services require consultation with the Department
of Personnel and Training (DoPT) which is reported to be playing
no role in career management of AFHQ civil cadres. While the
Group of Ministers in paragraph 6.76 of its Report on ‘Reforming
the National Security System’ had recommended in 2001 that ‘a
Committee may be set up to look into the issue of better utilization
of AFHQ civil service officers within the Ministry of Defence’ the
Committee’s examination of the subject-matter has, however,
revealed that nothing substantial has been done in this regard and
participation of this service within the Ministry remains inadequate.
The oral deposition and the written submission made before the
Committee also highlighted that despite recruitment to various
groups of AFHQ civilian cadres through common examination, their
service conditions continue to be at variance with similarly placed
services under the Government. Undoubtedly, the bleak career
prospects and absence of any lateral movements in the Ministry
of Defence have an adverse impact on the functioning of these
cadres where a number of cases relating to service matters are
reported to have been under protracted litigation. In the light of
16

the fact that cadre were introduced with the specific aim of
providing specialized infrastructural support to the three service
Headquarters and inter-service organizations, the Committee desire
that appropriate steps should be taken to strengthen the AFHQ
civilian cadres by restructuring their service conditions with a view
to bringing in parity with similarly placed services in the
Government.”
31. The Ministry in their action taken reply has stated as under:—
“The issue for utilisation of Armed Forces Headquarters (AFHQ)
Civil Service Officer in MoD Secretariat in pursuance of the GoM’s
recommendations contained in para 6.76 of its Report on ‘Reforming
the National Security System’ has been examined twice in
consultation with the Department of Personnel and Training
(DoP&T). On both occasions, the DoP&T have not agreed to the
proposal for utilising the AFHQ CS in MoD (Sectt.). A Cadre
Restructuring of Armed Forces Headquarters Civil Service (AFHQ
CS) has been done in 2008 with the approval of Ministry of Finance.”
32. The Committee are concerned to note that even when the
Group of Ministers (GoMs) in its report had recommended to set up
a Committee to look into the issue of better utilization of AFHQ Civil
Services office within the Ministry of Defence and the Committee in
the recommendation have emphasized to implement the
recommendation of GoMs, the Ministry has tried to sidetrack the
recommendations of the Committee by stating that DoPT has not agreed
to the proposal and has reiterated its stand of not reviewing the position
in the light of DoPT’s advise. The Committee again emphasized that
the AFHQs Civil Service Officers was introduced with the specific aim
of providing specialized infrastructural support to the three service
Headquarters and inter-service organizations. As such the concern of
the Committee should be brought in the knowledge of DoPT and
immediate action should be taken in the light of the recommendation
of GoMs.
J. Depleting strength of Field Firing Ranges
Recommendation (Paragraph No. 36)
33. The Committee had recommended as under:—
“The Committee are concerned to note that the number of Field
Firing Ranges (FFRs) is gradually decreasing over a period of time.
Although the army had a total of 104 FFRs at one point of time,
the number of such Ranges is expected to come down to mere
17

seven by the year 2014. One of the important reasons attributable
to the depleting number of these Ranges is reported to be the
clearances required to be obtained by the State Governments from
the Ministry of Environment and Forests to permit use of forest
land for non-forest activities in accordance with the Forest
Conservation Act, 1980 and Supreme Court judgment delivered in
2002. While the MoD is stated to have initiated a process of
consultation with all stakeholders in order to find a mutually
acceptable solution to the problem, the Committee feel that it is
high time that the Ministry imitated expeditious and concrete steps
to resolve this issue in the national interest in a time bound manner.”
34. The Ministry in their action taken reply has stated as under:—
“ARMY
There are 92 notified Field Firing Ranges (FFRs) in the inventory,
of which notification of 57 ranges has expired. Cases of 04 ranges
are under active consideration by State Governments for
re-notification.
Actions Taken
(i) Favourable judgment of Hon’ble Supreme Court with respect
to NPV.
(ii) Advance sensitization of environment prior to expiry of
notification for taking timely actions to refortify ranges.
(iii) Interaction by HQ Commands with respective State
Governments.
AIR FORCE
The Air Force has seven air-to-ground ranges, located in Gujarat,
Rajasthan, Punjab, West Bengal, Uttar Pradesh, Madhya Pradesh
and Assam-Meghalaya border. However, operations of following
ranges are severely constrained due to the restrictions imposed by
civil air traffic as well as proliferation of habitation/industries in
the vicinity:—
(i) Dollang Mukh Range (Assam)
(ii) Singpur Range (Gujarat)
(iii)Sarmat Range (MP)
(iv) Tilpat Range (UP)
Despite the above limitations, IAF continues to use these ranges
for its air-to-ground firing practices within the laid down safety
parameters.”
18

35. Keeping in view the depleting strength of Field Firing Ranges,
the Committee had desired to resolve all the issues in consultation
with all stake holders. The Committee are perturbed to note that despite
the action taken by the Armed Forces, out of 92 notified Field Firing
Ranges with army notification with regard to 57 ranges has expired
Cases. Only 4 ranges are under active consideration by State
Government for re-notification. All the 7 air-to-ground ranges, with
Air Force are severely constrained due to restrictions imposed by civil
air traffic as well as proliferation of habitation/industries in the vicinity.
Keeping in view the changing security scenario and the strategic
importance of Field Firing Ranges the Committee wish to reiterate
their earlier recommendation to take concrete steps to acquire the same.
19

CHAPTER II
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN
ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT
Recommendation (Paragraph No. 1)
The Committee’s analysis of the statistical information relating to
the preceding fifty years as furnished by the Ministry of Defence (MoD)
reveals that the shortage of manpower in the officers’ cadre has been
persisting during all these years in all the three services of the armed
forces. These statistics also bring out that the extent of deficiency of
officers notably in the army, has assumed alarming proportions after an
increase in the authorised strength of officers in the army was made
during the nineteen eighties. In fact, the reported shortage of officers in
the army stood at a staggering figure of 23.8 per cent of the authorised
strength followed by 16.7 and 12.1 per cent in the navy and the air force
respectively during the year 2007. In terms of the absolute numbers, the
deficiency of officers in 2007 was 11,087 in army, 1,493 in navy and 1,366
in air force. While several steps are stated to have been taken from time
to time to overcome the problem of shortage of manpower in the armed
forces, the Committee are perturbed to note that all these measures have
not proved efficacious enough to meet the requirements of officers in the
three services particularly during the last two decades. To the utter dismay
of the Committee, the MoD have attributed this shortage of manpower
in officers’ cadre mainly to low priority being accorded to military career
by the present day youth due to lucrative job opportunities available in
the civil sector. The Committee are not inclined to accept this plea of the
MoD in view of the fact that a substantially large number of talented
youth offer themselves both for competitive examinations conducted by
the Union Public Service Commission (UPSC) for recruitment of officers
in the armed forces as well as for non-UPSC entries. The Committee’s
examination of the subject matter and their interaction with the
ex-servicemen and experts having experience in this field has brought
out that the entire issue of shortage of officers in the armed forces
continues to be viewed in isolation without properly appreciating
the complexities of the various aspects of the manpower planning and
human resource management in all its ramifications resulting in present
State of affairs in the armed forces. The Committee have dealt with
some of the important areas of concern requiring urgent attention and
20

priority action on this subject and other related issues in the succeeding
paragraphs of the Report.
Reply of the Government
The Ministry has been continuously taking steps to address the
issue of shortages of officers. Important steps already taken in this regard
include implementation of recommendations of A.V. Singh Committee
(phase I), whereby all officers including Short Service Commission officers
are now eligible for substantive promotion to the rank of Captain, Major
and Lt. Col. after 2, 6 and 13 years of reckonable service, upgradation
of a total of 750 posts of Lieutenant Colonels to Colonels rank. Reduction
in the qualifying service required for promotion as Colonel to 15 years
as against 20 years earlier. Increase of the tenure of SSC officers from
10 to 14 years. Upgradation of a total of 1896 additional posts in the
ranks of Colonel, Brigadier, Major General and Lieutenant General
(and equivalent) in the three Services towards implementation of A.V. Singh
Committee (phase II), implementation of the recommendations of the
VI Central Pay Commission with substantial improvements in the pay
structure of officers of Armed Forces etc. These measures will go a long
way to make service in the Armed Forces more attractive which will
contribute towards reduction in shortages.
Ministry of Defence have further gone into the question of
addressing the issue of Shortage of officers in the Armed Forces in its
entirety. A Multi pronged approach has been adopted for addressing the
entire gamut of issues involved. These include measures to implement
the balance recommendations of A.V. Singh Committee regarding
restructuring of officers cadre, improving Cadre mobility, increasing
in-Service intakes, initiation of new entry schemes, making Short Service
Commission more attractive, augmentation and capacity enhancement of
Selection and Training infrastructure etc.
Recommendation (Paragraph No. 2)
The MoD have informed the Committee that the manpower
planning in the army is a complicated issue because of the factors like
induction and wastage of personnel annually; large number of services
within services with varied manpower requirement; wide rank structure
with varying retirement ages for different categories; different recruitment
patterns for various trades and regions; and above all, uncertainty in
planning due to unforeseen and unpredictable circumstances such as
wastages due to death; disciplinary cases; medical grounds; and
pre-mature retirement and the likes. The Committee are unable to
comprehend as to how Ministry could term manpower planning as a
21

complicated issue on account of factors such as annual induction, wastages,
large number of services within services etc., since these factors have
been in existence for a long time and can easily be anticipated and taken
care of well in time by the authorities entrusted with the task of
maintaining service records. The Committee also feel that although the
wastages due to death or disciplinary cases or pre-mature retirement
cannot be anticipated, yet these factors cannot throw the process of
manpower planning out of gear simply because the number of such cases
is usually very small. Obviously, the systems and procedures created in
the armed forces for this purpose are not sound enough to generate
precise information required for proper assessment of manpower
requirements. This view of the Committee is strengthened by the finding
contained in chapter II of the Report of the Comptroller and Auditor
General of India for the year ended March, 2006 on Union Government
(Defence Services), which clearly highlights that there was a mismatch
between the authorization and actual manpower held in respect of PBORs
in the army due to incorrect assessment of manpower. In the opinion of
the Committee, all these facts are clearly indicative of the shortcomings
in the existing systems which ultimately have an adverse bearing on the
recruitment in a timely manner. They, therefore, desire that the MoD
should take appropriate steps to update their systems by utilizing the
latest technological methodology of digital data base to address the issue
of assessment of manpower requirements for induction.
Reply of the Government
ARMY
Central Audit: Central audit of manpower is carried out by Staff
Duties Directorate annually to establish the correct authorization of
manpower to each regiment/corps.
Manpower Tracking and Management System (MTMS): To assist
in monitoring of manpower, Manpower Tracking and Management
System (MTMS) has been put in place which is a quarterly report on
manpower prepared by the record office. It is submitted to Additional
Directorate General of Manpower (Policy and Planning), Management
Information System Organization (MISO) and the respective personnel
sections of Line Directorates in addition to others for monitoring and
reconciliation.
Two year recruitment cycle: Prior to 31 March 2000, recruitment
vacancies were released annually. One year time was too cramped with
four (three monthly) sub-cycles which gave very little flexibility to cater
for slippages and turbulence in recruitment. Two years recruitment cycle
22

has been adopted w.e.f. April 2000 with four (six monthly) sub-cycles
which now provide adequate leverage to cater for modification/review,
under which recruitment releases are made for one sub cycle of six months
each at the time.
Computer model for release of recruitment vacancy: To workout
the number of vacancies for recruitment, an ‘excel’ based computer model
has been developed in-house and is in use. It takes into consideration
superannuation, wastage (premature retirement, death, invalidment,
desertion, discharge and training wastage), number of recruits under
training and recruits passing out and being inducted into the system.
With help of this computer model anticipated holding and authorized
strength of the army on a future date can be worked out, as close to the
actual strength and vacancies released accordingly.
Automation: The process for having a digital database has already
commenced and is in an advanced stage of implementation.
AIR FORCE
Manpower forecast and induction plan for officers is based on a
methodology that has been evolved with experience over a period of
time. It involves logical analysis of the data and intelligent prediction
for the future. The accuracy of manpower forecast and induction plan
has a direct bearing on the formulation of correct human resource policies
for effective cadre management in future. Induction plan is prepared to
overcome the shortages in a planned and phased manner. The plan is
prepared branch-wise and is based on the existing authorized
establishment. Anticipated future establishments are not taken into
consideration. IAF has incorporated the Regression Analysis method to
forecast wastages. It is a data analysis method developed by College of
Defence Management, Secunderabad, which establishes relationship
between two dependant variables like strength and wastage in these cases.
The in-service wastage figures thus obtained have been observed to be
fairly accurate. Hence, IAF has adopted a scientific method of forecasting
wastages in the process of working out the induction plan.
NAVY
Manpower Planning: Indian Navy has put in place a very scientific
and logical system of manpower planning using available Information
Technology. The recruitment planning of the Navy is aimed at deciding
the number of candidates to be inducted into the Navy each year for
filling the various posts available in different branches. The number
depends on the vacancies lying unfilled, those likely to arise as a result
23

of outgo of serving personnel during the time taken for recruitment and
training of new entrants, as well as new posts that may be sanctioned
during this period for manning the new ships/facilities which are newly
commissioned. Manpower planning in the Navy is carried out on the
basis of long and short term reviews of Navy’s manpower requirement.
The long term review is carried out at a broad macro level, covers a
period of approx. 5-10 years, whereas the short term review looks at a
scenario of 2-3 years. The long term review provides a broad indication
of the intake levels and the short-term review, on the other hand, is able
to take advantage of more up to date and reliable inputs and forecasts,
and is, therefore, useful for fine tuning.
Calculation of Intake Levels: The required annual intake levels
are derived by taking into account the anticipated growth in the sanctioned
strength, the anticipated wastage during the given period, the current
shortages and subtracting the number of personnel already in the training
pipeline. This figure divided by the number of years gives the average
annual intake.
No difficulty has been experienced in terms of manpower planning
in the Navy. The system of the Navy has stood the test of time. The
induction targets are being calculated accurately and the patterns
established in respect of manpower have been observed to be satisfactory.
Recommendation (Paragraph No. 3)
According to the MoD, the deficiencies in the officers’ cadre in the
Army persist due to attrition of the force levels from time to time and
the unpopularity of the military career on account of lucrative alternative
options available; frequent transfers; early retirement age based on rank
held; and risk factor. The Committee are unable accept this reasoning in
view of the fact that these aspects not only form essential part of military
services but also continue to remain the basic tenets on which the
manpower planning in military is based. On the other hand, the
Committee’s examination of the information furnished to them reveals
that the shortage of officers have reached unprecedented levels in the
range of 23 to 26 per cent only after the authorized strength of army
officers was increased by 26 per cent in the nineteen eighties. The fact
that the number of officers in the Army has been registering increase
albeit marginally during the past two decades is a clear indicator that
there has been no reduction in the availability of volunteers for induction
in the Army as is being asserted by the MoD and it is only the lack of
adequate infrastructure for pre-commission training which appears to be
coming in the way of enhanced intake necessitated on account of
24

substantial increase made in the authorized strength. While expressing
their grave concern over the failure of the MoD in initiating appropriate
timely measures to enhance the training infrastructure required for
matching increased authorized strength of the officers, the Committee
desire that the MoD should go into the entire gamut of this issue in all
the three services and urgently formulate a plan of action for
implementation in a time bound manner.
Reply of the Government
Shortage of officers has been continuing in the Armed Forces for
quite some time for a variety of reasons. Ministry of Defence has been
continuously taking steps to address the issue of shortages of officers by
way of motivating service officers to continue in service and attracting
talented youth to join the Armed Forces through improvements in service
conditions, besides other measures. Towards implementation of
recommendations of A.V. Singh Committee (phase I), all officers including
Short Service Commission officers are now eligible for substantive
promotion to the rank of Captain, Major and Lt. Col. after 2, 6 and 13
years of reckonable service. A total of 750 posts of Lieutenant Colonels
have been upgraded to Colonel’s rank. The qualifying service required
for promotion as Colonel has been reduced to 15 years as against 20 years
earlier. The tenure of SSC officers has been increased from 10 to 14 years.
A total of 1896 additional posts in the ranks of Colonel, Brigadier, Major
General and Lieutenant General and their equivalents in the other two
Services have been upgraded towards implementation of A.V. Singh
Committee (phase II). The implementation of the recommendations of
the VI Central Pay Commission with substantial improvements in the
pay structure of officers of Armed Forces will also go a long way in
making service in the Armed Forces more attractive which will contribute
towards reduction in shortages.
The Ministry has comprehensively examined the issue of shortage
of officers in the Armed Forces in its entirety. Steps required to be taken
on the entire gamut of issues having a bearing on the issue of shortages
have been identified. Accordingly, wide ranging proposals have been
initiated. These proposals include implementation of the balance
recommendations of Ajay Vikram Singh Committee (AVSC) Report (‘peel’
factors), with suitable modifications, aiming at further improving cadre
mobility and making the Armed Forces more attractive, initiation of new
entry schemes, increasing in-Service entries, augmentation of Selection
Infrastructure and Training Infrastructure etc. Augmentation of Training
and Selection Infrastructure forms a significant part of the proposed
measures to improve intakes.
25

Recommendation (Paragraph No. 4)
The Committee’s examination brings out that there is presently no
shortage of manpower for holding ranks other than officers in the army.
The Committee are however, not inclined to accept the contentious
reasoning of the Ministry that such shortages in the navy and the air
force are within the manageable proportions. Obviously, there is lack of
appropriate advance action in making planned induction of the manpower
in both these services. Although a large number of potential candidates
volunteer themselves for a career both as officers and lower ranks in the
armed forces, the Committee feel that there is an imperative need to
motivate and encourage the younger age-groups particularly in rural
areas by way of wider dissemination of information for raising their level
of consciousness about the positive aspects of Defence services as well
as the criteria of qualifications and the modes of selection prescribed for
entry at different levels in various branches/cadres of the three services.
The Committee also feel that the growing security challenges are becoming
primary issues of concern before the nation and every Ministry/
Department of the Government have to contribute their share in giving
support to the various dimensions of the defence services. The Committee,
therefore, emphasise that the MoD should devise multipronged strategies
in consultation with the three defence services, important Ministries/
Departments having a bearing on them and also the State Governments
so as to have full impact on the target age groups.
Reply of the Government
There are existing established strategies for reaching out to the
potential candidates all over the country for motivating them to take up
a career in the Armed Forces. The Forces have undertaken sustained
image projection and publicity campaign to create awareness among youth
on the advantages of taking up a challenging and satisfying career.
Focused publicity drives in various institutions to attract potential
candidates are undertaken. Awareness campaigns, participation in career
fairs and exhibitions, advertisements in print and electronic media,
motivational lectures in schools, colleges are undertaken. Information is
disseminated through official websites. Training imparted through NCC
Units in schools/colleges and Sainik Schools spread across the country
contributes in spreading awareness about career in Armed Forces.
Activities like Air Shows, Sky Diving, Adventure activities, and visits
by Naval Ships to small/medium ports are organised to give exposure
to the local populations and enthuse them to take up Armed Forces as
a career.
26

Recommendation (Paragraph No. 6)
The Committee in their 29th Report (14th LS) had, inter-alia,
recommended that the sanctioned strength of NCC should be sufficiently
augmented with adequate funding to cover all schools/colleges in the
waiting list and also those who like to enrol their students. The Committee
are convinced about the immense potential of NCC cadets and the
infrastructure created for the purpose and they strongly feel that the
coverage under NCC needs to be widened within shortest possible time
and earnest efforts directed towards optimal utilization of this resource.
Reply of the Government
With the view to cover the institutions on the waiting list for
introduction of NCC in a phased manner, training for NCC Senior
Division/Wing has been reduced from 3 years to 2 years, thereby providing
NCC coverage to additional 90,000 cadets by the end of the third year.
Recommendation (Paragraph No. 7)
The Government have established Rashtriya Indian Military College,
five Military schools and 22 Sainik Schools in various parts of the country
to act as feeder institutions for the National Defence Academy (NDA).
Although the curricula of these institutions are specifically designed to
train the students for entry to the armed forces, the Committee are
perturbed to find that a very small percentage of students from these
institutions are presently opting for a career in the defence services. The
Committee feels that it is high time that the MoD took concrete policy
initiatives to optimally utilize this infrastructure created for training the
younger generation to prepare them for a career in the armed forces by
further strengthening the quality of teaching faculty and providing
adequate financial assistance to these institutions as well as to the students
selected from economically weaker sections of the society.
Reply of the Government
Sainik Schools
The Sainik Schools follow the CBSE pattern of curriculum and a
number of measures have been initiated to achieve academic excellence.
These include posting of only select rank Cols. or equivalent from the
education branches of the three services as Principal to provide
experienced and professionally competent academic leadership. Annual
in-service professional training for all teaching and administrative staff
is conducted with specialist resource personnel from reputed education
related institutions like NCERT, National University of Education Planning
27

and Administration (NUEPA) and similar State run body for improvement
of Board results. Specialised resource personnel are co-opted to train and
guide cadets appearing in the board exams. Additionally, Services Selection
Board (SSB) oriented training is provided using professional resource
personnel. Sainik Schools have been conceived as financially self-sustaining
institutions. A major portion of the recurring expenditure is met out by
the fees payable by the parents. The State Government are responsible
for the creation/maintenance of physical infrastructure and meeting a
portion of the recurring expenditure. The State Governments award
scholarships on merit-cum-means basis to the boys of their respective
States. As far as the Union Government is concerned, a budget provision
of Rs. 17.60 crore exists under Defence Service Estimates to meet
expenditure on subsidies towards fee and dietary charges, incentives for
cadets joining the National Defence Academy, scholarships to wards of
Defence personnel/ex-servicemen and training grants to these schools.
The Ministry of Defence also provides training grants to the schools
regularly to upgrade their training infrastructure and skills. Rs. Two crore
have been provided from the Union Budget of 2008-09 to each School
to upgrade their training infrastructure. In addition, Central Government
has decided to provide 80 per cent of the additionality to the Sainik
Schools by way of grant-in-aid to meet the additional financial liability
on account of implementation of the Sixth Central Pay Commission. Every
year at least two Sainik School teachers are selected for the national
award conferred by the President on Teachers Day. The Sainik Schools
have shown an upward trend in the number of cadets joining the National
Defence Academy in keeping with the primary aim of establishing of
Sainik Schools to prepare boys academically, physically and mentally for
entry into the National Defence Academy. Details of the number of cadets
from Sainik Schools joining NDA during the last five years are given in
Annexure-‘A’.
Rashtriya Indian Military College
The training infrastructure at Rashtriya Indian Military College is
being optimally utilized. The standard of faculty at the College is above
average. Adequate funds to the institution and financial assistance to the
students is being provided. Details of the number of cadets from Rashtriya
Indian Military College joining NDA during the last four years are given
in Annexure-‘B’.
Rashtriya Military Schools
The aim of Rashtriya Military Schools is to provide quality education
and prepare the cadets for a career in the Armed forces. Constant efforts
are made to improve the infrastructure and ambience of these institutions.
28

In the Budget allocation for the financial year 2008-09 and 2009-10, an
allocation of Rs. 5.54 crore and Rs. 5.00 crore respectively has been made
for Rashtriya Military Schools for Major Works Projects. In addition to
this, the following public funds have been allotted during the financial
year 2008-09 to Rashtriya Military Schools:—
(i) ATG : Rs. 7.00 Lakh each school
(ii) I&M : Rs. 27.00 Lakh each school
(iii) Lib. Grant:Rs. 1.67 Lakh each school
(iv) IT : Rs. 100 Lakh all 5 schools
(v) SAG : Rs. 45 Lakh (RMS, Dholpur, Belgaum and Chail)
Efforts are being made to fill up the vacancies of teachers in
Rashtriya Military schools. Fee charged from the wards of PBOR entitled
category is highly subsidised. The non-entitled category i.e. wards of
officers and civilians are being offered scholarships @ 15% of total strength
as under:—
(i) Income below Rs. 1,00,000 per annum — waiver of full fee.
(ii) Income Rs. 1,00,000 - Rs. 1,50,000 per annum — waiver of
50% of fee.
In order to rejuvenate Rashtriya Military Schools, Project Officers
(Lt. Col./Major), Library NCO, Computer NCO, PT Instructor and Drill
Instructor have been provided to each school.
Annexure ‘A’
NDA Intake from Sainik Schools – Last five years
Sl. Year Course NDA Course-wise Total intake Percentage
No. Numbers authorized Intake of of Sainik of Sainik
course Sainik Schools Schools
strength in Schools cadets in cadets
the year cadets the year joined
(two NDA
courses)
1. 2004 111 - 112 600 38 and 87 125 20.9
2. 2005 113 - 114 600 18 and 96 114 19.0
3. 2006 115 - 116 600 42 and 131 173 28.5
4. 2007 117 - 118 600 43 and 120 163 27.1
5. 2008 119 - 120 595 28 and 158 186 31.2
29

Annexure ‘B’
NDA Intake from Rashtriya Indian Military College —
Last four years
Sl. No. Term Appeared Joined NDA Percentage
1. May 2005 30 20 66.66
2. Nov. 2005 35 24 68.57
3. May 2006 37 20 54.00
4. Nov. 2006 42 26 61.90
5. May 2007 29 24 82.75
6. Nov. 2007 28 17 60.71
7. May 2008 26 21 76.92
8. Nov. 2008 26 21 76.92
Recommendation (Paragraph No. 9)
The Committee note that different procedures are being adopted
by the three services for recruitment of PBORs/Sailor/Airmen. While
Air Force and Navy adopt a system of recruitment on all India basis,
the recruitment of PBORs in the Army is made through recruitment rallies
on the basis of the concept of census based Recruitable Male Population.
The Committee understand that the recruitment rallies so held in different
parts of the country for recruitment of PBORs attract a large number of
candidates. Besides causing inconvenience to the candidates coming for
the recruitment rallies, their large number also sometimes assume
unmanageable proportions resulting in stampede as is being reported in
the media from time to time. Considering the fact that the recruitment
procedure for PBORs involves a number of stages, the Committee strongly
recommend that a system of inviting applications in advance for such
rallies should be put in place and the eligible candidates called in batches
for smooth conduct of selection tests. The Committee are in no doubt
that such a system will not only discourage instances of impersonation
and involvement of touts but also project a bright image of the defence
services.
Reply of the Government
Prior to 1998, Indian Army was following the Application System
of recruitment. The system had to be changed on account of the following
drawbacks:—
(i) The system encouraged proliferation of touts/agents and their
increased influence over potential candidates.
30

(ii) It was very restricted in nature and not easily accessible to
the public.
(iii)Remote areas/backward areas were not covered.
(iv) A large number of applications were misplaced in postal
transit thus candidates were not screened.
To over come above drawbacks, ‘Open Rally System’ was brought
into effect in 1998 with the aim of ensuring that recruitment is transparent
and fool proof. Recruitment through “Open Rallies” facilitated recruitment
in the remote areas. Each district is covered at least once if not twice in
a recruitment year. The involvement of touts in this procedure has been
greatly curtailed. During the rallies, specific dates are earmarked for each
district/tehsil as also for various categories, to avoid over crowding during
rallies.
Recommendation (Paragraph No. 11)
As brought out earlier in this report, the pre-induction training
infrastructure especially in the army is inadequate to meet the enhanced
manpower requirement of the officers in the armed forces. The Committee
have been informed during evidence that a proposal to set up another
officers’ training institute to meet the training requirement of increased
induction of SSC officers in the army has been approved “in principle”
but it would require detailed financial approval from the Ministry of
Finance. In the light of the fact that creation of new infrastructure for
imparting pre-induction training not only involves huge financial
implications but also long drawn and time consuming process, the
Committee strongly feel that earnest efforts should be directed towards
large scale and rationalized expansion of existing training institutes in
a time bound manner so as to ensure optimal and efficient utilization
of these institutions. The Committee are in no doubt that besides being
cost-effective, such a step would also put minimal pressure on the
manpower required for running such institutions and requisitioned from
already depleted strength of the officers.
Reply of the Government
Augmentation of Pre-induction Training infrastructure and
enhancement of their capacity are among the important measures taken
up by the Ministry for addressing the issue of shortage of officers in the
Armed Forces. The proposals in this regard are being appropriately
progressed. As such, efforts are already under way for rationalized
expansion of pre-commission Training Institutes.
31

Recommendation (Paragraph No. 12)
The Committee note that the training period is counted towards
service in case of PBOR in the armed forces. However, the same benefit
is not extended to officers inducted in the armed forces. The Committee
feel that there can be no plausible explanation for not adopting uniform
practices in this regard and they desire that the period of pre-induction
training imparted to the officers in the armed forces should be reckoned
as service rendered for the purposes of pensionary benefits.
Reply of the Government
The issue of counting of training period of officer cadets for all
purposes was deliberated upon by the VI Central Pay Commission
(VI CPC). The VI CPC have observed that the successful completion of
training is a pre-requisite for the grant of Commission in the Defence
Forces, a situation which is not totally comparable with the civilian
side.They have further observed that counting of the service spent under
training for all purposes would imply that officers would get promoted
as Captain one year after commission instead of 2 years at present and
this residency period appears to be extremely short. Therefore, the
Commission did not recommend any change in the present provisions
relating to pre-commission service. Further, as no wage/salary is paid to
the trainee and induction to training is not after recruitment (as in the
case of PBOR and Civil Services), the training period cannot be counted
as service for officers.
Recommendation (Paragraph No. 18)
The Committee note that statutory and non-statutory channels are
available to the Defence service personnel for seeking redressal of their
service related grievances. While the efficacy of this system stands proved
by candid admission of Defence Secretary that a few promotions had
been given on the basis of statutory complaints, the Committee need
hardly emphasise that such complaints are required to be entertained on
priority and first cum first served basis so as to display a sense of equity,
fair play and justice. The Committee trust that the MoD will expeditiously
take appropriate steps in this regard.
Reply of the Government
Statutory and Non-Statutory complaints are handled as per laid
down guidelines and it is endeavoured to dispose of such complaints
within the stipulated time frame.
32

Recommendation (Paragraph No. 19)
Appropriate steps should also be taken to ensure that the adverse
entries made in the Annual Confidential Reports (ACRs) are invariably
communicated to the officers concerned within a prescribed time frame
with a view to affording them an opportunity to clarify their position
for appropriate action. Proper systems should also be put in place to
avoid any delay in forwarding the ACRs to the concerned quarters for
being placed before the selection boards so as to avoid any cause of
complaints from the eligible officers in the zone of consideration. The
feasibility of reducing the number of officers reviewing the ACRs should
also be considered in the positive light.
Reply of the Government
ARMY
As per extant provisions, adverse remarks in Annual Confidential
Reports (ACRs) are always communicated to the concerned officers by
their Initiating Reviewing officers as applicable.
Timely initiation of ACRs is monitored. A system has been put in
place under which details of ACRs not received in the stipulated
time-frame are automatically generated and intimation to HQ Commands
is forwarded for expediting their movement.
The system of reporting being followed in the Army is a three tier,
one which has an ‘initiator’, ‘moderator’ and a ‘balancer’ in the chain.
The initiating and the reviewing officers endorse all ACRs while
outstanding ACRs are reviewed by Senior Reviewing Officer also. The
system has been in vogue since independence and has stood the test of
time.
NAVY
The Naval Appraisal System has incorporated certain measures to
ensure that any adverse remark in the Annual Confidential Reports is
conveyed to the officer on whom the ACR is being rendered. This is done
through a Performance Appraisal Discussion on the ACR wherein the
Initiating Officer is required to advise the appraise on his/her performance
during the period under consideration. Further, all specific adverse
remarks are required to be countersigned by the appraisee in the ACR.
In order to obviate any delays in processing the ACRs the
Navy has instituted a system wherein the appraisee receives an
33

acknowledgement slip from all officers in the chain of reporting, when
they receive the ACR for endorsing their comments. This ensures that
the officer can monitor the progress of the ACR and can address the
concerned person, should there be any delay on any account.
There are only three levels of reporting in the case of more than
90% officers of the Navy. This is primarily on the grounds that it allows
objective analyses of the performance of individuals through comparison
with his peers, who would be carrying out similar tasks in different
organizations. This also entails that there are one or more Flag officers
in the Chain of Reporting, depending on the rank of the officer being
reported upon, whose experience would ensure adequate moderation, if
required.
AIR FORCE
Appropriate instructions already exist for mandatory
communication of adverse grading/comments to afford adequate
opportunity to all to clarify their position. A time frame has been stipulated
for processing and transmission of ACRs to ensure that the ACRs of
offices in zone of consideration are available to the selection boards and
the adherence to the same is closely monitored. The number of officers
reviewing ACRs is in consonance with those required to ensure a just
appraisal to all officers across the board.
Recommendation (Paragraph No. 20)
The fact that a large number of cases relating to service matters
of armed forces personnel are pending with various courts of law is a
clear indicator that the satisfaction level for seeking redressal of grievance
through normal departmental channels is distressingly low. Obviously,
the existing systems and procedures are not sound enough to provide
appropriate remedy to the aggrieved defence personnel. The Committee
are in no doubt that the laws governing the three services require a
thorough review in the light of various judgments delivered by the courts
during recent times. The Committee also feel that there is a need to
identify those weak spots in the system which opens the floodgates of
litigation. The Committee expect the MoD to give serious attention towards
this aspect so as to avoid unnecessary litigation involving huge financial
burden and loss of man-hours.
Reply of the Government
There is a well established redressal mechanism in the Services for
redressal of grievances. Despite this, a number of court cases inter alia,
34

relating to service matters, disciplinary matters etc. do arise. The issue
of review of laws/regulations pertaining to the Services for appropriate
changes is an ongoing process. The Government has also constituted the
Armed Forces Tribunal for adjudication of complaints and disputes
pertaining to Service matters and appeals arising out of Court Martials
with a view to provide for quicker and less expensive justice to the
members of the Armed Forces.
Recommendation (Paragraph No. 21)
The Committee understand that preparatory action has been taken
by the Ministry to establish the Armed Forces Tribunal. However, the
tribunal is yet to be notified under Section 4 of the relevant Act. The
Committee trust that an urgent action would be taken to operationalise
the Tribunal without any further delay.
Reply of the Government
Notification under Section 4 of the Armed Forces Act has been
issued on 07.08.2009 for establishing the Tribunal by specifying the
‘appointed day’ under Section 3 (c) of the Act. The Principal Bench of
the Tribunal at Delhi has started functioning from 10.08.2009. The
Government is making all efforts to facilitate the functioning/
operationalisation of all other Benches of the Armed Forces Tribunal.
Recommendation (Paragraph No. 22)
The Committee are in no doubt that while the chain of command
and control has to be kept intact to maintain highest level of discipline
in the Armed Forces, there is need for attitudinal change in the mindset
of those in the higher echelon in view of the socio-economic changes in
the society and the enhanced level of the educational qualification amongst
the personnel holding lower ranks in the armed forces. The Committee
feel that it is high time that multipronged strategies are devised and
adopted with a view to bringing in necessary reforms in the armed forces.
They, therefore, desire that concrete steps should be taken to discard
undesirable discriminatory practices based on rank structure and gender
bias. Needless to say that such step would not only result in redressal
of genuine grievances of lower ranks but also help in better management
of stress level in the armed forces.
Reply of the Government
Adequate safeguards/mechanisms exist to prevent any kind of
discrimination including based on rank structure or gender bias. There
is a well established redressal mechanism in the Services for redressal
35

of grievances for all ranks. Continuous measures are taken on an on
going basis aimed at reducing stress of Armed Forces personnel.
Recommendation (Paragraph No. 23)
The Committee are of the view that the Ministry of Defence may
come forward on their own and play a proactive role in addressing the
legitimate and genuine grievances of the members of the armed forces
considering the fact that the constitutional and legal provisions restrict
them to form associations or unions. The Committee feel that such an
act on the part of the Ministry will prove efficacious enough in boosting
the morale of the armed forces personnel.
Reply of the Government
ARMY
Army personnel are entitled to redress of grievances relating to
denial of military rights through Non Statutory Complaints. Such
complaints are submitted and processed alongwith laid down channels.
If the complainant is not satisfied with the outcome of Non Statutory
Complaint he may submit a Statutory Complaint on the same subject to
the Central Government.
Detailed procedures to process the grievances of personnel through
Command/Staff Channel are in place. There is also a forum called
“Dreamer’s Club” on official Army Website on internet, where every
officer and Personnel Below Officer Rank (PBOR) can share innovative
ideas and can also participate in discussion. The disclosing of identity
is optional, the suggestion and ideas are analysed in detail at the highest
level on regular basis and suitable corrective actions are taken to improve
the existing system and processes.
AIR FORCE
Officers and airmen are entitled to submit a representation to
Superior Officer, who shall investigate into the complaint. Besides the
above, a statutory right is also available to a person tried by a Court
Martial to submit a petition against the finding and sentence of a Court
Martial at the pre and post confirmation stage.
In the IAF, there is no gap between officers and staff in regard to
discussing (personal or other) problems openly. The facility of open
interviews with Air Officer Commanding/ Station Commander/ COs on
any issue is available to tall air warriors for speedy redressal of grievances
as well as to instill confidence and faith in the leadership.
36

Periodic counselling of subordinate staff is carried out by
supervisors/section commanders and Branch Head/Commanding Officers.
Special emphasis is put on inter-personal relationship and constant
interaction at all levels.
Facility has been provided to all service personnel to post any
suggestion/complaint at the CAS Website on the IAF Intranet, which are
addressed expeditiously.
Various forums already exist in the IAF where personnel can
project their grievances for redressal. These forums are being extensively
and effectively utilized. A well defined mechanism exists in the IAF
wherein the redressal of the grievances is provided to the personnel
within the parameters of the organization. Some of these are enumerated
below:—
(a) Adm. Help Cell: Adm. Help Cells called ‘Samvedna’ are
established at each station. These provide a single point
contact in the station for welfare of all AF personnel.
(b) CAS website: There is a facility available for all service
personnel to post any suggestion/complaint on the CAS
website on the IAF Intranet. These are considered at
appropriate level and feedback given expeditiously.
(c) Open Interview: Air Officer Commanding (AOC)/Station
Commander in all stations grant opportunity of open
interview to all personnel. The grievances brought out by
them are heard by the AOC/Stn. Cdr. personally and addressed
appropriately.
(d) Welfare Meeting: Welfare meetings for PBORs and Darbars
for DSC personnel are held periodically by Air Officer
Commanding/Station Commander/Commanding Officer.
Points related to welfare are addressed promptly.
(e) Helpline:In most of the Command HQ, helpline has been
set up which can be contacted at all times by all personnel
in the Command. Setting up of such helpline in the remaining
Command HQ is in progress.
(f) AFWWA:  A Air Force Wives Welfare Association (AFWWA)
looks after the welfare of the families of the air warriors.
Besides ensuring welfare of the families, all the grievances
put forth by the wives of air warrior are promptly
addressed.
37

NAVY
In the Navy, the ‘Divisional System’ is a time tested forum which
provides for regular interaction between officers and sailors. In this system,
a group of sailors are assigned to one Divisional Officer (who may be
their Departmental Officer) acting as their ‘friend, philosopher and guide’.
The sailors are encouraged to share all their problems including personal,
domestic, service and any other issue agitating them. The Divisional Officer
renders all possible help in the form of informing appropriate agencies,
authorities and Command to ensure ‘Redressal of their Grievances’ in an
informal environment. In addition Divisional Officer’s Period (DOP) is
conducted periodically and problems posed by sailors are recorded with
remedial measure taken. The sailors in the Navy have a well laid down
system of forwarding their requests to Divisional Officer pertaining to
their welfare, promotion, domestic issues and the same are disposed off
in a time bound manner at appropriate levels which can reach right up
to the ‘Chief of the Naval Staff’.
Recommendation (Paragraph No. 25)
The Committee note that certain criteria have been laid down in
the three services for considering the request for pre-mature retirement
or resignation from the Services. The Committee’s examination of the
subject matter has revealed that such requests from officers are considered
on merit of the case and requirements of the service. Undoubtedly,
discretionary powers in such matters result in discontentment among
officers in a number of cases. The Committee, therefore, stress that the
Ministry of Defence should lay down clear-cut, objective and well-defined
policy guidelines in this regard leaving no scope for arbitrary decisions.
It should also be ensured that cases of similar nature are treated in an
equitable manner.
Reply of the Government
Guidelines and mechanisms for considering requests for premature
retirement are already laid down for the three services. These are applied
uniformly and in an equitable manner.
Recommendation (Paragraph No. 26)
The Committee consider it desirable that the Government should
make it mandatory for all the armed forces officers including those serving
in Defence Public Sector Undertakings to seek permission from the
Government for taking up post-retirement employment within two years
of their release from the Services. Stringent action should be contemplated
against those violating such stipulations.
38

Reply of the Government
As per present instructions, armed forces officers are required to
seek permission of the Government prior to taking up commercial
employment within one year of their release from service.
Recommendation (Paragraph No. 31)
The Committee notes that the charter of DRDO requires them to
render advice to the three services and inter-services organizations on
scientific aspect of weapons, military operations, support and logistics
in all likely threats of conflict. Taking into account the multifarious
responsibilities assigned to the Secretary (R&D) to act as Director General
of DRDO and DG of Aeronautical Development Agency besides
being Scientific Advisor to Raksha Mantri, the Committee in their
(14th Lok Sabha) had observed that such a situation diluted the efficacy
of the DRDO. They had accordingly desired that one person in DRDO
should not be entrusted with a number of responsibilities. The Committee
have now been informed by the Ministry of Defence that the whole issue
of management of DRDO was being looked in to by a Committee headed
by Dr. P. Rama Rao and that Committee had submitted its confidential
report in March, 2008. Considering the fact that DRDO has an important
role in rendering advice on scientific aspects of weapons and military
operations to the three Services, the Committee feel convinced that any
further delay in taking decision in such a crucial matter will have an
adverse impact on the effective functioning of both the DRDO and the
three Services.
Reply of the Government
The DRDO Review Committee headed by Dr. P Rama Rao had
submitted its confidential report to the Government in March, 2008. The
report is under study and analysis by the Government.
Recommendation (Paragraph No. 32)
To sum up, the Committee’s examination has revealed certain
deficiencies and shortcomings in manpower planning and human resource
management in the armed forces. Broadly, the areas of concern are:—
(a) Absence of proper system for assessment of manpower
requirement;
(b) Inability to meet persisting shortage of officers;
(c) Inadequate initiatives to encourage and motivate the younger
generation to join armed forces;
39

(d) Lack of awareness among the eligible youth regarding
recruitment procedures;
(e) Need for improvement in the recruitment procedures;
(f) Adequate pre-induction training infrastructure;
(g) Desirability of better management of career prospects and
working conditions; and
(h) Need for multipronged strategies for welfare of serving
defence personnel and ex-servicemen.
Although the MoD have maintained that several policy initiatives
have been undertaking to address the issues, the Committee are of
considered view that some of these initiatives are still on paper while
the others will take a long time to fructify. The Committee strongly feel
that the armed forces deserve to be accorded the status of a national
service in view of the unique nature of duties being performed by them
in all parts of the country. They, therefore, desire that a permanent high
powered Core Group comprising representatives from the MoD; the three
defence services; and the Ministries/Departments connected with the
matter relating to the defence services in any manner should be constituted
by the Government so as to ensure effective and timely implementation
of the various steps contemplated from time to time or are in the process
of being introduced for improving the quality of life of defence service
personnel engaged in protecting national security concerns in difficult
situations away from their family for prolonged periods.
Reply of the Government
The Ministry is already seized of the entire gamut of issues covering
the areas raised by the Committee. The Ministry has ‘in principle’ approved
wide ranging measures covering different aspects for implementation.
Based thereon, specific proposals have been initiated which are being
suitably progressed for approval and implementation. Thus the
Ministry is fully alive to the issues pertaining to manpower planning and
human resource management in the armed forces and appropriate
action in this regard is already under way. The welfare of ex-servicemen
is being looked after by a full fledged Department (Department of
Ex-Servicemen Welfare) under Ministry of Defence. Appropriate forums
already exist for coordination between the Services and Ministry of
Defence. Wherever required, inter-ministerial consultations with the
concerned Ministries is done/will be done at an appropriate level. As
such, it is not considered necessary to constitute a separate permanent
high powered Core Group.
40

Recommendation (Paragraph No. 33)
With the advent of technological development and fast changing
nature of warfare in the modern times, the need for hi-tech training has
become a necessity for maintaining a highly skilled force. The Committee
are, however, distressed to find that a number of serving officers and
other ranks being sent for training is abysmally low in the three services
as is evident from the statistics furnished by the MoD which bring out
that the percentage of officers sent for training as against the officers in
position is 24 in Army followed by 5 per cent and 3 per cent in Navy
and Air Force respectively. The picture in respect of PBORs sent for
training as equally dismal with such figures being 6 per cent in Air Force,
4.8 per cent in Navy and a poor 1.7 per cent in Army. The Committee
is dismayed to find that despite depleted strength, the services are not
able to impart requisite training to the majority of serving officers and
other ranks on the latest technological changes and the state-of-the-art
equipment inducted from time to time. Undoubtedly, availability of
inadequate infrastructure and facilities in the training institutions is
adversely affecting the modernization of the armed forces. The Committee,
therefore, desire that the existing training infrastructure should be
expanded at a large scale keeping in view the future requirements
including those necessitated due to enhanced induction of manpower in
the future. Appropriate steps should also be simultaneously taken to
expeditiously meet the manpower requirements in the training institutions
and to ensure that the existing hi-tech training infrastructure is put to
optimal use.
Reply of the Government
ARMY
In order to enhance infrastructure to impart hi-tech training, a
detailed policy on establishment of Computer Training Laboratories(CTLs)
and Campus-Wide Networks (CWNs) has been formalized.
One-fourth (24%) of the Army officers are on training at any given
time. As far as PBOR is concerned the figure is 1.7%. Increase of this
figure is inter alia dependent upon the ability of units/formations to
spare the increased numbers of PBOR from operation and training
commitments.
With a view to enhance Training Infrastructure in Training
Establishments. A capital expenditure grant called ‘Modernisation of
Laboratories and Training Infrastructure (MOLTI)’ has been specially
instituted for this purpose based on Army’s Five Year Plans. The outlay
41

for this grant is substantial enough to meet the projected requirements
of Category A establishments. Utilising this grant, large amount of
infrastructure has come up and continues to be created.
AIR FORCE
The Air Force provides necessary training to its personnel as per
the requirements. This includes training on existing as well as modern
state-of-the-art equipment. In-service courses are also undertaken at
various stages of their service career to develop the skills of the personnel.
The training tasks are worked out keeping the requirements of the
personnel in mind.
The present infrastructure for cadets at Air Force Academy (AFA)
is of world class standard which is being progressively upgraded as per
various modernization programmers. With an increase in induction of
trainees and the evolving changes of training patterns necessitated by
advancement in technology, the IAF has felt the need to develop the
infrastructure at its training establishments. Action for further development
of training infrastructure with all modern facilities/amenities has been
initiated.
NAVY
The training philosophy in the Navy entails the following:—
Integrated approach for training of officers as they are required to
shoulder leadership and managerial responsibilities in addition to
furthering their professional knowledge at every stage of their career.
Vertical specialisation approach for training of sailors primarily
due to their limited responsibilities and short duration of initial
engagement as compared to the officers.
Both officers and sailors are trained at regular intervals, in various
facets to keep pace with advancements in technology by means of various
courses/attachments. These professional courses are interspersed with
tenures on boardships to consolidate the learning absorbed during courses.
100% officers and sailors undergo the professional training upto certain
stage.
In addition to the structured professional courses, operator/
maintainer training for the newly inducted equipment is conducted by
the Original Equipment Manufacturer (OEM) as part of the contract. The
42

requisite training aids/live equipment/simulators are procured for the
training schools to impart further training to the replacement crew as
part of the Pre-Commissioning Training (PCT). Thereafter, personnel are
given On the Job Training (OJT) to gain first hand knowledge in handling
the equipment.
The new Naval Academy at Ezhimala has been commissioned in
January, 2009. The current strength of the academy is 750 cadets.
Recommendation (Paragraph No. 34)
The Committee notes that a policy envisaging implementation
of e-learning by 2012 in three phases in army was introduced in
August, 2005. Considering the fact that the format of e-learning will not
only shorten the duration of the training but also enhance the capability
level, the Committee desires the MoD to make concerted efforts to ensure
that the policy is implemented strictly in accordance with the time
schedule prescribed in this regard. They also desire that an appropriate
mechanism to monitor progress of this policy be put in place in the
Ministry and the project not allowed to languish on any account of any
factor.
Reply of the Government
ARMY
In order to monitor e-learning implementation in the Army, a
steering committee will, all stake holders as members, has been constituted.
A road map with timelines for implementing various activities associated
with e-learning such as network architecture, content development etc.,
has also been issued to all concerned. A number of measures have been
implemented for expediting of e-learning in the Army. Concerted efforts
are being put in to ensure that e-learning policy is implemented as per
time schedule.
AIR FORCE
In respect of IAF, e-learning is planned to be introduced in the in-
service courses for the officers, such as Basic Professional Knowledge
Course (BPKC), Advanced Professional Knowledge Course (APKC), Basic
Air Staff Course (BASCO) and Intermediate Staff Course (ISCO) and for
airmen in Modules II and III, as part of their Modular Pattern Training.
This will be implemented, once the IAF communication network termed
AFNET, for which the work is underway, comes into operation.
43

NAVY
E-learning has been implemented in Navy since 2006 at the Naval
Training Command, Kochi. The system enables distributed learning for
professional training in various Professional Schools through Campus
Area Network (CAN) in the form of Sharable Content Object Resource
Management (SCORM) compliant e-learning packages.
Further, to implement e-learning in the entire Navy, a project
proposal is in concept development stage. The proposal is to provide
learning through on-line courses, based on the Data Centre model with
Navy-wide downward connectivity.
The proposal envisages a comprehensive naval portal on public
domain and a Satellite based Naval Educational Network (SANEN) for
providing access to remote areas. The services proposed to be provisioned
are, as follows:—
(a) Professional and Educational Development.
(b) Resource Centre based Knowledge Management (KM)
Services.
(c) In-house and Vocational On-line Courses.
(d) Educational/Academic On-line Courses.
(e) Resource Centre for all exams for Officers and Sailors.
Recommendation (Paragraph No. 35)
It has been informed during evidence by the representative of a
Service that the available training infrastructure especially for hi-tech
training needed to be increased with “speed”. The Committee consider
that this aspect requires utmost attention in the MoD, particularly in
view of the findings of Comptroller and Auditor General of India (C&AG)
contained in his report on Union Government (Defence Services) for the
year ended March, 2007 which reveals an instance where the issue of
procurement of new simulator has been pending for over four years in
the MoD thus adversely affecting the operational as well as on-the-job
training of the submarine crew. The Committee, therefore, strongly
recommend that the MoD should consider delegation of appropriate
power and authority to the service headquarters to enable them to take
timely measures on such issues so as to ensure increased and effective
combat capabilities of the forces.
44

Reply of the Government
Financial powers of the Vice Chief of Army Staff/Vice Chief of
Naval Staff/Deputy Chief of Air Staff/Chief of Integrated Service
Command have been enhanced from Rs. 30 crores to Rs. 50 crores for
sanctioning Capital Acquisition Scheme for procurement of equipment
and stores.
Recommendation (Paragraph No. 38)
The Committee understand that there is an urgent need to gear up
our armed forces to meet the challenges of growing threat perception
in view of the fact that the global security scenario is fast changing with
the advent of technological advancements in the nature of warfare. This
not only necessitates state-of-the-art training facilities but also requires
sustained efforts for being ready for tomorrow. The Committee,
accordingly, desires that the MoD should pay serious attention towards
this aspect and devise an effective training strategy to meet the long-term
technological requirements of the armed forces keeping pace with the
changing times and implement it in an efficient manner with adequate
budgetary support. Any constraints experienced in implementation of
this strategy should be adequately addressed well in time so that the
schedule of imparting knowledge on the upgraded technologies to the
armed forces personnel is not disturbed. The concept of jointness and
tri-services training should also be taken into account so as to ensure
effective integration of the combat capabilities and better coordination
in situation of war.
Reply of the Government
Training in the three services is an ongoing process. Keeping pace
with strategic objectives and operational and tactical focus, Armed Forces
have constantly refined and endeavoured to update the training
curriculum, syllabus and procedures. The art of warfare and conduct of
training in the Armed Forces is a dynamic process. Indian Armed Forces
have been continuously refining the system of training so as to keep pace
with the technological advancements and ever changing face of the future
battlefield. The training is structured in keeping with ever changing
environmental realities. All the three services have kept pace with the
induction of state-of-the-art equipment through extensive upgrades in
technology, intensive training aids. There has also been a thrust on the
improvement of training infrastructure, examination and revision of the
existing curriculum and its use. The Services have gone for e-learning,
computerised war game packages and extensive use of Information
Technology.
45

Jointness in warfare is the effective integration of the combat
capabilities of the three Services. The issue of jointness and tri-service
training in the Armed Forces is being addressed adequately. The raising
of Headquarters Integrated Defence Services and Theatre Command in
Andaman and Nicobar Command (ANC) are some significant steps in
this direction. The issue of joint training of officers in the Armed Forces
is addressed both at the pre-commissioning and in-service stages. National
Defence Academy (NDA) is the main institution which imparts
pre-commission training to cadets of the three Services, while in service
formations and units organise war games and exercises besides visits to
each other stations to enhance awareness and understand each others
capabilities and limitations. Further, various training establishments also
impart joint training to service officers at the induction, middle and higher
level like Defence Service Staff College, Wellington. The Higher Command
courses of the Army, Navy and the Air Force and Higher Defence
Management Course also contribute to the call of joint training in a big
way.
46

CHAPTER III
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE
DO NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE REPLIES
OF THE GOVERNMENT
Recommendation (Paragraph No. 10)
The Committee note that while the duration of pre-induction
training in the case of graduate level entry for Short Service Commission
(SSC) and Permanent Commission (PC) is same in the Navy and the Air
Force, the period of such training imparted to graduates of SSC at OTA
is only one year as against one and a half years in the IMA for those
seeking PC in the army. The Committee have been informed that the
training imparted for PC is more vigorous than that of SSC. Taking into
consideration the fact that the pre-induction training is imparted for
developing the qualities of leadership demanded of every army officer
after commissioning, the Committee find it rather strange as to why and
how the candidates for PC and SSC are trained differently when they
are expected to perform similar duties after being commissioned as officers
in the Army. The Committee, therefore, desire that the modules and
duration of training for graduate level entries for SSC and PC in the Army
may be thoroughly reviewed with a view to bringing in parity in imparting
pre-induction training to them on the lines of practices being adopted
by the other two Services.
Reply of the Government
Terms and conditions of service of each entry in Army are different
and no parallels can be drawn. Duration of pre-induction training is also
different for various entries. The pre-induction training is thus essentially
based on the employment and role which an individual is expected to
perform on induction. Considering the role and employment of SSC
officers, it has been kept at one year keeping in view their service period
of 14 years. The senior-most rank the SSC officers achieve is that of
Lt. Colonel and whereby they will only command a sub-unit. On the
other hand, a PC officer is likely to command battalions or higher
47

formations and hence has to be groomed/trained accordingly. In case of
Air Force and Navy such command structures (section, platoon, company
or battalion) do not exist and their training is mainly related to skill
(flying) or Technical. Hence, the pre-induction training period is same
for SSC as well as for PC officers.
Recommendation (Paragraph No. 16)
Although the Government appointed AV Singh Committee and
implemented its Report with a view to fulfilling individual career
aspirations of the Officers in the armed forces, the Committee find it
strange that no such efforts have been directed towards PBORs in the
three Services. The Committee desire that similar steps should be taken
for career advancement of PBORs.
Reply of the Government
Following steps have been taken for career advancement of
PBORs:—
(a) Assured Career Progression: Pursuant to the recommendations
of the 6th Central Pay Commission, PBORs will be entitled
to minimum three financial upgradation after 8,16,24 years
of Service.
(b) 6th Central Pay Commission: Pay and allowances of PBORs
in the three Services have been revised pursuant to the
recommendations of 6th CPC with some improvements.
(c) Qualifying Service for Pension: With the implementation of
recommendations of 6th Central Pay Commission, full pension
has been delinked from 33 years of qualifying service. A PBOR
shall be granted pension @ 50% of the last reckonable
emoluments subject to minimum qualifying service of
15 years.
(d) MoU with Indira Gandhi National Open University: MoU
with Indira Gandhi National Open University for award of
BA, BSc., B. Tech. and BBA degrees to PBOR to enhance their
career prospects post-retirement. Army has entered into an
MoU with Indira Gandhi National Open University (IGNOU)
for establishement of IGNOU—Army Community Colleges
that will empower the Regimental Training Centres/Human
48

Resource Development Centres (HRDCs) of the Army to grant
IGNOU recognised formal degree to PBOR based on their
in-service training. As per MoU signed on 4th September, 2009,
Army Regimental Training Centres (RTCs) and HRDCs will
be empowered to grant PBOR certificates, Diplomas and
Associate Degree based on the in-service training imparted
in the training Centres, HRDCs and Army School of
Instructors. The award of associate degree to soldiers will
enable them to obtain a degree from IGNOU after they
undergo a course module prescribed by IGNOU. Thus, the
Army-IGNOU community Colleges will create flexible
learning opportunists for personnel of the Indian Army that
would enhance their academic skill, status and confidence
and provide them with better post retirement opportunities
in civil job market.
(e) Cadre Review: To address the enhanced aspiration level of
PBOR, a study group headed by the Director General, Army
Air Defence has been constituted to carryout a holistic
appraisal of the existing rank structure of PBOR in all Arms
and Services in the Army.
Recommendation (Paragraph No. 37)
The Committee’s examination has also brought out that the number
of officers being sent for training abroad is minuscule. The Committee
feel that the training abroad provide opportunity to the armed forces
officers to upgrade their knowledge in a different environment and the
skills so acquired can be shared and gainfully utilized by the services.
The Committee, therefore, desire that the policy for sending officers for
training abroad should be reviewed in a positive light and emphasise
should be laid on identifying those specialized areas where inadequate
facilities exist in the country.
Reply of the Government
The country has advance training facilities which are at par with
those of most developed nations and the high quality of training imparted
alongwith the high professional standards have been appreciated by the
foreign officers and foreign delegations undergoing training and visiting
these institutes. However, training with foreign armed forces both at the
individual level and participation in service to service exercises involving
49

other countries are also undertaken. Selected officers and students from
the Tri-Services Institutes visit Training Institutes outside the country
and also host delegations from other countries so as to benefit from each
others’ experience and core competence.
50

CHAPTER IV
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH
REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN
ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE AND WHICH
REQUIRE REITERATION
Recommendation (Paragraph No. 5)
The Committee also feel that it is equally important to simultaneously
initiate concrete steps for the larger involvement of the three services for
imparting pre-selection Services Selection Board (SSB) oriented training
in all schools and educational institutions including technical education
institutions by utilizing the services of professionally qualified defence
personnel so as to supplement the governmental efforts in disseminating
the defence related information specially in those areas where such
infrastructure is weak, inadequate or non-existent.
Reply of the Government
Sainik Schools, spread across the country and NCC units operating
in Schools /Colleges across the country are engaged in imbibing Military
oriented training, physical fitness etc. among the students. The training
imparted by these organisations contributes in spreading career awareness
of students about the Armed Forces and motivates them to take up Armed
Forces as a career. These schools are excellent feeder organisations for
the defence forces.
Further, Rashtriya Military Schools are premier training establish-
ments of the defence services engaged in the pursuit of imparting quality
education and also preparing the students for a career in the Armed
Forces. The five Rashtriya Military Schools located at Chail, Ajmer,
Belgaum, Bangalore and Dholpur besides providing State of the art
educational facilities to the cadets are also grooming them as future
potential officers of the defence services. To achieve this aim, the cadets
are put through various outdoor activities as well as SSB training capsules.
Pre-SSB training is a regular feature in Rashtriya Military Schools. The
services of both serving and retired Group Task Officers (GTOs) and
51

Psychologists are taken to develop the personality of the cadets, inspire
them by widening their knowledge base and equip them adequately to
face the Services Selection Board.
Comments of the Committee
(Please see para 8 of Chapter-I of the report)
Recommendation (Paragraph No. 8)
The Committee find that a number of procedures for recruitment
of permanent Commissioned and short service commissioned officers
through UPSC and Non-UPSC mode have been put in place for entry
in the combatant and other specialized and allied wings of the three
services in the armed forces. However, all the candidates aspiring to
become officers have to invariably under-go Service Selection Board (SSB)
tests having same format both the combat and technical services. The
Committee’s examination has brought out that the format of SSB tests
has not undergone any major changes in the last three decades except
that the process now involves two stages in which the candidates are first
screened on the basis of psychological test and only those who qualify
these tests are assessed in the second stage. Although this system is stated
to be scientific enough to determine the suitability of a candidate for the
armed forces, the Committee have been informed during the evidence
that the present system of selection procedure has been examined by a
committee appointed by the Chiefs of Staff and its report has inter alia
highlighted that the “procedures for selection are extremely rigorous”.
The Committee’s interaction with an ex-serviceman having expertise in
this field has also brought out that the selection process in the SSB tests
is negative in approach and the whole exercise is directed towards finding
enough reasons to reject a candidate rather than carrying out an appraisal
of his good traits for selection. It has also been pointed out that the most
of the assessors hesitate to give clear-cut assessments and keep most of
the candidates as border liners implying thereby that the whole selection
process is unable to determine suitable of such candidates. Even the
Defence Secretary admitted during evidence that some of these tests are
rigorous and impracticable and require a “fresh look”. These facts lends
credence to the Committee’s view that the SSB tests for selection of officers
in the armed forces continue to be based on antiquated practices and no
serious attempt have been made to adopt and implement the modern
techniques of selection. While emphasizing that there should not be any
compromise with the quality and traits required for serving the
Armed Forces, the Committee recommend that an exhaustive review of the
52

selection process through SSB tests should be undertaken at the earliest
and latest techniques available for selection of candidates in an objective
manner should be put in place to inspire confidence among the candidates
volunteering for a career in the Armed Forces. Since a good number of
youth coming from rural background face considerable difficulties in
communicating in particular language, steps should also be taken to ensure
that such candidates are not subjected to language barriers while assessing
their suitability for the Armed Forces. Needless to say that language and
communication abilities of such selected candidate can be improved to
the desired level while imparting pre-induction training to them.
Reply of the Government
The selection procedure adopted by the Services Selection Boards
is scientific and is aimed at assessing the officer like qualities of an
individual. The ability of an individual to withstand physical and mental
stress is assessed to determine his/her suitability for an Armed Force.
The selection process is designed to select a prospective candidate
to meet the service requirements. The procedure is centrally standardized
by Defence Institute for Physiological Research (DIPR), New Delhi for
all three services. The process has delivered results and has stood the
test of time.
The emphasis during the testing of verbal abilities is on
communication skills and not on a language in particular and as long
as a candidate is able to comprehend the instruction given to him and
act accordingly it is considered good enough. Fluency in spoken English
or knowledge of English is not a limiting factor for a candidate during
testing.
Keeping with the modern techniques of selection, which have
evolved, the charges in the socio economic background and the envisaged
changes in the service requirement a project on “Comprehensive Selection
System in Armed Forces” has been taken up by DIPR for evolving a new
selection system based on cognitive abilities.
Comments of the Committee
(Please see para 11 of Chapter-I of the report)
Recommendation (Paragraph No. 13)
The Committee note that the cadets undergoing training before
induction as officers are not being paid any stipend except in the case
53

of graduate cadets who are reported to be paid a monthly stipend of
Rs. 8,000/- during training. The Committee understand that all the cadets
taking pre-induction training for joining the armed forces in the officers’
cadre do not necessarily come from affluent background and they
strongly feel that there is an imperative need to extend appropriate
financial support on the basis of their educational qualifications so as to
enable them to meet out their pocket expenses as well as the expectations
of their family members. They, therefore, strongly recommended that all
the cadets undergoing pre-induction training at NDA or similar
institutions must be paid Rs. 10,000/- and the graduate entrants
Rs. 15,000/- as monthly stipend during the entire period of training before
being commissioned in the armed forces. The Committee also desire that
the MoD should take up this matter expeditiously with the Ministry of
Finance at the highest level and impress upon them the need for extending
such a benefit
Reply of the Government
Post VI Central Pay Commission (VI CPC), the fixed stipend to
cadets at IMA, OTA and Cadet Training Wings at CME, MCEME and
MCTE has been increased to Rs. 21,000/- per month. However, the
Commission did not recommend grant of a stipend in NDA and
similar training academies in view of the fact that no payment is
required to be made by Cadets to such training academies and the
training results in award of a degree and subsequent employment in the
Defence Forces.
Comments of the Committee
(Please see para 14 of Chapter-I of the report)
Recommendation (Paragraph No. 15)
The Committee note that the substantive promotion upto the rank
of Lt. Colonel or equivalent in the three services is made by time-scale
on completion of the stipulated period of 13 years of reckonable
commissioned service. However, promotion of the officers to the rank
of substantive colonel not promoted by selection is made subject to their
being fit, only after completion of 26 years of reckonable commissioned
service. The Committee’s examination has brought out the rank structure
in armed forces being of steep pyramidal shape has little scope for the
officers to climb up the hierarchical ladder. The opportunities for their
promotion are further restricted because of limited availability of
training facilities for Higher Command Course. Needless to say that the
officers not selected for promotion or for Higher Command Course feel
54

demotivated which ultimately results in adverse effect on the overall
efficiency of the armed forces. The Committee, therefore, desire that in
order to achieve the functional efficiency; combat effectiveness; and to
keep down the age profile of the brigade commanders or equivalent in
the three Services of armed forces, the MoD should take appropriate
measures to introduce a system whereby the strength of permanent
commissioned officers vis-à-vis SSC Officers is gradually brought to level
of 30 per cent of the authorised strength in each of the three Services
and the time scale promotions upto the rank of Brigadier and equivalent
in all the Services are made by bringing in appropriate reduction in the
length of reckonable commissioned service so as to fulfil the individual
career aspirations as well as to keep the morale of officers high. The
Committee need hardly point out that such a measure would have
negligible financial implications consequent upon implementation of new
pay-bands in the armed forces besides going a long way in keeping the
rate of attrition at lower levels.
Reply of the Government
The AV Singh Committee had recommended that the ratio of
Permanent Commissioned officers to Short Service Commissioned officers
should be brought down. The Cabinet has already granted its approval
‘in principle’, to the reduction in the Permanent Commissioned officers
cadre and corresponding increase in the support cadre (including Short
Service Commission Officers). Specific proposals in this regard, keeping
in view the specific requirements of the three Services, are being examined
by the Ministry.
Comments of the Committee
(Please see para 17 of Chapter-I of the report)
Recommendation (Paragraph No. 17)
The Committee note that limited opportunities exist for promotion
of the officers in the armed forces due to steep rank structure. This fact
necessitates that fair and transparent systems are put in place for allaying
the fears in the minds of officers serving armed forces. Although the
constitution of selection boards for promotion is stated to be fixed, the
Committee understand that there is no fixed time schedule for holding
the meetings of such boards in different services. Undoubtedly, any delay
in holding the meetings of such boards may sometimes result in denial
of promotion to the officers otherwise eligible. During evidence, the
Defence Secretary informed the Committee that he would not like to
55

hazard a guess on the allegations made by those who are not promoted
that the dates were played with to rule them out and made a promise
that he would certainly look into this aspect. The Committee trust that
the Ministry would not only pay serious attention towards streamlining
the procedures in this regard but also ensure that the meetings of all
selection boards for promotions in different wings of the three services
are held at a regular interval of six months every year to make
selection for the posts anticipated in ensuing six months so that not even
a single deserving officer is deprived of his legitimate right. Any deviation
from the stipulated time schedule in holding meetings of the selection
boards for promotion should be viewed seriously and appropriate action
taken against those found responsible.
Reply of the Government
ARMY
Selection Boards (SBs) for consideration of officers for promotion
to the select ranks are to be held once a year to make selection for vacancies
accruing in the ensuing ‘one’ calendar year. Presently, two SBs are being
held in a calendar year.
AIR FORCE
A streamlined procedure exists for conduct of Promotion Boards.
The Board is conducted between February to March every year.
NAVY
The Navy conducts Promotion Boards on a yearly basis which are
based on the anticipated vacancies of the entire year.
Comments of the Committee
(Please see para 20 of Chapter-I of the report)
Recommendation (Paragraph No. 27)
The Committee note that the Department of Ex-servicemen Welfare
has been created in 2004 under the Ministry of Defence to formulate
various policies and programmes for the welfare and resettlement of
ex-servicemen (ESM) in the country. According to the information available
with the Committee, this Department is assisted by Kendriya Sainik Board
(KSB) and Directorate General of Resettlement (DGR). While the KSB
lays down general policies for the welfare of ESM and their dependants
56

and also administers welfare funds, the office of the DGR has been
entrusted with the responsibility of implementing schemes and
programmes of the Government for ESM which includes pre and post-
retirement training, re-employment, self-employment, etc. The Committee
are however, surprised to find that despite existence of such an elaborate
mechanism, there are a number of areas which require focussed attention
for dignified resettlement and rehabilitation of ESM. Undoubtedly, there
is an urgent and imperative necessity to address the legitimate needs of
ESM and the Committee strongly recommend the following measures:—
(i) In order to enable ESM to derive their due benefits from the
welfare schemes formulated for them by the Government,
the Ministry of Defence should urgently devise a foolproof
mechanism for compulsory registration of all ESM with the
relevant Zila Sainik Boards which in turn should forward
such data to Rajya Sainik Boards and DGR for being
maintained at State and National levels. Needless to say that
complete and precise data on the number of ESM in the
various States and the country as a whole would be immense
use to the various agencies involved in formulating and
implementing policies and programmes being contemplated
for the welfare of ESM.
(ii)Based on the accurate data on ESM so available with DGR,
the Ministry should ensure adequate allocation of funds to
DGR for efficacious implementation of various schemes being
launched for welfare of ESM in the country.
(iii) In their 4th Report (14th Lok Sabha), the Committee had
reiterated their earlier recommendation for setting up of
‘National Commission on Ex-servicemen’. The Committee
have now been informed during oral deposition that the
proposal for establishing such a Commission has since been
cleared by the Raksha Mantri. The Committee trust that the
‘National Commission on Ex-servicemen’ with statutory
powers will be established soon so as to ensure accountability
of existing structure put in place for implementation of various
welfare schemes for ESM.
(iv) The Committee understand that the revised pension policy
being implemented as a sequel to the recommendations of
the Sixth Central Pay Commission continues to remain a
contentious issue between the Government and the ESM. The
Committee desire that appropriate and expeditious action
should be taken to resolve this issue in accordance with the
general principles of equity.
57

Reply of the Government
(i) Process of computerisation has been started at Rajya Sainik
Board/State Hqrs. and Zila Sainik Boards/District Hqrs. level.
Funds for the same have also been released to all the State
Governments. Completion of computerisation is likely to take
time. Once the system is in place, computerised data at State
and District level would be available and the authorities may
be in a position to ensure compulsory registration.
(ii)Adequate funds are being provided to the Directorate General
(Resettlement) under the head ‘Training’ and the same are
being utilized for training of Officers as well as PBOR. The
welfare schemes for Ex-Servicemen are being handled by
Kendriya Sainik Board, the funds for which are being
provided out of the Armed Forces Flag Day Fund (AFFDF).
In addition, various State Governments have their own
schemes for benefit of the Ex-Servicemen residing in the
States.
(iii)The recommendation for setting up of ‘National Commission
on Ex-Servicemen’ has been considered but has not been
found feasible as a number of bodies such as Directorate
General (Resettlement), Kendriya Sainik Board at the Centre
and Rajya Sainik Boards at the State level already exist to
undertake welfare schemes for Ex-Servicemen and their
families.
(iv) A Committee was set up under the Chairmanship of Cabinet
Secretary on the direction of PM to look into the issue of One
Rank and One Pension (OROP) and other related issues. The
following recommendations have been made to substantially
improve the pension of Personnel Below Officer Ranks (PBOR)
and Commissioned Officers:—
Personnel Below Officer Ranks
I. The proposal of Ministry of Defence to bring pre 10.10.1997
PBOR pensioners at par with post 10.10.1997 PBOR pensioners
may be agreed to.
II. The proposal of the Ministry of Defence to reckon the
enhanced rate of classification allowance w.e.f. 1.1.2006 on
notional basis for the purpose of calculation of pension (as
in the case of reckoning MSP for determination of pension)
may be agreed to.
58

III. In order to reduce the gap between pre and post 1.1.2006
PBOR pensioners, it is proposed to follow the principle of
the Award of Group of Ministers (GoM) of 2006 in the
following manner:—
(a) To reckon the pension of all pre 1.1.2006 PBOR pensioners
with reference to a notional maximum in the post 1.1.2006
revised pay structure corresponding to the maximum of
pre-Sixth Pay Commission pay scales as per fitment table
of each rank.
(b) Also to continue with the enhanced weightages awarded
by the GoM.
Commissioned Officers
IV. The proposal to remove the linkage of full pension with
33 years of qualifying service w.e.f. 1.1.2006 instead of 1.9.2008
in the case of Commissioned Officers may be agreed to.
A similar dispensation will have to be extended to civilians
who have retired between 1.1.2006 and 31.8.2008.
V.  In order to address the issue of disparity in the pension of
pre and post 1.1.2006 pensioners at the level of Lt. General/
equivalent/Additional Secretary and equivalent civilian
categories, a separate pay scale starting at Rs. 67,000/- and
going up to Rs. 79,000/- may be created and all officers of
the level of Lt. General/equivalent/Additional Secretaries may
be fixed in this scale. As a result of this, the pension of pre
1.1.2006 Lt. Generals will get fixed at Rs. 36,500/- and those
of Additional Secretary at Rs. 33,500/-.
All Defence Pensioners
VI. It is proposed to agree to broad banding of percentage of
disability/war injury pension for pre 1.1.1996 disability/war
injury pensioners.
VII. It is proposed to remove the cap on war injury element of
pension in the case of disabled pensioners belonging to
Category E.
2. Government letter has already been issued on 30.10.2008
implementing the Committee’s recommendations Nos. (II) and (IV).
59

Comments of the Committee
(Please see para 26 of Chapter-I of the report)
Recommendation (Paragraph No. 28)
The Committee understand that besides their primary responsibility
of protecting the territorial integrity, the services of the armed forces
personnel are often requisitioned to assist the civil authorities during
internal security problems and rescue/relief operations during natural
calamities. Considering the fact that a large number of defence services
personnel retiring at a comparatively younger age, well trained and
experienced enough to handle problems of internal security and natural
calamities, the Committee are of the view that it would be in the national
interest that the Government devised an appropriate scheme for inducting
retiring armed forces personnel as a distinct force on the lines of Central
Paramilitary Forces personnel (CPMF). The Committee are in no doubt
that such a scheme would not only address the problems being
experienced in lateral induction of Ex-servicemen in CPMF but also result
in substantial financial savings to the Government on recruiting
procedures, training and pension payments. It would also minimize
instances if frequent deployment of the armed forces for secondary duties
as the services of the distinct force having professional experience would
always be available to assist the civil Authorities.
Reply of the Government
The issue of lateral transfer of army personnel into Central
Paramilitary Forces (CPMFs) has been under dialogue with Ministry of
Home Affairs. The issue is yet to be resolved. The Sixth Central Pay
Commission, in their report, have also recommended a scheme of lateral
transfer of defence personnel to Central Police Organisations/Defence
civilian organizations after rendering 7-17 years service in the defence,
with a view to, inter-alia, provide lifetime employment to defence
personnel. However, as per decision of the Government on the
recommendations of the VI CPC as contained in the Ministry of Finance
Resolution dated No. 1/1/2008-IC dated 29th August 2008, the
recommendation related to lateral shift of Defence Personnel to Central
Paramilitary Forces will be examined separately. The recommendation
for inducting retiring armed forces personnel as a distinct force for civil
duties on the lines of CPMFs.
Comments of the Committee
(Please see para 29 of Chapter-I of the report)
60

Recommendation (Paragraph No. 29)
The Committee note that civilian manpower and infrastructural
support to the services Headquarter office of inter-services organizations
under the Ministry of Defence are provided by the office of the Chief
Administrative Officer (CAO). While the office of CAO is responsible for
providing administrative cover to the civilian personnel so employed
including various categories of Armed Forces Headquarter (AFHQ) civilian
cadres, the Committee are surprised to find that the proposals regarding
cadre restructuring etc., of AFHQ civil services require consultation with
the Department of Personnel and Training (DoPT) which is reported to
be playing no role in career management of AFHQ civil cadres. While
the Group of Ministers in paragraph 6.76 of its Report on ‘Reforming
the National Security System’ had recommended in 2001 that ‘a committee
may be set up to look into the issue of better utilization of AFHQ civil
service officers within the Ministry of Defence’ the Committee’s
examination of the subject matter has, however, revealed that nothing
substantial has been done in this regard participation of this service within
the Ministry remains inadequate. The oral deposition and the written
submission made before the Committee also highlighted that despite
recruitment to various groups of AFHQ civilian cadres through common
examination, their service conditions continue to be at variance with
similarly placed services under the Government. Undoubtedly, the bleak
career prospects and absence of any lateral movements in the Ministry
of Defence have an adverse impact on the functioning of these cadres
where a number of cases relating to service matters are reported to have
been under protracted litigation. In the light of the fact that cadre were
introduced with the specific aim of providing specialized infrastructural
support to the three service Headquarters and inter-service organizations,
the Committee desire that appropriate steps should be taken to strengthen
the AFHQ civilian cadres by restructuring their service conditions with
a view to bringing in parity with similarly placed services in the
Government.
Reply of the Government
 The issue for utilisation of Armed Forces Headquarters (AFHQ)
Civil Service Officer in MoD Secretariat in pursuance of the GoM’s
recommendations contained in para 6.76 of its Report on ‘Reforming the
National Security System’ has been examined twice in consultation with
the Department of Personnel and Training (DoP&T). On both occasions,
the DoP&T have not agreed to the proposal for utilising the AFHQ CS
61

in MoD (Sectt.). A Cadre Restructuring of Armed Forces Headquarters
Civil Service (AFHQ CS) has been done in 2008 with the approval of
Ministry of Finance.
Comments of the Committee
(Please see para 32 of Chapter-I of the report)
Recommendation (Paragraph No. 36)
The Committee are concerned to note that the number of Field
Firing Ranges (FFRs) is gradually decreasing over a period of time.
Although the army had a total of 104 FFRs at one point of time, the
number of such Ranges is expected to come down to mere seven by the
year 2014. One of the important reasons attributable to the depleting
number of these Ranges is reported to be the clearances required to be
obtained by the State Governments from the Ministry of Environment
and Forests to permit use of forest land for non-forest activities in
accordance with the Forest Conservation Act, 1980 and Supreme Court
judgment delivered in 2002. While the MoD is stated to have initiated
a process of consultation with all stakeholders in order to find a mutually
acceptable solution to the problem, the Committee feel that it is high time
that the Ministry imitated expeditious and concrete steps to resolve this
issue in the national interest in a time bound manner.
Reply of the Government
ARMY
There are 92 notified Field Firing Ranges (FFRs) in the inventory,
of which notification of 57 ranges has expired. Cases of 04 ranges are
under active consideration by State Governments for re-notification.
Actions Taken
(i) Favourable judgment of Hon’ble Supreme Court with respect
to NPV.
(ii) Advance sensitization of environment prior to expiry of
notification for taking timely actions to refortify ranges.
(iii) Interaction by HQ Commands with respective State
Governments.
AIR FORCE
The Air Force has seven air-to-ground ranges, located in Gujarat,
Rajasthan, Punjab, West Bengal, Uttar Pradesh, Madhya Pradesh and
62

Assam-Meghalaya border. However, operations of following ranges are
severely constrained due to the restrictions imposed by civil air traffic
as well as proliferation of habitation/industries in the vicinity:—
(i) Dollang Mukh Range (Assam)
(ii) Singpur Range (Gujarat)
(iii)Sarmat Range (MP)
(iv) Tilpat Range (UP)
Despite the above limitations, IAF continues to use these ranges
for its air-to-ground firing practices within the laid down safety
parameters.
Comments of the Committee
(Please see para 35 of Chapter-I of the report)
63

CHAPTER V
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH
FINAL REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT ARE
STILL AWAITED
Recommendation (Paragraph No. 14)
In order to improve the cadre mobility and reduce the existing
problem of high rate of supersession, the AV Singh Committee on
restructuring of officers’ cadre of army officers had inter alia recommended
that SSC cadre should be enhanced with a corresponding reduction in
the regular cadre by making SSC sufficiently attractive so that adequate
number of candidates opt for this entry. The Committee have been
informed that Raksha Mantri has since conveyed his “in principle”
approval on certain proposal/action plans aimed at increasing the SSC
entry with a view to restructuring the officers’ cadre and reducing shortage
of officers in the armed forces. The Committee understand that all such
proposals including its financial implications are in the process of
submission to the MoD for approval. While expressing the hope that this
proposal will be expeditiously translated into reality, the Committee would
like the Ministry to also consider the following suggestions so as to make
SSC more attractive:—
(i) One of the measures suggested by the A.V. Singh Committee
to make SSC entry attractive related to lump sum grant of
Rs. five lacs and Rs. ten lacs after five years and ten years
of services respectively. The Committee has been informed
that a proposal is under consideration for grant of lump sum
amount to SSC officers at the rate of Rs. ten lacs after ten
years of service and for Rs. two lacs for each completed year
of service beyond ten years. Keeping in view the fact that
SSC officers seeking release after rendering 14 years of services
in the armed forces would be at such a crucial juncture of
their age where they require financial support to meet their
increasing liabilities, the Committee feel that the rate of lump
64

sum amount to be made payable in this case should be kept
at the rate of Rs. 1.5 lacs for each year upto ten years of
service followed by Rs. 2.5 lacs for each completed year of
service beyond ten years. The Committee feel convinced
that such an enhancement would go a long way in attracting
larger segments of the youth towards SSC in the Armed
Forces.
(ii) A.V. Singh Committee had also recommended for reduction
in number of papers for appearing in civil service entrance
examination along with age relaxation for SSC officers. The
Committee note that the emergency commissioned officers
inducted after 1962 war were given such an exemption to
appear in the Civil Service Examination and the whole system
of such recruitment has since been stopped years ago. They
find it rather strange that the Ministry have now put forth
the plea that such a proposal at this stage has wider
ramifications and is outside their purview. Keeping in view
the rich experience and knowledge gained by the SSC officers
during their career and the services rendered to the nation
by them during prime of their youth, the Committee consider
it desirable that appropriate concessions for appearing in civil
service entrance examination may be extended to the SSC
officers on the same analogy as was adopted in the case of
Emergency Commissioned officers. Effective steps should also
be taken for introducing innovative schemes for lateral
induction of SSC officers into Central Paramilitary
Organisation.
Reply of the Government
Implementation of the balance recommendations of Ajay Vikram
Singh Committee (AVSC) Report (‘peel’ factors), with suitable
modifications alongwith measures to make Short Service Commission
more attractive are being progressed for Cabinet approval in consultation
with the concerned Ministries.
Recommendation (Paragraph No. 24)
The defence service personnel are frequently deployed in different
parts of the country and such transfers have an adverse impact on their
65

wards in meeting domicile requirements specified in certain States for
the purposes of admission to under-graduate level courses in academic
and professional institutions. During their examination of the subject, the
Committee have been informed by the Ministry of Human Resource
Development (HRD) that “there is only one domicile i.e. of the Union
of India” under Article 5 of the Constitution. The Ministry of HRD have
also stated that the policy of the Central Government as laid down in
paragraph 3.8 of the National Policy of Education enunciates that
“steps will be taken to facilitate inter-regional mobility by providing
equal access to every Indian of requisite merit, regardless of his origin”
in the matters connected with higher education in general and
technical education in particular. Considering the unique nature of
duties required to be performed by defence services personnel in all
parts of the country, the Committee desire the Ministry of Defence to
take up the matter with the State Governments with a view to examining
the feasibility of doing away with the domicile requirements at least in
the case of wards of defence services personnel till such time the
Government enact an appropriate legislation to implement the
constitutional provisions and the policy framework envisaged in this
regard.
Reply of the Government
The Ministry has taken up with the State Governments for waiving
off Domiciliary conditions for admission of wards of defence personnel
in colleges/institutions in the States/Union Territories. In this regard Raksha
Mantri has written to the Chief Ministers of States and Lt. Governors of
States (Annexure-C).
Recommendation (Paragraph No. 30)
Canteen Store Department is yet another organization rendering
useful contribution in providing ‘service to the services’. The Committee
are of firm view that organizations of such nature as well as the civilian
employees contributing towards the functioning of the three Services in
different parts of the country have to be treated in an equitable manner.
They, therefore, desire the Government to make an objective assessment
of the service conditions of such civilian employees in the defence services
with a view to taking appropriate steps to bring in requisite improvements
for efficient functioning of the Services.
66

Reply of the Government
A proposal for cadre review has been initiated. Review of
Recruitment Rules for various posts in Canteen Stores Department has
been undertaken. Pay Anomalies Committee has been constituted. In-
house training programmes for staff in order to improve their efficiency
have been undertaken.
67

APPENDIX
MINUTES OF THE FIFTH SITTING OF THE STANDING
COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE (2010-11)
The Committee sat on Monday, the 17th January, 2011 from
1500 to 1545 hrs. in Committee Room ‘D’, Parliament House Annexe,
New Delhi.
PRESENT
Shri Satpal Maharaj — Chairman
M
EMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Harish Chaudhary
3. Shri H.D. Devegowda
4. Dr. Sucharu Ranjan Haldar
5. Shri Bhaskar Rao Patil Khatgaonkar
6. Prof. Prasanna Kumar Patasani
7. Shri A.T. Nana Patil
8. Shri Amarnath Pradhan
9. Shri Baju Ban Riyan
10. Shri Mahabali Singh
11. Rajkumari Ratna Singh
Rajya Sabha
12. Shri Avinash Rai Khanna
13. Shri T.K. Rangarajan
14. Shri Birender Singh
15. Shri Ram Kripal Yadav
16. Shri Naresh Gujral
68

SECRETARIAT
1. Shri T.K. Mukherjee —Joint Secretary
2. Smt. Sudesh Luthra —Director
3. Smt. Jyochnamayi Sinha —Deputy Secretary
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the members to the sitting
of the Committee. The Chairman apprised the Members that in connection
with examination of the subjects ‘Functioning of Military Cantonments
and Stations’ and ‘Management of Defence Land’, during the current
term, after taking permission from Hon’ble Speaker, the Committee had
sought opinion of 13 States. So far only Punjab Government has responded,
although the stipulated deadline given for furnishing the Committee has
expired. Besides, the Committee had also invited opinion of 27 experts.
In response, only 3 experts have responded. In view of the inadequate
response on such important subjects, the Committee unanimously decided
to invite the views of experts, various stakeholders and public at large
by issuing through DAVP press communique in print and electronic media.
3. The Committee then took up for consideration and adoption the
draft report on action taken by the Government on the recommendations/
observations contained in the Thirty-fourth Report (Fourteenth Lok Sabha)
on ‘Human Resource Planning, Shortage of Manpower, Infusion of
Hi-Tech Training and Infrastructure for the Armed Forces’ and adopted
the same without any modification in the report. The Committee, then,
authorised the Chairman to present the same to the House on a date
convenient to him.
The Committee then adjourned.
69

APPENDIX
ANALYSIS OF THE ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON
THE RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS CONTAINED IN
THE THIRTY-FOURTH REPORT OF THE STANDING
COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE
Total Percentage
of Total
1. Total number of recommendations 38
2. Recommendations/Observations which have
been accepted by the Government
Para Nos. 1, 2, 3, 4, 6, 7, 9, 11, 12, 18, 19, 20 23 61
21, 22, 23, 25, 26, 31, 32, 33, 34, 35 and 38
3. Recommendations/Observations which the
Committee do not desire to pursue in view
of Government’s replies
Para Nos. 10, 16 and 37 03 08
4. Recommendations/Observations in respect
of which replies of the Government have not
been accepted by the Committee
Para Nos. 5, 8, 13, 15, 17, 27, 28, 29 and 36 09 23
5. Recommendations/Observations in respect of
which final replies of the Government are
still awaited
Para Nos. 14, 24 and 30 03 08
70