1 
 
 
14 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE 
(2011-2012) 
 
 
 
(FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
MINISTRY OF DEFENCE 
 
 
[Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations/observations 
contained in the Twelfth Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) on `Demands for Grants 
(2011-2012)’]. 
 
 
FOURTEENTH  REPORT 
 
  
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
March, 2012/Phalguna, 1933 (Saka)                
  


2 
 
FOURTEENTH REPORT 
 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE 
(2011-2012) 
 
(FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
MINISTRY OF DEFENCE 
 
[Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations/observations 
contained in the Twelfth Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) on `Demands for Grants 
(2011-2012)’]. 
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 26 March, 2012 
 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on  26 March, 2012 
. 
 
  
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
March, 2012/Phalguna, 1933 (Saka)    
  


3 
 
 
 
C.O.D. No.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Price: Rs. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
© 2010 By LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT  
 
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in Lok Sabha  
(Twelfth Edition) and printed by ………………….  
  

4 
 
 
 
CONTENTS 
 
          PAGE 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (2011-2012).…………………….   (i)  
  
INTRODUCTION.…………………………………………………….… ……….  (iii) 
 
CHAPTER I  Report ……………………………………………….….  1 
   
 
CHAPTER II   Recommendations/Observations which have been  
   accepted by the Government…….……………….…....... 32  
 
CHAPTER III  Recommendation/Observations which the Committee 
   do not desire to pursue in view of Government‟s  
   replies…………………………………..…..……….….…… 70  
 
CHAPTER IV   Recommendations/Observations in respect of which 
    replies of Government have not been accepted by 
  the committee………………………..….…………..……… 71 
 
CHAPTER V Recommendations/observations in respect of which  
final replies of the Government are still awaited……….… 91 
 
APPENDIX  
I.    Annexure – I     ……………. 102 
 
 
I. Minutes of the Sixth Sitting of the Committee on  
Defence held on 27 February, 2012*……………...……..  
 
 
 
II. Analysis of Action Taken by the Government on the  
recommendations contained in the 14th Report of the  
Standing Committee on Defence (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) 
………………………………………………….……………. 103 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
*Minutes are not attached with the Cyclostyled version of the report 
  

5 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE (2011-12) 
Shri Satpal Maharaj   -  Chairman 
 Lok Sabha  
 
2. Shri Kamal Kishor `Commando‟  
3. Shri Harish Choudhary  
4. Shri Varun Gandhi  
5. Shri Sher Singh Ghubaya  
6. Shri Ramesh Chandappa Jigajinagi  
7. Shri Bhaskarrao Patil Khatgaonkar  
8. Shri Ajay Kumar  
9. Shri Mithilesh Kumar  
10. Shri Sadashivrao Dadoba Mandlik  
11. Shri Asaduddin Owaisi  
12. Shri A.T. Nana Patil  
13. Shri C.R. Patil  
14. Shri Amarnath Pradhan  
15. Shri Kadir Rana  
16. Shri Adhalrao Patil Shivaji  
17. Shri Mahabali Singh  
18. Rajkumari Ratna Singh  
19. Shri Uday Singh  
20. #  Vacant 
21. *Shri Manish Tewari 
  
Rajya Sabha  
 
22.  Shri Munquad Ali  
23.  Shri Naresh Gujral  
24.  Shri Avinash Rai Khanna  
25.  Prof. P.J. Kurien  
26.  Shri Mukut Mithi  
27.  Shri Mukhtar Abbas Naqvi  
28.  Shri T.K. Rangarajan  
29.  Shri M.V. Mysura Reddy  
30.  Shri Birender Singh  
31.  Shri Ram Kripal Yadav  
Secretariat 
1. Shri T.K. Mukherjee  - Joint Secretary 
2. Smt. Sudesh Luthra  - Director  
3. Shri Sanjeev Sharma  - Deputy Secretary 
________________________________________________________________________ 
 
# Shri M. Rajamohan Reddy ceased to be a Member of the Committee w.e.f. 28.02.2012 
consequent to his resignation from Lok Sabha. 
*Nominated w.e.f. 02.03.2012  
 

6 
 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
  
I, the Chairman of the Standing Committee on Defence (2011 -2012), having 
been authorised by the Committee to submit the report on their behalf, present this  
Fourteenth Report on „Action Taken by the Government on the 
recommendations/observations contained  in the Twelfth Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) 
on `Demands for Grants (2011-2012)‟ relating to the Ministry of Defence.  
 
2.  The Twelfth Report was presented to Lok Sabha and laid on the Table of Rajya 
Sabha on 3 August, 2011. The Ministry of Defence   furnished their Action Taken Notes   
on 23 December, 2011.  
 
3. The Report was considered and adopted by the Committee at their sitting held 
on 27 February, 2012.  
 
4.  For facility of reference and convenience, Recommendations/ Observations of 
the Committee have been printed in bold letters in the Report.   
 
5. An analysis of Action Taken by the Government on the 
Recommendations/Observations contained in the Twelfth Report (Fifteenth Lok 
Sabha) of the Committee is given at Annexure.  
 
NEW DELHI;                                       SATPAL MAHARAJ, 
12  March, 2012                                  Chairman,       
22  Phalguna (Saka)1933                       Standing Committee on Defence 
 
 
 

7 
 
 
CHAPTER–I 
 
 
REPORT 
 
This Report of the Standing Committee on Defence deals with action taken by 
the Government on the recommendations/observations contained in the Twelfth 
Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants (2011-12), which was presented 
to Lok Sabha and laid in Rajya Sabha on 03.08.2011.  
2. The Committee‟s Twelfth Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) contained 50 
recommendations/observations on the following aspects: -  
 
Para No. Subject 
1 Analysis of the overall allocation of the Ministry of Defence 
2 Capital Outlay 
3 Disproportionate quarterly spending pattern 
4 Non-finalisation of LTIPP and Eleventh Plan 
5 Married Accommodation Project (MAP)  
6 Outcome Budget 
7 Delegation of Financial and Administrative Power 
8 Offset clause 
9 Armed Forces Tribunal (AFT) 
10 & 11 Defence Land 
12 Optical Fibre Connectivity 
13 One Rank One Pension (OROP) 
14, 15 & 16  Construction of Border Roads 
17 Budgetary Allocation for Army 
18 Shortage of officers and the present system of selection 
19, 20 & 21 Modernization of Army 
22 Missiles and missile defence system 
23 Sainik Schools 
24 Jawans as Sahayaks to Officers 
25 & 26 Pension to ESM who retired pre-independence period 
27 Benefits to War Widows 
28 Facilities to Medal Winners 
29 Ordnance Factories 
30 Analysis of the Budgetary allocation for Air Force 

8 
 
31 & 32 Shortage of officers and PBOR in Air Force 
33 Accidents of Aircraft in Air Force 
34 & 35 Accidents of MIG aircrafts 
36 Investigation of cases of accident in Air Force 
37 Synergy between HAL, DGAQA, Air Force and MoD 
38 Setting up of crash laboratory and a wreckage museum 
39 Transport fleet 
40 & 41 Modernization of Air Field Infrastructure 
42 DRDO 
43 LCA and Kaveri Engine 
44 Rama Rao Committee  
45 Attrition of DRDO Scientists 
46 Analysis of Naval Budget  
47 Delay in acquisition and cost escalation thereto 
48 Training base at INS Chilka 
49 Fool proof coastal surveillance network 
50 Anti Piracy Operations 
 
3.  Action Taken Replies have been received from the Government in respect of 
all the recommendations/observations contained in the Report. These replies have 
been examined and the same have been categorized as follows: -  
 
(i) Recommendations/observations, which have been accepted by the 
Government (Please see Chapter II): - 
 
Para Nos. 1, 3, 5, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 14, 16, 17, 19, 20, 21,  22, 29,  31,  34,  36, 
39, 40, 41, 42, 43, 44, 45,  46, 48 & 49 
 
(29 Recommendations)  
 
(ii)  Recommendations/observations, which the Committee do not desire to pursue 
in view of the replies of the Government (Please see Chapter III): -  
 
Para Nos.  Nil  
(Nil Recommendation)  
 
(iii)  Recommendations/observations in respect of which replies of the Government 
have not been accepted by the Committee and which require reiteration 
(Please see Chapter IV): -  
 
Para Nos. 2, 4, 6, 13,15, 23,  25, 26, 28,  32, 33,  35, 37 & 47 
 
(14 Recommendations)  
  

9 
 
 
(iv)  Recommendations/observations in respect of which final replies of the 
Government are still awaited (Please see Chapter V): -  
 
Para Nos.  12, 18, 24, 27, 30, 38 & 50 
 
(07 Recommendations)  
 
4.  The Committee desire the Ministry’s response to  their comments made in 
Chapter-I of this Report be furnished to them at the earliest and in any case not 
later than six months of the presentation of this Report. 
A. Capital Outlay 
Recommendation (Para No. 2) 
5. The Committee had recommended as under:- 
“The Committee observe that the percentage expenditure under the capital 
section is declining over the years. The said  percentage during the year 2007-08 
was 39.02 which declined to 38.75 during the year 2008 -09 and then to 36.07 
percent during the year 2009-10.  Not only that the major part of the allocation is 
being spent on the committed liabilities. To add to this the spending on the 
committed liabilities is increasing over the years and the expenditure on the new 
schemes is declining. The Committee conclude  from the aforesaid scenario that 
the no. of new projects added over the years is declining. The Committee are of 
the view that the said ratio of the committed liabilities and the new schemes 
need to be studied carefully. While agreeing to the fact that th e defence 
acquisitions are capital intensive and the committed liabilities may increase over 
the years with more and more acquisitions added every year, the Committee are 
of the view that besides meeting the committed liabilities, there is an urgent need 
to ensure that the no. of new projects added also do not decline. The Committee 
as such would like to recommend that adequate allocation should be provided 
particularly under the capital section so as to ensure that more and more new 
schemes are added every year besides meeting the committed liabilities.” 
  
6. The Ministry in its action taken reply has stated as under:- 
“The requirement of the Services for capital modernisation as per their 
Perspective Plans, is projected to the Ministry of Finance. This tak es into 
account not only the requirement for committed liabilities but also the 
requirement for new schemes. The actual allocation however depends on the 
allocation made by the Ministry of Finance.” 
 
 
 

10 
 
 
Comments of the Committee 
7. The Committee  note from the reply furnished by the Ministry  that the 
requirement of the services for  Capital Modernization as per their Perspective 
Plans, which  also takes into account the requirement for committed liabilities  
and requirements for new  schemes have been projected to the Ministry of 
Finance. The reply furnished by the Ministry, in the opinion of the Committee is 
too general and does not throw light upon the intent of the recommendation. 
The Committee would like the  Ministry to intimate t hem the details about the 
new projects which have been added in Perspective Plan in  question. They 
would also like to be intimated separately about the projections made for 
committed liabilities vis-à-vis the new schemes. The Committee also feel that all 
out efforts be made to ensure that the  release of outlays   from the Ministry of  
Finance is  in accordance with the projections made in this regard. 
 
B. Non- finalisation of LTIPP and Eleventh Plan 
Recommendation (Para No. 4) 
8. The Committee had recommended as under:- 
 
“The Committee have consistently been raising serious concern over non -
finalisation of LTIPP 2012-27 and Eleventh Plan.  So far as LTIPP is concerned, 
the Ministry has informed that it is in the process of ratification at COSC level 
and is likely to be approved before the commencement of the Twelfth Plan.  With 
regard to Eleventh Plan, the plan size could not be finalized due to the difference 
of opinion between the Ministry of Defence and the Ministry of Finance, even 
when four years of the plan period have  already passed and the projections for 
the last year of the Plan i.e. 2011 – 12 have already been finalized.  What is 
more disturbing to the Committee is the fact that this is not the first time when 
the Five Year Plan could not be finalised.  Tenth Plan too met with the same fate 
and it has become a continuous practice with the Defence Ministry.  Further the 
Ministry has repeatedly been stating that annual acquisitions are subject to 
availability of annual budgetary allocations as a result of which modern ization 
programmes of varying extent are being compromised.  This trend is totally 
against the spirit of GoMs report on Reforming National Security System which 
state that Annual Plans should be strictly as per the five year plans.  While 
expressing unhapp iness over the adhocism in the whole planning process in 
Defence Ministry, the Committee strongly recommend that LTIPP should be 

11 
 
finalised without any further delay.   Besides all the initiatives should be taken to 
ensure that the projections for Twelfth P lan are finalised well in advance so that 
the Twelfth Plan do not meet the fate of Tenth and Eleventh Plan.” 
 
9. The Ministry in its action taken reply has stated as under:- 
“1. LTIPP- The LTIPP 2012 – 27 is under final stages of preparation.  It will 
be tabled at the next COSC for ratification and then at DAC for approval. 
2. As far as the 12 th Defence plan is concerned, the projections from JSOs, 
have been received and being perused by HQ IDS before vetting by MoD 
(Finance).  The vetted inputs from Army have been received and the inputs from 
Navy and Air Force are awaited.  Once all the inputs are received from all the 
services, the plan projection for the services would be consolidated and 
forwarded.” 
Comments of the Committee 
 
10. LTIPP 2012-27 which was in the process of ratification at COSC level as 
mentioned during the course of examination of Demands for Grants 2011-12 has 
now been stated to be under final stages of preparation.  The Committee fail to 
understand how the said long term Plan which wa s at the stage of ratification 
can after the passage of almost six months can revert back to the stage of 
preparation and would like the Department to clarify the position in this regard.  
With regard to finalization of the Twelfth Plan as per the informat ion furnished 
by the Ministry, the inputs from Navy and Air Force are still awaited which 
would be followed by consolidation and the projections for the Twelfth Plan.  
The Committee have their doubts about finalization and approval of the Twelfth 
Plan projections before the start of the Twelfth Plan keeping in view the fact that 
Twelfth Plan would commence shortly w.e.f 1 April, 2012.  The Committee may 
like to emphasize that  synchronizing of the Annual Plans with the Long Term 
Integrated Perspective Plans  is imperative for strengthening National Security 
of the country.  While deploring the tardy progress in finalization of LTIPP 2012 -
27 and Twelfth Plan, the Committee exhort the Ministry to take all initiatives so 
as to ensure that Twelfth Plan projection s do not meet the fate of Tenth and 
Eleventh Plans.  The Committee, therefore, would like the Ministry to ensure that 
LTIPP 2012 -27 and Twelfth Plan projections are finalized and approved before 
the commencement of the Twelfth Plan i.e. 1 April, 2012.  

12 
 
C. Outcome Budget 
Recommendation (Para No. 6) 
11. The Committee had recommended as under:- 
“The Ministry after continuous pursuance of the matter had agreed to attempt 
Outcome Budget in respect of Naval Dockyards besides National Cadet Corps 
and Married Accommodation Project (MAP) as communicated in the action taken 
replies to the Sixth Report of the Committee. The Committee are however, 
distressed to find that even after admitting the fact that there is great merit in 
adopting Outcome Budgeting, the Ministry now  again find problems related to 
security of information, identification of outcomes in identifiable and measurable 
terms among others. The reasons adduced by the Ministry do not convince the 
Committee. This clearly depicts the unwillingness on the part of the Ministry to 
prepare Outcome Budget. The Committee once again recommend the Ministry 
to make positive attempt to prepare Outcome Budget.”  
 
12. The Ministry in its action taken reply has stated as under:- 
“The Outcome Budget documents for the year 2011-12 have been prepared by 
the identified organisations – DGMAP, DG NCC and Naval Dockyards. These 
documents are under examination by the concerned wings in the Ministry.” 
 
Comments of the Committee 
13. The Committee have strongly been recommending the Ministry to prepare 
Outcome Budget of the Ministry.  After continuous pursuance of the matter, the 
Ministry had initially agreed to attempt Outcome Budget in respect of selected 
organizations as communicated in the action taken replies to the Sixth Report of 
the Committee.  When the issue was raised during the course of examination of 
Demands for Grants of the year 2011 -12, the Ministry’s response was not 
positive.  Even when the issue was pursued strongly i n the Twelfth Report, the 
action taken reply furnished by the Ministry does not indicate the status of 
preparation of Outcome Budget 2012 -13 related to the financial year 2012 -13 
commencing from 1 April, 2012.  To The surprise of the Committee the Ministry  
has now informed that the Outcome Budget documents for the year 2011 -12 
which would close by  31 March, 2012 have been prepared by the identified 
organizations and are under examination by the concerned Wings in the 
Ministry.  The Committee fail to unders tand the relevance of preparation of 

13 
 
Outcome Budget 2011-12 which pertains to the year which is going to close on 
31 March, 2012.  The action taken reply clearly indicates the unwillingness on 
the part of the Ministry to prepare Outcome Budget.   
14. The C ommittee would like to emphasize that Outcome Budget is an 
important document which ensures system of checks and balances , brings 
transparency and wins public trust and the achievements made by the Ministry 
are also scrutinized by virtue of being quantified.  While deploring the attitude of 
the Ministry in this regard, the Committee reiterate their recommendation and 
would like the Ministry to prepare Outcome Budget 2012 -13 positively and place 
before Parliament alongwith the Demands for Grants 2012-13.     
 
D. Optical Fibre Connectivity 
Recommendation (Para No.12) 
 
15. The Committee had recommended as under:- 
“The Committee observe that a fully secure and dedicated nationwide optical 
fibre network for Army & Navy was to be laid by MoC&IT.  The supply order of 
the equipment was to be placed by 13 Aug 2010.  However, this timeline has 
not been met by MoC&IT till date.  The Committee desire the Ministry to 
complete the task in a time bound manner. 
 
16. The Ministry in its action taken reply has stated as under:- 
“An MoU on vacation of Spectrum was signed between MoD and MoC & IT on 
22.5.2009.  As per the MoU, MoC & IT was to lay out a fully secure and 
dedicated nationwide Optical Fibre Network for Defence, Promulgate Defence 
Band and Defence Interest Zone and Waive  off spectrum usage charges for 
Defence in lieu of spectrum to be released by Defence.  Consequent to the 
signing of the MoU, Full Telecom Commission (FTC) on 28.8.2009 constituted 
an Inter-Ministerial Group (IMG) for vetting the scope and specification of  the 
Network.  Defence Services prepared a report containing the scope of the 
project, System Requirements and Technical Specifications.  M/s. BSNL 
prepared a Detailed Project Report (DPR) based upon this report.  
Subsequently, IMG submitted its report to FTC on 16.11.2009 and same was 
endorsed by FTC on 23.11.2009.  The Cabinet Committee on Infrastructure 
(CCI) approved the IMG report on 3.12.2009 and earmarked Rs. 9175 Cr for 
the project NFS including Rs. 1077 Cr for AFNET.  It was also directed by FTC 
that project should be implemented by BSNL and would be book transferred to 

14 
 
Defence Services on completion of the project.  The PDC of the project was 
December, 2012. 
Scope of Project as per MoU 
Project NFS being implemented by BSNL, as part of MoU has following 
four distinct components :- 
(a) Tri-Services backbone network interconnecting 414 locations (Army 219, 
Navy-33 and Air Force – 162). 
(b) Army Access Network. 
(c) Naval Access Network. 
(d) Migration of AFNET of NFS Backbone. 
 
In addition to the laying out of the fully secure and dedicated nationwide 
optical fibre network for Defence Services by MoC & IT, the following important 
tasks were also to be undertaken by Moc & IT in Aug 2010 :- 
(a) Promulgation of Defence Band and Defence Interest Zone for use of 
Electromagnetic Spectrum by Defence and Strategic Forces. 
(b) Waiver of Spectrum User Charges. 
Progress 
 The tender documents for Tri -Services backbone OFC and Army and 
Naval Access OFC was floated by BSNL in Feb -Apr 2010.  The tech -
commercial evaluation of the bids for t he tenders was carried out in Aug 2010 
by a CET.  As per the DPR, the cost estimate of only the OFC component for 
tri-Services backbone and Army & Naval Access Networks was Rs. 2000 Cr, 
whereas the L1 Quoted cost of the tenders was Rs. 7500 Cr.  Due to thi s 
escalation in the cost, FTC on 30.11.2010, directed MoD to vet the user 
specification & requirements and BSNL to carry out its cost estimations based 
upon the Defence QRs.  Reply of MoD on the issue was forwarded in February 
2011 stating that since FTC i tself had constituted IMG to define scope and 
specifications of the network, the technical issues be referred to IMG to firm up 
and authenticate the specifications. 
 Concerns of Defence Services regarding the delays in execution of MoU 
and for expediting p roject NFS were also communicated to Chairman E -GoM 
and Hon‟ble Telecom Minister on 25.2.2011.  Since the user specification and 
cost were worked out by an IMG, MoC & IT on 3.3.2011 reconvened the IMG to 
look further into the user requirements and cost estimates. Four meeting of IMG 
were held on 10.3.2011, 11.4.2011, 26.5.11 and 29.6.2011.  The preliminary 
inputs in terms of sub system level user requirements and Schedule of 
Requirements (SoR) were handed over by Defence to BSNL on 13.4.2011.  It 
was also decided that BSNL would do the costing based on the two documents 
and their implementation plan.  Detailed SoR based on numerous technical 
interactions with BSNL were forwarded to BSNL on 25.5.2011.  On 29.6.2011, 
IMG decided that a joint review of all the documents should be done by 
Defence and BSNL representatives.  The Joint Review Report was signed by 
all representatives on 19.7.2011.  The same was forwarded to BSNL on 
20.7.2011 for carrying out cost estimates.  It is learnt that BSNL has submitted 
the c omplete report including the cost estimates to IMG on 12.8.2011.  The 
next and final meeting of IMG is scheduled on 19.8.2011. 

15 
 
The project is being implemented on Mission mode basis and would 
restart after the necessary approvals are taken by MoC&IT.  BSNL  is likely to 
complete the project within a time frame of 36 months post approvals. 
Defence Band, Defence Interest Zone and waiver of Spectrum usage 
charges though agreed are yet to be promulgated/notified by MoC&IT.” 
 
Comments of the Committee 
17. Fully secured and  dedicated nationwide optical fibre network for the 
services    assumes special  significance as  it would  not only enhance their 
operational capabilities  and meet functional requirements  but would also 
contribute substantially in the overall stre ngthening of the    Defence forces. The 
Committee, while taking note of the progress made in this regard find  that the 
final meeting of Inter -Ministerial Group (IMG) was sche duled to take place on 
19.8.2011 for considering the report of BSNL including the cost estimates for the 
project.  Treating this reply as interim in nature, the Committee would like to be 
apprised of the outcome  of the meeting of the IMG which was scheduled to be 
held six months back. The Committee would  also like to be apprised wheth er the 
necessary approval have already been taken by MOC&IT which, according to the 
reply of the Ministry is contingent for restarting the project. Since  more than two 
and half years have  elapsed when  the MOU on  vacation of spectrum was signed 
between MOD and MOC&IT , the Committee would atleast now   like to be 
informed  of a final date on which the project is to begin. Needless to say that the 
project should be completed  within the stipulated timeframe  of 36 months 
without any time and cost escalations consequent to the commencement. 
18. Another area of concern is the non -promulgation/notification of the 
Defence Band, Defence Interest Zone and waiver of Spectrum usage charges by 
MOC&IT. The Committee fail to understand the delay in promulgation/notification 
particularly when the issues have been settled and agreed  to by  MOC&IT. The 
Committee therefore, recommend expeditious promulgation of the same as this 
step is deemed imperative for commencement of the project and is also a 
technical requirement which cannot be forgone. Once the needful is done  by the 
Ministry, the Committee would like to be informed accordingly.   
 

16 
 
 
E. One Rank One Pension. 
Recommendation (Para No. 13) 
 
19. The Committee had recommended as under:- 
“The Committee have consistently been recommending „One Rank One 
Pension‟ to ex-servicemen in their various reports. „One Rank One Pension‟ as 
informed by the Ministry implies that uniform pension be paid to the armed 
forces personnel retiring in the same rank with same length of service 
irrespective of their date of retirement and any future enhancement in the rate 
of pension be automatically passed on to the past pensioners.  Pursuant to the 
recommendation of the Committee, a Committee was set up under the 
Chairmanship of Cabinet Secretary to look into the issue of „OROP‟ and other 
related matters.  Based on the recommendation of the Committee, the 
pensionary benefits of ex -servicemen including disabled ex -servicemen have 
considerably been improved by the implementation of seven recommendations 
of the Committee. The Committee in the Sixth Report had emphasized to pay 
various emoluments due to various benefits provided to the ex -servicemen in 
pursuant to implementation of the recommendations of the Committee headed 
by the Cabinet Secretary alongwith  the arrears, if any, expeditiously. The 
Committee note that 26 Public Sector Banks and 4 private sector Banks have 
confirmed that they carried out disbursement of revised pension alongwith the 
arrears to almost 14 lakh pensioners. 
The Committee find that even after implementation of the aforesaid seven 
recommendations of the Committee headed by the Cabinet Secretary, the 
demand of ex -servicemen for One Rank One Pension still persists. In this 
connection when the issue was deliberated during the course of examination 
for Demands for Grants, the Committee have been informed that One Rank 
One Pension was not accepted by Fo urth and Fifth Central Pay Commission, 
Inter-Ministerial Committee, 2003 and GoM set up in January, 2005  due to 
administrative, financial and legal reasons.  The Committee have now been 
informed that there is no deadline as to when „OROP‟ would be implemented as 
a very conscious and deliberate decision based on historical facts, legal 
opinions and concrete judgements has been arrived at by the Government that 
considerable enhancement in the pension of all ranks has been given and it 
cannot be hundred percent.  With regard to the financial implications, the 
Committee‟s examination reveal that the Ministry is no t firm about the required 
outlay for the purpose.  During the course of deliberations on Demands for 
Grants of this year, the representative of the Ministry of Defence has submitted 
that the financial implication may be Rs. 3500 crore minus Rs. 2200 crore ( Rs. 
2200 crore is the financial implication for implementation of seven 
recommendations) that come to Rs. 1300 crore. The Committee have further 
been informed that the approximate figure of Rs. 1300 crore is per annum and 
not since the beginning of the period that has to be reckoned for the purpose of 
One Rank One Pension. The Committee during the course of deliberation on 
the Demands for the Grants of the previous year had been informed that the 

17 
 
financial expenditure would be to the tune of Rs. 8,000 cro re to Rs. 9,000 crore 
per annum if One Rank One Pension is implemented. 
The Committee understand that one of the administrative difficulties is 
availability of records. As informed by the Ministry, CGDA has computerized 
records from the date since the year  1989 and several records because of the 
retention schedule have been destroyed.  The Committee find that even when 
Ministry of Defence may not have maintained the records, such records seen to 
have been available with Banks which as stated by the Ministry  have 
reimbursed enhanced pension to approximately 14 lakh pensioners with the 
implementation of aforesaid seven recommendations.  As such the problem of 
records can be addressed in coordination with the Banks.  The Committee 
would again like to emphasize that even when implementation of the seven 
recommendations has improved pension to some extent, the demand of One 
Rank One Pension of the ex -servicemen still persists. As such the Committee 
maintain their earlier stand and would like the Government to impl ement One 
Rank One Pension so that a large number of ex-servicemen can be benefited.” 
  
20. The Ministry in its action taken reply has stated as under:- 
“Pension improvement is an ongoing process and considerable improvements 
have been made in the pensions of armed forces personnel.  
 
2.  The Group of Ministers (GoM) had in 2005 improved the pensionary 
benefits of Personnel Below Officer Rank (PBORs). On the recommendations 
of PMO, a Committee was set up under the Chairmanship of Cabinet Secretary 
in June, 2009 to look into the issue of 'One Rank One Pension and other 
related matters'. After considering all aspects of the matter, the Committee 
keeping in mind the spirit of the demand, suggested several measures  to 
substantially improve pensionary benefits of  Personnel Below Officer Rank 
(PBOR) and Commissioned Officers, which have been accepted by the 
Government and orders for implementation of all the recommendations have 
been issued. These are available at www.pcdapension.nic.in. 
3.  In the recent past many benefits have been exclusively extended on the 
Defence side. The Military Service Pay is exclusive to the Armed Forces. 
Moreover, the New Contributory Pension Scheme has been introduced on civil 
side but has not been extended to the Defence personnel, who are still covered 
under defined pension. The promotion prospects of the Officers have also been 
improved to a great extent with  
implementation A.V. Singh Committee Report. Pre -2006 PBORs have been 
extended the benefit that their pension is consolidated on the maximum of their 
pre-06 pay scales which has bridged the gap between the pre and post 2006 
PBOR pensioners to a large extent.  
4.  The implementation of recommendations of the Standing Committee is 
being reviewed on regular basis so that maximum pensionary benefits are 
extended to the Ex-servicemen. " 

18 
 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
21. The Committee take note of   the measures taken by the Ministry  to 
mitigate the problems of pensioners and issuing of the  orders for 
implementation of the recommendations of the Committee setup under the 
Chairmanship of Cabinet Secretary  to substantially improve pensionary 
benefits of Personnel Below Officers Rank (PBOR) and Commissioned Officers .  
These orders are in the public domain through the website.   
22. The issue of One Rank One Pension has continuously being 
recommended and pursued by the Committee in the various reports.  The 
Committee appreciate the response of the Ministry whereby it has been stated 
that the implementation of recommendations of the Committee is being 
reviewed on regular basis so that maximum pensionary benefits are extended to 
the ex-servicemen.  With regard to the financial implication in implementation of 
One Rank One Pension, the Committee at several occasions have been apprised 
of different cost estimates.  At one place, the estimates have been stated to be 
Rs. 1300 crore per annum approximately which do not take into account the 
period since the beginning that has to be reckoned for th e purpose of One Rank 
One Pension as stated by the Ministry.  Another estimate presented before the 
Committee is the approximate figure of Rs. 8000 crore to Rs. 9000 crore per 
annum.  The Committee may like to emphasize that financial implication for 
implementation of One Rank One Pension should be worked out clearly.  While 
reiterating the Committee’s stand, the Committee again strongly recommend the 
Ministry to implement One Rank One Pension expeditiously so that a large 
number of ex-servicemen are benefitted.   
F. Construction of Border Roads     
Recommendation No. (Para No. 15) 
23. The Committee had recommended as under:- 
“The Committee in their Eighth Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) on „Construction of 
roads in border areas of the country‟ had strongly emphasized for fast track 
procedures for forest and wildlife clearances for construction of border roads. 

19 
 
Inspite of that as p er information provided by the Ministry of Defence, 193 
forest/wildlife clearance proposals in respect of high priority roads/strategic roads 
are still pending with various authorities. During the oral evidence, the Defence 
Secretary has also admitted that  environment clearance is the main issue in 
delay in construction of roads. While reiterating the recommendations made in 
the aforesaid Eight Report for streamlining forest /wildlife clearances, the 
Committee recommend to form a core group of officers from  the Ministries 
involved in forest/wildlife clearances so as to expedite the process of such 
clearances.” 
 
24. The Ministry in its action taken reply has stated as under:- 
“To fast -track pending forest clearance cases MoEF has established single 
window Cle arance system at three levels – MoEF, State Government and 
district. Further it has simplified the forms required to be filled up for obtaining 
forest clearance. A unified form has now been designed to process 
simultaneously both forest clearance as well a s wild life clearance cases. 
Regular review meetings are held at a high level in MoD alongwith 
representatives of concerned States to resolve pending cases. The issue of 
dispensing with the need for wildlife clearance for the roads falling within 50 Kms 
of the border is being pursued. An Interlocutory Application has already been 
filed in the Supreme Court of India to exempt strategic roads within 50 Km of 
International border/LAC from relevant Acts relating to Forest and Wildlife. 
Further Ministry of Home Affairs is also finalizing a Bill for exemption of strategic 
roads from relevant provisions of forest and wildlife enactments.  Joint inter -
departmental monitoring team has been setup in Arunachal Pradesh to further 
speedup the Forest Clearance.” 
 
Comments of the Committee 
25. The Committee find that whereas the Ministry in the action taken note has 
enumerated various initiatives taken/being taken to fast -track the procedure for 
forest and wild life clearances with regard to construction of border roads, th e 
specific issue raised in the recommendation i.e. to form a core group of Officers 
from the Ministries involved in forest/wild life clearance has not been responded 
at all in the action taken note.  The Committee would like the specific response 
of the Mi nistry with regard to the aforesaid recommendation made by the 
Committee.   
26. The various initiatives taken by the Ministry with regard to the forest and 
wild life clearances in respect of the border roads as enumerated in the action 
taken note include s ingle window clearance system at MOEF, State 

20 
 
Governments and Districts; unified form for forest and wild life clearance; 
regular review meetings at high level in MoD. The Committee appreciate the 
aforesaid initiatives.  The Ministry has also indicated some  of the initiatives 
being pursued/under -consideration which include filing of an Interlocutory 
Application in the Supreme Court to exempt strategic roads within the 50 Kms 
of international border/LAC from relevant Acts relating to forest and wild life, 
finalization of a Bill with the Ministry of Home Affairs for exemption of strategic 
roads from relevant provision of forest and wild life enactments.  The 
Committee would like the Ministry to pursue with the Supreme Court and the 
Ministry of Home Affairs so t hat the exemption from the Supreme Court is 
obtained and the Bill is finalized and introduced in Parliament which would 
certainly help in expediting construction of roads and infrastructure in border 
areas which is the strategic requirement.  The Committee  further note from the 
action taken note that in Arunachal Pradesh Joint Inter-Departmental Monitoring 
Team has been set up to further speed up the forest clearance.  The Committee 
appreciate the aforesaid initiative of the State Government and would like the 
other border States to replicate the model of Arunachal Pradesh.  The Ministry 
of Defence should take up the issue in this regard with the concerned State 
Governments/UT Administrations.   
 
G. Sainik Schools 
Recommendation No. (Para No. 23) 
 
27. The Committee had recommended as under:- 
“While noting that the administration of Sainik Schools is ailing from variety of 
maladies, the Committee have consistently been recommending that entire 
funding of all Sainik Schools should be made by the Central Government on the 
pattern of Kendriya Vidyalayas.  The Ministry‟s stand in this regard has been 
that Sainik Schools are conceived as a joint venture of the Central Government 
and State Governments.  When the issue was again raised during the course of 
the examination of Demands for Grants of this year, the recommendation does 
not seem to be agreeable to the Ministry.  The Secretary of the Ministry during 
the course of the deliberations emphasized that it is Bhagidari with the States 
which is forcing the Ministry  to share expenditure with the States. The 
Secretary further elaborated that the Centre -State share was 50-50 and now in 
some States the Centre‟s share has been increased to sixty per cent. In this 
connection, the committee would like the Ministry to furni sh the name of the 

21 
 
States which are finding it difficult to bear the finances involved in running these 
schools.  Besides the Committee would also like to be apprised about the name 
of the States in which case the Centre share has been increased from 50 to  60 
per cent as stated by the Secretary. 
 
The Committee may again like to emphasize that Sainik Schools have always 
played a unique role as a recruiting and training ground of future officers of the 
forces.  As such there is an urgent need to look into the  concern of various 
States with regard to meeting the desired expenditure in running the schools. 
As acknowledged by the Secretary, the expenditure of running Sainik Schools 
is just Rs. 50 to 60 crore which can easily be born by the Central Government. 
As far as the concept of Bhagidari is concerned, the States are already 
providing land for these schools. To further ensure the State‟s involvement in 
running these schools, the Committee recommend that the Centre funding may 
further be increased to 90 per ce nt. 10 per cent funding by the State 
Governments as well as their bearing the land part would be sufficient to justify 
the Bhagidari concept. Moreover this would also address the issue of some of 
the States who are not able to bear the working expenditure of these schools.”     
 
28. The Ministry in its action taken reply has stated as under:- 
“The recommendation of the Standing Committee has been examined in detail. 
It is submitted that the Sainik Schools are conceived as joint ventures of 
Central Government and the State Governments set up primarily with the aim 
to remove regional imbalance in officer cadre of armed forces. 67% of the seats 
in each Sainik School are reserved for boys from the state in which the Sainik 
School is located to attract children of that state/region into the armed forces.  
2. Sainik Schools are unique assets of the State Governments. They 
provide land free of cost, build and maintain the school infrastructure.  In 
addition, they award scholarship on merit -cum-means basis. The impor tance, 
therefore, of the role of the State Government in running the School should not 
be done away with.  
3. Ministry of Defence provides three service officers and the APTCC/NCC 
instructors to the Sainik Schools besides scholarships to the cadets.  There  is 
no fixed ratio in financial terms between Centre and State Governments. 
4. Sainik schools were expected to be financially self -sufficient institutions.  
These depend mainly on fees paid by the parents. It is seen that the schools 
that are regularly getting funds from the State Governments are better run.  The 
schools such as Bijapur & Kodagu (Karnataka), Ghorakhal (Uttarakhand), 
Gopalganj & Nalanda (Bihar) and Kunjpura (Haryana) are getting regular funds 
from respective State Governments.   The Schools such as Balachadi 
(Gujarat), Chittorgarh (Rajasthan), Goalpara (Assam), Nagrota (J&K) & Rewa 
(Madhya Pradesh) are not getting regular funds from respective State 
Governments. Without diluting the responsibilities of the State Governments, 
the Centre has st eadily increasing its contribution and investment towards 

22 
 
Sainik Schools.  There are three States having two Sainik Schools and hence 
the contribution of Central Government is more in these States.   
5. The Ministry of Defence has provided grants -in-aid of  Rs. 73.10 crore 
(including 44 crores to then 22 Sainik Schools @ Rs. 2 crore for infrastructural 
improvement), 55.00 crore and Rs. 59.00 crore during the financial year 2008 -
09, 2009 -10 and 2010 -11 respectively. The grants -in-aid provided by the 
Ministry of Defence includes Scholarship and subsidy to the cadets, training 
grants, 80% of additionality of implementation of recommendations of 6 th Pay 
Commission on account of pay and allowances and pensions of employees of 
Sainik Schools and improvement of infrastructure.       
6. Recently, Ministry of Defence has initiated following steps:-  
 (1) Enhancement of Defence Scholarship from Rs. 10,500/ - per annum to 
Rs. 32,000/ - per annum to Non Commissioned Officers and other ranks and 
from Rs. 5250/- per annum to Rs. 16000/ - per annum to Junior Commissioned 
Officers w.e.f. financial year 2010-11. 
 (2) Increase in subsidy amount provided to all categories of cadets on tuition 
fee and dietary charges from Rs. 10,000/ - to Rs. 16,000/ - (approx.) w.e.f 
financial year 2010-11. 
(3) Provide 100% additionality on account of implementation of 
recommendations of 6 th Pay Commission in respect to pay and allowances  of 
employees of Sainik Schools as grants-in-aid. 
 (4) Provision of Grants -in-aid of Rs. One Crore annually to each of the 24 
Sainik Schools for infrastructure and modernization.  The modalities for utilizing 
this grant are being prepared for improving the  schools without diluting the 
responsibility of the State Governments towards them.” 
 
Comments  of the Committee 
  
29. The Committee are dismayed to note that the Ministry is portr aying the 
same set of reply in regard to enhance funding for the Sainik schools by the 
Central Government.  So far, Ministry has not initiated any step for 
implementing the recommendation of the Committee.  Although, the Committee 
have separately taken up the subject ‘Critical Review of Functioning of Sainik 
Schools’ for detai led examination and report, nevertheless, they would like to 
reiterate their earlier recommendation that the central share of expenditure in 
running the Sainik Schools be increased up to 90 per cent.   
 

23 
 
 
 
H. Pension to ESM  who retired pre – independence period 
Recommendation Nos. (Para Nos.25 &26) 
 
30. The Committee had recommended as under:- 
“The Committee note that World War I &  II veterans at present are being 
provided some sort of financial assistance. As per the written note of the 
Ministry, State/UTs, have been approached by the Department of Ex-servicemen 
Welfare for enhancing the financial assistance to a minimum level of R s.3000 
per month. As such some of the States have increased the amount and the 
financial assistance differ from States to States depending upon their financial 
resources. From the aforesaid position, it seems that these world war veterans 
may also be getting financial assistance even less than Rs. 3000 per month. The 
Committee in this regard would like to be apprised of the details of the financial 
assistance being provided to these veterans State/UT wise.” 
 
31. The Ministry in its action taken reply has stated as under:- 
“The detail of Financial Assistance being provided to the World War Veterans 
State/UT wise is given at Annexure I. State Governments have already been 
requested by the Central Government to enhance the Financial Assistance to 
World War Veterans to at least to Rs.3000/ - Per Month, and the matter is being 
perused with State Governments.” (Para No.25) 
 
32. The Committee had recommended as under:- 
 
“The Ministry has stated that there are 43362 World War II veterans. World War 
happened in 1939 to 45. If the average age of the veterans at the time of World 
War is presumed as 20 years, average age of veterans today would be 
approximately 90 years plus. K eeping in view the aforesaid position, the data 
furnished by the Ministry do not seem to be realistic. The Committee feel that 
only few veterans that too with regard to World War II may be alive. As such 
there is an urgent need to ensure that these veteran s live with dignity at the fag 
end of their life. Even if it is considered that all States are paying as Rs. 3000 per 
month, the Committee consider it a petty amount more so when the veterans are 
not provided facilitates like ECHS, CSD canteen. The Ministr y should collect the 
data of such veterans State/UT wise and should ensure that adequate financial 

24 
 
assistance and other facility like ECHS, CSD canteen admissible to other armed 
forces personnel be given to them.” 
 
33. The Ministry in its action taken reply has stated as under:- 
“The data pertaining to the number of World War Veterans is compiled by the 
Kendriya Sainik Board/Directorate General of Resettlement through Rajya Sainik 
Boards & Zila Sainik Boards. Because of constraints of manpower and 
budgetary support to these Boards, there is no mechanism in place to conduct 
extensive census to determine the number of these World War Veterans and 
data is based on the voluntary registration by the individuals with respective 
Rajya Sainik Board/Zila Sainik Board . However, in view of the specific direction 
of the Committee, Kendriya Sainik Board/Directorate General of Resettlement 
have been advised to undertake afresh the process of collection of data in 
respect of WW II Veterans, which would help in determining t he quantum of 
budgetary support required for extending financial assistance to them. 
 
World War II Veterans have already been made entitled to the facility of CSD 
Canteen. However, ECHS facility is restricted only to those Ex-Servicemen who 
are in receipt of pension.” (Para No. 26) 
Comments of the Committee 
34. The Committee are concerned to note that despite efforts made by the 
Ministry only seven States have improved financial assistance in respect of 
World War -II veterans . Not only that in  some S tates financial assistance is as 
meagre as Rs. 200 per month and three State are not providing even a single 
rupee to the World War -II veterans or  their widows.    Therefore, the Committee 
recommend that Ministry of Defence should take up the issue in ord er to adopt  
a uniform policy to give enhanced pension/financial assistance to the veterans 
so to make their life comfortable at the fag end of their life.   
35. The Committee are further concerned to note that the data with regard to 
the financial assistance to World War -I veteran has not been furnished to the 
Committee at all.  The status in this regard should be obtained from the State 
Governments and furnished to the Committee.  The Committee may also like to 
emphasize that a centralized data wit h regard to all World War -I and World War-
II veterans should be maintained and placed under public domain which would 
not only be beneficial for resolving issues concerning pension etc. but also 
transfer the history to the next generations to come. 
 

25 
 
I. Facilities to  Medal Winners 
 
Recommendation No. (Para No.28) 
 
36. The Committee had recommended as under:- 
 
“The Committee note that Sena Medal is ranked higher in the Order of 
Precedence than Police Medal for Gallantry and the awardees of Police Medal 
for gallantry have been allowed 75% concession on basic air fare by Indian 
Airlines, and free II AC/Sleeper travel along with a companion by Railways.  No 
such concession has been extended to Sena/Nao/Vayu Sena Medal awardees 
by the Air India/Railway Board.  The Committee also note that the Ministry has 
taken up the matter regarding parity in rail concessions with the Railway Board.  
 
Considering the fact that Sena Medal awardees are ranked higher in the Order 
of Precedence than Police Medal for gallantry and both the medals are given 
for same types of valour, therefore, the Committee desire that awardees of all 
three types of sena medal i.e. Sena/Nao/Vayu should also be given 
facilities/concessions in rail and air travel as provided to the winners of police 
medals”. 
 
37. The Ministry in its action taken reply has stated as under:- 
 
“In so far as para 28 (Facilities to Medal Winners) of Recommendations of 
Standing Committee on Defence contained in 12 th Report is concerned, it is 
hereby informed that the President‟s Police Medal for Gallantry awardees have 
been provided with complementary railway passes while Sena/Nao Sena/Vayu 
Sena Medal gallantry awardees of the Armed Forces who rank higher in the 
order of Precedence than the President‟s Police Medal for Gallantry awardees 
have been denied this facility.  The matter has been taken up with Railway 
Board on few occasion s in past at the level of Defence Secretary and Special 
Secretary.  However, no fruitful outcome has been achieved yet. 
 
Air travel concession is being extended to the awardees and their widows.  
However, the issue of grant of air travel concession to next  of kin of unmarried 
posthumous awardees was taken up with Air India.  Air India expressed their 
inability to accede additional request for grant of air travel concession to any 
category of awardees other than Bravery Level I & II awardees, who are 
already in receipt of the air travel concession.  It was further intimated that in 
pursuance of a decision taken in the Meeting of Secretaries held on 05 th March, 
2003 all pending and future requests for concession would be processed by 

26 
 
them on the basis of reimb ursement of subsidy by the Ministry sponsoring the 
request/concession.  In this connection a copy of their Reply No. HCD/8 -R/70 
dated 03 Dec 2010 is also enclosed.”  
 
Comments  of the Committee 
38. The Committee are dismayed over the fact that President’s Police Medal 
for Gallantry awardees have been provided with complementary railway passes 
while Sena/Nao Sena/Vayu Sena Medal Gallantary awardees of the Armed 
Forces who rank higher in the order of P recedence than the President’s Police 
Medal for Gallantary awardees have been denied this facility and despite taking 
up the matter with Railway Board no fruitful outcome has been achieved.  
Therefore, the Committee once again reiterate that the matter sho uld be taken 
up at the highest level in the Ministry of Railways so that the awardees of 
Sena/Nao Sena/Vayu Sena medals should also get the same level of facilities.  
   
39. In regard to agreeing with air travel concession to next of kin of 
unmarried Posth umous awardees, the Committee have now learnt from the 
reply furnished by the Ministry that in pursuance of a decision taken in the 
meeting of Secretaries held on 5 th March, 2003 all  pending and future requests 
for concession would be processed by the Air  India on the basis of 
reimbursement of subsidy by the Ministry sponsoring the requests/concession.  
While appreciating the decision taken at the aforesaid sitting of the Secretaries 
the Committee fail to understand  the delay in extending air travel facility to the 
next of kin of unmarried posthumous awardees. .  The Committee, therefore, in 
no uncertain terms recommend that matter be taken  up  with Ministry of Civil 
Aviation/Air India  expeditiously for extending the travel con cession for sena 
medal awardees  for undertaking air travel and decision be taken by the Ministry 
of Defence for reimbursement of subsidy from  their own funds head in order to 
resolve this long pending issue. 
 
 
 

27 
 
 
J. Shortage of Officers and PBOR in Air Force 
Recommendation (Para No.32) 
40. The Committee had recommended as under:- 
 
“With regard to the shortage of officers, the Committee note that out of the 
deficiency of 828 officers 414 is for pilots.  The Committee during the course of 
deliberations have been informed that the proposal with regard to considering 
NCC Cadets and pilots with civil license for recruitment in Air Force is under 
consideration.  The Committee has also been informed that the basic 
qualification requirement is not being diluted.  The Committee feel that there may 
be sufficient number of NCC Cadets and pilots with civil license which may meet 
the basic qualification requirement of Air Force  and by taking the decision in this 
regard, Air Force may be able to recruit some additional p ilots.  The Committee 
as such strongly emphasize to take early decision in this regard.” 
  
41. The Ministry in its action taken reply has stated as under:- 
“(a) The shortage of officers in IAF, as on 01 August, 2011 is 763, out of which 
408 are pilots. 
(b) There has been a concerted effort to induct more NCC cadets as officers 
in all the branches of the IAF.  To enhance the induction of NCC cadets a Fast 
Track Selection (FTS) based on the campus placements process in respect  of 
NCC cadets was conducted in October 2010.  In this FTS, a total of 35 NCC 
cadets were recommended for second phase of testing.  In January, 2011, a 
motivational lecture and a FTS for NCC cadets was also conducted during the 
Republic day Camp.  All efforts are being made to motivate N CC cadets to join 
the IAF. 
(c) The Indian Air Force gives two years age relaxation to candidates who 
are holding current Commercial Pilot‟s Licence (CPL) issued by DGCA (India) for 
induction into Short Service Commission of Flying Branch.  The upper age li mit 
for CPL holder candidates is relaxed to 25 years, whereas for the other 
candidates it is 23 years.” 
 
Comments of the Committee 
42. The Committee’s main concern in the aforesaid recommendation was 
with regard to the shortage of officers in Indian Air Force in the rank of pilots.  
As such the Committee had strongly emphasized to take early decision on the 

28 
 
proposal of the Government with  regard to considering NCC cadets and pilots 
with civil license for recruitment in Air Force, even if the criteria of not diluting 
the basic qualification is insisted.  The Ministry has not adequately responded 
to the aforesaid recommendation of the Commit tee. The Committee may again 
like to emphasize that there may be sufficient number of NCC cadets and pilots 
with civil license which may meet the basic qualification requirement of Air 
Force.  As such, the decision in this regard should be taken expeditiou sly so as 
to enable Air Force to fill in as many as 408 vacancies of pilots. 
 
K. Accidents of MIG aircrafts Aircraft in Air Force 
Recommendation (Para No.34) 
 
43. The Committee had recommended as under:- 
“The Committee find from the information made available  by the Ministry that 
accident rate in MIG aircraft is rather more high.  476 MIG aircrafts so far have 
met the accidents and the remaining fleet is 470 aircraft.  Thus, more than 50 
percent MIG aircraft have already met with accidents.  The Ministry has 
acknowledged that majority of technical defect accidents pertain to old 
technology aircraft.  Problems associated with vintage technology especially 
aero engine malfunctions MIG -21 and MIG -27 are more pronounced.   The 
Committee have further been apprised t hat these aircraft have even been 
phased out of the Russian Air Force like MIG-27 and we are only Air Force in the 
world which is flying this aircraft now.  In the aforesaid scenario, the Committee 
may like to strongly emphasize that all the initiatives sh ould be taken to ensure 
that planned acquisitions of aircraft are in place within the stipulated time frame 
so that these old MIG aircraft can be phased out as early as possible.” 
 
44. The Ministry in its action taken reply has stated as under:- 
“Policy regarding extensions of Life Span of an aircraft system 
(a)The Original Equipment Manufacturer (OEM) of any aircraft assigns initial life 
and outlines maintenance cycle based on the design parameters.  However, 
upon exploitation of the aircraft, large amount of data is collected to predict 
optimum life and maintenance cycle.  The life extension provided to an aircraft is 
based on the results obtained from the „ Reliability Analysis‟ of the failure data of 
similar aircraft.  The findings of the reliability study are translated into life 
extensions, modifications, changes in Standard Operating Procedures.  Thus life 
extension of an aircraft is an acceptable norm in order to optimally utilize safe 

29 
 
operating life of the aircraft.  In all lifing studies OEM/RCMA /CEMILAC/NAL/HAL 
designs departments etc., are involved.   
Review of life of existing fleet and induction of new fleet by its replacement is a 
continuous process, and a decision in  this regard is based on operational 
requirements of the Defence forces.” 
 
Comments of the Committee 
45. The Committee while taking not e of the fact that 476 MIG Aircrafts i.e. 50 
per cent of the total MIG fleet have already met with accidents had strongly 
recommended to take all the desired initiatives to ensure the timely plan 
acquisition of Aircrafts so that these old MIG Aircrafts can  be phased out 
expeditiously.  The Ministry instead of addressing to such a serious issue has 
stated in a very casual way that review of life of existing fleet and induction of 
new fleet by its replacement is a continuous process.  The Ministry has also 
stated that life extension of an aircraft is an acceptable norm in order to 
optimally utilize safe operating life of the aircraft.  In all lifing studies 
OEM/RCMA/CEMILAC/NAL/HAL designs departments etc., are involved, the 
reply is silent on the  consultation held   with the Original Equipment 
Manufacturer (OEM) of the specific initial aircraft who determine  the initial life 
of the aircraft.   The aforesaid response of the Ministry clearly indicates that 
adequate measures are not being taken to phase out MIG Aircraft even when the 
Ministry during the course of oral evidence in the context of examination of 
Demands for Grants had acknowledged that problems associated with vintage 
technology especially aero engine malfunctions MIG -21 and MIG -27 are mor e 
pronounced and these Aircrafts have even been phased out of the Russian Air 
Force like MIG-27 and we are the only Air Force in the world flying these Aircraft 
now.  While disapproving the way such an important issue has been addressed 
by the Ministry, th e Committee would like to reiterate their concern and 
emphasize that all out measures should be taken to ensure that planned 
acquisition of Aircraft are in place within the stipulated timeframe so that these 
old MIG Aircraft can be phased out as early as possible.  
 
 

30 
 
L. Modifying the system of purchases of aircraft and the comparative study of 
acquisition of defence aircraft in various country 
 
Recommendation (Para No.35) 
46. The Committee had recommended as under:- 
 
“The detailed deliberations with the representatives of MoD and Air Force in the 
context of examination of Demands for Grants has revealed that the Ministry did 
not have the information with regard to the rate of accidents of MIG aircraft in the 
manufacturing countries as well as the other co untries which have purchased 
these aircraft.  The Secretary has acknowledged that Russian are extremely 
reluctant to share certain information.  The Committee feel that the selling 
countries not divulging the vital information is a matter of serious concer n.  Our 
system of making purchases without making the selling country binding for 
sharing such information is to be blamed in the aforesaid scenario.  As such, the 
Committee strongly recommends that in all the future purchases the condition to 
mandatorily sharing the information with regard to the accidents and helping us 
in case of technical defect should be inbuilt in the agreement itself.  Besides, the 
Ministry and Air Force should try to gather the information about accidents of 
various types of aircraf t through our intelligence mechanism so that a 
comparative study can be made which definitely help the country in taking 
corrective action to check the rate of accidents.” 
  
47. The Ministry in its action taken reply has stated as under:- 
“With  regard to the directions mentioned in the para that „All the future purchase 
the condition to mandatorily share the information with regard to the accidents 
and helping us in case of technical defect should be inbuilt in the agreement 
itself‟ .  It may be stated tha t while there are „product support‟ clauses in the 
standard RFP (para 11) and the standard contract document(Article 30) of 
Defence Procurement  Procedure,2011 it does not necessarily require giving of 
information relating to accidents.”  
 
Comments of the Committee 
48. While taking note of the high rate of accidents of MIG Aircrafts, the 
Committee had strongly recommended that in all future purchases the condition 
to mandatorily sharing the information with regard to accidents and helping us 
in case of technological defe cts should be in -built in the agreement itself.  The 
Ministry instead of taking the concrete action in this regard has in a vague 

31 
 
manner stated that Procedure 2011 does not necessarily require giving of 
information relating to accidents.  With regard to the issue regarding helping the 
selling country to the buyer country in case of technological defects, the clear 
response has not been given.  The Ministry has stated that there are ‘product 
support’ clauses in the Standard RFP (Para 11) and the Standard Con tract 
Document (Article 30) of Defence Procurement Procedure, 2011.   
49. The Secretary during the course of examination of Demands for Grants 
has acknowledged that Russians are extremely reluctant to share certain 
information.  In this background, the Com mittee would like to reemphasize that 
our system of making purchases without making the selling country binding for 
sharing certain information is to be blamed for the selling country not divulging 
the vital information. While expressing unhappiness over t he way the issue has 
been dealt with by the Ministry, the Committee would like to reiterate their 
earlier recommendation and desire the Ministry to make amendments to our 
defence procurement procedures so that the condition to mandatorily sharing 
the information with regard to accidents and helping us in case of technological 
defects is in -built in our purchase agreements itself.    Besides, as 
recommended earlier, the Ministry and Air Force should try to gather the 
information about accidents of various ty pes of aircrafts through our 
intelligence mechanism so that a comparative study can be made which  would 
definitely help the country in taking corrective action to check the rate of 
accidents.     
 
M. Synergy between HAL, DGAQA, Air Force and MoD 
Recommendation (Para No.37) 
 
50. The Committee had recommended as under:- 
“The Committee from the detailed information made available by the Ministry 
with regard to the reasons of accidents of aircraft in Air Force note that in some 
of the cases HE/HAL (Human Error /Hindustan Aeronautics Limited) and 
TD/HAL (Technical Defect / Hi ndustan Aeronautics Limited) has been given as 
the reason for the accident.  Besides, the Ministry in the written note has 
acknowledged that inadequacy of quality checks / assurances for the aircraft 

32 
 
services / overhauled / produced at Hindustan Aeronautic s Limited need to be 
addressed on priority.   Not only that the Ministry has also stated that the 
process of enforcing quality assurances by Director General Aerospace Quality 
Assurances (DGAQA) further need to be strengthened.  The Committee while 
taking note of the areas of concern may like to urge that these issues need to be 
taken up with HAL and DGAQA on an urgent basis.  Besides, there is an urgent 
need to synergize the efforts made for flight safety amongst the various agencies 
viz. HAL, DGAQA, Air F orce and MoD.  The periodicity of quality checks may 
further need to be reviewed.” 
 
51. The Ministry in its action taken reply has stated as under:- 
“Quality Assurance in aviation industry is of utmost importance and thus takes a 
prime place. Quality Checks and Audits of HAL are being carried out regularly or 
on specific requirement by joint IAF, CEMILAC, DGAQA and HAL teams and all 
important quality issues are addressed. Additional IAF officers have been posted 
to strengthen DGAQA organization.” 
 
Comments of the Committee 
52. The Committee are surprised to note that even when the Ministry during 
the course of examination of Demands for Grants 2011 -12 has itself 
acknowledged inadequacy of quality checks/assurances for the aircraft 
services/overhauled/produced at Hindustan Aeronautics Limited, the action 
taken note furnished by the Ministry indicates a sense of complacency with 
regard to the quality assurances.  The Committee had noted from the 
information made available by the Minis try that in some of the cases HE/HAL 
(Human Error/Hindustan Aeronautics Limited) and TD/HAL (Technical 
Defect/Hindustan Aeronautics Limited) has been given as the reason for the 
accidents.  While expressing unhappiness over the way the Ministry has acted 
on the serious issue raised by the Committee in the recommendation, the 
Committee may again like to emphasize to take up the aforesaid issue with HAL 
and DGAQA on an urgent basis.  Besides , as recommended in the earlier 
recommendation there is an urgent need to have organizational mechanism to 
synergize the efforts made for flight safety amongst the various agencies viz. 
HAL, DGAQA, Air Force and MoD.  The periodicity of quality checks may also 
need to be reviewed as recommended earlier.  The Committee while reiterating 
their earlier recommendation would like the Ministry to take the concrete 

33 
 
initiatives on each of the suggestions made and informed the Committee 
accordingly.      
 
N. Delay in acquisition and cost escalation thereto 
 
Recommendation No. (Para No.47) 
53. The Committee had recommended as under:- 
 
“The Committee finds from the information made available by the Ministry that 
delivery schedule in respect of some of the important projects of Navy has been 
revised resulting into huge cost escalation. Some of the delayed projects in this 
regard are Gorshkov, P -15, P-15A and P -17. The analysis of the data furnished by 
the Ministry indicates that cost escalation in respect of Gorshkov,  P15, P-15A and 
P-17 has in fact been four times of the initial estimated cost. While deploring the 
delay in acquisition of some of the important projects, the committee strongly 
recommended that all the precautions should be taken so as to ensure the deli very 
of important projects is not further delayed and the projects are delivered by revised 
indicated dates. The Committee may also like to be informed about the specific 
reasons for delay of the said projects.”  
 
54. The Ministry in its action taken reply has stated as under:- 
1. “Gorshkov.     The induction of the Gorshkov/Vikramaditya is re-scheduled 
due to the necessity to carry out additional works for renewal of almost all 
equipment/systems, hull structures, cabling and application of long -life paint to 
afford greater protection to the ship‟s steel plating. The delivery date of the ship 
has been revised to December, 2012 with attendant revision in prices. However, 
the additional works have increased the service life of the Carrier significantly 
which will now be similar to the service life of a new Aircraft Carrier.   
 
2. Project P-15 -  P-15 was the first platform of the size of a destroyer to be 
indigenously designed and built and commissioning of the Delhi Class of ships 
was a landmark achievement for the nation. The major reason for delay in 
completion of the project were as follows:- 
 
(a)      M/s MDL had not built a ship of this complexity and there was a 
necessity to integrate weapons and sensors of different origin on board the ship. 
 

34 
 
(b)      The weapons, sensors and propulsion system of three ships were 
predominantly of Soviet origin. After the collapse of the Soviet Union, delivery 
and installation of these systems was adversely affected which caused major 
slippages in timely completion.   
 
 
3. Project P -15A – The initial government sanction for Rs. 3580 crore 
accorded in May, 2001, was only an estimate which  was based on the P-15 cost 
at 1999 price level (without taking inflation into account). At the time of seeking 
initial sanction, it w as stated that the cost of weapons & sensors would be 
finalised closer to the date of construction so as to avoid obsolescence. This was 
the first stage sanction. Therefore, the revised government sanction of Rs. 
11662 crore accorded in Feb, 2006, is not a n escalation but a revision to the 
cost. Some of the factors that caused time delays and revision of cost are as 
follows:- 
 
(a) Delay in Supply of Warship Building Steel.      Steel was ordered from M/s 
Promote, Russia in three lots of three ships. After suppl y of the first lot of steel in 
May, 2004, the firm stopped supply demanding higher prices on account of 
sharp increase of steel prices in the international market. The shipyard was left 
with no option but to re -negotiate the price, which delayed the supply  by 18 
months.  
 
(b) Impact of revised wages.    The component of labour and labour overhead 
escalated substantially due to revision in wages over the build period.  
 
(c)      Services of Russian Specialists.     The expenditure towards securing the 
services of Russian specialists was initially based on Soviet era rates. These 
revised rates are substantially higher and have added to the cost of the ships. 
(d)        Finalisation of cost of weapon and sensors.    The ships of P-15A were 
envisaged to be fitted with state of the art weapons and sensors in place of 
conventional ones. The initial approval of government  in May, 2001 was based 
on the estimated cost as they were in developmental stage. 
4. Project P-17.       The initial government sanction for Rs. 2250 crore was 
accorded in January, 1998. The initial estimates were based on the weapons 
supplied by the Russian side for P -16A and P-15 ships which were inducted into 
the Indian Navy in 80s and early 90s. The  main reasons for the higher cost of 
these Russian weapon systems is the commercialisation of Russian military 
hardware industry as against the earlier State controlled regime. As a result, 
Russian equipment initially estimated to cost about Rs. 93 crore p er ship finally 
costed Rs. 707 crore per ship. This increase in cost of Russian origin equipment 
alone accounts for 68% of the increase in the cost of equipment. The revised 
government sanction was accorded in March, 2006 for Rs. 8101 crore, including 
Rs. 217 crore towards yard modernisation. The factors effecting delay in delivery 
are as follows:- 
 

35 
 
(a) Delay in availability of Warship Quality Steel .   The order  for the steel 
was placed in April, 2000 on a Russia firm and the delivery had commenced 
from July, 2000. However, disagreement between the bankers of both parties on 
Letter of Credit (LC) led to a delay in the delivery of steel. 
 
(b)  Delay in acquisition of Weapon equipment from Russia.    The P -17 
design was primarily for Russian origin weapons. Though a  memorandum was 
presented to the Russian side in Sept, 1995, the offer was received only in Nov, 
1998 as Russia was in the process of adjusting to the new political reality after 
the collapse of the former Soviet Union. In view of late response from the 
Russian side, the contract for the weapon package could only be signed in April, 
2000 i.e. 13 months after the scheduled date. This affected the finalisation of 
structure drawings as technical/binding data was not available. 
 
(c) Delay in finalisation of propuls ion equipment view complex Combined 
Diesel and Gas (CODOG) Arrangement.      It was the first time that the Indian 
Navy was designing a frigate with Combined Diesel or Gas (CODOG) main 
propulsion. Refining the requirements and evaluation of the technical of fers 
received for the Propulsion System Integration (PSI) and studies took about 20 
months as against 6 months originally envisaged. This had a cascading effect in 
finalisation of structural drawings. 
 
(d)   Withdrawal of support from US OEMs.     The order for the CODOG main 
propulsion, LM 2500 Gas Turbine was placed on US firm M/s General Electric 
Company (GE) in 1998 when India had conducted the Pokhran II nuclear test. 
This resulted in slowdown in support from the firm. Once again, in 2009, the 
propulsion trials of the first ship were delayed as the US government desired M/s 
GE to conclude a Technical Assistance Agreement (TAA) with the Indian side 
which took some time to be completed.” 
 
Comments of the Committee 
55. The Committee are not satisfied with the reasons explained in the Action 
Taken Note for slippages resulting in time and cost over run of some of the 
major projects of Navy viz. Gorshkov, P -15, P-15A, P-17.  Most of the reasons 
given by the Ministry such as carrying out of additional works for ren ewal of 
equipments/systems, inability of M/s. MDL having not built a ship of such 
complexity and causing delays in regard to P -15 are not acceptable to the 
Committee.  Likewise, the reasons furnished by the Ministry for delay and cost 
escalation of project  P-15A, such as demanding higher prices for steel, 
escalation of labour overheads, revision of expenditure for securing the 
services of Russian specialists are too general in nature, which in the opinion of 
the Committee should have been avoided had due ca re and caution been 
exercised by the Ministry in  timely manner. 

36 
 
56. Also, the reasons given by the Ministry for delay in Project P -17 such as 
wrong calculation of estimates which were based on weapons supplied for P -
16A and P-15 ships and the new prices s ubsequent to the commercialization of 
Russian Military hardware, disagreement between the bankers of both parties 
on Letter of Credit, defining the requirements and evolution of the technical 
offers received from the Propulsion System Integration (PSI) and  slowdown in 
support from the US firm M/s General Electric Company (GE) in 1998 are seen 
by the Committee as an attempt to justify the delay and avoid any responsibility 
in this regard.  All these cases are very old and had the Ministry taken prompt 
and timely action the delay could have been curtailed to a larger extent.   
57. The Ministry evidently failed to safeguard its own interest and ensure 
timely procurement. Procurement of such sensitive equipments has a chain 
reaction which compromises defence pre paredness at the ground level.  It is 
also baffling to understand whether the penalty clause was inbuilt in each of the 
contract in question.  The Committee would like to be intimated thereof and also 
recommend that in all contracts of such nature penalty clause be invariably 
incorporated.   
58. The Committee recommend while reiterating their concern for  long delay  
in acquisition of the major projects of Navy , desire that   at least now all these 
supplies should meet the dates as given and all care be tak en in future to 
ensure timely deliveries.  It is needless to say that all contracts should have 
penalty clause.  
O. Anti Piracy Operations 
Recommendation No. (Para No.50) 
59. The Committee had recommended as under:- 
“The constant piracy/robbery threats by Somalian pirates in the Indian Ocean is 
a cause of concern.  Vulnerability to piracy/robbery etc. affect country‟s strategic 
maritime interests.  Sea trade consists of major volume of country‟s trade and it 
is vital f or appropriate growth.  Hence, it is  imperative for Navy to create safe 
and secured maritime environment.  The refore, the Committee recommend  the 
Ministry  for  setting up of separate unit under Indian Navy to deal with the issues 
related to piracy.  Besi des,  stringent measures may  also  be taken in the 
direction of making Indian Maritime Zone safe for fishermen and trade. 
 

37 
 
60. The Ministry in its action taken reply has stated as under:- 
1.  Anti Piracy Operations.     One ship on a rotational basis, exclusively 
 for anti -piracy operations, has been deployed by IN in the Gulf of Aden since 
 Nov 08. In addition, anti -piracy patrols have also been undertaken off the 
 Lakshadweep Islands   (Operation „Island Watch‟) fro m Dec 10 to Jun 11.  
 Details of surveillance undertaken during the operation are as follows:- 
 (a)    A total of 79 IN/ICG ships have been deployed amounting to a total of 507 
 „ship days‟. 
 (b)     A total of 64 surveillance sorties have been flown by ma ritime patrol 
 aircraft. 
2. Capture of Pirates.  A total of 120 pirates have been apprehended and 
 73 fishermen and crew rescued in four operations by IN against pirate mother 
 ships in East Arabian Sea in 2011.   
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
61. The Committee are saddened  to note that one of the most important 
operative part of the recommendation i.e. setting up of separate unit under Indian 
Navy to deal with the issues related to piracy has not been  responded at  all by 
the Ministry.  The Commi ttee are not oblivious of the fact that incidents of piracy 
by Somalian pirates in the Indian waters are not contained.  It is in this backdrop 
that setting up of separate unit as stated above is  imperative not only to 
safeguard the Indian waters but also for the life and safety of the Indian crew in 
particular and sailor fraternity in general.  The Committee, therefore, in 
unequivocal terms reiterate that separate unit   under Indian Navy should be set 
up  to deal with the issues related to piracy.  Any further delay in this regard 
would tarnish not only the image of Indian Navy but also the country’s defence 
preparedness.  
  

38 
 
 
 
CHAPTER-II 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS, WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED 
BY THE GOVERNMENT 
 
 
Recommendation No. (Para No.1) 
 
The Committee note that the Budget Estimates (Net) for the year 2011-12 are for 
Rs.164415.49 crore which comprises of Rs.95216.68 crore as Revenue outlay and 
Rs.69198.81 crore as capital outlay. Although in absolute term there is an increase in 
the defence budget, the analysis of the data with regard to the growth of defence 
budget indicates that the percentage growth is declining over the years.  During the 
year 2008 -09 and 2009 -10, the growth was 24.15% and  24.13% respectively which 
declined drastically to just 6.91% during the year 2010 -11. Not only that, the defence 
expenditure as percentage of GDP is also declining over the years. During the year 
2009-10 the said percentage was 2.16% which declined to 1.92% during the year 2010-
11 to 1.83% during 2011 -12. If the defence expenditure is compared to the overall 
Central Government expenditure during the year 2010 -11 it has declined to 12.46% as 
compared to 13.48% during the previous year.  
 
The Committee have consistently been recommending in the reports on 
Demands for Grants for increasing capacity for the utilization of outlay so as to justify 
the demand of higher allocation particularly under the capital section. The Committee 
are pleased to note that during  the year 2010 -11, the Ministry was able to utilize the 
entire allocation as stated by the Secretary during the course of oral evidence. The 
Secretary has also informed that capability of Defence Department to absorb the funds 
is improving and the expendit ure of DGOF, R&D & DGQA is for higher than the 
allocations made by them during the period 2007-08 to 2009-10. 
 

39 
 
The Committee‟s examination further reveal that there are gaps between the 
projections made by the Ministry and the allocation provided at BE stage during each of 
the year. As per the Ministry, the budgetary allocation not commensurating with the 
projections made by the three Services and various organisations would affect the 
prioritization of modernization programme including acquisition of land and capital 
works to varying extent. The Committee emphasise that India is surrounded by difficult 
neighbours and it is utmost necessary to build the deterrent capabilities to safeguard 
the nation. No compromise can be made when it is the question of security of the 
country. The Committee are of the firm view that the allocations as projected should be 
provided to the Ministry of Defence particularly when the allocations made during the 
year 2010 -11 could be utilized fully by the Ministry. The Committee would like the 
Ministry to take up the matter at the highest level and the Ministry of Finance, so that 
projected allocations are provided to the three Services and Organisations to enable 
them to meet the set targets under their modernization programmes including 
acquisition of land and capital works.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Keeping in view the requirement project ed by the Services, the Ministry had 
projected a requirement of Rs. 4032.24 cr under revenue and Rs. 7676 cr under capital 
to Ministry of Finance at the First Supplementary stage.  
 
2. In the light of the observations of the Standing Committee the matter h as again 
been taken up with the Ministry of Finance. The requirement of additional funds, 
keeping in view the felt need of the Services and the trend of utilisation of budget, shall 
also be suitably projected to Ministry of Finance for RE 2011-12 and BE 2012-13. 
 
 
 
 
 
 

40 
 
 
 
Recommendation (Para No.3) 
 
The analysis of the budget data further reveal that substantial part of the 
allocation is being spent during the last quarter of the year. During the years 2008 -09 
and 2009 -10 the spending during the last quarter was 33.47 and 32.38 percent 
respectively. T he committee are not convinced with the argument put forth by the 
Ministry that the trend of disproportionate expenditure at the end of the quarter is 
across the border in all the spending Departments of the Government of India. More so 
when the major part  of the allocations are being spent on the committed liabilities, 
where the scale of expenditure is well known, the disproportionate spending pattern in 
the various quarters is not understandable. The committee would like to emphasize that 
utmost care should be taken to ensure that the expenditure is evenly spread during the 
year in line with the guidelines of the Ministry of Finance. Besides budget management, 
the even expenditure would go a long way in convincing the Ministry of Finance to 
allocate the outlay as per the projections.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The financial outgo particularly under the Capital segment is contingent upon 
major acquisition and works proposals getting the necessary approvals from the CCS & 
Ministry of Finance, necessary docume ntation being completed by the firms to which 
the contracts are awarded and achievement of project related/contractual milestones. 
Nevertheless, the issue of even pace of spending has been taken up with the Services 
and the Financial Planning Directorates have been requested to ensure an even pace 
of expenditure.  
 
2. At the close second quarter, 44.54% of the allocation for 2011 -12 has been 
utilised as against 40.79% last year. Efforts are being made to ensure that the current 
pace of expenditure is maintained. 
 

41 
 
 
 
 
 
Recommendation (Para No.5) 
 
The Committee in their earlier reports have been recommending for early 
completion of Phase -I of Married Accommodation Project and simultaneous 
implementation of all the four phases without any break. The Committee are concerned 
to note that despite their persistent pursuance, the number of dwelling units to be 
constructed during Phase -I has declined from 61,658 to 57,875.  Not only that, the 
deadline to complete Phase -I is continuously being extended.  The initial t arget date of 
completion of the project was 2002 -03.  The deadline was first extended to 2005 -06.  
The Cabinet on 9 th August, 2010 has extended the deadline further to 31 st December, 
2010.  The Defence Secretary during deposition before the Committee admit ted that 
Phase-I got significantly delayed because of initial problems.  The Secretary also 
informed the Committee that the Ministry has been taking corrective measures not to 
repeat the mistake of Phase -I in other phases of MAP.  While deploring the tardy  pace 
of work, the Committee would like to recommend that sincere efforts should be made to 
complete all the four phases of Married Accommodation Project without any further 
delay, so that the basic need of housing for the Armed Forces can be met.  
 
 Reply of the Government 
 
The Married Accommodation Project (MAP) undertaken by MoD envisages 
construction of 1,98,881 Dwelling units (DUs) for the three Services.  The number of 
Dwelling units (DUs) under MAP Phase -I was revised from 61,658 to 57,875 by the 
Cabinet on 9 th August, 2010, out of which 53,044 DUs have been completed and 
remaining will be completed shortly. 
 
 

42 
 
 
There has been delay in the Project, as this was a new concept for the Armed 
Forces.  Delay occurred due to contractors facing severe resource s crunch on account 
of economic slowdown, severe strain on availability of local labour and construction 
material, high fluctuating prices of steel, cement and labour and court cases etc. 
To offset the reduction in number of dwelling units to be constructe d under MAP 
Phase-I, Cabinet in its meeting held on 9 th August, 2010 approved construction of 
69,992 DUs under Phase -II of the MAP instead of construction of 66,727 DUs 
sanctioned earlier.  Phase -II of the project has also started. The shortcomings noticed  
during execution of Phase -I have been rectified in Phase -II so as to ensure better user 
satisfaction. 
In order to ensure that the balance 71,014 dwelling units of Phase -III and Phase-
IV also get completed expeditiously, Phase -III & IV have been merged for  which 
Cabinet has given approval for commencement of planning.  All efforts are being made 
to offset the delays incurred in the initial stages of the project. 
 
 
Recommendation (Para No.7) 
 
The Committee observe that a comprehensive proposal for enhancement of the 
existing delegation of powers to the Services has been submitted by the Committee set 
up in Finance Division in December, 2010 and the same is under consideration in the 
Ministry of Defence. The Committee feel that the proposal merits co nsideration and 
would expedite the acquisition process when implemented. As such, the Committee 
desire the Ministry to take final decision in this regard expeditiously.‟  
Reply of the Government 
 
After careful consideration of pros and cons of the issue, t he Ministry has 
decided to have a comprehensive audit of sanctions issued under delegated powers. 
The audit exercise is going on. Further delegation of powers would be considered in the 
light of audit findings for proper balance of  efficiency and accountability considerations. 

43 
 
 
 
2. The Ministry would like to assure the Committee that the pace of 
acquisition/modernisation would not in any way be affected by the issue of delegation of 
powers.” 
 
Recommendation (Para No.8) 
 
The Committee have been informed that in the next 5 to 10 years procurement 
of equipment would be more than 100 billion dollars.  The offset provisions i.e. 30% of 
the cost of equipment would accordingly be 30 billion dollars. The Committee 
understand that till now the benefits of offset have been measured in the form of 
creating Indian vendor base, direct flow into joint ventures with OEMs etc.  The 
Committee are constrained to note that even when this clause was introduced in year 
2005 and amendments were made in the year 2006, the polic y is yet to be fully 
evolved.  In view of the immense potential of offset clause, the Committee desire the 
Ministry to make earnest efforts to ensure that the gains of offset cl ause in real term are 
achieved.  
Reply of the Government 
  
The Offset Policy was introduced in 2005 and detailed guidelines were issued in 
2006.  So it is relatively a new policy and still in the process of evolution. The first offset 
contract was signed in 2007.  Till now 16 offsets contracts have been signed. As such 
the impact of offsets on development of indigenous Defence industrial base is expected 
to become visible in the coming years. 
In DPP -2011, the scope of Offset Policy Guidelines was expanded to include 
“civil aerospace”, “internal security” and “training” within the ambit of eligible products 
and services for discharge of offset obligations. This will provide a wider range of offset 
opportunities to vendors participating in defence procurements and encourage building 
up of indigenous manufacturing capability in crucial areas. 
 

44 
 
 
The Committee, set up under the Chairmanship of Director General (Acquisition) 
to undertake a comprehensive review of the existing offset guidelines, has submitted its 
report.  The same is under consideration of Ministry of Defence.  
 
Recommendation (Para No.9) 
 
The Committee observe that many a time AFT has found itself helpless as its 
orders are not being implemented by the three Services. Out of 303 cases, decisions 
of various benches of the Tribunal are yet to be implemented by the Services. In a few 
cases involving substantial question of law, they are being processed for adjudication 
by the Supreme Court. During the course of examination of Demands for Grants, the 
Committee have been informed that decisions of the Tribunal are gene rally 
implemented. However in some cases, due to the hierarchal structure of the services, 
particularly, Army, the process of implementation takes time. Nonetheless, the 
services have been advised to implement the decision of AFT promptly like the 
decision of High Court and Supreme Court. As informed by the Ministry the proposal 
to give more powers to the Tribunal is under examination by the Chief of Staff 
Committee/Ministry of Defence in view of the enormous importance given to AFT. 
While taking note of th e action being taken to give more teeth to the Tribunals, the 
Committee strongly emphasise to take early decision in this regard and bring the 
desired amendments to the Armed Forces Tribunal Act. Till the process of amendment 
is completed, the Services should be given instructions to comply with the decisions of 
AFT without any prejudice. 
Reply of the Government 
 
Presently, the Tribunal has Criminal Contempt Powers. It has no Civil Contempt 
Power. Ministry of  Defence  has decided in principle to amend Sect ion 19 of the 
Armed Forces Tribunal Act  to vest full contempt powers so that the Tribunal can 
enforce its decisions. An amendment to this effect is under consideration. In the 
meantime, suitable instruction has been issued to the Service HQrs in respect o f the 
Orders passed by Armed Forces Tribunal.  

45 
 
 
 
 
Recommendation (Para No.10) 
 
The Committee find that recently a lot of controversies with regard to use of 
defence land have been reported in the media including the Sukna and latest Adarsh 
Housing Society land scams.  In this connection, the Committee have consistently been 
recommending for an independent regulator for the purpose of effective management of 
defence land in the Country.  The Ministry‟s stand in this regard has been that the 
existing system is adequate and there is no need of an independent regulator.  To the 
surprise of the Committee even when Comptroller General of Defence Accounts in its 
report has suggested for a comprehensive study on disbanding DGDE from most of the 
activities of defence land management and even suggested for an independent agency, 
the Ministry do not see merit in the recommendation of the Committee for an 
independent regulator for the purpose of management of defence land as has been 
communicated in the Action Taken Repl ies to Sixth Report.  The Committee while 
reiterating their recommendation for an independent regulator would like the 
Department to study the system of management of land by various sister Ministries like 
Ministry of Railways, Posts etc. which have huge t racts of land.  The early decision on 
the issue should be taken and the Committee informed accordingly.  
     
 
Reply of the Government 
 
As recommended by the Committee, DGDE have studied land management 
systems of Ministry of Railways and Deptt. of Posts an d reported that the 
responsibility for management of Railway land is carried out at various levels.  At the 
level of Railway Board, Land and Amenities Directorate, functioning under the 
Member Engineering is responsible for it.    The original records rela ted to land are 
kept at the Chief Engineer‟s office with copies at Division and field level.  Acquisition of 
land is normally done under the Land Acquisition Act, 1894, except for special Railway 
projects under the Railways (Amendment) Act, 2008.  Action t o remove encroachment 
is taken under the Public Premises (Eviction of Unauthorised Occupants) Act, 1971.  
Rail Land Development Authority (RLDA) was set up in 1971, as a part of Ministry of 
Railways, to undertake all tasks related to property development o n Railway land.  As 

46 
 
such, Railway land is being managed by the Ministry of Railways through its own 
setup and no Independent Regulator/body has been created.         
 
Department of Posts does not have very large land holdings.  Their land holdings 
are used for Post Offices, administrative offices, staff Quarters etc., for which, there is 
no separate specialist cadre.  Land is acquired for various purposes directly from 
State Governments/Development authorities/private persons.  Postal authorities hire 
buildings etc. also.  As such there is no formal system of land management in the 
Department of Posts.   
 
 
Directorate General of Defence Estates (DGDE) is essentially performing 
functions relating to management of Defence land on behalf of the Ministry.  
Provisions already exist under Cantonments Act, 2006, Cantonment Land 
Administration Rules, 1937 and Acquisition, Custody & Relinquishment of Military land 
in India Rules, 1944.  Further, a Land Management Bill for management of Defence 
land outside notified Ca ntonments is under consideration of Ministry.  Guidelines for 
issuing of No Objection Certificates for construction of buildings on lands adjacent to 
Defence establishments have been issued on 18th May, 2011.   
 
Thus, Ministry of Defence has its own adequate and effective land management 
system through DGDE, as per its requirements and needs.” 
 
 
Recommendation (Para No.11)  
 
 
The Committee further note that Comptroller General of Defence Accounts has 
made 27 recommendations.  One of the important recommendation is to direct Service 
Headquarters and DGDE to convert all their land records on defence land into a 
comprehensive and electronic database within one year.  In this connection, the 
Ministry has informed that the project on computerization of Military Lands 
Registration and General Lands Registration through a software named „Raksha 
Bhumi‟ is already going on and is likely to be completed by March, 2011.  The 
Committee hope that the project would have been completed by now.  The Committee 
further note that two projects one on Digitization of Land records involving scanning, 
indexing and microfilming and the other on Survey o f Defence Land using modern 

47 
 
technology have been sanctioned recently.  Besides, the issue of land audit is under 
consideration.  The Committee observe that it is utmost necessary that the land 
records as maintained in Military Land Register and General Lan d Register are up-to-
date.  To achieve the purpose, the aforesaid two projects need to be carried out 
expeditiously.  Moreover, to check encroachments and misuse of defence land, there 
is an urgent need to have a system of periodic land audit.  As such, th e Committee 
strongly recommend to take decision on the issue of land audit.  Besides, land records 
should be updated and made available on the website so as to have transparency.  All 
the desired initiatives should be taken with utmost urgency and the Committee be kept 
informed about the progress made in this regard.   
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
In order to prevent misuse of defence land, various steps have been initiated to 
streamline its proper management and its protection. The project known as “Raksha 
Bhoomi” on computerisation of Military Lands Registers (MLR) and General Lands 
Registers (GLR) has been completed.  The software has been installed in all 62 
Cantonment Boards and all 37 Defence Estates Offices.  Data entry, verification and 
authentication have been completed by all the field offices.  With the objective to have 
transparency, Directorate General of Defence Estates(DGDE) has also launched its 
website and some land data is already available in the same.  Efforts are on to put all 
other relevant land data on the website. 
 
A project has been sanctioned in Feb, 2011 to be implemented in a period of 3 
years, for Scanning, Digitization, Indexing and Microfilming, of all the land records of 
Defence Estates Officers Offices and Cantonments in order to  strengthen and 
preserve records.  The project on computerisation of land records and digitisation and 
indexing complement each other.  While project on computerisation on land records 
deal with entries in Land Registers of each piece of land acquired, its  title and 
management, the project on digitisation and indexing etc. involve scanning all the 
records connected with acquisition and then their microfilming for long term 
preservation.  It is underway in eight DEOs circles of DEO Chennai, Agra, Bareilly, 
Allahabad, Jammu, Kolkata, Secunderabad and Delhi and the Cantonment Boards of 
Kirkee, Pune, Dehu Road and Deolali.   

48 
 
 
 
In order to strengthen management of Defence Lands, Ministry has sanctioned 
a project in Feb, 2011 to be implemented in a period of 3 years, for survey, 
demarcation and verification of Defence lands.  The main objectives of this project are 
re-verification of details of total defence lands and their authentication on grounds, 
compiling information on disputed lands & encroachments, const ruction of boundary 
pillars. 
 
Further, considering the importance of land as a national resource, Ministry has 
issued orders on 18.04.2011 to resume land audit and work has already started in 
DEO Circles under Southern Command.     
 
Construction work for t he establishment of an Archival Unit & Resource 
Center(AU&RC) has also started in Raksha Sampada Bhawan, Delhi Cantt.  AU&RC 
will also act at disaster management unit.”   
 
 
Recommendation (Para No.14) 
 
 The Committee find that Army‟s Road Infrastructure Development which is 
planned under two projects-73 Roads Project and GS Roads LTPP has not progressed 
satisfactorily. Whereas, 73 Roads Project lists out the critical and strategically important 
73 roads along the Northern border with China, which are requ ired to be completed in a 
time bound manner by 2012, the progress of the project as reported by the Ministry is 
very slow. Out of these 73 roads only 15 roads have been completed so far with overall 
progress, of approximately 43%. The other project, GS Roa ds LTPP which identified 
then other roads to be developed along the borders of India with China, Pakistan and 
Myanmar, only eight roads have been completed so far, with overall progress of 
approximately 22%. The Committee deplore that despite Government‟s so called 
preference to these projects, the roads and infrastructure development work is running 
way behind the schedule. 
 The Committee find that the Ministry proposes to take certain initiatives to 
increase the pace of road construction. Such initiatives include making available  

49 
 
sufficient funds for the three strategic rail projects in North East, draft infrastructure Bill 
to provide statutory exemption for strategic projects being moved (by MHA), leasing of 
helicopters by BRO from Pawan Hans Helicopters  Ltd. replacing old and vintage 
equipment by purchasing latest equipment, purchase of plant and equipment worth 
approximately Rs. 200 crore, procurement of new equipment like crawler rock drill etc. 
The Committee feel that proposed initiatives would go a l ong way in addressing the 
logistic issues with BRO   and   would   certainly   help   in    speedy     development    
of infrastructure and construction of roads in border areas. As such the Committee 
emphasize for early finalization of said proposals. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The work could not progress with the required momentum due to certain reasons 
like time taken in Forest/Wild Life clearance, inadequate Air Lift, unprecedented cloud 
burst, very limited working season on Hugh altitude Areas (HAA) etc . However, all 
possible efforts are being made to increase the pace of work. The progress of works on 
three strategic Rail Projects is discussed in detail in Point No. 16. The latest position of 
funding of three strategic Rail Projects in North East, draft  infrastructure bill to provide 
strategic exemption for strategic projects, procurement of specialized equipments and 
leasing of Helicopter from PHHL are as under: 
a). Funding of strategic Rail Project - Railway Board has been asked to project 
funding proposal in Cabinet Committee on Infrastructure through Planning Commission 
after due endorsement of Ministry of Defence. Railway Board may project the case for 
non lapsable funds to Planning Commission/Ministry of Finance. 
b). Draft Border Infrastructure bill – The draft bill, to exempt border infrastructure 
from relevant Acts of forest and wildlife, is finalized by MHA in consultation with other 
Stakeholder/Ministries.  
c). Procurement of new equipments -    Sanction for procurement of 
Vehicle/Equipments/Plants (V/E/Ps) to the tune of Rs. 99.89 Cr for creating  Bank of 
equipments, Rs. 42.36 Cr is supplementary Annual Procurement Plan (APP) 2010 -11 
and Rs. 429.85 Cr in APP 2011 -12  have  been sanctioned. Out of this the following 

50 
 
latest technology vehicle, Equipment and Plants are being procured for speedy 
construction of various strategic roads. 
 i). Hyd Excavator 30 Ton with Rock breaker. 
 ii). Hyd Excavator 20 Ton with and without Rock breaker. 
 iii). Hyd Excavator 7/8 Ton with and without Rock breaker. 
 iv). Stone crusher 20/40 TPH. 
 v). Tandom vibratory road roller. 
 vi). Hot Mix Plant 20/30 TPH. 
 vii). WMM Plant 60 TPH. 
 viii). Hydrostatic Paver finisher with sensor. 
 ix). Concrete Auto batch mix plant. 
 x). Transit mixer 5/6 cum/Hr. 
 xi). Concrete pump 15 cum/Hr. 
 xii). Lattice crane with grab bucket. 
 xiii). Self propelled telescope boom man carrying bucket. 
 xiv). Refueller 6 KL. 
 xv). Multi utility tractor with accessories. 
 xvi). Crawler Rock Drill Medium and light. 
d). To augment air -lift capacity,  a contract was executed with M/S Pawan Hans 
Helicopter Ltd (PHHL).    However,   due to   accident   in    Arunachal  
Pradesh, PHHL has suspended its operations. IAF is providing the requisite air 
efforts needed.  Furthermore an Empowered Committee under the Chairmanship of DG 
(Air Ops) and DGBR as convenor has been constituted to finalize outsourcing of air 
efforts in an integrated manner for various agencies/Organisation. 
Further Capability constraints have been sought to be reduced by allowing BRO 
to ou tsource works and raising more units as per restructuring of BRO approved by 
CCS. A total of 144 units have already been raised against 151 units approved in the 
CCS. New projects have been inducted in Ladakh, Uttarakhand and Arunachal 
Pradesh. 
 

51 
 
 
 
Recommendation (Para No.16) 
 
The Committee also urge the Ministry of Railways to give priority to complete the 
work related to the three strategic railways lines i.e. NLP -Along-Silapathar, Missamari-
Tawang and Mukongelek -Pasighat-Rupai in the North East so that movement of 
personnel and development of North East can be accelerated.”  
Reply of the Government 
  
Twenty eight railways lines, which were reduced to 14 subsequently, (including 
the three Railways Lines i.e. NLP -Along-Silapathar, Missamari -Tawang and 
Murkongselek-Pasighat-Rupai in North East)  were declared as strategic railways lines, 
with the approval of Raksha Mantri, from defence point of view and Ministry of Railways 
were requested on 16.08.2010, to initiate the process of undertaking the survey of  
these lines to establish technical feasibility and cost of the project. A representative of 
the Army Headquarter will coordinate/follow up the progress with Railways from time to 
time. 
Based on the directions of the Cabinet Secretary in the meeting of the  
Committee of Secretaries held on 08.01.2010 to review the Railways Projects in the 
Northern Borders and other issues raised by the Chief of Army Staff (COAS), 
Permanent Coordination Framework at New Delhi and Regional Permanent 
Coordination Framework at G uwahati have been constituted on 10.02.2011 to resolve 
operational issues pertaining to the strategic railway projects in the North East sector. 
These Permanent Coordination Frame Works consist of members form MoD, M/O 
Railways, M/o Environment & Forest, D eptt. of Development of North East Region,    
Army   Headquarter   and   its   Eastern Command officers as well as representatives of 
State Government of Assam, Arunachal Pradesh, Nagaland, Manipur and Tripura. 
Meeting of these Permanent Coordination Frame  Works are taking place from time to 
time to watch and expedite the progress of the development of these strategic railways 
line and for addressing the obstacles. AHQ has been coordinating these meeting.  
ii. The status of three strategic railway lines mentioned in Paragraph 16 is as 
follows: 

52 
 
a). North Lakhimpur -Along-Silapathar – PET survey for this line was 
proposed in 2010 -11 and the same was completed in May 2011. 
The cost of the 248 Km new line is Rs. 11155 Crore and ROR is ( -) 
6.27%. The report is currently under examination. 
b). Missamari-Tawang - PET survey for this new line which is 140 Km 
long was sanctioned in 2010 -11. The survey is currently in 
progress and expected to be completed by January 2012. 
c). Murkongselek-Pasighat-Rupai - Murkongselek-Pasighat (30 Km) 
has been included in budget 2011 -12 at a cost of Rs. 166 Cr. PET 
survey of Pasighat -Tezu-Rupai (65 Km) is currently in progress 
and expected to be competed by January 2012. 
 
 
Recommendation (Para No.17) 
 
From the data furnished by the Ministry it is noted that against Army‟s projection 
of Rs.102962.17 crore for the year 2011 -12, Rs.82820.49 crore, have been allocated. 
Thus the gap between the projection and the Budget Estimate is of Rs.20141.68 crore. 
As far as the revenue allocation is  concerned, after providing for pay and allowances 
and other obligatory payments, the remaining allocation is made for purchase of 
ordnance and other stores, transportation, revenue works and maintenance, new 
raisings, Ex-Servicemen Contributory Health Sch eme (ECHS) and other miscellaneous 
expenditure, etc.  The Ministry has acknowledged that the said gap between the 
projected and the allocated outlay would affect important heads like purchase of 
ordnance and other stores, transportation, revenue works and maintenance, new 
raisings and ECHS. As regards capital outlay, reduced allocation may impact 
acquisition of land and capital works to varying extent. It would also affect prioritization 
of modernization schemes in the light of available allocation. 
 
The Committee strongly recommend that the desired allocation should be made 
available to Army at the Revised Estimate 2011 -12 stage so that important 
projects/programmes under capital & revenue heads, particularly modernisation 
programme of Army do not suffer for want of resources”.  
 
 

53 
 
 
The requirement of the Army for additional funds after analysing the trend of 
utilisation of budget and the schemes in the pipeline, shall be conveyed to the Ministry 
of Finance at the RE 2011 -12 stage. The concerns of the Standing Committee in this 
regard have been conveyed to the Ministry of Finance. 
 
 
Recommendation (Para No.19) 
 
The Committee note from the data made available by the Ministry that the 
outlay allocated for modernization of Army at Budget Estimates stage is being reduced 
at Revised Estimates stage during each year of the Eleventh Plan. During the year 
2010-11 Rs. 8876.88 crore were allocated at Budget Estimates stage. The allocation 
was reduced to Rs. 7433.23 crore at Revised Estimates stage. As per the init ial 
information made available to the Committee, the expenditure up to February, 2011 
was to the tune of Rs. 2993.06 crore. In response to a supplementary question asking 
about the reasons for such a low level of expenditure, to the surprise of the 
Committee, the Ministry has informed that expenditure to the tune of 101.32% has 
been achieved. The Committee have consistently been raising concern over the 
utilization of substantial part of the allocation during the third quarter of the financial 
year. Expendi ture to the level of 60% of the allocation that too with regard to 
modernization of army during the last month of the financial year 2010 -11 is not 
understandable to the Committee. 
 
 
Recommendation (Para No.20) 
 
 
The Committee further find that modernization plans of army encompasses 
force modernization and the development of critical combat capabilities, besides 
overcoming obsolescence in core capabilities in consonance with the Defence 
Capability Development stra tegy. As such there is an urgent need to utilize the 

54 
 
allocation in an effective manner so that the modernization plans of army are properly 
implemented. The Committee desire the clarification from the Ministry about the 
utilization of 60% of allocation during the last one month of the financial year 2010 -11. 
Besides the Committee would like to emphasize that allocations earmarked during the 
year 2011-12 should be utilized in a phased manner during the year so as to achieve 
the targets set under the modernization plans. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The process of capital acquisition involves, among other things, issue of 
Request for Proposal (RFP), evaluation of technical offers, field evaluation of 
equipment, commercial negotiations and approval by the Competent Financial 
Authority (CFA) as per the Defence Procurement Procedure and other relevant 
instructions. During the year 2010 -11, five major acquisition proposals viz Akash 
Missile System, 3D Tactical Control Radar, Project Samvahak phase II, Project Sanjay 
and Schilka upgrade were concluded in the month of March 2011 after the approval of 
Ministry of Finance/CCS. After the signing of contracts in these cases, advance 
payment to the tune of  ` 3507.72 crore was released to the vendors. This resulted in 
incurring substantial expenditure in the month of March, 2011.  
 
2. In the financial year 2011 -12, expenditure of ` 3998.78 crore towards 
Committed Liability payment has been planned in an even and phased manner as 
follows:- 
 
S.No. Qarter Amount Percentage 
(i) Qr I 829.88 21%  
(ii) Qr II 1087.20 29% 
(iii) Qr III 896.82 23% 
(iv) Qr IV 1184.88 27% 
         Total 3998.78 100% 
 
3. As regards New Scheme, the budget allocation for 2011 -12 is ` 6741.24 crore. 
In view of complexities in procurement, bulk of expenditure is likely to be incurred in 
Quarter III and Quarter IV of current financial year. However, all efforts are being 
made to spread the expenditure in an even and phased manner .  (Reply of Para 19 
and 20).” 

55 
 
 
 
Recommendation (Para No.21) 
 
On the issue of modernization of training centres, the Ministry has informed that 
not all the disciplines of training are having simulators to train soldiers.  The Ministry 
has further added that presently these simulators and other modern facilities do not 
cover all disciplines of training.  The Committee emp hasize that besides procuring state 
of the armament, tanks missiles, it is utmost necessary that persons behind the 
machines are adequately trained.  As such it should be ensured that all the disciplines 
of training do have simulators  and other modern fac ilities to train soldiers.  The 
Committee strongly recommend that adequate allocation should be made for the 
purpose.  Besides all the desired initiatives should be taken so that training centres of 
Army are equipped with latest infrastructure. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Under modernization of all training establishments of Army, state of the art 
facilities are being created for training of all ranks.  Training infrastructure is being 
upgraded in a planned manner with the induction of high -tech training equipment 
including simulators.  For this purpose, Modernization of Laboratories and Training 
Infrastructure (MOLTI) Grant has been introduced for modernisation of all training 
establishments of Army and procurement of training equipment is being done thro ugh 
prospective plans drawn under Five Year Army Plans.  Major disciplines of training 
have been covered in this modernisation process under 11 th Army Plan.  All the other 
disciplines of training are being covered under 12 th Army Plan.  Over and above this , 
procurement of training aids and simulators is also undertaken through Annual Training 
Grant and Technical Training Grant. 
Simulators are now being procured along with the New Generation Weapon 
Systems and Equipment.  In addition, Army has also establish ed Simulator 
Development Division at Secunderabad to facilitate induction of simulators through in -
house development to meet the specific training requirements of Army. 

56 
 
 
 
 
Recommendation (Para No.22) 
 
The Committee find from the information made available by the Ministry that all 
the missiles which have been handed over to Army are imported. The maximum range 
of the missiles that have been handed over to the Army is 25 kms only. The 
Committee have also been apprised that induction of some more missiles is i n 
pipeline. In this connection missile system developed by BrahMos Aerospace Private 
Limited in a joint venture formed by DRDO (India) and NPOM (Russian Federation) 
has maximum range of 290 kms. The Ministry has informed that the induction of this 
missile system is on going. Besides procurement of Akash Missile system is at an 
advanced stage of fructification. Some more planned projects are upgradation of Self 
Propelled Air Defence System Gun Missile System., Schilka Gun system and L 70 
gun. While taking no te of the existing position of missiles and missile defence system 
in Army, the Committee strongly recommend to induct/upgrade the planned missiles in 
stipulated time frame so that Army is geared up so as to provide substantial deterrent 
capability. 
Reply of the Government 
 
1. The Indian Army is currently in the process of procurement of advanced long 
range missile system and upgradation of certain existing weapon platforms. 
2. Various agencies in the Army are involved in the ibid acquisition and 
upgradation process. It is highlighted that the requirement of timely induction/ 
upgradation to ameliorate the existing state of missiles and missile defence systems is 
being accorded due importance and priority. 
3. Requisite concurrent actions have also been undert aken at all levels to 
expedite the process with the concerned agencies ensuring that the planned 
acquisitions/upgradations materialize in the stipulated timeframe thereby enabling the 
Army in maintaining substantial deterrent capability at all times.” 
 

57 
 
 
 
  
Recommendation (Para No.29) 
 
From the data supplied by the Ministry it is seen that expenditure on 
modernization is on the decrease for the last two years.  In 2008 -09, Ordnance Factory 
Board spent Rs.627.23 crore on modernization, while this expenditure came down to 
Rs.492.61 in the year 2009-10.  The Committee note that initiatives have been taken for 
modernization by inducting state of the art technology, which includes Quality 
Management System, Technology up -gradation, modernization of civil infrastru cture 
etc.  A Comprehensive Long -term Modernization Plan covering Plants and Civil Works 
has also been prepared by each Ordnance Factory, which is under finalization. 
 
The Committee note that the value of export of products is also not impressive 
all these  years and the number of countries, where products are being exported has 
also come down.  The Committee are of the view that almost all the Ordnance 
Factories are highly capital intensive units and a budget of approximately Rs.500 crore 
is not sufficient to modernize all the factories.  Therefore, the Committee desire that the 
adequate budgetary support should be provided for the modernisation programme of 
Ordnance Factories so they can turn into vibrant and efficient organisation and become 
capable of producing state of the art products for supply to Indian Armed Forces and to 
the world market. 
Reply of the Government 
 
The main reason for decrease in expenditure on modernisation during 2009 -10 
was on account of putting procurement of the Modular Change Sys tem (BMCS) Plant 
„on hold‟, required for Ordnance Factory Nalanda Project. The BE for modernisation, for 
2009-10, was estimated at Rs. 759.13 crores out of which 257.14 crore was envisaged 
for the BMCS Plant. 
OFB has prepared a Comprehensive Modernisation Plan and as per it the proposed 
expenditure in XII plan towards Plant and Machinery is Rs.9325 crore under New 

58 
 
Capital (NC) and Rs 9388 Cr. under renewal and replacement (RR), 03  Major 
Augmentation Projects involving an investment of Rs. 1969 crores have been approved 
by MOD in 2010-11 and 2011-12 (till Sept, 2011), 
During last few years demand from Indian Defence Forces has increased 
substantially.  The items which have export potential have also been demanded by 
Indian Defence Forces in large quantity du ring the period, thereby leaving little spare 
capacity for export.  This has resulted in reduction in export from OFB during these 
years.   
For 2009 -10, BE for modernisation was estimated to be Rs.759.13 Cr. out of 
which Rs. 257.14 crore was expected to be  incurred on BMCS Plant.  Owing to put on 
hold decision for BMCS Plant, expenditure at Nalanda in the year 2009 -10 was 
drastically reduced. 
 
 
Recommendation (Para No.31) 
 
As per the information made available by the Ministry, against the sanctioned 
strength of Air Force i.e. 12,221, the present strength is 11, 403. thus the shortage 
being of 828 officers.  In case of Persons Below Officer Rank (PBOR), the sanctioned 
strength is 1,32,382 and the present strength is 1,28,760, the shortage being 3,662 a s 
on date.  Besides there is shortage of 137 non -combatant (Enrolled).  The Committee 
find that various initiatives are being taken by the Government  to meet the shortage of 
officers and PBOR.  Such initiatives include participation in career fair, exhibi tions, 
advertisement in print and electronic media, motivational lectures in schools, colleges, 
visuals/signages all over the country at strategic locations.  The Committee have further 
been informed by the Ministry that the existing deficiency in PBOR is expected to be 
made good by March, 2012.  The Committee hope that with the aforesaid initiatives 
being taken by the Ministry the shortage of PBOR in Air Force would be made good by 
the stipulated deadline i.e. by March, 2012. 
  
 

59 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
(a) (i) The shortages in the IAF earlier were due to lower than planned induction.  This 
trend has been overcome to a large extent and induction targets have been met over 
the last one year, which has reduced overall shortage of officers in the IAF.  The s teps 
initiated by the IAF to reduce shortages are yielding results.  The initiatives like 
introduction of Fast Track Selection all round the country, participation in career fairs / 
exhibitions, advertisements in print and electronic media, motivational le ctures in 
schools, colleges, visuals / signages all over the country at strategic locations has 
contributed towards reducing the shortage of officers. 
(b) The shortage of officers in IAF has progressively reduced from 1343 in Mar 2010 
to 1110 in Feb 2011 a nd 763, as on 01 Aug 2011, because of the above mentioned 
proactive measures.  As on 01 Aug 2011, the IAF has a strength of 11,420 officers 
against an establishment  (total sanctioned strength) of 12,221. 
(c) Further, the re -introduction of Short Service C ommission (SSC) for men in all 
three streams (Fighter, Transport & Helicopter) and continuation of SSC scheme for 
women for Transport and Helicopter streams have proved to be very successful in 
countering shortages.  Besides , the implementation of the Rec ommendations of the 
Sixth Central Pay Commission by the Government have also contributed to making the 
service more attractive, as a career option.  
(ii) The sanctioned establishment of airmen in the IAF as on 01 August, 2011 is 
1,32,403 and the present st rength is 1,30,216 . Thus a deficiency of  2187 exists. The 
existing deficiency of airmen and the attrition during the year is expected to  be made 
good by the year 2012. 
(iii) The sanctioned establishment of NCs(E) in the IAF as on 12 August, 2011  was 
10,799 and the present strength is 10,687 leading to a deficiency of 92.  The existing 
deficiency of NCs(E) is also expected to  be made good by year 2012. 
 
 
 

60 
 
 
 
 Recommendation (Para No.34) 
 
The Committee find from the information made available by the Ministry that 
accident rate in MIG aircraft is rather more high.  476 MIG aircrafts so far have met the 
accidents and the remaining fleet is 470 aircraft.  Thus, more than 50 percent MIG 
aircraft have already met with accidents.  The Ministry has acknowled ged that majority 
of technical defect accidents pertain to old technology aircraft.  Problems associated 
with vintage technology especially aero engine malfunctions MIG -21 and MIG -27 are 
more pronounced.   The Committee have further been apprised that thes e aircraft have 
even been phased out of the Russian Air Force like MIG -27 and we are only Air Force 
in the world which is flying this aircraft now.  In the aforesaid scenario, the Committee 
may like to strongly emphasize that all the initiatives should be taken to ensure that 
planned acquisitions of aircraft are in place within the stipulated time frame so that 
these old MIG aircraft can be phased out as early as possible.” 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Policy regarding extensions of Life Span of an aircraft system 
(a) The Original Equipment Manufacturer (OEM) of any aircraft assigns initial life 
and outlines maintenance cycle based on the design parameters.  However, upon 
exploitation of the aircraft, large amount of data is collected to predict optimum life and 
maintenance cycle.  The life extension provided to an aircraft is based on the results 
obtained from the „ Reliability Analysis‟ of the failure data of similar aircraft.  The 
findings of the reliability study are translated into life extensions, modification s, changes 
in Standard Operating Procedures.  Thus life extension of an aircraft is an acceptable 
norm in order to optimally utilize safe operating life of the aircraft.  In all lifing studies 
OEM/RCMA /CEMILAC/NAL/HAL designs departments etc., are involved.   
 

61 
 
Review of life of existing fleet and induction of new fleet by its replacement is a 
continuous process, and a decision  in this regard is based on operational requirements 
of the Defence forces. 
 
 
 
Recommendation (Para No.36) 
 
As per the information furnished by the Ministry, 13 cases with regard to 
accidents of aircraft in Air Force are under investigation.  In this connection, the 
Committee would like to be apprised since when these investigations are going on.  
The Committee may also like to be app rised about the average time taken in 
investigation of accident of aircraft in Air Force.” 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Investigations relating to aircraft accidents are under progress in some cases 
since Jan 2010 onwards. As per the Air Force Orders,  the Co urt of Inquiry( CoI) is a 
time bound activity and should be completed within a duration of four months. However, 
the CoI teams of  Indian Air Force, need to liaise with the OEM/HAL/DRDO and other 
Laboratories for providing test results, on various componen ts of aircraft involved in 
accidents, the accident investigation gets delayed in these cases due to the time 
needed by above mentioned  agencies to test and provide reports.  
 
Recommendation (Para No.39) 
 
 
The Committee find that efforts are being made to modernise the transport fleet 
of Air Force.  A proposal for procurement of ten C -17 heavy lift aircraft is being 
processed. Besides, an agreement was signed on 31 January, 2008 for procurement of 
six C-130-J-30 transport aircraft for IAF.  AN -32 aircraft of IAF is also being upgraded.  

62 
 
While taking note of the efforts being made to augment the transport fleet, the 
Committee strongly emphasize to finalize the proposals for upgradation and 
acquisitions expedit iously.  Besides adequate outlay for the purpose should also be 
made available. 
Reply of the Government 
 
The Indian Air Force (IAF), is progressing the procurement and upgradation 
schemes for modernising its Transport fleet as per time lines set in the Long Term 
Perspective Plan of the IAF. The status of the schemes being progressed is given 
below:- 
(a) C-17 Golbemaster III : The  Letter of Offer & Acceptance was signed on 14 June, 
2011 for the  procurement of ten  C -17 Globemaster III Heavy Lift Aircraft  from the 
United States Government  through Foreign Military Sales route. Delivery of the aircraft  
is to commence from June, 2013 and all 10 aircraft are expected to be delivered by 
June, 2015.  
(b) An -32 Fleet Upgrade:  The AN -32 fleet of IAF is being up graded to maintain its 
operational potential. A contract for Life Extension, overhaul and re -equipment of the 
AN-32 fleet was concluded with M/s Spets Techno Export, Ukraine on 15 June, 2009. 
Upgrade of 40 aircraft at the vendor‟s premises  is planned to b e completed by 2014 
and balance 64 aircraft would be thereafter  upgraded in India by 2017.  The upgrade 
programme is progressing as per schedule. 
(c ) C-130J procurement : A Letter of Offer & Acceptance was signed on   31 January, 
2008 for the procurement of six C-130J aircraft from the United States Government . Of 
these four aircraft have already been inducted into the IAF.  The remaining two aircraft 
would be inducted by November, 2011.  In addition, a proposal is being  progressed for  
procurement of six additional   C-130J aircraft. 
 
 
 
 
 

63 
 
 
 
Recommendation (Para No.40) 
 
The Committee find that all the 52 air fields being used by Air force in the 
Country are proposed to be modernised in two phases under Modernisation of Air Field 
Infrastructure project.  In the first phase, 30 air fields would be undertaken for 
modernization and the remaining would be undertaken in phase two of the project. With 
regard to the status of the Modernisation of Air Field Infrastructure - I and 
Modernisation of Air Field Infrastructure -II the Committee have been informed that the 
case for moderni sation of balance 26 air fields of IAF, Army, Navy and Coast Guard 
etc. under Phase II will be initiated within 18 -24 months  of signing of the contract for 
Modernisation of Air Field Infrastructure -I keeping in view the experience gained during 
implementation of Phase I.  No cost has been estimated as yet for the 2 nd Phase. The 
Ministry has also informed that the contract would be signed during the current financial 
year entailing an outgo of about Rs. 183 crore.  As Air Force require air fields from 
strategic point of view, the Committee emphasise that commercial negotiations for first 
phase should be completed expeditiously so that the modernisation process with regard 
to Modernisation of Air Field Infrastructure -I starts followed by modernisation of the 
remaining air fields under Modernisation of Air Field Infrastructure -II.  All the desired 
allocations required for the purpose should be made available.”   
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The contract for Modernisation of Air Field Infrastructure Phase -I was signed  on 
16 March, 2011 at a total cost of Rs. 1219.99 crore.  An advance  of Rs. 183 crore was 
also released during the financial year 2010 -11 as per the Contract and the project is 
under implementation. Adequate Funds are available for timely implementation   of the 
project. 
 
 
 

64 
 
 
 
Recommendation (Para No.41) 
 
The Committee find that out of 52 operational IAF bases, 8 air fields bases do 
not have electrical air field lighting and regular night operations are not undertaken from 
these places.  On completion of MAFI Phase I and II, the Ministry has stated all the IAF 
air fields will have electrical air field lighting system to facilitate night landing.  The 
Committee may like to emph asise that the said 8 air fields which do not have electrical 
air field lighting should be covered on priority  basis  under the modernisation 
programme so that the Electrical air field lighting in all the air fields is available which 
may ensure regular night operations from the said bases. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Out of 52 operational IAF airfields, 10 airfields do not have electrical Airfield 
Lighting System (AFLS). Installation of AFLS at these airfields  will be undertaken on 
priority basis. On compl etion of Modernisation of Air Field Infrastructure project all the 
IAF airfields will have electrical airfield lighting system to facilitate night landing. 
 
Recommendation (Para No.42) 
 
 
The Committee observe that the allocations for R& D in defence have 
consistently been increased in absolute terms.  However, if the R&D budget as 
percentage of the total budget is taken into consideration, there is decline during the 
year 2011-12 as compared to the previous year.  The said percentage duri ng the year 
2011-12 is 6.24 against 6.66 of the previous year.  Not only that there is a gap of Rs. 
4595.70 crore in the proposed allocation and allocation provided at Budget Estimate 
stage during the year 2011 -12.  The Secretary, DRDO during the course of  
deliberations have informed the Committee that DRDO‟s total production value this year 
is about Rs. 48,000 crore which is leading to self -reliance through the industry.  The 

65 
 
Secretary, further enumerated about the achievements of DRDO during the last one 
year which include testing of Interceptor Missile, launching of Agni II Missile, Brahmos 
launch, Astra Missile flight trials, production of Akash Missile, the completion of first 
flight trial of Missile Helina and Initial Operational Clearance of LCA, desi gning and 
development of Rustom in the area of UAV.  The Secretary further highlighted that 
significant progress has been made with regard to under water sensors and sonars.  
The Committee while appreciating the achievements of DRDO would like the 
organization to keep up the momentum so that the country can achieve self -reliance in 
defence production.  The Committee would also like to emphasize that adequate 
allocations should be made available for R&D so that DRDO programmes do not suffer 
for want of resources.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Defence Research and Development Organisation (DRDO) is fully committed 
towards enhancing self -reliance in defence production through national efforts by all 
Government agencies including Ministry of Defence, Defence Indust ries (both public 
and private), Ordnance Factories.  DRDO is strengthening its core competence and 
making all efforts to reduce gestation periods and cut down time and cost overruns.  To 
increase the production of systems developed by DRDO, industries have  been involved 
in a big way and currently, more than 500 industries are participating in the defence 
production.      
As already explained by the Secretary, Department of Defence R&D, many 
DRDO developed systems have been tested, evaluated, productionised and inducted 
into Armed Forces, whereas a large numbers are at various stages of integration, trials, 
production and induction.  This would definitely improve self -reliance and indigenous 
content in defence systems.    
Defence R&D Budget, when compared to total Defence Budget, indicates the 
decline in percentage because of quantum of increase in Defence Budget.  However, 
Defence R&D Budget has increased in absolute terms.  Ministry of Finance and 
Ministry of Defence allocate additional funds, whenever requi red by Department of 
Defence R&D.  All out efforts would be made to utilize the allocations in full and 
additional funds, if required, would be requested at later stage during the Financial Year 
2011 – 2012.   

66 
 
 
 
 
Recommendation (Para No.43) 
 
 
The Committee have consistently been emphasizing in their reports to sort out 
all the problems being faced with regard to LCA so that it is made operational.  From 
the information furnished by DRDO, the Committee note that initial operational 
clearance of LCA has been completed on 10 June, 2011.  Newer version of LCA is 
ready and its first flight is scheduled this year.  So far as the issue of the Kaveri engine 
is concerned, the Committee find that some problems are being encountered on the 
issue of integration of Kaver i into LCA.  The Secretary, DRDO during the course of 
deliberations assured the Commiuttee that Rs. 10,000 crore spent on LCA are worth as 
technology levels have come up.  He also informed that Indian Navy and Railways have 
shown interest in Kaveri.  The C ommittee note that Tejas Project was initially 
sanctioned in the year 1983 and at last operational clearance on LCA could be 
completed.  The Committee in this regard would again like to emphasize that all the 
issues related to integration of Kaveri with  T ejas should be sorted out expeditiously so 
that LCA is operational and our Services and other agencies like Railways can be 
benefited by the technology developed indigenously by DRDO.  
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 
The Initial Operational Clearance (IOC) of Light Combat Aircraft (LCA) Tejas was 
obtained in Jan 2011.  It is planned to integrate Kaveri Engine with LCA in 2013 after 
the approval of the Government.  As of now, Kaveri Engine has been integrated and 
tested as one of the Power Plant in IL -76 in Russia.  A total 27 flights were conducted 
and Engine has undergone 55 hrs of flight. 
 
 
 

67 
 
 
 
Recommendation (Para No.44) 
 
The Committee have consistently been requesting the Ministry of Defence to 
apprise the Committee about the details of the recommendations made by P. Rama 
Rao Committee on the restructuring of DRDO.  The Ministry have not been furnishing 
the information on the pretext of being confidential.  At last now, the status of seven 
recommendations made by P. Rama Rao Committee which include some of t he 
important issues like formation of Defence Technology Commission, creation of 
Commercial Arm of DRDO and decentralization of finance has been made available to 
the Committee.  The Committee note that the recommendations are at various stages 
of implemen tation.  The Committee again emphasize to implement at least the 
recommendations on which final decision has been taken by the Government which 
would definitely go a long way in effective functioning of DRDO. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
After the approval of  the recommendations of the Defence Secretary Committee 
on report of Rama Rao Committee (RRC) by Hon‟ble Raksha Mantri, the Defence 
Research and Development Organisation (DRDO) has constituted two Committees to 
deliberate and work out the most appropriate actions with regard to the implementation 
of RRC recommendations at the earliest.  The Apex Committee called “Advisory 
Committee” has been constituted to study in detail the roles and functions of various 
institutions and mechanism recommended by the RRC a nd fine tune to make them 
more effective in facilitating the functioning of DRDO.  The second Committee i.e., 
“Implementation Committee” has been constituted to work out the implementation 
methodology of the fine-tuned systems and to work out details of ac tual implementation 
in terms of interaction between various functionaries, Standard Operating Procedures 
(SOPs), etc. within the broad framework as suggested by the Advisory Committee. 
 

68 
 
Based on deliberations of the above two Committees, following progress  has been 
made towards implementation of the recommendations of the RRC:- 
(i) The constitution and objectives of the Defence Technology Commission  (DTC) 
have been fine tuned to ensure effective performance of the Commission. 
(ii) The detailed objectives of the Commercial Arm of DRDO have been worked out. 
(iii) A draft Cabinet Note has been prepared seeking approval of the Cabinet for the 
creation of DTC as well as for the creation of a Private Limited Company as 
Commercial Arm of DRDO.  The Note has been f orwarded for concurrence of Hon‟ble 
Raksha Mantri. 
(iv) The status of the implementation of recommendations of RRC are as follows:- 
  
 Formation of Defence Technology Commission (DTC) 
 
A Note for approval of Cabinet has been initiated for approval of Hon‟bl e 
Raksha Mantri. 
 
 Creation of the Commercial Arm of DRDO 
 
A Note for approval of Cabinet has been initiated for approval of Hon‟ble 
Raksha Mantri. 
 Renaming of Director General DRDO as Chairman DRDO 
 
A Note for approval of Cabinet has been initiated for approval of Hon‟ble 
Raksha Mantri. 
 The three Services to nominate an officer each of the rank of 2 star General 
for structured discussion with DRDO 
 
The Services have nominated nodal officers. 
 Creation of seven technology area wise clusters/centres under a  Director 
General to facilitate timely execution of major programmes and healthy 
growth of Science & Technology (S&T) in the laboratories.  
 
Details have been worked out by the Advisory Committee appointed by 
DRDO including roles, empowerments of Director Generals (DGs) and 
Directors and linkage at all levels. 

69 
 
 
Roles and functions of various entities of management structure and SOPs 
for interaction amongst them are being worked out. 
 DRDO to engage an eminent HR specialist 
 
Modalities being worked out. 
 Decentralisation of Finance 
 
As a part of decentralization of Finance, enhanced delegation of Financial 
Powers to various functionaries has been done with the approval of Hon‟ble 
Raksha Mantri.  The allocation of additional manpower for the purpose and their 
positioning is being planned in consultation/concurrence with the Secretary, 
Defence Finance.”  
 
 
 
Recommendation (Para No.45) 
 
The Committee find some of the gaps between the authorized and the existing 
strength of Scientists in DRDO.  As on January, 2011  the strength of Scientist is 7854 
against the authorized strength of 8214 thus the gap being of 360 Scientists.  The 
Committee are further constraint to note that level of attrition of Scientists during the 
year 2010.  As per the information made availabl e by DRDO only one top scientists of 
the rank of „Distinguished Scientists‟ has taken voluntary retirement from DRDO in the 
year 2010.  At lower levels, three scientists in the field of computer science and 
seventeen scientists in the field of electronics and communication have resigned from 
DRDO during 2010.  The Committee are concerned to note that even when 21 
scientists including one „Distinguished Scientists‟ have left the organization, DRDO do 
not seem to be bothered about the alarming trend.  DRDO se ems to be contended by 
taking note of the fact that attrition is less than one per cent of the total strength of 
scientists.  The Committee take the attrition of scientist in DRDO seriously and strongly 
recommend to analyze the position critically so as to  know the specific reasons of 
scientists leaving such a prestigious organization.  Besides, the Committee would also 
like to emphasize that a comparative analysis of the salary and other perks being made 

70 
 
available to scientists of DRDO and in the private s ector should be done so as to have 
proper analysis of the impact of the recommendations of Sixth Pay Commission.” 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 
Defence Research and Development Organisation (DRDO) has been regularly 
monitoring attrition of scientists.  Just before the implementation of 6 th Central Pay 
Commission‟s recommendations, attrition of scientists was 340 in 2006.  This came 
down to 68 in 2010.  To arrest attrition of scientists, a number of incentive schemes 
have already been implemented in DRDO, like , grant of variable increments at the time 
of promotion, acquiring higher qualifications in reputed institutions during service, 
awards to deserving scientists, professional update allowances, etc.  Besides these, 
scientists are provided excellent transit facilities while on temporary duty, at residential 
complexes and also at places of duties.  Even after giving all such good incentives and 
pay-packages, some scientists leave the job as other institutions/companies offer better 
incentives/pay-packages.  Am ong all the three Government strategic Departments, 
DRDO is almost at par with ISRO and DAE in terms of incentives and pay -packages 
except Performance Related Incentive Scheme (PRIS).  In ISRO and DAE, PRIS has 
already been implemented over the last few ye ars.  DRDO has also submitted its case 
to Department of Expenditure, Ministry of Finance for grant of PRIS to DRDO scientists.  
The case is being pursued by the DRDO.  
 
In regard to pay and allowances in private institutions, authentic information is 
not available.  Even the pay and allowances are not standardised in private sector.  
These are linked with individual qualification, experience, performance, production, 
sales, etc.  And also the service conditions of personnel working in Private Institutions 
are different from Government Institutions.  DRDO, being a Government Organisation, 
follows rules and procedures set up by the Government.  Therefore, comparison of pay 
scales and allowances of DRDO scientists with private institutions may not be possible.        
 
 

71 
 
 
 
 
Recommendation (Para No.46) 
 
The allocations at BE stage exclusively for Navy during the year 2011 -12 are for 
Rs.25246.89 crore against the projected outlay of Rs.40541.07 crore. The analysis of 
the data further indicates that the gap between projected and BE allocations is there 
during each year of the Eleventh Plan. However, during the year 2011 -12 the said gap 
(Rs.15,194.18 crore) is more pronounced. Another trend noticed is allocations at BE 
stage during each year are being enhanced at RE stage. While taking note of the 
adhocism in  providing allocations for Navy, the Committee in Sixth Report had 
recommended to provide adequate funds at BE stage. The Committee had also 
recommended to provide additional requirement of Rs.4481 crore as required by Navy 
during the year 2010 -11. When th e position was reviewed during this year, the 
Committee have noted that even when the observation of the Committee was brought 
to the notice of Ministry of Finance, the additional requirement was neither provided nor 
any formal response was made by the Min istry of Finance. Consequently, Navy‟s 
requirement of additional funds under Capital segment has been met through internal 
appropriations at RE stage. The Committee note that contracts for various projects 
towards capability enhancement and modernization o f Indian Navy already been 
concluded and some of the important projects are in the pipeline. Besides many ships 
and submarines are under construction in India and Overseas. As such the Committee 
strongly recommend that adequate allocations for Navy should be provided at BE stage 
itself so as to provide certainty of allocations to Navy.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The matter has been taken up with the Ministry of Finance. Projections for RE 
2011-12 and BE 2012 -13 are presently under preparation by the Service s and the 
same shall be considered and projected to the Ministry of Finance. 
 

72 
 
 
 
 
Recommendation (Para No.48) 
 
The Committee find that with the augmentation of security along the coast, the 
pressure on INS Chilka located in Orissa which is a training base for sailors for Indian 
Navy and Coast Guard has gone up substantially.  The training load is at peak as 
stated by the representatives of the Ministry of Defence.  In view of this, the Committee 
would like to recommend to take all the initiatives to augment the infrastructure so that 
the quality of training is not compromised.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
1.  Training Load at Chilka.     Post 26/11, training load at Chilka has shown a 
quantum jump due to the enhanced inductions by Indian Navy(IN) and Indian Coast 
Guard(ICG).  The unit is presently undertaking training of 2200 trainees (1900 IN + 300 
ICG) as against the designed capacity of 1700, an over-capacity of almost one third. 
2.  Augmentation of Infrastructure.   Following initiatives have been undertaken to 
augment the infrastructure to ensure that quality of training is not compromised, despite 
the existing constraints:-    
(a)  One building to house 300 trainees is presently under renovation.  Special 
Works for five additional buildings have also been sanctioned. 
(b) Works in respect of the following have been included in Annual Maintenance 
Works Programme (AMWP ) for the year 2011 -12. These are likely to be 
completed by 2014:- 
(i) Additional 50m Swimming Pool. 
(ii) 56 additional classrooms. 
(iii) One additional 300-men accommodation block. 
 

73 
 
Recommendation (Para No.49) 
 
Modernization of Coast Guard Organisation and integration of various agencies 
involved with coastal surveillance has gained momentum post Mumbai terrorist attacks.  
However, there is still persistent threat scenario through sea routes and there is an 
imperative need for creating a fool proof coastal surveillance network.  Establishment of 
Coast Guard Station, Marine Police Station on hub and spoke basis, setting up of 
coastal radar chain network and constitution of National Committee on Strengthening 
Maritime and Coastal Security again st threats from the sea with Cabinet Secretary as 
Chairman are appropriate measures.  Making Indian Navy as the agency responsible 
for overall maritime security including coastal security is also a step forward in reducing 
ambiguities.  Nevertheless, in view of the Committee, there is still need for effective gap 
analysis and further strengthening of coastal security network.  Coast Guard may also 
speed up the work related to identification of suitable transponders/GPS.  The process 
of land acquisition for establishing Minicoy Coast Guard Air Enclave and other 
infrastructure related issues should further be paced up so as to augment the 
surveillance in the region. 
Reply of the Government 
  
1. Strengthening of the Coastal Security.   In addition to implementat ion of the 
approved Cabinet Committee on Security (CCS)  directives on 16 Feb 09, the following 
measures are being implemented for strengthening coastal security:- 
(a)   Enhanced Coastal Surveillance by IN and ICG Units . Patrols by the IN and ICG 
along the coa stline and off our island territories have been enhanced.  During such 
patrols, investigations of various ships, boats and fishing vessels are carried out.  
Overall, 5456 surveillance sorties by ships and 1828 sorties by aircraft of IN & ICG 
have been unde rtaken for coastal security till 30 September 2011, with 932 
surveillance sorties by ships and 307 air sorties in September 2011 alone.  There 
has been an increase of 80% in naval ship deployment and 100% increase in aircraft 
deployment for coastal securit y tasking.  Surveillance of the Offshore Development 
Areas (ODA)have  also been enhanced.  
  

74 
 
(b)   Coastal Security Exercises (by IN and ICG). Coastal Security Exercises are 
conducted regularly on both the East and West coasts.  In addition, awareness 
drives to sensitize the fishing/coast al community about threats from the sea are also 
being conducted by IN and CG in conjunction with State Marine Police in all coastal 
States.  A total of 56 Exercises and 259 Awareness Campaigns for the fishermen 
community along the coast have been conducted so far from Jan 09 till 30 Jun 11. 
 
(c)  National Maritime Domain Awareness (MDA) Project (National MDA).    CCS had 
approved the establishment of a National Command & Control & Communication & 
Intelligence (NC 3I) Network as  one of the measures for strengthening coastal and 
maritime security.  The aim of the Network was to integrate all Coastal Radars, the 
Automatic Identification System (AIS) chain and Long Range Identification and 
Tracking (LRIT)   with the Joint Operation Centers (JOCs)in order to develop a 
common operational plot by fusing the inputs from all these sensors.  As an 
extension of the NC 3I Network, a National MDA project has been conceived in which 
additional infrastructure such as radars [ i.e. Vessel Traffic  Management System 
(VTMS) for all ports] and State Monitoring Centers (akin to the existing JOCs) in all 
states has been proposed.  The CCS note for this project furnished by Indian Navy is 
under consideration of Ministry of Defence.   The estimated cost o f the National MDA 
project is Rs. 1002 Crores. 
(d)    Identification of suitable transponders/Global Positioning System (GPS).  Pilot 
projects are being undertaken of the suitable transponders for fitment onboard all 
fishing vessels. 
(e)    Establishment of Coast Guard Air Enclave at Minicoy.  The Board Proceedings 
for land acquisition have already been submitted by ICG to Directorate General of 
Defence Estates prior to taking up the case with Ministry of Defence for  sanction. 
     
2. Gap Analysis in the E xisting Coastal Security Infrastructure .  Based on the 
Hon‟ble RM‟s directives, a gap analysis has been undertaken with the aim to further 
strengthen maritime and coastal security, by induction of capability to address these 
gaps, in light of experience ga ined in the past few years.  The gap areas pertain to 
capability and assets (ships, aircraft, Unmanned Aerial Vehicles) required for 
persistent surveillance and response to threats in our oceanic areas of interest, 

75 
 
Special Forces for neutralization of thre ats detected, new organizational structures 
including manpower and additional infrastructure for supporting coastal and maritime 
security operations.  The broad aims and objectives of the second phase of Coastal 
Security Scheme are to bridge the gaps obser ved in the first phase of Coastal 
Security Scheme, with a view to further strengthen coastal security.  Presently, the 
proposals of Indian Navy and Coast Guard for the second phase of Coastal Security 
scheme are being processed in the Ministry of Defence for CCS approval.  
  

76 
 
 
 
 
CHAPTER - III 
 
 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS, WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT 
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(Nil Recommendation) 
 
 
  

77 
 
 
CHAPTER -IV 
 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF 
THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE AND 
WHICH REQUIRE REITERATION 
 
Recommendation (Para No.2) 
 
The Committee observe that the percentage expenditure under the capital 
section is declining over the years. The said percentage during the year 2007 -08 was 
39.02 which declined to 38.75 during the year 2008 -09 and then to 36.07 percent 
during the year 2009-10.  Not only that the major part of the allocation is being spent on 
the committed liabilities. To add to this the spending on the committed liabilities is 
increasing over the years and the expenditure on the new schemes is declining. The 
Committee conclude from the aforesaid scenario that the no. of new projects added 
over the years is declining. The Committee are of the view that the said ratio of the 
committed liabilities and the new schemes need to be studied carefully. While agreeing 
to the fact that the defence acquisitions are capital intensive and the committed 
liabilities may increase over the years with more a nd more acquisitions added every 
year, the Committee are of the view that besides meeting the committed liabilities, there 
is an urgent need to ensure that the no. of new projects added also do not decline. The 
Committee as such would like to recommend tha t adequate allocation should be 
provided particularly under the capital section so as to ensure that more and more new 
schemes are added every year besides meeting the committed liabilities. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The requirement of the Services for cap ital modernisation as per their 
Perspective Plans, is projected to the Ministry of Finance. This takes into account not 
only the requirement for committed liabilities but also the requirement for new schemes. 
The actual allocation however depends on the al location made by the Ministry of 
Finance. 
(Please see para No. 5 of Chapter-I of the Report) 

78 
 
 
Recommendation (Para No.4) 
The Committee have consistently been raising serious concern over non -
finalisation of LTIPP 2012 -27 and Eleventh Plan.  So far as LTIPP is concerned, the 
Ministry has informed that it is in the process of ratification at COSC level and is likely 
to be approved before the commencement of the Twelfth Plan.  With regard to Eleventh 
Plan, the plan size could not be finalized due to the d ifference of opinion between the 
Ministry of Defence and the Ministry of Finance, even when four years of the plan 
period have already passed and the projections for the last year of the Plan i.e. 2011 – 
12 have already been finalized.  What is more distur bing to the Committee is the fact 
that this is not the first time when the Five Year Plan could not be finalised.  Tenth Plan 
too met with the same fate and it has become a continuous practice with the Defence 
Ministry.  Further the Ministry has repeatedly  been stating that annual acquisitions are 
subject to availability of annual budgetary allocations as a result of which modernization 
programmes of varying extent are being compromised.  This trend is totally against the 
spirit of GoMs report on Reforming National Security System which state that Annual 
Plans should be strictly as per the five year plans.  While expressing unhappiness over 
the adhocism in the whole planning process in Defence Ministry, the Committee 
strongly recommend that LTIPP should be f inalised without any further delay.   Besides 
all the initiatives should be taken to ensure that the projections for Twelfth Plan are 
finalised well in advance so that the Twelfth Plan do not meet the f ate of Tenth and 
Eleventh Plan.” 
Reply of the Government 
 
1. LTIPP- The LTIPP 2012 – 27 is under final stages of preparation.  It will be 
tabled at the next COSC for ratification and then at DAC for approval. 
2. As far as the 12 th Defence plan is concerned, the projections from JSOs, have 
been received and being perused by HQ IDS before wetting by MoD (Finance).  The 
vetted inputs from Army have been received and the inputs from Navy and Air Force 
are awaited.  Once all the inputs are received from all the services, the plan projection 
for the services would be consolidated and forwarded. 
(Please see para No. 8 of Chapter-I of the Report) 

79 
 
 
Recommendation (Para No.6) 
 
The Ministry after continuous pursuance of the matter had agreed to attempt 
Outcome Budget in respect of Naval Dockyards besides National Cadet Corps and 
Married Accommodation Project (MAP) as communicated in the action taken replies to 
the Sixth Report of the Committee. The Committee are however, distressed to find that 
even after admitting the fact that there is great merit in adopting Out come Budgeting, 
the Ministry now again find problems related to security of information, identification of 
outcomes in identifiable and measurable terms among others. The reasons adduced by 
the Ministry do not convince the Committee. This clearly depicts t he unwillingness on 
the part of the Ministry to prepare Outcome Budget. The Committee once again 
recommend the Ministry to make positive attempt to prepare Outcome Budget. 
Reply of the Government 
 
The Outcome Budget documents for the year 2011 -12 have been  prepared by 
the identified organisations – DGMAP, DG NCC and Naval Dockyards. These 
documents are under examination by the concerned wings in the Ministry. 
(Please see para No. 11 of Chapter-I of the Report) 
 
Recommendation (Para No.13) 
 
The Committee hav e consistently been recommending „One Rank One 
Pension‟ to ex -servicemen in their various reports. „One Rank One Pension‟ as 
informed by the Ministry implies that uniform pension be paid to the armed forces 
personnel retiring in the same rank with same len gth of service irrespective of their 
date of retirement and any future enhancement in the rate of pension be automatically 
passed on to the past pensioners.  Pursuant to the recommendation of the Committee, 
a Committee was set up under the Chairmanship of Cabinet Secretary to look into the 
issue of „OROP‟ and other related matters.  Based on the recommendation of the 
Committee, the pensionary benefits of ex -servicemen including disabled ex -
servicemen have considerably been improved by the implementation of seven 

80 
 
recommendations of the Committee. The Committee in the Sixth Report had 
emphasized to pay various emoluments due to various benefits provided to the ex -
servicemen in pursuant to implementation of the recommendations of the Committee 
headed by the Cab inet Secretary alongwith  the arrears, if any, expeditiously. The 
Committee note that 26 Public Sector Banks and 4 private sector Banks have 
confirmed that they carried out disbursement of revised pension alongwith the arrears 
to almost 14 lakh pensioners. 
 
The Committee find that even after implementation of the aforesaid seven 
recommendations of the Committee headed by the Cabinet Secretary, the demand of 
ex-servicemen for One Rank One Pension still persists. In this connection when the 
issue was delibera ted during the course of examination for Demands for Grants, the 
Committee have been informed that One Rank One Pension was not accepted by 
Forth and Fifth Central Pay Commission, Inter -Ministerial Committee, 2003 and GoM 
set up in January, 2005  due to ad ministrative, financial and legal reasons.  The 
Committee have now been informed that there is no deadline as to when „OROP‟ 
would be implemented as a very conscious and deliberate decision based on historical 
facts, legal opinions and concrete judgements has been arrived at by the Government 
that considerable enhancement in the pension of all ranks has been given and it 
cannot be hundred percent.  With regard to the financial implications, the Committee‟s 
examination reveal that the Ministry is not firm ab out the required outlay for the 
purpose.  During the course of deliberations on Demands for Grants of this year, the 
representative of the Ministry of Defence has submitted that the financial implication 
may be Rs. 3500 crore minus Rs. 2200 crore ( Rs. 220 0 crore is the financial 
implication for implementation of seven recommendations) that come to Rs. 1300 
crore. The Committee have further been informed that the approximate figure of Rs. 
1300 crore is per annum and not since the beginning of the period tha t has to be 
reckoned for the purpose of One Rank One Pension. The Committee during the 
course of deliberation on the Demands for the Grants of the previous year had been 
informed that the financial expenditure would be to the tune of Rs. 8,000 crore to Rs.  
9,000 crore per annum if One Rank One Pension is implemented. 
 

81 
 
The Committee understand that one of the administrative difficulties is 
availability of records. As informed by the Ministry, CGDA has computerized records 
from the date since the year 1989 an d several records because of the retention 
schedule have been destroyed.  The Committee find that even when Ministry of 
Defence may not have maintained the records, such records seen to have been 
available with Banks which as stated by the Ministry have re imbursed enhanced 
pension to approximately 14 lakh pensioners with the implementation of aforesaid 
seven recommendations.  As such the problem of records can be addressed in 
coordination with the Banks.  The Committee would again like to emphasize that eve n 
when implementation of the seven recommendations has improved pension to some 
extent, the demand of One Rank One Pension of the ex -servicemen still persists. As 
such the Committee maintain their earlier stand and would like the Government to 
implement One Rank One Pension so that a large number of ex -servicemen can be 
benefited.” 
Reply of the Government 
Pension improvement is an ongoing process and considerable improvements 
have been made in the pensions of armed forces personnel.  
2.  The Group of Ministers (GoM) had in 2005 improved the pensionary benefits of 
PBORs. On the recommendations of PMO, a Committee was set up under the 
Chairmanship of Cabinet Secretary in June, 2009 to look into the issue of 'One Rank 
One Pension and other re lated matters'. After considering all aspects of the matter, 
the Committee keeping in mind the spirit of the demand, suggested several measures 
to substantially improve pensionary benefits of Personnel Below Officer Rank (PBOR) 
and Commissioned Officers, w hich have been accepted by the Government and 
orders for implementation of all the recommendations have been issued. These are 
available at www.pcdapension.nic.in. 
3.  In the recent past many benefits have been exclusively extended on the 
Defence side. The Military Service Pay is exclusive to the Armed Forces. Moreover, 
the New Contributory Pension Scheme has been introduced on civil side but has not 
been extended to the Defence personnel, who are still covered under defined pension. 
The promotion prospects of the Officers have also been improved to a great extent 
with implementation A.V. Singh Committee Report. Pre -2006 PBORs have been 
extended the benefit that their pension is consolidated on the maximum of their pre-06 

82 
 
pay scales which has bridged the gap between the pre and post 2006 PBOR 
pensioners to a large extent.  
4.  The implementation of recommendations of the Standing Committee is being 
reviewed on regular basi s so that maximum pensionary benefits are extended to the 
Ex-servicemen. 
(Please see para No. 19 of Chapter-I of the Report) 
 
Recommendation (Para No.15) 
 
The Committee in their Eighth Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) on „Construction of 
roads in border areas of the country‟ had strongly emphasized for fast track procedures 
for forest and wildlife clearances for construction of border roads. Inspite of that as per 
information provided by the Ministry of Defence, 193 forest/wildlife clearance proposals 
in respect of high priority roads/strategic roads are still pending with various authorities. 
During the oral evidence, the Defence Secretary has also admitted that environment 
clearance is the main issue in delay in construction of roads. While reiterating the 
recommendations made in the aforesaid Eight Report for streamlining forest /wildlife 
clearances, the Committee recommend to form a core group of officers from the 
Ministries involved in forest/wildlife clearances so as to expedite the process of such 
clearances. 
Reply of the Government 
 
To fast -track pending forest clearance cases MoEF has established single 
window Clearance system at three levels – MoEF, State Government and district. 
Further it has simplified the forms required to be filled up for obtaining forest clearance. 
A unified form has now been designed to process simultaneously both forest clearance 
as well as wild life clearance cases. Regular review meetings are held at a high level in 
MoD alongwith representatives of concerned States to resolve pe nding cases. The 
issue of dispensing with the need for wildlife clearance for the roads falling within 50 
Kms of the border is being pursued. An Interlocutory Application has already been filed 
in the Supreme Court of India to exempt strategic roads within  50 Km of International 
border/LAC from relevant Acts relating to Forest and Wildlife. Further Ministry of Home 

83 
 
Affairs is also finalizing a Bill for exemption of strategic roads from relevant provisions 
of forest and wildlife enactments.  Joint inter -departmental monitoring team has been 
setup in Arunachal Pradesh to further speedup the Forest Clearance. 
(Please see para No. 23 of Chapter-I of the Report) 
 
Recommendation (Para No.23) 
 
While noting that the administration of Sainik Schools is ailing from variety of 
maladies, the Committee have consistently been recommending that entire funding of 
all Sainik Schools should be made by the Central Government on the pattern of 
Kendriya Vidyalayas.  The Ministry‟s stand in this regard has been that Sainik Schoo ls 
are conceived as a joint venture of the Central Government and State Governments.  
When the issue was again raised during the course of the examination of Demands for 
Grants of this year, the recommendation does not seem to be agreeable to the 
Ministry.  The Secretary of the Ministry during the course of the deliberations 
emphasized that it is Bhagidari with the States which is forcing the Ministry to share 
expenditure with the States. The Secretary further elaborated that the Centre -State 
share was 50 -50 and now in some States the Centre‟s share has been increased to 
sixty per cent. In this connection, the committee would like the Ministry to furnish the 
name of the States which are finding it difficult to bear the finances involved in running 
these schools.  Besides the Committee would also like to be apprised about the name 
of the States in which case the Centre share has been increased from 50 to 60 per 
cent as stated by the Secretary. 
 
The Committee may again like to emphasize that Sainik Schools have  always 
played a unique role as a recruiting and training ground of future officers of the forces.  
As such there is an urgent need to look into the concern of various States with regard 
to meeting the desired expenditure in running the schools. As acknowl edged by the  
can easily be born by the Central Government. As far as the concept of Bhagidari is 
concerned, the States are already providing land for these schools. To further ensure 
the State‟s involvement in running these schools, the Committee recommen d that the 
Centre funding may further be increased to 90 per cent. 10 per cent funding by the 
State Governments as well as their bearing the land part would be sufficient to justify 

84 
 
the Bhagidari concept. Moreover this would also address the issue of some of the 
States who are not able to bear the working expenditure of these schools.     
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The recommendation of the Standing Committee has been examined in detail. 
It is submitted that the Sainik Schools are conceived as joint ventures  of Central 
Government and the State Governments set up primarily with the aim to remove 
regional imbalance in officer cadre of armed forces. 67% of the seats in each Sainik 
School are reserved for boys from the state in which the Sainik School is located to 
attract children of that state/region into the armed forces.  
2. Sainik Schools are unique assets of the State Governments. They provide land 
free of cost, build and maintain the school infrastructure.  In addition, they award 
scholarship on merit -cum-means basis. The importance, therefore, of the role of the 
State Government in running the School should not be done away with.  
3. Ministry of Defence provides three service officers and the APTCC/NCC 
instructors to the Sainik Schools besides scholarships to the cadets.  There is no fixed 
ratio in financial terms between Centre and State Governments. 
4. Sainik schools were expected to be financially self -sufficient institutions.  These 
depend mainly on fees paid by the parents. It is seen that the schools t hat are 
regularly getting funds from the State Governments are better run.  The schools such 
as Bijapur & Kodagu (Karnataka), Ghorakhal (Uttarakhand), Gopalganj & Nalanda 
(Bihar) and Kunjpura (Haryana) are getting regular funds from respective State 
Governments.   The Schools such as Balachadi (Gujarat), Chittorgarh (Rajasthan), 
Goalpara (Assam), Nagrota (J&K) & Rewa (Madhya Pradesh) are not getting regular 
funds from respective State Governments. Without diluting the responsibilities of the 
State Governments, the Centre has steadily increasing its contribution and investment 
towards Sainik Schools.  There are three States having two Sainik Schools and hence 
the contribution of Central Government is more in these States.   
 
5. The Ministry of Defence has provided grants-in-aid of Rs. 73.10 crore (including 
44 crores to then 22 Sainik Schools @ Rs. 2 crore for infrastructural improvement), 

85 
 
55.00 crore and Rs. 59.00 crore during the financial year 2008 -09, 2009-10 and 2010-
11 respectively. The grants -in-aid provided by the Ministry of Defence includes 
Scholarship and subsidy to the cadets, training grants, 80% of additionality of 
implementation of recommendations of 6 th Pay Commission on account of pay and 
allowances and pensions of employees of Sainik School s and improvement of 
infrastructure.       
6. Recently, Ministry of Defence has initiated following steps:-  
 (1) Enhancement of Defence Scholarship from Rs. 10,500/ - per annum to Rs. 
32,000/- per annum to Non Commissioned Officers and other ranks and from  Rs. 
5250/- per annum to Rs. 16000/ - per annum to Junior Commissioned Officers w.e.f. 
financial year 2010-11. 
(2) Increase in subsidy amount provided to all categories of cadets on tuition fee 
and dietary charges from Rs. 10,000/ - to Rs. 16,000/ - (approx.) w.e.f financial year 
2010-11. 
(3) Provide 100% additionality on account of implementation of recommendations 
of 6 th Pay Commission in respect to pay and allowances of employees of Sainik 
Schools as grants-in-aid. 
(4) Provision of Grants -in-aid of Rs. One Crore annually to each of the 24 Sainik 
Schools for infrastructure and modernization.  The modalities for utilizing this grant are 
being prepared for improving the schools without diluting the responsibility of the State 
Governments towards them. 
(Please see para No. 27 of Chapter-I of the Report) 
 
Recommendation (Para No.25) 
 
The Committee note that World War I & II veterans at present are being provided 
some sort of financial assistance. As per the written note of the Ministry, State/UTs, 
have been approached by the Department of Ex -servicemen Welfare for enhancing the 
financial assistance to a minimum level of Rs.3000 per month. As such some of the 
States have increased the amount and the financial assistance differ from States to 
States depending upon their financial resources. From the aforesaid position, it seems 

86 
 
that these world war veterans may also be getting financial assistance even less than 
Rs. 3000 per month. The committee in this regard would like to be apprised of the 
details of the financial assistance being provided to these veterans State/UTs wise. 
 
Reply of the Government 
The detail of Financial Assistance being provided to the World War Veterans 
State/UT wise is given at Annexure I. State Governments have already been requested 
by the Central Government to enhance the Financial Assistance to World War Veterans 
to at least to Rs.3000/ - Per Month, and the matter is being perused with State 
Governments. 
(Please see para No. 30 of Chapter-I of the Report) 
 
Recommendation No. (Para No.26) 
 
The Committee had recommended as under:- 
 
The Ministry has stated that there are 43362 World War II veterans. World War 
happened in 1939 to 45. If the average age of the veterans at the time of World War is 
presumed as 20 years, average age of veterans toda y would be approximately 90 
years plus. Keeping in view the aforesaid position, the data furnished by the Ministry do 
not seem to be realistic. The Committee feel that only few veterans that too with regard 
to World War II may be alive. As such there is an  urgent need to ensure that these 
veterans live with dignity at the fag end of their life. Even if it is considered that all 
States are paying as Rs. 3000 per month, the Committee consider it a petty amount 
more so when the veterans are not provided facili tates like ECHS, CSD canteen. The 
Ministry should collect the data of such veterans State/UT wise and should ensure that 
adequate financial assistance and other facility like ECHS, CSD canteen admissible to 
other armed forces personnel be given to them. 
  

87 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The data pertaining to the number of World War Veterans is compiled by the 
Kendriya Sainik Board/Directorate General of Resettlement through Rajya Sainik 
Boards & Zila Sainik Boards. Because of constraints of manpower and budgetary  
support to these Boards, there is no mechanism in place to conduct extensive census 
to determine the number of these World War Veterans and data is based on the 
voluntary registration by the individuals with respective Rajya Sainik Board/Zila Sainik 
Board. However, in view of the specific direction of the Committee, Kendriya Sainik 
Board/Directorate General of Resettlement have been advised to undertake afresh the 
process of collection of data in respect of WW II Veterans, which would help in 
determining t he quantum of budgetary support required for extending financial 
assistance to them. 
World War II Veterans have already been made entitled to the facility of CSD 
Canteen. However, ECHS facility is restricted only to those Ex -Servicemen who are in 
receipt of pension. 
(Please see para No. 32 of Chapter-I of the Report) 
 
 
Recommendation (Para No.28) 
 
The Committee note that Sena Medal is ranked higher in the Order of 
Precedence than Police Medal for Gallantry and the awardees of Police Medal for 
gallantry have been allowed 75% concession on basic air fare by Indian Airlines, and 
free II AC/Sleeper trav el along with a companion by Railways.  No such concession 
has been extended to Sena/Nao/Vayu Sena Medal awardees by the Air India/Railway 
Board.  The Committee also note that the Ministry has taken up the matter regarding 
parity in rail concessions with the Railway Board.  
Considering the fact that Sena Medal awardees are ranked higher in the Order 
of Precedence than Police Medal for gallantry and both the medals are given for same 
types of valour, therefore, the Committee desire that awardees of all three  types of 

88 
 
sena medal i.e. Sena/Nao/Vayu should also be given facilities/concessions in rail and 
air travel as provided to the winners of police medals”. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
In so far as para 28 (Facilities to Medal Winners) of Recommendations of 
Standing Committee on Defence contained in 12 th Report is concerned, it is hereby 
informed that the President‟s Police Medal for Gallantry awardees have been provided 
with complementary railway passes while Sena/Nao Sena/Vayu Sena Medal gallantry 
awardees of t he Armed Forces who rank higher in the order of Precedence than the 
President‟s Police Medal for Gallantry awardees have been denied this facility.  The 
matter has been taken up with Railway Board on few occasions in past at the level of 
Defence Secretary and Special Secretary.  However, no fruitful outcome has been 
achieved yet. 
Air travel concession is being extended to the awardees and their widows.  
However, the issue of grant of air travel concession to next of kin of unmarried 
posthumous awardees was taken up with Air India.  Air India expressed their inability 
to accede additional request for grant of air travel concession to any category of 
awardees other than Bravery Level I & II awardees, who are already in receipt of the 
air travel concession.  It  was further intimated that in pursuance of a decision taken in 
the Meeting of Secretaries held on 05 th March, 2003 all pending and future requests 
for concession would be processed by them on the basis of reimbursement of subsidy 
by the Ministry sponsorin g the request/concession.  In this connection a copy of their 
Reply No. HCD/8-R/70 dated 03 Dec 2010 is also enclosed. 
(Please see para No. 36 of Chapter-I of the Report) 
 
Recommendation (Para No.32) 
 
With regard to the shortage of officers, the Committee note that out of the 
deficiency of 828 officers 414 is for pilots.  The Committee during the course of 
deliberations have been informed that the proposal with regard to considering NCC 
Cadets and pilots with civil license for recruitment in Air Force is un der consideration.  

89 
 
The Committee has also been informed that the basic qualification requirement is not 
being diluted.  The Committee feel that there may be sufficient number of NCC Cadets 
and pilots with civil license which may meet the basic qualificati on requirement of Air 
Force  and by taking the decision in this regard, Air Force may be able to recruit some 
additional pilots.  The Committee as such strongly emphasize to take early decision in 
this regard. 
Reply of the Government 
 
(a) The shortage of officers in IAF, as on 01 August, 2011 is 763, out of which 408 
are pilots. 
(b) There has been a concerted effort to induct more NCC cadets as officers in all 
the branches of the IAF.  To enhance the induction of NCC cadets a Fast Track 
Selection (FTS) bas ed on the campus placements process in respect  of NCC cadets 
was conducted in October 2010.  In this FTS, a total of 35 NCC cadets were 
recommended for second phase of testing.  In January, 2011, a motivational lecture 
and a FTS for NCC cadets was also co nducted during the Republic day Camp.  All 
efforts are being made to motivate NCC cadets to join the IAF. 
 (c) The Indian Air Force gives two years age relaxation to candidates who are 
holding current Commercial Pilot‟s Licence (CPL) issued by DGCA (India)  for induction 
into Short Service Commission of Flying Branch.  The upper age limit for CPL holder 
candidates is relaxed to 25 years, whereas for the other candidates it is 23 years.” 
 
(Please see para No. 40 of Chapter-I of the Report) 
 
Recommendation (Para No.33) 
 
The Committee note from the information furnished by the Ministry that 999 
aircraft accident cases in Air Force have so far been reported since 1970.  So far as the 
cause of accidents is concerned, the analysis of the data made available by the Ministry 
indicates that in majority of the cases the cause is technical defect or human error 
(Aircrew).  In 39.5 per cent of the cases technical defect is the cause and in almost 

90 
 
equal number of cases i.e. 39 per cent of the cases human error (Aircrew ) in the 
reason.  On the issue of addressing to the human error aspect, the Committee notes 
that training of the pilots can play an important role.  In this context, there is an urgent 
need to have adequate trainers and simulators.  The Ministry itself has  acknowledged 
that an area of concern has been the availability of suitable trainer aircraft to meet the 
training requirement of our young pilots.  The Committee further note that the existing 
strength of Indian Air Force trainer fleet includes HPT -114 number, Kiran MK -1/1A-96.  
The Committee have further been informed that HPT -32 and Kiran MK I & II would be 
replaced with the new induction of Basic Trainer Aircraft, the Intermediate Jet trainers 
and the Advance Hawk Jet trainer aircraft.  The representativ e of the Air Force during 
the course of deliberations has acknowledged that they have issues of Advance Jet 
Trainer which they did not have for a number of years.  The Committee feel that there is 
an urgent need to modernize the trainer fleet of IAF and as  such the proposed 
inductions should be acquired expeditiously so that the outdated trainer aircraft are 
replaced which would certainly improve the training scenario in Air Force. 
Reply of the Government 
 
Availability of Suitable Trainer Aircraft 
1. The IAF is pursuing the modernization of its trainer aircraft.  The developments 
in this regard are as follows:- 
(a) Advanced Jet Trainer (AJT)  . The IAF has already inducted 51 Hawk aircraft in 
the role of AJT.  The plan is to induct a total of 106 aircraft.  T he rate of induction is 
approximately 02 aircraft every month, which is the rate of production of these aircraft 
under license by HAL. HAL has delivered 15 AJTs during 2010 -11 and is to deliver 
another 15 aircraft during 2011 -12.  The delivery of additiona l 57 AJTs is expected to 
be completed by 2016-17 . 
(b) Basic Trainer Aircraft (BTA) . The case for replacement of existing HPT -32 with 
the BTA has been pursued vigorously and is expected to be finalized within the current 
financial year. 
(c) Intermediate Je t Trainer (IJT).   The IJT has been under development as a 
replacement for the Kiran aircraft  .  The likely entry into service of the IJT is now 
expected earliest by 2014. 

91 
 
2. Simulators are being inducted with the above aircraft being procured, to add 
further value to flying training. 
(Please see para No. 43 of Chapter-I of the Report) 
 
 
 
Recommendation (Para No.35) 
 
The detailed deliberations with the representatives of MoD and Air Force in the 
context of examination of Demands for Grants has revealed that the Ministry did not 
have the information with regard to the rate of accidents of MIG aircraft in the 
manufacturing countries as well as the other countries which have purchased these 
aircraft.  The Secretary has acknowledged that Russian are extremely reluctant to 
share certain information.  The Committee feel that the selling countries not divulging 
the vital infor mation is a matter of serious concern.  Our system of making purchases 
without making the selling country binding for sharing such information is to be blamed 
in the aforesaid scenario.  As such, the Committee strongly recommends that in all the 
future purchases the condition to mandatorily sharing the information with regard to the 
accidents and helping us in case of technical defect should be inbuilt in the agreement 
itself.  Besides, the Ministry and Air Force should try to gather the information about 
accidents of various types of aircraft through our intelligence mechanism so that a 
comparative study can be made which definitely help the country in taking corrective 
action to check the rate of accidents.” 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
With  regard to the di rections mentioned in the para that „All the future purchase 
the condition to mandatorily share the information with regard to the accidents and 
helping us in case of technical defect should be inbuilt in the agreement itself‟ .  It may 
be stated that whil e there are „product support‟ clauses in the standard RFP (para 11) 
and the standard contract document(Article 30) of Defence Procurement  

92 
 
Procedure,2011 it does not necessarily require giving of information relating to 
accidents.  
(Please see para No. 46 of Chapter-I of the Report) 
 
 
Recommendation (Para No.37) 
 
The Committee from the detailed information made available by the Ministry with 
regard to the reasons of accidents of aircraft in Air Force note that in some of the cases 
HE/HAL (Human Error /Hindustan Aeronautics Limited) and TD/HAL (Technical Defect / 
Hindustan Aeronautics Limited) has been given as the reason for the accident.  
Besides, the Ministry in the written note has acknowledged that inadequacy of quality 
checks / assurances for the aircraft services / overhauled / produced at Hindustan 
Aeronautics Limited need to be addressed on priority.   Not only that the Ministry has 
also stated that the process of enforcing quality assurances by Director General 
Aerospace Quality Assurances (DGA QA) further need to be strengthened.  The 
Committee while taking note of the areas of concern may like to urge that these issues 
need to be taken up with HAL and DGAQA on an urgent basis.  Besides, there is an 
urgent need to synergize the efforts made for flight safety amongst the various 
agencies viz. HAL, DGAQA, Air Force and MoD.  The periodicity of quality checks may 
further need to be reviewed. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Quality Assurance in aviation industry  is of utmost importance and thus takes a 
prime place. Quality Checks and Audits of HAL are being carried out regularly or on 
specific requirement by joint IAF, CEMILAC, DGAQA and HAL teams and all important 
quality issues are addressed. Additional IAF officers have been posted to strengthen 
DGAQA organization. 
(Please see para No. 50 of Chapter-I of the Report) 
 

93 
 
 
Recommendation (Para No.47) 
 
The Committee finds from the information made available by the Ministry that 
delivery schedule in respect of some of the important projects of Navy has been revised 
resulting into huge cost escalation. Some of the delayed projects in this regard are 
Gorshkov, P -15, P -15A and P -17. The analysis of the data furnished by the Ministry 
indicates that cost escalation in respect of Gorshkov, P15, P -15A and P -17 has in fact 
been four times of the initial estimated cost. While deploring the delay in acquisition of 
some of the important projects, the committee strongly recommended that all the 
precautions should be taken so as to ensure the delivery of important projects is not 
further delayed and the projects are delivered by revised indicated dates. The 
Committee may also like to be informed about the specific reasons for delay of the said 
projects. 
Reply of the Government 
1. Gorshkov.     The induction of the Gorshkov/Vikramaditya is re -scheduled due 
to the necessity to carry out additional works for renewal of almost all 
equipment/systems, hull structures, cabling and application of long -life paint to afford 
greater protection to the ship‟s steel plating. The delivery date of the ship has been 
revised to December, 2012 with attendant revision in prices. However, the additional 
works have increased the service life of the Carrier significantly which will now be 
similar to the service life of a new Aircraft Carrier.   
 
2 Project P -15 -  P-15 was the first platform of the size of a destroyer to be 
indigenously designed and built and commissioning of the Delhi Class of ships was 
a landmark achievement for the nation. The major reason for delay in completion of 
the project were as follows:- 
 
(c)      M/s MDL had not built a ship of this complexity and there was a necessity to 
integrate weapons and sensors of different origin on board the ship. 
 

94 
 
(d)      The weapons, sensors and propulsion system of  three ships were 
predominantly of Soviet origin. After the collapse of the Soviet Union, delivery and 
installation of these systems was adversely affected which caused major slippages in 
timely completion.   
 
 
3    Project P-15A – The initial government sanction for Rs. 3580 crore accorded in 
May, 2001, was only an estimate which  was based on the P -15 cost at 1999 price 
level (without taking inflation into account). At the time of seeking initial sanction, it 
was stated that the cost of weapons & sensors would be finalised closer to the date 
of construction so as to avoid obsolescence. This was the first stage sanction. 
Therefore, the revised government sanction of Rs. 11662 crore accorded in Feb, 
2006, is not an escalation but a revision to the cost. Som e of the factors that 
caused time delays and revision of cost are as follows:- 
 
(c) Delay in Supply of Warship Building Steel.      Steel was ordered from M/s 
Promote, Russia in three lots of three ships. After supply of the first lot of steel in May, 
2004, the firm stopped supply demanding higher prices on account of sharp increase of 
steel prices in the international market. The shipyard was left with no option but to re -
negotiate the price, which delayed the supply by 18 months.  
 
(d) Impact of revised wages .    The component of labour and labour overhead 
escalated substantially due to revision in wages over the build period.  
 
(c)      Services of Russian Specialists.     The expenditure towards securing the 
services of Russian specialists was initially based on Soviet era rates. These revised 
rates are substantially higher and have added to the cost of the ships. 
(d)        Finalisation of cost of weapon and sensors.    The ships of P-15A were 
envisaged to be fitted with state of the art weapons and sensors in place of 
conventional ones. The initial approval of government  in May, 2001 was based on the 
estimated cost as they were in developmental stage. 
4. Project P -17.       The initial government sanction for Rs. 2250 crore was 
accorded in January, 1998. The i nitial estimates were based on the weapons supplied 

95 
 
by the Russian side for P -16A and P -15 ships which were inducted into the Indian 
Navy in 80s and early 90s. The main reasons for the higher cost of these Russian 
weapon systems is the commercialisation of  Russian military hardware industry as 
against the earlier State controlled regime. As a result, Russian equipment initially 
estimated to cost about Rs. 93 crore per ship finally costed Rs. 707 crore per ship. 
This increase in cost of Russian origin equipm ent alone accounts for 68% of the 
increase in the cost of equipment. The revised government sanction was accorded in 
March, 2006 for Rs. 8101 crore, including Rs. 217 crore towards yard modernisation. 
The factors effecting delay in delivery are as follows:- 
 
(e) Delay in availability of Warship Quality Steel .   The order  for the steel was 
placed in April, 2000 on a Russia firm and the delivery had commenced from July, 
2000. However, disagreement between the bankers of both parties on Letter of Credit 
(LC) led to a delay in the delivery of steel. 
 
(f)  Delay in acquisition of Weapon equipment from Russia.    The P-17 design 
was primarily for Russian origin weapons. Though a memorandum was presented to 
the Russian side in Sept, 1995, the offer was received only in N ov, 1998 as Russia was 
in the process of adjusting to the new political reality after the collapse of the former 
Soviet Union. In view of late response from the Russian side, the contract for the 
weapon package could only be signed in April, 2000 i.e. 13 m onths after the scheduled 
date. This affected the finalisation of structure drawings as technical/binding data was 
not available. 
 
(g) Delay in finalisation of propulsion equipment view complex Combined 
Diesel and Gas (CODOG) Arrangement.      It was the first time that the Indian Navy 
was designing a frigate with Combined Diesel or Gas (CODOG) main propulsion. 
Refining the requirements and evaluation of the technical offers received for the 
Propulsion System Integration (PSI) and studies took about 20 months as  against 6 
months originally envisaged. This had a cascading effect in finalisation of structural 
drawings. 
 

96 
 
(h)   Withdrawal of support from US OEMs.     The order for the CODOG main 
propulsion, LM 2500 Gas Turbine was placed on US firm M/s General Electric 
Company (GE) in 1998 when India had conducted the Pokhran II nuclear test. This 
resulted in slowdown in support from the firm. Once again, in 2009, the propulsion trials 
of the first ship were delayed as the US government desired M/s GE to conclude a 
Technical Assistance Agreement (TAA) with the Indian side which took some time to be 
completed.  
 
(Please see para No. 53 of Chapter-I of the Report) 
  

97 
 
 
 
 
CHAPTER -V 
 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL REPLIES 
OF THE GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED  
 
 
 
Recommendation (Para No.12) 
 
The Committee observes that a fully secure and dedicated nationwide optical 
fibre network for Army & Navy was to be laid by MoC&IT.  The supply order of the 
equipment was to be placed by 13 Aug 2010.  However, this timeline has not been 
met by MoC&IT till date.  The Committee desire the Ministry to complete the task in a 
time bound manner. 
Reply of the Government 
  
An MoU on vacation of Spectrum was signed between MoD and MoC & IT on 
22.5.2009.  As per the MoU, MoC &  IT was to lay out a fully secure and dedicated 
nationwide Optical Fibre Network for Defence, Promulgate Defence Band and 
Defence Interest Zone and Waive off spectrum usage charges for Defence in lieu of 
spectrum to be released by Defence.  Consequent to t he signing of the MoU, Full 
Telecom Commission (FTC) on 28.8.2009 constituted an Inter-Ministerial Group (IMG) 
for vetting the scope and specification of the Network.  Defence Services prepared a 
report containing the scope of the project, System Requireme nts and Technical 
Specifications.  M/s. BSNL prepared a Detailed Project Report (DPR) based upon this 
report.  Subsequently, IMG submitted its report to FTC on 16.11.2009 and same was 
endorsed by FTC on 23.11.2009.  The Cabinet Committee on Infrastructure (CCI) 
approved the IMG report on 3.12.2009 and earmarked Rs. 9175 Cr for the project 
NFS including Rs. 1077 Cr for AFNET.  It was also directed by FTC that project should 
be implemented by BSNL and would be book transferred to Defence Services on 
completion of the project.  The PDC of the project was December, 2012. 

98 
 
Scope of Project as per MoU 
Project NFS being implemented by BSNL, as part of MoU has following four 
distinct components :- 
(e) Tri-Services backbone network interconnecting 414 locations (Army 219,  Navy-
33 and Air Force – 162). 
(f) Army Access Network. 
(g) Naval Access Network. 
(h) Migration of AFNET of NFS Backbone. 
 
In addition to the laying out of the fully secure and dedicated nationwide optical 
fibre network for Defence Services by MoC & IT, the following important tasks were 
also to be undertaken by Moc & IT in Aug 2010 :- 
(c) Promulgation of Defence Band and Defence Interest Zone for use of 
Electromagnetic Spectrum by Defence and Strategic Forces. 
(d) Waiver of Spectrum User Charges. 
Progress 
 The tender document s for Tri -Services backbone OFC and Army and Naval 
Access OFC was floated by BSNL in Feb -Apr 2010.  The tech -commercial evaluation 
of the bids for the tenders was carried out in Aug 2010 by a CET.  As per the DPR, the 
cost estimate of only the OFC component for tri-Services backbone and Army & Naval 
Access Networks was Rs. 2000 Cr, whereas the L1 Quoted cost of the tenders was 
Rs. 7500 Cr.  Due to this escalation in the cost, FTC on 30.11.2010, directed MoD to 
vet the user specification & requirements and B SNL to carry out its cost estimations 
based upon the Defence QRs.  Reply of MoD on the issue was forwarded in February 
2011 stating that since FTC itself had constituted IMG to define scope and 
specifications of the network, the technical issues be referre d to IMG to firm up and 
authenticate the specifications. 
 
 Concerns of Defence Services regarding the delays in execution of MoU and 
for expediting project NFS were also communicated to Chairman E -GoM and Hon‟ble 
Telecom Minister on 25.2.2011.  Since the u ser specification and cost were worked 

99 
 
out by an IMG, MoC & IT on 3.3.2011 reconvened the IMG to look further into the user 
requirements and cost estimates. Four meeting of IMG were held on 10.3.2011, 
11.4.2011, 26.5.11 and 29.6.2011.  The preliminary inpu ts in terms of sub system 
level user requirements and Schedule of Requirements (SoR) were handed over by 
Defence to BSNL on 13.4.2011.  It was also decided that BSNL would do the costing 
based on the two documents and their implementation plan.  Detailed S oR based on 
numerous technical interactions with BSNL were forwarded to BSNL on 25.5.2011.  
On 29.6.2011, IMG decided that a joint review of all the documents should be done by 
Defence and BSNL representatives.  The Joint Review Report was signed by all 
representatives on 19.7.2011.  The same was forwarded to BSNL on 20.7.2011 for 
carrying out cost estimates.  It is learnt that BSNL has submitted the complete report 
including the cost estimates to IMG on 12.8.2011.  The next and final meeting of IMG 
is scheduled on 19.8.2011. 
 
The project is being implemented on Mission mode basis and would restart 
after the necessary approvals are taken by MoC&IT.  BSNL is likely to complete the 
project within a time frame of 36 months post approvals. 
 
Defence Band, Defence  Interest Zone and waiver of Spectrum usage charges 
though agreed are yet to be promulgated/notified by MoC&IT. 
(Please see para No. 15 of Chapter - I of the Report) 
 
Recommendation (Para No.18) 
 
 From the data furnished by the Ministry it is seen that there is a huge gap 
between authorized and held strength of officers of Army after accretion of 1260 officers 
for infrastructure development in the North East. Consistently every year, the Ministry is  
giving the same reply quoting AV Singh Committee report and sustained image 
projection campaign to bridge the gap. The Defence Secretary during the course of 
deliberations seems to be very optimistic about filling up the shortage particularly after 
implementation of Sixth Pay Commission.  However, the increasing gaps between the 

100 
 
authorised & held strength as is apparent from the data furnished by the Ministry clearly 
indicates about the inadequacy of the initiatives being taken by the Ministry. 
 
  On the p resent system of selection of officers, the Committee have been 
informed that the Government of India in 1948, decided to examine the system of 
selection of officers and appointed an Experts Committee, (The Ghosh Committee) for 
the purpose.  The said Commi ttee recommended that the current system was sound 
but needed improvements and modifications which were to be effected by a research 
organisation and therefore, the Psychological Research Wing (PRW) came into being 
which, by August, 1962, developed into a Directorate of Psychological Research.  As 
stated by the Ministry the only major modification introduced till date was the elimination 
of the interview by a Psychiatrist and stated that system of selection has been able to 
cope with the requirements of the country. 
 The Ministry has informed through its reply that a study to improve the system of 
selection of officers entitled „Development of a de -novo selection system to meet the 
challenges of non -conventional warfare‟ is in progress at Defence Institute o f 
Psychological Research (DIPR).  It has also been stated that present system is working 
fine. The Committee wonder that if it is true then where was the need to conduct the 
study to improve the selection system. The Committee note that the present system of 
selection of officers in armed forces has the linage from the pre independence period 
i.e. year 1943.  Even when the selection procedure for civil servants, IIT graduates and 
also of the higher level recruitments made by the private sector are constantl y being 
reviewed over the years, the armed forces are clinging to the same set of selection 
system for the last 63 years except one modification.       
 The Committee understand that over the years with the advent of new 
technology, wars are now being foug ht differently and focus has been shifted from 
person to person combat to complex integrated system involving computers, high 
speed communication equipment and sensors. The advantage of modern systems in 
fighting the wars in the night has again forced nati ons to develop night fighting 
capabilities resulting in relying more on technology than conventional methods.  
Considering the above fact, the Committee are of the view that it is high time that the 
Ministry should look into the issue of selection of candi dates, aspiring to become 
officers in armed forces afresh keeping in mind changing face of wars to be fought in 

101 
 
future. The Committee therefore, would like the Ministry to review the selection 
procedure critically keeping in view the challenges lying ahead . Besides, all the desired 
initiatives should be taken to motivate the youth of the country to join Army so as to 
address the issue of shortage of officers.   
 
Reply of the Government 
 
   Ministry is closely looking into the issue of shortages of officers,  at the highest 
level, so that eh gaps between the authorised & held strength be reduced.  In order to 
increase the intake of officers, recently Cabinet have cleared a proposal for setting up 
of seven new Service Selection Boards: 2 for Army, 3 for Navy an d 2 for Air Force, 
which will ensure that more number of candidates are tested for induction into the 
Armed Forces.  This will help in reducing the shortage. 
 As regards, system of selection, it is true that the structure of the selection 
system being foll owed from pre -independence period has been amended from time to 
time. In this regard, periodic review of the selection system has been carried out by 
Defence Institute of Psychological Research (DIPR).  Apart from replacement of 
Psychiatrist as an Intervie wing Officer (as indicated in the Point 18, para 2), the major 
modifications were done in the form of revision of tests, development of parallel forms, 
inclusion of Stage -I Selection System (1998), Customization for Women Entry (1991 -
1992), Development of Online Self -Assessment Military Aptitude Test (2009), 
Development of Comprehensive Battery for Cognitive Assessment (parallel run in 
progress) and Computerized Pilot Selection System (serial production in progress) etc. 
Automation using modern IT tools has  also been introduced in the Test procedures.  
The need to review present selection system and to develop a new selection system 
(De Novo System) was felt after examining the various concerns highlighted by various 
forums involving Parliamentary Committees and Service Hqrs.  Accordingly, a proposal 
was launched in the form of XI Five Year Plan to develop the De Novo Selection 
System. The major objectives of this programme are as follows:-     
(i) To take into cognizance the socio -economic changes that may have taken place 
in the psyche of today‟s youth. 

102 
 
(ii) To identify the skill variety that is required to face tomorrow‟s warfare involving 
technological advancement and operational challenges.  
(iii) To develop more candidate-friendly assessment system involving economy of 
testing time and automation. 
(iv) To finally evolve the selection system comparable to current selection system 
and compatible to recent scientific developments.  
 Work is in progress to develop a „De Novo‟ selection system and is likely to be 
finalised by 2013. 
(Please see para No. 40 of Chapter - I of the Report) 
 
 
Recommendation (Para No.24) 
 
 The Committee are informed that thousands of trained soldiers are being used 
as Sahayaks to the Officers/Junior Commissioned Officers. The Ministry  argued in 
favour of Sahayaks stating that the Sahayaks assist the officers in communicating on 
the radio, delivering messages, erecting shelters, and when isolated in operations and 
other similar conditions.  In operations, the army functions in teams of two personnel 
each. Every sub unit has earmarked teams wherein the two individuals function as a 
well knit team. One covers the movement of the other and protects him in operations. 
Support has to be total -mental physical and moral.  The officer/JCO and hi s Sahayak 
thus become a team; it is essential that in peace time a team spirit and personal 
equation is allowed to develop between the two.  The provision of this facility is 
essential in the Army for leaders to carry out their assigned tasks effectively. It is a 
relationship based on faith, respect for each other where laying down own life for the 
other is quite a norm. This cannot be developed instantaneously and deserves to be 
built up over a period of time.  However, the Committee are not convinced with  the view 
point put forth by the Ministry and feel that as the practice of Sahayaks is also not 
present in Navy and Air Force, this practice should be abolished in army also. 
 

103 
 
  
The Committee are further dismayed over the fact that recommendation of the 
Committee made in their Thirty -first report on „Stress Management in Armed Forces‟ 
was misquoted in the circular issued by the AG Branch of Army, which stated that 
scrapping/ abolition of the practice of employment of Sahayaks would not be in the 
organisational interest and was even not commented upon as such in the Report of the 
Standing Committee.  Not only that the Ministry of Defence too did not notice the 
misreporting of the recommendations of the Committee. The Committee place on 
record their anguish ov er the disrespect to one of their important recommendation and 
the Ministry owe an explanation in this respect.        
 
Reply of the Government 
 
   The observations of the Standing Committee have been taken up for fresh 
examination by the Ministry. The Committee will be apprised about the development in 
this regard in due course. 
 It is regretted that the sentence “and was even not commented upon as such in 
the report of the Standing Committee” at para 7 of Army Hqrs. AG Branch‟s note 
NO.B/32009/AG/PS 2(c) dated 1 st May, 2009 was inadvertently included as a matter of 
oversight.  The ibid note may please be treated as cancelled. Ministry of Defence 
sincerely regret the misunderstanding caused due to misreporting of facts in the Army 
Hqrs. note referred above. 
 
 
 
Recommendation (Para No.27) 
 
The Committee while examining the Demand for Grants of the previous year had 
noted that the Government has not maintained any data with regard to war widows 
and disabled soldiers who had laid down their lives and disabled pensioners  who had 
lost their limbs to safeguard their nation, even though certain benefits are being 
provided to them. The Ministry in the action taken note has stated that action is in 

104 
 
progress for getting the data of disabled/war disabled pensioners and as a resu lt of 
concerted efforts made some data in respect of disabled/war disabled pensioners has 
been received. When the position was reviewed while examining Demands for Grants 
2011-12, the Ministry has again informed that the process of collection of data is in  
progress and some data which has been reported by PCDA (P), Allahabad right from 
1951 onwards, however, does not include the data relating to Air Force and Navy after 
1985. It has further been stated that there is no proposal to increase the family 
pension to war widows.  
 
The Committee are surprised to note that even when some benefits are being 
provided to war widows and disabled soldiers, the Ministry could not maintain the data 
in this regard even after pursuing the matter by the Committee in their var ious reports. 
The Committee may like to emphasize here that it is the duty of the Nation to take 
care of the families of the martyrs who have laid down their lives for the motherland. 
To review the position with regard to the benefits extended to these mar tyrs it is 
utmost necessary to collect the preliminary data. As such, the Committee again like to 
emphasize that the Ministry should collect the data from various sources particularly 
when war widows and disabled soldiers are already being provided some be nefits. 
The position of financial and other benefits being extended may be reviewed after 
getting the preliminary information and it should be ensured that adequate benefit is 
provided to enable the war widows and disabled pensioner a life of dignity. The 
concrete action in this regard should be taken and the Committee informed 
accordingly. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 
The details of financial assistance and other benefits available to War Widows 
and disabled pensioners are given at Annexure II. As regards to the collection of data 
in respect of War Widows and disabled soldiers, it is informed that for collection of 
data, Department of Ex -Servicemen Welfare, Directorate General of Resettlement & 
Kendriya Sainik Board are dependent upon Rajya Sainik Boards/Zila Sainik Boards. 
Since the registration of the details with RSB/ZSBs is not compulsory,  the authentic 
data is not available. Recently, the Department of Ex-Servicemen Welfare has evolved 
a format to develop a comprehensive database on Ex -Servicemen/Dependants which 
has been circulated to Directorate General of Resettlement/ Kendriya Sainik Board 

105 
 
with directions to cir culate the same to Rajya Sainik Boards and Regimental Record 
Offices.  
 
 
 
Recommendation (Para No.30) 
 
 The Demands for Grants of Air Force during the year 2011 -12 are for 
Rs.46209.98 crore against the allocation of Rs.40462.45 crore during the previous year. 
The trend of expenditure under the Capital head indicates under spending during the 
first three years of the Eleventh Plan. The under -spending during the year 2008-09 was 
for Rs.2673.22 crore and Rs.1563.30 crore during 2009 -10.   Although the allocati ons 
made for Air Force under Capital and Revenue heads are being increased in absolute 
term, the under-spending has resulted into lower percentage – wise spending under the 
capital head. The said percentage was 15.72 percent during 2008 -09 which declined to 
Rs. 13.09 percent during the year 2009 -10. Although Air Force have been able to 
spend the allocation under the Capital Head fully during the year 2010 -11 as 
acknowledge by the Secretary, the Committee‟s examination has revealed that during 
the Eleventh P lan Rs.96746.28 crore were allocated for modernization of Air Force. 
However, the actual expenditure incurred upto 28 th February, 2011 is Rs.60963.51 
crore. The Ministry has informed that the balance amount i.e. Rs.35782.77 crore would 
be spent in the rema ining part of the Eleventh Plan. The Committee observe that 
acquisition for Air Force are highly capital intensive. Keeping in view the fact that 
acquisition for some of the aircraft, helicopter, radars etc. are in pipeline, and Air Force 
target is to reach a level of 42 squadrons by the end of Thirteenth Plan, the Committee 
strongly recommend that the required allocation particularly under the capital head 
should be made available to Air Force so that the important projects do not suffer for 
want of resour ces. Further, while recommending for adequate resources to Air Force, 
the Committee would also like to emphasize that the resources made available to Air 
Force should be effectively utilized so that the Ministry of Defence can present their 
case effectively to the Ministry of Finance for getting the adequate allocations.  
 

106 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
    
The matter has been taken up with the Ministry of Finance. Projections for RE 2011 -
12 and BE 2012-13 are presently under preparation by the Services and the same shall 
be considered and projected to the Ministry of Finance. 
2. At the close of the second quarter, Air Force has utilised 33.11% of its BE allocation 
for capital acquisition. 
 
 
Recommendation (Para No.38) 
 
The Committee find that a crash laboratory is being set up at Institute of Safety 
for giving a practical exposure of accidents investigation and build up expertise level.  
Alongside, a wreckage museum is also being set up with display of cut our models or 
crashed aircrafts components as training aids.   The Committee note that all the 
proposed initiatives are in the right direction and the crash laboratory and wreckage 
museum should be set up expeditiously. 
 
Reply of the Government 
Setting  up of the Crash Laboratory and Wreck Museum are in progress.  
 
Recommendation (Para No.50) 
 
The constant piracy/robbery threats by Somalian pirates in the Indian Ocean is a 
cause of concern.  Vulnerability to piracy/robbery etc. affect country‟s strategic maritime 
interests.  Sea trade consists of major volume of coun try‟s financial trade and it is vital 
for appropriate growth.  Hence, it is pertinent for Navy to create safe and secure 

107 
 
maritime environment.  Therefore, the Committee recommends the Ministry of consider 
setting up of separate units under Indian Navy to d eal with the issues related to piracy.  
Beside more stringent measures may be taken in the direction of making Indian 
Maritime Zone safe for fishermen and trade. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
1.  Anti Piracy Operations.     One ship on a rotational basis, exclusively for anti -
piracy operations, has been deployed by IN in the Gulf of Aden since Nov 08.  In 
addition, anti-piracy patrols have also been undertaken off the Lakshadweep Islands   
(Operation „Island Watch‟) from Dec 10 to Jun 11.  Details of surveillance undertaken 
during the operation are as follows:- 
(a)    A total of 79 IN/ICG ships have been deployed amounting to a total of 507 „ship 
days‟. 
(b)     A total of 64 surveillance sorties have been flown by maritime patrol aircraft. 
2. Capture of Pirates.  A total of 120 pirates have been apprehended and 73 
fishermen and crew rescued in four operations by IN against pirate mother ships 
in East Arabian Sea in 2011.   
 
 
(Please see para No. 59 of Chapter - I of the Report) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI;                                       SATPAL MAHARAJ, 
 12 March, 2012                                  Chairman,       
22  Phalguna (Saka)1933                       Standing Committee on Defence 
  

108 
 
 
 
 
 


109 
 
 
APPENDIX - II 
 
MINUTES OF THE FIFTH SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
DEFENCE (2011-12) 
 
 
The Committee sat on Monday, the 27 th February, 2012 from 1500 hrs. to 1715 
hrs. in Committee Room  No. „53‟, Parliament House, New Delhi for consideration and 
adoption of draft report on action taken by the Government on the 
recommendations/observations contained in their Twelfth Report (Fifteenth Lok 
Sabha) on „Demands for Grants 2011-2012‟  xx     xx    xx.  
PRESENT 
Shri M.V. Mysura Reddy  -  in the Chair 
 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
2. Shri Kamal Kishor „Commando‟ 
3. Shri Sher Singh Ghubaya 
4. Shri A.T. Nana Patil 
5. Shri C.R. Patil 
6. Shri Amarnath Pradhan 
7. Shri Adhalrao Patil Shivaji 
8. Shri Mahabali Singh 
9. Rajkumari Ratna Singh 
RAJYA SABHA 
10. Shri Avinash Rai Khanna 
11. Shri Mukut Mithi 
12. Shri Birender Singh 
13. Shri Ram Kripal Yadav 
14. Shri Naresh Gujral 
 
SECRETARIAT 
4. Shri T.K. Mukherjee  - Joint Secretary 
5. Smt. Sudesh Luthra  - Director  
6. Shri Sanjeev Sharma - Deputy Secretary 
 

110 
 
2. In the absence of Hon‟ble Chairman, the Committee chose Shri M.V. Mysura 
Reddy, M.P. (Rajya Sabha) and the Member of the Committee to act as Chairman of 
the Committee under Rule 258 (3) of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business 
in Lok Sabha.   
3. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members of the Committee and 
informed them about the agenda for the sitting.  The Committee then considered and 
adopted draft Report on Action Taken by the Government on the 
recommendations/observations contained in their Twelfth Report (15 th Lok Sabha) on 
Demands for Grants (2011 -12) without any modification. The Committee then 
authorized the Chairman to present the report to the House on a date and time 
convenient to him.   
4. xx xx xx xx xx xx xx 
5.  xx xx xx xx xx xx xx 
6.  xx xx xx xx xx xx xx 
 
(Witnesses then withdrew) 
          A copy of the verbatim proceedings has been kept on record. 
The Committee then adjourned 
  

111 
 
APPENDIX -III 
 
ANALYSIS OF THE ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS CONTAINED IN THE TWELFTH REPORT 
(FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA) ON `DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2011-2012)’  
 Total Percentage 
of Total 
1.  Total number of recommendations  50  
2.  Recommendations / Observations which have been 
accepted by Government  
Para Nos. 1, 3, 5, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 14, 16, 17, 19, 20, 21,  
22, 29,  31,  34,  36, 39, 40, 41, 42, 43, 44, 45,  46, 48 
& 49 
 
29 58 
3.  Recommendations/Observations which the 
Committee do not desire to pursue in view of 
Government’s replies  
Para Nos. NIL 
- - 
4.  Recommendations/Observations in respect of 
which replies of Government have not been 
accepted by the Committee  
Para Nos. 2, 4, 6, 13,15, 23,  25, 26, 28,  32, 33,  35, 
37 & 47 
 
14 28 
5.  Recommendations/Observations in respect of 
which final replies of Government are still awaited  
Para Nos. 12, 18, 24, 27, 30, 38 & 50 
 
07 14 
 