STANDING  COMMITTEE  ON
DEFENCE
(2009-2010)
FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA
MINISTRY OF DEFENCE
[Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in their First Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) on
Demands for Grants (2009-10)]
SEVENTH REPORT
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
May, 2010/Vaisakha, 1932 (Saka)
7

SEVENTH REPORT
STANDING COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE
(2009-2010)
(FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA)
MINISTRY OF DEFENCE
[Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations/Observations of the
Committee contained in their First Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha)
on Demands for Grants (2009-10)]
Presented to Lok Sabha on 7.5.2010
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 7.5.2010
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
May, 2010/Vaisakha, 1932 (Saka)

C.O.D No. 117
Price : Rs. 79.00
© 2010 BY LOK S ABHA S ECRETARIAT
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of
Business in Lok Sabha (Thirteenth Edition) and printed by National Printers,
New Delhi-110 028.

(i)
CONTENTS
PAGE
C OMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (2009-2010).........................................(iii)
INTRODUCTION.............................................................................................. (v)
C HAPTER I Report................................................................................. 1
C HAPTER II Recommendations/Observations which have been
accepted by the Government......................................... 28
C HAPTER III Recommendations/Observations which the Committee
do not desire to pursue in view of Government’s
replies................................................................................. 51
C
HAPTER IV Recommendations/Observations in respect of which
replies of Government have not been accepted by the
Committee......................................................................... 55
C
HAPTER V Recommendations/Observations in respect of which
final replies of Government are still awaited............. 71
A PPENDIX
Minutes of the Seventeenth sitting of the Standing
Committee on Defence (2009-10) held on 5.5.2010*.... 74
Analysis of Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations contained in the
First Report of the Standing Committee on Defence
(Fifteenth Lok  Sabha)..................................................... 76
* Not included in cyclostyled version of the report

COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE
(2009-10)
Shri Satpal Maharaj — Chairman
M EMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Harish Choudhary
3. Shri Kamal Kishor ‘Commando’
4. Shri H.D. Devegowda
5. Shri Varun Gandhi
6. Dr. Sucharu Ranjan Haldar
7. Shri Ramesh Jigajinagi
8. Shri Kapil Muni Karwaria
9. Shri Arjun Ram Meghwal
10. Shri Asaduddin Owaisi
11. Dr. Prasanna Kumar Patasani
12. Shri A.T. Nana Patil
13. Shri Bhaskarrao Bapurao Patil
14. Shri Amarnath Pradhan
15. Shri C. Rajendran
16. Shri M. Raja Mohan Reddy
17. Shri Baju Ban Riyan
18. Shri Ijyaraj Singh
19. Shri Kalyan Singh
20. Shri Mahabali Singh
21. Rajkumari Ratna Singh
(iii)

(iv)
Rajya Sabha
22. Shri R.K. Dhawan
23. Prof. P.J. Kurien
24. Shri Mukut Mithi
25. Shri Prakash Javadekar
26. Shri K.B. Shanappa
27. Shri T.K. Rangarajan
28. Shri Munquad Ali
29. Shri M.V. Mysura Reddy
30. Smt. Shobhana Bhartia
31. Shri Sanjay Raut
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri T.K. Mukherjee —Joint Secretary
2. Smt. Sudesh Luthra —Director
3. Smt. J.M. Sinha —Deputy Secretary

INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairman of the Standing Committee on Defence (2009-10),
having been authorised by the Committee to submit the Report on their
behalf, present this Seventh Report on action taken by the Government
on the Recommendations/Observations contained in the First Report
(Fifteenth Lok Sabha) on ‘Demands for Grants (2009-10) of the Ministry
of Defence’.
2. The First Report was presented to Lok Sabha on 16 December,
2009 and laid on the table of Rajya Sabha on the same day.  The Ministry
furnished their Action Taken Notes on the Recommendations/Observations
contained in the First Report on 22 March, 2010.
3. The Report was considered and adopted by the Committee at
their sitting held on 5 May, 2010.
4. For facility of reference and convenience, the Recommendations/
Observations of the Committee have been printed in bold in
Chapter-I of the report.
5. An analysis of action taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations contained in the First Report
(Fifteenth Lok Sabha) of the Committee is given at Annexure-II.
N
EW DELHI;  SATPAL MAHARAJ,
5  May, 2010 Chairman,
15 Vaisakha, 1932 (Saka)Standing Committee on Defence.
(v)

CHAPTER I
REPORT
This Report of the Standing Committee on Defence deals with action
taken by the Government on the recommendations/observations contained
in their First Report on Demands for Grants (2009-2010), which was
presented to Lok Sabha and laid in Rajya Sabha on 16.12.2009.
2. The Committee’s First Report contained recommendations/
observations on the following aspects:—
Para No. Subject
(1) (2)
1. Overview
2. Growth in Defence Budget
3. Revenue Outlay
4. Capital Outlay
5. Capital Acquisition Expenditure
6. Outcome Budget
7. Indigenization of Defence Equipment
8. Early Finalization of Long Term Integrated Perspective Planning
9. 11th Defence Five Year Plan
10. Implementation of Offset Clause
11. Zero Based Budgeting
12. Indian National Defence University
13. Modernization of Army
14. Shortage of Officers in Army
15. Bullet Proof Jackets
16. Stipend to National Defence Academy Cadets
17. Sainik Schools
18. National Cadet Corps
19. One Rank One Pension
20. Educational facilities to wards of Ex-servicemen

(1) (2)
21. Pension to war-widows and disabled soldiers
22. Lateral Induction of Ex-servicemen
23. Modernization of Ordnance Factories
24. Budgetary Allocation for Navy
25. Shortage of Manpower
26. Modernization of Indian Navy
27. Construction of Air Defence Ship
28. Joint Staff
29. Maritime Surveillance of Navy
30. Budgetary allocations for Air Force
31. Squadron Strength for Indian Air Force
32. Modernization of Air Fields
33. Operational clearance for Light Combat Aircraft
(LCA)—Tejas
34. Acquisition of Radars for Air Force
35. Trainer aircraft for Indian Air Force
36. Shortage of Officers in Indian Air Force
37. Defence Research and Development Organization
3. Action taken replies have been received from the Government
in respect of all the recommendations/observations contained in the Report.
These replies have been examined and categorized as follows:—
(i) Recommendations/observations, which have been accepted
by the Government (Please see Chapter II):
Para Nos. 1, 2, 13, 14, 15, 18, 23, 24, 25, 26, 27, 28, 29, 30,
31, 32, 33, 34, 35, 36 and 37
(21 Recommendations)
(ii) Recommendations/observations, which the Committee do not
desire to pursue in view of the replies of the Government
(Please see Chapter III):
Para Nos. 10 and 20
(02 Recommendations)
2

(iii)Recommendations/observations in respect of which replies
of the Government have not been accepted by the Committee
and which require reiteration (Please see Chapter IV):
Para Nos. 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 9, 11, 17, 19, 21 and 22
(11 Recommendations)
(iv)Recommendations/observations in respect of which final
replies of the Government are still awaited (Please see
Chapter V):
 Para Nos. 8, 12 and 16
(03 Recommendations)
4. The Committee desire that the Ministry’s response to their
comments made in Chapter-I and final replies to the recommendations/
observations mentioned in chapter-V of this Report be furnished to
them at the earliest and in any case not later than six months of the
presentation of this Report.
 5. The Committee will now deal with the action taken by the
Government on some of their recommendations in the succeeding
paragraphs.
A. Revenue Outlay
Recommendation (Para No. 3)
6. The Committee had recommended as under:—
“The Defence outlay BE for the year 2009-10 amounting to
Rs. 141703 crore comprises of Rs. 86879 crore as revenue expenditure
and Rs. 54824 crore as capital outlay. Defence expenditure is entirely
the Non-Plan expenditure. The percentage-wise distribution of the
revenue budget during the year 2009-10 is 60.86 per cent for
pay and allowances, 24.72 per cent for stores and equipment,
2.76 per cent for transportation, 3.94 per cent for Misc. charges and
7.71 per cent for revenue works. The revenue expenditure has grown
from Rs. 38058.82 crore during the year 2001-02 to Rs. 86879 crore
during the year 2009-10. During the year 2008-09, BE was
Rs. 57593 crore which was enhanced by Rs. 16007 crore at the
RE stage. The BE 2009-10 in this regard is Rs. 13279 crore and
Rs. 29286 crore higher if compared to RE and BE of the previous
year respectively. As informed by the Secretary during the course
of oral evidence the growth in revenue allocation during the current
3

year is 50.85 per cent over BE and 18.04 per cent of RE of the
previous year. The revenue allocation has increased due to the
implementation of the Sixth Pay Commission’s recommendations.
While appreciating the fact that the welfare of the armed personnel
is of paramount importance and the implementation of the Sixth
Pay Commission’s recommendations is the step in the right direction,
the Committee feel that there is an urgent need to curb the avoidable
wasteful expenditure. The Committee have consistently been raising
this issue in their earlier reports. In pursuance thereof, the Ministry
had constituted a Defence Expenditure Review Committee to
comprehensively review all aspects of defence expenditure. This
Committee has submitted its report. On the issue of implementation
of the recommendation of the said Committee, the Committee have
been informed that various officers in the Ministry have been
assigned the responsibility of looking into various aspects of the
report. The Committee strongly recommend that the
recommendations of the Committee should be implemented within
a stipulated time frame so that the duplication of expenditure can
be avoided and revenue expenditure is contained. The Committee
should be kept apprised about the status of implementation in this
regard”.
7. The Ministry in its action taken reply, has stated as under:—
“Given the elaborate procedure followed for sanctioning
expenditure, both under revenue and capital, as also limited
availability of the revenue budget, the possibility of any wasteful
expenditure being incurred consciously is rather remote.
Nevertheless, the Defence Expenditure Review Committee had been
set up to examine and suggest ways of improving the efficiency
of expenditure. As communicated to the Committee in the past,
various officers in the Ministry of Defence have been assigned the
responsibility of looking into the recommendations of the
Committee. These are at different stages of examination/
implementation. The Committee would be apprised of the
developments after the process is completed”.
8. Instead of implementing the recommendations of the Defence
Expenditure Review Committee (DERC) on the issue of curbing
avoidable wasteful expenditure, the Ministry has tried to emphasized
that the possibility of any wasteful expenditure being incurred
consciously is remote both under revenue and capital outlay. This clearly
indicates the unwillingness on the part of the Ministry to implement
the recommendations made in the DERC. While deploring the way the
4

Department is delaying the implementation of the recommendations
of DERC, the Committee again emphasize for early implementation
of the recommendations of the Committee so that the duplication of
expenditure can be avoided and revenue expenditure is contained.
B. Capital Outlay
Recommendation (Para. No. 4)
9. The Committee had recommended as under:—
“The Capital Outlay during the Budget Estimates stage in the year
2008-09 was for Rs. 48007 crore which was, Rs. 6085 crore more
than BE of 2007-08. The outlay of Rs. 48007 crore during the year
2008-09 was however, reduced to Rs. 41000 crore thus amounting
to the reductions of Rs. 7007 crore at RE stage. During the year
2009-10, the outlay provided at BE stage is Rs. 54824 crore which
is Rs. 13824 crore more, if compared to RE of the previous year.
Said increase comes to Rs. 6817 crore if the current year’s BE is
compared to the BE of the previous year. Although in absolute
terms, capital outlay during the current year has been enhanced
by 14.20 per cent, if compared to BE and 33.72 per cent, if compared
to the RE of the previous year, the revenue capital ratio that was
55:45 during BE 2008-09 stage, has come to 61:39 at BE 2009-10
stage. With regard to the cut of Rs. 7007 crore at RE stage, the
Committee are concerned to note that the outlay was reduced
keeping in view the pace of expenditure at that time. The
representative during the course of oral evidence has acknowledged
that there were slippages in delivery schedules due to certain
contracts not getting finalized. The Committee are seriously
concerned to note the incapacity of the Ministry to utilize the outlay
provided under the Capital section which is primarily for the
modernization of the Services. The Committee feel that apparently
there are problems in execution of projects due to procedural
bottlenecks. Therefore, the various shortcomings need to be
identified and the corrective actions taken, so that the trend to
reduce the outlay at RE stage does not repeat during the current
year due to the inefficiency of the Ministry. The Committee would
also like to recommend that the capital revenue ratio should be
corrected so that more allocation is provided on the capital side.
While recommending for higher outlay under the capital side,
certainly the Committee expect the Ministry to increase the capacity
to utilize the outlay since this is the area where no compromises
can be made. The desired action on the suggested line should be
taken and the Committee be apprised accordingly”.
5

10. The Ministry, in its action taken reply, has stated as under:—
“The Committee has basically observed that the revenue to capital
ratio should be improved and corrective steps be taken to remove
procedural bottlenecks in capital procurements.
In so far as the revenue to capital ratio, it may be mentioned that
during the years 2008-09 and 2009-10, the main reason for increase
in the revenue expenditure was implementation of the
recommendations of the Sixth Pay Commission, which resulted in
increase in pay and allowances and payment of arrears. Capital
procurements also result in increase in revenue expenditure on
account of operational exploitation and maintenance of the capital
assets. Revenue budget is also utilized for maintaining reserves of
arms and ammunition. These factors impose a serious limitation
on containing revenue expenditure. However, all out efforts are
made to keep the projections of revenue requirement at the bare
minimum level.
As regards the corrective steps be taken to remove procedural
bottlenecks in capital procurements, it may be mentioned that the
capital acquisitions are made as per the procedure laid down in
the Defence Procurement Procedure (DPP), which was last revised
in 2008 and amended in 2009. The prescribed procedure aims at
expeditious procurement of approved requirements of the Defence
Services in terms of capability sought within the time-frames
prescribed in the DPP by optimally utilizing the allocated budgetary
resources. All major decisions are being taken at the time of initiation
of the case at the highest level in a time-bound manner to reduce
the overall lead time for procurement. All major deviations are also
monitored at the highest level. Following salient provisions exist
in DPP 2008 to expedite capital procurements:—
(a) Maximum time stipulation for issue of RFP within two years
of Acceptance of Necessity (AON). In cases beyond two years,
fresh AON is considered only after re-examination of available
technology and operational necessity.
(b) Extension of time for submission of offers is restricted to
eight weeks.
(c) In multi-vendor cases, once L-1 vendor has been identified,
normally there would be no need for any further price
negotiations,
(d) Increased delegation of financial powers to the Services
Headquarters”.
6

11. The Committee’s main concern in the recommendation was
the cut of Rs. 7007 crore at RE stage under the capital outlay of the
Ministry of Defence keeping in view the pace of expenditure at that
time. As such the Committee had emphasized to increase the capacity
to utilize the outlay earmarked under the capital section. The Ministry
in the action taken reply has nowhere responded to the aforesaid
concern of the Committee. The Committee again emphasize that the
Ministry has to increase its capacity to utilize the outlay under the
capital head to get the adequate allocation under the capital section
and also to ensure that the outlay earmarked at BE stage is not reduced
at RE stage. This would automatically result into correction in the
existing revenue to capital ratio of the Ministry. While reiterating the
earlier recommendation, the Committee would like the Ministry to
take the concrete action and inform the Committee accordingly.
C. Capital Acquisition Expenditure
Recommendation (Para No. 5)
12. The Committee had recommended as under:—
“The Capital outlay of the Ministry comprises Land and Works of
three services, Married Accommodation Project, DGOF, DRDO and
other Defence Departments as well as Defence acquisitions. Almost
75 to 80 per cent of the capital outlay is for capital acquisition
expenditure. The percentage share of defence acquisition of the
capital outlay was 78.30 per cent during the year 2007-08, which
declined to 78.08 per cent during 2008-09. During the current year,
the percentage share has further declined to 73.63 per cent. The
information furnished by the Ministry further reveal that the
expenditure on committed liabilities is more than the new schemes.
The Committee are concerned to note that the findings of C&AG
as per its report numbers CA 17 and 18 of 2008-09, according to
which due to procedural delays in acquisition of various equipments
and associates spares, many surveillance equipments could not be
put to effective operational use and led to enormous increase in
the project cost. Some of the areas pointed out by C&AG are,
(i) the objective of inducting an aircraft carrier in time to fill the
gap in Indian Navy could not be achieved and the cost of acquisition
has been more than doubled at Rs. 7,207 crore in four years,
(ii) the Ministry took nine years to conclude a contract for
the construction of six submarines. The inordinate delay led
to enormous increase in the project cost to the extent of
Rs. 2,838 crore. (iii) five radars imported at a cost Rs. 24.88 crore
7

could not be installed for more than three to five years after their
acquisition and in the process, the radars have not only lost 50 per
cent of their life but also remained unavailable for operational
purpose and (iv) despite almost a decade in developmental effort
and spending Rs. 27.88 crore, DRDO has not been able to provide
a radar as per the requirement of the army. Even when the Ministry
has introduced Procurement Policy since 2002 and the policy is
being updated periodically, the aforesaid findings indicate that still
a lot needs to be done to streamline the procurement procedures.
The Committee strongly recommend the Ministry to take all the
desired actions to streamline the procurement procedures. Besides,
the declining trend of percentage allocation for acquisition out of
the capital outlay should be reversed. More and more outlay need
to be provided for the new projects”.
13. The Ministry, in its action taken reply, has stated as
under:—
“The objective of the Defence procurement procedure (DPP) is to
ensure expeditious procurement of the approved requirements of
the Armed Forces in terms of capabilities sought and time frame
prescribed by optimally utilizing the allocated budgetary resources.
While achieving the same, it demonstrates the highest degree of
probity and pubic accountability, transparency in operations, free
competition and impartiality. However, delays sometimes occur in
some of the defence procurement cases due to several reasons such
as insufficient and limited vendor base, non-conformity of the offers
to the request for proposals (RFP) conditions, field trials,
complexities in contract negotiations, limited indigenous capability
and long lead time for indigenization etc. Further the market for
state-of-the-art defence equipment and platform being circumscribed
by denial regimes, limited availability of required type of material,
complexities in construction and manufacturing involving
integration of large number of systems, assemblies and institutional
delays, procedures and processes and continuously refined on the
basis of experience gained during the procurement process.
Following provisions exist in DPP-2008 (Amendment 2009) to
expedite capital procurements:—
(a) Maximum time stipulation for issue of RFP within two years
of accordance of AON. In cases beyond two years, fresh AON
will be considered only after re-examination of available
technology and operational necessity.
(b) Extension of time for submission of offers restricted to eight
weeks.
8

(c) In multi vendor cases once L1 vendor has been identified,
normally there would be no need for any further price
negotiation.
(d) Increased delegation of financial powers of Service
Headquarters.
Service HQ maintains a requirement based balance between
allocation for new schemes and committed liabilities while seeking
allocation of funds under Capital outlay”.
14. The Committee note that even after the implementation of
DPP 2008 and subsequent amendment to the procurement policy, there
are long delays in acquisitions resulting into cost escalation of the
projects. As such there is an urgent need to further streamline the
procurement procedures. Even when the aforesaid issue was raised in
the recommendation, the Ministry has not given heed to the
recommendation of the Committee and has simply reproduced the
provisions that exist in DPP 2008 as amended. The Committee express
serious concern over the way the Ministry has addressed to one of the
important recommendations. The Committee again emphasize to look
into the matter and take the desired action to streamline the procurement
procedures further. Besides, as recommended in Sixth Report of the
Committee, the Committee would like to emphasize that urgent steps
should be taken by the Ministry to ensure transparency and
accountability in defence acquisitions.
D. Outcome Budget
Recommendation (Para No. 6)
15. The Committee had recommended as under:—
“The Committee in their 29th and 35th Reports (Fourteenth Lok
Sabha) had recommended that the Ministry should identify the
areas and organizations for which the Outcome Budget could be
prepared and present the same to Parliament at least from the year
2009-10 onwards. The Ministry, however, could not present the
same in the Budget Session of the current year. During the course
of the examination of Demands for Grants of the current year, the
Committee have been informed that the areas and organizations
for preparation of Outcome Budget were identified. Although these
organizations prepared the Outcome Budget, the same was
considered inadequate. The concept being new, there was lack of
conceptual clarity with regard to the methodology to be followed
for the preparation of the Outcome Budget. The Committee further
9

note that the Defence Expenditure Review Committee set up to
study the issue of curbing wasteful expenditure has also
recommended that the proposed Demands for the year 2009-10
should be entirely outcome oriented and a workshop may be
conducted to finalise the methodology. Even then, the Ministry
could not present the Outcome Budget during the year 2009-10.
The Committee are unhappy to note the casual attitude of the
Ministry in the matter. The Committee feel that the matter should
not be delayed further. To begin with the Outcome Budget for
the selected activities viz. Ordnance Factories, PSUs, Naval
Dockyards and depots and some other selected establishments as
decided may be prepared on a pilot basis followed by the
comprehensive Outcome Budget. The Committee hope that the
Outcome Budget of the Ministry would be presented to Parliament
for the year 2010-11.
16. The Ministry in its action taken reply, has stated as under:—
“The Hon’ble Committee has been apprised in the past of the efforts
made by the Ministry of Defence in this regard and the inadequacies
in the outcome documents prepared by the identified organizations.
In the light of the recommendations of the Committee, the matter
has been examined de-novo and it has been decided to renew the
effort by getting outcome budget prepared in respect of National
Cadet Corps (NCC) and the Married Accommodation Project (MAP).
Orders in this regard have been issued on 18th February 2010.
However, it may not be appropriate to place the outcome budgets
in the public domain or present them to the Parliament till such
time as sufficient experience is gained to ensure that quality and
contents of the outcome budget reach an acceptable level of
excellence”.
17. The Committee do not agree with the reply of the Ministry
that due to inadequate methodology, the outcome documents could not
be prepared by the identified organizations. However, on February,
2010, orders have been issued to prepare outcome budget in respect
of NCC and MAP. The Committee note with concern that the Ministry
has not conducted any workshop to finalize the methodology to prepare
outcome budget, nor it has learnt any lessons from other Ministries
which are preparing outcome budget. The experience and level of
excellence in terms of quality and contents of the Outcome Budget will
be achieved only when the Ministry will prepare that.
The Committee deplore the way the presentation of Outcome
Budget is being delayed by the Department without taking any concrete
10

action as consistently been recommended by the Committee and the
Expenditure Review Committee. The Committee while reiterating their
earlier recommendation would like the Ministry to cover some other
areas like Ordnance Factories, PSUs, naval dockyards and some other
selected establishments and ensure that Outcome Budget 2011-12 is
presented to Parliament followed by a comprehensive Outcome Budget
in the coming years.
E. Indigenization of Defence Equipment
Recommendation (Para No. 7)
18. The Committee had recommended as under:—
“The Committee observe that till date, the Ministry is spending a
great deal of their budgetary allocation on import of defence
equipments and there are procedural delays in their acquisition.
The Committee are concerned to note that the Ministry is not
maintaining data with regard to break up of Capital acquisition
made from indigenous sources and from abroad. The difficulty is
also being experienced in categorization of suppliers, indigenous
and Foreign, in view of the fact that a sizeable proportion of
procurement takes place through the Ordnance Factories and
DPSUs, which are indigenous sources, but have to depend on
imports for manufacturing the finished product. Further, the
Ministry is yet to identify the private industries as Raksha Udyog
Ratna under `make category’ of DPP.
In view of the above, the Committee firmly believe that achieving
self reliance in defence equipment is a distant dream. The production
agencies are still dependant on foreign countries for spare parts
and also for manufacturing the finished products. This clearly
reflects the weaknesses in our research and Development
processes.
The Committee therefore, strongly recommend that besides
strengthening DRDO laboratories, the R&D in all the defence
production agencies has to be strengthened and adequate budgetary
allocation should be made to them for this purpose. The Committee
further urge the Ministry to complete the task of identifying private
industries having expertise under Raksha Udyog Ratnas (RUR) in
order to permit them to share the responsibilities of indigenization
and self-reliance in Defence production”.
11

19. The Ministry in its action taken reply, has stated as under:—
“Several indigenous programmes for development of weapons,
sensors, propulsion equipment, communication and EW equipment,
etc. are in progress.
DRDO is concentrating on development of strategic, complex and
security sensitive systems. DRDO has developed a number of
systems/products/technologies worth Rs. 30,000 crore which have
already been inducted into Armed Forces, besides a large number
of items are in the process of development, production and
induction.
Further, Policy and procedural steps have been initiated towards
enhancing self reliance. Joint development and transfer of
technology have been encouraged by recent amendments to Defence
Procurement Procedure (DPP) 2008, in November 2009, which aims
to provide the procedural framework and detailed guidelines for
enhancing self reliance. A new category ‘Buy and Make Indian’ has
been included in DPP 08 (Amendment-2009). This change in DPP-08
would enable pro-active participation of Indian industry in
manufacturing defence products through co-production
arrangements, such as Joint Venture (JV), with foreign manufacturers
and through transfer of technology”.
20. During examination of DFG 2009-10, the Committee had
observed that sizeable proportion of procurement takes place through
the ordnance factories and DPSUs which are indigenous sources
but have to depend on import for manufacturing the finished
products. Therefore, they had recommended to strengthen the R&D in
all defence production agencies and provide adequate budgetary
support to that effect. The Ministry has not addressed to the aforesaid
issue raised in the recommendation. The Committee would like the
Ministry to take the concerted action as suggested and inform the
Committee accordingly.
F. Early Finalization of Long Term Integrated Perspective Planning
and 11th Defence Five Year Plan
Recommendation (Para Nos. 8 and 9)
21. With regard to LTIPP, the Committee had recommended as
under:—
“The Committee note that GoMs in its report, on `Review of
National Security system’, had recommended that the Five Year
12

Defence Plan by the Services should be prepared on the basis of
Long Term Integrated Defence Perspective Plan and the defence
planning process incorporating the long term defence plan, five
year plan and annual budget should be revised at the earliest.
The Committee are constrained to observe that the Ministry is
now in the process of evolving a fresh LTIPP covering the period
2012-27 on the basis of recast of 11th plan (2007-12) which is
yet to get its final clearance. The Committee are further distressed
to note that instead of adhering to the recommendation of GoMs
report for timely completion of the task in a time bound manner,
the Ministry is apprehensive that since the scope of report calls
for deliberative efforts, and any attempt to rush these
recommendations may prove counter productive. This clearly
reflects the callous attitude of the Ministry to complete that task
of preparing LTIPP.
The Committee deplore the lackadaisical attitude of the Ministry/
Service Headquarters and recommend that the Ministry should take
necessary steps for the early finalization of LTIPP”.
22. With regard to 11th Defence Five Year Plan, the Committee had
recommended as under:—
“Although the 11th Defence Five Year Plan has commenced from
April, 2007 and the year 2009-10 being the third year of the plan
period, the Committee are perturbed to find that the plan size is
yet to be approved by the Ministry of Finance. Although the Ministry
of Defence are carrying out the programmes for modernization
without any fund constraints, however, budgetary exercise on annual
basis is strictly against the spirit of GoMs report on Reforming
National Security System.
The Committee deplore the adhocism in the defence planning
process. This approach of the Ministry has an adverse impact on
the modernization programme of the Armed Forces as optimal
utilization of resources cannot be achieved unless greater emphasis
and attention is given to the process of budget formulation and
implementation including forecasting, monitoring and control of
defence planning processes. Therefore, the Committee recommend
that the Ministry of Defence should make concerted efforts to finalise
the 11th Plan at the earliest without any further loss of time. The
defence of the country cannot be left to the adhoc policy planning
and accountability should be fixed for such a casual attitude towards
the defence preparedness of the country keeping in view the
neighbourhood around us”.
13

23. The Ministry in its action taken reply, has stated as under:—
“Currently, the Long Term Integrated Defence Perspective Plan
(LTIPP) 2012-17, as approved by Raksha Mantri, is in vogue. The
changing security scenario and the perceived environment will
impact the capability development strategy, plans and procurement
priorities of the Armed Forces for the next three Plan periods,
beyond March 2012. Hence, a need has been felt for recasting of
acquisition proposals to meet the prospective operational needs of
the Armed Forces. The finalization of the LTIPP 2012-27, which is
being undertaken in the above background, will also factor in a
Technology Road Map for this period. The Ministry and the Services
Headquarters are fully conscious of the imperative need for early
finalization of the LTIPP 2012-27 and are attending to this work
with all seriousness.
It may be mentioned at the outset that the Eleventh Defence
Plan for the period 2007-12 was prepared and the projections
sent to the Ministry of Finance in July 2006 itself. However, the
Plan could not be taken to the Cabinet Committee on Security
(CCS) – as was done in respect of some of the Five-year Plans
in the past — because of the difference in the Plan size in
monetary terms, as projected by the Ministry of Defence and as
accepted by the Ministry of Finance. Meanwhile, capital acquisitions
are being made as per the Annual Acquisition Plans, which are
based on the 11th Defence Plan, subject to availability of budgetary
allocations”.
 24. The Committee have repeatedly been recommending to
finalize the Long Term Integrated Perspective Plan LTIPP (2012-27).
Till date, the LTIPP has not been finalized. Now the Ministry has
stated that the finalization of the LTIPP will also factor in a Technology
Road Map for this period. The Ministry and the Services Headquarters
are fully conscious of the imperative need for early finalization of the
LTIPP 2012-27 and are attending to this work with all seriousness.
With regard to Eleventh Defence Plan, the Committee find that precious
three years of the plan period have been lost because of the differences
of the Plan size between the Ministry of Defence and Ministry of
Finance. The Committee are constrained to observe the way long-term
Plans are being drawn by the Ministry particularly when it relates to
the security of the nation. While expressing unhappiness over the
adhocism in the planning process, the Committee would like to strongly
14

recommend that at least now the LTIPP should be finalized without
any further delay. Besides the Committee would also like to stress that
all the initiatives should be taken by the Ministry to ensure that the
preparation work for Twelfth Plan is started well ahead so as to avoid
such delays in the Twelfth Plan.
G. Zero Based Budgeting
Recommendation (Para No. 11)
25. The Committee had recommended as under:—
“The Committee observe that the Ministry of Defence does not
follow the zero based Budgeting as a tool for financial planning
because of complexity and the size of Defence Services. However,
the underlying principle of ZBB is followed while preparing the
five year and annual acquisition procurement plans. The Committee
are perturbed to find that the 11th Five Year Plan of the Ministry
is yet to be finalized, though half of the plan period is already over.
Therefore, the Committee recommend that for all ongoing schemes,
Ministry of Defence should follow the principle of Zero Based
Budgeting in a time bound manner in the management of defence,
as recommended by Group of Ministers. By following Zero Based
Budgeting, the Ministry will be able to comprehensively review its
requirement of funds for different ongoing schemes and other
activities”.
26. The Ministry in its action taken reply, has stated as
under:—
“In so far as the 11th Defence Plan is concerned, the position has
been explained in response to Para No. 9 of the Report of the
Committee.
It is re-treated that Ministry of Finance with whom the matter was
taken up has intimated that the Zero Based Budgeting exercise is
being done by the Planning Commission. The entire defence budget
being non-plan budget is, however, not subject to any scrutiny by
the Planning Commission. However, it is submitted that the
budgetary projections are finalized by the Ministry after a rigorous
process of scrutiny at various levels to keep expenditure strictly
as per requirement”.
27. The Committee are not convinced with the reply of the
Ministry that defence budget being non-plan budget and not subject
15

to any scrutiny by the Planning Commission, should not follow the
principle of zero based budgeting. While agreeing to the fact that the
Defence allocations are entirely under non-plan head, the Committee
find that almost 40 per cent of the allocation are under the capital
segment. Not only that, under the revenue segment also the substantial
part of the allocations are utilized for maintenance and repair of assets
under the three services and the headquarter. As such the exercise of
zero based budgeting is more required in the case of the Ministry of
Defence. Moreover, the underlying principles and advantages of zero
based budgeting are enormous, as it helps any organization, to identify
the alternatives methods of performing each activity which will lead
to optimum level of spending in comparison to the current operating
level.
In view of the above advantages and to save the country’s scarce
resources, the Committee once again recommend the Ministry to follow
the principle of zero based budgeting.
H. Sainik Schools
Recommendation (Para No. 17)
28. The Committee had recommended as under:—
“During the course of deliberations, the Committee was informed
that as per MoU signed between the Central Government and the
State Governments, any state wants a Sainik School to be opened,
has to offer a certain area of land and provide the infrastructure
for it and also bear the cost of maintenance grant. In this context,
the Committee, while noting that the administration of Sainik
Schools was ailing from variety of maladies, had strongly
recommended in their 29th report (14th Lok Sabha) that entire
funding of all Sainik Schools should be made by the Central
Government on the pattern of Kendriya Vidyalayas/Navodaya
Vidyalayas. In this context, the Secretary during the course of
deliberations has informed that the recommendation of the
Committee is under consideration and a final view is yet to be
taken on that. The Committee again emphasize that Sainik Schools
have played an important role as a recruiting and training ground
for future leaders of Defence Forces. As such, there is an urgent
need to address the problems being faced in the administration of
Sainik Schools without any further delay. The Committee reiterate
that the decision on the recommendations of the Committee should
be taken without any further delay and the Committee be apprised
accordingly”.
16

29. The Ministry in its action taken reply, has stated as under:—
“The recommendation of the Standing Committee has been
examined in detail. It is submitted that the Sainik Schools are
conceived as joint ventures of Central Government and the State
Governments set up primarily with the aim to remove regional
imbalance in officer cadre of armed forces. 67% of the seats in each
Sainik School are reserved for boys from the State in which the
Sainik School is located to attract children of that State/region into
the armed forces. The Sainik Schools are unique assets of the State
Governments. They provide land free of cost, build and maintain
the schools infrastructure. In addition, they award scholarships on
merit–cum-means basis. The importance, therefore, of the role of
the State Government in running the School should not be done
away with.
2. Sainik schools were expected to be financially self-sufficient
institutions. These depend mainly on fees paid by the parents.
It is seen that the schools that the regularly getting funds
form the State Government are better run. The schools such
as Bijapur and Kodagu (Karnataka), Ghorakhal (Uttarakhand),
Gopalganj and Nalanda (Bihar) and Kunjpura (Haryana) are
getting regular funds from respective State Governments at
an average of Rs. 2 cores per year during the last three year.
3. Sainik Schools and Kendriya Vidyalayas are not comparable
in the matter of objective, organizational set up, source of
budget/finance, provision of land, status of employees etc.
Kendriya Vidyalayas have been set up to cater to the
educational needs of the children of transferable employees
of Central Government/State Government/PSUs. Whereas the
aim of Sainik Schools is to prepare boys academically,
physically and mentally for entry into the National Defence
Academy and to remove regional imbalance in the officer
cadre of the defence services. Further, the Kendriya Vidalayas
are day schools and the Sainik Schools are residential Schools.
Hence, it would not be possible to accept the
recommendations of the Standing Committee that entire
funding of all Sainik Schools should be made by the Central
Government on the pattern of Kendriya Vidyalayas/Navodaya
Vidyalayas.
4. The Central Government is fully committed to the improved
functioning of Sainik Schools. The Central Government is
actively considering the modification of the scheme to provide
more funds to the Sainik Schools. It may also be pointed, in
17

recent times, the following specific steps have been taken by
the Central Government to improve the quality of the Sainik
Schools:
(a) At present, Ministry of Defence awards Scholarships on
merit-cum-means basis to the wards of defence personnel
including ex-servicemen, Centre Share to the cadets who
are in receipt of State Scholarship and subsidy in the
form of NDA incentive/sharing of burden. The amount
of scholarship and subsidy is proposed to be enhanced
substantially.
(b) 80% funding has been provided for meeting the
additionality in respect of salaries and pension consequent
upon acceptance of recommendations of the Sixth Central
Pay Commission. Proposal has been initiated to increase
this amount of 80% to 100%.
(c) Letters at the level of RRM have been regularly issued
to the Chief Ministers and Members of Parliament to
provide funds for better infrastructural facilities of the
Sainik Schools.
(d) While it is felt that taking over the Sainik Schools by the
Centre on the pattern of Kendriya Vidyalayas might not
be viable because it would tend to lessen the involvement
and commitment of the State Governments to these
institutions, at the same time it is reiterated that the Centre
is actively considering certain amendments to the scheme
whereby it would contribute more funds in certain key
areas to facilitate the improved running of these schools
without diluting the responsibility of the State
Government towards them”.
30. While noting that the administration of Sainik Schools is
ailing from variety of maladies the Committee had consistently been
recommending that entire funding of all Sainik Schools should be
made by the Central Government on the pattern of Kendriya Vidyalaya/
Navodaya Vidyalaya. Instead of taking the desired action on the
suggested lines, the Ministry has chosen not to agree to the
recommendation of the Committee on the pretext that Sainik Schools
are conceived as joint venture of the Central Government and State
Governments. The Committee again emphasize that the Sainik Schools
are facing various problems which include lack of financial support
from the State Governments. As such there is an urgent need to
implement the aforesaid recommendation of the Committee particularly
18

when these schools are very important for the Defence services which
are facing acute shortage of officers and PBORs. The Committee while
reiterating their earlier recommendations would like the Ministry to
change the funding pattern of the Sainik Schools on the line of Kendriya
Vidyalayas/Navodaya Vidyalayas and entire funding of all Sainik
Schools should be made by the Central Government.
I. One Rank One Pension (OROP)
Recommendations (Para No. 19)
31. The Committee had recommended as under:—
“The Committee notes that the Ex-servicemen are demanding OROP
for a long time which is being denied by the Government on one
pretext or the other. This year, Finance Minister in his Budget Speech
mentioned about a Committee headed by Cabinet Secretary on the
issue, which submitted its report on 30.06.09.This Committee made
recommendations to substantially improve the pensionary benefits
of pre-1.1.2006 Personnel Below Officer Rank (PBOR) which have
also been accepted by the Government. The Ministry has further
clarified that the said Committee has not recommended OROP
formula. As regards the status of implementation of the
recommendations made by the Committee, the Ministry has
informed that two of the recommendations stand implemented with
the issuance of letter dated 30.10.09 with regard to OROP. The
Committee would like to recommend that all recommendations
made by the aforesaid Committee should be implemented
expeditiously. Besides, the Committee may like to emphasize that
OROP is the long over due demand of the ex-servicemen. Even
after implementation of recommendations of the 6th CPC, the
demand of OROP still persists.
The Committee have repeatedly been recommending to accept the
aforesaid demand of ex-servicemen in their reports. In this regard,
the Committee again emphasize that the government should
consider the issue of One Rank One Pension afresh in case of officers
as well as PBORs, so that the Officers and PBORs who have served
the nation with a pride, lead a dignified retired life.”
32. The Ministry in its action taken reply, has stated as under:—
“After the report of the 6th CPC was accepted by the Government
the matter regarding One Rank One Pension was examined in the
light of the observations/recommendations made by various
19

Committees/Commissions which did not recommend the demand
of OROP. The matter was taken up with the Ministry of Law. Relying
on the judgment of Supreme Court in the case of D.S. Nakara,
[1983(2)SCR 165], K.L. Rathi [SLJ 1997(3)/2007] and All India Ex-
servicemen League (AIR 1991 SC 1182), Ministry of Law did not
recommend the demand of OROP.
On the directions of PMO, a Committee was set up under the
Chairmanship of Secretary to look into the issue of OROP and
other related matters. After a series of meetings, the Committee
submitted its report on 30.6.09.
After considering all aspects of the issue, the Committee did not
find it administratively feasible to recommend OROP as such.
However, keeping in mind the spirit of the demand several other
recommendations to substantially improve pensionary benefits of
PBORs and Commissioned Officers have been made, which have
been accepted by the Government.
(i) Inclusion of classification Allowance for PBOR from 1.1.2006.
(ii) Removal of linkage of full pension with 33 years from 1.1.2006.
(iii)Revision of Lt. General pension after carving out a separate
pay scale for them.
(iv) Bringing parity between pension of pre and post 10.10.97
PBOR pensioners.
(v) Further improving PBOR pensions based on award of GOM
2006.
(vi) Broad banding percentage of disability/war injury pensions
for pre-1.1.2006 disability/war injury pensioners.
(vii) Removal of cap on war injury element of pension in the case
of disabled pensioners belonging to Category E.
These are in various stages of implementation.”
33. The Committee find that ex-servicemen are demanding One
Rank One Pension which implies that uniform pension be paid to the
Armed Forces personnel retiring in the same rank with the same length
of service irrespective of their date of retirement and any future
enhancement in the rates of pension to be automatically passed on to
the past pensioners. In this context the Ministry has informed that
after the report of the 6th CPC was accepted by the Government the
matter regarding One Rank One Pension was examined in the light
20

of the observations/recommendations made by various Committees/
Commissions which did not recommend the demand of OROP. The
matter was taken up with the Ministry of Law. Relying on the judgment
of Supreme Court in the case of D.S. Nakara, [1983(2)SCR 165],
K. L. Rathi [SLJ 1997(3)/2007] and All India Ex-servicemen League (AIR
1991 SC 1182), Ministry of Law did not recommend the demand of
OROP. From the aforesaid position, the Committee conclude that One
Rank One Pension has not been accepted by the Government. However,
the pensionary benefits of ex-servicemen including disabled ex-
servicemen have considerably been improved by implementation of
seven recommendations of the Committee. The Committee still
recommend that the Government should implement One Rank One
Pension in a holistic manner so that large number of ex-servicemen
can be benefitted. The Government should also ensure that the various
benefits provided to the ex-servicemen due to implementation of the
recommendation of the Committee headed by the Cabinet Secretary
along, with the arrears if any, are paid expeditiously.
J. Pension to war widows and disabled soldiers
Recommendation (Para No. 21)
34. The Committee had recommended as under:—
“The Committee are unhappy to note that the Ministry has not
maintained any data with regard to widows of the soldiers who
had laid down their lives and disabled pensioners, who had lost
their limbs to safeguard the nation, even though certain benefits
are being provided to them. The Committee desire that the
Government should seriously look into this aspect and maintain
a centralized data of these categories. Besides, there is an urgent
need to disseminate the information about the benefits being given
to the war widows and disabled pensioners, particularly when they
are the most vulnerable lot and there may be a possibility that the
benefits announced may not trickle down to them due to lack of
access to information. The Committee are of the opinion that to
update the data regarding war widows and disabled pensioners,
the Ministry can take the help of respective Regimental Centers
and Pension Payment Order Records.
The Committee further note that various benefits are being provided
to pre-1.1.2006 and post-1.1.2006 cases of disabled pensioners.
However, in calculating pension of disabled pensioners, there is an
element of disparity between the two. While the pre-1.1.2006 are
getting a fixed amount, the post-1.1.2006 retirees are getting it
21

@30% of emoluments last drawn. The Committee, therefore, would
like to recommend that the pre-1.1.2006 retirees may also be given
disability pension at the revised rates as recommended by the 6th
CPC and accepted by the Government of India.
The Committee are also of the opinion that for the purposes of
disability pension and other related benefits any type of injury
sustained in performance of duty by any military personnel may
be treated at par with war injury.”
35. The Ministry in its action taken reply, has stated as under:—
“Para 21 highlights following 3 parts:
(i) of maintaining centralized data in regard to war disabled
pensioners and widows by the regimental centres.
(ii)Pre-1.1.2006 disabled retirees may also be given disability
pension at the revised rates as recommended by 6th
CPC in r/o post-1.1.2006 disabled retirees.
(iii)For the purpose of disability pension and other related
benefits, any type of injury sustained in performance of
duty by any military personnel may be treated at par
with war injury.
2. The position is as under:
(i) Action is in progress for getting the data of disabled/war
disabled.
(ii)The matter regarding provision of modified parity to the
1.1.2006 disability pensioners at the maximum of the pre-
revised pay scales is also under consideration.
(iii)Since injury sustained during war has a special
connotation for the individual who makes supreme
sacrifice of his life during war or war-like situation, it
cannot be equated with injury suffered during normal
performance of duty. It is likely to dampen the morale
of the Armed Forces personnel going on the war-front.
In view of the position, part of the recommendation of the Hon’ble
Committee is not acceptable to that extent.”
36. The Committee do not accept the logic of the Ministry in
regard to unequal treatment of soldiers sustaining injury while
performing duty and war injury for the purpose of disability pension
22

and other related benefits as it is likely to dampen the morale of the
Armed forces personnel going on the war front.
Rather, the Committee strongly feel that waiving of the present
disparity will motivate the young talented aspirants to join the Armed
forces which will be helpful in minimizing the existing shortage of
manpower in the armed forces and will attract talents. Therefore, the
Committee desire the Ministry to reconsider the issue and take the
desired action.
K. Lateral Induction of Ex-servicemen
Recommendation (Para No. 22)
37. The Committee had recommended as under:—
“The Committee in their earlier reports had observed that lateral
induction of Ex-servicemen in Central Para Military Forces which
will not only provide the employment opportunities to retiring
armed forces personnel, but would also keep the army young and
also Central and State Governments will be benefitted by trained
and disciplined manpower. However, despite the recommendation
of the Committee for recognizing the need for lateral induction of
Ex-servicemen in Central Para Military Forces/Central Police
Organisations, Public Sector Banks and other Undertakings, the
Government have not felt the need for any action on the issue. In
its latest reply, the Ministry has stated that the issue is still under
consideration and consultations are on with Ministry of Home
Affairs. The Committee reiterate their earlier recommendation for
lateral induction of Ex-servicemen into Central Para Military Forces/
Central Police Organisations and State Police Forces, Public Sector
Banks and PSUs in State and Centre and desire that the issue should
be decided at the earliest without any further loss of time. The
Committee also desire that the Government should take all the
initiatives to ensure that each and every armed forces personnel,
who retire at younger age get suitable re-employment in the
Government/private sector.”
38. The Ministry in its action taken reply, has stated as under:—
“The Central and State Governments provide a number of
concessions to Ex-servicemen (ESM) for their re-employment in
23

Central/State Government Departments. These include reservation
of posts/relaxation in age and educational qualifications, exemption
from payment of application/examination fees and priority in
employment to the disabled ESM and dependants of deceased
service personnel on compassionate grounds.
2. As regard the resettlement of ESM, Persistent efforts of the
Department with the dual aim of increasing awareness
amongst the Corporate Sector on the availability of valuable
human resources in Ex-Servicemen and enhance job
opportunities for ESM in Corporate/Private Sector have borne
fruits with major demands now coming up from the Corporate
Sector/PSUs.
3. Apart from the above, the Government has formulated several
Self-employment ventures for rehabilitation and resettlement
of Ex-servicemen and their families. The Self-employment
schemes are as follows:—
(i) Allotment of Army Surplus Vehicles
(ii) Coal Tipper Scheme
(iii)Allotment of Oil Product Agency
(iv) Mother Dairy Milk Booths and Fruit and Vegetable (Safal)
shops
(v) Management of CNG Station by ESM (Officers) in NCR
(vi) Management of Toll Plaza under NHAI
4. The issue of lateral transfer of army personnel into Central
Paramilitary Forces (CPMFs) has been under correspondence
with Ministry of Home Affairs. The issue is yet to be
resolved.”
39. The Committee are distressed to not that despite its
several recommendations from time to time and GoMs Report in
‘Reforming National Security System in 2001, highlighting the
advantages of lateral induction of ex-servicemen into Central Para
Military Forces’, the issues are yet to be resolved in consultation with
the Ministry of Home Affairs.
24

In view of the savings to be accrued in terms of Finance,
training, expertise and precious time by re-employment of young retired
soldiers, the Committee desire the Ministry to expedite the matter to
resolve the lateral induction of ex-servicemen in Central Para Military
Forces, Public Sector Banks and Undertakings and State Police
Departments.
L. Squadron strength for Indian Air Force
Recommendation (Para No. 31)
40. The Committee had recommended as under:—
“The Committee note that Indian Air Force needs 42 fighter
squadrons for achieving strategic balance on both the fronts viz.
China and Pakistan. In this regard only 35 squadrons out of the
required strength of 42 have so far been planned to be raised and
that too upto 12th Plan i.e. by 2017. The Committee have been
informed that as an interim measure, four pronged strategy has
been proposed which includes upgradation and life extension of
the existing fleet, inductions of force multipliers and additional
combat and squadrons. From the data made available to the
Committee with regard to accidents of aircraft of Indian Air Force,
the Committee find that 68 category 1 accidents have taken place
during the last five years. The percentage of accidents due to
technical defects, human failure and bird hit during this period are
27.94 and 36.76 (64.7%) per cent respectively. In view of the position
of accidents of air force aircraft, the Committee strongly feel that
the strategy of life extension of existing fleet need a relook. Life
extension of fighter aircraft should not go beyond a certain years
and not more than one life extension be recommended.
It is needless to point out that depleted strength of squadrons in
Air Force is a matter of serious concern from the point of view
of national security. As per the planning of Air Force, 35 squadrons
are to be raised by 2017. Keeping in view the aforesaid position,
the Committee feel that the required strength of 42 squadrons would
take another decade. It is a matter of serious concern particularly
in view of the prevailing situation around our borders. As such
the Committee strongly recommend that all the steps should be
25

taken so that the required strength of squadrons is available
expeditiously and the required allocations should be provided.”
41. The Ministry in its action taken reply, has stated as under:—
“The Government is fully cognizant of the imperative need to
modernize the Air Force and augment its operational capabilities.
The IAF is presently in the process of augmenting and modernizing
its fleet by development and procurement of various aircraft
including Medium Multi Role Combat Aircraft, the indigenous Light
Combat Aircraft, Airborne Warning and Control System Aircraft
and Fifth Generation Fighter Aircraft. It is also upgrading its existing
aircraft to enhance their combat capabilities.”
42. The Committee note that IAF is presently in the process of
augmenting and modernizing its fleet by development and procurement
of various aircraft to enhance their combat capabilities. Since the
depleted strength of squadrons is a matter of serious concern, the
committee desire the Ministry to complete the task in a time-bound
manner.
M. Modernization of Air Fields
Recommendation (Para No. 32)
43. The Committee had recommended as under:—
“The Committee observe that modernization of 56 airfields is being
undertaken in two Phases. Phase I is presently at the stage of
commercial negotiations and is expected to be executed in 42 months
from the date of signing of contract. Commencement of Phase II
will be dovetailed with the completion of Phase I. The Committee
further note that at present 8 airfields do not have electrical lighting
facilities as no regular night operations are undertaken from those
airbases. On completion of modernization of airfields infrastructure
as proposed to be taken under Phase I and II, all the airfields will
have lighting system to facilitate the night landing. As Air Force
requires airfields from strategic point of view, the Committee
emphasize that commercial negotiations for Phase I and Phase II
projects be completed expeditiously. The Committee should be kept
apprised about the progress made in this regard”.
26

44. The Ministry in its action taken reply, has stated as under:—
“The proposal for modernization of air fields is being progressed
as per the Defence Procurement Procedure 2006 and is presently
at the Contract Negotiations stage”.
45. The Committee desire the Ministry to fix a prescribed time
limit for modernization of Airfields and strictly adhere to that time
schedule.
27

CHAPTER II
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS, WHICH HAVE BEEN
ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT
Recommendation (Para No. 1)
In Budget Estimates 2009-10, the Ministry of Defence have been
allocated Rs. 1,41,703 crores (net) for Defence Services and Departments
comprising Rs. 86879.00 crores under Revenue and Rs. 54824.00 crores
under Capital Outlay. The demands were laid in Lok Sabha on 7 July,
2009. The Demands have already been passed by the Parliament. This
year being the election year, the budget was presented to Parliament on
7 July, 2009 and Demands were passed without the same being referred
to the concerned Departmentally Related Standing Committees after
suspension of Rule 331G of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of
Business in Lok Sabha. However, as per the ruling of the Chair in
Lok Sabha, the Demands have been referred to the Standing Committee
for examination and report.
In the aforesaid background, the Committee in this report have
inter-alia analysed the position of outlay and expenditure in the context
of examination of Demands for Grants (2009-10).
Reply of the Government
This para does not contain any actionable point or recommendation
and, therefore, no action is called for.
Recommendation (Para No. 2)
The Committee note that the Defence outlay (BE) for the year 2009-10,
is of Rs. 141703 crore against the projections of Rs. 154156.42 crore thus
leaving a gap of Rs. 12453.42 crore between the projections and Budget
Estimates. If the BE of the current year is compared to the RE of the
previous year i.e.2008-09, the increase is to the tune of Rs. 27503 crore.
Looking at the defence expenditure in absolute term, the data provided
by the Ministry indicates that it has increased from Rs. 35278 crore during
the year 1997-98 to Rs. 141703 crore during the year 2009-10. With regard
to the position of defence expenditure as percentage of Central
Government expenditure, it was 17.81 per cent during the year 1988-89.
28

It has gradually declined over the years and the lowest is 12.72 per cent
in the year 2008-09. For the year 2009-10, it has slightly been increased
to 13.88 per cent. In terms of defence expenditure as percentage of GDP,
it was highest during the year 1988-89 and then declined over the years.
It was lowest as 1.94 per cent during the year 2007-08 and subsequently
increased to 2.15 per cent during the year 2008-09 and 2.42 per cent
during the current year. The Ministry feel that the co-relation of defence
expenditure with GDP is just an indexation and has no bearing on defence
preparedness. The Ministry further seem to be contended with the growth
of the defence budget in absolute terms. The Committee strongly feel
that while comparing the data of different years, the rate of inflation also
need to be taken into account. More so, the defence budget as percentage
of the overall Government spending and GDP are the true indicators of
the growth of the defence budget. The recent Mumbai attack has given
an entirely new dimension to the security scenario and defence
preparedness. There are big challenges before the country and the
declining share of defence as percentage of GDP as well as total
Government expenditure are a matter of concern. The Committee strongly
recommend that the adequate outlay should be provided for the defence
sector.
The Committee during the course of examination of the Demands
for Grants had desired to be apprised about the comparative data of
different countries, terms of their defence expenditure as percentage of
Government expenditure as well as percentage of GDP share. In this
regard, the Ministry has furnished the data for the years 2004-05 and
2005-06. When asked to comment on the non-availability of the latest
data, the Ministry has apprised that generally data on defence expenditure
is compiled by various NGOs and institutions. Because of the enormity
of efforts and the difficulties involved in gathering the data, the
information for the current or the preceding year is generally not available
even in the publications brought out by these organizations. The
Committee’s further examination of the issue has revealed that the data
for the year 2008-09 is available on the World Bank website data
finder.worldbank.org. The Committee are concerned to note that the
Ministry was unable to provide the information particularly when the
same was available on the internet. This explains the casual attitude of
the Ministry in furnishing the desired information to the Committee.
Even otherwise also, the Ministry being unaware of the various parameters
of the defence allocations in other countries is not appreciated by the
Committee. The Committee would like the Ministry to have the system
of maintaining updated information about the day to day happenings
in the world about the defence preparedness in different countries.
29

Reply of the Government
The observation/recommendation of the Committee was referred
to the Ministry of Finance on 31.12.2009 with the request that it may be
kept in view while finalizing the budgetary ceilings for 2010-11 and the
subsequent years.
As regards the observation that the Committee would like the
Ministry to have the system of maintaining updated information about
the day to day happenings in the world about the defence preparedness
in different countries, it is submitted that the Services do carry out analyses
of the capabilities of our friends and adversaries. Defence Planning is
based on threat perception and the capabilities required to meet those
threats, which are then converted into specific acquisition/modernization
programmes. The requirement of funds is assessed on the basis of these
programmes and the revenue expenditure required for maintaining the
force levels, infrastructure and manpower.
Headquarters Integrated Defence Staff has been tasked to maintain
data pertaining to defence expenditure of various countries. This
would henceforth be regularly monitored in the Ministry of Defence.
Information on other matters relating to defence preparedness of different
countries is also being regularly monitored by Armed Forces
Headquarters/MoD.
Recommendation (Para No. 13)
The Committee find that the outlay provided at BE stage for Army
for the year 2009-10 is Rs. 76117.23 crore which includes Rs. 58097.29
crore as revenue and Rs. 18019.94 crore as capital outlay. The projections
in this regard were for Rs. 83284.84 crore which comprised of Rs. 61704.07
crore for revenue and Rs. 21580.77 crore for capital. For the Revenue
Section, the percentage of allocations against projections is 94.15 per cent,
whereas for the Capital Section it is 83.50 per cent. The Committee find
that during the year 2008-09, outlay amounting to Rs. 49228.23 crore was
provided. During the Revised Estimates stage the outlay was increased
to Rs. 59058.57 crore. The actual expenditure was Rs. 57667.91 crore.
Thus, during the previous year, Rs. 1381.66 crore remained unspent. There
is enhancement of Rs. 17058.66 crore, if the BE of 2009-10 is compared
to RE of the previous year. The enhancement is primarily to meet the
impact of the Sixth Pay Commission’s recommendations. The average
revenue capital ratio of the total Defence Budget during the Eleventh
Plan is 74:26 against 64:36 during the Tenth Plan. In the case of Army
for the year 2009-10, the revenue capital ratio is 76:24. The Committee
note that for the capital expenditure of the Army, the ratio during the
30

current year is even lesser than the overall average percentage provided
for the Defence Budget. From the information provided by the Ministry,
the Committee note that in the current plan, the aim is to procure modern
medium guns, Ultra Light Howitzers, Tracked and Wheeled Self Propelled
guns, Multiple Barrel Long Range Rocket Systems, Cruise Missiles and
Surveillance Systems. The Committee are of the firm view that, the country
cannot afford compromises with regard to modernization programme of
the Army. As such there is an urgent need to provide adequate outlay
under the Capital Section. The revenue and capital ratio for the Army
should be corrected so that capital outlay at any cost is not lesser than
the overall capital average of the total Defence Budget so as to enable
the Ministry to implement the modernization plan efficiently.
Reply of the Government
The concern of the Parliament Standing Committee is well
appreciated. However, it is submitted that although the proportion of the
capital expenditure may be 24%, the modernization process of the army
is in no way compromised. A large portion of the revenue expenditure
constitutes salary and allowances. The Indian Army, being a manpower
intensive force, it is natural that the revenue budget would be huge. The
revenue budget has gone up further due to revision in the salary and
allowances as a result of the implementation of the recommendations of
the Sixth Pay Commission. In addition to this, a number of small weapons
and equipment, and also consumable stores/ammunitions are procured
under the revenue budget.
The five year Army Plans incorporate the weapons and equipment
that the Army would procure over the next five years and annually.
Based on these procurement plans, the BE is projected for a financial
year. Although, the proportion of the capital budget was only 24% of the
total Army budget; in figures, the allocation to capital expenditure was
Rs. 18,019.94 crore for 2009-10. As per the Army Plan, under which the
modernization of the Army is taking place, this amount is considered
sufficient to meet the annual requirements of the Army for its
modernisation. However, as stated earlier, the ratio of revenue to capital
budget has become skewed towards the revenue side, due to hike in the
salary and allowances of the personnel.
Recommendation (Para No. 14)
From the data provided by the Ministry, the Committee note that
present strength of Army officers is 35131 against the sanctioned strength
of 46614. Thus, there is a shortage of 11483 officers which is approximately
24 per cent of the sanctioned strength. The Committee find that a lot of
31

initiatives are being taken by the Ministry to attract talented youth to
join Armed Forces. As recommended by A.V. Singh Committee report,
all officers including Short Service Commission officers are now eligible
for substantive promotion to the rank of Captain, Major and Lt. Colonel
after 2,6 and 13 years of service respectively. Besides a total of 754 posts
of Lt. Colonel have been upgraded to Colonel rank. In addition, the
tenure of SSC officers has also been extended from 10 years to 14 years.
With regard to creating awareness among the youth, a lot of initiatives
are being undertaken by the Ministry as informed during the course of
examination of Demands for Grants. The Committee note that all the
aforesaid initiatives being taken by the Ministry are in the right direction
and should be continued. The Committee feel that with substantial
improvement in pay and structure of officers of armed forces after
implementation of Sixth Pay Commission recommendations, army would
certainly be a favoured career option for the youth. Besides, the Committee
also feel that there is an urgent need to undertake survey to find out
the inhibitions of the youth to join the Armed Forces. Once the reasons
for not joining the Armed Forces are known, the corrective action can
be taken to make the Armed Forces as an attractive option for the talented
youth. The action on the suggested lines should be taken and the
Committee be informed accordingly.
Reply of the Government
The Ministry has been continuously taking steps to address the
issue of shortages of officers. Important steps already taken in this regard
include implementation of recommendations of AV Singh Committee
report (phase I). Where by all officers including Short Service
Commissioned officers are now eligible for substantive promotion to the
rank of Captain, Major and Lt. Col. after 2, 6 and 13 years of reckonable
service, upgradation of a total of 750 posts of Lieutenant Colonels to
Colonel’s rank, reduction in the qualifying service required for promotion
as Colonel to 15 years as against 20 years earlier, increase of the tenure
of SSC officers from 10 to 14 years, upgradation of a total of 1896 additional
posts in the ranks of Colonel, Brigadier, Major General and Lieutenant
General (and equivalent) in the three Services towards implementation
of AV Singh Committee report (phase II), implementation of the
recommendations of the VI Central Pay Commission with substantial
improvements in the pay structure of officers of Armed Forces etc. These
measures will go a long way to make service in the Armed Forces more
attractive which will contribute towards reduction in shortages.
2. Ministry of Defence have further gone into the issue of addressing
Shortage of officers in the Armed Forces in its entirety. A Multi pronged
approach has been adopted for addressing the entire gamut of issues
32

involved. It is a continuous process and is being monitored on a regular
basis.
3. However, as suggested by the Committee, steps have been
initiated for undertaking a survey on the interest of the youth in joining
the Armed Forces.
Recommendation (Para No. 15)
From the data made available by the Ministry, the Committee note
that the authorisation of Bullet Proof Jackets (BPJs) is 3,53,765, while the
deficiency is 1,86,138 units. The Ministry has also stated that the approval
of Defence Acquisition Council (DAC) has been obtained on 19.10.2009
for purchase of 1,86,138 BPJs during the Eleventh Plan. The BPJs will be
procured as ‘Buy Indian’ from sources producing indigenously at the
cost of Rs. 50,000 per unit. The Committee are surprised to note the fact
that a deficiency of 1,86,138 BPJs still exists, which is risking the life of
as many soldiers. The Committee desire that such important life saving
items should be purchased through fast track procedures and quality
control should strictly be observed so that precious life of trained soldiers
may not be lost for lack of BPJs.
2. The Committee also note that as per the latest General Staff
Qualitative Requirement (GSQR), the weight of BPJs ranges from 10.5 Kg
to 11.5 Kg, which seems to very heavy as the soldier has to carry this
weight in addition to the regular items, which will affect his agility and
mobility in war like situations as well as during counter insurgency
operations in unfriendly terrains and mountainous region etc. Therefore,
the Committee desire that the Government should try to procure light
weight BPJs from Indian/International market. The Committee also desire
that other likewise items which are essential to save a soldier’s life, should
be identified and procured without any further loss of time.
Reply of the Government
Briefly it is brought out that in March 04, quantity 3,53,765 Bullet
Proof Jackets (BPJs) were authorized to Indian Army. Upto January, 2006
quantity 2,35,624 BPJs were procured on need basis. Subsequently, in
May 2009, Infantry Directorate formulated the revised General Staff
Qualitative Requirements (GSQR) for BPJs. Based on revised GSQR,
approval by the Defence Acquisition Council (DAC) has been obtained
in October 2009 for procurement of quantity 3,53,765 BPJs with quantity
1,86,168 BPJs to be procured in the 11th Army Plan. Presently, vetting
of Request for Proposal (RFP) is in progress. Same will be issued to
Indian vendors shortly and the procurement is likely to fructify soon.
33

2. Fast Track Procedure (FTP) is invoked for procurement of
equipment of operational urgency wherein extensive trials are not required
to be carried out. However, in this case, as the numbers are large, it is
considered essential to have extensive trials prior to induction of the
equipment. However, to meet the immediate requirement of BPJs for
Quick Reaction Teams (Ghatak), quantity 8232 is being procured through
FTP.
3. Regarding the Committee’s concern about the BPJs being very
heavy, it is informed that the soldiers in field are exposed to various
kinds of operational environment. With the varying operational
environment, the threat level also varies from low to high. Changing
threat level ensures different kinds of protection level for a soldier. The
proposed design of BPJ, which is under procurement, encompasses the
various levels of protection that a soldier requires under various
threat levels. The proposed modular natured BPJ can be configured as
per the threat levels envisaged and protection level required by the
soldiers.
4. The various kinds of Threat levels configuration and protection
levels are listed in the following table:—
Sl Threat Confi- Components Protection Against
No. Level guration
1. Low 1 Basic Complete Jacket with 9x19 mm parabellum
trauma pad to include (KF) fired from 9mm
all round Soft Armour SAF Carbine (Indian)
Panel (SAP) including at 05 metre/MP 5
front, sides, back, from 05 metre.
collar and neck.
2. Low 2 Upgrade 1Including Hard Armour 7.62 mm x 39 mm
Plate (HAP) for front mild steel core
and sides. ammunition of AK-47
from 10 metre.
3. Medium Upgrade 2 Additional one HAP in
rear.
4. High Upgrade 3 Additional Upper Arm SAP as per Sl.No. 1
SAP, Groin Hard and HAP as per
Armour Plate (HAP) Sl.No. 2 and 3 above.
and Throat HAP.
5. The maximum weight of the BPJ when all the components are
worn ranges from 10.5 kgs. to 11.5 kgs (depending on the size of the BPJ).
However, if the threat level is Low1 as given in the table above, the
weight of BPJ under procurement will be much lesser (less than 4 Kgs.)
34

as compared to the existing BPJ which is of 6.62 Kgs. The proposed BPJ
is mission specific, modular in nature, provides maximum protection,
ergonomically designed, snug fit and user friendly.
6. Thus, it can be seen that the weight of the BPJ is incremental
from less than 4 Kgs to a maximum of 11.5 Kgs, based on level of threat.
The soldier is not required to wear the BPJ at its maximum weight under
low threat levels.
Recommendation (Para No. 18)
During the year 2008-09, Rs. 74 crore were provided at BE stage
for Central procurement of retention clothing, life cycle items and tentage
with accessories. Due to emergent requirements, an additional requirement
of Rs. 10 crore were projected at RE stage. As such, Rs. 84 crore were
available during the year 2008-09 for the aforesaid items. The utilization
status as informed to the Committee is just Rs. 41 crore thus leaving
Rs. 43 crore as unspent. The Committee have further been apprised that
reduction in training period from 3 to 2 years from the training year
2007-08 resulted in an increase in the requirement of clothing for approx.
90,000 cadets. As such the projections were retained at RE stage and
additional allocation of Rs. 12 crore were also provided for local purchase.
The Committee are unhappy to note that even when the amount was
increased at RE stage, the Ministry failed to utilize the outlay effectively,
the reason being non-processing of orders for retention clothing items
due to change over from the procedure of Central Government to rate
contract system and also due to delay in finalization of rate contracts.
Another reason given for under utilization of outlay is non-acceptance
of counter offered rates by the vendors with regard to a few life cycle
items and tentage with accessories. The Committee conclude that due to
certain procedural problems, the Ministry failed to utilize the allocated
amount. Not only that, the additional intake of NCC cadets have been
deprived of the uniforms and other clothing items. All these explains
inefficiency on the part of the Ministry with regard to an important issue.
While expressing unhappiness over the way the Ministry has acted, the
Committee would like to emphasize that the remaining retention clothing
items should be purchased without any further delay.
Reply of the Government
Supply Orders worth Rs. 23.53 crore (approximately) for retention
clothing items were placed in September/October, 2009 against which
supplies have been materializing. Action for procurement of the remaining
quantity has also been initiated and the remaining supply orders worth
Rs. 40 crore will be placed in the current financial year.
35

2. In addition procurement through local purchase has been resorted
to at the State Directorates level to meet emergent requirements of deficient
retention clothing items to the tune of Rs. 10 crore (approximately) based
on the availability of funds.
3. The directions of the Committee have been noted for future
compliance. It is emphasized that in future procurements, it will be our
endeavour to utilize the allotted budget.
Recommendation (Para No. 23)
The Committee note that main consumer of Ordnance Factories
products is the army and as stated by the Secretary, Defence Production,
the Ordnance Factories are not authorized to sell their production
anywhere else. But in reply to a question regarding exports, the Ministry
of Defence has stated that steps have been taken to increase exports by
making the procedure customer friendly, and by reducing the response
time through electronic transmission of technical data and brochures,
provisions of e-mailable and printable product, Compact Disc and
continuous production promotions in Military Technology magazines etc.
Ordnance Factory Board has been participating in various international
defence exhibitions and is also linked up with an international generic
website. The Committee find that there is contradictions in the statement
made by the Secretary and the information provided in the written note.
The Committee would like the Ministry to clarify the position in this
regard. Besides, the Committee would also like that all the desired
initiatives should be taken so that production capabilities of Ordnance
Factories are utilized to the optimum.
The Committee also note that the budget of Rs. 300 crore has been
allocated for the modernization of Ordnance Factories during the year
2009-10. The Committee feel that Ordnance Factories are highly capital
intensive units and a budget of Rs. 300 crore is not sufficient to modernize
39 Ordnance Factories. Therefore, the Committee desire that the Ministry
should substantially increase the allocation, so that Ordnance Factories
can be modernized and upgraded into vibrant and efficient organisation
and become capable of producing world class products economically for
supply to Indian Armed Forces and to the world market and can earn
foreign exchange too.
The Committee note from the information provided by the Ministry
that there is only one instance of participation by private sector with
Ordnance Factories. The Committee are of the view that Ordnance
Factories should involve private sector in Research and Development
also for joint development and manufacturing of products so that fresh
36

ideas and better management techniques can be learnt from them to
produce state of the art products. The private sector participation can be
a boon due to better reach of private sector to market Ordnance Factory
products internationally.
Reply of the Government
The primary responsibility of Ordnance Factories is to supply arms,
ammunition and other weapon systems to Indian Defence Forces. It is
after meeting the requirement of Indian Defence Forces, there is
any surplus available production capacity then export markets are
explored. The product basket of OFB also consists of some products the
technology for which has been taken from foreign OEMs. There
technologies are transferred by foreign OEMs with restrictions on exports
to other countries.
OFB has worked out a detailed plan for modernization of plant
and machinery during XIth and XIIth plan. It has been planned to invest
Rs. 1707.50 cr. in XI Plan and Rs. 2100 cr. in XII plan. OFB is in continuous
touch with the latest technology providers in the world to make sure that
its manufacturing infrastructure remains upgraded and modernized so
that the organization remains vibrant and efficient and produces world
class products. Ministry is seized of the issue in delay in modernization
of Ordnance Factories. It has been planned to send two teams of officers
to various manufactures of ammunition and explosive in European
Countries to study latest technology and process of production and
manufacturing, latest plant and machinery available the degree of
automation available and use of robotics, implementation for quality
control and process control. These team will make and submit an
integrated plan of modernization after study. Funds as required for
modernization will be made available subject to budgetary provisions
OFB has been procuring raw material, sub assemblies, components etc.
from private sector depending on the nature of requirement. The quantum
of procurement is quite high ranging from 51% to 69%.
Recommendation (Para No. 24)
The Committee note that Indian Navy along with Coast Guard and
other agencies is responsible for safety and security of 7517 Kms. of
coastline and 2.02 million Sq. Kms. of exclusive economic zone. Budgetary
allocations to Navy during the year 2009-10 are Rs. 20604.02 crore which
is comprised of Rs. 8322.11 crore under the Revenue Section and
Rs. 12281.91 crore under the Capital Section. There is gap between the
projected outlay and the allocations provided for the year 2009-10. Under
the Revenue Section, the outlay provided is Rs. 521.80 crore lesser than
37

the projections. Further, under the capital head, such gap is of
Rs. 226.77 crore. With regard to the percentage of naval budget under
Revenue and Capital section, the Committee note that the share of Navy
is declining over the years. Under the Revenue Section during the year
2007-08 and 2008-09, the share of Navy was 12.89 per cent which has
declined to 9.58 per cent during the year 2009-10. Further under the
Capital Section, the said share was 25.19 per cent during the year
2007-08 which declined to 25.17 per cent during 2008-09 and in 2009-10
it has further, been decreased to 22.40 per cent. In respect of percentage
of total budget, Navy has the lowest allocation which is 14.54 per cent
of the total budget. The aforesaid analysis indicates that adequate emphasis
is not being given to the Navy of providing substantial budgetary
allocation.
Another disturbing trend noticed by the Committee while analyzing
the data is that even the reduced allocations are not being effectively
utilized by the Navy. The allocations provided at BE stage are lesser
than the projections. Whatever is being allocated is further reduced at
RE stage and the actuals are also not cent per cent of RE. During the
year 2008-09, BE was for Rs. 19506.77 crore which was reduced by
Rs. 2194 crore at RE stage. Even the reduced allocation could not be fully
utilized and there was under-spending of Rs. 64.76 crore. During the year
2007-08, such under-spending as compared to RE was Rs. 1150.94 crore.
The Committee conclude from the aforesaid scenario that there are serious
problems in execution of various projects. The Committee observe that
after the recent Mumbai terrorist attacks, the questions are being raised
about the effective surveillance on the coastal line. Besides, there are
challenges of providing adequate infrastructure and force level for the
coastal lines surveillance. In view of this, there is an urgent need to
provide adequate outlay in this regard. While recommending for
enhancing the outlay for Navy, the Committee would also like that the
Ministry has to review the position with regard to utilization of outlay
and take corrective actions to increase the capacity so that the outlay is
effectively utilized.
Reply of the Government
1. The Allocation of funds is made after careful consideration
of the requirements projected by the three Services. Due importance
is given to the Navy for budgetary allocation based on its
requirement.
2. Every effort is made for complete utilization of finds allotted
in a Financial Year. Utilization of the Naval Budget is reviewed
regularly at the highest levels in the Service Headquarters and the
38

Ministry of defence. The requirement of funds is rationalized at various
Budgetary Review Stages (ER/MAR) based upon the actual progress of
the schemes/projects. Budgetary projections were reduced at the RE stage
in Financial Year 2007-08 and 2008-09 under the Capital Budget due to
delays/slippages in the progress of New Schemes that were targeted for
contract conclusion.
3. With reference to post 26/11 actions, Navy’s efforts are being
supplemented by Coast Guard. The Coastal security is being addressed
by an integrated approach adopted by Navy, Coast Guard, Ministry of
Shipping, Ministry of Home Affairs and Ministry of Agriculture. Thus
necessary infrastructure is being funded by other Ministries also.
Recommendation (Para No. 25)
The Committee have been informed that there is a shortage of
1512 officers in Indian Navy and various initiatives are being taken for
making good the shortage of officers. Such initiatives include vigorous
recruitment drive and image projection campaigns. While noting
that these steps are in the right direction, the Committee emphasize
that Indian Navy should be projected as better career option to the
adventurous youth of the country. Besides the recruitment and training
facilities for officers/sailors in Navy and Coast Guard should be
integrated so that the training infrastructure available with them is
optimally utilized.
Reply of the Government
1. The Committee has been informed that the Indian Navy has
taken various actions to attract the youth to join Indian Navy viz. focused
publicity in several institutions and launched an Image Projection
Campaign (IPC) through TV advertisements, internet, hoardings etc.
Besides, one additional Services Selection Board (SSB) at Diamond
Harbour has been approved and new entry schemes for induction of
officers have been introduced.
2. Indian Navy is pursuing the ‘Image Projection Campaign’
continuously for the last two years and it is proposed to continue it
during 2009-10 also. The Image Projection Campaign generally focuses
the career options available in Indian Navy with the inherent spirit of
patriotism and adventure.
3. The training facilities of Indian Navy and Coast Guard are already
integrated as Coast Guard does not have separate training infrastructure
for their officers and yantriks.
39

Recommendation (Para No. 26)
The Committee note that Defence Acquisition Council on 25.3.2003
had directed that the Navy should not let the force level fall below
140 ships. In this regard, the existing force level of ships is 130 only. To
fulfil the gap of the required and the existing strength, the Committee
have been informed that the shortfall is being partially mitigated by
extending the life of suitable platform through a Mid Life Upgrade (MLU).
In this regard formal sanction for MLU of 23 ships and one submarine
has been obtained and the ships are in various stages of upgradation.
The Committee have also been informed that a detailed plan for induction
of ships has been outlined in the MCPP (2005-2022). Besides, there are
a number of ships/submarines that are under construction in various
Indian/foreign shipyards. In addition, a number of proposals for
acquisition of ships/submarines are at various stages of processing as per
the Defence Procurement Procedure (DPP) 2008. The Committee take
note of the shortage of the ships and submarines seriously and would
like to recommend that all efforts should be made to expedite the
acquisition/construction of the ships/submarines so that at least the existing
fleet of ships/submarines do not fall below the minimum required level.
Reply of the Government
Modernisation of the Indian Navy and review of the existing
Force Level is an ongoing process. This is based on capabilities to be
achieved, prevailing security environment, threat perceptions, emerging
technologies and availability of funds. The Navy has formulated the
Maritime Capability Perspective Plan which follows a Capabilities
Dominant and Mission Based approach. The long-term, short-term and
annual plans for modernisation are reviewed and monitored regularly
at the highest levels in Service Headquarters and the MoD.
Recommendation (Para No. 27)
The Committee in the earlier reports had strongly been emphasizing
on meeting the need of minimum three aircraft carriers, one each for the
Eastern and Western coast and the third one to address the maintenance/
repair needs of the other two carriers. With regard to existing position,
the country has only one aircraft carrier INS Viraat that too was to be
decommissioned in 2008. However, since the acquisition of Ex-Admiral
Gorshkov was being delayed and the other aircraft carrier was under
construction at Cochin Shipyard Ltd., the functioning of the INS Viraat
has been extended till 2012. Keeping in view the security scenario in the
country, the Committee note that the existing state of affairs is of serious
concern. The Committee again strongly recommend that the completion
40

of construction of aircraft carrier at Cochin Shipyard Ltd. should be
completed expeditiously by providing all the required allocations. Besides,
the issue related to Ex-Admiral Gorshkov project for automatic transfer
of upgraded technology without liability of additional royalty payment,
wherever applicable, should be settled with the Russian side during the
negotiations so that the delivery acceptance of the ship is not further
delayed beyond the scheduled date i.e. December, 2012.
Reply of the Government
1. The progress of construction of the Aircraft Carrier at M/s Cochin
Shipyard Limited (CSL), Kochi, is being monitored by Empowered Apex
Committee (EAC) headed by Defence Secretary. Since, an Aircraft carrier
is being constructed for the first time in India, numerous issues of
integration, ordering of complex equipment etc. are being addressed by
the EAC. All efforts are being made to ensure delivery of the ship by
Dec. 2014. Fund allocations are being made as per requirements projected
by CSL.
2. The issue regarding inbuilt provision for transfer of upgraded
technology was discussed with the Russian Side during the recently
concluded contract negotiations regarding the Admiral Gorshkov Project.
After discussions, an Article has been included in the Supplementary Agreement
to Repair & Re-equipping Contract of the Gorshkov Project which
stipulates that “The SUPPLIER shall regularly provide information to
the Customer on change, safety, and upgradation of the Aircraft Carrier
equipment to facilitate upgradation of the equipment.”
Recommendation (Para No. 28)
The Committee during the course of examination of Demands for
Grants have been apprised about the details of the achievements made
by the Joint Staff which includes Setting up of Joint Committee,
Formulation of Joint Doctrines, Defence Space Vision 2020, Formulation
of LTIPP (2002-2017), Synchronization of Services 11th Defence Plan with
the DRDO, Plan-Forwarded to DRDO in May 2007, Joint Intelligence
Assessment — Shared with JIC and Three Services, and Establishment
of INDU. With regard to the allocation of outlay for the Joint Staff, the
Committee note that during the year 2008-09, Rs. 489.03 crore were
allocated at BE state. The allocation was enhanced to Rs. 669.03 crore at
RE state. However, during the year 2009-10 the allocation provided is
Rs. 619.55 crore which is Rs. 49.48 crore lesser than the RE of the previous
year. The Committee would like to know the reasons for the reduction
in the allocation of the Joint Staff. Besides, the Committee would also
like that keeping in view the tasks undertaken by the Joint Staff, adequate
allocations should be provided to it.
41

Reply of the Government
The ceiling fixed by the Ministry of Finance for Defence Budget
(BE 2009-10) was less than the projections made by the Ministry of Defence
and, therefore, the allocation made to various Services and Departments
was proportionately reduced with reference to their projections. The
revenue budget allotted to Joint Staff (Rs. 619.55 crores) constituted 94.10%
of the requirement projected by it. However, the allocation has been
suitably enhanced in RE 2009-10.
Recommendation (Para No. 29)
The Committee take note of the various initiatives being taken by
the Government for the effective surveillance of the coastline particularly
after the recent terrorist attack at Mumbai. The Secretary during the course
of deliberations has apprised the Committee that a mandate has been
given to induct 1000 men who will protect the sea frontier. Besides
80 fast aircrafts have been sanctioned to Coast Guard. Coast Guards have
also been sanctioned 2000 men, 46 aircrafts and a large number of vessels.
To expedite the induction of the proposed boats and interceptor boats
etc., the regular meetings are being taken at the level of Cabinet Secretary.
The issue is being addressed at the highest level and Raksha Mantri is
also taking the issue in coordination with Ministry of Home Affairs and
Defence and other agencies. The Committee appreciate all these initiatives
being taken and strongly recommend that all the proposed boats and
interceptor boats, ships etc. should be expeditiously made available to
the Navy and Coast Guard for the effective surveillance of the coastline.
The Committee should be kept apprised about the follow up action in
this regard.
The Committee further note that since various Ministries/State
Governments and agencies are involved in the task of surveillance of
coastline, there is an urgent need for proper coordination. The Ministry
should take the appropriate action for proper coordination and apprise
the Committee accordingly.
During the course of deliberations, the Committee have been
apprised that the State of Tamil Nadu has done a good work on
establishing maritime Police Stations which are working in close
coordination with Navy and Coast Guard. Recently an exercise was
undertaken along the Tamil Nadu Coast to see what would be the situation
if there was an attack similar to recent Mumbai terrorist attack. While
appreciating the efforts made by the Tamil Nadu State, the Committee
feel that the other States having coastline should replicate the initiatives
taken by Tamil Nadu. The Ministry has to play a pro-active role in
42

motivating these State Governments. Concrete action on the suggested
lines should be taken and the Committee apprised accordingly.
Reply of the Government
1. In Feb. 09, the Indian Navy was designated as the authority
responsible for overall maritime security which includes coastal security
and offshore security. As directed, the Indian Navy is to be assisted by
the Coast Guard, State marine police and other Central and State agencies
for the coastal defence of the nation. A number of actions have been
initiated as directed by the CCS. Apart from periodic reviews being
conducted at the highest levels in concerned Ministries, the Government
has also constituted a "National Committee for Strengthening Maritime
and Coastal Security against Threats from the Sea' under the Chairmanship
of the Cabinet Secretary to ensure timely implementation of all decisions
of the CCS. The first meeting of the Committee was held on 04 Sep. 09
and attended by the Chief of Naval Staff, Secretaries and officials from
the Ministries of Home Affairs, Defence, Shipping and Agriculture,
Director General Coast Guard and officials of Intelligence agencies.
2. To improve on ground coordination between various agencies
involved in coastal surveillance a number of coastal security exercises
have been conducted by the Indian Navy in close coordination with the
Coast Guard, State Marine Police, Port authorities, Customs, Immigration
and Fisheries authorities in all coastal States and UTs. These exercises
have been controlled from the Joint Operation Centres that have been
established at Mumbai, Kochi, Visakhapatnam and Port Blair and
are jointly manned by the Indian Navy and Coast Guard. Further, the
Standard Operating Procedures (SOPs) that are to be followed between
the Indian Navy and the Coast Guard for coastal security, have been
finalised. Similarly, SOPs between security agencies and State
Governments/agencies have been formulated and are being examined by
States prior finalization.
3. All coastal security exercises have been conducted with active
involvement of the respective State Marine Police. The necessity for early
establishment of marine police stations as per the coastal security scheme
2005 of the Ministry of Home Affairs has been reiterated to the Ministry
of Home Affairs and State administration by the Indian Navy during
various review meetings as also debrief of various coastal security
exercises.
4. Procurement of Fast Interceptor Crafts, boats and other
equipment for Navy and Coast Guard is an on-going process and top
priority is being attached to this item of work.
43

Recommendation (Para No. 30)
The Committee note that the allocations for the Air Force at the
BE stage during the year 2009-10 are Rs. 34432.26 crore which comprises
Rs. 20114.08 crore as the capital outlay and Rs. 14318.18 crore as the
revenue outlay. The aforesaid allocation is against the projections of
Rs. 37242.01 crore (Rs. 22026.09 crore under the Capital Section and
Rs. 15215.92 crore under the Revenue Section). Thus the gap between the
projections and allocations made at BE stage is Rs. 2809.75 crore
(Rs. 1912.01 crore under the Capital Section and Rs. 897.74 crore under
the Revenue Section). As regards the percentage share of Air Force out
of the total Defence budget, the Committee note that during the
year 2009-10, the percentage share has declined from 28.53 per cent to
24.30 per cent as compared to the previous year. During the course of
examination of Demands for Grants, the Committee have been apprised
that various new acquisitions which include Mirage-2000 upgrade 3UAV
Schemes Intermediate Jet Trainer etc. are in pipeline during the year
2009-10. Besides, many major acquisition contracts like Akash, Rohini
Radar and SU-30 Block IV etc. have been signed during the years
2008-09 and 2009-10. In view of the acquisition plans and the acquisition
contract signed, the Committee recommend that adequate allocation
should be provided to Air Force so that the various projects do not suffer
for want of allocations.
Reply of the Government
Adequate funds are being provided to meet the requirements of
the Air Force.
Recommendation (Para No. 31)
The Committee note that Indian Air Force needs 42 fighter
squadrons for achieving strategic balance on both the fronts viz China
and Pakistan. In this regard only 35 squadrons out of the required
strength of 42 have so far been planned to be raised and that too upto
12th Plan i.e. by 2017. The Committee have been informed that as an
interim measure, four pronged strategy has been proposed which includes
upgradation and life extension of the existing fleet, inductions of force
multipliers and additional combat and squadrons. From the data made
available to the Committee with regard to accidents of aircraft of
Indian Air Force, the Committee find that 68 category 1 accidents have
taken place during the last five years. The percentage of accidents due
to technical defects, human failure and bird hit during this period are
27.94 and 36.76 (64.7%) per cent respectively. In view of the position of
accidents of air force aircraft, the Committee strongly feel that the
44

strategy of life extension of existing fleet need a relook. Life extension
of fighter aircraft should not go beyond a certain years and not more
than one life extension be recommended.
It is needless to point out that depleted strength of squadrons in
Air Force is a matter of serious concern from the point of view of national
security. As per the planning of Air Force, 35 squadrons are to be raised
by 2017. Keeping in view the aforesaid position, the Committee feel that
the required strength of 42 squadrons would take another decade. It is
a matter of serious concern particularly in view of the prevailing situation
around our borders. As such the Committee strongly recommend that
all the steps should be taken so that the required strength of squadrons
is available expeditiously and the required allocations should be
provided.
Reply of the Government
The Government is fully cognizant of the imperative need to
modernize the Air Force and augment its operational capabilities. The
IAF is presently in the process of augmenting and modernizing its fleet
by development and procurement of various aircraft including Medium
Multi Role Combat Aircraft, the indigenous Light Combat Aircraft,
Airborne Warning and Control System Aircraft and Fifth Generation
Fighter Aircraft. It is also upgrading its existing aircraft to enhance their
combat capabilities.
Comments of the Committee
(Please see para 42 of Chapter-I of the report)
Recommendation (Para No. 32)
The Committee observe that modernization of 56 airfields is being
undertaken in two Phases. Phase I is presently at the stage of commercial
negotiations and is expected to be executed in 42 months from the date
of signing of contract. Commencement of Phase II will be dovetailed with
the completion of Phase I. The Committee further note that at present
8 airfields do not have electrical airfield lighting facilities as no regular
night operations are undertaken from those airbases. On completion of
modernization of airfields infrastructure as proposed to be taken under
Phase I and II, all the airfields will have lighting system to facilitate the
night landing. As Air Force requires airfields from strategic point of
view, the Committee emphasize that commercial negotiations for Phase
I and Phase II projects be completed expeditiously. The Committee should
be kept apprised about the progress made in this regard.
52

Reply of the Government
The proposal for modernization of air fields is being progressed
as per the Defence procurement Procedure 2006 and is presently at the
Contract Negotiations stage.
Recommendation (Para No. 33)
The Committee note that Tejas LCA project was sanctioned in the
year 1983 with the original cost of Rs. 560 crore. The first phase was
completed on 31 March 2004. The likely date of completion of IInd phase
was 31 December 2008. Now the project is further spilled over to
31 December 2012 with additional fund reserves of Rs. 2475.78 crore.
Even when 26 years have gone by since the project was sanctioned,
LCA is still to see the light of the day. Not only that, the engine for
Tejas is also running into serious problems as informed by the
Defence Secretary during the course of deliberations. The options of
either to import an engine or persist with the Kaveri are being
explored. This is a sorry state of affairs. As such the Committee strongly
recommend that all the problems being faced with regard to Tejas should
be sorted out expeditiously and it should be ensured that the Tejas is
operational by the stipulated time frame and there is no further cost
escalation.
Reply of the Government
Twenty Light Combat Aircraft (LCA) have already been contracted
for in March 2006 in Initial Operational Clearance (IOC) configuration.
The delivery of the first batch of two LCA is expected in March 2011.
Subsequently, M/s. Hindustan Aeronautics Limited (HAL) would produce
08 aircraft every year and all the aircraft are expected to be delivered
by March 2014. A proposal for additional twenty LCA in Final Operational
Clearance (FOC) configuration is also being progressed. As regards the
LCA engine, the decision to import the GE 404 IN 20 engines has already
been finalized for IOC configuration. Engine selection for LCA Mk II
programme is currently in progress.
Recommendation (Para No. 34)
The Committee have been informed that Contract for Low Level
Transportable Radars (LLTRs) has been signed on 29 July, 2009. Besides
46

Contract for Low Level Light Weight Radars (LLLWRs) was signed on
4 January, 2009. The Committee hope that these Radars would be made
available expeditiously to the Air Force. The Committee should be kept
apprised about the progress made in this regard.
The Committee further note that the Air Force has aero stats (ground
based balloon system) which gives us the look capability of 400 kilometers
into on ground territories. There are plans to enhance these capabilities
with other futuristic radars and hopefully by the year 2020, Air Force
might have radars which can look into as much as 2000 kilometres. The
Committee strongly recommend that to increase the surveillance and
automation of Air Defence system, the look capability need to be enhanced.
As such all the initiatives should be taken to have the enhanced capability
by the stipulated time frame of 2020.
Reply of the Government
Various steps have been taken to meet our Defence requirement.
Delivery of the Low Level Transportable Radars (LLTRs) is expected to
commence from October 2011 and all 19 radars are to be delivered by
February 2016. Delivery of Low Level Light Weight Radars (LLLWRs) is
expected to commence from April 2010 and will be completed by May
2011. In addition a contract had also been signed in October 2007 for four
Medium Power Radar (MPR) which are expected to be delivered by
December 2011. Further, a case for additional Aerostate radar system is
also being progressed.
Recommendation (Para No. 35)
The Committee have been apprised that there are plans to replace
indigenous Multirole 14 Seater Saras aircraft by Dornier aircraft. In this
regard, a study was conducted on the suitability of the proposed
acquisition of SARAS aircraft based on data supplied by National
Aerospace Laboratory (NAL). Based on the study, a case for procurement
of SARAS aircraft was moved by IAF in February, 2002. In this regard,
the letter of interest for procurement of SARAS aircraft has already been
issued by IAF to NAL on 15 February 2002. The Ministry have also
informed that An Integrated Project Monitoring Team (IPMT) has been
formed to monitor the development of the project and the cost of the
project for 15 aircraft is estimated as Rs. 777.04 crore. The aircraft is still
in the development stage. The Committee recommend that the Air Force
47

should take the desired action so that desired number of squadron aircrafts
are raised expeditiously.
Reply of the Government
IAF is taking all steps for early induction of SARAS aircraft. In the
course of flight testing, SARAS Prototype-2 aircraft was involved in fatal
accident on 06 March 2009. While the investigation in the accident has
been completed, the formal report from the Director General of Civil
Aviation (DGCA) is awaited. Based on the report, requirement of any
design changes prior to recommending flight tests and production of the
aircraft will be examined.
Recommendation (Para No. 36 )
As per the date made available to be Committee, there is shortage
of 1384 officers, 7968 airmen and 166 non combatants and 8000 civilians
in the Air Force as compared to the sanctioned strength. The Air Force
has taken concerted efforts to make good the shortage of officers and
others. The steps initiated include participation in career fairs and
exhibitions, advertisement, motivational lectures in the schools, colleges,
fast track selection etc. The Committee note that these steps are in the
right direction and need to be continued further.
Reply of the Government
The current shortage of officers in the AIF is 1312 as on 01.12.2009.
The earlier steps taken included participation in career fairs and
exhibitions, advertisement, motivational lectures in the schools, colleges,
fast track selection etc. have been yielding results and are being continued.
The same is being followed up vigorously in the target groups. Fast track
selections on the lines of campus placements were carried out by Air
Force during the preceding two months at different locations across the
country.
Recommendation (Para No. 37)
The Committee note that during the year 2009-10, Rs. 8481.54 crore
have been made available for R&D against the allocations of Rs. 7737.64
crore during the previous year. Defence R&D Budget as percentage of
Defence budget was 6.82 per cent during the year 2007-08 which declined
to 6.75 per cent during the year 2008-09. The percentage has further
48

declined to 5.98 per cent during the year 2009-10. The aforesaid trend
of declining percentage of allocation for R&D is a matter of serious
concern. The Committee strongly recommend that adequate allocation
should be provided for R&D and the fund constraint should not be the
handicap for taking up various R&D activities by DRDO.
The Committee have been apprised that a Committee headed by
Defence Secretary has been constituted by the Government to examine
the issue of restructuring of DRDO. At present the Committee is examining
the responses and suggestions by various stakeholders on the
recommendations of Rama Rao Committee. The Committee strongly
recommend that the matter of restructuring of DRDO should be
expeditiously finalized. The Committee should also be kept apprised
about the follow up in this regard.
Reply of the Government
‘Defence Budget’, ‘Defence R&D Budget’ and ‘Defence R&D Budget
as % age of Defence Budget’ during the last three years are given below:—
(Rs. in crore)
Year Defence Budget Defence R&D Defence R&D
Budget Budget as %age
ofDefence Budget
2007-08 91680 (RE)* 6256.81 (MA)*** 6.82%
2008-09 114600 (RE) 7737.64 (MA) 6.75%
2009-10 141703 (BE)** 8471.54 (BE) 5.98%
*RE : Revised Estimate
**BE : Budget Estimate
***MA : Modified Appropriations.
Defence R&D Budget when compared to total Defence Budget
indicate the decline in percentage because of quantum of increase in
Defence Budget. However, Defence R&D Budget has increased in absolute
terms by 35.56% for the year 2009-10 w.r.t. 2007-08. Government has
always allocated additional funds, whenever required by Department of
Defence R&D.
Independent Review Committee under the chairmanship of
Dr. P. Rama Rao was constituted by the Government to suggest measure
for improving the functioning of DRDO inter-alia Ministry of Defence,
49

and Services. The Committee submitted its report to the Government on
5th March 2008. Another Committee under the Chairmanship of Defence
Secretary was formed by the Government to look into the responses and
suggestions made by the various stakeholders on the recommendations
of the Rama Rao Committee and is in the process of finalizing its
recommendations.
50

CHAPTER III
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS, WHICH THE COMMITTEE
DO NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE REPLIES
OF THE GOVERNMENT
Recommendation (Para No. 10)
The Committee observe that as per the Defence Procurement
Policy (DPP) the ‘Offset’ Clause is being implemented in all capital
acquisition cases of the value of Rs. 300 crore or above. However, the
Committee are distressed to note the observation of CAG in its report
No. CA 18, 2008-09 that in placing the order for the acquisition of
40 aircraft ‘M’, costing Rs. 9,036.84 crore, Ministry/IAF failed to go in
for the Offset Clause as stipulated in the DPP. This led to the denial of
corresponding benefit amounting to Rs. 2,711 crore to Indian Defence
Industry and the objective of urgent acquisition has also not been achieved.
In view of the above loss of benefit to Indian Defence Industry, the
Committee recommend that the Ministry should ensure that the DPP
provisions are strictly implemented in all capital acquisition cases.
Reply of the Government
The Defence Procurement Procedure 2006 stipulates that offset
would be applicable for all procurement proposals where the indicative
cost is above Rs. 300 crore and where the schemes are categorized as ‘Buy
Global’. The issue of categorization was deliberated by Defence Acquisition
Council and it was decided to categorise the proposal as ‘Buy Indian’
from M/s. Hindustan Aeronautics Limited (HAL) as these aircrafts were
being assembled by M/s. HAL from technical kit under licence from OEM.
Offset stipulations are not attracted under procurement cases under ‘Buy
Indian’ category. It may be added that decision to procure these additional
40 SU-30 MKI from M/s. HAL instead of from the foreign OEM encourages
indigenous capability to manufacture such high technology aerial platform,
enhances self-reliance and reduces dependence on foreign OEMs.
51

Recommendation (Para No. 20)
The Committee note with deep concern that admission to the Naval
Institute of Technology, Mumbai has been stopped with effect from
academic year 2009-10 as the existence of Institute on Government land
has been objected to by audit. The institute would be closed in 2011 when
all current students complete their courses. The Committee are constrained
to note the decision of the Ministry to close such an important Institute.
The Ministry should coordinate with the respective State Government,
so that suitable land is provided to shift the Naval Institute of Technology.
Alternatively the Navy should consider allocating their own land at
suitable location for setting up of the Institution. The action on the desired
lines should be taken and the Committee be apprised accordingly.
The Committee also note that the Personnel Below Officers Ranks
(PBORs) cannot afford the full fee for their wards for training at technical
institutions of repute, run by armed forces or other institutions. In this
regard the Ministry should consider bearing the cost of said course for
the wards of PBORs, so that no child is deprived of the higher education
due to financial constraints.
The Committee also reiterate their earlier recommendation to create
a separate fund for award of scholarships to the wards of army personnel
under Civil Budget of the Ministry of Defence and exclusive reservation
for wards of war widows/Ex-servicemen in professional colleges/
institutions under the Government of India or recognized by the State
or Central Government.
The Committee also desire that sufficient funds should be provided
to Army Welfare Education Society (AWES) for opening up of more
professional colleges so that the long standing demand of wards of
Ex-servicemen, war-widows etc. for admission to professional courses can
be met and Army personnel especially the war widows become self
dependant. The Committee also feel that there should be proportionate
distribution of scholarships by AWES, so that more and more wards of
PBORs/Ex-servicemen/war-widows can be benefitted. The Committee also
like that the fee of children of Ex-Servicemen/PBORs/war widows should
be reimbursed, if they are not benefitted by any type of scholarship/
financial aid.
52

Reply of the Government
2. The recommendations made by the Committee regarding bearing
the cost of training at technical Institutes run by the Armed Forces and
other institutions for wards of Personnel Below Officers Ranks (PBORs)
is not considered necessary in view of the fact that complete
reimbursement of tuition fee till 1st degree level for children of armed
forces personnel killed, missing or permanently disabled is made by
Government of India through the respective Service HQrs. Besides this
Army Welfare Education Society awards scholarships from Class IXth up
to the Post Graduate level of education @ Rs. 5000/- per annum. Besides
this financial assistance from Raksha Mantri Discretionary Fund (RMDF)
is given for vocational training and under the Prime Minister’s Scholarship
Scheme 4000 scholarships are given to the wards of defence personnel
@ Rs. 15,000/- for boys and Rs. 18,000/- for girls for technical and
professional courses and the case for increasing the number of scholarships
from 4,000 to 10,000 and scholarship rate from Rs. l5,000/- to Rs. 25,000/-
for boys and Rs. 18,000/- to Rs. 30,000/- for girls is under process. It is,
therefore, felt that there is no specific requirement for bearing the cost
of technical courses for the wards of PBOR.
3&4. As may be seen from the above, there are various schemes
under which financial grants in the form of scholarship and assistance
is provided to the wards of ex-servicemen/widows (PBORs) for pursuing
their higher education/professional courses both technical and
non-technical. Besides these State Governments also provide education
grants to the children of ESM/widows which vary from State to State.
Moreover, educational loans from nationalized banks for pursuing higher
technical and non-technical education are easily available. Army Welfare
Education Society (AWES) which is a registered society under the Society
Registration Act caters for the educational needs of the children of serving
army personnel, ex-army personnel and war widows/widows. The
infrastructure for the educational institutions run by the AWES is created
from the Army’s Welfare Fund, which is a non public fund. Army HQr.
is not in favour of alloting public funds to AWES for opening of more
professional colleges due to legal reasons since funding by Government
will involve following Government instructions/reservations for various
categories which would deprive the wards of serving army personnel,
ex army personnel, widows, war widows of their legitimate due. It is,
therefore, felt that there is no specific requirement for creating a new
53

Civil Budget Head to cater to financial needs of wards of ESM etc. for
pursuing higher education. As regards exclusive reservation for wards
of war widows/ex-servicemen in professional colleges/institutes under
Govternment of India is concerned, it is stated that such reservations
already exist in Medical/Dental and Engineering colleges including IITs.
However, the matter of increasing such reservation up to 5% has been
taken up at the highest level with Ministry of Human Resource
Development whose response is awaited.
54

CHAPTER IV
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH
REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN
ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE AND WHICH
REQUIRE REITERATION
Recommendation (Para No. 3)
The Defence outlay BE for the year 2009-10 amounting to
Rs. 141703 crore comprises of Rs. 86879 crore as revenue expenditure and
Rs. 54824 crore as capital outlay. Defence expenditure is entirely the
Non-Plan expenditure. The percentage wise distribution of the revenue
budget during the year 2009-10 is 60.86 per cent for pay and allowances,
24.72 per cent for stores and equipment, 2.76 per cent for transportation,
3.94 per cent for Misc. charges and 7.71 per cent for revenue works.
The revenue expenditure has grown from Rs. 38058.82 crore during the
year 2001-02 to Rs. 86879 crore during the year 2009-10. During the year
2008-09, BE was Rs. 57593 crore which was enhanced by Rs. 16007 crore
at the RE stage. The BE 2009-10 in this regard is Rs. 13279 crore and
Rs. 29286 crore higher if compared to RE and BE of the previous year
respectively. As informed by the Secretary during the course of oral
evidence the growth in revenue allocation during the current year is
50.85 per cent over BE and 18.04 per cent of RE of the previous year.
The revenue allocation has increased due to the implementation of the
Sixth Pay Commission’s recommendations.
While appreciating the fact that the welfare of the armed personnel
is of paramount importance and the implementation of the Sixth Pay
Commission’s recommendations is the step in the right direction, the
Committee feel that there is an urgent need to curb the avoidable wasteful
expenditure. The Committee have consistently been raising this issue in
their earlier reports. In pursuance thereof, the Ministry had constituted
a Defence Expenditure Review Committee to comprehensively review all
aspects of defence expenditure. This Committee has submitted its report.
On the issue of implementation of the recommendation of the said
Committee, the Committee have been informed that various officers in
the Ministry have been assigned the responsibility of looking into various
aspects of the report. The Committee strongly recommend that the
recommendations of the Committee should be implemented within a
55

stipulated time frame so that the duplication of expenditure can be avoided
and revenue expenditure is contained. The Committee should be kept
apprised about the status of implementation in this regard.
Reply of the Government
Given the elaborate procedure followed for sanctioning expenditure,
both under revenue and capital, as also limited availability of the revenue
budget, the possibility of any wasteful expenditure being incurred
consciously is rather remote. Nevertheless, the Defence Expenditure
Review Committee had been set up to examine and suggest ways of
improving the efficiency of expenditure. As communicated to the
Committee in the past, various officers in the Ministry of Defence have
been assigned the responsibility of looking into the recommendations of
the Committee. These are at different stages of examination/
implementation. The Committee would be apprised of the developments
after the process is completed.
Comments of the Committee
(Please see para 8 of Chapter-I of the report)
Recommendation (Para No. 4)
The Capital outlay during the Budget Estimates stage in the year
2008-09 was for Rs. 48007 crore which was Rs 6085 crore more than BE
of 2007-08. The outlay of Rs. 48007 crore during the year 2008-09 was
however reduced to Rs. 41000 crore thus amounting to the reductions
of Rs. 7007 crore at RE stage. During the year 2009-10, the outlay provided
at BE stage is Rs. 54824 crore which is Rs. 13824 crore more if compared
to RE of the previous year. Said increase comes to Rs. 6817 crore if the
current year’s BE is compared to the BE of the previous year. Although
in absolute terms, capital outlay during the current year has been enhanced
by 14.20 per cent if compared to BE and 33.72 per cent if compared to
the RE of the previous year, the revenue capital ratio that was 55:45
during BE 2008-09 stage, has come to 61:39 at BE 2009-10 stage. With
regard to the cut of Rs. 7007 crore at RE stage, the Committee are
concerned to note that the outlay was reduced keeping in view the pace
of expenditure at that time. The representative during the course of oral
evidence has acknowledged that there were slippages in delivery schedules
due to certain contracts not getting finalized. The Committee are seriously
concerned to note the incapacity of the Ministry to utilize the outlay
provided under the Capital section which is primarily for the
modernization of the Services. The Committee feel that apparently there
are problems in execution of projects due to procedural bottlenecks.
56

Therefore, the various shortcomings need to be identified and the
corrective actions taken, so that the trend to reduce the outlay at RE stage
does not repeat during the current year due to the inefficiency of the
Ministry. The Committee would also like to recommend that the capital
revenue ratio should be corrected so that more allocation is provided on
the capital side. While recommending for higher outlay under the capital
side, certainly the Committee expect the Ministry to increase the capacity
to utilize the outlay since this is the area where no compromises can be
made. The desired action on the suggested line should be taken and the
Committee be apprised accordingly.
Reply of the Government
The Committee has basically observed that the revenue to capital
ratio should be improved and corrective steps be taken to remove
procedural bottlenecks in capital procurements.
In so far as the revenue to capital ratio, it may be mentioned that
during the years 2008-09 and 2009-10, the main reason for increase in
the revenue expenditure was implementation of the recommendations of
the sixth pay commission, which resulted in increase in pay and allowances
and payment of arrears. Capital procurements also result in increase in
revenue expenditure on account of operational exploitation and
maintenance of the capital assets. Revenue budget is also utilized for
maintaining reserves of arms and ammunition. These factors impose a
serious limitation on containing revenue expenditure. However, all out
efforts are made to keep the projections of revenue requirement at the
bare minimum level.
As regards the corrective steps be taken to remove procedural
bottlenecks in capital procurements, it may be mentioned that the capital
acquisitions are made as per the procedure laid down in the Defence
Procurement Procedure (DPP), which was last revised in 2008 and
amended in 2009. The prescribed procedure aims at expeditious
procurement of approved requirements of the Defence Services in terms
of capability sought within the time-frames prescribed in the DPP by
optimally utilizing the allocated budgetary resources. All major decisions
are being taken at the time of initiation of the case at the highest level
in a time-bound manner to reduce the overall lead time for procurement.
All major deviations are also monitored at the highest level. Following
salient provisions exist in DPP 2008 to expedite capital procurements:
(a) Maximum time stipulation for issue of RFP within two years
of Acceptance of Necessity (AON). In cases beyond two years,
fresh AON is considered only after re-examination of available
technology and operational necessity.
57

(b) Extension of time for submission of offers is restricted to
eight weeks.
(c) In muti-vendor cases, once L-1 vendor has been identified,
normally there would be no need for any further price
negotiations,
(d) Increased delegation of financial powers to the Services
Headquarters.
Comments of the Committee
(Please see para 11 of Chapter-I of the report)
Recommendation (Para No. 5)
The Capital outlay of the Ministry comprises Land and Works of
three services, Married Accommodation Project, DGOF, DRDO and other
Defence Departments as well as Defence acquisitions. Almost 75 to 80
per cent of the capital outlay is for capital acquisition expenditure. The
percentage share of defence acquisition of the capital outlay was
78.30 per cent during the year 2007-08, which declined to 78.08 per cent
during 2008-09. During the current year, the percentage share has
further declined to 73.63 per cent. The information furnished by the
Ministry further reveal that the expenditure on committed liabilities is
more than the new schemes. The Committee are concerned to note
that the findings of C&AG as per its report numbers CA 17 and 18 of
2008-09, according to which due to procedural delays in acquisition of
various equipments and associates spares, many surveillance equipments
could not be put to effective operational use and led to enormous increase
in the project cost. Some of the areas pointed out by C&AG are, (i) the
objective of inducting an aircraft carrier in time to fill the gap in Indian
Navy could not be achieved and the cost of acquisition has been more
than doubled at Rs. 7,207 crore in four years, (ii) the Ministry took
nine years to conclude a contract for the construction of six submarines.
The inordinate delay led to enormous increase in the project cost to the
extent of Rs. 2,838 crore. (iii) five radars imported at a cost of Rs. 24.88 crore
could not be installed for more than three to five years after their
acquisition and in the process, the radars have not only lost 50 per cent
of their life but also remained unavailable for operational purpose
and (iv) despite almost a decade in developmental effort and
spending Rs. 27.88 crore, DRDO has not been able to provide a radar
as per the requirement of the army. Even when the Ministry has
introduced Procurement Policy since 2002 and the policy is being
updated periodically, the aforesaid findings indicate that still a lot needs
to be done to streamline the procurement procedures. The Committee
58

strongly recommend the Ministry to take all the desired actions
to streamline the procurement procedures. Besides, the declining trend
of percentage allocation for acquisition out of the capital outlay should
be reversed. More and more outlay need to be provided for the new
projects.
Reply of the Government
The objective of the Defence procurement procedure (DPP) is to
ensure expeditious procurement of the approved requirements of the
Armed Forces in terms of capabilities sought and time frame prescribed
by optimally utilizing the allocated budgetary resources. While achieving
the same, it demonstrates the highest degree of probity and pubic
accountability, transparency in operations, free competition and
impartiality. However, delays sometimes occur in some of the defence
procurement cases due to several reasons such as insufficient and limited
vendor base, non-conformity of the offers to the request for proposals
(RFP) conditions, field trials, complexities in contract negotiations,
limited indigenous capability and long lead time for indigenization etc.
Further the market for state-of-the-art defence equipment and platform
being circumscribed by denial regimes, limited availability of required
type of material, complexities in construction and manufacturing
involving integration of large number of systems, assemblies and
institutional delays, procedures and processes and continuously refined
on the basis of experience gained during the procurement process.
Following provisions exist in DPP-2008 (Amendment 2009) to expedite
capital procurements:—
(a) Maximum time stipulation for issue of RFP within two years
of accordance of AON. In cases beyond two years, fresh AON
will be considered only after re-examination of available
technology and operational necessity.
(b) Extension of time for submission of offers restricted to eight
weeks.
(c) In multi vendor cases once L1 vendor has been identified,
normally there would be no need for any further price
negotiation.
(d) Increased delegation of financial powers of Service
Headquarters.
Service HQ maintains a requirement based balance between
allocation for new schemes and committed liabilities while seeking
allocation of funds under Capital outlay.
59

Comments of the Committee
(Please see para 14 of Chapter-I of the report)
Recommendation (Para No. 6)
The Committee in their 29th and 35th Reports (Fourteenth Lok
Sabha) had recommended that the Ministry should identify the areas and
organizations for which the Outcome Budget could be prepared and
present the same to Parliament at least from the year 2009-10 onwards.
The Ministry however could not present the same in the Budget Session
of the current year. During the course of the examination of Demands
for Grants of the current year, the Committee have been informed that
the areas and organizations for preparation of Outcome Budget were
identified. Although these organizations prepared the Outcome Budget,
the same was considered inadequate. The concept being new, there was
lack of conceptual clarity with regard to the methodology to be followed
for the preparation of the Outcome Budget. The Committee further note
that the Defence Expenditure Review Committee set up to study the
issue of curbing wasteful expenditure has also recommended that the
proposed Demands for the year 2009-10 should be entirely outcome
oriented and a workshop may be conducted to finalise the methodology.
Even then, the Ministry could not present the Outcome Budget during
the year 2009-10. The Committee are unhappy to note the casual attitude
of the Ministry in the matter. The Committee feel that the matter should
not be delayed further. To begin with the Outcome Budget for the selected
activities viz Ordnance Factories, PSUs, Naval Dockyards and depots and
some other selected establishments as decided may be prepared on a
pilot basis followed by the comprehensive Outcome Budget. The
Committee hope that the Outcome Budget of the Ministry would be
presented to Parliament for the year 2010-11.
Reply of the Government
The Hon'ble Committee has been apprised in the past of the efforts
made by the Ministry of Defence in this regard and the inadequacies in
the outcome documents prepared by the identified organizations. In the
light of the recommendations of the Committee, the matter has been
examined de-novo and it has been decided to renew the effort by getting
outcome budget prepared in respect of National Cadet Corps (NCC) and
the Married Accommodation project (MAP). Orders in this regard have
been issued on 18th February 2010. However, it may not be appropriate
to place the outcome budgets in the public domain or present them to
the Parliament till such time as sufficient experience is gained to ensure
that quality and contents of the outcome budget reach an acceptable level
of excellence.
60

Comments of the Committee
(Please see para 17 of Chapter-I of the report)
Recommendation (Para No. 7)
The Committee observe that till date, the Ministry is spending a
great deal of their budgetary allocation for import of defence equipments
and there are procedural delays in their acquisition. The Committee are
concerned to note that the Ministry is not maintaining data with regard
to break up of Capital acquisition made from indigenous sources and
from abroad. The difficulty is also being experienced in categorization
of suppliers, indigenous and Foreign in view of the fact that a sizeable
proportion of procurement takes place through the Ordnance Factories
and DPSUs, which are indigenous sources, but have to depend on imports
for manufacturing the finished product. Further, the Ministry is yet to
identify the private industries as Rakshya Udyog Ratna under ‘make
category’ of DPP.
In view of the above, the Committee firmly believe that achieving
self-reliance in defence equipment is a distant dream. The production
agencies are still dependant on foreign countries for spare parts and also
for manufacturing the finished products. This clearly reflects the
weaknesses in our research and Development processes.
The Committee therefore, strongly recommend that besides
strengthening DRDO laboratories, the R&D in all the defence production
agencies has to be strengthened and adequate budgetary allocation
should be made to them for this purpose. The Committee further urge
the Ministry to complete the task of identifying private industries having
expertise under Raksha Udyog Ratnas (RUR) in order to permit them to
share the responsibilities of indigenization and self-reliance in Defence
production.
Reply of the Government
Several indigenous programmes for development of weapons,
sensors, propulsion equipment, communication and EW equipment, etc.
are in progress.
DRDO is concentrating on development of strategic, complex and
security sensitive systems. DRDO has developed a number of systems/
products/technologies worth Rs. 30,000 crore which have already been
inducted into Armed Forces, besides a large numbers of items are in the
process of development, production and induction.
61

Further, Policy and procedural steps have been initiated towards
enhancing self-reliance. Joint development and transfer of technology
have been encouraged by recent amendments to Defence Procurement
Procedure (DPP) 2008, in November 2009, which aims to provide the
procedural framework and detailed guidelines for enhancing self reliance.
A new category ‘Buy and Make Indian’ has been included in DPP 08
(Amendment-2009). This change in DPP-08 would enable pro-active
participation of Indian industry in manufacturing defence products
through co-production arrangements, such as Joint Venture (JV), with
foreign manufacturers and through transfer of technology.
Comments of the Committee
(Please see para 20 of Chapter-I of the report)
Recommendation (Para No. 9)
Although the 11th Defence Five Year Plan has commenced from
April, 2007 and the year 2009-10 being the third year of the plan period,
the Committee are perturbed to find that the plan size is yet to be approved
by the Ministry of Finance. Although the Ministry of Defence are carrying
out the programmes for modernization without any fund constraints,
however, budgetary exercise on annual basis is strictly against the spirit
of GoMs report on Reforming National Security System.
The Committee deplore the adhocism in the defence planning
process. This approach of the Ministry has an adverse impact on the
modernization programme of the Armed Forces as optimal utilization of
resources cannot be achieved unless greater emphasis and attention is
given to the process of budget formulation and implementation including
forecasting, monitoring and control of defence planning processes.
Therefore, the Committee recommend that the Ministry of Defence should
make concerted efforts to finalise the 11th Plan at the earliest without
any further loss of time. The defence of the country cannot be left to the
adhoc policy planning and accountability should be fixed for such a
casual attitude towards the defence preparedness of the country keeping
in view the neighborhood around us.
Reply of the Government
It may be mentioned at the outset that the Eleventh Defence Plan
for the period 2007-12 was prepared and the projections sent to the
Ministry of Finance in July 2006 itself. However, the Plan could not be
taken to the Cabinet Committee on Security (CCS) — as was done in
respect of some of the Five-year Plans in the past — because of the
62

difference in the Plan size in monetary terms, as projected by the Ministry
of Defence and as accepted by the Ministry of Finance. Meanwhile, capital
acquisitions are being made as per the Annual Acquisition Plans, which
are based on the 11th Defence Plan, subject to availability of budgetary
allocations.
Comments of the Committee
(Please see para 24 of Chapter-I of the report)
Recommendation (Para No. 11)
The Committee observe that the Ministry of Defence does not follow
the zero based Budgeting as a tool for financial planning because of
complexity and the size of Defence Services. However, the underlying
principle of ZBB is followed while preparing the five year and annual
acquisition procurement plans. The Committee are perturbed to find that
the 11th Five Year Plan of the Ministry is yet to be finalized, though half
of the plan period is already over. Therefore, the Committee recommend
that for all ongoing schemes, Ministry of Defence should follow the
principle of Zero Based Budgeting in time bound manner in the
management of defence, as recommended by Group of Ministers. By
following Zero Based Budgeting the Ministry will be able to
comprehensively review its requirement of funds for different ongoing
schemes and other activities.
Reply of the Government
In so far as the 11th Defence Plan is concerned, the position has
been explained in response to Para No. 9 of the Report of the Committee.
It is re-terated that Ministry of Finance with whom the matter
was taken up has intimated that the Zero Based Budgeting exercise is
being done by the Planning Commission. The entire defence budget
being non-plan budget is, however, not subject to any scrutiny by
the Planning Commission. However, it is submitted that the budgetary
projections are finalized by the Ministry after a rigorous process of scrutiny
at various levels to keep expenditure strictly as per requirement.
Comments of the Committee
(Please see para 27 of Chapter-I of the report)
Recommendation (Para No. 17)
During the course of deliberations, the Committee was informed
that as per MoU signed between the Central Government and the State
63

Governments, any State which wants a Sainik School to be opened, has
to offer a certain area of land and provide the infrastructure for it and
also bear the cost of maintenance grant. In this context, the Committee
while noting that the administration of Sainik Schools was ailing from
variety of maladies had strongly recommended in their 29th report
(14th Lok Sabha) that entire funding of all Sainik Schools should be made
by the Central Government on the pattern of Kendriya Vidyalayas/
Navodaya Vidyalayas. In this context, the Secretary during the course of
deliberations has informed that the recommendation of the Committee
is under consideration and a final view is yet to be taken on that. The
Committee again emphasize that Sainik Schools have played an important
role as a recruiting and training ground for future leaders of Defence
Forces. As such there is an urgent need to address the problems being
faced in the administration of Sainik Schools without any further delay.
The Committee reiterate that the decision on the recommendations of the
Committee should be taken without any further delay and the Committee
be apprised accordingly.
Reply of the Government
The recommendation of the Standing Committee has been examined
in detail. It is submitted that the Sainik Schools are conceived as joint
ventures of Central Government and the State Governments set up
primarily with the aim to remove regional imbalance in officer cadre of
armed forces. 67% of the seats in each Sainik School are reserved for boys
from the State in which the Sainik School is located to attract children
of that State/region into the armed forces. The Sainik Schools are unique
assets of the State Governments. They provide land free of cost, build
and maintain the schools infrastructure. In addition, they award
scholarships on merit–cum-means basis. The importance, therefore, of
the role of the State Government in running the School should not be
done away with.
2. Sainik schools were expected to be financially self-sufficient
institutions. These depend mainly on fees paid by the parents. It is seen
that the schools that the regularly getting funds form the State Government
are better run. The schools such as Bijapur and Kodagu (Karnataka),
Ghorakhal (Uttarakhand), Gopalganj and Nalanda (Bihar) and Kunjpura
(Haryana) are getting regular funds from respective State Governments
at an average of Rs. 2 crores per year during the last three year.
3. Sainik Schools and Kendriya Vidyalayas are not comparable in
the matter of objective, organizational set up, source of budget/finance,
provision of land, status of employees etc. Kendriya Vidyalayas have
been set up to cater to the educational needs of the children of transferable
64

employees of Central Government/State Government/PSUs. Whereas the
aim of Sainik Schools is to prepare boys academically, physically and
mentally for entry into the National Defence Academy and to remove
regional imbalance in the officer cadre of the defence services. Further,
the Kendriya Vidyalayas are day schools and the Sainik Schools are
residential Schools. Hence, it would not be possible to accept the
recommendations of the Standing Committee that entire funding of all
Sainik Schools should be made by the Central Government on the pattern
of Kendriya Vidyalayas/Navodaya Vidyalayas.
4. The Central Government is fully committed to the improved
functioning of Sainik Schools. The Central Government is actively
considering the modification of the scheme to provide more funds to the
Sainik Schools. It may also be pointed, in recent times, the following
specific steps have been taken by the Central Government to improve
the quality of the Sainik Schools:
(a) At present, Ministry of Defence awards Scholarships on
merit-cum-means basis to the wards of defence personnel
including ex-servicemen, Centre Share to the cadets who are in
receipt of State Scholarship and subsidy in the form of NDA
incentive/sharing of burden. The amount of scholarship and
subsidy is proposed to be enhanced substantially.
(b) 80% funding has been provided for meeting the additionality
in respect of salaries and pension consequent upon acceptance
of recommendations of the Sixth Central Pay Commission.
Proposal has been initiated to increase this amount of 80%
to 100%.
(c) Letters at the level of RRM have been regularly issued to the
Chief Ministers and Members of Parliament to provide funds
for better infrastructural facilities of the Sainik Schools.
(d) While it is felt that taking over the Sainik Schools by the
Centre on the pattern of Kendriya Vidyalayas might not be
viable because it would tend to lessen the involvement and
commitment of the State Governments to these institutions,
at the same time it is reiterated that the Centre is actively
considering certain amendments to the scheme whereby it
would contribute more funds in certain key areas to facilitate
the improved running of these schools without diluting the
responsibility of the State Government towards them.
65

Comments of the Committee
(Please see para 30 of Chapter-I of the report)
Recommendation (Para No. 19)
The Committee notes that the Ex-servicemen are demanding OROP
for a long time which is being denied by the Government due to one
pretext or the other. This year, Finance Minister in his Budget Speech
mentioned about a Committee headed by Cabinet Secretary on the issue,
which submitted its report on 30.06.09.This Committee made
recommendations to substantially improve the pensionary benefits of
pre-1.1.2006 Presonnel Below Officer Rank(PBOR) which have also
been accepted by the Government. The Ministry has further clarified
that the said Committee has not recommended OROP formula. As regards
the status of implementation of the recommendations made by the
Committee, the Ministry has informed that two of the recommendations
stand implemented with the issuance of letter dated 30.10.09 with regard
to OROP. The Committee would like to recommend that all
recommendations made by the aforesaid Committee should be
implemented expeditiously. Besides, the Committee may like to emphasize
that OROP is the long over due demand of the ex-servicemen even after
implementation of recommendations of the 6th CPC, the demand of OROP
still persists.
The Committee have repeatedly been recommending to accept the
aforesaid demand of ex-servicemen in their reports. In this regard, the
Committee again emphasize that the Government should consider the
issue of One Rank One Pension afresh in case of officers as well as PBORs,
so that the Officers and PBORs who have served the nation with a pride,
lead a dignified retired life.
Reply of the Government
After the report of the 6th CPC was accepted by the Government
the matter regarding One Rank One Pension was examined in the light
of the observations/recommendations made by various Committees/
Commissions which did not recommend the demand of OROP. The
matter was taken up with the Ministry of Law. Relying on the judgement
of Supreme Court in the case of D.S. Nakara, [1983(2)SCR 165]
K.L. Rathi [SLJ 1997(3)/2007] and All India Ex-servicemen League
(AIR 1991 SC 1182), Ministry of Law did not recommend the demand
of OROP.
66

On the directions of PMO, a Committee was set up under the
Chairmanship of Cabinet Secretary to look into the issue of OROP and
other related matters. After a series of meetings, the Committee submitted
its report on 30.6.09.
After considering all aspects of the issue, the Committee did not
find it administratively feasible to recommend OROP as such.
However, keeping in mind the spirit of the demand several other
recommendations to substantially improve pensionary benefits of
PBORs and Commissioned Officers have been made, which have been
accepted by the Government.
(i) Inclusion of classification Allowance for PBOR from 1.1.2006.
(ii) Removal of linkage of full pension with 33 years from 1.1.2006.
(iii) Revision of Lt.General pension after carving out a separate
pay scale for them.
(iv) Bringing parity between pension of pre and post 10.10.97
PBOR pensioners.
(v) Further improving PBOR pensions based on award of GOM
2006.
(vi) Broad banding percentage of disability/war injury pensions
for pre-1.1.2006 disability/war injury pensioners.
(vii) Removal of cap on war injury element of pension in the case
of disabled pensioners belonging to Category E.
These are in various stages of implementation.
Comments of the Committee
(Please see para 33 of Chapter-I of the report)
Recommendation (Para No. 21)
The Committee are unhappy to note that the Ministry has not
maintained any data with regard to widows of the soldiers who had laid
down their lives and disabled pensioners, who had lost their limbs to
safeguard the nation, even though certain benefits are being provided to
them. The Committee desire that the Government should seriously look
into this aspect and maintain a centralized data of these categories. Besides
there is an urgent need to disseminate the information about the benefits
being given to the war widows and disabled pensioners particularly when
they are the most vulnerable and there may be a possibility that the
67

benefits announced may not trickle down to them due to lack of access
to information. The Committee are of the opinion that to update the data
regarding war widows and disabled pensioners, the Ministry can take
the help of respective Regimental Centers and Pension Payment Order
Records.
The Committee further note that various benefits are being provided
to pre-1.1.2006 and post-1.1.2006 cases of disabled pensioners. However,
in calculating pension of disabled pensioners, there is an element of
disparity between the two. While the pre-1.1.2006 are getting a fixed
amount, the post-1.1.2006 retirees are getting it @30% of emoluments last
drawn. The Committee, therefore, would like to recommend that the pre-
1.1.2006 retirees may also be given disability pension at the revised rates
as recommended by the 6th CPC and accepted by the Government of
India.
The Committee are also of the opinion that for the purposes of
disability pension and other related benefits any type of injury sustained
in performance of duty by any military personnel may be treated at par
with war injury.
Reply of the Government
Para 21 highlights following 3 parts:—
(i) Urgency of maintaining centralized data in regard to war
disabled pensioners and widows by the regimental
centres.
(ii)Pre-1.1.2006 disabled retirees may also be given disability
pension at the revised rates as recommended by 6th
CPC in r/o post-1.1.2006 disabled retirees.
(iii) For the purpose of disability pension and other related
benefits, any type of injury sustained in performance of
duty by any military personnel may be treated at par
with war injury.
2. The position is as under:—
(i) Action is in progress for getting the data of disabled/war
disabled.
(ii)The matter regarding provision of modified parity to the
1.1.2006 disability pensioners at the maximum of the pre-
revised pay scales is also under consideration.
68

(iii) Since injury sustained during war has a special
connotation for the individual who makes supreme
sacrifice of his life during war or war-like situation, it
cannot be equated with injury suffered during normal
performance of duty. It is likely to dampen the morale
of the Armed Forces personnel going on the war-front.
In view of the position, part of the recommendation of the
Hon’ble Committee is not acceptable to that extent.
Comments of the Committee
(Please see para 36 of Chapter-I of the report)
Recommendation (Para No. 22)
The Committee in their earlier reports had observed that lateral
induction of Ex-servicemen in Central Para Military Forces which will
not only provide the employment opportunities to retiring armed forces
personnel, but would also keep the army young and also Central and
State Governments will be benefitted by trained and disciplined
manpower. However, despite the recommendation of the Committee for
recognizing the need for lateral induction of Ex-servicemen in Central
Para Military Forces/Central Police Organisations, Public Sector Banks
and other Undertakings, the Government have not felt the need for
any action on the issue. In its latest reply, the Ministry has stated that
the issue is still under consideration and consultations are on with
Ministry of Home Affairs. The Committee reiterate their earlier
recommendation for lateral induction of Ex-servicemen into Central
Para Military Forces/Central Police Organisations and State Police Forces,
Public Sector Banks and PSUs in State and Centre and desire that the
issue should be decided at the earliest without any further loss of time.
The Committee also desire that the Government should take all the
initiatives to ensure that each and every armed forces personnel, who
retire at younger age get suitable re-employment in the Government/
private sector.
Reply of the Government
The Central and State Governments provide a number of concessions
to Ex-servicemen (ESM) for their re-employment in Central/State
Government Departments. These include reservation of posts/relaxation
in age and educational qualifications, exemption from payment of
application/examination fees and priority in employment to the disabled
ESM and dependants of deceased service personnel on compassionate
grounds.
69

2. As regard the resettlement of ESM, Persistent efforts of the
Department with the dual aim of increasing awareness amongst the
Corporate Sector on the availability of valuable human resources in
Ex-Servicemen and enhance job opportunities for ESM in Corporate/
Private Sector have borne fruits with major demands now coming up
from the Corporate Sector/PSUs.
3. Apart from the above, the Government has formulated several
Self-employment ventures for rehabilitation and resettlement of
Ex-servicemen and their families. The Self-employment schemes are
as follows:—
(i) Allotment of Army Surplus Vehicles
(ii) Coal Tipper Scheme
(iii)Allotment of Oil Product Agency
(iv) Mother Dairy Milk Booths and Fruit and Vegetable (Safal)
shops
(v) Management of CNG Station by ESM (Officers) in NCR
(vi) Management of Toll Plaza under NHAI
4. The issue of lateral transfer of army personnel into Central
Para Military Forces (CPMFs) has been under correspondence with
Ministry of Home Affairs. The issue is yet to be resolved.
Comments of the Committee
(Please see para 39 of Chapter-I of the report)
70

CHAPTER V
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF
WHICH FINAL REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT
ARE STILL AWAITED
Recommendation (Para No. 8)
Early Finalization of Long Term Integrated Perspective Planning (LTIPP)
The Committee note that GoMs in its report, on ‘Review of National
Security system’ had recommended that the Five Year Defence Plan by
the Services should be prepared on the basis of Long Term Integrated
Defence Perspective Plan and the defence planning process incorporating
the long term defence plan, five year plan and annual budget should be
revised at the earliest. The Committee are constrained to observe that the
Ministry is now in the process of evolving a fresh LTIPP covering the
period 2012-27 on the basis of recast of 11th plan (2007-12) which is yet
to get its final clearance. The Committee are further distressed to note
that instead of adhering to the recommendation of GoMs report for timely
completion of the task in a time bound manner, the Ministry is
apprehensive that since the scope of report calls for deliberative efforts,
and any attempt to rush these recommendations may prove counter
productive. This clearly reflects the callous attitude of the Ministry to
complete that task of preparing LTIPP.
The Committee deplore the lackadaisical attitude of the Ministry/
Service Headquarters and recommend that the Ministry should take
necessary steps for the early finalization of LTIPP.
Reply of the Government
Currently, the Long Term Integrated Defence Plan (LTIPP)
2012-17, as approved by Raksha Mantri, is in vogue. The changing security
scenario and the perceived threat environment will impact the capability
development strategy, plans and procurement priorities of the
Armed Forces for the next three Plan periods, beyond March 2012. Hence,
a need has been felt for recasting of acquisition proposals to meet the
prospective operational needs of the Armed Forces. The finalization of
the LTIPP 2012-27, which is being undertaken in the above background,
71

will also factor in a Technology Road Map for this period. The Ministry
and the Services Hqrs. are fully conscious of the imperative need for
early finalization of the LTIPP 2012-27 and are attending to this work
with all seriousness.
Comments of the Committee
(Please see para 24 of Chapter-I of the report)
Recommendation (Para No. 12)
Since 2004-05, the Committee in their Reports on Demands for
Grants and corresponding Action Taken Reports have been recommending
for early setting up of Indian National Defence University (INDU).
However, they are astonished to note that even after identification of
land in Haryana for setting up the University, the matter is still under
consultation with the concerned Ministries. Deploring the slow pace in
setting up of such an important institution, the Committee recommend
that the Ministry should take action in this regard at the earliest.
Reply of the Government
The directions/views of the Committee have been noted and
action is being taken to expedite setting up of the University at the
earliest.
Recommendation (Para No. 16)
The Committee note that the NDA cadets are not given any salary/
stipend during their training at NDA. The stipend is an amount given
to a trainee to enable him to meet his daily needs. The Committee feel
that there is an urgent need to consider stipend of the trainees of NDA
particularly in view of the shortage of officers in the services. The provision
of stipend would not only help the trainee to take care of their day to
day needs but would also attract youngsters to join NDA which would
ultimately help in solving the problem of shortage of officers in the three
services.
The Committee further note that induction of officers in three
services is done through competitive examination. After the recruitment,
the candidates join the different institutes like IMA, OTA and Naval
Academy for getting training in the respective field. Though the stipend
is given in IMA, OTA and Naval Academy, the period of training, is not
considered as being on the job training. The Committee note that in
respect of Civil Servants who also come through competitive examination,
72

the period of training is considered on the job training. The Committee
note that the training given by these institutes is very tough, risky and
life threatening. As such at par with Civil Servants, the period of training
in all the Armed forces institutes should be considered as on the job
training. All these measures would go a long way in solving the problem
of shortage of officers in the services.
Reply of the Government
The matter is under consideration.
N
EW DELHI;  SATPAL MAHARAJ,
5  May, 2010 Chairman,
15 Vaisakha, 1932 (Saka)Standing Committee on Defence.
73

MINUTES OF THE SEVENTEENTH SITTING OF THE STANDING
COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE (2009-10)
The Committee sat on Wednesday, the 05th May, 2010 from
1500 to 1545 hrs. in Committee Room ‘B’ , Parliament House Annexe,
New Delhi.
PRESENT
Shri Satpal Maharaj — Chairman
M
EMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Harish Choudhary
3. Shri Kamal Kishor ‘Commando’
4. Dr. Sucharu Ranjan Haldar
5. Shri Arjun Ram Meghwal
6. Dr. Prasanna Kumar Patasani
7. Shri A.T. Nana Patil
8. Shri Bhaskarrao Bapurao Patil
9. Shri Amarnath Pradhan
10. Shri C. Rajendran
11. Shri Baju Ban Riyan
12. Shri Ijyaraj Singh
13. Rajkumari Ratna Singh
Rajya Sabha
14. Shri Mukut Mithi
15. Shri Prakash Javadekar
16. Shri K.B. Shanappa
17. Shri T.K. Rangarajan
18. Shri M.V. Mysura Reddy
74

S ECRETARIAT
1. Shri T.K. Mukherjee —Joint Secretary
2. Smt. Sudesh Luthra —Director
3. Smt. J.M. Sinha —Deputy Secretary
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the members to the sitting
of the Committee.
*** *** *** *** ***
3. The Committee then considered and adopted the draft
Action Taken Report on the First Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) on
‘Demands for Grants (2009-10)’ with modifications at Para Nos. 30 and 33
contained in Chapter-I of the Report.
4.*** *** *** *** ***
5. The Committee, then, authorized the Chairman to finalize the
above draft report and present the same to the House on a date convenient
to him.
The Committee then adjourned.
75

APPENDIX
ANALYSIS OF THE ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON
THE RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS CONTAINED IN
THE FIRST REPORT OF THE STANDING
COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE
Percentage
of Total
1. Total number of recommendations 37
2. Recommendations/Observations which have
been accepted by Government
Para Nos. 1, 2, 13, 14, 15, 18, 23, 24, 25, 26, 21 56.75
27, 28, 29, 30, 31, 32, 33, 34, 35, 36, and 37
3. Recommendations/Observations which the
Committee do not desire to pursue in view
of the replies of the Government
Para Nos. 10 and 20 02 5.40
4. Recommendations/Observations in respect
of which replies of Government have not
been accepted by the Committee and which
require reiteration
Para Nos. 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 9, 11, 17, 19, 21 and 22 1129.72
5. Recommendations/Observations in respect of
which final replies of the Government are
still awaited (Please see Chapter V)
Para Nos. 8, 12 and 16 03 8.13
76