1 
 
16 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE 
(2011-2012) 
 
(FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
MINISTRY OF DEFENCE 
 
 
CRITICAL REVIEW OF FUNCTIONING OF SAINIK SCHOOLS 
 
 
SIXTEENTH REPORT 
 
  
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
 
August, 2012/ Sravana, 1934 (Saka)  


2 
 
SIXTEENTH REPORT 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE 
(2011-2012) 
  
(FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
MINISTRY OF DEFENCE 
 
 
CRITICAL REVIEW OF FUNCTIONING OF SAINIK SCHOOLS 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 22.08.2012 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 22.08.2012  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
 
 
August, 2012/ Sravana, 1934 (Saka)  


3 
 
 
CONTENTS 
 
          PAGE. 
 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE .…………………………………… (ii)   
INTRODUCTION..…………………………………………………….… ………           (iv) 
 
PART-I 
 
 
I Introductory……………………………………….................................. 01 
 
II  Funding / Opening of new Schools………………………………………11 
 
III Admission of Girl Cadets………………………………………………….22 
 
IV Menace of Ragging………………………………………………………..25  
 
IV Miscellaneous…………......................................................................28 
 
 
PART-II 
 
 
Observations/Recommendations ………………………………………........... 32  
 
Annexures…………………………………………………………………………..49 
 
Minutes of the sittings of the Committee held ………………………………… 52  
on 12.01.2012 and 08.06.2012 are not included in the  cyclostyled  
copy of the Report. 
 
 
 
 

4 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE (2011-12) 
Shri Satpal Maharaj   -  Chairman 
   Lok Sabha  
 
2. Shri Kamal Kishor `Commando‟  
3. Shri Harish Choudhary  
4. Shri Varun Gandhi  
5. Shri Sher Singh Ghubaya  
6. Shri Ramesh Chan  dappa Jigajinagi  
7. Shri Bhaskarrao Patil Khatgaonkar  
8. Shri Ajay Kumar  
9. Shri Mithilesh Kumar  
10. Shri Sadashivrao Dadoba Mandlik  
11. Shri Asaduddin Owaisi  
12. Shri A.T. Nana Patil  
13. Shri C.R. Patil  
14. Shri Amarnath Pradhan  
15. Shri Kadir Rana  
16. Shri Adhalrao Patil Shivaji  
17. Shri Mahabali Singh  
18. Rajkumari Ratna Singh  
19. Shri Uday Singh  
20. *Shri Manish Tewari 
21. #Vacant  
 Rajya Sabha  
22.  **Shri Munquad Ali  
23.  Shri Naresh Gujral  
24.  Shri Avinash Rai Khanna  
25.  @Prof. P.J. Kurien  
26.  Shri Mukut Mithi  
27.  Shri Mukhtar Abbas Naqvi  
28.  Shri T.K. Rangarajan  
29.  ***Shri M.V. Mysura Reddy  
30.  Shri Birender Singh  
31.  Shri Ram Kripal Yadav  
30. ****Shri Devender Goud T. 
31. ****Chaudhary Munabbar Saleem  
 
*  Nominated to the Committee w.e.f. 02.03.2012 
#  Shri M. Rajamohan Reddy ceased to be a Member of the Committee w.e.f. 28.02.2012 consequent to his 
resignation from Lok Sabha.  
 
** Shri Munquad Ali  and  ***Shri M.V. Mysura Reddy retired  w.e.f. from 02.04.2012 

5 
 
 
****  Nominated to the Committee w.e.f. 04 May 2012 
*****  Nominated to the Committee w.e.f. 15 May 2012 
 
@  Prof. P.J. Kurien ceased to be a Member of the Committee w.e.f. 02.07.2012 and re-nominated 
to the Committee w.e.f. 03.07.2012 
 
 
  

6 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
  
1. *Shri T.K. Mukherjee - Joint Secretary 
2. Smt. Sudesh Luthra - Director 
2. Shri Sanjeev Sharma - Additional Director 
 
*Superannuated w.e.f. 30 June 2012 
  

7 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
I, the Chairman of the Standing Committee on Defence (2011-12), having been 
authorized by the Committee to present the Report on their behalf, present this Sixteenth 
report on „„Critical Review of Functioning of Sainik Schools‟. 
2.  The Committee took evidence of the representatives of the Ministry of Defenc e on the 
subject on 12 January 2012. 
3.  The Draft Report was considered and adopted by the Committee at their sitting held 
on 8 June 2012. 
4.  The Committee wish to express their thanks to the officers of the Ministry of Defence 
for appearing before the C ommittee and furnishing the material and information which the 
Committee desired in connection with the examination of the subject. 
5.  For facility of reference and convenience, the recommendations/observations of the 
Committee have been printed in bold letters in Part-II of the report. 
 
 
New Delhi;  Satpat Maharaj, 
19 July, 2012                             Chairman 
28 Sravana, 1934 (Saka)     Standing Committee on Defence. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

8 
 
REPORT 
PART 1  
CHAPTER I 
 
Introductory 
 Sainik Schools were established as a joint venture of the Central and State 
Governments.  These schools are under the overall governance of Sainik School Society.  
 The objectives of Sainik School, as stated by the Ministry include bringing quality 
public school education within the reach of the common man, all round development of a 
child‟s personality and to remove regional imbalance in the officer‟s cadre of the Ar med 
Forces.  As per the information furnished by the Ministry Sainik Schools have shown an 
upward trend in the number of cadets join ing the National Defence Academy (NDA) in 
keeping with the primary aim of establishing of Sainik Schools to prepare boys aca demically, 
physically and mentally for entry into the National Defence Academy.  These Sainik Schools 
admit boys into classes VI and IX in the age 10 -11 years for classes VI and 13 -14 years for 
class IX as on 1 st July of the year in which admission is soug ht.  Admissions are based in 
order of merit on the basis of an All India Entrance Examination held in January each year.  
1.2 The scheme to establish Sainik Schools was introduced in the year 1961.  These 
schools are managed by a society which is registere d under the Societies Registration Act 
(XXI of 1860).  The Chief Executive Body of the Sainik Schools Society is a Board of 
Governors functioning under the Chairmanship of the Defence Minister.  These Schools are 
stated to function under a three tier Admin istration viz. Sainik Schools Society, Chairman, 
Local Board of Administration and Principal.  The Board of Governors, Ministry of Defence 
supervise/control or give directions in regard to policy matters, smooth conduct of the All 
India Entrance Examination, carrying out annual inspection of each school, review decisions 
of Local Board of Administration and Audit reports of the School.  Principal is the Chief 
Executive and Academic head of the school.  He is responsible for effective command and 

9 
 
control, efficient administration and optimum training efficiency. Principal, as the head of the 
institution takes all the decisions relating to day to day administration of the school. 
1.3 Currently, there are 24 Sainik Schools spread out in 21 States.  Sainik School  at 
Rewari i s stated to be the latest one which started in March, 2009.   A list containing the 
details of such schools is given at Annexure – A.  It may be seen from the list that seven (07) 
States viz. Uttar Pradesh, Tripura, Meghalaya, Goa, Arunachal Pradesh, Mizoram & Sikkim 
and all the 07 Union Territories, namely, N.C.T. of Delhi, Puducherry, Chandigarh, Andaman 
and Nicobar Islands, Dadra and Nagar Haveli, Daman and Diu and Lakshdweep do not have 
even a single Sainik School.  It is pertinent to note that the most populous State of Uttar 
Pradesh is without a Sainik School since Uttrakhand became the 27th State of the Republic 
of India on 9th November 2000 after having bifurcated from Uttar Pradesh. 
1.4 The Committee were concerned to note the meagr e selection rate of students in 
Sainik Schools and wanted to know the reasons of the same.  The Ministry in this regard 
simply stated th at the intake of cadets in Sainik Schools was limited to seats availability.  
They also supplied the figures for the last three years which indicated that during the years 
2009-10, 2010-11 and 2011-12, the percentage stood at 8.58, 7.12 and 6.93 from all t he 24 
Sainik Schools.  The number of aspirants vis -à-vis students selected during the last three 
years stood as under :-  
2009-10 2010-11 2011-12 
Students 
appeared 
Students 
selected 
Students 
appeared 
Students 
selected 
Students 
appeared 
Students 
selected 
 
27749 2383 34757 2477 35767 2482 
Percentage : 8.58 7.12 6.93 
 
Comparison with RIMS and RIMC / NDA Intake  
Rashtriya Military Schools 
 1.5 While examining the Sainik Schools the Committee thought it prudent to compare the 
functioning  of  Sainik Schools with Rashtriya Military Schools and Rashtriya Indian Military 

10 
 
College (RIMC) keeping in view the fact that the object ive of all these schools is to prepare 
students to join the Military Services.  The Committee found that in addition to the se 24 
Sainik Schools, 5 Rashtriya Military Schools affiliated to Central Board of Secondary 
Education are functioning at Ajmer, Bangalore, Belgaum, Dholpur and Chail.  These Military 
Schools admit boys in Class VI based on the results of an All India Entra nce Examination.  
While 67% seats are reserved for wards of Junior Commissioned Officers/ORs called 
„entitled category‟ out of 33% non -entitled category seats, 20% are reserved for the wards of 
service officers.  
Rashtriya Indian Military College (RIMC)  
1.6 The Committee also learnt that the Rashtriya Indian Military College (RIMC) was 
founded on March 13, 1922, with the objective of providing the necessary preliminary training 
for boys of Indian birth or domicile, wishing to become officers in the Armed F orces of India.  
The institution now serves as a feeder institute to the National Defence Academy.  Selection 
for Rashtriya Indian Military College is through a written examination cum viva voce 
conducted through the State Governments.  Seats for respectiv e States are reserved based 
on population.  The intake into the Rashtriya Indian Military College is biannual, in January 
and July.  The maximum strength of Rashtriya Indian Military College is 250.  The intake is at 
Class VIII for selected boys in the age  groups 11 to 13 years.  The college runs classes in 
science stream on 10+2 Central Board of Secondary Education pattern. 
1.7 The Committee's examination has revealed that in terms of objectives of setting up of 
the three institutions mentioned above, Sain ik Schools are far behind than  Rashtriya Indian 
Military College in terms of performance.  The comparative analysis of the years 2008, 2009 
and 2010 as contained in Annexure – B indicates that in Rashtriaya Indian Military College 
76% of its students join  NDA whereas 18 was the percentage for Rashtriya Military Schools 
and 20% for Sainik Schools. 
1.8 When enquired about the difference in objectives of the three type of schools i.e. 
Sainik School, Rashtriya Military Schools and Rashtriya Indian Military Col lege, the Ministry, 
in the written reply stated as under :- 

11 
 
“Rashtriya Indian Military College (RIMC) was established in 1922 with the aim to 
prepare selected boys to join National Defence Academy (NDA) and Naval Academy 
(NAVAC).  25 cadets are admitted in each term twice a year (January and July) on the 
basis of All India Entrance Examination without any reservation.        
Rashtriya Military Schools (RMS) aim to provide quality education to the cadets and 
prepare them to join Defence Services. There are f ive Rashtriya Military Schools 
presently functioning in the country and the last of these schools was established in 
1961.  No new Rashtriya Military School has been established thereafter in the 
backdrop of the introduction of the scheme of Sainik Schools  around the same time . 
67% of the seats in RMS are reserved for the wards of Junior Commissioned Officers/ 
Other ranks, 20% seats are reserved for wards of Commissioned Officers and the 
remaining 13% for the wards of civilians.   
The Sainik Schools provide  an opportunity for the participation of the State 
Governments in terms of capital expenditure, a portion of revenue expenditure and 
scholarships for the boys of the State.  Two -thirds of the seats in a Sainik School are 
reserved for the boys of the State.   
The RIMC and RMS on the other hand are institutions run entirely by the Central 
Government and admissions to these schools are made on the basis of an all India 
Entrance Examination with no provision of reservations for boys belonging to the State 
where the school is situated.” 
 
1.9 When asked to furnish the number of students passed out form Rashtriya Military 
Schools and Rashtriya Indian Military College during each of the last three years and the 
number of students who actually joined the Armed Forces , the Ministry in its written reply 
stated :- 
“Officers are inducted to the Defence Forces through Indian Military Academy, Officers 
Training Academy and their equivalent academies in respect of Air Force and Navy 
etc.  In so far as Rashtriya Indian Milita ry College, Rashtriya Military Schools and 
Sainik Schools are concerned, their primary aim is to   prepare boys for entry into the 
National Defence Academy (NDA)……." 
1.10 During the course of evidence the attention of the representatives of the Ministry wa s 
drawn to the fact that their existed a low percentage intake in the NDA from Sainik Schools 
during the years   2008, 2009 and 2010 which stood at 21, 22 and 18 respectively.  Their 
attention was also drawn towards the better percentage intake from the Ras htriya Indian 
Military College.  When the Committee wanted to know the reasons for said variance, a 
representative of the Ministry during evidence stated:- 

12 
 
"...................The Sainik  School boys leave the school in the month of April after 
appearing in their class XII exam. The courses which are starting in January at NDA, 
that exam takes place after they leave the school. The courses which are starting in 
the month of July at NDA, th at exam takes place in the month of August when the 
boys are in the school. That exam is under supervision of the school. 
Therefore,...................the results are much better than those shown in the red colour. 
That is because at that time they have go ne back to their respective homes. They are 
under the supervision of their parents. That is no reason for not joining NDA. Our 
analysis shows that it is primarily because they are not under the supervision of the 
school, so this result has gone down.  
Secondly, why is RIMC‟s result much ahead of that of Sainik Schools. RIMC is one of 
its kind. They take one or maximum two boys per State every six months. So, they get 
the best. In this case the boys are coming from a particular State with the reservation 
policy with SC, ST and the 60 per cent quota, 25 per cent for defence personnel, etc., 
and so the intake pattern is affected  by that. RIMC does not follow any reservation 
policy. Because of this one or two students per State provision, they invariably get th e 
best students. Our study has also revealed that they are the ex -students of Sainik 
Schools who leave the school in the VIII standard and join the RIMC. That is also 
there.  
RIMC students do not have the CBSE exam. Class XII exam of the RIMC is 
conducted by Director General of Military Training. It is recognised by CBS E. In case 
of Sainik School boys, they have to appear in the CBS E Class XII exam. Therefore, 
their attention gets diverted sometimes for NDA and sometimes for Class XII exam. It 
is something like, each one of us realises, that our own children when they appear in 
the XII standard that year they find it very difficult to crack the IIT or medical entrance 
because they require a separate preparation. Similar situation is happening. In case 
RIMC that does not happen because there the exam is an internal exam.  
RIMC follows a semester pattern which is not there in any of the schools under CBS E. 
They have Eighth Day, Eighth Week; Ninth Day, Ninth Week. What happens is that 
their XII is taken care and  they get more number of periods for preparation for the 
National Defence Academy. This is the reason. However, we have, this year, ordered 
a study by NIEPA, an independent body, to give us a proper feedback who will tell us 
how to improve this result of NDA so that we come up to the expectation levels."  
1.11 When asked specifically how the percentage intake from Sainik Schools to the NDA 
course be improved, the Ministry through a written reply informed as under :- 
 "With a view to increase this percentage:-  
(i)    An elaborate programme of in -service training to the teachers is being 
implemented with the assistance of experts from the Services and professional 
educational institutions/bodies like National University of Educational Planning and 

13 
 
Administration (NUEPA), National Council of Educational Research and Training 
(NCERT) and similar State run bodies.  
(ii)     In keeping with the specific aim of these schools, Service Selection Board (SSB) 
oriented training is being provided to the cadets using professional resource 
personnel.   
(iii)     The Ministry of Defence also provides training grant for upgrading training 
infrastructure and skills. 
(iv)       Tuition fee actually paid in class XI & XII is reimbursed as i ncentive to the 
cadets joining NDA and Technical Entry." 
1.12 To be specific, the Committee also wanted to know whether any comparative analysis 
had ever been made as to why the intake from the RIMC was much higher than that of Sainik 
Schools.  Elaborating the reasons the Ministry in their written reply intimated the Committee 
as under:- 
"No easy comparison can be made for the following reasons:-  
(i)   Selection procedures are different. One or two boys per State are admitted in 
RIMC every six months. Thus , RIMC always gets best boys of the State.  On 
the other hand, in the case of Sainik Schools, 67% of seats are reserved for 
boys from the State where the school is located. 25% seats are reserved for 
defence personnel and ex -servicemen.  Out of these quota s, there is 
reservation @ 15% and 7.5% respectively for SCs and STs. 
  (ii)      Secondly, RIMC students do not have to appear for CBSE examination. Class 
XII examination of RIMC conducted by Directorate General of Military Training 
is recognised by CBSE.  RIMC follows a semester pattern that allows the 
student appear twice in NDA examination while in the school. Students of RIMC 
get more number of periods for preparation for the NDA.  Cadets of Sainik 
Schools appear for Class XII CBSE examination.  Their a ttention is diverted 
between CBSE examination and NDA examination. 
(iii)     The number of cadets appearing for NDA from RIMC and Sainik Schools is 
entirely different. Every year about 50 -60 students from RIMC appear for NDA 
examination whereas number of s tudents appearing from Sainik Schools is 
about 900-1000 cadets.         
 
1.13 During their examination the Committee found that no comparative analysis was done 
on the functioning of Sainik Schools with such other schools in foreign countries.  In this 
regard they wanted to know that in the absence of such a comparison how would it be 

14 
 
ensured that the education and skills imparted would be world class.  Replying to the query, 
the Ministry through a written reply stated as under :- 
"Sainik Schools are today recognised amongst the premier educational institutions of 
the country.  So fa r as academic standards are concerned, the Sainik Schools have 
achieved a pass percentage of 100 percent in class X and 97 per cent in class XII 
board examination. Concerted efforts are being made to maintain the academic 
standards in Sainik Schools. An el aborate programme of in service training to the 
teachers, administrative staff and competition oriented training for the cadets is being 
implemented with the assistance of experts from the Services and professional 
educational institutions/ bodies. In keep ing with the specific aim of these schools, 
Service Selection Board (SSB) oriented training is also being provided using 
professional resource personnel.  Principals of Sainik Schools are also deputed for 
training programme conducted by CBSE in collaborati on with Indian Institutes of 
Management and NUEPA. Improvement of educational infrastructure is an ongoing 
process." 
1.14 The Committee's examination of  the subject has revealed that the Sainik Schools are 
not able to achieve their objectives fully as there is significant dropout rate prevalent amongst 
the students.   The representative of the Ministry  while acknowledging  the aforesaid fact  
candidly submitted as under:- 
"What we have seen is that in case we give that option to the students, the very 
purpose gets defeated. I do not know whether the presentation will have that or not. 
The number of students leaving school after good education up to Class X, is very 
high. The single child norm nowadays is prevailing in the country and large number of 
parents prefer to give good education from the military schools and leave them after 
getting public education and join various other institutions. Actually we do not want 
them to have an option. We make it compulsory that they have to appear in the NDA." 
Quantifying the dropout rate the witness further added :- 
"It is about 20 -22 per cent in the case of Sainik schools and 27 per cent in military 
schools. When they do so, they pay back the scholarship amount in toto." 
 However, contradicting its own figures the Minis try subsequently intimated through a 
written reply that the total dropout rate of students of Sainik Schools is about 7% annually.   
 
 

15 
 
1.15 When the Committee wanted to know about the steps taken to reduce the dropout rate  
in Sainik Schools, the Ministry in its written reply furnished as under :- 
“The steps taken by the Sainik Schools to reduce the drop – out rates of cadets are as 
under:- 
(a)  Poor Academic Background:- 
 
(i) Close monitoring the cadets‟ performance, identification of slow learners and   
providing extra coaching classes to them regularly to enhance the academic 
performance.  
 
(ii) Guidance and counseling are being given to the academically weak cadets   by 
House Masters, Headmaster, and Principal at regular intervals. 
 
(iii) The School Authorities regularly i nform the parents regarding the progress of 
the cadets and request the parents of academically weak cadets to put 
pressure on them to study hard.  
 
(iv) Adequate study material is  provided through library reference and practice.   
 
(v) The withdrawals on parents r equest is slightly on the higher side primarily due 
to the cadets who hail from the remote village, are not able to adapt to the 
routine/regimen of the school and also not able to overcome the homesickness. 
 
(b) Parents’ Request:- 
 
(i) The Parents are intimated of the advantages of the overall balanced personality 
of cadets and the role of Sainik Schools Education in contribution inculcating a 
balanced personality in life. 
 
(ii) The parents are advised of the advantages of the career of their wards in 
Armed Forces as the main aim of the Sainik Schools is to prepare the cadets 
for Armed Forces. 
 
(iii) Special care of those cadets who are not able to adjust themselves initially in 
the routine of the Sainik Schools is taken by School Authorities. 
 
(iv) Lot of emphasis is given on ac ademics and cadets are always encouraged to 
excel themselves. 
 

16 
 
(v) Visit to NDA/IMA to attend/ witness passing out parades.  Visit to Defence 
Establishments. 
 
 
(c) Disciplinary Grounds:- 
 
(i) Central talks have been organized to create awareness about the pernicious 
effect of ragging. 
(ii) Discipline committee comprising Senior Staff and cadets to monitor/resole such 
cases. 
(iii) Close interaction with the parents. 
(iv) Creation of awareness about ragging etc. through assembly talks day to day 
basis. 
(v) Display of information/ sign boards against ragging 
(vi) The orders of Hon‟ble Supreme Court against ragging and its consequences 
have been displayed prominently on Cadets `Notice Board & Cadets‟ Mess.  
 
(d) Medical Grounds:- The Medical grounds cases are brought down through strict 
Medical Examination  at intake level  and by conducting Annual Medical Examinations 
of the Cadets. 
2. The results achieved  by all the Sainik Schools by implementing above remedial  
measures to reduce the drop-out rates of cadets are as under:- 
(a)  The withdrawals on poor  academic grounds is very minimal due to the corrective 
measures adopted viz., close monitoring   of the cadets performance,  identification of 
slow  learners and providing extra coaching classes. 
(b)  The Schools have been able to   curtail the drop -outs/withdrawals and continue to 
Endeavour to achieve nil drop-outs.” 
1.16 The Committee were concerned to know about the lack of knowledge of English 
amongst the students hailing from rural background and they wanted to know about  the 
efforts  being made or proposed for improving the English communication skills, both spoken 
and written, for such students.  Throwing light on the issue the Ministry through a written 
reply stated :- 
"To improve the English communication skills of the cadets following steps are taken:- 
 (i)    Establishment of language labs and internet facilities. 
 (ii)   Upgradation and modernization of libraries. 

17 
 
 (iii)   Emphasis on spoken English as medium of communication. 
 (iv)  Compulsory stage activities like lectures, public speaking, debates,   
 group discussions, dramatics etc. 
 (v)   Faculty development programmes by specialists."     
 When further asked about the time period as to when the concrete outcome are likely 
to be registered in this regard, the Ministry clarified as under :- 
"Improvement of communication skills is an ongoing continuous process. Each year a 
new batch of class VI with many cadets from rural/semi urban background enters the 
school. These cadets are groomed over the next seven years to achi eve prescribed 
CBSE standards." 
 
1.17 The Committee also felt that there exists a direct co -relation between the course 
strength of NDA  and  the number of students selected thereto.  Accordingly, the Committee 
wanted to know whether any need had been felt for increasing the course strength of the 
NDA.  The Ministry in this regard informed through a written reply as under :- 
"The increase in co urse strength of NDA was considered and following measures 
have been taken:- 
(i)  Sanction for 16 th Squadron at NDA has already been accorded. This has 
 enhanced the capacity of NDA from 1800 cadets to 1920 cadets. 
(ii)   Proposal for raising 5 th Battalion at NDA with 4 new Squadrons is under 
 consideration." 
  

18 
 
CHAPTER – II 
FUNDING/OPENING OF NEW SCHOOLS 
 
2.1 The Committee drew the attention of the representatives of the Ministry to their 
Twelfth Report on Demands for Grants whereby it had been recommended that the central 
funding for running the Sainik Schools may be increased to 90% and the remaining 10% 
funding to be met by the respective State Governments, as this would justify the Bhagidari 
concept. Moreover, this would also address the issues of some of the States who were not 
forthcoming for setting up the new schools due to financial constraints. 
2.2 Throwing light on the funding aspects of the Sainik Schools , the Secretary, Ministry of 
Defence during evidence stated as under :- 
"….. These institutions have three principal sources of funding. One is the State 
Government. The entire capital expenditure on land and buildings is met by the 
respective State Governments who are also required to provide funds for maintenance 
of infrastructure and for new infrastructural projects. The State Governments also 
award scholarships on merit -cum-means basis. The Central  Government provides 
additional infrastructure grant, funds towards salaries and scholarships. The third 
source is the fees from the students that is used for recurring expenditure of the 
school..................................................................... 
A grant of Rs. 44 crore sanctioned has been gainfully utilized by all Schools during the 
last financial year. Apart from the infrastructural grant, measures have also been taken 
to improve the service conditions of the employees of our Sainik Schools by 
implementing the Sixth Pay Commission with 100 per cent of its burden being borne 
by the Central Government. The Defence Scholarships have been increased three -
fold. That too would greatly benefit the wards of the Defence personnel and reduce 
the financial b urden on their parents. The net result of all these measures would 
compensate for the burden of tuition fee being paid by the parents of the 
cadets........................................................................  
As an innovative measure, a plan of  granting Rs. 1.0 crore each to our Sainik Schools 
annually for modernization and infrastructure development has been approved by the 
Ministry of Defence in this financial year. All these measures are in line with the 
specific directions given by Raksha Ma ntri for reducing the financial burden on the 
parents and for improving the training and infrastructural facilities in all the Sainik 
Schools......" 
 
 

19 
 
2.3 The Secretary in this regard further stated :- 
"The Central Government is offering funds and that is why we saw that over a period 
of four or five years from Rs.16 crore, it has come to Rs.93 crore.  It is not an issue.  It 
is because if the scheme is made like that, the Central Government has to make 
initiative.  Here and there, it is not such a big issue.   
Probably, the fact is that the Government would like to introduce this scheme – 
keeping this in its original shape – where the State Government also feels the 
responsibility of participating.  It is very important.  Though, we have been taking more 
and more burden on ourselves, as Rs. 1 crore is being given every year.  The central 
issue is that the State Government should also participate.  It is very important.”     
 
2.4 When enquired about the break -up of the different sources of funding the Sainik 
Schools, namely the States, the Centre and tuition fees, the Ministry in their written reply 
submitted as under :- 
“Sainik Schools are primarily self -sustaining institutions in which funds are received 
from State, Centre and the tuition fee. The current break up is as under:- 
(a) State Governments 
      The entire capital expenditure on land, buildings, furniture and educational 
equipments required by Sainik Schools. 
 Major portion of the running expenditure. 
 Maintenance of buildings, roads, installations and the major replacements. 
 Release grants -in-aid to meet special requirement on actual need basis or 
sought for additional requirements of buildings and furniture, transport, 
laboratory equipment, etc. 
 Grant of scholarships to State domicile cadets.  
 
(b) Central Government 
      As per Sainik Schools Society Rules & Regulations, Central Government has to 
provide three Service Officers and APTCC/NCC instructors.  Their salaries are paid 
from the Defence Service Estimates.  Ministry of Defence also provides  scholarships 
to the wards of Service personnel and ex-servicemen.   
 
 

20 
 
However, in order to reduce the burden of fee on parents, following assistance is 
being provided by the Central Government to Sainik Schools :- 
 Defence scholarship which has been increa sed from Rs. 10,500 to 32,000/ - 
per annum 
 
 Subsidy on tuition fee/dietary charges of Rs. 16,000/ -(approx) per annum 
per cadet to all the categories of cadets studying in Sainik Schools. 
 
 Reimbursement of actual tuition fee paid in class XI & XII by the cad ets who 
join NDA as an incentive. 
 
 Scholarship to cadets who are in receipt of State Government scholarship 
@ Rs. 2,000/-, Rs. 1062/- and Rs 125/- per annum. 
 
 100% additionality on account of implementation of recommendations of 6 th 
Pay Commission in respect of pay and allowances, pension of employees of 
Sainik schools as grants-in-aid. 
 
         In order to improve the infrastructure and for betterment of Sainik Schools:- 
 Regular Training Grant of Rs. 10 lakhs is provided to each Sa inik School 
every year. 
 
 An amount of Rs. 2 crore was provided in the year 2007 -08 to each of the 
then existing 22 Sainik Schools for infrastructure development as a one time 
measure. 
 
 It has been decided to provide an amount of Rs. 1 crore every year as 
grants-in-aid to each Sainik School for infrastructure development and 
modernization w.e.f. financial year 2011-12. 
 
(c) Tuition Fee 
       As Sainik Schools are primarily self -sustaining institutions, a major portion of 
the expenditure is met out by the fees payable by the parents. However, the burden of 
fees is offset by the scholarship provided by the State Government and Central 
Government. It is pertinent to mention here that where the Scholarship provided by the 
State Government is more, parents have to pay less.   The schools such as Bijapur & 

21 
 
Kodagu (Karnataka), Ghorakhal (Uttarakhand), Gopalganj & Nalanda (Bihar) and 
Kunjpura (Haryana) are getting regular funds from respective State Governments and 
cadets in these schools are getting a handsome amount as scholarship. Thus, in 
these schools, parents have to pay less.  The Schools such as Balachadi (Gujarat), 
Chittorgarh (Rajasthan), Goalpara (Assam), Nagrota (J&K) & Rewa (Madhya Pradesh) 
are not getting regular funds from respective State Governments. The scholarships 
slabs and rates have not been revised for a long time. Therefore, in these schools, 
parents have to pay more.” 
2.5 On being asked about any fresh request made in the year s 2010 and 2011 as well for 
apportioning funds from Member s of Parliament Local Area Development Scheme for 
infrastructural improvement in Sainik Schools, the Ministry in their written reply submitted as 
under: 
“Requests have been made during the years 2010 and 2011 at the level of the 
Principals of the Sainik Schools for apportioning funds from Member of Parliament 
Local Area Development Fund.  However, only Sainik School, Amravathi Nagar has 
been able to get an amount of Rs. five lakhs during the year 2010.” 
[[[[[[[[[[[[[[[[[[  
2.6 The Committee have learnt that even the allocated amount of Rs. 1 crore was not 
actually disbursed to each Sainik School per year which has led the schools into a 
disadvantage.  Explaining the position, the Ministry in a written reply informed the Committee 
as under :- 
"Sufficient amount has not been allocated in the budget for the current financial year, 
so as to make it possible to disburse rupees one crore to each Sainik School. The 
amount of Rs. 3,66,00,000 available in the allocated budget has been disbursed to the 
most deserving Sainik Schools."       
2.7 In a power point presentation before the Committee, a representative of the Ministry 
during oral evidence brought into light the funding pattern which is as under :-  
Funding Pattern of Multiple Stake Holders 
State Government    
 Land  - 38 Acres to 509 Acres 
 Building  Maintenance & 
Scholarships  
 
- Approx 75 crores for new schools  

22 
 
Central Government   
 Defence Scholarships 
NDA Incentive 
Fee and dietary Subsidy 
VIth Central Pay Commission 
IT Grant etc. 
  
93 crores (2011-12) 
Parents   
 Tuition Fee  
Dietary Charges 
Pocket  Money 
Miscellaneous 
 Approximate annual charges – 
Rs. 75000/- after deducting 
various scholarships parent‟s 
contribution varies between 
 Rs. 0 to Rs. 44,270/- annually  
 
2.8  After nearly celebrating golden jubilee of establishment of Sainik Schools, only 24 
Sainik Schools have been set up in various parts of the country. When asked about the 
reasons for the same the Ministry of Defence in a written reply stated as under :- 
“Sainik Schools are established on receipt of a specific request from a State 
Government. It must agree to provide land along with funds for the creation and 
maintenance of basic infrastructure, equipment and facilities besides scholarship for 
the cadets of t he State. The State Government is also required to sign a prescribed 
Memorandum of Agreement (MoA). Once the State Government makes a commitment 
to provide suitable land, the requisite finance and to sign the MoA, Ministry of Defence 
takes further action o n the proposal.   Ministry of Defence provides three service 
officers for the posts of Principal, Headmaster and Registrar and the APTCC/NCC 
instructors to the Sainik Schools besides scholarships to the cadets.  
Eleven requests have been received during th e last five years from various State 
Governments for opening new Sainik Schools in their States.  Out of these, four 
proposals have since been finalised and new Sainik Schools have since been opened.  
These are Punglwa in Nagaland (02.04.2007), Kodagu in K arnataka (18.10.2007), 
Ambikapur in Chhatisgarh (15.08.2008) and Rewari in Haryana (02.04.2009).   
In the case of Sikkim, the State Government initially offered site at Ravangla on 
20.01.2005 which was found suitable by the Ministry of Defence.  On 25.01.2 008, the 
State Government informed that the proposal to start Sainik School at Ravangla is not 
feasible and an alternate site at Bojoghari was proposed.  In principle approval of 
Ministry of Defence was conveyed on 08.05.2008 for opening the Sainik School at 
Bojoghari. On 25.07.2008, the State Government informed that due to technical 
problems a new site has been identified at Namphing. The same was not found 
suitable by this Ministry. No further site has since been proposed by the State 
Government. Ultimately, the matter has been treated as closed.  

23 
 
The State of Punjab is already having a Sainik School at Kapurthala.   In the year 
2007, the Chief Minister, Punjab requested the Raksha Mantri to open one more 
Sainik School in the State. He was informed of the  responsibilities and financial 
obligations of the State Government for opening the Sainik School. He was requested 
to forward the State Government‟s willingness to accept these responsibilities and 
confirmation regarding willingness to meet all requiremen ts. No further reference has 
since been received from the State Government. 
The State of Jharkhand is already having a Sainik School at Tilaiya. A proposal was 
received in the year 2007 for opening of one more Sainik School in the State at 
Gumla. The site proposed by the State Government was inspected by officers from 
Ministry of Defence but the same was not found suitable. No further reference has 
been received from the State Government after May, 2008.  
The State of Uttarakhand is already having a Sainik School at Ghorakhal.   In the year 
2010, the Chief Minister, Uttarakhand requested the Raksha Mantri to open one more 
Sainik School in the State. He was informed of the responsibilities and financial 
obligations of the State Government for opening the Sain ik School. He was requested 
to forward the State Government‟s willingness to accept these responsibilities and 
confirmation regarding willingness to meet all requirements. No further reference has 
since been received from the State Government. 
Recently, Pr oposals have been received from the State Governments of Orissa, 
Madhya Pradesh and Andhra Pradesh for setting up new Sainik Schools in 
Sambalpur, Sagar and Chittoor districts respectively. After site inspection by  the 
officers of the Ministry, „in princi ple‟ approval has been accorded for setting up of new 
Sainik Schools in these States. The State Governments have been requested to 
transfer the land, build up basic infrastructure and sign Memorandum of Agreement. 
Service Headquarters have been requested t o give a commitment for sparing suitable 
service officers for the posts of Principal, Headmaster and Registrar.” 
2.9 Elaborating on the proposal of some of the State Government s, the Ministry in the 
post evidence reply submitted as under:-  
 (A)  Sikkim  
 The Committee found that request for opening up a new Sainik Schools in Sikkim has 
been pending since long due to one reason or the other.  On a specific query about the 
problem, the Ministry through a post evidence reply informed the Committee as under :- 
"As per the present dispensation, Sainik Schools are established on receipt of a 
specific request from a State Government.  
In case of Sikkim, initially State Government earmarked land at Ravangla  for opening 
of Sainik School. The same was approved by the Ministry of Defence.  However, State 
Government did not transfer the land to Ministry of Defence. The alternate site 

24 
 
proposed by the State Government at Bojoghari was also approved by Ministry of 
Defence but later on the State Government intimated some technical problems to 
transfer the said land.      
The site proposed at Namphing was not found suitable due to the fact that size of the 
land was not adequate. Secondly, the land was recorded in the name of Education 
Department of State Government. Based on the past experience, it was ascertained 
from the State Government whether the proposed land is earmarked for any other 
project. No reply was received from State Government in the matter despite 
reminders. As the State Government has not been able to provide a suitable land, the 
matter of establishment of a Sainik School in Sikkim has been treated as closed." 
(B)  Jharkhand 
 Similarly, in Jharkhand a request has been pending since May, 2007 for openi ng up a 
second school.  The Committee noted that an alternative site in place of Gumla has not yet 
been provided by the State Government. The Ministry in this regard informed the Committee 
through a written note as under :- 
"The State Government informed that the land identified for setting up Sainik School is 
under acquisition. Hon‟ble Raksha Mantri requested the State Government on 28.7.08 
to confirm if the process of acquisition is complete. There is no further response from 
the State Government." 
(C) Uttarakhand 
 In regard to Uttarakhand also the Committee have found that the matter of opening of 
the new school could not reach to a logical conclusion as it is apparent that the State did not 
convey its willingness to accept responsibilities conveyed to it .  In this regard, the Ministry 
through a written reply informed as under :- 
"The State of Uttarakhand is already having a Sainik School at Ghorakhal.   In the 
year 2010, the Chief Minister, Uttarakhand requested the Raksha Mantri to open one 
more Sainik School in the State. He was informed of the responsibilities and financial 
obligations of the State Government for opening the Sainik School. He was requested 
to forward the State Government‟s willingness to accept these responsibilities and 
confirmation to meet all requirements. No further reference has since been received 
from the State Government." 
 
 
 

25 
 
(D) Orissa, Madhya Pradesh and Andhra Pradesh  
Similar problems were also seen on the part of the State Governments of Orissa, 
Madhya Pradesh and Andhra Pradesh which are clear from the written information furnished 
by the Ministry.  The information pertaining to the State of Orissa states :-  
"The Sta te Government initially offered land at Bargarh district. The sites proposed 
were inspected but not found suitable. State Government was requested to suggest 
alternate suitable land. State Government again proposed a site at Sambalpur district. 
The site wa s inspected and it was intimated to the State Government that the new 
school will be opened at permanent site. It was also requested to construct minimum 
infrastructure facilities at permanent site before the school could start. The State 
Government was al so requested to sign the Memorandum of Agreement on 
27.10.2010. State Government has been reminded time and again by this Ministry to 
intimate the present status of construction of minimum facilities and signing of MoA, 
but no response has so far been received." 
For Madhya Pradesh, the Ministry has informed as under :- 
"After inspection, in -principle approval was conveyed in regard to the permanent 
location of the proposed school at Gambihiria village in the district of Sagar.  Approval 
of State Government for allotment of 38 acres of land was received. Principal, Sainik 
School, Rewa was authorised to liaise on behalf of Sainik Schools Society with the 
State Government in regard to transfer of land. Principal, Sainik School, Rewa 
concluded an agreement betwe en Government of MP and Ministry of Defence for 30 
years lease of 15.2 Hectare of land for the proposed school. State Government has 
been consistently requested to take necessary action for signing of MoA and 
construction of minimum infrastructure faciliti es to enable this Ministry to process the 
case further.  No response has so far been received." 
2.10 As far as the State of Andhra Pradesh is concerned, the Committee have been 
informed as under :- 
"In-principle approval was conveyed on 8.7.2011 for opening of Sainik School in 
Chittoor district. State Government was requested to construct minimum facilities at 
permanent site in the first phase before the new school could start. The State 
Government was also requested to sign the Memorandum of Agreement (MoA). MoA 
has since been signed between State Government and Sainik Schools Society. State 
Government has been requested again to construct minimum infrastructure facilities at 
permanent site before the school could start." 
2.11 On being further probed whether any definite timeline was fixed for the various stages 
of setting up of Sainik Schools.  Such stages may include singing of Memorandum of 

26 
 
Agreement, providing suitable land  by the State Government and creating infrastructure,  the 
Ministry in the written reply submitted as under:- 
“Besides providing suitable land and signing of prescribed Memorandum of 
Agreement, the State Government has to provide basic infrastructure where the 
school can be opened. The school starts functioning as soon as the minimum requisite 
infrastructure is provided by the State Government.”   
2.12 When asked about the number of Sainik Schools for which Memorandum of 
Agreements have been signed by  State Governments, the Mini stry in their written reply 
stated as under :- 
“So far Memorandum of Agreements have been signed by seven State Governments.” 
2.13 Further when being enquired about the manner in which matter had been pursued 
with the remaining State Governments to enable early signing of Memorandum of 
Agreement, the Ministry of Defence stated :- 
“Letters at the level of Raksha Rajya Mantri have been sent to the Chief Ministers of 
concerned State Governments. Principals of all the Sainik Schools take up the matter 
regularly with the State Government authorities.  Inspecting officers also pursue the 
matter with State Government officials including the concerned Secretaries, whenever 
they visit the Schools.” 
2.14 When enquired about the opening of Sainik Schools suo-moto by Central Government 
the representative of the Ministry of Defence, during the oral evidence submitted  as under :- 
“The suggestion is that Central Government should open schools suo motu.  It should 
be welcomed except that it would mean a change in the scheme .  The scheme as it 
was first conceived in the 60s was a collaborative effort so that the areas of the 
country, which did not have this kind of facility, should have military schools.  That is 
why, even now 67 per cent reservation for the children of the S tate, in which the 
school is located is maintained.”        
 2.15 On a pin-pointed query whether the Ministry could expend on construction and 
infrastructure if it is provided land by the State Government  in order to provide at least one 
school in every state, the Secretary said :- 
"……………the whole scheme has to be reworked… …..…we can examine this 
proposal." 
 
 

27 
 
Delay in Establishment of Sainik Schools at Nalanda and Gopalganj 
 
2.16 The Committee were also in formed during evidence that as per the Memorandum of 
Agreement signed by the State Government of Bihar in the year 2003, the building for 
Nalanda was to be constructed between the year 2003 and 2005.  However, it could not 
come to fruition as the land was provided twice but after the inspection it was found that it 
had certain shortcomings.  Now, the land which has been given is found to be suitable and 
tender has also been issued.  The school would be completed in two or three years.  
Subsequently, clarifying the position further the Ministry in a post evidence reply informed as 
under :- 
"The tender for construction of school building was published on 27.6.2011. The 
tender was finalised on 14 th September, 2011. The work of construction of compound 
wall is in progress." 
2.17 Similarly, there has been evident delay in establishing Sainik School at Gopalganj in 
Bihar State.  The reasons given by a representative of the Ministry during evidence included 
unsuitable land which had to be land filled as during monsoons substantial water logging took 
place.  The Ministry has got  the land filling operation completed  and according to it the 
tender for construction has been issued and the construction would take two or three years.  
The land filling was done by the Sta te Government.  In this regard, the Ministry in a post 
evidence reply also informed :- 
"The work of construction of school building was entrusted to Bihar State Educational 
Infrastructure Development Corporation (BSEIDC). As per the information provided by  
BSEIDC, tender has not been issued. Design and detailed estimate has been 
prepared which is in the process of technical sanction by the competent authority." 
2.18 On a related query enquiring about the number of Sainik School in desert areas, the 
Committee in the post evidence reply submitted that there was no Sainik School in the desert 
areas.  Further, on a query asking about the districts in which maximum land for defence 
purposes was acquired and the position of Sainik School in such districts/areas, t he Ministry 
in the post evidence reply stated that o ne school is operational in the Chittorgarh District of 
Rajasthan.  It was also informed that in the Jaisalmer District of Rajasthan, Ministry had 
acquired largest area of land for Defence purposes.  

28 
 
 
2.19 During the course of examination, the Committee also found that there were certain 
problems in manning the new schools due to constraint in releasing the serving officers for 
such schools.  In this connection, a representative of the Ministry during evi dence informed 
the Committee that each of the 24 Sainik Schools ha s been provided with three serving 
officers which makes a total of 72.  The Service Headquarters of Army, Air Force and Navy 
take a view that establishment of officers has not been increased  whereas during the last six 
years the number of Sainik Schools has gone up to 24 from 18.  In addition to the 72 officers 
there are five serving JCOs and NCOs equivalent for NCC and physical training instructors.  
The Ministry is not able to meet this demand and manning is indeed a big problem.  The 
Ministry has no objection in opening new schools but all these problems were to be adjusted.  
  

29 
 
CHAPTER – III 
ADMISSION OF GIRL CADETS 
 
3.1 During examination of the subject the attention of the Ministry was drawn to the fact 
that although the female officers have been granted permanent commission in various 
streams in the services yet there was no Sainik School for the girl cadets in the country.  The 
Committee were a lso of the view that the Ministry could address this issue by opening the 
schools exclusively for the girls and the land should not be a problem because it can be 
taken from the cantonments.  Explaining the view point of the Ministry a representative during 
evidence stated as under :- 
"The points are very well taken.  Girls are not taken into any Sainik School because at 
the moment girls do not find any place in NDA.  It is as simple as that.  There are 
some girls, who would be studying in our Sainik School s but they would be the 
children of the staff.  They will not follow the regimen of the other students.  Perhaps, 
they would not take part in physical training activities.  They would go back to their 
homes, etc.   
The suggestion is that Central Government  should open schools suo motu.  It should 
be welcomed except that it would mean a change in the scheme.  The scheme as it 
was first conceived in the 60s was a collaborative effort so that the areas of the 
country, which did not have this kind of facility, should have military schools.  That is 
why, even now 67 per cent reservation for the children of the State, in which the 
school is located is maintained." 
3.2 When asked whether Ministry can open a school for girls if the State Government 
wants to do so, the Secretary stated :- 
"The issue is that first we have to make rooms for girls in NDA.  If we open a school 
and they are not taken in NDA, then it is also an issue.   There are only certain 
streams, which have been cleared as of now.  We can clarify this issue.  It is not all.  
There are certain streams where girls have been allowed."    
3.3 He also stated :- 
"........................... presently only the girls who are children of staff of Sainik Schools, 
they are getting education in Sainik Schools.  As far as physical activity is concerned, 
their curriculum is different.  They are not being trained for getting into the Army." 
 

30 
 
3.4 The Secretary on a policy issue in this regard informed the Committee that after the 
recent Supreme Court Judgement a policy has been framed where the girls are given 
permanent commission in non -combatant streams.  He was of the view that in future this 
policy could be changed on the lines of several countries such as USA where the female 
officers are also inducted for the combatant duties.  
3.5 His attention was also drawn to the fact that there were areas where women could do 
well and future wars were going to be mostly technological involving the use of computers 
etc.   When his opinion on this issue was solicited, the Secretary said :- 
"......................., I am not disagreeing with you.  I am saying that it should be done.  
But it is for Parliament to make a policy for that." 
3.6  When asked whether Ministry could propose a policy where the girls could be taken 
for combat duties in the Armed Forces, the Defence Secretary stated :- 
"The fact is that there is a shift taking place.  There is no doubt about it.  But this 
change is very difficult and there is resistance also within the organisation.  When a 
proposal is moved, it is considered by the Committee of Chiefs and then there are 
various pros and cons.  There is no accommodation, so how to keep them.  There are 
other issues also which are really of genuine concern.  So, gradually they are opening 
out.  I cannot say that they are just saying no to this.  In Air Force, all ground duties 
have now been opened.  This is a policy decision after the Supreme Court took up this 
case.  In Navy also, some branches have been opened up.  But this process has to be 
gradual and as we move along then we have to create the commensurate 
infrastructure also to suit them and which is convenient for the girl and women officers.  
It is not that we can ju st send them in the field without any proper toilet and proper 
staying places.  So, that is also a limiting factor." 
3.7 When enquired about the proposal sent by the Madhya Pradesh Government for 
opening up a Sainik School exclusively for girls, the Ministry in a written reply stated :- 
"There is no proposal to admit girls in Sainik Schools.  However, a proposal was 
received from Government of Madhya Pradesh to set up Sainik School exclusively for 
girls.  The same has been considered but in the present scen ario, it has not been 
found practically possible to set up Sainik School exclusively for girls."  
 
 
 

31 
 
3.8 In a sequel to the intake of cadets to the NDA course the Defence Secretary also 
informed the Committee that the Sainik School students also join the Armed Forces through 
other schemes.  To be precise he said :- 
".......A sizeable number of Sainik Schools‟  students also join the technical entry 
schemes and Armed Forces Medical College, besides other direct entry schemes 
through the Indian Military Academy, Indian Naval Academy and Indian Air Force 
Academy after their graduation. Sainik Schools thus provided  unique opportunities 
over the last five decades to students from the underprivileged socio -economic strata 
to rise to the highest levels in various fields....." 
3.9 The figures supplied by the Ministry indicated that on an average about 20% of the 
Sainik School students join the NDA.  In this connection, the Committee wanted to know 
whether the Ministry ever found that the remaining 80% of the students who are not abl e to 
make to the National Defence Academy and have subsequently joined the Armed Forces 
through different schemes such as through Officers Training Academy, Indian Military 
Academy, Coast Guard etc.   Further they also wanted to know about the percentage of  the 
students who joined Armed Forces after graduation in general or technical branches through 
Indian Military Academy, Officers Training Academy and equivalent academies i n respect of 
Air Force and Navy. The Ministry could not give any reply to the perti nent queries of the 
Committee and through a written reply it simply stated :- 
"No such data is maintained." 
 
  

32 
 
CHAPTER – IV 
MENACE OF RAGGING 
4.1 As per media reports one particular incident of ragging at Sainik School, Tilaiya  was 
reported by the print and electronic media on 14 th November, 2011.  When enquired about 
the number of ragging cases reported in Sainik Schools, the Committee during the course of 
oral evidence have been apprised that a s per records available, no stude nt has left the 
School due to ragging in last three years. In the last three years, 13 students have been 
expelled as punishment for ragging and 15 students suspended from school for 1 -2 months. 
An internal enquiry has been conducted by the school authorit ies in the matter.  It was 
revealed during the enquiry that the incident in question occurred during November, 2010.  
However, the matter was not reported by the victims to the school authorities at that time.  
The senior students responsible for the raggi ng passed out from the School in March, 2011.  
Chairman, Local Board of Administration of the School has been instructed to initiate a formal 
court of inquiry into the whole incident and specifically on the role of the school 
administration.  During the court of inquiry, the perpetrators would also be summoned so that 
their point of view can be recorded.  Further action would depend on the outcome of the court 
of inquiry. 
4.2 When the attention of the representative of the Ministry during the course  of ora l 
evidence was drawn to the news item whereby it was reported that due to ragging one 
student left the school and was working in a tea shop , t he representative of the Ministry 
stated as under :- 
"Two cases have been reported.  In the case of one boy, he an d his parents were 
repeatedly asked to give in writing and to explain why he has left the school and why 
he has not come back.  The parent and the boy have written to say that he has joined 
some other school and that they have no complaint against the school." 
4.3 The Defence Secretary further added:- 
“Let me assure that these cases will be taken to the logical conclusion.  We will not 
leave anybody unpunished who are guilty.” 
 

33 
 
4.4 When asked  about the number of complaints of ragging which have been receiv ed 
during each of the last three years, steps taken to remedify the situation or to persuade the 
students to rejoin the school who have left the school due to ragging and whether any 
enquiry has ever been instituted to find out the lapses in this regard, t he Ministry of Defence 
in the written reply stated as under:- 
  
“Stray incidents of ragging and bullying have come into light from Sainik Schools in the 
past.  In the last three years, for a total of 12885 cadets in 24 schools, a total of 11 
incidents have been reported.  One particular incident of ragging at Sainik Sc hool, 
Tilaiya was reported by the print and electronic media on 14 th November, 2011. As per 
records available, no student has left the School due to ragging in last three years. 
[[[ 
In Sainik Schools, strict action has always been taken against the perpetrators in all 
reported and observed cases of ragging.  Based on the gravity of the matter, suitable 
action is taken such as counselling, community service, revocation of appointment, 
suspension and in extreme cases expulsion.  In the last three years, 13 students have 
been expelled as punishment for ragging and 15 students suspended from school for 
1-2 months. 
A voluntary organization, Jharkhand Human Rights Movement has approached the  
National Commission for Protection of Child Rights regarding ragging in Sainik School, 
Tilaiya.  The Commission has asked the Ministry of Defence to get the matter 
investigated and take further necessary action.   
An internal enquiry has been conducted by  the school authorities in the matter.  A 
senior officer of the rank of Brigadier was also sent by the Ministry of Defence to 
investigate the matter.   It was revealed during the enquiry that the incident in question 
occurred during November, 2010. However, the matter was not reported by the victims 
to the school authorities at that time. The senior students responsible for the ragging 
passed out from the School in March, 2011. Chairman, Local Board of Administration 
of the School has been instructed to ini tiate a formal court of inquiry into the whole 
incident and specifically on the role of the school administration.  During the court of 
inquiry, the perpetrators will also be summoned so that their point of the view can be 
recorded.  Further action will depend on the outcome of the court of inquiry.”   
4.5  The representative of Ministry further clarified during oral evidence:- 
“I want to assure the Hon. Members that we take the ragging incident very seriously.  
While we see that certain amount of disciplin e might be considered necessary to 
toughen the boys, but the ragging that was shown on the television clip was 
unpardonable and absolutely brutal.  That has been the consistent view taken in the 
Ministry itself.  It may also be pointed out that the boy who  complained to the 
Commission for the prevention of child abuse is not connected in any way with the 
clip.  It is about a year old.  However, in this present instance, a Board of Inquiry has 

34 
 
been ordered which is sitting at the moment.  Two boys responsibl e for the ragging 
have passed out of the school.  They will be located and their views will be recorded 
by the Board of Inquiry.  The report of the Board of Inquiry is expected by the end of 
this month.  I should mention the legal opinion was also taken be cause the High Court 
of Jharkhand has also taken suo motu  cognizance of the television clip and has 
ordered the State Government to institute its own independent inquiry.  The legal 
opinion said that we should not take any further action until the views of  the boys 
involved is not taken. I want to assure the Committee that the matter will not end here 
and we are very serious about it.  In our Sainik Schools there is so much procedure in 
place to control ragging.  Parents and students are constantly encourag ed to report 
cases of intimidation or brutality of any kind.  No child has actually left the school 
because of ragging.   
4.6 Summing up the position  in the aforesaid ragging cases the Ministry in the post 
evidence submitted as under:- 
"Court of Inquiry su bmitted its report.   After examination of the report, the Ministry of 
Defence has sent it back with some observations."  
  

35 
 
CHAPTER – V 
MISCELLANEOUS  
 
(A) Motivating the Cadets 
5.1 On the issue of providing support which include coaching and guidance to the 
students of Sainik Schools to improve their intake in NDA, the Ministry in the written note 
submitted as under :- 
“These are fully residential schools run on public school lines. The schools provide all 
facilities for overall personality development. N CC is compulsory upto class -XII. They 
offer a common CBSE curriculum and the medium of instruction is English, though 
English is not a pre-requisite for admission. Most Sainik Schools are designed for 580 
cadets spread over from class -VI to XII. Curriculum  and facilities in Sainik School 
include Adventure Activities, Games & Sports, various Hobbies clubs, NCC, well 
equipped Laboratories, Library, Obstacle Course, Riding Clubs, CSD Canteen, 
Swimming Pool, and Gymnasium. 
Sainik Schools admit boys in Classes V I & IX. Admissions are made strictly in the 
order of merit on the basis of an Entrance Examination held once a year. 67% of the 
seats in each Sainik School are reserved for boys from the State in which the Sainik 
School is located. 15% of the total seats a re reserved for Scheduled Castes and 7.5% 
seats for Scheduled Tribes.  25% seats are reserved for Children of service personnel 
including ex-servicemen.” 
 
5.2 When asked to furnish the details of the modus-operandi being followed by the Sainik 
Schools, frequency of such lectures during the last three years, and the steps being taken to 
increase their frequency as well as the feedback received , as well as the name of the cities  
in which the coaching and guidance is being imparted,  the Ministry of Defence i n their 
written reply, stated  as  under: 
“In keeping with specific aim of these schools, various specific initiatives have been 
taken to ensure the development of a well -rounded personality to give the cadet the 
necessary competitive edge. These are hobby classes, communication skills 
development programme, extensive outdoor games and sports exposure, co-curricular 
activities in literary/ dramatics fields and extensive IT exposure. To motivate cadets 

36 
 
and increase intake of Sainik Schools cadets in National Defence Academy, following 
steps have been initiated:-  
(i) Detailing cadets for UPSC written examination coaching and Service 
Selection Board (SSB) through coaching and guidance at professional 
institutes in major cities. 
(ii) Detailing ex-assessors from the Service Selection Boards to provide i n-
depth guidance to Cadets from time to time at Schoollevel. 
(iii) Development of obstacle course for physical training at School level for 
SSB Exam.   
(iv) Organizing regular motivational lectures for joining Armed Forces by 
Senior Serving Officers of Army/Air Force/ Navy to cadets. 
(v) Organisation of SSB guidance by Inspecting Officers and Service 
Officers who are ex-assessors at regional and central locations. 
Conduct of motivation lectures by guest speakers, school alumni and senior defence 
officers is  a regular ongoing system in the Sainik Schools.  The school Principals 
organize such lectures from time to time and officers from the Services are also 
deputed through the Sainik Schools Society to deliver the motivation lectures in the 
schools on SSB guidance, leadership and other related issues.  On an average, 3 to 5 
such lectures are organised every year in each school. Inspecting Officers also 
interact intensively with cadets during their visits to the Schools.  All these lectures are 
well received by the cadets of Sainik Schools.       
Guidance and coaching for the Service Selection Board is imparted to all those cadets 
who receive the call up letters initially at the school level by qualified officers and ex -
assessors. Services of specialist private academies are also taken by calling them at 
school level itself for giving coaching for written UPSC examination and Service 
Selection Board. Cadets are also sent for coaching mainly at Delhi and Chandigarh.”  
5.3 In a presentation before the Committee, th e Ministry furnished the following statistical 
information about the Academic performance of Sainik Schools:- 
Academic performance class X Results w.e.f 2001 
Year Appeared Passed Pass percentage 
2001 1504 1490 99.06 
2002 1474 1458 98.91 

37 
 
2003 1548 1513 97.73 
2004 1550 1511 97.48 
2005 1588 1567 98.67 
2006 1590 1527 96.03 
2007 1618 1613 99.69 
2008 1698 1693 99.70 
2009 1793 1789 99.77 
2010 1769 1765 99.77 
2011 1954 1954 100 
 
Academic performance class XII Results w.e.f 2001 
Year Appeared Passed Pass percentage 
2001 985 813 82.53 
2002 908 790 87.00 
2003 963 897 93.14 
2004 893 770 86.22 
2005 908 794 87.44 
2006 972 863 88.78 
2007 990 906 91.51 
2008 939 868 92.43 
2009 1024 938 91.60 
2010 1026 962 93.80 
2011 1232 1174 95.29 
 
Contribution of Sainik Schools in National Defence Academy in last twelve courses 
Course Sl. 
No. 
NDA course  
Strength 
(A) 
No. of Cadets 
(B) 
% age 
(C) 
115 – Jan 06 261  
646 
49  
180 
18.77  
27.86 116 – Jul 06 385 131 34.02 
117 – Jan 07 296  43  14.52  

38 
 
118 – Jul 07 353 649 122 165 34.56 25.42 
119 – Jan 08 197  
608 
28  
187 
14.21  
30.75 120 – Jul 08 411 159 38.68 
121 – Jan 09 331  
691 
53  
202 
16.01  
29.23 122 – Jul 09 360 149 41.38 
123 – Jan 10 319  
619 
48  
162 
15.04  
26.17 124 – Jul 10 300 114 38 
125 – Jan 11 300  
663 
51  
167 
17  
25.18 126 – Jul 11 363 116 31.95 
Total UPSC NDA Aspirants (Aug, 2011) 1,45,000 Approx  
 
 
 
 
 
  
  

39 
 
PART - II 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS 
 
Background of Establishment of Sainik Schools 
 The scheme to establish Sainik Schools was introduced in the year 1961 with 
the aim of bringing quality public school education within the reach of common man, 
all round development of personality and to remove regional imbalance in the officers' 
cadre of A rmed Forces.  The Committee also find that prior to establishment of such 
scheme there did exist five Rashtriya Military Schools and one Rashtriya Indian 
Military College which have the same objectives as that of Sainik Schools. All the 
three institutions are basically the nurseries which nurture cadets for entry into the 
coveted National Defence Academy.  The examination of the subject  has revealed 
several anomalies in achieving the objectives for which the Sainik Schools were 
established and also that th eir performance has been below the expected levels.  
Several lacunae have surfaced on the issue of opening new Sainik S chools  during  
the course of examination. Not only that the expansion of Sainik Schools  has proved 
to be a tardy process whereby the St ates interested in opening of the new schools  did 
not pursue with their requests when the financial obligation on the part of the State 
Governments was conveyed.   The various recommendations/observations of the 
Committee emerging out of the detailed deliberations on the subject have been 
enumerated in the succeeding paragraphs of the report. 
 

40 
 
Performance/comparison  of Sainik Schools with Rashtriya Military School , Rashtriya 
Indian Military College  
 
2. The Committee note that Sainik Schools were esta blished subsequent to the 
Rashtriya Military School and Rashtriya Indian Military College.  The Sainik Schools 
were established with the well defined aims and objectives and having a very sound 
organizational structure which flowed right from the Ministry o f Defence at the apex 
level and Local Board of Administration at the ground level where these schools are 
situated.  The significance of Sainik Schools can be attributed to the fact that none 
other than the Raksha Mantri himself acts as the Chairman of the  Board of Governors 
of Sainik Schools.  To consolidate and streamline the smooth functioning and 
operations of Sainik Schools, they have been provided with three Service Officers for 
the posts of Principal, Head Master and Registrar as well as APTCC/NCC instructors in 
addition to the requisite skilled staff.  The Committee also note that these schools are 
designed in a well spread  out land and have sophisticated facilities for imparting 
education and other skills in making their cadets an able officer of Ar med Forces in 
future.  
 Notwithstanding, the support extended by the Central and State Governments, 
the Committee are concerned to note the drooping performance of Sainik Schools in 
comparison to Rashtriya Military Schools specifically in terms of the intake in NDA.  
The average intake in Rashtriya Indian Military College during the years 2008 to 2010 
is 75% whereas in the Sainik Schools it is barely 2 0%.  It has little edge over the 
Rashtriya Military Schools where the percentage for the aforesaid period is 18.  
Various reasons extended by the Ministry such as reservation in selection in Sainik 

41 
 
Schools, less inclination in appearing for NDA after the C lass XII CBSE Exams and 
lower intake in the August Exam when boys are in the school, following a semester 
pattern in RIMC etc.  fail to convince the Committee, particularly when the aforesaid 
areas are well within the domain of the Ministry/Sainik School an d these constraints 
can be addressed by taking certain policy decisions.  The issue of lesser intake into 
NDA in the August Exam as the students leave the school and are within the influence 
of parents as stated by the Ministry can be addressed by holding the students back in 
the school after Twelfth Exam.  Moreover, students of Sainik Schools appearing for 
NDA exam be made compulsory in line with the stipulated objective of setting up of 
Schools i.e. nurturing candidates for entry into NDA  and feeling of p atriotism be 
inculcated so that the cadets are motivated to join the Defence forces.   
Since NDA is an independent examination conducted by the UPSC the selection 
to which is purely based on merit, in the opinion of the Committee the numbers 
appearing for the examination whether those from Sainik Schools, RIMC or general 
category of students is not very significant. What is more significant is improving the 
pass percentage of Sainik Schools in this regard.  For that the Committee believe that 
the mental lev el and efficiency bar of the candidates is infact to be raised. Although 
there is no reservation in the intake of RIMC of any sort, yet there is no denying the 
fact that inspite of the reservations the intake in Sainik Schools is through  a very wide 
base.  Such intake is based  purely  on rigorous selection procedure.  Once selected, 
both the institutions have the same level playing field and it is difficult to understand 
why the percentage wise intake through Sainik Schools to NDA should be so low.  The 
Committee learn that to increase this percentage a programme of in-service training to 

42 
 
the teachers is being implemented with the assistance of experts from the Services, 
National University of Educational Planning and Administration (NUEPA), National 
Council of Educational Research and Training (NCERT) and similar States run bodies.  
In this regard, the Committee recommend that the outcome of such training imparted 
to the teachers should be quantified in terms of the increased number of selection  of 
cadets in the NDA and also the Ministry should not leave any stone unturned by 
exercising the requisite due diligence at least from now onwards so that the number of 
cadets selected for the NDA invariably goes up.  The Committee also desire that the 
outcome of s uch selection in the ensuing course s be communicated to them.  If 
required the Ministry should also take assistance from reputed management 
institutions by conducting a proper study in order to ensure that the objectives of 
setting up of the Sainik Schools  are fully met and results achieved as per the 
expectations.  The Committee recommend that the composition of Board of Directors 
of Sainik School s should be reviewed so as to have representation from NDA, IMA 
retired Generals and eminent academicians. 
Comparative Analysis of such schools internationally  
3. Another area of concern as observed by the Committee is that even in this 
modern world where technology has shortened all distances, the Ministry has not 
bothered to undertake any comparative analysi s of  the functioning of Sainik Schools 
vis-a-vis such schools, if any, existing in foreign countries mainly developed 
countries.  The Committee, therefore, recommend that a comparative analysis of the 
institutions, if any existing in the foreign countries  be made and the outcome of the 
same be intimated to the Committee .  It is needless to say that advance practices of 

43 
 
such international schools be replicated in Sainik Schools by taking the desired 
initiatives.   
Drop out rate 
4. The Committee on the issue of drop out rate of students in Saink Scholls have 
initially been apprised that drop out rate was 20.22 per cent.  However, the data was 
modified at a later stage and it was intimated that the drop out rate stood as 7 per cent 
annually.  Even if 7 per cent drop out rate is accepted, the average number of seats 
that remained vacant during the last three years approximately comes to 514.  
Although, the Committee have been intimated that several steps have been taken such 
as improvin g the academic efficiency of the cadets, convincing parents of the 
advantages of overall balanced personality , strict medical check up at the intake level 
etc. yet the Committee feel that the drop out rate should be brought to a 'nil' level.  The 
seats which fall vacant after the cadets leave the schools midway remain vacant until 
the next entrance examination is held.  This has a rippling effect as on the one side the 
precious resources of the Government go waste due to idling of seats and on the 
other side it truncates the prospective candidates intending to join the NDA course.  
The Committee, therefore, recommend that this problem should be addressed on 
priority basis.  Not only that the nil drop out rate should be achieved within the 
stipulated time frame by taking the desired corrective initiatives.   The Committee also 
recommend that the anomaly in  the data furnished to the Committee with regard to 
drop out rate should be reconciled and the correct figure be intimated to them.   
 

44 
 
NDA Course Strength 
5. Various issues discussed during the examination of the subject such as 
increasing the number of intake to the NDA, drop out rates, opening new schools etc. 
bears a direct correlation with the NDA course strength.  The NDA course strength, as 
informed by th e Ministry to the Committee  has remained more or less  static.  The 
average seats available during the years 2008 -10 are 640.  These are filled by  the  
cadets of Sainik Schools, Rashtriya Military Schools, Rashtriya Indian Military College 
and general stud ents from the entire India.  The Committee also find from sifting the 
information made available to them that sanction for 16th Squadron at NDA has 
already been accorded which has enhanced the capacity of NDA from 1800 cadets to 
1920 cadets. The Committee also find that proposal for raising 5th Battalion at NDA 
with 4 new Squadrons is under consideration.  The Committee see this as a positive 
development and, therefore, in unequivocal terms recommend that the proposal for 
raising 5th Battalion should be con sidered as a priority and all clearances etc. should 
be obtained within a timeframe.  The dual advantage of removing the shortage of 
officers and giving opportunities to the able and desirous candidates  would be 
available once this Battalion comes to fruit ion.   The Committee would also like to be 
informed of the correct figures of NDA course strength as two figures submitted to the 
Committee and brought out in the opening part of this paragraph contradict each 
other.  
 
 

45 
 
Funding of Sainik Schools/Constraints/ Regional Imbalance 
6. The Committee are dismayed to note that the entire scheme and gamut of 
funding pattern as envisaged for Sainik Schools has in fact dissuaded the States from 
taking pro-active part in opening up of the new schools.   The Committee took serious  
note of this issue in  various reports whereby it was recommended that the entire 
funding of all Sainik Schools be made by the Central Government on the p attern of 
Kendriya Vidyalayas.  H owever, citing the Bhagidari concept the  Ministry was not 
agreeable to this suggestion. In addition  to the land, the entire capital expenditure 
such as buildings furniture educational equipments, major portion of recurring 
expenditures, scholarships for domicile cadets  are mandated to be met by  the State 
Governments.  As is evident, not many States/UTs are coming forward for establishing 
new Sainik Schools and even those who initiated the process did not take interest 
subsequently when they were intimated of their financial responsibilities.  It  may not 
be out of place here to emphasize that seven States and several Union Territories as 
mentioned in Part-I of this Report have no Sainik Schools at all.  The Committee also 
note that the benefits of this Bhagidari concept and the envisaged arrangeme nts for 
tuition fee are also not evenly spread out.  For instance, schools in few States such as 
Karnataka, Uttarakhand, Bihar and Haryana get handsome amount as scholarship and 
as a result parents of these schools have to pay less in fee whereas, the scho ols in 
Gujarat, Rajasthan, Assam , Jammu and Kashmir and Madhya Pradesh are not getting 
regular scholarships from their States and hence parents have to pay more.  Although, 
the Ministry have attempted to allocate Rs. 1 crore  to each Sainik School but the same 
has also not been actually disbursed as sufficient amount was not allocated in the 

46 
 
budget for the current year .  The Committee are also perturbed to note that out of the 
11 requests received during the last five years from various States for opening new  
Sainik Schools, only four proposals could be finalized and the proposal for the rest 
stumbled either on the ground of unsuitability of the site proposed by the State 
Government as was the case of Sikkim and Jharkhand or when State Governments 
swayed away from sharing their financial obligations as was the case in the States of 
Punjab and Uttarakhand.  Similarly, the proposal for opening of new schools in Orissa, 
Madhya Pradesh and Andhra Pradesh has also not reached the logical conclusion as 
the said State Governments have been requested to transfer the land, build t he basic 
infrastructure and sign the Memorandum of Agreement.  The Committee also observe 
that there is only one Sainik School in 'Ghora Khal' in Kumaun Mandal of Uttrakhand.  
Since Kumaun and Gharwal Regions have been traditional recruitment grounds for the 
Armed Forces, the Committee recommend that all possibilities be looked into by 
impressing the State Government to open one more Sainik School in the Gharwal 
Mandal. 
The Committee conclu de from the aforesaid scenario that the Sainik Schools 
have not been able to meet the main objective of setting up of these Schools that to 
remove regional imbalance in the officers cadres of the Armed Forces particularly 
when the most populous State of th e country i.e. Uttar Pradesh is not having even a 
single Sainik School.  Having taken note of all the shortcomings mentioned above the 
Committee recommend  that in no uncertain words the Ministry should revisit and 
rework the entire scheme of establishment of Sainik Schools vis-à-vis Bhagidari 
concept. Here the Committee may like to refer to the fact acknowledged by the 

47 
 
Secretary during the course of examination of Demands for Grants (2011 -12) whereby 
the Committee had been informed that the expenditure of r unning Sainik Schools in a 
year is just 50-60 crore.  The Committee as such would like to emphasize that Rs. 50 to 
60 crore expenditure can easily be borne by the Central Government.   As such the 
Committee would like to recommend that the entire funding for running and 
infrastructure of the Sainik Schools should be borne by the Central Government and 
as a Bhagidari, the State Governments may provide land for setting up these schools.  
To correct the regional imbalance the Committee may strongly like to 
emphasize to amend the current guidelines within a timeframe so that at least one 
school is established in each of the State/UTs either by taking suo -moto initiatives by 
the Central Gover nment or on the proposal of the respective State Government/UT 
administration.  The Committee would like to see a situation whereby no State is left 
without a Sainik School especially the most populous State of Uttar Pradesh  which at 
present has no Sainik School. Not only that the number of Sainik Schools in a State 
should be in proportion to the population.  The most populous St ate of Uttar Pradesh 
which at present has no Sainik School s should have adequate number of Sainik 
Schools in proportion to the p opulation of the State.  They also recommend that the 
Ministry mulls a  new propitious guidelines so that this recommendation becomes 
operational at the earliest possible span of time. The steps initiated in this regard 
should be monitored at senior level in  the Ministry on monthly basis and the 
achievement made in this regard be communicated to the Committee. 
The Committee find that some of the State Governments like Punjab have taken 
innovative measures to build and sustain capacity of the students to compe te in 

48 
 
NDA/other entrance exams  conducted to join the Defence Services.  The Committee 
recommend that the Ministry should study such initiatives and motivate the State 
Governments to replicate the best of the models in this regard.  
Issues related to land f or setting up of Sainik Schools in various States and 
apportioning funds from MPLAD Scheme  
 
7. The Committee note that the building for pro 
posed Sainik School at Nalanda was to be constructed between 2003 and 2005. To the 
utter dismay of the Committee th is has not happen even after an  elapse of about 
seven years. The main reason attributed for this delay is the unsuitability of the l and. 
The Committee also observe  that now the suitable land has been earmarked and the 
tender for the construction of the bui lding was finalized in September, 2011 after 
which the construction of compound wall is in progress. Likewise, the Committee  find 
that evident delay has taken place in the construction of the Sainik School at 
Gopalganj in Bihar.  This delay, too took place  due to unsuitable land provided by the 
State Government and the onus  of land filling of the same was, technically taken  by 
it. The Committee deprecate the delays of such nature where problems surfaced due 
to the unsuitability of land for setting up of S ainik Schools.  Therefore, the Committee 
desire that if possible the surplus land from suitable cantonment areas be provided for 
Sainik Schools in  exchange of equal area of land from the respective State 
Governments.  This is all the more the reason for t he Committee to believe that 
responsibilities of such nature  should be borne by  the Central Government  as  these 
schools eventually  provide skilled, trained  and competent manpower for meeting  the 

49 
 
precious Defence related human resource needs.  The Ministry should explore setting 
up of new Sainik Schools on the land donated by the individuals/trusts etc.  
 One avenue for fund raising for the infrastructural developments of Sainik 
Schools could be apportioning funds from the Members of Parliament Local Area 
Development Scheme.  The Member of Parliament is also part of the Local Board of 
Administration where t he school exists.  The Committee have learnt that although 
requests were made during the years 2010 and 2011 at the level of principles of Sainik  
Schools for seeking such funds from MPLAD Scheme but only for one Sainik at 
Amravathi Nagar Rs. 5 lakhs were given.   The Committee may like to recommend that 
Members of Parliament may be approached through a much higher pedestal for 
apportioning funds for the Sainik Schools falling in their constituencies. The 
Committee would like to be apprised of the initiatives taken in this regard.  
The Committee further note that largest area of land for defence purposes has 
been acquired in Jaisalmer, a district in State of Rajasthan which is one of the desert 
districts of the country.  The Committee are constraint to note that having contributed 
extensively by way of providing land for defence purposes only one Sainik School 
could so far be set up in Chittorgarh. The Committee strongly recommend that the 
Ministry should take up urgent steps to set up Sainik Schools in deser t areas in 
various States either by taking suo -moto action on the part of the Central Government 
or initiating the proposal by the respective State Governments.    
 
 

50 
 
Constraints in manning Sainik Schools 
8. The Committee note  with concern  that the Ministry has not been able to meet 
the demand of manning the Sainik Schools.  The main constraint in this regard has 
been indicated as release of adequate number of serving officers .  There has been no 
proportionate increase in the number of servi ng officers which  remain ed static at  72 
although the  number of Sainik Schools has  gone up from 18  to 24 .  In this 
connection, the Committee would like to emphasize that the requirement of number of 
serving officers for Sainik Schools should be reviewed  periodically and the requisite 
number of serving officers provided for the smooth and effective functioning of Sainik 
Schools.  
Admission of Girl Cadets 
9. Admission of girl cadets to Sainik Schools is an important issue which has 
drawn the attention of t he Committee. The Committee are happy to note that State 
Government of Madhya Pradesh has taken a very rightful and encouraging lead in 
sending a proposal for opening up a Sainik School exclus ively for girls.  However, the 
proposal is not agreeable to the Ministry primarily on the ground that there is no room 
for girls in the NDA course.  While substantiating their stand, the Ministry has added 
that there are limited streams hitherto opened for female officers in the three Services. 
The views of the Defence Secretary in this regard w ere candid as he went on  record 
stating  'It is for Parli ament to make a policy for that' . Deeper scrutiny of the subject 
further reveal that certain develop ed countries such as USA has female officers in 
combat duties as well.  In the opinion of the Committee, opening up of new streams is 

51 
 
an inevitable situation which has to happen sooner  or later.  The Committee in this 
regard would like to recommend that the Ministry should create necessary 
infrastructure for inducting the fem ale officers for the new streams and pave the way 
for the intake of female officers in the NDA course.  Once such decision is taken, 
opening of Sainik Schools for girls will become a complementary process.  The 
Ministry should initiate the steps for formul ating a new policy in this regard and the 
Committee be kept informed.  
 
Creation of Data Bank 
10. The Committee find that on an average only about 20% of the Sainik Schools 
Cadets join the NDA.  On a specific query of the Committee as to how many students 
out of the remaining 80 percent subsequently join Defence Forces through different 
streams such as Officers Training Academy, Indian Military Academy and Coast Guard  
etc. or other technical B ranches, the Ministry  in a vague manner has stated that no 
such data is maintained .  Such a response from the Ministry on a vital issue is 
unacceptable to the Committee. The Committee have all reasons to believe that a 
sizable number of cadets would be joini ng the Armed Forces subsequent to leaving 
the Sainik Schools and completing their graduation. The specific data in this regard 
would not only help the Ministry in its future expansion plans of Sainik Schools but 
the value of money spent by the Central / State Governments would also be properly  
quantified.  The country would also be benefited as the cadets already trained in 
Sainik Schools who are a precious manpower resource would get the opportunity of 
joining the Armed Forces alongwith the recognition of  their Sainik Schools. The 

52 
 
Ministry should, therefore, follow the right trajectory and do the needful to start and 
maintain such a data bank.  One such suggestion in this regard could be incorporating 
of one column   depicting the background of Sainik School in the form which is filled 
for all entry streams in all the forces other than NDA.       
Menace of Ragging  
11. The Committee are dismayed to note that the Sainik Schools having such a high 
level of disci pline and culture of Armed Forces are also not free from the menace of 
ragging.  As per the specific data furnished by the Ministry,  a total of 11 incidents of 
ragging have been reported during the last three years.  In one case, as highlighted by 
the media a cadet left the school and his parents were repeatedly asked to give in 
writing and explain why he left the school.  Eventually, the parent of the boy wrote that 
his son has joined another school and have no complaint against the school.  Not 
satisfied with these facts,  the Committee would like the Ministry to take proactive 
approach in such cases surfacing in future and make every effort to retain the child 
who takes such step due to the fear and torture of ragging. 
 In another case which has much wider connotations  as the clippings of the 
horrific incident of ragging was released  on all the major news channel s, the 
Committee have been informed that the court of inquiry has already submitted its 
report and after the examination, the Ministry has sent it back with some observations.  
This incident occurred during November 2010.  The  matter was not reported by the 
victims to the school authorities at that time and the senior students responsible for 
the ragging passed out from the school in March 2011.  As informed to the Committee 

53 
 
the formal court of enquiry was constituted to look i nto the whole incident and 
specifically on the role of the school administration. The Ministry has stated that t he 
perpetrators would also be summoned during the enquiry.  The Committee in this 
regard deduce that administration of Sainik School at Tilaya completely failed to check 
this incident.  Even if, the matter was not reported by the victims, the administration 
should have in the normal case used their own system of checks and balances to 
identify such incident and should have taken appropriate remedial action.   
 The Committee believe that only 11 ragging cases in Sainik Schools have 
surfaced but there could be some more of this nature which could not come to the 
fore.  While deploring the delay in pronouncement of the punishment on the guilty 
cadets, the Committee in unequivocal terms recommend that they be apprised of the 
findings of the court of enquiry as well as the observations made by the Ministry on 
that inquiry.  They would also like to know whether the perpetrators were called before 
the enqu iry and what were the findings on the role of the school administration as 
they believe that the administration of the school was assigned the ‘duties of care’ in 
which it failed.  The Committee would like to be apprised about the details of the 
enquiry and the penalty imposed in each of the aforesaid 11 cases.  
 The C ommittee understand that in the recent past various colleges and 
technical institutions in the country have taken stringent measures to curb the 
menace of ragging.  While taking note of the in itiatives being taken by Sainik Schools 
in this regard, the Committee strongly recommend that the Ministry of Defence / Sainik 
Schools should study the best of the practices being taken in various colleges / 

54 
 
technical institutions and replicate the same in  Sainik Schools so as to achieve the 
'nil' level of ragging in these prestigious schools.  
Appearing for NDA Entrance to be made mandatory 
12. The Committee are happy to note that the Academic performance of cadets  in 
class Tenth and Twelfth has been satisfactory. Nevertheless, they are concerned to 
note from the deposition made before them that a large number of students leave 
Sainik school after class Tenth.  It appears that so far no mechanism is in place for 
retaining these students till c lass Twelfth and then to make them appear for  the NDA 
entrance examination. Even if the candidates complete their full education from Sainik 
Schools, the pass  percentage of candidates who appear  for NDA  entrance while they 
are not  in the  school is low .  Notwithstanding the fact, s everal measures have been 
taken to motivate the candidates for appearing in the NDA entrance and also to 
improve their representation , the Committee can only infer that  Sainik Schools  are 
used by many for availing the facili ties of good  educatio n, extracurricular activities 
and overall development of personality.  Only relatively fewer and serious ones appear 
for the NDA entrance.  The Committee in this regard would like to recommend that 
apart from return ing of the scholars hip money, which is currently the rule , more 
innovative measures should be thought  of so that only the real aspiring students join 
the Sainik Schools and after completion of class Twelfth they have to appear for the 
NDA entrance.  As stated in the earlier  part of the report, appearing for NDA exam 
should be made mandatory.  Some kind of undertaking at the initial level of entrance 
would not be out of place.   

55 
 
13. While concluding the Committee observe  that there exists a large scope for 
further improvement of Sainik Schools.  The various recommendations made in the 
report which include spreading Sainik Schools evenly in all the States and UTs, 
starting intake of girls in Sainik Schools by taking certain policy initiatives, addressing 
the financial issues with the States/UTs, improving the infrastructure and training 
facilities in these schools, if implemented would certainly go a long way in making 
these schools a significant nursery to nurture students  not only for NDA exam but 
also for other streams of the Armed Forces.  The improvement of the functioning of 
Sainik Schools would ultimately help the Defence Forces in getting quality as well as 
adequate number of officers for their forces and would certa inly solve the problem of 
shortage of officers in the Services.  The Committee as such would like the Ministry to 
seriously consider the recommendations made in the report and implement the same 
within the stipulated time frame.  
 
 
 
                                                                                                Satpal Maharaj, 
22 August, 2012                                                   Chairman 
31Sravana, 1934 (Saka)                              Standing Committee on Defence. 
 
 
 
 
 
  

56 
 
 
ANNEXURE – A 
LIST OF 24 SAINIK SCHOOLS IN 21 STATES 
S. No. STATE NAME OF SAINIK SCHOOLS 
1. ANDHRA PRADESH SAINIK SCHOOL KORUKONDA 
2. ASSAM SAINIK SCHOOL GOALPARA 
3. BIHAR 1. SAINIK SCHOOL GOPALGANJ 
2. SAINIK SCHOOL NALANDA 
4. CHHATISGARH SAINIK SCHOOL AMBIKAPUR 
5. GUJARAT SAINIK SCHHOL BALACHADI 
6. HARYANA 1. SAINIK SCHOOL KUNJPURA 
2. SAINIK SCHOOL REWARI 
7. HIMACHAL PRADESH 3. SAINIK SCHOOL SUJANPUR TIRA 
8. JAMMU & KASHMIR SAINIK SCHOOL NAGROTA 
9. JHARKHAND SAINIK SCHOOL TILAIYA 
10. KARNATAKA 1. SAINIK SCHOOL BIJAPUR 
2. SAINIK SCHOOL KODAGU 
11. KERALA SAINIK SCHOOL KAZHAKOOTAM 
12. MADHYA PRADESH SAINIK SCHOOL REWA 
13. MAHARASHTRA SAINIK SCHOOL SATARA 
14. MANIPUR SAINIK SCHOOL IMPHAL 
15. NAGALAND SAINIK SCHOOL PUNGLWA 
16. ORISSA SAINIK SCHOOL BHUBANESWAR 
17. PUNJAB SAINIK SCHOOL KAPURTHALA 
18. RAJASTHAN SAINIK SCHOOL CHITTORGARH 
19. TAMIL NADU SAINIK SCHOOL AMARAVATHI NAGAR 
20. UTTRAKHAND SAINIK SCHOOL GHORAKHAL 
21. WEST BENGAL SAINIK SCHOOL PURULIA 
 
  

57 
 
Annexure – B 
Rashtriya Indian Military College 
2008 2009 2010 
No. of 
students 
passed out 
No. of  
students 
joined 
NDA/  
NAVAC 
No. of 
students 
passed 
out 
No. of  
students 
joined 
NDA/  
NAVAC 
No. of 
students 
passed 
out 
No. of  
students 
joined 
NDA/  
NAVAC 
49 38 33 28 50 32 
Percentage  78% 85% 64% 
 
  Average percentage :  76% 
Rashtriya Military Schools 
2008 2009 2010 
No. of 
students 
passed out 
No. of  
students 
joined 
NDA 
No. of 
students 
passed 
out 
No. of  
students 
joined 
NDA 
No. of 
students 
passed 
out 
No. of  
students 
joined 
NDA 
135 22 168 30 149 31 
Percentage  16% 18% 21% 
 
Average percentage :  18% 
Sainik Schools 
2008 2009 2010 
No. of 
students 
passed out 
No. of  
students 
joined 
NDA 
No. of 
students 
passed 
out 
No. of  
students 
joined 
NDA 
No. of 
students 
passed 
out 
No. of  
students 
joined 
NDA 
868 181 938 202 962 175 
Percentage  21% 22% 18% 
 
Average percentage :  20% 
NDA Course Strength 
2008 2009 2010 
608 691 619 
 

58 
 
Annexure – C 
 
Cadets leaving Sainik Schools during 2008-09 to 2010-11 
Sl. 
No. 
Year Total 
Strength 
Poor 
Academic 
Performance 
Discipline Medical Parent 
Request
s 
Total Drop 
out Rate 
(%) 
1. 2008-2009 11965 287 7 47 544 885 7.40 
2. 2009-2010 12507 210 6 63 564 843 6.74 
3. 2010-2011 12804 197 60 63 689 1009 7.88 
 
 