1 
 
 
11 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE 
(2010-2011) 
 
  (FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
MINISTRY OF DEFENCE 
 
 [Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations/observations contained 
in the Eighth Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha)  on Construction of Roads in the Border 
Areas of the Country ] 
 
ELEVENTH  REPORT 
 
  
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
March, 2011 / Phalguna 1932 (Saka) 
  


2 
 
ELEVENTH  REPORT 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE 
(2010-2011) 
 
(FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
MINISTRY OF DEFENCE 
 
[Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations/observations contained 
in the Eighth Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) on  Construction of Roads in the Border 
Areas of the Country ] 
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on        24 March, 2011  
Laid in Rajya Sabha on            24 March, 2011  
 
  
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
March, 2011 / Phalguna 1932 (Saka) 
  


3 
 
  
(i) 
CONTENTS 
 
          PAGE 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (2010-2011).…………………….   (ii)  
  
INTRODUCTION.…………………………………………………….… ……….  (iii) 
 
CHAPTER I  Report ……………………………………………….….   1  
  
 
CHAPTER II   Recommendations/Observations which have been  
   accepted by the Government…….……………….…... 17   
CHAPTER III  Recommendations/Observations which the Committee 
   do not desire to pursue in view of Government‟s  
   replies…………………………………..…..……….….… 33   
CHAPTER IV   Recommendations/Observations in respect of which 
    replies of Government have not been accepted by 
  the committee………………………..….…………..…… 34  
 
 
CHAPTER V   Recommendations/Observations in respect of which  
 final replies of Government are still awaited. ………… 42   
 
APPENDIX 
 
 
Minutes of the Sixth Sitting of the Committee on Defence  
held on 16 July, 2011 
 
 
    Analysis of Action Taken by the Government on the  
recommendations contained in the Eighth  Report of the  
Standing Committee on Defence (Fifteenth Lok 
Sabha)………………………………………………….… 43  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 

4 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE (2010-11) 
 
Shri Satpal Maharaj   -  Chairman     
 
LOK SABHA  
 
2.  Shri Harish Chaudhary  
3.  Shri Kamal Kishor „Commando‟  
4.  Shri H.D. Devegowda  
5.  Shri Varun Gandhi  
6.  Dr. Sucharu Ranjan Haldar  
7.  Shri Kapil Muni Karwariya  
8.  Shri Bhaskar Rao Patil Khatgaonkar  
9.  Shri Asaduddin Owaisi  
10.  Prof. Prasanna Kumar Patasani  
11.  Shri A.T. Nana Patil  
12.  Shri C.R. Patil  
13.  Shri Amarnath Pradhan  
14.  Shri C. Rajendran  
15.  Shri J. Ramesh  
16.  Shri M. Rajamohan Reddy  
17.  Shri Baju Ban Riyan  
18.  Shri Kalyan Singh  
19.  Shri Mahabali Singh  
20.  Rajkumari Ratna Singh  
 
RAJYA SABHA  
 
21. Shri Munquad Ali  
22.  Shri Avinash Rai Khanna  
23.  Prof. P.J. Kurien  
24.  Shri Mukut Mithi  
25.  Shri Mukhtar Abbas Naqvi  
26.  Shri T.K. Rangarajan  
27.  Shri Birender Singh  
28.  Shri Ram Kripal Yadav 
29.  Shri M.V. Mysura Reddy 
30.  Shri Naresh Gujral 
SECRETARIAT 
1. Shri T.K. Mukherjee   - Joint Secretary 
2. Smt. Sudesh Luthra   - Director 
3. Smt. Jyochnamayi Sinha  - Deputy Secretary 
4. Shri Rahul Singh   - Committee Officer 

5 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
  
I, the Chairman of the Standing Committee on Defence (2010-2011), having been authorised 
by the Committee to submit the report on their behalf, present this Eleventh Report on „ action taken 
by the Government on the Recommendations/Observations contained in the Eighth Report 
(Fifteenth Lok Sabha) on Construction of Roads in border areas of the country‟.   
 
2.  The Eighth Report was presented to the Lok Sabha on 19 August, 2010 and laid on the 
Table of Rajya Sabha on the same day. The Ministry furnished their Action Taken Notes on all the 
Recommendations/Observations contained in the Eighth Report on 21 January, 2011.  
 
3. The Report was considered and adopted by the Committee at their sitting held on 16 March, 
2011.  
 
4.  For facility of reference and convenience, Recommendations/ Observations of the 
Committee have been printed in bold letters in the Report.   
 
 
5. An analysis of Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations/Observations 
contained in the Eleventh Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) of the Committee is given at Annexure-II.  
 
 
NEW DELHI;      SATPAL MAHARAJ, 
16    March, 2011     Chairman, 
25 Phalgun, 1932 (Saka)                       Standing Committee on Defence 
        
  

6 
 
CHAPTER–I 
 
 REPORT 
 
 This Report of the Standing Committee on Defence deals with action taken by the 
Government on the recommendations/observations con tained in the   Eighth    Report 
(Fifteenth Lok Sabha) on „ Construction of Roads  in the Bo rder Areas of the Country‟ , 
which was presented to Lok Sabha and laid in Rajya Sabha on 19.08.2010. 
 
2. The Committee‟s Eighth Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) contained 18 
recommendations/observations on the following aspects: - 
 
Para No. Subject 
1. Overall scenario of construction of roads and border areas 
2. Construction of roads on borders by the neighbouring countries  
3.  Long Term Perspective Plans of construction of border roads 
4. Capacity building of BRO 
5. Expertise in tunnel construction by BRO 
6. Maintenance of Border Roads 
7. The budget as well as staff constraints 
8. Induction of Information Technology in Border Areas 
9. Outsourcing of activities of BRO 
10. Strengthening of infrastructure available with BRO 
11. Providing proper uniform and other livery items to BRO officers and 
workers  
12. Inadequate Airlift 
13. Availability of land for construction of border roads 
14. Streamlining the procedure with regard to forest and wildlife clearances  
15. Single umbrella for wildlife  and forest clearance 
16. Coordination of various authorities  to handle infrastructure for Border 
Roads  
17. Rehabilitation & Resettlement 
18. Concluding  recommendations/observations 
  
 
 
 

7 
 
3. Action Taken Replies have been received from the Government in respect of all the 
recommendations/observations contained in the Report. These replies have been 
examined and the same have been categorized as follows: - 
 
(i) Recommendations/observations, which have been accepted by the Government 
(Please see Chapter II): - 
 
Para Nos. 1, 2, 3, 4, 6, 9, 11, 12, 16, 18 
(10 Recommendations) 
(ii) Recommendations/observations, which the Committee do not desire to pursue in 
view of the replies of the Government (Please see Chapter III): -  
 
Para Nos. Nil  
(Nil Recommendation) 
(iii) Recommendations/observations in respect of which replies of the Government have 
not been accepted by the Committee and which require reiteration (Please see Chapter 
IV): - 
Para Nos.  5, 7, 8, 10, 13, 14, 15, and 17.  
     (08 Recommendations) 
(iv) Recommendations/observations in respect of which final replies of the Government 
are still awaited (Please see Chapter V): - 
 Para Nos. Nil 
 (Nil Recommendation) 
4. The Comm ittee desire the Ministry’s response to their comments made in 
Chapter-I of this Report be furnished to them at the earliest and in any case not later 
than six months of the presentation of this Report.  
   

8 
 
A. Overall scenario of construction of roads in border areas 
 
Recommendation (Paragraph No.1) 
 5. The Committee had recommended as under: 
“The Committee note that India has 14,880 Kms. long land borders running through 
92 districts in 17 States and share with seven neighbouring Countries viz 
Afghanistan, Pakistan, Bangladesh, Myanmar, China, Bhutan and Nepal. Whereas 
the Western borders of the country along the State of J&K (plains), Punjab, 
Rajasthan and Gujarat are reasonably well connected and fairly accessible, the 
Northern and Eastern Borders are not a s well connected as informed by the 
Ministry of Defence. In view of the aforesaid status of border roads, the Army posts 
along the Northern and Eastern borders are also not so well connected. Although a 
lot of efforts are being made by the Union Government  and State governments to 
provide connectivity to our borders, the unique strategic location of India poses 
unique security challenges. More so, the problems specific to different portions of 
our extensive borders have become aggravated in recent times due  to cross border 
terrorism as acknowledged by the Group of Ministers in its report.  Besides the 
infrastructure being created on the border by our neighbouring countries particularly 
China further poses challenges before the country. 
The G overnment has cre ated the Border Roads Organization (BRO) in the year 
1960 with the aim of speedy development of road network and infrastructure along 
the borders and the roads constructed by the Ministry of defence are mainly 
handled by BRO. The Committee during the  rece nt study visit to Leh, Srinagar and 
border areas have observed that  construction and maintenance of border 
roads/tunnels/infrastructure are affected due to various  factors which include  lack 
of adequate funds, capability constraints, inadequate airlifti ng facility,  pending  
forest/wildlife  clearance, overall increase in the quantum of work being  entrusted 
to Border Road Organization (BRO). The Committee may like to emphasize that 
roads are an essential part of the border management. Besides the good 
connectivity to our border by roads is pre -requisite for the socio -economic 
development of the nation. Not only the, roads in the border areas are necessary 
for the Armed Forces to meet their strategic needs. In wartime, it is essential to 
develop and maintain roads to keep the line of communication open in original and 
redeployed sectors for the Armed Forces. Various aspects related to construction of 
border roads have been examined in detail by the Committee and 
recommendations/observations covering variou s issues have been given in the 
succeeding part of the report. Here, the committee may like to strongly recommend 
the Government to take all the desired initiatives to address to the various problems 
coming in the way of construction of border roads. Not o nly that, there is an urgent 
need to have fast track procedures for the construction of roads and other 
infrastructure on our borders, keeping in view the strategic needs as well as the 
challenges the country faces.” 

9 
 
 
6. The Ministry in its action taken reply, has stated as under:- 
 “Observations of the Committee have been noted.” 
  
 7. The Committee had recommended that  Government should take all the 
desired initiatives to address the various  problems coming in t he way of 
construction of roads. However , the Ministry  has simply stated that the 
observations of the Committee have been noted, instead of indicating any concrete 
action taken in response to the recom mendation of the Committee . Therefore, the 
Committee desire that specific action taken in this regard should be intimated to 
them at the earliest. 
 
B. Expertise in tunnel construction by BRO 
 
Recommendation (Paragraph No.5) 
8. The Committee had recommended as under: 
 “The Committee find that tunnel construction is part of the road works. BRO is the 
premier organization involved with the creation of infrastructure on our borders, 
even then it has no expertise in tunnel construction. The Committee during the 
course of examination have been informed that reputed consultants are being 
inducted to execute the wo rk for execution of Rohtang tunnel. The Committee are  
unhappy to note the aforesaid position. It is surprising to note that even after 
celebrating the Golden Jubilee of BRO in the year, 2010, adequate emphasis has 
not been given on tunnel training. To address the problem, only 6-7 officers are now 
being trained in the task of tunnel construction. T he Committee strongly 
recommend that all out efforts should be made to train more and more officers in 
the construction of tunnels. While involving the internati onal reputed consultants for 
tunnel works, it should be ensured that our own officers are also associated with the 
task so that they may also get proper on -the-job training. The Committee would 
also like to emphasize that it should be ensured that all the tunnel works including 
Rohtang Pass are completed within the stipulated time frame.” 

10 
 
 
9. The Ministry in its action taken reply, has stated as under:- 
 “Government is seriously concerned about training of BRO engineers for tunnel 
works. Further a Steering Committee (of MOD) is closely and regularly monitoring 
the progress of Rohtang Tunnel and all efforts are being made to complete it in 
stipulated time.” 
  
10. The Committee while observing that only 6 -7 officers were being given 
training in  the task of tun nel construction , had  recommended that all out efforts 
should be made to train more and more officers in the construction of tunnels.  The 
Ministry has stated that the Government is seriously  concerned about the training 
without indicating any  steps taken or any modalities  framed in the f ield of 
construction of tunnels  particularly when the infrastructure created by our 
neighbouring countries particularly China po sses challenges before the country .  
Expressing serious concern over the inadequate attention  being paid to one of the 
important activities of infrastructure creation in  border areas i.e. construction  of 
tunnels, the Committee  strongly recommend to initiate concrete steps in regard to 
imparting training  to  BRO engineers in this field.   
 
C. The budget as well as staff constraints 
 
Recommendation (Paragraph No. 7) 
11. The Committee had recommended as under: 
“The Committee observe  from the information furnished by the Ministry that funds 
are not a constraint so far as the issue of construction of border roads is concerned. 
The outlay during Eleventh plan is steadily increasing and the expenditure position 
is also satisfactory except for the year 2009 -10 when Rs.779 Crore had to be 
surrendered due to late approval of budget, the year being the election  year. While 
taking note of the fact the finances are not a constraint so far as the matter of 
construction of border roads is concerned, the Committee find that a lot needs to be 

11 
 
done to increase the capacity of BRO that is the main organization involved in the 
construction of roads. From the data made available by Ministry of Defence, the 
Committee find that the restructuring  of BRO was sanctioned in September, 2006. 
Out of 151 sanctioned units , BRO has raised only 127 units as part of capability 
building measures. The Committee further  observe  that there is a huge gap 
between the  sanctioned and the existing strength of officers and  subordinates in 
BRO. Out of the  authorized strength of 1999 officers, the present strength is only 
1204, the  deficienc y being 36.9 percent. Similarly in case of subordinates the 
existing strength is 35579 against the authorized strength of 40747, the deficiency 
being 12.7 percent. With the raising of the remaining 24 units, the situation in this 
regard may further worsen.  The Committee express serious concern over such a 
state of affairs and strongly recommend that all  initiatives should  be  taken  to 
raise the  remaining 24 sanctioned units and to recruit the officers and staff  without 
any further delay so as to enable  BRO to meet the  overall increase in the quantum 
of work.” 
 
12. The Ministry in its action taken reply, has stated as under:- 
“Regarding steps taken so far, to fill up deficiencies of Officers and Subordinates:- 
(a) Officers: Process for recruitment of 83  posts of AEE(Civ), 22 posts of 
AEE (E&M) and 31 posts of AO on interview basis has been completed by 
UPSC.  Verification of documents, medical test etc are being done and offer 
of appointment will be issued shortly on completion of these requirements. 
(b) Subordinates:  8610 candidates have since been inducted against 
various Advertisements since Sep 2007.  Recruitment process in respect of 
2565 vacancies published vide Advertisement No 01/2010 in Employment 
News dated 5 -11 Jun 2010 is in process.  The det ails of manpower up to 
Dec 10 are tabulated as follows:- 
  

12 
 
 
 
 
 
*
G
R
E
F Personnel 
@Army Personnel 
Regarding raising of balance 24 units, it is submi tted that  presently steps are being 
taken to augment the existing units for better efficiency and once existing units get 
augmented additional units will be raised.” 
 
13. Capacity building is one of the imperative measures for timely construction of 
border roads.  Therefore, the Committee had recommended to increase the strength 
of officers as well as subordinates as per the authorised strength.  The Committee 
had also recommended to raise 24 more units  as part of capacity building 
measures.   In this regard the Committee note that all out efforts are being taken by 
the Ministry to meet the shortage of manpower.  However,  as stated by the Ministry 
the remaining 24 units will be created  only after fulfilling the requirements of the 
existing units.  A s construction of border roads are very much  required from the 
strategic point of view, and the task to be completed by BRO during the 11 th & 12th 
Plan, the Committee wish to reiterate their earlier recommendation to take 
appropriate steps  on war footing   to raise the 24 units at the earliest. 
 
D. Induction of Information Technology in Border Areas 
Group Auth Held Deficiency 
GP* AP@ Total GP AP Total GP AP Total 
   A 980 556 1536 516 329 845 464 227 691 
   B  363 0 363 340 0 340 23 0 23 
   C 37748 2999 40747 32754 2734 35488 4994 265 5259 
Total 39091 3555 42646 33610 3063 36673 5481 492 5973 

13 
 
Recommendation (Paragraph No.8 ) 
14. The Committee had recommended as under: 
“As per the information furnished by the ministry of Defence, BRO Wide Area 
Network (BRO -WAN) is planning for connecting all BRO units for the purpose of 
sharing of data, voice and video. The Committee finds that it is utmost necessary to 
provide communication links in border areas. Not only that, proper communication 
is urgently required in wa r like situation. As such the Committee would like to 
emphasize that all efforts should be made so that the aforesaid project is executed 
expeditiously.  
 
15. The Ministry in its action taken reply, has stated as under:- 
 “BRO-WAN was sanctioned by Govt of  India, Sectt BRDB vide letter 
No.02/426/BEA/2006 dated 18 Aug 2006 for a total amount of Rs.15 Crore. The 
scope of work includes setting up of MPLS (Multi Protocol Label Switching) based 
WAN consisting of core, distribution and access network which includ es application 
software like office automation, e -mail etc. at various BRO locations including Delhi 
and Pune. 
An Expression of Interest (EOI) was published for BRO -WAN in National 
Newspapers, Indian Trade Journal and BRO Website on 17 Sep 2009. Necessary 
steps are being taken for awarding the contract.” 
 
16. With a view to provide communication links in border areas in general and 
war like situation in particular , the Committee had recommended to make all out 
efforts to execute the BRO-WAN  project expeditiously. 
From the action taken reply it is observed that the Government has 
sanctioned the project in the year 2006.  But the Government has  taken three years 
to publish  an Expression of Interest in the National Newspaper on 17 September, 
2009. The Ministry is taking necessary steps for awarding the contract. 
The Committee do not appreciate the inordinate delay for such an important 
assignment. Since communications network is a vital one in border  area, the 
Committee wish to reiterate their earlier recommend ation to complete the   task 
within a time bound manner. 

14 
 
  
E.  Strengthening of infrastructure available with BRO 
 
Recommendation (Paragraph No.10) 
 
 17. The Committee had recommended as under: 
“The data furnished by Ministry of Defence with regard to the aut horized and 
existing infrastructure available with BRO indicates that there are gaps between 
quantity authorized and quantity held. Whereas, the Ministry of Defence has 
claimed that latest snow cutting equipments are available with BRO, the data 
indicates that out of 154 number of authorized snow cutting equipments, the 
quantity held is 77 i.e. around 50 per cent. Similarly, for welding sets, there is 
shortage of 16 items and under dragline; there is shortage of 4 numbers. Border 
roads are constructed on di fficult terrains and under the harsh climatic conditions 
and adequate number of snow equipments and other machines/infrastructure are 
urgently required to enable BRO to accomplish the give tasks. The gap between the 
quantities held in respect of the import ant items is a matter of serious concern. T he 
Committee strongly recommend  that the equipments should be purchased as per 
the authorized quantity without any further delay. Besides urgent action should be 
taken to procure the latest equipments available wo rldwide to address to the 
challenges of constructing roads and infrastructure on difficult terrains.” 
 
18. The Ministry in its action taken reply, has stated as under:- 
“The Government has approved 17 numbers of Snow Cutters in Annual 
Procurement Plan (APP) 2010-11, out of which 05 Nos are being procured, and for 
balance 24 Nos size -II Dozers in lieu of Snow Cutters are being procured as 
presently BRO is improving many roads to NHDL specification where a large fleet 
of Dozers are required and proposed procu rement will serve dual purpose. Once 
the NHDL work will get completed the requirement of Snow Cutter will be 
reassessed and procured accordingly.  
Regarding welding sets  the Government has approved 20 Nos Welding Sets in 
APP 2010-11 and procurement action is under progress. 
In addition, Government has sanctioned Rs 100 Crore for creating a bank of cutting 
edge equipment over and above the authorization to meet the unforeseen 
requirements and fair wear and tear.” 
 

15 
 
19. The Committee in their earlier report had  noted deficiency of 77 nos. of 
authorised  number of snow cutting equipment and urged that urgent action should 
be taken to procure the latest equipment available world wide to address the 
challenges of constructing roads  and infrastructure on difficul t terrains.  However, 
in the  action taken reply, the Ministry has stated that the Government has approved 
17 numbers of snow cutters in Annual Procurement Plan (APP) 2010-11 and against 
that  5 nos. are  being procured, thereby leaving a gap of 12 snow cu tters as per the 
APP. Even if the 17 approved snow cutters are procured,  the ga p between the 
authorised and the quantity held would be of the number of sixty.  Therefore, the 
Committee desire that additional allocation should be made in this year ’s budget so  
that roads of strategic importance may be completed  to facilitate the A rmy  to 
remain  in the state of operational readiness.  
 
F. Availability of land for construction of border roads 
 
Recommendation (Paragraph No.13) 
20. The Committee had recommended as under: 
“The Committee notes that availability of land is the prerequisite for construction of 
border roads. The delay in land acquisition is one of the factors responsible for 
delay in completing the BRO projects as admitted by Ministry of Defence. V arious  
reasons for delay in acquisition of land  that  have been stated are lengthy legal 
procedures,  non -availability of land records, frequent changes in the cost of land 
etc. It has also been stated that  the maximum  time  is taken for the  proposal to 
reach the nodal officer level  and most of the time  is  wasted in getting staff 
together for joint  survey. While noting that lengthy legal procedures and no -
availability of land records are the real hurdles in acquisition of land, the Committee 
feel t hat some of the impediments being faced in the land acquisition can be 
addressed with the proper coordinating mechanism between the State 
Governments, district administration and local authorities. Better coordination would 
definitely address the problem o f the time wasted in getting staff together in joint 
survey. The Ministry has stated that there is a need to sensitize state governments 
in this regard. The Committee feel that not only State Governments, but the district 
authorities, local bodies and the public also need to be sensitized that the land is 
required for the construction of border roads which is required for the security of the 

16 
 
country. The Committee also notes that public is an important stakeholder on the 
matter of construction of roads. Besides serving the strategic purpose, border roads 
also result in economic and social upliftment of the masses residing in those areas. 
As such frequent interaction by the Army with the masses would certainly help the 
authorities in getting the land for construction of border roads. The committee would 
like to emphasize that all the desired actions on the suggested lines should be 
taken and committee informed accordingly.” 
 
21. The Ministry in its action taken reply, has stated as under:- 
 “The matter of Land  Acquisition (LA) & Forest Clearance (FC) were deliberated at 
various levels in detail and with the directions of Cabinet Secretariat, MOEF has set 
up Three Level Single Window system (at district, State HQ and Ministry) for FC 
cases of BRO and others.  As  first initiative, MOEF has also simplified the form. In 
the system of Single Window, there will be a facilitating team, comprising of 
specialists to help preparing FC/WL clearance proposal with the Nodal Officer in 
consultation with the State level coordinator of BRO/ITBP. The Single Window team 
at the level of MOEF will visit the different States to sensitize the teams at state 
levels and see the progress in operationalisation of other single windows.” 
  
22. In order  to remove the impediments  on  the pa th of land acquisition  for 
construction of border roads, the Committee  had desired the Ministry to have 
coordinating mechanism among State Government,   District administration and 
local authorities to  address the problem of time wasted in getting staff together for 
the joint survey.  The Committee had  further desired to sensitize the local people 
about the overall development, the construction of border roads would  lead to. The 
Ministry in its action taken reply has only stated about the three level si ngle window 
system at District, State and Ministry level, which has already made available to the 
Committee during the course of examination of the subject .  The Ministry has not 
replied about the steps taken to  sensitize the  local people about the impact of 
border roads on their economic and social upliftment. The  Committee therefore, 
wish t he  Ministry to take concrete action in this regard and apprise them 
accordingly. 
 

17 
 
G. Streamlining the procedure with regard to forest and wildlife clearances 
 
Recommendation (Paragraph No. 14) 
23. The Committee had recommended as under: 
“The Committee notes that border roads do not need environment clearance under 
the Environment Protection Act. However, forest and wildlife clearances are 
required under the Forest Conservation Rule and wildlife Protection Act respectively 
As per the Forest conservation Rules, 2003, the timelines for clearance  of 
proposals at state Government and  Central Government  level have been 
prescribed. These are 90 days  for processing at the Stat e Government level and 
60 days at the Central government level for border roads along the Indo -China 
border and projects of national security importance. In spite of the clear cut time 
frame provided under the rules, the forest and wildlife clearances have  been the 
biggest stumbling block for construction of roads and other infrastructure 
development in border areas as observed by the committee during the Study visit. 
The Committee have been informed that the average time taken is 2 -3 years and in 
certain c ases, 8-9 years have been taken for such clearances. The detailed data 
furnished by the Ministry with regard to forest clearance further substantiates the 
aforesaid observation of the Committee. Out of 109 Indo China Border roads 
(ICBR) cases, in respect o f 11 cases forest clearances are not required.  As such 
out of 98 remaining cases final approval accorded and approval in principle 
accorded is for 79 cases. As such approval of 19 cases is still pending at various 
stages. Similarly, in cases of non -ICBR c ases, 138 cases still require forest 
clearances. 
The Committee notes that the aforesaid issue is being considered by the  Ministries 
of Defence and Environment and Forests and various steps have been taken to 
streamline the forest and wildlife clearances w hich include simplifying and  design 
integrated form for application for forest and wildlife clearance,  single  window 
system at three levels viz. Ministry of Environment and Forests level, State  Forest 
Department Head Quarters and at DFO level in distri cts, processing of applications 
involving forests clearance and wildlife simultaneously. The Committee notes that 
all these initiatives are steps in the right direction. However the real issue is 
enforcement of various decisions taken by the issue is enfor cement of various 
decisions taken by the Government. In this connection, various suggestions were 
made in the meeting held by the Cabinet, the details of which were given by the 
Defence Secretary during the course of oral evidence. A proposal was made to 
have a nodal officer at the State level in the Ministry of Defence and the Ministry of 
environment and forests. It was also suggested that a checklist should be given to 
the nodal officers clearly delineating the responsibility of giving timelines. The 
Committee find that the aforesaid proposal merit consideration and the earlier 
decisions in this regard should be taken and the Committee informed. The 
Committee would also like the Ministry to follow the impact of the recent decisions 

18 
 
taken by the Government on the forest and wildlife clearances and keep the 
Committee informed. The Committee also desires that to strictly maintain the 
compressed timelines for forest clearance besides taking all the proposed 
initiatives, it is utmost necessary that the accountab ility at each level is fix ed, only 
then the stipulated tim e frame for the purpose of forest clearance would be 
maintained. Concrete initiatives on the suggested lines should be taken and the 
Committee Apprised about the follow up actions in this regard.” 
 
24. The Ministry in its action taken reply, has stated as under:- 
 “Three level single window system has been operationalised. Timelines have also 
been fixed by MoEF for different tasks at different stages. Nodal officers of MoD 
and MoEF are functioning. A dditional Secretary (A) of MoD reviews forest 
clearance cases every quarter where representatives of MoEF and State Govts. 
participate. This has yielded positive results.”   
 
25. With regard to streamlining the procedure for forest and wildlife clearances,  
the Committee note that three level single window system has been operationalised.  
Timeliness   have also been fixed by Mo EF. Additional Secretary of MoD review  
forest clearance  cases every quarter. However, the Ministry has not replied in 
regard to prep aring a checklist for nodal officers clearly delineating the  
responsibility of giving timeliness and to ensure accountability at each level to 
adhere to the fixed time limit.  T herefore the committee wish the Ministry to furnish 
the action taken in this regard.   
 
 
 
 
H. Single umbrella for wildlife  and forest clearance 
Recommendation (Paragraph No.15) 
26. The Committee had recommended as under: 

19 
 
“The Committee notes that on the issue of forest clearance, certain timelines have 
been prescribed under the fore st rules which are further compressed for 
construction of roads and infrastructure for border roads along the Indo -China 
border and those of national security importance. However, in case of wildlife 
clearance, no timelines have been prescribed. There is a n empowered committee 
constituted by the Supreme Court which also addresses some questions on wildlife. 
By the Army, an application has been filed before the Hon‟ble Supreme Court that 
for roads falling within 50 Kms. of the border, wildlife clearance shou ld be 
dispensed with and the application is under consideration of the Court at the 
moment. The Committee strongly recommends that the issue should be followed 
with the Court. If the Supreme Court agrees to the aforesaid request of Army, it 
would certainly help in expediting wildlife clearances. The Committee further notes 
that although certain initiatives are being taken by the Government to streamline 
wildlife clearances which include processing wildlife forest clearance simultaneously 
and preparing integ rated form for  both the clearances, the Secretary Environment 
and Forests on record stated that this is an endeavor; however, both the processes 
are different. The committee, strongly recommends that there is an urgent need to 
process forest and wildlife clearance simultaneously so as to cut short the time 
taken individually for each of the processes. In this connection, appointment of the 
common nodal officers for both forest and wildlife clearance as proposed by the 
Cabinet Secretary merits consideration . The final decision in this regard should be 
taken expeditiously and the Committee informed accordingly.” 
 
27. The Ministry in its action taken reply, has stated as under:- 
 “The MOEF has implemented parallel cases for WLC & FC clearance 
simultaneously.  The formats have also been circulated to the States for 
implementation in letter and spirit.” 
 

20 
 
28. In the 8 th report the Committee had recommended for a single umbrella 
for wildlife and forest clearance (WLC). Further the Committee   had also 
recommended that the  issue of dispension  of wildlife   clearance for the 
roads falling within 50 kms. of the border, should be pursued with the 
empowered Committee of Supreme Court. The Committee note that the MoEF 
has implemented parallel cases for WLC clearance simultaneously. However, the 
Ministry has not replied to the other part of the recommendation to  pursue the 
matter with the Supreme Court.  Therefore, the Committee desire the Ministry to 
apprise them on the above issue. 
 
I. Rehabilitation & Resettlement 
Recommendation (Paragraph No.17) 
 29. The Committee had recommended as under: 
“The Committee observe that rehabilitation in case of acquisition of land for 
construction of border roads is the responsibility of the concerned State/Union 
Territory. BRO pays amount of compensation as intimated by the revenue 
authorities for any such measures. BRO deposits the amount for rehabilitation as 
demanded by the State Governments. The Committee further observe that there 
are 432 number of cases pending in various courts because of various reasons 
such as lack of land records, joint family system and demand for higher 
compensation etc. The Committee feel that besides taking various initiatives to 
facilitate the land acquisition process it is utmost necessary that the person who 
has sacrificed his ancestral land, gets displaced and loses his livelihood is 
adequately compensated. The Committee desire that BRO should take all the 
initiatives in this regard. It should be monitored by BRO, that the amount  paid by 
them to the  State Gov ernment for compensation actually reaches the affected 
people on time by asking the State Governments to submit utilization certificates 
and holding regular meetings with the State Government officials and the affected  
parties. The Committee also desires BRO to go for out of court settlement and pay 
the market price for the land to optimize the satisfaction level of the affected people. 
The initiatives as suggested should be taken expeditiously and the Committee be 
kept informed.” 
 
 

21 
 
30. The Ministry in its action taken reply, has stated as under:- 
 “BRO pays the demanded amount of land acquisition to State authorities as per 
law. In practice out of Court settlement is rare. But nowadays the concerned 
authorities are taking into account the market rates for determining compensation.”  
 
31. In order to ensure timely payment of compensation to the people for 
sacrificing their land and livelihood for Defence, t he Committee had desired  that 
BRO should ask the State Government to submit utilisation certificate . However, the 
action taken reply is silent on this aspect.  The Ministry has simply stated that BRO 
pays the demanded amount of land acquisition to State Authorities as per law.  The 
Committee do not approve such type of casual attitude in regard to payment o f 
compensation. The Committee, therefore, reiterate their earlier recommendation to 
monitor the disbursement of amount to rehabilitate the population by insisting on  
submission of  utilisation certificates  by the State Governments.  
  

22 
 
CHAPTER II 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS, WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY 
THE GOVERNMENT  
 
 
Recommendation (Paragraph No.1) 
 “The Committee notes that India has 14,880 Kms. long land borders running 
through 92 districts in 17 States and share with seven neighbouring Countries vi z 
Afghanistan, Pakistan, Bangladesh, Myanmar, China, Bhutan and Nepal. Whereas 
the Western borders of the country along the State of J&K (plains), Punjab, 
Rajasthan and Gujarat are reasonably well connected and fairly accessible, the 
Northern and Eastern B orders are not as well connected as informed by the 
Ministry of Defence. In view of the aforesaid status of border roads, the Army posts 
along the Northern and Eastern borders are also not so well connected. Although a 
lot of efforts are being made by the Union Government and State governments to 
provide connectivity to our borders, the unique strategic location of India poses 
unique security challenges. More so, the problems specific to different portions of 
our extensive borders have become aggravated in recent times due to cross border 
terrorism as acknowledged by the Group of Ministers in its report.  Besides the 
infrastructure being created on the border by our neighbouring countries particularly 
China further poses challenges before the country. 
The go vernment has created the Border Roads Organization (BRO) in the year 
1960 with the aim of speedy development of road network and infrastructure along 
the borders and the roads constructed by the Ministry of defence are mainly 
handled by BRO. The Committee during the  recent study visit to Leh, Srinagar and 
border areas have observed that  construction and maintenance of border 
roads/tunnels/infrastructure are affected due to various  factors which include  lack 
of adequate funds, capability constraints, ina dequate airlifting facility,  pending  
forest/wildlife  clearance, overall increase in the quantum of work being  entrusted 
to Border Road Organization (BRO). The committee may like to emphasize that 
roads are an essential part of the border management. Be sides the good 
connectivity to our border by roads is pre -requisite for the socio -economic 
development of the nation. Not only the, roads in the border areas are necessary 
for the Armed Forces to meet their strategic needs. In wartime, it is essential to 
develop and maintain roads to keep the line of communication open in original and 
redeployed sectors for the Armed Forces. Various aspects related to construction of 
border roads have been examined in detail by the Committee and 
observations/recommendations covering various issues have been given in the 
succeeding part of the report. Here, the committee may like to strongly recommend 
the Government to take all the desired initiatives to address to the various problems 
coming in the way of construction of bor der roads. Not only that, there is an urgent 

23 
 
need to have fast track procedures for the construction of roads and other 
infrastructure on our borders, keeping in view the strategic needs as well as the 
challenges the country faces.” 
 
The Ministry in its action taken reply, has stated as under:- 
 “Observations of the Committee have been noted.” 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see para no. 7 of Chapter-I of the Report) 
 
Recommendation (Paragraph No.2) 
The Committee had recommended as under: 
”The committee f inds that whereas it is an acknowledged fact that the roads and 
other infrastructure is being created on the borders by different countries 
particularly China, the Ministry has not maintained any details and data with regard 
to such activities going on the  borders which is evident from the response of the 
ministry. This speaks volume of the casual attitude of the Ministry towards such and 
important matter concerning the security of the nation. The committee feels that it is 
utmost necessary to keep a watch on the construction activities going on our 
borders by different countries and maintain the data in this regard. Besides there is 
an urgent need to ensure that our plans are in consonance with the impending 
security challenges. As such the committee strong ly recommends to formulate 
some sort of mechanism in this regard. The committee should be kept informed 
about the action taken in this regard.” 
 
The Ministry in its action taken reply, has stated as under:- 
“In recent years, China has undertaken developmen t projects of constructing roads 
in Tibet Autonomous Region (TAR). The details of major roads 
constructed/upgraded by China in TAR are as under: 
(a). Major Highways: All major highways have been upgraded to two way 
black top all weather and opened for traf fic throughout the year. The details 
of highways in TAR are given below: 
 (i). Western Highway.  This highway is also called Lhasa -
Kashgar/Aksai Chin Highway. The distance from Kashgar to Lhasa is 3105 
Km. It has a capacity of 3200 tons per day. This Highw ay has three 

24 
 
alignments from Shiquanhe to Lhasa. The details of the alignment are as 
under: 
 Northern Alignment:  This 1260 Km one -way road passes through 
Gerze and meets Central Highway at Amdo. 
 
 Southern Alignment” It is a 1855 Km road from Shiquanhe to 
Lhasa. 
 
 Alternate Alignment: An alternate alignment passes through Rudok -
Shiquanhe-Gerze-Lhasa. Total distance is 1657 Km. 
 
(ii). Central Highway:  This 1154 Km highway is the main road 
link between Mainland China and TAR and links Gormo to Lhasa. 
Repair/upgradation of 535 Km section of this highway from Golmud to 
Lhasa, commenced in mid 2009. 
(iii). Eastern Highway:  This is a 1715 km highway between 
Chengdu (Sichuan) and Linzhi (Ngiti). It has a capacity of 3200 tones. 
(b). Road Infrastructure Along the borders:  China has constructed 
roads from all highways, logistic centres and major defence installations to 
all the passes and military on the LAC/IB. The details of the same are as 
under: 
 Western Sector. The details are as under. 
S/No. Road Classification Surface 
i. Dropp Karpo-Dambuguru - Black top 
ii. Kongk La-Mobdo La - Ungravelled Motorable track 
iii. Chhaga La-Quinzang CL-9 - 
iv. Charding La Nilung - Fair weather 
v. Dumchele Along Indus River -
Umbu Mane 
- Motorable all weather track. 
vi. Rudok-Khurnak-Fort-Sirijap - Black top 
vii. Chorten-Charding La - Fair Weather road 
viii. Ane La-Dambuguru CL-9 1-2 km short of Ane La and 
umetalled from Ane La to 1 -3 
km short from LAC 
 

25 
 
 Central Sector. The details are as under. 
 S/No. Road Classification Surface 
i. Manza-Gumar CL-9 Motorable 
ii. Sarkya-Tunjun La 
(Barahori) 
CL-9 - 
iii. Mew Road Bifurcation 
from Poling -Kabrak-
Sarang 2 km West of 
Vill Kabrak 
CL-9 Gravelled 
iii. Shiquanhe-Gartok - Black top 
iv. Tholing-Menze 
(Missar) 
CL-9 Metalled 
 Eastern Sector. The details are as under. 
 
 S/No. Road Classification Surface 
i. Kalashar-Phari 
Dzong-Yatung 
CL-40 Black top 
ii. Khamba Dzong -Traksing 
Gompa 
CL-18 Black top 
iii. Kalashar-Trakshing Gompa CL-18 Black top 
iv. Mating-Yaksha-Yatung CL-18 Black top 
v. Yatung to Nathu La CL-18 Black top 
vi. Tsethang-Doshong La CL-18 Black top 
vii. Khamba Dzong -Traksing 
Gompa via Serkang 
CL-18 Black top 
viii. Khamba Dzong-Giru CL-9 Natural 
ix. Giru-Sebu La CL-9 Natural 
x. Sebu La-Kongra La CL-9 Natural 
xi. Khamba Dz ong-Lawu CL-9 Natural 

26 
 
Gompa 
xii. Lawu Gompa-Kongra La CL-9 Natural 
xiii. Giru-Road Junction CL-9 Natural 
xix. Lawu Gompa -Towards 
Naku La Upto 
CL-9 Natural 
xv. Traksing Gompa-Chomdo CL-9 Natural 
xvi. Traksing Gompa-Chago La CL-9 Natural 
xvii. Chago La  Mating-Tuna 
Road Head 
CL-9 Natural 
xviii. Yaksha-Phari Dzong -IB 
Bhutan Border 
CL-9 Natural 
xix. Phari Dzong0IB Bhutan 
Border Tremo La 
CL-9 Natural 
xx. Road Junction -IB Bhutan 
Border 
CL-9 Natural 
xxi. Phari Dzong to Talung 
Dzong 
CL-9 Natural 
xxii. Tangla/Supra to Lingsi La CL-9 Natural 
xxiii. Road Junction North of 
Yatung to Tangkarla La 
CL-9 Natural 
xxiv. Road Junction Chumbi to 
NE of Chakung Chhu 
CL-9 Natural 
xxv. Rubinkha-Point 4476 CL-9 Natural 
xxvi. Chimintoka-Phim Karula CL-9 - 
xxvii. Chang-Wuligang CL-9 Natural surface 
upto 
Kangpaso, 
thereafter 
Black top 
xxviii. Nayu-Kungo-Tungu La CL-9 - 

27 
 
xxix. Lilung-Singo Samba CL-9 Natural surface 
xxx. Nagiti-Lunang CL-9 Black Top 
xxxi. Track Paka-Lamdo La CL-9 - 
xxxii. Thongama-Goyu CL-9 Natural surface 
xxxiii. Slambi-Lung CL-9 Natural surface 
xxxiv. Migyitun-Bisa Bridge CL-9 Natural surface 
xxxv. Chosam-Yume CL-9 Natural surface 
xxxvi. Medi-Tatu CL-9 All weather 
xxxvii. Rima-Madan Bridge CL-9 - 
 
 (c). Myanmar Border Roads- Construction of Stillwell Road.   
 
The 1739 km Stillwell Road starts from Assam and links Kunming in Yunnan 
province of South China through the Pangsau pass on the India -Myanmar 
Border. China has shown considerable interest in development of this Road. 
Present status of Stillwell Road is as under: 
 Kunming-Myitkyina (647 km) China has already 
constructed/upgraded the stretch from Kunming to Myitkyina via 
Kambaiti pass into a all weather road in May 07. 
 
 Myitkyina-Tanai (192 Km). Ya Za NA construction company, a 
Myanmarese company with pro -Chinese leanings, is constructing the 
road from Myitkyina to Tanai. Work is being carried out on a fast track 
to convert it into a four-lane road. 
 
 Tanai-Pangsau (174 km).  Reportedly the contracts for the 
Tanai-Pangsau Stretch, has also been a warded to a pro -China 
Myanmarese company. 
 
2. The following roads are planned to be constructed/widened in near future in 
Pakistan: 
 (a).  Road Jaglot-Skardu. The road is being converted to highway. 
 (b). Road Sazin-Thakot- The road is being converted to highway. 

28 
 
 (c). Road KKH – Dushanbe – Inputs suggest that a feasibility study for a road 
that would link Dushanbe to the KKH through the Kuliab Pass is being 
carried out. 
 (d). Four-Laneing of the KKH- The widening of the highway entails making of a 
closed tunnel (length 480m) and 18 open tunnels (total length 197m) 
 (e). Realignment of KKH- The Diamer -Basha Dam is proposed to be 
constructed on the Indus River (35 Kms east of Chilas) with more than 100 
Kms long reservoir. The reservoir of the Dam would submer ge a 100km 
stretch of the KKH from Sazin to Raikot. 
 
Government plans in view of the impending security challenges with reference to 
development and construction of the  roads by    China along the order are as 
under :-  
Integrated Headquarters of MoD (Ar my) is seized of infrastructure 
development by China on its borders with India.  India‟s own operational 
plans are in consonance with existing ground realities and impending 
security challenges.” 
 
Recommendation (Paragraph No. Para No. 3 ) 
The Committee had recommended as under: 
“The government has chalked out Long Term Perspective Plans viz LTPP1 and 
LTPP-II for augmentation of infrastructure on India borders. Under LTPP1, 277 
roads of the length of 13100 Kms amounting to Rs 24886 crore are to be 
constructed by 2012. Similarly, under LTPP2, 281 roads of 14857 kms of the cost of 
Rs. 25268 Crore are to be constructed by the year 2022. The data with  regard  to 
progress  of the works under LTPP1, as furnished by the  Ministry indicated that out 
of total of 277 number  of roads, only 29 roads could be completed and the work in 
respect of another 168 roads is in progress. No work has yet started in respect of 
80 roads measuring 2624 Kms. 
The  Committee finds that even when the Secretary, Ministry of defence durin g the 
course of oral  evidence has admitted  that  they  may not  be able  to meet the 
deadline of 2012 in respect  of LTPP1, there  seems  to be a sense  of  
complacency  on the part of BRO. When  the issue of tardy progress of road works 
was  raised during evidence, instead of informing  the committee about the concrete 
action being  taken by BRO, the representative of BRO stated the  the time  taken 
by them is one of the least taken  by any  other agency like PWD. 

29 
 
The Committee would like to emphasize th at BRO is the prestigious organization of 
the country, which need to set international standards.  The Committee therefore, 
strongly recommends that all the initiatives should be taken to address the various 
problems being faced with regard to construction  of roads and it should be ensured 
the roads under LTPP1 and LTPP2 are constructed within the stipulated time 
frame.” 
 
The Ministry in its action taken reply, has stated as under:- 
 “There are 116 roads of total length 3765 km identified under GS LTPP -I. 6 roads 
of length 98 Km have been completed and  work is under progress on 52 roads of 
length 2125 Km. BRO will complete total 45 roads of length 911 km by 2012.  BRO 
has planned to complete total 103 roads of length 2878 Km by 2015 and balance 
beyond 2015. The total cost of LTPP-I on present base year is Rs 9200 Cr.  
There are 188 roads of length 8538 km with a cost on present base year of  Rs 
15255 Cr in LTPP -II. Presently work on 11 roads of length 876 Km is under 
progress. 
The delayed PDsC of these roads  are mainly attributed to delay in obtaining forest 
clearance, restricted fund flow upto Financial Year (FY) 2008 -09, restricted/limited 
available working season, inadequate air effort available,  reluctance/resistance 
shown by concerned state PWDs in hand ing over of roads and shortage of staff. 
However Govt has taken various steps to obviate these problems and MOEF has 
activated Single Window Clearance to clear the proposal of BRO on priority. In 
addition Govt has also approved incentives to contractors in  remote/high altitude 
areas, outsourcing of air efforts and more recruitments.  
Maximum efforts are put on the 73 Indo China Border Roads (ICBR) wherein 61 
Nos of units have been moved to J&K, 7 Nos in Himachal, 33 Nos in Uttarakhand, 
46 Nos in Arunachal Pradesh and 21 Nos in Sikkim. In last 2 years the deficiency of 
the manpower has been brought down from 25% to 12% it will be further reduced in 
near future. 
BRO is committed to complete the works at the earliest with international 
standards.” 
 
 
 

30 
 
Recommendation (Paragraph No. 4) 
The Committee had recommended as under: 
“The Committee notes that all the road construction works of Ministry of Defence on 
the borders are executed by BRO. Besides, Ministry of Defence, BRO also works 
for five other Union Ministries. Not only the work assigned by Planning Commission 
State /UT Governments, National Highway Authority of India, public Sector 
undertakings, autonomous bodies are also handled by BRO. It has come out during 
the deliberations that this has led to a situation  where the planned quantum of GS 
works is beyond the capability of BRO. From the detailed information furnished by 
the  Ministry, the  Committee understands  that the  works  being assigned to BRO 
by various Ministries/agencies  other than ministry of Defe nce are basically 
intended to develop the induction routes to the Borders as also to keep them traffic 
worthy at all times for the movement of the Army. While appreciating the fact the 
aforesaid works are complementary to the requirement of the Armed Force s, the 
Committee feels that efforts should be made to assign the normal works to the 
various Central and State Government agencies like PWD, so that BRO is primarily 
involved in the strategic infrastructure activity as per their mandate. The Committee 
feels that this would address the problem of over work of BRO and the various 
strategic works would be completed in time. The Committee would like to 
recommend that the necessary guidelines in this regard should be issued to various 
Ministries/State governments and other public sector agencies and the committee 
informed accordingly.”  
 
The Ministry in its action taken reply, has stated as under:- 
 “We agree with the recommendations of the Committee that BRO should 
concentrate on strategic infrastructure. Other works should be taken up only when it 
becomes absolutely necessary for operational reasons and manpower 
management.” 
Recommendation (Paragraph No.6) 
The Committee had recommended as under: 
“The Committee notes that for regular maintenance of  border roads,  BRO gets 
yearly maintenance grant and has special  specifications not only for high altitudes 
but also for places where  there are slides and areas where the  roads  could get  
damaged due to snow. However, the Committee during the month of June, 2010 

31 
 
have observed that road condition at high altitude areas was so  bad that it took 
seven hours to reach from Leh to Pengong Lake.  
During the course of deliberations, the Committee has been informed by the 
representative of the Ministry of Defence that over a period of time because of lack 
of funding, they always made less specification to cover greater length of roads.  
The Committee strongly feel that besides constructing wide network of roads along 
with the borders, it is imperative to maintain the existing one. Reducing the 
specifications of roads due to lack of fund is not a healthy sign. 
The Committee, therefore, strongly recommends that funds should not be a 
constraint for maintenance of roads. Adequate outlay as such should be provided 
for the maintenanc e of border roads. The Committee would like to be apprised of 
the data with regard to the expenditure involved in the maintenance of border roads 
during each year of Tenth Plan and Eleventh plan so as to understand the 
requirement of outlay in this regard.” 
 
The Ministry in its action taken reply, has stated as under:- 
 “Adequate funds have been made available to BRO for various construction works 
for both development & maintenance. The scale of maintenance has been doubled 
for better quality of works. (Anx-1). 
Maintenance of Border Roads :-The year wise Allotment Vs Expenditure incurred by 
BRO is given as under:- 
S/No Financial Year Allotment Expenditure 
Total Amount 
allocated to 
BRO 
(in Rs Cr) 
Amount 
allocated to 
Maint of 
Roads (in Rs 
Cr) 
Total Amount 
utilized by BRO 
(in Rs Cr) 
Amount 
utilized for 
Maint of 
Roads by BRO  
(in Rs Cr) 
 10th PLAN 
1 2002-2003 784.22 212.68 806.64 216.75 
2 2003-2004 807.56 210.59 830.48 215.08 
3 2004-2005 943.00 251.36 936.41 251.58 
4 2005-2006 922.26 261.16 890.87 255.59 
5 2006-2007 981.00 256.26 952.55 250.35 

32 
 
 11th PLAN 
1 2007-2008 1100.00 294.39 1099.13 292.82 
2 2008-2009 1500.00 395.76 1535.15 392.99 
3 2009-2010 2200.00 387.01 2141.03 263.34 
4 2010-2011 
 
3000.00 402.13 534.02 
 (up to Jul‟10) 
76.92 
(up to Jul‟10) 
 
Recommendation (Paragraph No.-9) 
The Committee had recommended as under: 
“BRO permitted outsourcing for all works in all projects from November, 23008. 
Besides, outsourcing consultancy and supply of materials, BRO is also outsourcing 
works related to desig n and construction of Bridges/Flyovers and construction of 
roads. From the data made available by Ministry of Defence, the Committee notes 
the execution contracts and supply contracts are increasing over the years. While 
taking note of the decision of the Ministry to outsource some of the execution and 
supply works of BRO, the Committee feels that it should actually result in increase 
in overall road and infrastructure construction activities of BRO. During the year 
2008-09, the expenditure met was Rs 436.0 2 Crore, more than the pervious year 
whereas the execution contracts for Rs.653 Crore and supply contracts for Rs.269 
Crore were sanctioned during the aforesaid year.  
Similarly, during the year 2009-10, there was an increase of Rs.605.88 Crore in the 
expenditure met by BRO whereas execution contract of Rs.830 Crore plus Rs.1458 
Crore for Rohtang tunnel and supply contract for Rs. 352 Crore were sanctioned. If 
the amount involved in works outsourced is deducted from the overall expenditure 
the data indicate s the decline in expenditure of BRO which is not a healthy sign. 
The Committee would like the Ministry to furnish the specific reasons in this regard. 
They would also like to emphasize that all actions should be taken to increase the 
capacity of BRO so tha t the border roads are constructed within the stipulated time 
frame of different plans.” 
The Ministry in its action taken reply, has stated as under:- 
 “During the year 2008 -09 (Rs 3304 Cr), the expenditure made was Rs 701 Crore, 
more than the pervious yea r (Rs 2603 Cr) whereas  execution contracts for Rs.653 
Crore and supply contracts for Rs.269 Crore were sanctioned during the aforesaid 
year.  

33 
 
Similarly, during the year 2009 -10 (Rs 4205 Cr), there was an increase of Rs.901 
Crore in the expenditure made by BRO whereas execution contract of Rs.830 Crore 
plus Rs.215 Crore paid as mobilization advance for Rohtang tunnel (total cost of 
contract is Rs 1458.06 Cr) and supply contract for Rs. 352 Crore were sanctioned. 
Therefore the total expenditure incurred on o utsourcing for FY 2008 -09 is Rs 922 
Cr. and Rs 1397 Cr for FY 2009 -10. If we compare the increase of outsourcing in 
FY 2009-10 then it comes to increase of Rs 475 Cr over FY 2008 -09. The increase 
in total expenditure of FY 2009 -10 over FY 2008 -09 is Rs 901  Cr thus increase in 
outsourcing is commensurate with the increase in expenditure. In addition during 
FY 2009-10 BRO had exceeded its capability in departmental works. Achievements 
of BRO for departmental works for FY 2009 -10 for Formation is 1573 Km again st 
capability of 1136 Km, for Surfacing 1943 Km against 2020 Km and for Permanent 
Works Rs 866 Cr against Rs 533 Cr.”  
 
Recommendation (Paragraph No.11) 
“BRO  staff work in harsh climatic conditions and as such it is  utmost necessary 
that they are provide d with proper uniform, shoes and other required livery items. 
From the information furnished by the Ministry,  the Committee notes that there are 
huge gaps between annual requirements for replacement and available items. The 
Committee strongly recommends t hat the uniform, shoes and other livery items 
provided to BRO personnel should be of high quality and all efforts should be made 
to have the adequate number of each of the items so as to enable the officers/staff 
to work in such harsh conditions.” 
 
The Ministry in its action taken reply, has stated as under:- 
”BRO staff is authorized 77 types of uniform items including shoes and other livery 
items. Annual requirement for replacement are made available to Projects well in 
advance. Therefore there is not much gap between requirement and availability. 
Most of the items for BRO personnel are being procured on DGS&D Rate contract 
and tender. The DGS&D has in house quality assurance to ensure quality, whereas 
DGQA has been engaged for ensuring quality of items procured through tenders. 
Regular review with a view to introduce new item, scale and quality are being 
carried out. These are put up for Govt sanction if recommended. DGBR has been 
advised to be cautious and careful regarding quality of procurement.”  
Recommendation (Paragraph  No.-12) 

34 
 
The Committee had recommended as under: 
“During the study visit to Leh, Srinagar and some border areas, the committee had 
found that HQ DGBR has been consistently allotted air  efforts lesser than its 
requirement as  Indian Air Force does not have the requisite air lifts to meet the 
equipment  of agencies including BRO. The data furnished by the Ministry with 
regard to demand and availability of airlift facility further substantiates the aforesaid 
observation of the Committee. Ag ainst the  total demand of 4054.01 MT projected 
by BRO for the year 2010 -11, requisition for 1250.68 MT has been placed by 
various projects and only 142.45 MT air  efforts has only  materialized up to 11 July, 
2010. From the aforesaid data, the Committee f inds that inadequate airlift is one of 
the major areas hampering the task of construction of border roads. To address the 
aforesaid issue, various short term and long term measures are being 
taken/proposed to be taken by the Ministry. 80 medium lift helico pters have been 
ordered which would be coming but the process would take time as acknowledged 
by the   Secretary, Ministry of Defence during the course of oral evidence. Various 
options like outsourcing and involvement of private sector are being explored. As an 
interim measure BRO is negotiating with Pawan Hans for helicopters. However, 
these helicopters would be able to lift equipment of certain kind only. The 
equipment which is really very heavy requires a hook for which Air force would be 
catering. Thus Pawan Hans would complement the air lift facility provided  by Air 
Force and there would be  some  addition to the capacity. While taking  note of the  
fact that various proposals  of the  ministry to increase the airlift capacity are in the 
pipeline, the   Committee would like to emphasize that  early decision on all the 
projects should be taken so the airlift capacity is enhanced without any further 
delay. Besides the Committee would also like to emphasize that there is an urgent 
need to do the long -term planning in this regard. The demand  of airlift in the 
coming years should be  properly assessed and the requisite measures taken  to fill 
the gap between the required and the existing airlift capacity through various 
proposed initiatives like  outsourcing , involvement  of private sector etc. the  
concrete initiatives should be taken without any further delay and the Committee 
informed accordingly.”   
 
The Ministry in its action taken reply, has stated as under:- 
 “Against the demand of 4054.01 MT Rotary Wi ng (RW), 929 MT RW air effort has 
been allotted by the Ministry of Defence. Further the following actions have been 
taken by BRO to outsource the RW air Effort for shifting of essential stores, 
Equipment and man power in Eastern and Northern Sectors:- 
(a) Outsourcing Through Contract Agreement With PHHL :-  Contract 
agreement between PHHL and BRO for outsourcing of RW air effort in the Eastern 
Sector has been concluded on 19 Aug 2010.  Airlifting by PHHL has already 
commenced. 

35 
 
(b) Outsourcing Through Empowered Committee. Govt has constituted an 
empowered committee under the Chairmanship of DG (Ops) Air HQ to finalize 
outsourcing of air efforts in an integrated manner. Necessary steps are being taken 
to finalize it. It is expected that by mid -2011 the situation of air efforts would improve 
substantially.   
 
Recommendation (Paragraph   No.16) 
The Committee had recommended as under: 
“The Committee finds from the information made available to the Committee that 
various projects relating to the infrastructure at b orders in the country are being 
implemented by various union Ministries/undertakings and State Governments. 
Ministry of Defence conducts regular review meetings with the representatives of 
State Governments. Besides, cabinet Secretariat/PMO also organizes coordination 
meetings with the officials of the Ministry of Defence, Border Roads Organization 
and State Governments. The Committee strongly feels that there is an urgent need 
to have some sort of structured coordinating mechanism represented by the various 
Ministries, State governments, Public Sector Undertakings involved in border roads 
and BRO so as to have a holistic view of the infrastructure being created on our 
borders. Such a mechanism would also help in resolving the various conflicting 
issues. The Committee urges that such mechanism should be set up expeditiously 
and the Committee informed accordingly.” 
 
The Ministry in its action taken reply, has stated as under:- 
 “The development of the Border Areas is under the Border Management 
Department unde r the Home Ministry  and they coordinate on this issue in 
consultation with BRDB and MOD. Moreover, an empowered committee on border 
infrastructure has been constituted  under the Chairmanship of Cabinet Secretary. 
Ministry of Home Affairs is the coordinati ng Ministry. The recommendations of the 
Standing Committee is thus taken care of with regard to having a mechanism to 
review infrastructure being created on borders. 
To conclude the Committee notes that the routine procedures rules and guidelines 
can never be the guiding principles when it is the question of security and safety of 
the nation. Since border  roads  are needed  for the  strategic reasons, it is of  
utmost importance to  amend the  laws,  rules and guidelines to evolve the  fast 
track procedures for land  acquisition and also for getting forest wildlife clearances. 
Besides, there is an urgent need to address other issues viz. capacity constraints of 
construction agency I.e. BRO, inadequate airlift etc. The urgent actions as 

36 
 
suggested in the vari ous recommendations/observations made in the report should 
be taken so as to provide very good connectivity to our borders.” 
 
The Ministry in its action taken reply, has stated as under:- 
 “Govt fully shares the concerns. Efforts are being made to streamli ne procedures 
for fast track construction of strategic roads. Coordination with different 
Ministries/State Governments is yielding results.” 
Index 
S/No. Para No. Subject Page 
i. Para No.1 Overall Scenario of construction of roads and 
border areas 
1-2 
ii. Para No.2 Construction of roads on borders by the 
neighboring countries 
3-8 
iii. Para No.3 Long Terms Perspective Plans of construction 
of border roads 
9-10 
iv. Para No.4 Capacity building of BRO 11 
v. Para No.5 Expertise in tunnel construction by BRO 12 
vi. Para No.6 Maintenance of Border Roads 13-14 
vii. Para No.7 The budget as well as staff constraints 15-16 
viii. Para No.8 Induction of Information Technology in Border 
Areas 
17 
ix. Para No.9 Outsourcing of activities of BRO 18-19 
x. Para No.10 Strengthening of infrastructure available with 
BRO  
20-21 
xi. Para No.11 Providing proper uniform and other livery items 
to BRO officers and workers 
22 
xii. Para No.12 Inadequate Airlift 23-24 

37 
 
xiii. Para No.13 Availability of land for construction of border 
roads 
25-26 
xiv Para No.14 Streamlining the procedure with regard to forest 
and wildlife clearances   
27-28 
xv. Para No.15  29 
xvi. Para No.16  30 
xvii. Para No.17 Rehabilitation & Resettlement 31 
xviii. Para No.18  32 
 
Recommendation (Paragraph No.18) 
The Committee had recommended as under: 
“To conclude the Committee notes that the routine procedures rules and guidelines 
can never be the guiding principles when it is the question of security and safety of 
the nation. Since border  roads  are need ed  for the  strategic reasons, it is of  
utmost importance to  amend the  laws,  rules and guidelines to evolve the  fast 
track procedures for land  acquisition and also for getting forest wildlife clearances. 
Besides, there is an urgent need to address other issues viz. capacity constraints of 
construction agency I.e. BRO, inadequate airlift etc. The urgent actions as 
suggested in the various recommendations/observations made in the report should 
be taken so as to provide very good connectivity to our borders.” 
The Ministry in its action taken reply, has stated as under:- 
 “Govt fully shares the concerns. Efforts are being made to streamline procedures 
for fast  track construction of strategic  roads. Coordination with different 
Ministries/State Governments is yielding results.” 

38 
 
CHAPTER -III 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS, WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT DESIRE 
TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NIL 
  

39 
 
CHAPTER IV 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE 
GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE AND WHICH 
REQUIRE REITERATION 
Recommendation (Paragraph No.5) 
“The Committee finds that tunnel construction is part of the road works. BRO is the 
premier organization involved with the creation of infrastructure on our bor ders, 
even then it has no expertise in tunnel construction. The Committee during the 
course of examination have been informed that reputed consultants are being 
inducted to execute the work for execution of Rohtang tunnel. The Committee is 
unhappy to note the aforesaid position. It is surprising to note that even after 
celebrating the Golden Jubilee of BRO in the year, 2010, adequate emphasis has 
not been given on tunnel training. To address the problem, only 6-7 officers are now 
being trained in the task o f tunnel construction. The Committee strongly 
recommends that all out efforts should be made to train more and more officers in 
the construction of tunnels. While involving the international reputed consultants for 
tunnel works, it should be ensured that our own officers are also associated with the 
task so that they may also get proper on -the-job training. The Committee would 
also like to emphasize that it should be ensured that all the tunnel works including 
Rohtang pass are completed within the stipulated time frame.” 
Reply of the Government 
“Government is seriously concerned about training of BRO engineers for tunnel 
works. Further a Steering Committee (of MOD) is closely and regularly monitoring 
the progress of Rohtang Tunnel and all efforts are being m ade to complete it in 
stipulated time.” 
 Comments of the Committee 
(Please see para no. 10 of Chapter-I of the Report) 
 
Recommendation (Paragraph No. 7) 
“The Committee observes from the information furnished by the Ministry that funds 
are not a constraint so far as the issue of construction of border roads is concerned. 
The outlay during Eleventh plan is steadily increasing and the expenditure position 
is also satisfactory except for the year 2009 -10 when Rs.779 Crore had to be 
surrendered due to late appro val of budget, the year being the election year. While 
taking note of the fact the finances are not a constraint so far as the matter of 
construction of border roads is concerned, the Committee find that a lot needs to be 
done to increase the capacity of B RO that is the main organization involved in the 

40 
 
construction of roads. From the data made available by Ministry of Defence, the 
committee finds that the restructuring BRO was sanctioned in September, 2006. 
Out of 151 sanctioned units BRO has raised only 1 27 units as part of capability 
building measures. The Committee further  observe  that there is a huge gap 
between the  sanctioned and the existing strength of officers and  subordinates in 
BRO. Out of the  authorized strength of 1999 officers, the present  strength is only 
1204, the  deficiency being 36.9 percent. Similarly in case of subordinates the 
existing strength is 35579 against the authorized strength of 40747, the deficiency 
being 12.7 percent. With the raising of the remaining 24 units, the situat ion in this 
regard may further worsen. The Committee express serious concern over such a 
state of affairs and strongly recommend that all  initiatives should  be  taken  to 
raise the  remaining 24 sanctioned units and to recruit the officers and staff  wit hout 
any further delay so as to enable BRO to meet the  overall increase in the quantum 
of work.” 
Reply of the Government 
 “Regarding steps taken so far, to fill up deficiencies of Officers and 
Subordinates:- 
(a) Officers: Process for recruitment of 83 pos ts of AEE(Civ), 22 posts of 
AEE (E&M) and 31 posts of AO on interview basis has been completed by 
UPSC.  Verification of documents, medical test etc are being done and offer 
of appointment will be issued shortly on completion of these requirements. 
(b) Subordinates:  8610 candidates have since been inducted against 
various Advertisements since Sep 2007.  Recruitment process in respect of 
2565 vacancies published vide Advertisement No 01/2010 in Employment 
News dated 5 -11 Jun 2010 is in process.  The details  of manpower up to 
Dec 10 are tabulated as follows:- 
 
 
 
 
 
*GREF Personnel 
@Army Personnel 
Group Auth Held Deficiency 
GP* AP@ Total GP AP Total GP AP Total 
   A 980 556 1536 516 329 845 464 227 691 
   B  363 0 363 340 0 340 23 0 23 
   C 37748 2999 40747 32754 2734 35488 4994 265 5259 
Total 39091 3555 42646 33610 3063 36673 5481 492 5973 

41 
 
Regarding raising of balance 24 units, it is submitted that  presently steps are being 
taken to augment the existing units for better efficiency and once existing units get 
augmented additional units will be raised.” 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see para no. 13 of Chapter-I of the Report) 
 
Recommendation (Paragraph No.8) 
The Committee had recommended as under: 
“As per the information furnished by the ministry of Defence, BRO Wide Area 
Network (BRO -WAN) is planning for connecting all BRO units for the purpose of 
sharing of data, voice and video. The Committ ee finds that it is utmost necessary to 
provide communication links in border areas. Not only that, proper communication 
is urgently required in war like situation. As such the Committee would like to 
emphasize that all efforts should be made so that the a foresaid project is executed 
expeditiously.  
Reply of the Government 
“BRO-WAN was sanctioned by Govt of India, Sectt BRDB vide letter 
No.02/426/BEA/2006 dated 18 Aug 2006 for a total amount of Rs.15 Crore. The 
scope of work includes setting up of MPLS (Mul ti Protocol Label Switching) based 
WAN consisting of core, distribution and access network which includes application 
software like office automation, e -mail etc. at various BRO locations including Delhi 
and Pune. 
An Expression of Interest (EOI) was publis hed for BRO -WAN in National 
Newspapers, Indian Trade Journal and BRO Website on 17 Sep 2009. Necessary 
steps are being taken for awarding the contract.” 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see para no. 16 of Chapter-I of the Report) 
Recommendation (Paragraph No.10) 
“The data furnished by Ministry of Defence with regard to the authorized and 
existing infrastructure available with BRO indicates that there are gaps between 
quantity authorized and quantity held. Whereas, the Ministry of Defence has 
claimed that l atest snow cutting equipments are available with BRO, the data 
indicates that out of 154 number of authorized snow cutting equipments, the 

42 
 
quantity held is 77 i.e. around 50 per cent. Similarly, for welding sets, there is 
shortage of 16 items and under dra gline; there is shortage of 4 numbers. Border 
roads are constructed on difficult terrains and under the harsh climatic conditions 
and adequate number of snow equipments and other machines/infrastructure are 
urgently required to enable BRO to accomplish the give tasks. The gap between the 
quantities held in respect of the important items is a matter of serious concern. The 
Committee strongly recommends that the equipments should be purchased as per 
the authorized quantity without any further delay. Besides u rgent action should be 
taken to procure the latest equipments available worldwide to address to the 
challenges of constructing roads and infrastructure on difficult terrains.” 
Reply of the Government 
“The Govt has approved 17 numbers of Snow Cutters in Ann ual Procurement Plan 
(APP) 2010-11, out of which 05 Nos are being procured, and for balance 24 Nos 
size-II Dozers in lieu of Snow Cutters are being procured as presently BRO is 
improving many roads to NHDL specification where a large fleet of Dozers are 
required and proposed procurement will serve dual purpose. Once the NHDL work 
will get completed the requirement of Snow Cutter will be reassessed and procured 
accordingly.  
Regarding welding sets the Govt has approved 20 Nos Welding Sets in APP 2010 -
11 and procurement action is under progress. 
In addition, Govt has sanctioned Rs 100 Cr for creating a bank of cutting edge 
equipment over & above the authorization to meet the unforeseen requirements 
and fair wear & tear.” 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see para no. 19 of Chapter-I of the Report) 
 
Recommendation (Paragraph No.13) 
The Committee had recommended as under: 
“The Committee notes that availability of land is the prerequisite for construction of 
border roads. The delay in land acquisition is one of th e factors responsible for 
delay in completing the BRO projects as admitted by Ministry of Defence. Various  
reasons for delay in acquisition of land  that  have been stated are lengthy legal 
procedures,  non -availability of land records, frequent changes in  the cost of land 
etc. It has also been stated that  the maximum  time  is taken for the  proposal to 
reach the nodal officer level  and most of the time  is  wasted in getting staff 
together for joint  survey. While noting that lengthy legal procedures an d no -
availability of land records are the real hurdles in acquisition of land, the Committee 
feel that some of the impediments being faced in the land acquisition can be 

43 
 
addressed with the proper coordinating mechanism between the State 
Governments, district administration and local authorities. Better coordination would 
definitely address the problem of the time wasted in getting staff together in joint 
survey. The Ministry has stated that there is a need to sensitize state governments 
in this regard. The Committee feel that not only State Governments, but the district 
authorities, local bodies and the public also need to be sensitized that the land is 
required for the construction of border roads which is required for the security of the 
country. The Commi ttee also notes that public is an important stakeholder on the 
matter of construction of roads. Besides serving the strategic purpose, border roads 
also result in economic and social upliftment of the masses residing in those areas. 
As such frequent intera ction by the Army with the masses would certainly help the 
authorities in getting the land for construction of border roads. The committee would 
like to emphasize that all the desired actions on the suggested lines should be 
taken and committee informed accordingly.” 
 
The Ministry in its action taken reply, has stated as under:- 
 “The matter of Land Acquisition (LA) & Forest Clearance (FC) were deliberated at 
various levels in detail and with the directions of Cabinet Secretariat, MOEF has set 
up Three Leve l Single Window system (at district, State HQ and Ministry) for FC 
cases of BRO and others.  As first initiative, MOEF has also simplified the form. In 
the system of Single Window, there will be a facilitating team, comprising of 
specialists to help prepar ing FC/WL clearance proposal with the Nodal Officer in 
consultation with the State level coordinator of BRO/ITBP. The Single Window team 
at the level of MOEF will visit the different States to sensitize the teams at state 
levels and see the progress in operationalisation of other single windows." 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see para no. 22 of Chapter-I of the Report) 
 
Recommendation (Paragraph No. 14) 
The Committee had recommended as under: 
“The Committee notes that border roads do not need environme nt clearance under 
the Environment Protection Act. However, forest and wildlife clearances are 
required under the Forest Conservation Rule and wildlife Protection Act respectively 
As per the Forest conservation Rules, 2003, the timelines for clearance  of 
proposals at state Government and  Central Government  level have been 
prescribed. These are  90  days  for processing at the State Government level and 

44 
 
60 days at the Central government level for border roads along the Indo -China 
border and projects of nat ional security importance. In spite of the clear cut time 
frame provided under the rules, the forest and wildlife clearances have been the 
biggest stumbling block for construction of roads and other infrastructure 
development in border areas as observed by  the committee during the Study visit. 
The Committee have been informed that the average time taken is 2 -3 years and in 
certain cases, 8 -9 years have been taken for such clearances. The detailed data 
furnished by the Ministry with regard to forest clearanc e further substantiates the 
aforesaid observation of the Committee. Out of 109 Indo China Border roads 
(ICBR) cases, in respect of 11 cases forest clearances are not required.  As such 
out of 98 remaining cases final approval accorded and approval in princ iple 
accorded is for 79 cases. As such approval of 19 cases is still pending at various 
stages. Similarly, in cases of non -ICBR cases, 138 cases still require forest 
clearances. 
The Committee notes that the aforesaid issue is being considered by the  Minis tries 
of Defence and Environment and Forests and various steps have been taken to 
streamline the forest and wildlife clearances which include simplifying and  design 
integrated form for application for forest and wildlife clearance,  single  window 
system at three levels viz. Ministry of Environment and Forests level, State  Forest 
Department Head Quarters and at DFO level in districts, processing of applications 
involving forests clearance and wildlife simultaneously. The Committee notes that 
all these ini tiatives are steps in the right direction. However the real issue is 
enforcement of various decisions taken by the issue is enforcement of various 
decisions taken by the Government. In this connection, various suggestions were 
made in the meeting held by t he Cabinet, the details of which were given by the 
Defence Secretary during the course of oral evidence. A proposal was made to 
have a nodal officer at the State level in the Ministry of Defence and the Ministry of 
environment and forests. It was also sugg ested that a checklist should be given to 
the nodal officers clearly delineating the responsibility of giving timelines. The 
Committee find that the aforesaid proposal merit consideration and the earlier 
decisions in this regard should be taken and the Com mittee informed. The 
Committee would also like the Ministry to follow the impact of the recent decisions 
taken by the Government on the forest and wildlife clearances and keep the 
Committee informed. The Committee also desires that to strictly maintain the  
compressed timelines for forest clearance besides taking all the proposed 
initiatives, it is utmost necessary that the accountability at each level is fixed, only 
then the stipulated tine frame for the purpose of forest clearance would be 
maintained. Conc rete initiatives on the suggested lines should be taken and the 
Committee Apprised about the follow up actions in this regard.” 
 
 
The Ministry in its action taken reply, has stated as under:- 

45 
 
 “Three level single window system has been operationalised. Tim elines have also 
been fixed by MoEF for different tasks at different stages. Nodal officers of MoD 
and MoEF are functioning. Additional Secretary (A) of MoD reviews forest 
clearance cases every quarter where representatives of MoEF and State Govts. 
participate. This has yielded positive results.”   
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see para no. 25 of Chapter-I of the Report) 
 
Recommendation (Paragraph No.15) 
The Committee had recommended as under: 
“The Committee notes that on the issue of forest clearance, certain timelines have 
been prescribed under the forest rules which are further compressed for 
construction of roads and infrastructure for border roads along the Indo -China 
border and those of national security importance. However, in case of wildlife 
clearance, no timelines have been prescribed. There is an empowered committee 
constituted by the Supreme Court which also addresses some questions on wildlife. 
By the Army, an application has been filed before the Hon‟ble Supreme Court that 
for roads falling within 50 Kms. of the border, wildlife clearance should be 
dispensed with and the application is under consideration of the Court at the 
moment. The Committee strongly recommends that the issue should be followed 
with the Court. If the Supreme Court agrees  to the aforesaid request of Army, it 
would certainly help in expediting wildlife clearances. The Committee further notes 
that although certain initiatives are being taken by the Government to streamline 
wildlife clearances which include processing wildlife forest clearance simultaneously 
and preparing integrated form for  both the clearances, the Secretary Environment 
and Forests on record stated that this is an endeavor; however, both the processes 
are different. The committee, strongly recommends that th ere is an urgent need to 
process forest and wildlife clearance simultaneously so as to cut short the time 
taken individually for each of the processes. In this connection, appointment of the 
common nodal officers for both forest and wildlife clearance as p roposed by the 
Cabinet Secretary merits consideration. The final decision in this regard should be 
taken expeditiously and the Committee informed accordingly.” 
 
 
The Ministry in its action taken reply, has stated as under:- 

46 
 
 “The MOEF has implemented paral lel cases for WLC & FC clearance 
simultaneously.  The formats have also been circulated to the States for 
implementation in letter and spirit.” 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see para no. 28 of Chapter-I of the Report) 
 
Recommendation (Paragraph No.17) 
“The Committee observes that rehabilitation in case of acquisition of land for 
construction of border roads is the responsibility of the concerned State/Union 
Territory. BRO pays amount of compensation as intimated by the revenue 
authorities for any such measures. BRO deposits the amount for rehabilitation as 
demanded by the State Governments. The Committee further observes that there 
are 432 number of cases pending in various courts because of various reasons 
such as lack of land records, joint family sys tem and demand for higher 
compensation etc. The committee feels that besides taking various initiatives to 
facilitate the land acquisition process it is utmost necessary that the person who 
has sacrificed his ancestral land, gets displaced and loses his li velihood is 
adequately compensated. The Committee desires that BRO should take all the 
initiatives in this regard. It this regard, it  should be monitored by BRO, that the 
amount  paid by them to the  State Government for compensation actually reaches 
the affected people on time by asking the State Governments to submit utilization 
certificates and holding regular meetings with the State Government officials and 
the affected  parties. The Committee also desires BRO to go for out of court 
settlement and pay the market price for the land to optimize the satisfaction level of 
the affected people. The initiatives as suggested should be taken expeditiously and 
the Committee be kept informed.” 
 
Reply of the Government 
“BRO pays the demanded amount of land acquisit ion to State authorities as per 
law. In practice out of Court settlement is rare. But nowadays the concerned 
authorities are taking into account the market rates for determining compensation.”  
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see para no. 31 of Chapter-I of the Report) 
  

47 
 
CHAPTER -V 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL REPLIES OF 
THE GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NIL 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI;                                 SATPAL MAHARAJ,   
16 March, 2011                                  Chairman,       
25 Phalguna (Saka)1932                                    Standing Committee on Defence 
 
  

48 
 
MINUTES OF THE SIXTH SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE 
(2010-11) 
 
 The Committee sat on Monday, the 16th March, 201 1 from 1500 to 1530 hrs. in 
Committee Room `62‟, Parliament House, New Delhi. 
 
PRESENT 
Shri Satpal Maharaj   -      Chairman 
 
MEMBERS 
 
LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri Harish Chaudhary  
3. Shri Kamal Kishor „Commando‟  
4. Shri Kapil Muni Karwariya  
5. Prof. Prasanna Kumar Patasani 
6. Shri J. Ramesh 
7. Shri M. Rajamohan Reddy 
  8. Shri Baju Ban Riyan  
  9. Rajkumari Ratna Singh  
 
RAJYA SABHA  
 
  
10.  Shri Avinash Rai Khanna  
11  Shri Mukut Mithi 
12.  Shri Mukhtar Abbas Naqvi 
13.  Shri M.V. Mysura Reddy 
 
SECRETARIAT 
1.  Shri T.K. Mukherjee   - Joint Secretary 
2. Shrimati Sudesh Luthra  - Director 
3. Shrimati Jyochnamayi Sinha - Deputy Secretary 
 

49 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the members to the sitting of the 
Committee.  
 
3. The Committee then took up for consideration and adoption of the draft report on 
action taken by the Government on the recommendations /observations contained in the  
Eighth (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) on Construction of Roads in border areas of the country  and 
adopted the same with slight modification. The Committee, then, authorised the Chairman 
to present the same to the House on a date convenient to him.  
  
The Committee then adjourned. 
________ 
 
 
 
 
 
  

50 
 
 
APPENDIX 
ANALYSIS OF THE ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS CONTAINED IN THE EIGHTH    REPORT  OF 
THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE 
 
Total  Percentage 
of Total 
 
1. Total number of recommendations  18  
 
2. Recommendations/Observations which      
 have been accepted by Government 
 Para Nos. 1, 2, 3, 4, 6, 9, 11, 12, 16 and 18 10  56 
  
3. Recommendations/Observations which  -  -   
the Committee do not desire to pursue  
 in view of Government‟s replies 
 Para Nos.  Nil 
 
4. Recommendations/Observations in respect 08  44  
 of which replies of Government have not 
 been accepted by the Committee 
 Para Nos. 5, 7, 8, 10, 13, 14, 15, and 17 
 
5. Recommendations/Observations in respect -    - 
 of which final replies of the Government are 
 still awaited 
 Para Nos.  Nil 
 
 
 