1 
 
13 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE  
(2011-2012) 
 
(FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA)  
 
MINISTRY OF DEFENCE  
 
PERFORMANCE OF COAST GUARD ORGANISATION  
 
THIRTEENTH REPORT 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT  
NEW DELHI 
 
 
December, 2011 / Agrahayana, 1933 (Saka)  
 
 


2 
 
 
THIRTEENTH REPORT 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE  
(2011-2012) 
  
(FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA)  
 
MINISTRY OF DEFENCE  
 
 
PERFORMANCE OF COAST GUARD ORGANISATION  
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 8   December, 2011 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 8  December, 2011 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT  
NEW DELHI 
 
 
December, 2011 / Agrahayana, 1933 (Saka)  


3 
 
 
CONTENTS 
 
  PAGES 
CHAPTER – I              Introductory           7 
CHAPTER - II  Organizational Structure        9 
CHAPTER – III  The   Enhanced Role of Coast Guard Organisation     10 
and the Long Term Planning  to M eet the added challenges  
CHAPTER – IV  Infrastrucutre         17 
CHAPTER – V  Force Level        21 
CHAPTER – VI            Fishing Community Eyes a nd Ears of Coast Guard  29 
CHAPTER – VII  Disaster Management       31 
CHAPTER – VIII Protection of Marine Environment    33 
CHAPTER – IX   Manpower & Training      37 
CHAPTER – X  Coordination amongst v arious Agencies at Sea  41 
CHAPTER – XI  Anti Piracy       44 
CHAPTER – XII  International Obligations      46 
PART-II 
 
Observations/ Recommendations  ……………………………………… ... 48 
 
ANNEXURES…………………………………………………………………… ... 70 
 
Minutes of the sittings of the Committee …………………………………          76 
 
 
 


4 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE (2011 -12) 
 
Shri Satpal Maharaj    -  Chairman 
     
Lok Sabha  
 
2. Shri Kamal Kishor `Comm ando’  
3. Shri Harish Choudhary  
4. Shri Varun Gandhi  
5. Shri Sher Singh Ghubaya  
6. Shri Ramesh Chandappa Jigajinagi  
7. Shri Bhaskarrao Patil Khatgaonkar  
8. Shri Ajay Kumar  
9. Shri Mithilesh Kumar  
10. Shri Sadashivrao Dadoba Mandlik  
11. Shri Asaduddin Owaisi  
12. Shri A.T. Nana Patil  
13. Shri C.R. Patil  
14. Shri Amarnath Pradhan  
15. Shri Kadir Rana  
16. Shri Adhalrao Patil Shivaji  
17. Shri Mahabali Singh  
18. Rajkumari Ratna Singh  
19. Shri Uday Singh  
20. Shri Mekapati Rajamoha n Reddy  
21. Vacant  
  
 Rajya Sabha  
 
22.  Shri Munquad Ali  
23.  Shri Naresh Gujral  
24.  Shri Avinash Rai Khanna  
25.  Prof. P.J. Kurien  
26.  Shri Mukut Mithi  
27.  Shri Mukhtar Abbas Naqvi  
28.  Shri T.K. Rangarajan  
29.  Shri M.V. Mysura Red dy  
30.  Shri Birender Singh  
31.  Shri Ram Kripal Yadav  
 
Secretariat 
1. Shri  T.K. Mukherjee  - Joint Secretary 
2. Smt. Sudesh Luthra   - Director 
 


5 
 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE (2010 -11) 
 
Shri Satpal Maharaj    -  Chairman     
Lok Sabha  
 
2.  Shri Harish Chaudhary  
3.  Shri Kamal Kishor ‘Commando’  
4.  Shri H.D. Devegowda  
5.  Shri Varun Gandhi  
6.  Dr. Sucharu Ranjan Haldar  
7.  Shri Kapil Muni Karwariya  
8.  Shri Bhaskar Rao Patil Khatgaonkar  
9.  Shri Asaduddin Owaisi  
10.  Prof. Prasanna Kumar Patasani  
11.  Shri A.T. Nana Patil  
12.  Shri C.R. Patil  
13.  Shri Amarnath Pradhan  
14.  Shri C. Rajendran  
15.  Shri J. Ramesh  
16.  Shri M. Rajamohan Reddy  
17.  Shri Baju Ban Riyan  
18.  Shri Kalyan Singh  
19.  Shri Mahabali Singh  
20. 
21.  
Rajkumari Ratna Singh  
 Vacant  
 
 Rajya Sabha  
 
22. Shri Munquad Ali  
23.  Shri Avinash Rai Khanna  
24.  Prof. P.J. Kurien  
25.  Shri Mukut Mithi  
26.  Shri Mukhtar Abbas Naqvi  
27.  Shri T.K. Rangarajan  
28.  Shri Birender Si ngh  
29.  Shri Ram Kripal Yadav  
30.  Shri M.V. Mysura Reddy  
31.  Shri Naresh Gujral  
 
 
 
 


6 
 
INTRODUCTION  
 
  
I, the Chairman of the Standing Committee on Defence (2011 -12), having been 
authorised by the Committee to present the Report on their behalf, prese nt this Thirteenth 
report on `Performance of Coast Guard Organization ’. 
2.  The Committee took evidence of the representatives of the Ministry of Defence and 
Coast Guard Organization on 21st October 2010.     
3.  The Draft Report was considered and adopted  by the Committee at their sitting 
held on 4 November 2011.    
4.  The Committee wish to express their thanks to the officers of the Ministry of 
Defence and Coast Guard Organization for appearing before the Committee and 
furnishing the material and informa tion which the Committee desired in connection with 
the examination of the subject.  
 
5. The Committee thank their predecessor Committee for taking  oral evidence and 
obtaining information on the subject.  
 
6. The Committee wish to express their thanks to Adm(Retd) RH Tahiliani, PVSM, 
AVSM and VAdm (Retd) VA Kamath, PVSM for furnishing valuable material  and 
information in connection with the  examination of this subject  
7. For facility of reference and convenience, the recommendations/ observations of 
the Committee have been printed in bold letters in Part -II of the report. 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI;             SATPAL MAHARAJ,  
7 December, 2011                               Chairman, 
 16 Agrahayana, 193 3 (Saka)                   Standing Committee on Defence  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


7 
 
REPORT 
INTRODUCTORY  
 Ever since the 1960 ’s, the Navy had been requesting the Government of India for 
setting up an auxiliary service for Maritime Law Enforcement and undertaking Safety and 
Security Tasks in the Indian Waters.  The United Nation Convention on the  Law of the 
Sea  (UNCLOS) in 1972, which awarde d Exclusive Economic Zone for all coastal States 
further boosted the rationale for the institution of a Coast  Guard.  Consequently, a 
Committee set up by the Government of India in 1974 recommended for settin g up of a 
separate Coast Guard Organization.  In the light of the aforesaid developments the 
Indian Coast Guard was constituted as an armed force of the union by an Act of 
Parliament on August 18, 1978 (Act No. 30 of 1978) to undertake predominantly peace 
time tasks of ensuring the security of the maritime Zones of India.  Hence the Indian 
Coast Guard is entrusted with peace time tasks in the sea areas of responsibility of 2.01 
million sq km and 3.9 million sq km of Indian Search and Rescue Region.   
2. Section 14 of the Coast Guard Act, 1978 specifies the duties and functions of the 
service mandating adoption of appropriate measures for specific tasks as per the said 
Act.   The tasks entrusted include safety and protection of artificial islands and offshore  
terminals, installation and devices, protection and assistance to fishermen at sea, 
preservation and protection of marine environment, prevention and control of marine 
pollution, assistance to customs and other authorities in anti -smuggling operations and  
enforcement of enactment being in force in the maritime zones.   
3. Coastal security has been on the centre stage post terror attack on Mumbai on  
26 November, 2008.  The use of sea route by terrorists for attacks on Mumbai has 
highlighted  the vulnerabil ity of our coastline and the existing security mechanism.  With 
a view to enhance the coastal security mechanism after the attack of 26/11, Cabinet 
Committee on Security (CSS) in the meeting held on 16 th February, 2009 has approved 
various steps to be take n by the Indian Coast Guard. Indian Coast Guard has been 
additionally designated as the authority responsible for coastal security in territorial 
waters and the Director -General, Coast Guard has been designated as Commander 


8 
 
Coastal Security responsible for  overall coordination between Central and State 
agencies in all matters relating to coastal security.  The main thrust given in the 
directives is to enhance surveillance in territorial waters by all agencies which include 
Indian Navy, Indian Coast Guard, M arine Police, Customs and other State and Central 
agencies. 
4. The Committee while taking note of the multiplicity of the assigned tasks of the 
Coast Guard Organisation have analysed the effective steps being taken/proposed to be 
taken to upgrade the infra structure, force levels, manpower etc. to meet the challenges 
particularly in the post 26/11 scenario and made various recommendations/observations 
in Part II of the Report.  
  


9 
 
CHAPTER-II 
ORGANIZATIONAL STRUCTURE  
 
5. The Coast  Guard  operates from its Headquarter located a t New  Delhi.  
The field  functions are executed  by the four  Regional Headquarters  located at  
Mumbai, Chennai, Gandhi  Naga r a n d Po rt  Blair . Unde r  thes e   Regiona l  
Headquarter s  there   are  12  District  Headquarters,  located  along  the  coastal  
States  of India.  
  
6. When the attention of the Ministry was drawn to non -existence of regional 
headquarter on the North Eastern Coastal Border, the Ministry in the written note has 
stated as under : - 
 
 “The maritime  State  of Orissa and West Bengal are located  adjacent  to  
Bangladesh.   Of late,  there  has  been  large  number of refugee  influx and  
anti- national  activities in this area. The sea area  adjoining  these two 
maritime  States is rich  in marine  biotic resources.   Consequentl y, this  
area  has  witnessed increased poaching  by the  neighbouring  countries  
(Bangladesh,  Burma and  Thailand).  Also, the  coast  of Orissa  is known  
for nesting of  endangered   species  of Olive Ridley Turtle,  which  needs 
to  be  protected. Further, the  Sand  Heads   approach  in river Hooghly is 
the  gateway to the  ports  of Kolkata handling  large  amount of import- 
export  trade.  This being the restricted  water, there  is  persistent  risk of oil 
pollution and requires  constant  monitoring by  Coast Guard .  Also, there i s 
large exploration  activity being undertaken in sea adjoining West 
Bengal/Orissa. ” 
 
7. When specifically asked about the need to establish a new Regional 
Headquarter, the Ministry has acknowledged the need and stated that t o protect 
the environment and safety of life and property, there is inescapabl e need of 
establishing Regional Headquarters  (North -East) and t he case for Regional 
Headquarters  (North East)  along with co-located  station at  Kolkata has been 
approved by Government on 30 Augus t, 2010.  It is planned to set up the Headquarters 
by March 2012. 
 
  


10 
 
CHAPTER-III 
THE   ENHANCED ROLE OF COAST GUARD ORGANISATION AND THE LONG 
TERM PLANNING  TO MEET THE ADDED CHALLENGES  
 
8. The Committee have been informed that the role of the Indian Coast  Guard has 
increased substantially over the years owing to the changes in Maritime scenario and 
incidents at sea.  In the changing scenario, the Indian Coast Guard has been entrusted 
with the added responsibilities in addition to the mandate as laid down u nder Section 14 
of Coast Guard Act, 1978.   As per the written note furnished by the Ministry, the Indian 
Coast Guard has been entrusted the following lead roles: -  
“Offshore Security Coordination  Committee   
The  Director  General, Indian  Coast  Guard  is the  Chairman  of Offshore  
Security  Coordination  Committee  (OSCC)  constituted  by the  Ministry of 
Petroleum  and  Natural  Gas (MoPNG). The terms of reference  of the 
Committee  are, implementation  of security policies, threat assessment a n d 
task assign ment , preparing contingency  plans  and  executing  them  when  
necessary  for offshore  securit y. 
 
 
National Maritime Search and Rescue Coordinating Authorit y 
The responsibilities  of National Maritime Search  and Rescue  have been  
entrusted to the Indian  Coast Guard  on India’s accession  to SAR 
Convention  1979.   To coordinate national  SAR objectives   in  accordanc e 
with  the  provision s  of the  International  Conventions,  a National Maritime 
Search  and Rescue  Board was constituted  by the Ministry of Shipping,  
Road Transport  and Highways on 28 Jan 20 02 with the  Director General, 
Indian Coast Guard as the National Maritime Search and Rescue Coordinating  
Authority(NMSARCA).  
 
Lead Intelligence Agency for Coastal and Sea Borders  
 
The Indian Coast Guard has  been  entrusted with the  duties  of Lead 
Intelligence  Agency (LIA) for the   coastal  sea borders  commencing  July 
2003, by MHA with concurrence of MoD, vide GoI F.No. 1/18/02-BM-IV dated 
22 Sep 2003,  for  the  purpose   of generating,  coordinating  and  sharing  
the  intelligence  with  agencies   concerned including  the  Central  
Government.  The LIA primarily functions  as  a coordinating intelligence body 
and provides a forum for close interaction and sharing of intelligence  among  all 
intelligence  agencies,  both  at the  State  and Center  levels operating in a 


11 
 
given  area.  This  intelligence  is concerning  the  State as  well as  the  
Centre. The concept of forming of LIA of the Coast Guard is on lines of the 
Hub and Spoke. The  inputs  received  are  analysed by the  Intelligence  
Officer ,  and shared  as well as acted  upon  for timely response.  The need  
for monitoring  and  follow up is carried out thereafter. 
 
Coastal Security  
 
With a view to enhance  the coastal  security  mechanism  after the attack of 
26/11,  various steps  have been  taken by different  Organisations/  
Departments  toward  strengthening  the  Coastal  Security.  The Indian  
Coast  Guard has been  additionally designated  as the authority  responsible  
for coastal  security  in territorial waters and the Director General, Indian  
Coast Guard has been  designated  as  Commander  Coastal  Command,  
responsible  for overall   coordination  between Central  and  State  agencies 
in all matters relating  to coastal  security.  The  thrust  given in the directives  
is to enhance  surveillance  in territorial waters by all agencies  which include  
Indian  Navy, Indian  Coast Guard,  Marine Police, Customs  and  other State  
and Central agencies. ” 
                                                                                   
9. When enquired about the details of the Maritime Zones that  the Coast 
Guard of India has to protect and the limit of territorial water, Contiguous Zone 
and Exclusive Economic Zone which  falls under the jurisdiction of Coast 
Guard, the Ministry has elaborated as under : -  
 
“Territoria l Waters  The  sovereignty  of India  extends and  has always  
extended  to the  territorial  waters  of India  and  to the  sea bed  and  sub  soil 
underlying  and  the  air space  over  such  waters. The limit of the  territorial  
water is the  line, every  point of which is at a distance of 12 nautical  miles 
from the  base  line. The Central Government  may whenever it 
considers necessary to do so  having regard  to International Law and State  
practice, alter, by notification  in the  Official Gazette, the  limit of the  
territorial waters. 
 
Contiguous Zone The contiguous zone of India is an area beyond  
and adjacent to the territorial waters and the limit of the contiguous is the line 
every point of which is at a distance of 24 nautical miles from the  nearest 
point of the baseline. 
 
Exclusive Economic  Zone (EEZ)  The EEZ of India  is an area  beyond 
and adjacent  to the territorial waters and the limit of such zone is 200 
nautical  miles from the  baseline.”    
                                                                                
 


12 
 
The long term planning for Coast Guard Organization  
10. The Committee have been informed that the  l ong term  planning  for Coast 
Guard Organization i s being  made  sinc e  inception .   The  latest  such  plan  is 
called  Coast Guard Perspective Plan 2007 -22, with  an  outlay of  Rs. 49,377.33 
cro re which  is under  revision  post  26/11.   
                                                                             
11. When asked over the expenditure that would be involved in the envisaged 
upgradation of Indian Coast Guard force levels during its Perspective Plan  2007 -2022, 
the Ministry in its written reply has stated as under: - 
 
“The proposed  Coast  Guard  Perspectiv e Plan 2007-22  initially had  a  total  
outla y  of  Rs.  4937 7.33   Cr (Revenu e  -  Rs.  16,592.5 6 Cr & Capita l  – 
Rs.32,784.77  Cr). Post 26/11,  it was  decided  to consider  revision  of CGDP 
XI and the  revised  XIth CGDP has  been approved with an outlay of Rs. 
7930.22 Cr.  As we are  closer to the  end  of CGDP (2007-12) and also that  
CGDP (2012-17) is likely to  be promulgated,  it was decided  to ensure  a  
comprehensive  CGPP  2012-27  instead  of  revising  the  CGPP 2007-22.  
Therefore,  the   envisaged  expenditure    involved   in   the  upgradation of 
ICG force levels during  CGPP 2007-22  shall have  no relevance at this 
stage.” 
                                                                      
 
12. The Ministry has further added that Coast Gu ard Perspective Plan 2012 -2027 is 
under formulation on the basis of the broad guidelines which include Coast Guard 
operational deployment plan vis -à-vis statutory duties, current threat perception and 
national security scenario, infrastructure support faci lity requirement for optimum 
utilization of Operational assets and manpower requirement.  
 
13. When specifically asked about the deadlines of the proposed upgradation, the 
Committee have been apprised that the deadlines for the upgradation would be made on 
approval of the Coast Guard Perspective Plan 2012 -2027. 
 
14. When enquired about the outlay earmarked for the proposed upgradation and 
new acquisitions during Eleventh Plan, the Committee have been apprised as under: - 
“The original XIth Plan which was approved by the  MoF had  an outlay of Rs. 


13 
 
7000 crore.  However, on revision of same as per the directives and new 
guidelines  of MoF, the  revised  CGDP has been  approved with a total outlay 
of Rs. 7930.22 crore (Revenue  – Rs. 3268.457 crore & Capital – Rs. 
4661.766 crore) .  The approved figures are  purely  indicative  and  annual  
allocation  would depend on resource availability, appraised  needs  of the  
organization  and  the  pace  of utilization  of allocated  funds.” 
 
 
15. When further asked about the pre paration of the Ministry/Coast Guard for the 
coming Twelfth Plan, the Ministry in the written note has submitted as under : - 
 
“ The Coast Guard Twelfth Plan will be formulated by September, 2011 after 
considering the progress made in materialization of pro jects as proposed in 
revised Eleventh Plan.  Howe ver,  the same  will be formulated  after  finalization  
of CGPP 2012-27   during  early  2011,  considering  the  progress made  in  
materialization projects as proposed  in Eleventh  Plan.” 
 
 
16. The Committe e have been informed that Coastal Security Plan Phase -I and 
Phase-II have been planned to augment the coastal security. The details of Coastal 
Security Plan Phase -I and Phase -II as informed by the Ministry in the written note are as 
under:-   
 
   “Coastal Security Scheme (CSS) Phase -I 
Based on the recommendations  of the Group of Ministers on ‘Reforming the 
National  Security System’, a comprehensi ve and integrated Coastal Security 
Scheme (CSS) was formulated  in consultations  with all agencies  
concerned,  such  as Navy, Coast Guard and nine Coastal States/four Union 
Territories. The CSS had the objective of strengthening  infrastructure  of 
Marine Police Force for patrolling and surveillance of coastal areas , particularly  
in shallow water  areas close to the coast. The scheme  also aimed at 
establishing  institutional arrangements  at State and District levels for 
coordination among  various  agencies including the  Coast Guard and  the  
Navy. 
 
The CSS Phase-I was  approved by the  Cabinet  Committee  on  Security  
in January  2005   for implementation  over  5 years  starting from  2005-06. 
However, date  of completion  of CSS Phase-I had been  extended by one 
year i.e. till Mar 2011. 
 
The scheme provides  for setting  up of 73 Coastal Police  Stations, 97 


14 
 
check posts,  58 outposts  and 30 operational  barracks,  and to equip them  
with 204 boats,153  jeeps  and  312  motorcycle s for  mobility on  the  coast  
and  in close  coastal  waters.  A lump sum  assistance  of Rs.10  lakh  per  
Police Station  is also  given  for equipment,  computers  and furniture.  Under 
the scheme, manpower  for the Marine Police personnel including  technical  
crew  for  the  boats  is provided  by the  States and  UTs.  However,  
Governmen t of  India  provides  funds  for  meetin g   training  requirem ents 
of the Marine Police personnel.  The implementation of this scheme  is being  
carried  out by Coastal  State  Governments/UT  Administrations  concerned. ”          
(Reply 1, Q. 45, P -58) 
  
 Coastal Security Scheme Phase -II 
 
Consequent  to  the  Mumbai incident  on  26/11,  the  entire  coastal  security  
scenario  of the  country  has  been  subjected  to multi-level  inter-ministerial 
review by the  Government  of India and  several  important  
decisions/initiatives  have  been  taken.  The Ministry of Home Affairs was 
tasked  to formulate  Phase -II of the Coastal Security Scheme in order to fill 
the gaps in creating fool proof coastal  patrolling along the Indian coastline.  
Accordingly, the Coastal States/U Ts were asked to undertake an exercise  to 
identify the  vulnerable  gaps  in consultation  with the  Coast Guard.  On the  
basis of the vulnerability/gap  analysis,  the future projections  were  
submitted to MHA for formulation  of a comprehensive  proposal  to be known  
as  Phase-II of the  Coastal Security Scheme. The Coast Guard  were also  
asked to  work  out  in consultation  with the States, additional  requirement of 
boats  to be incorporated  in the Phase-II. Based on the inputs  received  
from the Coast Guard and coastal  States/U Ts, as well as  on  the  
discussi ons/ consultations  in several  high  level  meetings,  the  Coastal 
Security Scheme (Phase-II) has been formulated . CSS Phase-II includes 131 
Coastal Police Stations, 180 boats, 10 large  vessels  for Andaman  and  
Nicobar Islands, 60 jetties  for berthing the  boats, 276 four wheelers and 
607 motor  cycles. 
 
The Coastal Security  Scheme  (Phase-II) will be implemented  over a period 
of five years starting from 2010-11, by nine Coastal States and four Union 
territories.  
 
With regard to financial implication for  phase -II, the Committee have been 
apprised that Phase -II is being implemented by MHA and is yet to be 
approved by CCS. ” 
 
 
17. When enquired about the reasons for extension of CSS Phase -I by one year, the 
Committee have been informed that the Coastal Secur ity Scheme is being implemented 


15 
 
by the Ministry of Home Affairs in 9 Coastal States and 4 Coastal Union Territories   
Owing to several reasons such as identification, site selection and acquisition of land by 
Coastal States/UTs, price negotiation for inter ceptor boats etc., the progress of the 
scheme has been behind the schedule.  Accordingly, extension of ongoing Coastal 
Security Scheme by one year, as requested by MHA, was accorded.  
 
18. Coast Guard has further added that the physical progress of CSS Pha se I is being 
monitored by the ICG. The physical progress of Phase -I as informed to the Committee is 
as under :-   
 
Ser Sanctioned 
buildings  
Made 
Operational  
Construction 
completed 
Construction 
in progress  
Construction 
not yet 
started 
(a) Coastal Police 
Stations (73)  
71 48 11 14 
(b) Check Posts (97) 92 75 09 13 
(c) Outposts (58) 54 54 02 02 
(d) Barracks (30) 28 22 -- 08 
 
 
ALLOCATION AND UTILIZATION OF OUTLAY DURING TENTH AND ELEVENTH 
PLANS AND PREPARATION FOR TWELFTH PLAN  
 
19. The details regarding  year wise allocation and utilization during Tenth and 
Eleventh Plans,  proposed costs and the expenditure position of the outlay earmarked 
during each year of the  Eleventh Plan have been given at Appendix I and II respectively.  
 
20. The  analysis of Appe ndix I reveals that under the Capital Head, Project cost is 
Rs. 20134.901 crore, out of  which   the  expenditure   during    Eleventh Plan  so far  is  
Rs. 5293.093 crore and  Rs. 12855.982 crore would be carried forward to Twelfth Plan.  
Out of the total l ikely expenditure under capital head to the tune of Rs. 5293.093 crore, 
the expenditure on new schemes is Rs. 2631.270 crore i.e. almost fifty per cent of the 
total expenditure.  The remaining allocation is mostly used for committed liabilities, 
replacement schemes and civil works.  
 


16 
 
21. With regard to the status of utilisation of outlay as given at Appendix – II during 
the first three years of Elevnth Plan, the data furnished by the Ministry indicates that 
under the Capital Head out of the outlay of Rs. 191 6.71 crore, Rs. 1667.86 crore has 
been utilised, hence,  the underspending being Rs. 249.85 crore.  


17 
 
CHAPTER-IV 
INFRASTRUCUTRE  
 
22. With regard to the  present infrastructure  needs of t h e  Indian Coast  
Guard and places where   infrastructur e  need to be  augmented, t he 
Ministry in its written reply has stated as under: - 
 
“ In general, the infrastructure  requirement  of ICG is broadly classified into 
three categories  viz. - 
 
● Land for  construction  of OTM and  married  accommodation  for the  
existing  and  newly sanctioned CG Stations, CG Air Enclaves and  Air 
Stations.  
● Creation of Operational  Infrastructure  facilities to accommodate  the  
augmented  force  levels  -   berthing facilities, water  front  for ships, 
runway, Hangars , link taxi track for Air Stations/Air Enclaves. 
● General Infrastructure  like OTM/married accommodation,  training 
facilities,  sports  and recreation facilities, etc;  for all CG Units. 
 
23. The Committee during their study tour to Mumbai, Goa, Bangaluru and 
Visakhapatnam from 29 June to 04 July, 2011 have observed that keeping current 
security scenario into consideration, Coast Guard force level is being enhanced at a 
much faster rate. Towards this purpose the Coast Guard requires infrastructural facilities 
in a larger scale viz, suppo rt for berthing place for ship, place for hovercraft operations, 
air operations, maintenance facilities, land for creation of operation and communication 
centre, admi8nistrative complexes and married accommodation. The present assets with 
the Coast Guard a re negligible and are on temporary arrangements with other 
organizations at most of the places. Respective State Governments, port authorities and 
air port authorities are being approached to provide such support.  
Coastal Stations  
24. On  being asked  abo ut the total number and location of Coastal Stations 
functioning at present and the range being covered by a single station, the total 
requirement of Stations for the surveilance and mointoring of 7,500 Kms. of coastal 


18 
 
boundary, the Ministry in the  writte n reply has stated as under: - 
 
“A total  of 27 Indian  Coast Guard Stations  are presently  functioning. . A  CG 
Station  generally  covers  a range  of approximately  75-120  Km on either  
side of its location.   Keeping in view the long coast line of India and diverse 
topography, the present arrangements  are considered  inadequate for 
surveillance  and to monitor  our coastal  boundaries.  Cases have  been  taken  
up with the  Govt. to enhance  these stations to 41 from 27 by 2012.  
Further, the  Chain of Coastal  Surveillance network  is also  being  
established  all around the  coast.  Total of 204  Coastal  Police Stations have  
also  been  sanctioned.  These  Coastal  Police Stations  will be  operating in 
the Hub and  Spoke  concept with the  Coast  Guard  Stations  for filling gaps  
identified after  carrying out vulnerability and gap analysis  by the State  
Govt/Marine  Police  of the  State  along  with the  Indian  Coast  Guard.  In 
addition,  the  Indian Coast  Guard will utilize the  collective  assets with the  
other  stakeholders  like Customs,  Marine Police and  Indian  Navy.” 
  
25. While elaborating on the proposed coast guard station at Gujarat 
Coastline, the Ministry in the written note has added as Below :- 
 
“Coast Guard Stations a t Vadinar  and Verava l have  been  established on 
15 Oct and  17 Dec 09,  respectively. Establishment  of Coast Guard  Station 
at  Pipavav  has been  p l a n n e d by 2012.  The manpower  sanction fo r  
these Stations has  been accorded  by the  GoI. Each Station will  have atleast 
02 Intercep tor Boats to meet the operational  commitments.  Further  a Coast 
Guard Station at Mundra  is envisaged in Revised XI Plan (2007-12). Land 
acquisition has been simultaneously  progressed.  As acquisition  of land and 
subsequent  infrastructure  development  will r equire  a lead time of 02-03  
years,  efforts  are in hand  to hire/outright  purchase  of buildings  for interim  
setting  up of the  planned Stations.  
 
It is considered  that  the  Stations  will be sufficient to undertake surveillance  
and monitoring  of the  Gujarat  area.” 
 
Air Stations, Air Enclaves and Squadrons  
 
26. On the status of Air Station, Air Enclaves and Independent Squadrons and their 
location, the Committee during the course of examination have been informed as 
under:- 
“At present, there are 02 Air Stations, 03 Air Enclaves and 03 Independent 
Squadrons operating from various strategic locations along the coast.  The 


19 
 
locations of  these Air Stations/Air Enclaves /Squadrons  are  placed  as 
follows: - 
 
 Air Stations     - Daman and Chennai  
 Air Enclave    - Porbandar,   Port Blair and Goa  
  
 Independent Air squadrons  - 842 Sqn (CG) Mumbai,  
       747 Sqn(CG) Kochi and  
                      700  Sqn (CG) Kolkata  
  
27. On the proposed plans for increasing Air Stations, Air Enclaves etc. the Ministry in 
the written note has added as : -  
 
“03 Air Stations  (Ratnagiri,  Tuticorin  & Ulundurpet/Puducherry)  and  04 Air 
Enclaves  (New  Mangalore,  Kochi, Vizag & Bhubaneshwar)  are  being  
planned for establishment by 2012.   By 2012 Coast Guard will have a total 
of 05 Air Stations, 07  Air Enclaves,  01 Helibase  and 02 
Independent  Squadrons,  which will meet  the effective  air surveillance  
of the entire  coast.” 
                  
Marine Police   
 
28. When enquired about  the functioning  and operationa l  structur e  of  
Coastal  Police,  and the  detaile d  co-ordinating   mechanis m betwee n  
Coast  Guard  and Marine  Police, the Ministry has informed as under: -  
 
“Under the Coastal Security Scheme Phase-I, 73 Coastal Police Stations  
were  sanctioned  on  the  mainland  and  L  & M Islands, by the  MHA. The  
Nine Coastal  States  and  04 Union Territories have  so  far  
activated  66 Coastal  Police Stations. 
 
 
These Marine Police Stations  were activated all along the coastline  to fill the 
wide gaps.   Ministry of Home Affairs has  sanctioned  budget under  the  
scheme  for activation  of each  Coastal Police Station along with necessary  
support infrastructure  in terms of vehicles, communication s and office 
equipment. In addition each Coastal Police Station  will have  12  ton  and  5 
ton  boats  for  patrolling.  As per  SOPs for Coastal  Security,  these boats  


20 
 
are  required  to patrol  up to 12 NM at sea  from the coastline.  
 
These  Coastal  Police Stations  are  envisaged to integrate  into the  ‘hub 
and spoke concept’ with Coast  Guard  Stations. The Indian  Coast  Guard  
is conducting  regular  exercises on Coastal  Security  in coordination  with 
other  Central  and  State  Government  agencies  to validate  the SOPs and 
impart  valuable  field experience to all agencies involved in coastal  security,  
which  includes  the Marine Police also. ICG is also  conducting  ab-initio  
training  to the  Marine Police  personnel.  So far 1987 police personnel have  
been  trained by ICG.” 
 
 
 
Coastal  Radar Chain   
 
 
29. The M inistry has infor med that in order to fill the voids and gaps existing in 
coastal border a network of coastal radar chain is being implemented all across the 
coastline. A total of 46 coastal radar chains  are in the process of being started.  
 
 
  


21 
 
CHAPTER-V 
FORCE LEVEL  
 
30. The Committee during the course of examination have been apprised that 
following aspects  have been taken  into consideration  while progressing  to 
review the force level in the  Indian  Coast Guard keeping  in view the  challenges 
faced  and  envisaged in the  changing   scenario   of maritime  safety  and  
national  maritime  interest  of India: 
(a)  Coast  Guard  Perspective Plan (CGPP) 2002 -2017,2007-2022. 
(b)  Coast  Guard  Developmen t Plans  (CGDPs) 2002-2007&2007 -
2012.  
(c)  Perceived  threat levels. 
(d)  Perceived  growth  plan of the  other  maritime  services.  
(e) Advances  in technolog y. 
(f)  International Maritime Organisation  and  regulations.  
(g) Geo political and Geo strategic situations.  
(h)  Requirements  of mutual  support/Jointness.   
(i) Economics  and  carry forwards.  
(j)  Duties and functions.  
(k)  Increased areas  of responsibilit y.  
(l) Weapons  and Sensors.  
(m)  Perspective,  practices,  and policies of governance.  
(n) Rustomji  Committee  report.  
(o)  Strength, Weaknesses,  Opportunity  and Threats Analysis.   
(p) Cost Vs Benefit Analysis. 
 
Perceived Threat Levels 
  
31. When enquired about the  various  types  of threats that  the  Indian  Coast 
Guard h a v e  to  fa c e ,  th e  C o mmi tte e  h a v e  b e e n  a p p r i s e d  th a t th r e a ts  
a r e  i d e n ti fi e d  k e e p i n g  th e  topography, areas  of responsibilit y, immediate  
neighbours,  ongoing  internal   conflicts   in  the neighborhood,  seabed  
resources,   United Nations  Convention  on the  Law of the Sea,  International 
Maritime Law, demands  from/at  sea,  influence  of the  growing superpowe r, i.e. 
China, Bangladesh,  Myanmar,  Pakistan,  Iran  & Sri Lanka, Cho ke points,  flow of oil 
and  trade, arc of concern  i.e. Cape Comorian to the  South  edge  of the Malacca 
Straits,  density  of traffic and the vastness of the oceans.  


22 
 
 
32. The Min istry has further added that the  e x p e c t e d  variety of threats are as 
follows:  
(a)      Weapons  of Mass Destruction  (WMDs). 
(b)  Maritime/oil  terrorism  and  transnational  ocean  crimes  including 
 ocean  based insurgency  and militant activities. 
(c)  Gun running/illegal  immigration  and  drug  trafficking.  
(d)  Piracy, vessel  jacking,  hostage taking  and  armed  robber y.  
(e) Pollution, Prevention, Protection a n d Control . 
(f)  Maritime Search  and Rescue  (M-SAR). 
(g) Leak of intelligence.  
(h)  Close quarter traffic.  
(i)       Narcotics, Hazardous waste, Flagless ships and Slave trade. 
(J)  Threat  to Nuclear  & Atomic installations,  Offshore  & Onshore  oil   
installations  by sabotage, sinking, mines,  suicide attacks etc. 
(k)  Damage  to Marine Resources  and Environment  including 
Seabed.  
(l)  Disaste r Management.  
  
33. The Co mmittee ha ve further been  infor med that the levels of the 
threat perceived  are increasing  day by day with the growth of hatred,  religious  
fanaticism,  access  to weapons  of mass  destruction, spurt  in rogue  States, 
show  of  power,  uni-polar  globe,  technologica l advancemen t  etc. The  othe r  
for m  of  threa t   that  is  likel y  to  hove r  is  Low  Intensit y   Maritime  Operations  
(LIMO). 
 
34. With regard to the preparedness of Coast  Guard to meet the various 
challenges, the Committee have been apprised that the  Indian Coast Guard, with 
assets that are cost effective  are ideally suited  to take  up these challenges,  
provided  the  Development  Plans gets  the  approval  of the Governm ent on time 
and the funds envisaged are made available to the Service. 
 
Advances in Technology  
 
35. The Committee during the course of examination have been informed that the 
fas t  pace d advancement s  in  the  fiel d  of  computers ,  satellites, 
communicati ons, weapons  and   sensors  along   with  platforms  having   speed 


23 
 
as w ell as stealth  have  redefined the threats. The threat can be countered  by 
evolving the  concepts  of domination  in the  area  of jurisdiction  as  well as  
attending  to the charter  of duties  with speed and precision.  Huge  demands  of 
patrol  crafts  can  be replaced by the  monitoring  capabilities  of satellite  based 
Automatic  Identification  System  (AIS) and  space  based periodic  monitoring  of  
the  sea/area  of concern. Even  mobile  platforms  can  track  down  the  odd  man  
and  inform  covertly.  The requirement  would be  only to have  force  levels  to  be  
tasked  as  expeditiously,  as well as  rapid  deploymen t forces.  This arrangement 
requires   state  of art  shore  based units,  real time information  sharing, and  high 
level of net  working of forces for seamless  flow of information.  
 
36. The Ministry while elaborating the use of latest state -of-art technology for 
effective surveillance of coastal borders has stated as under :- 
 
 ”The  use  of  spac e   base d   monitoring ,  communication ,  weapon s   
intercontinental  ranges, computer  based weapons  and  sensors  along  
with  their integrated   output,  sensors  capable  of penetrating  the  water  
columns,  Automatic Direction/Finders, identifiers, covert indicators, advances 
in forensic sciences, Remote  Controlled Vehicles and aerostats, have 
enhance d the stealth as well as sophistication leaps and bounds. The age of 
computerisation  has related all functioning  to time in real sense. The whole 
world appears shrunk  and  instant. These advances  have  to be  evaluated 
in all plan  projections  and  this  calls for more  resource  diversion  for 
technolog y. With information  being  power,  we can  have  all inputs  at  our 
place  of work on a single desk  instantl y.” 
 
37. The Committee in Sixteenth report on Demands for Grants, 2007 -08, 14 th Lok 
Sabha (Para No. 9.9) had observed as under : - 
 
“The Committee are concerned to note that there are serious shortages in the 
force level of C oast Guard. Against the assessed requirement of 154 ships, 93 
boats and 105 aircraft, the present force level is only 42 ships, 18 boats and 45 
aircrafts. The Committee also note that there is inadequate surveillance 
capabilities of Coast Guard in various fields..”  
 
 
 


24 
 
38. The fleet strength presently held with Indian Coast  Guard, as per the 
information furnished by the Ministry, is as under -  
● Ships       - 44 
· Hovercraft (ACVS)     - 06 
· Coastal Surveillance  Aircraft  (Dornier) -  28 
●  Twin engine  Helicopters  (ALH)  -   04 
● Single engine  Helicopter   (Chetak)  -   20 
· IB’s       - 24 
 
39. So far as the upgradation of Surveillance  Capability  is concerned, the 
following aircraft are planned to be inducted during Eleventh Plan as informed to 
the Committee during the course of deliberation:  
 
(i) 12 Dornier aircraft.  
 
40. The final outgo for the above projects of Eleventh Plan is Rs. 1349.75 crore 
under the  Capital Head.  
 
41. In addition to the aforesaid aircraft the status of the induction of some more 
aircraft is as under : - 
(i) The RFP issued for procurement of 06 (Six) Multi Mission Maritime Aircraft 
(MMMA) has been retracted on 25 April, 2011 with t he approval of 
competent authority.  Fresh RFI has been issued on 14 June 11.  
 
(ii) Case for procurement of 16 Light Helicopters (Twin Engine) has been 
approved by DAC on 06 August 10 . RFP  has been issued on 18 July 
2011. 
 
(iii) Case for procurement of 14 Shore Bas ed Helicopters (Twin Engine) has 
been approved by DAC on 15 November 2010 and is at RFP stage.  
 
42. The Coast Guard Organisation during the Study Visit of the Standing Committee 
on Defence to Mumbai, Goa, Bangalore and Vishakhapatnam from 29  June to 04 Ju ly, 
2011 requested that following facilities be provided for development of Coast Guard 


25 
 
infrastructure at each of the existing port and airport and also such requirements be 
catered in all upcoming ports and airports : - 
Port Limits 
(a) 200 meters of dedicated jetty for unhindered 24x7 CG Operations.  
(b) 5-10 acres of seafront land adjacent to jetty for creation of logistics, administration 
and technical support complex to support CG operations.  
(c) 20-30 acres of land for creation of hoverport.  
Outside Port Limits  
150-200 acres land for administrative complex, married accommodation and other 
allied facilities. 
Airports 
50-100 acres of land for creating dedicated dispersal, hangers and air operation 
support facilities.  
43. The Committee during their Study Visit to Goa on  30 June, 2011 inspected the 
residential accommodation provided to the officials of Coast Guard Organisation and 
Navy and found that the accommodation was in a dilapidated condition and maintained 
badly.  
44. On being asked about the short term and long   term programme  for  fleet 
modernisation to fulfil  the mandate of Coast Guard for  maritime security in coastal 
areas, the Ministry has stated: - 
“Indian  Coast  Guard  has  been  performing  the  delegated  charter of 
duties  with a  force  level of 74  commissioned  surface  platforms  and  51  
aircraft. 50 per cent  of the surface  platforms  have already  exceeded  their 
designated  life. Post 26/11, acquisition  of essential  platforms,  aircraft  and  
operational  assets  to augment  the  surveillance  capability  was  accorded  
high priority.   The modernization  of the fleet  through induction  of state  of 
the  art  platforms  and  cutting  technology  for increasing  the  capabilities  
were  focused.  As a short term measure  CCS on 16 February, 2010 
accorded sanction  for the acquisition  of the 60 surface  platforms  and 42 
aircraft and  are being processed  with stringent  timeline.   As a long term  
measure, the XIth Development  Plan and   CG Perspective  Plan have  been  


26 
 
recast  within the  available budget with an aim to process essential  assets 
during  current  Plan.   Currently,  113  surface  platforms  and  13  aircraft  are  
under  construction   in various  Yards/Firms. The c o n tr a c t fo r  1 5 7  surface  
platforms  and 19 aircraft has been  accorded during FY 2008-11. In  
addition,  sanction  of 09  operational  and  aviation  assets have  been  
accorded during FY 2009-10. The cases for 32 surface platforms are being 
processed  for fructification during current FY 2010-11. The CCS case  for 
setting  up of Coastal Surveillance  Chain Network is a priority case  taken  up 
by ICG for augmenting the coastal  surveillance. ” 
 
45. When enquired about  the number of equipments, sensors, communication 
equipments, other sophisticated gadgets and fleet such as helicopters/ aircrafts 
with Coast guard  which are lying non -operational, the Ministry  has replied as 
under:- 
 
 “ (a) There are no communication equipments lying non -operational as on 
date. 
 
The Super Rapid Gun Mounting (SR GM) installed onboard ICG ships 
Samar, Sangram are not wor king since 2006 and on ICG Sagar since Jun 
2009. The SRGM  onboard ICGS Sarang is partially operational. The 
Electronically operated fire control system (EOFCS ) of  all the SRGM had 
become obsolete and OEM had  expressed inability to provide product 
support. The remedial actions initiated for making SRGM operational are as 
follows: - 
 
(i) The normal routines of SRGM onboard ICG S Samar have been 
completed by M/s Bharat Heavy electrical Limited, Haridwar in 
September 2011 and routines on SRGM of ICGS Sangram will be 
undertaken during ship ’s refit likely to commence in Dec 11. The case 
for normal routine onboard ICG ships Sagar and Sarang is in progress 
and order likely to be placed by mar 12. The delay anticipated in 
commencement of Routine on these SRGM view 18 month s lead time 
for supply of spares by M/s BHEL.  
(ii) One each Target Designator Sight (TDS) for OPVs (Samar class ) has 
been developed and procured from M/s Bharat Electronics Ltd., 
Bangalore in June 2011 and order for installation of TDS onboard ICG 
ships Samar a nd Sangram has been placed on 07 Oct 2011  and likely 
to be completed  by Dec 2011.  
(iii) The case for installation of TDS onboard ICG ships Sagar and Sarang 
is being processed and is expected to be completed by March 2012.  
(iv) The SRGM can be exploited manually on installation of TDS.  
(v) Development of EOFCS for SRGM by M/s BEL, Bangalore is in 
progress and will be considered for procurement as a replacement of 


27 
 
obsolete EOFCS. ” 
(c )  the unserviceability of Aircraft/Equipment  held at CG units is as  
follows:- 
 
Sl. A/C Held at   For  Since Remarks/EDC 
(i) CG 
778 
CGAS 
Daman 
V/UHF Tranreceiver 
and Control unit of 
V/UHF system 
unserviceable. 
21 Aug 11 Awaiting for 
repair/replacement 
by M/s HAL (TAD) 
under warranty. 
EDC: No. 11 
(ii) CG 
821 
CGAS 
Daman 
Aircraft met accident   
at CGAS Daman  and 
suffered heavy 
damages on airframe 
and major assemblies  
30 Aug 11  Repairs are  in 
progress by M/s 
HAL under 
warranty EDC: Apr 
12 
(iii) CG 
808 
CGAS 
Chennai 
Aircraft ditched in 
Andaman & Nicobar 
Region. Loss 
categorized as “Total 
loss”. 
21 Jan 08 Regularization of 
loss is in progress  
with MoD  since 
Aug 11. 
 
 
(d) In addition, following aircraft are undergoing major servicing/repairs/modifications  
by M/s HAL. 
 
Dornier 
 
Sl. A/C Held at   For  Since Remarks/EDC  
(i) CG 
762 
HAL (TAD), 
Kanpur 
7200 HRLY 
Servicing 
08 Apr 11 Nov 11 
(ii) CG 
770 
HAL (TAD), 
Kanpur 
3600 HRLY 
Servicing  
08 Jun 11 Dec 11 
(iii) CG 
755 
HAL (TAD), 
Kanpur 
8400 HRLY 
Servicing  
30 Jun 11 Dec 11 
(iv) CG 
752 
HAL (TAD), 
Kanpur 
8400 HRLY 
Servicing  
07 Jul 11 Jan 12 
(v) CG 
763 
HAL (TAD), 
Kanpur 
7200 HRLY 
Servicing  
11 Jul 11 Jan 12 
(vi) CG 
766 
HAL (TAD), 
Kanpur 
6000 HRLY 
Servicing  
12 Jul 11 Feb 12 
(vii) CG 
761 
CGAIS (Goa) 12 Monthly 
inspection   
25 Oct 11  Dec 11 
 
 
 
 
 
 


28 
 
 
 
 
 
Chetak 
 
Sl. A/C Held at   For  Since EDC 
(i) CG  
815 
HAL (BKP), 
Barrackpore 
 MI Servicing  01 Dec 10 Nov 11 
(ii) CG  
8106 
HAL (BKP), 
Barrackpore 
 T1SI  Servicing  20  Oct 11 Dec 11 
(iii) C09 CGAE 
(Goa),  
T1SI  Servicing  31 Mar 11 Nov 11 
(iv) CG  
807 
CGAE 
(Goa), 
T1 Servicing  23 Aug 11 Dec 11 
(v) CG  
813 
CGAE 
(Goa), 
T1 Servicing  and 
engine Overhaul  
 22 Sep 11 Dec 11 
 
 
Dhruv 
 
Sl. A/C Held at   For  Since EDC 
(i) CG  
853 
HAL 
(MRO), 
Bengaluru 
750 HRLY Servicing  06 Aug 11 Jan 12 
 
46. The other aircraft/equipments  undergoing  repair/servicing are giv en in 
Annexure V.   The examination of the tables reveal that as many as 7 Dornier and 5 
Chetak aircraft are lying  non -operational/under servicing.  ” 
 
47. During course of oral evidence, the representative of the Ministry of Defence 
acknowledged that the n umber of platforms which are running in the Coast Guard at 
present are at the end of their life. There is induction/de -induction plan. A force level is 
planned over a period of 25 years. The average  life of a ship is 25 -30 years. 
48. The representative of Coast Guard during the course of deliberations further 
added as under: - 
 “As far as the replacement programme is concerned, again I would reiterate that 
never in the history of the Coast Guard so many ships have been constructed for 
the Coast Guard today. Sir, 131 surface platforms are already under construction 
in Indian yards and another 200 platforms are in the process of being contracted. 
It would result in the Coast Guard having a substantial force level by 2018. ” 


29 
 
 
 
VI          FISHING COMMUNITY EYES A ND EARS OF COAST GUARD  
 
49. When asked about the  measures/initiatives being taken by  Coast Guard/ related  
agencies  for  tackling  or engaging the local coastal communities especially the fishermen 
for strengthening their intelligence network, the Ministry in the written  reply has stated:- 
 
“Indian Coast Guard is regularly conducting community interaction programmes in 
the fishing villages. During these programmes, fishermen are trained at various 
lifesaving / survival drills at sea.  Training is also i mparted in developing 
seamanship skills. As the  fishermen are  first to notice  any irregularity  / suspicious  
activity at sea,  ICG is also educating the fishing community  to be the eyes and 
ears for intelligence  gathering, owing to their enlarge pres ence all along the vast, 
porous  coastline. Further, the  Indian  fishermen are  also  densely  and  randomly  
present closer to the coastline  as well as upto the EEZ and near  the International 
Maritime Boundary  Line (IMBL).  Since 01 Jun e  2009,  a total  of 330  community  
interaction programmes have  been  conducted by the Coast Guard.” 
 
50. The current status of the initiatives taken by the Government on issues such 
as registration  of fishing  and  other vessels, installation  of communication  
equipm ent on  these boats  and uniform system  of issuance  of identity cards to 
fishermen  as elaborated by the Ministry during the course of examination of the 
subject are as given:- 
 
“The Government  had  given  directives  in February, 2 0 09 that all fishing  
boats  should be registered  under  the provisions of the Merchant Shipping Act 
1958.  The  Directorate   General  of Shipping  has  notified  the  Port  Officers  
of various  Coastal  States  and  Union  Territorie s  as  Registrars  of Fishing  
Boats.  All fishing boats  will be  registered through an electronic template  
established by the National  Informatics  Centre.  The  information  gathering  
of  the  fishing  boats  has commenced  by the  State  Governments.  The 
NIC, in coordination  with the  State Govern ments,  are registering  the  boats  
in a common  format  and the  database will be given access to all law 
enforcement  agencies.  The MoA has already  provided the necessary  
funding  assistance  to the NIC.” 
 
 
51. The representative of the Ministry during oral  evidence has informed that 


30 
 
half a million fishing boats of all sizes are there and for centuries in India, people 
are free to go for fishing without any regulation. Gradually license is starting now 
and the fishing community is also understanding and appr eciating this. The 
fishermen themselves are becoming eyes and ears of Coast Guard 
Organisation.  
 
52. Biometric Identity Cards for Fishermen  The  MoA has  provided Rs. 72 
crore to the  consortium, led by M/s BEL, Bangalore, to undertake the  data 
gathering and issue of Biometric Identity  Cards to more than  4 lakh fishermen. 
The data  gathering and processing has commenced. The Card Readers will be 
issued  to Coast Guard and other  law enforcement agencies subsequently.   
When enquired about the status of is suance of Biometric Identity Cards for 
fishermen, the Ministry has informed that presently 16 ,75,398 coastal fishermen 
have been  identified for issuance of Biometric Identity Cards.  Data has been 
collected against 10,15,001 (64.34%)  fishermen and for 5,62 ,662 (33.50%) 
fishermen, same is in progress .  State/U.T. wise details as furnished to the 
Committee are as  under : - 
 
Sl.  State Population of 
Fishermen 
Percentage 
completed 
(a) Gujarat 1,40,327 36.6% 
(b) Maharashtra 1,64,595 0.0% 
(c) Goa 13,362 21.5& 
(d) Karnataka 80,000 1.7% 
(e) Kerala 2,40,305 20.9% 
(f) Tamil Nadu 2,38,651 42.8% 
(g) Andhra Pradesh 1,16,647 32.7% 
(h) Orissa 2,37,641 0.0% 
(i) West Bengal 2,50,960 0.0% 
(j) Lakshadweep 10,000 0.0% 
(k) A&N 10,000 0.0% 
(l) Puducherry 37,148 61.1% 
(m) Daman & Diu 9,500 0.0% 
 


31 
 
53. When enquired about the data of existing fishing vessels, the Ministry has replied 
as under :- 
“The fishing vessels are controlled by the respective State Governments,  under 
their respectiv e Marine Fisheries Regulation Act. Their details are not intimated 
to the  Coast Guard.” 
 
54. The Ministry has further added that i n order  to regulate the  movement of 
fishing boats  in and out of all landing points  along the  Indian  Coast,  the  
following proposals are  being  examined  :- 
 ●  The fitment of fishing harbor/ landing points with Radio Frequency 
Identification  Device  (RFID),  which  remotely   monitor   the 
movement  of boats  and  also fitment  of RFID tags  in the  fishing 
boats. 
● Fitment of satellite  based transponde r on each  fishing boat below 20 
mts  in length, so as to monitor  the  movement of these boats  at sea.  
 
● Fitment  of vessel  monitoring  system (VMS) for deep  sea  fishing 
vessel.  
 
●      Fitment of AIS(B) for all fishing vessels  above  20 mts  in  length. 
 
55. Transponders for Tracking Fishing Vessels  The Committee  have been 
informed that the Coast Guard is coordinating with the DG, Shipping for fitment of 
‘vessel tracking system ’  on board for all fishing vessels in accordance with the 
decision taken  by the Cabinet Secretary post 26/11. The  Government  has   
formed   a Committee,  led  by  Director  General  Indian  Coast  Guard  to  identify  
suitable  transponder for fitment onboard fishing vessels  less than 20 meters. The 
Committee has identified  three types of technology that can be used to track the 
fishing vessels in consideration of the  peculiarities  and limitation under which, 
most  of the  fishing boats  operate in the  Indian  waters. The  trials  were  
undertaken  from  Dec ember 2009 to February 2010 and it was found that  the 
technology is readily available  to track the boats, but majority  of the  boats  do 
not  have  any  power  supply  to provide  power  to the equipment. Trials  for  
modified  transponders  incorporating the  necess ary in -built rechargeable 
batteries are being undertaken.  


32 
 
 VII DISASTER MANAGEMENT  
56. When enquired about the calamity identification system available with the Coast 
Guard Organisation, the Ministry in the written note has submitted as under : - 
“There  is no system available  with Coast Guard to identify the  natural 
calamity  related  issues/incidents . However, D i r e c t o r a t e o f  Operations 
at CGHQ  maintains  regular liaison  with Indian Meteorological   Department,  
Lodhi Road, New Delhi, for getting regular  met  forecast.   The synoptic  chart,  
Satellite  pictures  and met forecast are collected  every day from IMD office. ” 
 
57. On asking whether Coast Guard is well  equipped,  in case of emergency, so 
as to enable it to evacuate the  coastal villages/habitatio ns, the representative of the 
Ministry submitted  as under: - 
“On  shore  evacuation  is  the  responsibility   of  the  concerned   State  
Governments. However,  on specific request from the Civil Authorities,  Indian  
Coast Guard  provides  aid during natu ral calamities. The  National  Disaster  
Management Authority have  found  their  policy frame work in conformity  with the  
International strategy for disaster reduction , the  Rio -declaration, the  millennium  
development goals  and  the  Hyogo framework 2005-15. The salient  features 
are:- 
● Community-based disaster  management,  including  last  mile 
integration of the  policy, plans  and  execution.  
 
● Capacity development in all related areas.  
● Consolidation of past  initiatives  and best  practices.  
● Cooperation with agencies at nation al, regional  and  international 
levels. 
● Compliance and coordination to generate a multi -sectoral 
 synergy.” 
 
58. The representative of the Coast Guard during the deliberations has informed the 
Committee that Coast Guard has a very large task to play on humanitarian assistance, 
oil pollution, search and rescue and fishermen helping.  On the issue of warning system 
for tusnami  the representative of Coast Guard elaborated as under : - 
“In tsunami, the Government of India has got a tsunami , warning centre, w hich 
has been established under a specific Ministry, and we have this National 
Disaster Management Cell, as you know, which is a separate organisation ”. 


33 
 
VIII     PROTECTION OF MARINE ENVIRONMENT  
 
  
59. The  Coast Guard Organisation has been mandated to pro tect mangroves  
forests  and coral reefs.  When asked about the comparative  data on  mangroves  
forest  and coral reefs in  1978 and the present position, the Ministry has stated as 
under:-  
“The  Ministry of Environment   and  Forest  is the  nodal  Ministry  for protection 
of corals  and  mangroves in India  and  has  departments and  institutions to look 
after  the issues  of coral reefs  and mangroves protection.  The exact  details of 
the  mangrove and coral reef  area  since 1978 are held with the  Mo EF.” 
 
60. When asked about the steps being taken  to protect the marine environment 
which include regulatory and enforcement measures  and the role of  the Ministry of  
Defence and the Coast Guard in  this regard, the Ministry in its written reply has 
submitted as under :- 
 
“Study of marine environment is a professional work, which is generally 
undertaken by the National Institute of Oceanography (NIO), Goa. The Coast 
Guard undertakes risk assessment, whenever, a contingency plan is submitted to 
Coast Guard by  Ports and Oil companies for vetting. The risk assessment is 
carried out based on the  traffic pattern, the  amount of oil flow through tankers in 
a particular  port and the environment sensitivity of the local area. The Coast 
Guard has directed the releva nt ports,  oil handling   agencies  and   the State  
Governments to establish the contingency plan and also to establish Tier -I (upto 
700 tons)  pollution response facility to take  actions  systematically in the  event  
of an oil spill. Most of the ports and oil handling agencies have established the 
contingency plan and Tier -I facilities. However, the Coastal States have not done 
so far. The Coast Guard coordinates all actions regarding oil spill response 
through a national forum viz. the National Oil Spi ll Disaster Contingency Plan  
(NOSDCP) and  preparedness meeting convened twice every year.  The 
NOSDCP delineates responsibilities of various Governmental Departments and 
Agencies. 
 
The Ministry of Defence  forms part of the Crisis Management Group (CMG),  
headed by the Home Secretary, in the event  of an environment disaster of oil 
spill. In accordance with the ‘Allocation of Business Rules 1961 ’, the Coast Guard 
is nominated as the  Central  Coordinating  Agency for combating oil spills in 
Indian  waters. ” 
 
 


34 
 
 
61. When enquired about the initiatives being taken by the Coast Guard to 
restrict/control the unseaworthy vessel operations, the Committee have been apprised 
as under: 
“The issue  falls in the  administrative domain  of Ministry of Shipping. However,  
following measures may prevent operation of sub  standard ships  in the Indian  
waters:- 
 
● Restriction  of entry  of vessels  more  than  25  years  in territorial waters.  
● Increase the  number of ship  inspections, under  the  Port  State Control 
by the Mercantile Marine Department.  
● Target  the vessels that  are operated by flags, which has history of 
violating the standards of shipping  operations.  
● Strict checking of loading operations at ports.  
● Loading of iron ore during monsoon to be avoided.  
● Establishment of Emergency Towing Vessels  during  monsoon to assist  
the vessels in emergency. ” 
 
62. Since  1991,  the  Coast  Guard  had  initiated  an  exclusive  operation code 
named  ‘Olivia’ for the  protection of the  endangered species, viz. the  Olive Ridley 
turtles  off Orissa coast. This operation has been  undertaken for the past two decades, 
wherein  Coast  Guard  ships  and aircraft  have  been  deployed  extensively from 
November  to May. During the  operation, the  trawlers and other  fishi ng boats  are  
prevented to operate close  to the  coast  and  the  offenders are  apprehended under  
Orissa Marine Fisheries  Act and handed over to the  police. The Coast Guard has been  
awarded the  Green  governance in the  year 2008 for this endeavour . The details of the 
ship deployment, aircraft sorties and apprehension of offenders in the past three years 
are as follows : -  
 
Year Ship Deployment  Air Sorties Apprehension 
2007 131 67 05 
2008 161 74 05 
2009 163 72 14 
 
 


35 
 
 
63. With regard to the initia tives being undertaken to create  awareness regarding 
protection of marine  environment, the Committee have been appr ised that  the  Coast  
Guard has undertaken following  measures :- 
 
● Conduct of  national  level  pollution  response exercise  with  all response 
agencies 
● Conduct  of  inspection   of  contingency  plans  of  ports  and  oil 
companies. 
● Conduct of joint audit of Tier -1 capabilities of ports and oil handling 
facilities, 
● Imparted IMO level I   pollution  response training  to  both  public  and 
private sector, free  of cost  to enhance the  awareness. A total  of 251 
since 2009 till date personnel from  42  agencies have  been  imparted 
with  the above  training.  
 
64.    The Committee have further been apprised that Section 14 (3) of the Coast 
Guard Act, 1978 states that the Coast Guard should function in close liaison with other 
agencies, so as to avoid duplication of efforts.  Hence, the Coast Guard role is restr icted 
to provide assistance to such agencies, who look after such environment protection 
issues.  In the past, the Coast Guard has apprehended poachers, who damaged the 
coral reefs in Andaman Islands and handed them over to the local Police for 
prosecution.  
 
65. The Committee during the course of examination of the subject ha ve been 
informed that total 8 2 cases of oil spill incidents have occurred in Indian water since 
1982.  The Coast Guard coordinated oil spill response in 75 cases of oil spill incidences.  
The details of oil spill incidence and coordination undertaken by the Coast Guard have 
been given at Appendix -III whereby it is seen that out of 75 cases in as many as 16 
cases, the quantity and type of oil spill could not be assessed.  Besides only in 11 ca ses 
the amount was received from the polluter.  
 
 
 
 


36 
 
 
66. On enquiring what kind of risk assessment has been made and measures 
suggested by  Indian Coast Guard to cover the  areas  such as chemical  and  
hazardous  substances  pollution,  which is highly te chnical and need multi -agency 
coordination, the Ministry has informed as under: -    
“The Coast Guard has already  put in place the necessary measures for oil 
pollution  response in the  form  of inspection of contingency plans,  pollution 
response equipmen t drills exercises and  imparting  training  to all concerned.  
 
At present, the  issue  of HNS is being  administered by the  MoS through DG 
Shipping and MMD in accordance with the  provisions  of MS Act, 1958  and  
various MS Rules.   The  OPRC -HNS  2000  protocol  is likely to be  signed  by 
India  shortly. The Coast Guard has recommended MoS to establish the 
necessary framework and modalities  of implementation of the  HNS response 
system,  prior acceding  to the OPRC HNS protocol.  The Coast  Guard  has   
intimated MoS, that  the  service  is  not ready  at  present to  shoulder   the  
responsibility  of HNS pollution  as  it requires specialized  training,   skill, 
equipment,  protective gears,   monitoring   gadgets, availability of scientific 
inputs and enormous coordination activity to undertake any response actions. ” 
 
 
67. Coast  Guard  has  presently established  three  Regional  Pollution Response  
Teams  at  Mumbai, Chennai  and  Port  Blair  to cater  for marine  pollution response. 
These  teams tr ain the CG personnel in house round  the year.  The facility of pollution  
response training  is  presently extended to  related agencies outside  Coast  Guard  
only at Pollution Response Team  (West),  Mumbai. This training  has been  imparted to 
581 persons from civil agencies, 384 persons from the  Navy and 1 348  persons from  
Coast  Guard  till date.  The  annual  training  calendar of PRT (West) is enclosed. In 
future, the training programme will be  upgraded to international standard on availability 
of resource personnel.  


37 
 
IX    MANPOWER & TRAINING  
68. As per the information furnished by the Ministry  the acceptable teeth to tail ratio 
maintained by any maritime force is normally 1:2 i.e. for every one person at sea two 
are placed ashore, so that they c an replace man at sea at regular intervals. The teeth to 
tail ratio maintained by Indian Navy is generally 1:2 which is minimum. But in case of 
Coast Guard, it is 2:1. This in turn results into longer sea time and frequent transfers. 
The Ministry has furth er reinstated that though with advent of technology upgraded 
systems are being installed for monitoring along the coastal line, still it is opined that 
there is no second alternative for physical patrolling at sea.  
 
69. When enquired about the time  since when the shortage of officers/staff is existing 
and how the Coast Guard Organisation plans to meet the shortage in near future the 
Ministry has informed as under:  
 
“On activation of the Coast Guard on 01 Feb 1977, officers and sailors from 
Indian Navy wer e deputed to man the Coast Guard afloat and  ashore units. 
However, this deputation has been drastically reduced over a period of time due 
to the growth of Indian Navy leading to shortage of manpower in Coast Guard. 
Coast Guard being  a young  force,  addi tional  shore  establishments, surface  
and  air units have  been  inducted/activated. The organisation has been facing 
the  shortage  of manpower because of its growth. ” 
 
70. The Coast Guard has a sanctioned strength of 12446 personnel. This includes 
sanction of 3260 personnel in 2009, another 951 personnel in 2010 and 88 posts in 
2011. 
 
71. The present manpower  status as on as informed to the Committee  is as 
under: - 
 
Sl.No. Category Sanctioned 
Strength 
Borne Shortage Percentage 
 
(i) Officers 1714 1093 621 36.23% 
(ii) Enrolled 9181 6723 2458 26.77% 
(iii) Civilian 1551 902 649 41.84% 
TOTAL 12446 12446 8718 3728 34.94% 
 


38 
 
72. Thus the  shortage  is actually  a result  of lead  time  that  exists  between  
the approval  of Government  and  recruitment,  training  and  position  of force. 
When enquired about the initiatives taken/proposed to be taken to fill the gap between 
the required and the existing strength, the Committee have been informed as under: - 
 
“The Coast Guard is aware  of the needs to accelerat e its recruitment  
process for early filling up of the  sanctioned posts.  However,  the  
recruitment has  to be in synchronisatio n  wit h  the  availabilit y  of  training  
vacancie s   at  Nava l  training  establishment  both  for basic and 
downstream  training.  The Indian  Navy has  been  generous  to allot 
additional vacancies  for CG personnel and the same  as resulted in 
increased enrolment of officers and enrolled personnel to 130 and 680 
respectively  annuall y.” 
 
73. The Committee have further been informed that efforts are in progress for 
filling up 649 civilian personnel  posts through SSC/local recruitment which will 
take considerable time. ”When asked about the latest position of the above 
mentioned induction programme, the Ministry replied as under: - 
 
“Extensive efforts have been undertaken by the organization to increase the 
awareness  of Coast Guard in the youth both through electronic  and print 
media.  In addition,  the  recruitment  centres  for selection  of officers  have  
increased  from 4 to 7.  This has  enabled the  organization  to increase the  
enrolment of officers. Overwhelming  response  is received  from the 
candidates  for recruitment as enrolled personnel. ” 
 
74. The officers and enrolled personnel post enrolment are sent to Naval training 
establishment for basic and downstream training.  The details of officers and enrolled 
personnel who  have  completed  the  basic  training  batch  wise  since  2005  is as 
follows:- 
Sl. 
No. 
 
Year 
 
Officers 
 
Enrolled Personnel 
 
Total 
YTK Nvk(GD) Nvk(DB) 
 (i) 2005 23 33 85 15 156 
(ii) 2006 43 46 220 48 57 
(iii) 2007 47 36 267 39 389 


39 
 
(iv) 2008 29 57 312 52 450 
(v) 2009  81 102  338  12 533  
(vi) 2010  130  115  450  115  810  
(vii) 2011  60 71 255  66 452  
 
Note. The manpower  induction  has  increased during  the  year  2009-10. 
 
Training  
 
75. During the course of deliberations, the Committee have been informed by the 
Ministry of Defence that one of the factors for slow pace of induction is non -availability of 
a dedicated Training Academy for Coast Guard Organisatio n. On the issue of latest 
position with regard to setting up of  its own training Institute, the Ministry has informed 
as under:- 
“Presently, the ab -initio training of Coast Guard Officers and Enrolled Personnel is 
undertaken by the Navy.  The training of Coast Guard Personnel on Coast Guard 
related subjects is imparted at Coast Guard Training Centre located at Kochi.  The 
setting up of dedicated Coast Guard Academy has been envisaged in Coast 
Guard Revised XI Plan (2007 -12) and approval in principle had be en accorded by 
GoI on 12 October, 2010.  Subsequently, the location for ICG Academy has been 
identified at Azhikkal, Kerala.  164 Acre land has been acquired at Azhikkal, 
Kerala on February, 2011.  The Hon ’ble Raksh Mantri had laid the foundation 
stone for  the Academy on 28 May, 2011.  The Academy will cater for all Coast 
Guard oriented courses except the ab -initio training.  The training courses will be 
conducted for the following : - 
 
· Coast Guard Officers and Enrolled Personnel.  
· Courses for personnel from the other Services.  
· Courses for ART members &Foreign countries.  
· Courses for personnel from Corporate/PSUs. ” 
 
 
 


40 
 
76. When enquired about the kind of  programmes that have been organised in  the 
past one year for exposure and training to the officers/sailors.  The Ministry has 
furnished the following details :-.  
 
 “The Coast Guard officers and men  are  undergoing two  types  of  training:- 
 
● Initial Training.  
● Mid Career/refresher  professional  training.  
The initial training  prepares  a person  to perform  as  a full-fledged  staff  in 
assigned  Coast  Guard roles. This varies between 71 - 139 weeks  in case  
of officers and 43- 130 weeks  in case  of EPs depending upon their 
branches.  The Mid Career Professional   training  is imparted to  the  officers  
and  men  at  the  Army/Navy/Air Force  training establishments  and even  
abroad  for some selected  officers. Besides,  the  Coast  Guard  outsources  
its training  to  reputed  Civil Institutions  in  India  for conducting  short  
courses for its officers and men.” 
 
77. The Coast Guard is a non-military  constabulary  force mandated  for security  
of Maritime zones  of India.  This means  the  service  is required to acquire,  operate 
and  maintain  a variety  of ships,  aircraft,  sensors, special  equipment/  weapons  for 
the  envisaged roles.  The maritime  law enforcement  and  humanitarian  SAR beside  
security  are  the  primary  roles  of the  Coast  Guard.  The  Coast  Guard  is broadly 
manned  by two categories  of personnel  namely,  General  Duty (General  services,  
Pilots, Navigators, Seaman, Mechanics) and the Technical (Marine Engineers, Electrical 
Engineers,  Aeronautical  Engineers,  Electronics  Engineers  and  their  corresponding  
diploma holder assistants)  for proper  functioning  of the  force.  Two more  branches 
of Enrolled Personnel  namely  Domestic  and  Enrolled Followers  are  positioned  for 
support services.  The general  pattern  of training of all personnel is as follows: - 
 
● Orientation  Training  - 09 to 24 weeks  as per branch. 
 
● Sea Training    - 02 to 60 weeks  as per branch. 
● Professional Training  - 43 to 97 weeks  as per branch. 
 ● Mid Career  Training  -  Different  durations as enquired.  
 ● Promotion  linked  Training  -  Different  durations as required.  for 
       enrolled  personnel 


41 
 
X COORDINATION AMONG VARIOUS AGENCIES AT SEA  
 
78. There are a large number of maritime agencies associated with and operating in 
the maritime environment. These include shipping compa nies, port authorities, fishing 
community, offshore development operators, oil companies, ocean research agencies, 
customs, Environment and Forests Ministry, immigration, marine police, Intelligence 
Bureau and the Indian Navy and the Coast Guard. Effective  coordination, collaboration 
and cooperation between all these agencies that operate under different Central and 
State regulations, has not happened in the past but has become an inescapable 
requirement  today. On the issue, the Ministry has replied as und er: 
“Indian Coast Guard has been  ‘additionally designated ’ as the authority  
responsible for Coastal Security in territorial waters and the Director General 
Indian Coast  Guard  has  been designated as  Commander Coastal  Command, 
responsible for overall coordination between Central and State agencies in all 
matters related to Coastal Security. Coast Guard as the Lead Intelligence Agency 
for the maritime coastal borders is responsible and is coordinating intelligence  
with all stake  holders  at the  State   as well as Centre.   Further, sharing of 
information  has  resulted in timely exchange of information  leading  to quick  
corroboration as  well as  to ascertain the  actionable intelligence.  
During the oral evidence, the representative of Coast Guard O rganisation has 
informed that the Navy and the Coast Guard have been taking up this case for 
about 10 years at least that every maritime State must have a State Maritime 
Board. At the moment, three maritime Boards have been established out of the 
nine coas tal States and one more in Kerala has been sanctioned by the Cabinet. 
Further, the DG ICG assured that by next year all the nine States have got State 
Maritime Boards because the Government of India has been very categorical 
about this.  In the written not e the Committee have been informed that the State of 
Gujarat, Maharashtra and Tamil Nadu have set up State Maritime Board. ” 
 
79. While elaborating on the initiatives being taken by the Ministry for expediting 
setting up of State Maritime Board in the Coast al States, the Ministry enumerated 
the various steps as detailed below: - 


42 
 
(a) The concerned State Governments have been advised for setting up of 
Maritime Board during the Coastal Security Exercise debriefs.     
 (b) The issue has been flagged in the MSDC M eetings.  
          (c) The issue has been raised in the NCSMCS Meetings Chaired by Cabinet      
Secretary.   
(d) Honb’le Raksha Mantri has written letter to Chief Ministers of 06 Coastal 
states for early setting up of State Maritime Boards.  
 
IN-CG Coordination   
80. The Coast Guard and Navy together are responsible for overall maritime security 
and safety, therefore, abundance of synergy is inevitable and also  coordination and 
systematic delegation of functions between the two agencies is quintessence for  the 
systematic effectiveness. While replying to this issue the Ministry has stated as below : 
 
“The two services  operate in common  maritime  domain,  and  participate in 
tandem, not only in real -time operations such  as Ops Swan,  Tasha,  Vijay, etc.  
but also in periodical joint exercises that are held annually,  to validate  
procedures and rehearse preparedness. ” 
 
 
81. The Ministry has also informed that NAVGUARD is the apex body for IN -CG 
coordination.  The two services start with training of the  Coas t  Guard officers  and  
personnel at  Naval training  Institutions including  the  basic  sea  training  and  cross -
deputation of officers  and  personnel between the  two services. The other  issues 
relating  to IN -CG cooperations are  as under: - 
 
82. Regular participation of Indian Coast  Guard ships  with the  Naval fleet  units 
during exercises. 
i) An annual  meeting  viz. NAVGUARD,  is held  between the  two services  
since  Apr 1990,  to  enhance inter -service cooperation. NAVGUARD is 
the  apex  body for I N-CG coordination. 
ii) With the  Indian  Navy and  the  Indian  Coast  Guard  being  given 
additional responsibilities for overall maritime security and Coastal 
Security  in territorial  waters respectively, to avoid duplication  of efforts  
and to enhance the  corporation between the two maritime  services,  


43 
 
guidelines  for SOP on Coastal Security were prepared by the Indian Navy 
in coordination with Indian Coast Guard, with the VCNS and  the  DGICG 
signing  the  same  in a special  NAVGUARD meeting. In addition ,  both 
the services  have joint working groups to  coordinate issues  of  routine  
nature   relating  to  operations, planning, Human  resource development.  
iii) To  further   develop  the  synergy  between the  two  services   at 
Command/Regional levels,  Com mand  level NAVGUARD meetings have 
also been  instituted.  
iv) The  Indian  Navy and  the  Indian  Coast  Guard  conduct  regular  
exercises to prepare and validate the compatibility and procedures at the  
time of war. 
 
Indian Navy and Indian Coast Guard Synerg y in a Changed Environment  
83. Unity of Command is one of the ten accepted principles of war. Duality of 
responsibilities may result into ambiguities and imprecision, which was evident  during 
the 26/11 terrorist attacks in Mumbai. Therefore, a distinct an d unified patrolling, 
reporting and executing network at sea cannot be denied any more. However, with two 
distinct Head Quarters of Navy and Coast Guard respectively may lead to two channels 
of execution which may be at times overlapping and on the other h and may leave 
lacunae. The Ministry in their replies have ascertained that The Indian Navy has been  
designated as the authority  responsible for overall maritime security which includes  
coastal  security  and offshore  security.   The Indian Navy will be  assisted by  Coast  
Guard,  State  Marine Police and  other  Central  and State  agencies for the Coastal 
defence of the nation.  
 
84. The Group of Ministers Report, 2001 on Reforming the National Security System 
recommended for setting up of a Federal Ape x Body to deal with maritime affairs so that 
institutionalized linkages between the Navy, Coast Guard and the concerned Ministries 
of the Central and State Governments take place. However the same is yet to be 
considered.  
 
 


44 
 
XI     ANTI PIRACY 
 
85. On the  reason for occurrence of anti -national incidences the Ministry has 
furnished the following details : - 
“India is endowed with coastline of 7516 Kms and 2.01 million square kilometers 
of Exclusive Economic Zone (EEZ).  Further  the vast coast line of India has got 
numerous creeks, uninhabited islands and is thinly populated with dense 
forestation and rocky topography.  Hence , the coastline is vastly porous.  The 
security agencies besides customs are not having adequate ships and aircraft to 
undertake effecti ve maritime ’ surveillance , and to curb disruptive activities like 
smuggling, pilferage, piracy, infiltration and terrorist threats.  Human resources 
and infrastructure for establishment of foolproof coastal security is not existing 
presently especially wit h the Indian Coast Guard.  The Coastal Surveillance 
Network (CSN) is being implemented by way of static radar chain for electronic 
surveillance all along the coast line to overcome existing shortcomings and 
address all issues especially pertaining to gaps amongst concerned agencies.  In 
addition, the vulnerability and gap analysis carried out by the Maritime State 
Government/Union Territories with the assistance of the Indian Coast Guard has 
resulted in planning additional 131 Coastal Police Stations 180 in  number 12 ton 
boats besides 10 large vessels for Andaman and Nicobar Islands. ”  
 
86. The Ministry has further added that the concerned authorities pertaining to anti -
smuggling activities are Customs, Narcotics Control Bureau (NCB), Directorate of 
Revenue Intelligence (DRI), Indian Coast Guard (ICG) and State Marine Police.  
Whenever ICG receives intelligence regarding smuggling activities from these agencies, 
necessary assistance is provided by way of ships and aircraft for joint operations, in 
order to af fect apprehension of personnel involved and seizure of contraband at sea.  
The apprehended vessels along with contraband seized are handed over to the nearest 
Coastal Police Station for further legal proceedings.  
87. The Group of Ministers Report, 2001 on Reforming the National Search System 
suggests that laws and procedure relating to detention and prosecution of poachers and 
confiscation of boats need to be tightened. The concerned Ministries/Departments of the 
Government of India should consider setting up Maritime Courts or alternatively, giving 
powers of prosecution and detention to the Coast Guard and to the proposed Marine 
Police.    


45 
 
88. When enquired as to how many Indians have been held hostages by the 
Somalian and other pirates during the  last thr ee years and the efforts made by Coast 
Guard Organisation in this regard, the Ministry has replied as under: - 
“No separate record/statistics are available with Indian Coast Guard (ICG) for 
Indians taken hostages by Somalian pirates.  However, a total of 490 Indian crew 
were taken as hostages by the Somalian Pirates in last three years. While 437 
crew have been released, 53 are still in captivity.  The ICG has no role in  
negotiating with Somalian Pirates for the release of Indian crew. The negotiations 
are initiated by the concerned shipping company .”  


46 
 
 XII INTERNATIONAL OBLIGATIONS  
 
 89. When enquired about the regional and international cooperation/alliances to 
tackle the emerging issues related to Maritime Zone, the Ministry in the written note has 
furnished the following information: - 
“India as a country has been the largest democracy, peace preaching, 
Sovereign  Republic.  We  have  always  promoted peaceful  co existence, 
nuclear  use  only for peaceful  gains,  no first strike  policy and  possessing 
second strike  capability.  Our democratic set  up,  sense   of regional  
cooperation, good  neighbourly relations, acceptability and  tolerance have  
forced  us  with three  conflicts,  a few crisis and uninterrupted terrorism since 
ages. Whereas, in the  near  future, with the regional realignment as well as the 
global orientation, India has to re -evaluate her perspective, policies and  
practices to face  all threats to her  sovereignty instantly, sharply  and smartly,  
thereby outwitting  the  enemies in any form. 
 
The  Geo political and  the  Geo strategic issues  bring  to fore  the  issues  of 
regional cooperation, division on the basis of the geographical areas, 
commonality in the  perception of the  threat, and  application  of Geo 
economics  in the  plan  to effectively  combat  the  acts  of terrorism,  in the  
present day  context. The  most salient  aspect that  dictates the  Geo 
situations is the  need for oil, its presence and it ’s stocking for a better 
tomorrow.  One better method of combating t he asymmetric warfare  is to show  
presence by our reach  and  the  sustainability. The proximity of India to the  
Indian  Ocean  has  to be  considered in every  analysis  concerning the 
aspects of security.  This is because, besides the  choke  points,  the  ocean  
contains  the  American,  British and  the  French  colonies.  It  also  has  the  
connectivity  to Antarctica,  has  abundance of resources  and  contains   the  
maritime  connectivity between the  East and the  West.   
 
 Based  on the  common ality  of threat, economy  of a country, combat  power 
and proximity to a support base, most of the countries have started to get 
together as  a  regional  team. These  countries are  pooling  in their  resources 
for Maritime Search and Rescue,  Maritime E nvironment Security,  Trans 
national  crimes like Anti -Piracy,  etc.  and  other  humanitarian tasks.  Indian  
Coast  Guard  has  at  present institutionalised  joint exercise  programme with 
Japan  Coast  Guard  (JCG), Korea Coast Guard (KCG) and Maldives  Coast 
Guard. The service  is also in the process of signing MOU ’s with Coast Guards 
of many countries for assisting each  other  in case of Search  and  Rescue,   
Anti-Piracy and  other  trans -national crimes  and  issues  pertaining to  oil spill 
disaster. Ships and delegation visits with many neighbouring countries and 
ASEAN countries has also become a regular  feature to boost mutual 
cooperation and  jointness to deal  with various  maritime  issues  concerning to 
law enforcement and humanitarian assist ance.” 


47 
 
  
90. The Committee have been informed that under SAR Convention, 1979 ratified 
in 2001, the parties to the Convention are required to establish ship reporting systems, 
under which ships report their position to a Coast Radio Station. This enables t he 
interval between the loss of contact with a vessel and the initiation of search operations 
to be reduced. It also helps to permit the rapid determination of vessels.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


48 
 
PART-II 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS  
SETTING UP O F REGIONAL HEADQUARTER (NORTH -EAST) 
The Committee observe that as per the existing Organisational Structure, 
the Coast Guard operates from its headquarters located at New Delhi.  The field 
functions of the Coast Guard are executed by the four Regional Head quarters 
located at Mumbai, Chennai, Gandhi Na gar and Port Blair along with 12  District 
Headquarters set up under these Regional Headquarters located at the Coastal 
States of India.  The Committee during the course of deliberations have observed 
that the m aritime State s of Orissa and West Bengal are located adjacent to 
Bangladesh and of late there has been a large number of refugee influx and anti -
national activities in this area.  Not only that the sea area adjoining these two 
maritime States is rich in ma rine biotic resources and the Coast of Orissa is 
known for nesting of endangered species of Olive Ridley Turtle which needs to be 
protected.  To add to the importance of this area the Sand Heads approach in river 
Hooghly is the gateway to the ports of Kolk ata handling large amount of import -
export trade.  This being the restricted water, there is persistent risk of oil 
pollution.  Besides large exploration activity is being undertaken in sea adjoining 
West Bengal and Orissa.  The Ministry itself has acknowl edged that there is 
inescapable need f or establishing Regional Headquarters (North -East).  The 
Committee have further been informed that the case for Regional Headquarters 
(North-East) along with co -located station at Kolkata is being examined.   
While tak ing note of the strategic and important location of the maritime 
States of Orissa and West Bengal, the Committee are of the firm view that there is 
an urgent need to take the immediate action with regard to setting up of Regional 
Headquarter (North -East) at the proposed site i.e. Kolkata so that the environment, 
sea life and property are protected besides meeting the strategic need of checking 
the influx of refugees, anti -national activities and poaching.  The expeditious 


49 
 
decision in this regard should be t aken by the Government and the Committee 
informed accordingly.  
 
ADHOCISM IN LONG TERM PLANS  
2. The Committee during the course of examination have been informed that 
the long term planning for the Coast Guard Organisation is being made since 
inception.  T he detailed analysis of the information furnished by the Ministry 
indicates that various long -term plans envisaged by the Coast Guard could not be 
finalized.  The proposed Coast Guard Perspective Plan (2007 -22) initially had an 
outlay of Rs. 49377.33 crore  and post 26/11, it was decided to ensure a 
comprehensive CGPP 2012 -27 instead of revising the CGPP 2007 -22.  As such, as 
per the Ministry, the envisaged expenditure involved in the upgradation of ICG 
force level during CGPP 2007 -22 shall have no relevance .  With regard to Five Year 
Plans, the Committee on the one hand have been informed that Eleventh Plan was 
approved by the Ministry of Finance with an outlay of Rs. 7,000 crore which was 
consequently revised to Rs. 7930.22 crore , o n the other hand, the app roved 
figures have been stated to be purely indicative.  When the Committee specifically 
enquired about the deadline for the proposed upgradations post 26/11 scenario, 
the Committee have been informed that the deadline for upgradation would be 
made on the approval of CGPP 2012 -27.  The Committee conclude from the 
aforesaid scenario that long-term Plans envisaged are not being finalized and the 
revised plans are taking so much time thereby leading to uncertainty over the 
annual allocations for the Coast Guar d and the whole plans of upgrading the 
infrastructure and the force level.    
While expressing serious concern over the ad -hocism in the whole planning 
process, the Committee strongly recommend that Coast Guard Perspective Plan 
2012-27 should be finanlised  within the stipulated time frame.  Besides the 
allocations for the Twelfth Plan according to the set targets as per the CGPP 2012 -
27 should be finalized expeditiously by the Coast Guard Organisaiton/Ministry of 
Defence so that the approval of the Ministry  of Finance is obtained before the start 


50 
 
of the Twelfth Plan.  The Committee may again like to emphasize that there is an 
urgent need to give more attention to the long -term plans so that the proposed 
upgradations are made so as to enable Coast Guard Organ isation of India to meet 
the responsibilities bestowed to it owing to change in maritime scenario and 
increased incidents of terrorism and poaching at sea over the years.  
 
COASTAL SECURITY SCHEME PHASE – I AND PHASE –II 
3. The Committee observe that a comp rehensive and integrated Coastal Security 
Scheme (CSS) was formulated in consultation with all agencies concerned with the 
objective of strengthening infrastructure of marine police force for patrolling and 
surveillance of coastal areas, particularly in sh allow water areas close to the post.  The 
CSS Phase -I was approved by the Cabinet Committee on Security in January 2005 and 
was to be implemented over the five years starting from 2005 -06.  The Committee further 
note that the date of completion of CSS Phas e-I has now been extended by one year i.e. 
till March 2011.  The data furnished by the Ministry with regard to the physical progress of 
Phase-I further indicates that there are gaps between the sanctioned buildings and the 
buildings made operational.  Such  gap is of No. 2 with regard to coastal police stations 
no. 5 in respect of check posts and out posts and no. 2 with regard to barracks.  Besides 
in a good number of projects construction has not yet started.  With regard to coastal 
police stations althoug h 71 out of the 73 sanctioned police stations have been made 
operational, as per the information furnished by the Ministry, the construction in respect 
of 42 out of 48  buildings ha s been completed and for 11 buildings the construction is in 
progress.  In respect of 14 buildings the construction has not yet started.  It indicates that 
Phase-I may require further extensions.  Not only that a good number of police stations 
seems to be working without buildings.  With regard to Phase -II even the financial 
implications have not been yet finalized and the approval of CCS is yet to be obtained.  
The Committee observe that post 26/11 scenario, there is an urgent need to 
increase patrolling and surveillance infrastructure in coastal areas.  With the 
status of infrastr ucture projects, the details of which have been given above it 
would take more years to complete the projects targeted under Phase -I and Phase-
II.  Keeping in view the strategic requirement the Committee strongly emphasize 


51 
 
that the targeted projects under Phase-I should be completed expeditiously. 
Besides financial allocations for Phase -II should be finalized expeditiously so that 
Phase-II can start expeditiously.  
 
UNDER UTILISATION OF OUTLAY DURING ELEVENTH PLAN  
4. The   Committee   note   from  the  data   furnished  by  the  Ministry   that Rs. 
20134.901 crore under the capital head for different projects have been earmarked 
to be spent by the end of the Twelfth Plan.  Out of the allocated outlay, Rs. 
5293.093  crore  would  be  spent  by  the   end  of  the  Eleventh  Plan  and  Rs. 
12855.982 crore would be carried forward to Twelfth Plan.  The detailed 
examination of the data further reveals that likely expenditure for the new 
schemes is Rs. 2631.270 crore out of Rs. 5293.093 crore for the Eleventh Plan 
which means that almost 50 per cent of the outlay is earmarked for meeting 
committed liability, replacement schemes and civil works.  The analysis further 
indicates that there is under utilization of outlay, particularly under the capital 
schemes during ea ch year of Tenth Plan and Eleventh Plan.  During the first three 
years of Eleventh Plan overall expenditure is 92.81 per cent of the total outlay 
whereas under the capital head, the expenditure is Rs. 1667.86 crore out of the 
allocation of Rs. 1916.71 cror e i.e. 87.01 per cent.  
 The Committee at one place have been informed by the Ministry that the 
annual allocations would depend upon resource availability.  On the one hand the 
allocations earmarked are not being fully utilized on the other hand the deadli nes 
for proposed up -gradations have been stated to be dependent upon resource 
availability.  The Committee again emphasize that there is an urgent need to 
ensure that up -gradation, modernization of various plans of Coast Guard are 
completed within the stip ulated deadline so as to address the challenges before 
the Coast Guard Organization.  As such all the initiatives should be taken to 
ensure that the allocations made for the different projects are fully utilized.  
Besides keeping in view the long -term plan s, the adequate outlay for the new 


52 
 
schemes, should be made available by the Government.  The concerns of the Committee in this 
regard should be duly communicated to the Ministry of Finance.                
INFRASTRUCTURE 
5. The Committee find that a lot of infrastructure is being upgraded with a view to enhance the 
coastal surveillance network. At present, there are 27 Coast Guard Stations along the coast line 
and as per the information furnished by the Ministry, Coast Guard Station generally covers a range 
of approx. 75 to 120 km.  The Ministry itself has acknowledged that the present arrangements are 
considered inadequate for surveillance keeping in view the long coast line of India and adverse 
topography. To monitor the coastal boundaries, the Ministry has  taken up the case with the 
Government to enhance the stations from 27 to 41 by 2012. Besides, 204 Coastal Police  Stations  
have also been sanctioned which would be operating in the Hub and Spoke concept with the Coast 
Guard Stations for filling  gap iden tified after carrying out vulnerability and gap analysis by the 
State Government/Marine Police  of the State along with the Indian Cast Guard. With regard to 
upgrading Air Stations, Air Enclaves and Squadrons, the Committee have been informed  that at 
present there are two Air Stations, three Air Enclaves and three independent Squadrons operating 
from  strategic locations along the coast line.  Additional three Air Stations and four Air Enclaves 
are being planned to be established by 2012.  As such by 2012 the Coast Guard would be having 
total five Air Stations, seven Air Enclaves and one Helibase and two independent Squadrons which 
according to the Ministry would meet the effective air surveillance of the entire coast.  In addition a 
total of 46 coastal rad ar chains are in the process of being started.  
 The representatives of Coast Guard Organisation during the Study Visit of the Committee 
to Mumbai, Goa, Bangalore and Vishakhapatnam from 29 June to 04 July, 2011 made certain 
suggestions to upgrade the infra structure at each of the existing port and airport. The suggestions 
made include providing 200 meters of dedicated jetty for unhindered 24x7 CG Operations, 5 -10 
acres of seafront land adjacent to jetty for creation of logistics, administration and technica l 
support complex to support CG operations and 20 -30 acres of land for creation of hoverport within 
port limits. Suggestion was also made to provide 150 -200 acres land for administrative complex for 
married accommodation and other allied facilities outside  port limits.  For airports, the 
representative suggested that 50 -100 acres of land for creating dedicated dispersal, hangers and 
air operation support facilities should be provided.  The Committee recommended the Ministry of 
Defence to consider the sugges tions of Coast Guard Organisation.  
The   Committee  during  their  study  tour  to  Mumbai,  Goa,  Bangalore  and 
Vishakhapatnam   from   29   June   to  4  July  2011   have  observed  that  keeping current security   
scenario   into  consideration,  Coast    Guard    force   level   is  being   enhanced   at   a  much   
faster   rate.   Towards   this   purpose  the  Coast  Guard   requires infrastructural facilities    in    a    
larger   scale   viz.,    support    for     berthing    place    for    ship   place   for 


53 
 
hovercraft  operations, air operations maintenance facilities, land for creation of 
operation and communication centres, Administrative Complexes, Married 
Accommodation.  The present assets with the Coast Guard are negligible and are 
on t emporary   arrangements with other organizations at most of the places. 
Respective State Governments port authorities and airport authorities are being 
approached to provide such support. The Committee   are of the strong view that 
infrastructure are  the  backbone for maintaining  a strong force level for Coast 
guard organization to meet the current security  scenario.  This type of st op-gap 
arrangement will weaken not only the capacity of CG but also the morale of  the 
Coast Guard Personnel. This matter ne ed to be dealt on  war footing stage .  The 
State Governments have to play an important role in setting up the proposed 
infrastructure primarily on the issue of acquisition of land for various types of 
infrastructure projects.  As such, there is an urgent ne ed to sensitize the State 
Governments about the urgency of upgradation of coastal network.  The issue 
needs to be taken up at the highest level with the State Governments.  The 
Ministry has to play a proactive role in motivating the various State Governmen ts.  
Concrete initiatives on the suggested lines should be taken by the Government 
and the Committee apprised accordingly.  
 
FORCE LEVEL  
6. The Committee observe that the existing strength of aircraft and other 
surveillance force level of Indian Coast Guar d includes 4 4 ships, 6 hovercrafts 
aircrafts, 2 4 boats, 20 Chetaks and 4 ALH.  The Coast Guard during the year 2007 -
08 had 42 ships, 18 boats and 45 aircrafts as informed to the Committee during the 
course of examination of Demands for Grants 2007 -08.  The  comparison of the 
status of surveillance force level of Coast Guard during the year 2007 -08 and the 
strength, at present, indicates that there has been addition of only 2 ships and 6 
boats during the past four years.  The Committee have been given the imp ression 
that a lot of efforts are being made to upgrade the capacity of Coast Guard Post 
26/11 Mumbai attack.  However, the aforesaid scenario with regard to up -gradation 


54 
 
of force level indicates that the progress in this regard is slow.  Even if the data 
with regard to the existing force level is compared to the assessed requirement 
during the year 2007 -08 as informed to the Committee during the course of 
examination of Demands for Grants, the Committee note that there are huge gaps 
between the required an d the existing force level. The assessed requirement of 
ships at that time was 154 and 93 boats while the Indian Coast Guard at present 
has only 45 ships and 27 boats.  
The Committee further note from the Information furnished by the Ministry 
that a large n umber of gadgets/helicopters/aircraft available with Coast Guard 
Organisation are lying non -operational for long time and repair/servicing  seems 
to be a very slow process.  The Super Rapid Gun Mounting (SRGM) installed 
onboard ICG ships Samar, Sangram are  not working since 2006 and on ICG Sagar 
since Jun 2009.  The SRGM onboard ICGS Sarang is partially operational.  The 
Electronically operated fire control system (EOFCS) of all the SRGM had become 
obsolete and OEM had expressed inability to provide product  support.  The 
existing strength Donier and Chetak are 28 and 20 respectively, out of which one -
fourth of the fleet is undergoing major servicing/repairs.  
 The Committee take serious note of the huge gaps between the existing and 
the requi red force level as well as the s low progress of acquisition of the force 
level in Coast Guard.  Not only that whatever limited capacity of force level the 
Coast Guard  possesses, is not fully operational as is apparent from the 
information  furnished by the Ministry.   The  Committee would like to emphasize 
that with the increasing perceived threat levels from various quarters, the country 
cannot afford delay and shifting of deadlines in respect of acquisition of various 
types of force level.  As such the Committee strongly recommend that all out 
efforts should be made to ensure that the inductions are in place within the 
stipulated time frame.  The requisite allocation should be made available to Coast 
Guard so as to meet the gaps between the required and existing strength t o 
enable the Coast Guard to meet the emerging security challenges as well to 
handle the peace time operations particularly during natural calamities. Besides, it 


55 
 
should also be ensured that the various systems and the aircraft, equipments, 
electronic gadge ts, etc. which become non -operational due to various reasons are 
repaired/ serviced within the shortest possible time.  In this regard, the Defence 
capacity to repair/service the various equipments, aircraft systems also need to be 
augmented. 
The Committee  further express serious concern over almost one -fourth of 
the total strength of Donier and Chetak undergoing major services/repairs.  The 
Committee would like to be informed whether the Defence has tried to find out the 
reasons for such a large number of aircraft going non -operational.  The detailed 
reasons in this regard should be furnished to the Committee so as to understand 
the issue of such a large number of Donier and Chetak going non -operational. 
 The Committee during the Study Visit to Goa observed  that the 
accommodation provided to the officials of Coast Guard Organisation/Navy was in 
a dilapidated condition.  The Committee note that on the one hand there is 
shortage of accommodation for the officials of the services, on the other hand, 
whatever ac commodation is provided is not being maintained properly.  The 
Committee take serious view of the poor maintenance of the residential 
accommodation provided to the officials of Coast Guard and Navy.  The 
Committee strongly recommend the Ministry to look in to the matter urgently.  
Besides the outlay required for proper maintenance of the residential 
accommodation should be provided.  
SURFACE PLATFORMS  
7. The   Committee  note    that  the  Coast  Guard  has   been   performing  the  
delegated  charter of  du ties  with  a force level of 72 commissioned surveillance  
platforms  out   of   which,   as  per  the  Ministry ’s   own admission, 50  per  cent  
of  the  platforms  have  exceeded their designated life.  The  Ministry   has   
informed  that  131   survei llance   platforms  are  already under construction  in  
Indian  Shipyards  and   another  200  platforms  are  in  the process  of  being  


56 
 
contracted.  The   aforesaid  position indicates  that     there    are    huge    gaps   
between    the    required    and   the    existing  
strength of surface platforms.  What is more disturbing is the fact that whatever 
limited capacity of platforms Coast Guard has, have already exceeded their life.  
While expressing serious concern over the existing situation, the C ommittee 
strongly recommend that all the initiatives should be taken so that additional 
platforms are inducted within the stipulated time frame and the out dated 
platforms are phased out thereby strengthening the force level of Coast Guard.   
 
ISSUE OF BIO METRIC IDENTITY CARDS TO FISHERMAN  
8. The Committee note that for centur ies people were free to go for fishing 
without any regulation.  Post 26/11 scenario, the move to issue license has 
started.  The Committee appreciate that fishing community is underst anding the 
need to regulate the fishing.  One of the initiative being undertaken to regulate the 
fishing in the country is issue of biometric identity cards to fishermen.  So far as 
the status of the task in this regard is concerned, the Committee find fro m the 
information furnished by the Ministry that 16,75398 coastal fishermen have been 
identified for issue of biometric identity card.  Data in respect of 10,15,001 i.e. 
64.34% of the fishermen have been collected.  So far as the issue of biometric 
identity cards to the individuals is concerned, the Committee note that the 
position is not very satisfactory.  Only in Puducherry, Tamil Nadu, Gujarat and 
Andhra Pradesh more than 30% of the identified fishermen have been issued 
biometric identity card.  In six States/UTs the percentage of the task completed 
has been shown as nil, as per the data furnished by the Ministry.  In Karnataka, 
only 1.7% of the task has been completed.  In Kerala which has large number of 
fishermen population only 20.9% of the task has been completed.  The Committee 
express serious concern over the tardy progress of the task of issue of biometric 
identity card to fishermen.  The Committee strongly recommend that Coast Guard 
Organisation should monitor and pursue the State Governments and  Ministry of 


57 
 
Agriculture so that the biometric identity cards are issued within the stipulated 
timeframe.  The concerns of the Committee in this regard should be duly 
communicated to the respective Ministries/State Governments.  
9. The Committee observe th at the Ministry of Agriculture has provided Rs. 72 
crore to the consortium led by M/s BEL, Bangalore to undertake the data gathering 
and issue of biometric identity cards to more than four lakh fishermen.  From the 
information furnished by the Ministry, th e Committee note that more than 16 lakh 
of the fishermen have been identified for issue of biometric identity cards.  The 
Committee would like the Ministry to clarify whether the remaining task of issue of 
biometric identity cards would be undertaken by BE L or some other agency has 
been identified/proposed to be identified to undertake the remaining task.  The 
Committee would also like that the necessary outlay should be provided to the 
Ministry of Agriculture so that the task is completed within the stipul ated 
timeframe.   
 
REGISTRATION OF FISHING BOATS  
10. The Committee find that besides issue of Biometric identity cards the 
Government is registering fishing boats for effective surveillance in coastal areas .  
In this direction, the Government has given dir ectives in February, 2009 that all 
fishing boats should be registered under the provisions of the Merchant Fishing 
Act, 1958.  NIC in cooperation with the State Governments is undertaking the task 
of registration of boats and the necessary funding assistan ce has already been 
provided by the Ministry of Agriculture in this regard. The Committee are 
concerned to note that the initiative of registration of boats started in February 
2009, and even after passage of more than three years, the Coast Guard which is  
the nodal O rganisation is not even aware about the number of fishing vessels and 
their status of registration.  The Committee believe that identification and 
registration of boats is the first initiative to monitor/track the vessels in the sea.  
As such i t is utmost necessary that the task is completed within  the stipulated 


58 
 
time frame.  The Committee, therefore, strongly recommend that Coast Guard 
Organisation should coordinate with the respective Ministries/NICs/State 
Governments and monitor the status o f registration of boats in Coastal States.   
The periodic information about the task being undertaken should be obtained by 
the Coast Guard and furnished to the Committee.  Besides the concerns of the 
Committee in this regard should be conveyed to the conc erned Ministries, State 
Governments and NIC so that the task is completed within the definite time frame.  
 
VESSEL TRAFFIC MANAGEMENT  
11. The Committee have been informed during the course of examination that  
the Coast Guard is coordinating with the Direct or-General Shipping for fitment of 
vessel, tracking system on board for all fishing vessels in accordance with the 
decisions taken by the Cabinet Secretary post 26/11. To achieve the task, the 
Government is examining some of the proposals to regulate the m ovement of 
fishing boats in and out of all landing points along the Indian Coast which include 
the fitment of shipping harbor/landing points with Radio Frequency Identification 
Device (RFID), fitment of satellite based transponder on each fishing boat belo w 
20 mts in length, fitment of vessel monitoring system (VMS) for deep sea fishing 
vessel and fitment of AIS(B) for all fishing vessels above 20 mts in length.  
The detailed examination of the subject by the Committee has revealed  that 
some headway has be en achieved in respect of fitment of vessel tracking system 
in fishing vessels less than 20 mts.  However, in respect of fitment of 
transponders for fishing vessels above 20 mts and for deep sea fishing vessels as 
well as for fitment of RFID tags, the prop osals seems to be still at the conceptual 
stage.  The Committee feel that an effective vessel monitoring and tracking system 
is utmost necessary for monitoring the operation of all types of vessels in the sea.  
As such there is an urgent need to fast track  the process of identification of 
technologies, trials so that various types of proposed monitoring systems are 
fitted in all types of vessels.  So far as the constraint being felt with regard to the 


59 
 
small boats which do not have power supply to provide po wer to the monitoring 
equipment is concerned, the Committee feel that the constraint can be addressed 
by fitting the rechargeable batteries.  
The Committee strongly recommend that all the proposed initiatives should 
be fast tracked so that the monitoring a nd tracking systems/transponders RFID 
tags are fitted in all types of vessels expeditiously.  The Committee may also like 
to recommend to take the help of DRDO a premier Defence Research Organisation 
of the country in identification of various technologies  and to address to the 
constraints being faced in various trials.  
 
DISASTER MANAGEMENT  
12. One of the mandated duties of Coast Guard Organisation is to provide 
assistance and protection to fishermen at sea while in distress.  As informed to 
the Committee during the course of deliberations, humanitarian assistance, 
search and rescue and fishermen helping are the daily operations of the Coast 
Guard.  The Committee note that at the time of a natural calamity in the coastal 
areas, various Ministries/Department s play an important role.  There is a National 
Disaster Management Cell.  The Indian Meteorological Department, Lodhi Road, 
New Delhi is the main Department for weather forecast for Tsunami. Besides, the 
Government of India has got a Tsunami warning centre .  The task of off -shore 
evacuation has been stated to be the responsibility of the concerned State 
Governments.  The Committee find that a lot of lessons need to be learnt post 
recent Tsunamis which have played havoc and costed many lives.  The most 
important task during a natural disaster like tsunami is to disseminate the warning 
of impending disaster and to evacuate the people residing in the area to a safe 
location so as to avoid the large scale loss of life and destruction in such areas. 
The Committee  observe that during a natural calamity like Tsunami  the Coast 
Guard is the organisation which first comes in direct contact with the coastal 
areas.  As such all the initiatives should be taken to have a full proof coordinating 
mechanism between the vario us agencies, Ministries, Departments of Union 


60 
 
Government and State Governments.  There should be a structured mechanism 
whereby the Coast Guard Organisation is immediately alerted about the predicted 
natural disaster.  The warning of the natural disaster s hould be telecast on real 
time basis on Radio and Doordarshan.  Coast Guard Organisation can also 
disseminate the warnings through some other mechanisms like public address 
system, etc.  The Committee strongly recommend that the Ministry of Defence, 
Coast Guard Organization should take up the issue with the concerned Ministries, 
Departments, State Governments and related organisations and convey the 
concern of the Committee so that the immediate action is taken up.     
13. The Committee further observe that  full proof telecommunication and 
internet connectivity is the pre -requisite for a proper coordination mechanism 
amongst various Ministries, Departments, State Governments and other 
authorities responsible for warnings, evacuation and post Tsunami operatio ns.  
The Coast Guard Organisation can play an effective role in discharging its various 
activities only when the warnings regarding disasters are instantly communicated.  
Further, as suggested above, the news about the expected disaster can be 
broadcast on  Radio and Doordarshan on real time basis, only when various 
technologies, telecom and internet  connectivity, power supply remains intact 
during a critical situation.  The Committee may further like to emphasize that the 
emerging  state -of-the-art technol ogies over the world have actually redefined the 
emerging threats from the sea. The positioning of latest and the state -of-the-art 
force levels on our coastal borders to some extent act as a deterrent. However, for 
proper functioning of all the technologic al equipments it is utmost necessary that 
our connectivity which include telecommunication, internet and power 
connectivity remains intact during the disaster which may be natural disaster or a 
war like situation. As such there is an urgent need to have la yers of alternate 
telecommunication, internet and power supply networks.   The Ministry of 
Defence, Coast Guard Organisation should take up the issue with the concerned 
Ministries/Departments so that Coast Guard Organisation remains connected even 
in worst situation, particularly in the natural disasters.  


61 
 
 
 
 
 
CONTROLLING MARINE POLLUTION  
 
14. The Coast Guard Act,1978 specifically mentions that one of the roles and 
responsibilities of Coast Guard Organisation is taking such measures as are 
necessary to pre serve and protect the maritime  environment  and to prevent 
and control marine pollution. The Coast Guard besides the charter of duties 
enumerated in section 14(2) of the Coast Guard Act, has to undertake many other 
duties. These include Protection of enda ngered species such as Whale Sharks, 
Olive Ridley Turtles, etc and  Coordination of international Coastal Clean -up Day 
in September every year with the inter -governmental organization viz. South Asia 
Cooperative for Environment Protection (SACEP).  
 
The Com mittee appreciate the effort of the Coast Guard Organisation 
regarding protection of the  endangered  species,  viz. the  Olive Ridley turtles  
off Orissa coast. Such exclusive efforts may be initiated in connection 
with protection of mangrove forests, coral  reefs and other onshore as 
well as offshore natural assets.   
 
OIL SPILL 
15. The Committee observe that oil spill is one of the major factor for marine 
pollution. Besides, contaminating the sea water, oil spill causes great 
environmental hazards and is har mful for flora and fauna in the ocean.  The 
Committee during the course of  examination have been given the detailed 
position of the oil leakage cases reported from 1982 to 15 August, 2010.  The 
analysis of the information reveal that 80 cases of oil spill  have occurred in Indian 
water during the aforesaid period.  The Coast Guard coordinated oil spill response 
in 75 cases of oil spill incidents.  Out of these 75 cases in as many as 16 cases, 


62 
 
the quantity and type of oil spill could not be assessed.  Beside s only in 11 cases, 
the amount of compensation could be received from the polluter.  The aforesaid 
scenario indicates that more needs to be done to strengthen our post oil spill 
investigation and adjudication mechanism in case of oil spill.  The various la ws 
related to compensation/adjudication need to be examined and reviewed.  As such 
the Coast Guard Organisation should take up the issue strongly with the 
concerned Ministries, including the Ministry of Shipping.  
16. The Committee understand that the Coas t Guard is the Central Coordinating 
Agency for combating oil spills in Indian waters in accordance with ‘Allocation of 
Business Rules, 1961 ’.  One of the initiative taken by the Coast Guard is to get 
established the contingency plan and tier -I (upto 700 to ns) pollution response 
facility by relevant ports, oil handling agencies and the State Governments to 
enable them to take up action systematically in the event of an oil spill.  The 
Committee during the course of deliberations have been informed that most of the 
ports and oil handling agencies have established the contingency plan and tier -I 
facility. However, the coastal States have not undertaken the task so far.  The 
Committee while expressing serious concern over the delay in finalizing the 
contingency plans and establishing pollution response facility by  the State 
Governments would like the Ministry to pursue the matter so that such 
contingency plan and pollution response facility are established within the definite 
time period.  Besides, the Committee  would also like to know the name of the 
ports and oil handling agencies which have not established the contingency plan 
and the tier -I oil response facility. The Committee would also like to emphasize 
that such ports and oil handling agencies should be di rected to finalize the 
contingency plan and pollution response facility without any further delay.   
17. The Committee further note that entry of the ships/vessels who have 
outlived their life is one of the important factor for oil spill in the ocean.  Whe n the 
issue was raised during the course of deliberations, the Committee have been 
apprised that it is under the administrative domain of the Ministry of shipping.  
One of the suggestion made by the Coast Guard to prevent operation of sub -


63 
 
standard ships is  restriction of entry of vessels more than twenty five years in 
territorial waters.  The Committee find that sea has no boundaries and as such the 
issue of entry of sub -standard ships in the ocean need to be addressed 
internationally through various conven tions and treaties.  The Committee during 
the course of deliberations have been informed that India is likely to sign the 
OPRC HNS 2010 Protocol.  The Ministry of Defence/Coast Guard should take up 
the issue with the Ministry of Shipping and the issue of r estricting entry of 
ships/vessels more than 25 year old should be taken up at the international fora/ 
conferences so that some way out can be found to address the matter.  
18. The Coast Guard during the course of deliberations have made various 
other sugges tions to address the issue of operation of sub -standard ships in the 
Indian waters. Such suggestions include increasing the number of ship 
inspections, targeting the vessels that are operated by flags which has history of 
violating the standards of shippin g vessels, strict checking of loading operations 
at ports, avoiding loading operations of iron ore during monsoon and establishing 
Emergency Towing Vessels during monsoon to assist the vessels in emergency.  
The Committee feel that the aforesaid suggestion s merit consideration and need 
to be pursued with the concerned Ministries/Departments. Besides guidelines 
need to be prepared with regard to periodic checking, inspections of ships, etc.  
The concrete initiatives in this regard should be taken and the Com mittee 
informed accordingly.   
19. The Committee have been apprised that the Coast Guard has recommended 
MoS to establish the necessary framework and modalities for implementation of 
the HNS response system, prior acceding to the OPRC HNS protocol.  In thi s 
connection, the Committee find that the Coast Guard has certain constraints.  The 
Coast Guard  has intimated MoS that the service is not ready at present to 
shoulder the responsibility of HNS pollution as it requires specialized training, 
skill, equipmen t, protective gears, monitoring gadgets, availability of scientific 
inputs and enormous coordination to undertake any response actions.  The 
Committee may again like to emphasise that the Coast Guard has been designated 


64 
 
as the central coordinating agency f or combating oil spills in Indian waters.  The 
Coast Guard being not well -equipped to take up the responsibility of HNS 
pollution is the matter of serious concern.  The Committee strongly recommend 
that capacity building of Coast Guard in this direction sh ould be given utmost 
importance and the officials should be imparted specialized training, besides 
creating the desired infrastructure so as to enable it to address for the challenge 
of HNS pollution.  
 
MANPOWER AND TRAINING  
20. The Committee have been inf ormed that the acceptable t eeth to tail ra tio 
maintained by any maritime force is normally 1:2 i.e. for every one person at sea 
two are placed ashore, so that they can replace man at sea at regular intervals.  
Whereas Indian Navy generally maintains the se t 1:2 ratio which is the minimum 
requirement but in case of Coast Guard the t eeth to tail ratio is 2:1   resulting into 
longer sea time and frequent transfers.  What is more disturbing is the fact that 
there are huge gaps between the sanctioned and the exis ting strength of 
personnel at various levels.  The Coast Guard has a sanctioned strength for 12446 
personnel whereas the borne strength is 8718, the overall shortage being 34.9 4%.  
If the shortage category wise is taken into consideration, the said shortag e in 
civilian category is more acute i.e. 41 .84%.  In case of officers the shortage is 
36.23% and for enroll ed personnel the shortage is 26.77%.  
 The Committee during the course of deliberations have been informed that 
the major constraint in bridging the gap between the sanctioned and borne 
strength is non -availability of a dedicated training academy for the Coast Guard 
Organisation.  As per the existing system the officers and enrolled personnel are 
sent to naval training e stablishment for basic and downs tream training. The 
Committee have further been apprised that the setting up of dedicated Coast 
Guard academy has been envisaged in Coast Guard revised Eleventh Plan and 
approval in principle has been accorded by the Government on 12 th October, 2010.  
Subsequently, 164 acre land has been acquired at the identified location at 


65 
 
Azhikkal, Kerala and even Hon ’ble Raksha Mantri has also l aid foundation stone 
for the academy on 28 th May, 2011.  The Committee strongly recommend that the 
dedicated Coast Guard Academy should be set up expeditiously which would 
certainly pace up the induction of Coast Guard personnel at various levels.  
21. The Committee have been apprised that efforts are being made for filling up 
the post of 649 civilian personnel through SSC/local r ecruitment which according 
to the Ministry would take considerable time.  The Committee may like to 
recommend that the vacancies should be properly advertised through press and 
electronic media.  The advertisement may, particularly, be given in  the regional 
newspapers.  With regard to the shortage of officers in the Coast Guard, the 
Committee may like to emphasize for filling the vacancies by recruitment 
examination and campus placement s.  The Committee feel that the Ministry/Coast 
Guard may consider the pe rsons living in shore areas/coast al villages and river 
estuary areas for the post of sailors as they are well -versed with water.  The 
Committee strongly recommend that all the suggested measures should be taken 
so as to fill the gap between the sanctioned and borne strength of the Coast Guard 
at various levels within the definite time frame.   
22. The Ministry during the course of deliberations has acknowledged that there 
is no second alternative for physical patrolling at sea.  Not only that the 
incidents/threats from sea have increased over the years. The challenges for the 
coast guard have increased manifold post 26/11 scenario.  The Committee, 
therefore strongly recommend that the existing  teeth to tail ratio of 2:1 with the 
Coast Guard should be immedi ately reviewed to 1:2 i.e. at par with Navy and is the 
acceptable teeth to tail ratio for any Maritme force.  
23. The Committee find that the Coast Guard Organisation is a multi task 
agency.  Besides, the challenging role of the Coast Guard in war time situ ation, 
the mandate of Coast Guard includes multiple peace time operations of various 
types like preservation and protection of marine environment and anti smuggling 
operation, protection of fishermen at sea, etc.   To handle the multi task it is 
utmost nec essary that Coast Guard personnel are provided the requisite training.  


66 
 
The Committee during the course of examination have found that the service is 
not ready at present to shoulder the responsibility of HNS pollution.  As such the 
Committee strongly reco mmend that the training curriculum of Coast Guard 
personnel should be such that it results into capacity building of the personnel to 
handle the multiple task s which include certain technical task s.  The Committee 
may further like to add that besides the proposed inductions of latest state -of-the-
art force level, it is utmost necessary that persons behind these machines 
equipments are well trained.  As such while signing various agreements for 
acquisitions it should be ensured that the deals contain provisi ons for training of 
the Coast Guard personnel in manning/handling and maintenance  the latest 
technology.   
 
ANTI PIRACY 
24. The Committee find that the constant piracy/robbery threats by Somalian 
pirates in the Indian Ocean is a n area of concern.  The majo r volume of India ’s 
trade is through sea route.  The issue of vulnerability to piracy/robbery need to be 
addressed on an urgent basis since it affects our strategic maritime interests.  As 
such all the desired initiatives need to be taken to create safe an d secure maritime 
environment.  In this context, the Committee in 12 th Report on Demands for Grants 
(2011-12) have recommended the Government to consider setting up of a separate 
unit to deal with the anti piracy operations.  The Committee while reiteratin g their 
earlier recommendation would like the Government to consider the aforesaid 
recommendation on an urgent basis.    
The Committee find from the information furnished by the Ministry of 
Defence that the Ministry of Defence/Coast Guard has not maintaine d 
record/statistics for Indians taken hostages by Somalian pirates.  However, with 
regard to Indian crew, the Committee have been informed that a total of 490 Indian 
crew were taken as hostages by the Somalian pirates in the last three years.  So 
far as th e position with regard to crew Members still in the custody of the pirates  


67 
 
is concerned, the Committee have been informed that 437 crew members have 
been released and 53 are still in captivity.  The Committee are concerned to note 
the response of the Mini stry of Defence that the Coast Guard has no role in 
negotiation with Somalian pirates for the release of Indian crew.  The negotiations 
are initiated by the concerned shipping company.  The Committee observe  that the 
efforts made by the Government for rele ase of the Indians held hostages by the 
Somalian Pirates are insufficient and even today many of the Indians have been 
held hostages for  considerable period of time.  The Committee would like to 
strongly recommend to the Ministry to coordinate with the co ncerned 
Ministries/agencies  so as to ensure that the Indians held hostages are released 
without any further delay.  
25. The Committee may further like to refer to the Group of Ministers  Report, 
2001 on Reforming the National Security Systems, whereby it h as been suggested 
that the laws and procedures relating to detention and prosecution of poachers 
and confiscation of boats need to be tightened and the concerned 
Ministries/Departments of the Government of India should consider setting up the 
Maritime Cour ts or alternatively giving powers of prosecution and detention to the 
Coast Guard and the Marine Police.  The Committee while endorsing the views of 
the Group of Ministers would like the Government to consider the aforesaid 
suggestion keeping in view the i ncreased threats of piracy and robbery by the 
poachers/ pirates.  
 
LEAD INTELLIGENCE AGENCY  
26. The Coast Guard Organisation has been additionally designated as the Lead 
Intelligence Agency for maritime, coastal and sea borders.  The representative of 
the Ministry has informed that the DGICG will be designated as Commander 
Coastal Command and will be responsible for overall coordination between 
Central and State agencies in all matters related to Coastal security.  Besides the 
Coastal security, other mandat ed duties of the Organisation are providing 


68 
 
assistance to customs and other authorities in anti -smuggling operations, 
providing seaward security during the VIP visits to the various metros as 
requested by various Police Authorities/State Governments, seawa rd clearance 
around the area whenever there is a satellite launch or missile is tested 
(Sriharikota and Chandipur), enforcement of anti -poaching measures, monitoring 
and surveillance of Deep Sea Fishing etc.  All these tasks involve intelligence 
gathering and quick dissemination of information .  
 In this connection, the Committee may like to observe that there is an 
urgent need to have a structured mechanism whereby the information by different 
intelligence gathering agencies is shared instantly with the Co ast Guard 
Organisation which has been designated as the lead intelligence agency for 
maritime coastal and sea borders.  Intelligence gathering and sharing is a 
technical task and as such the Coast Guard personnel need to be imparted 
specialized training to  ensure that the Coast Guard perform the task of lead 
intelligence agency for maritime coastal and sea borders  effectively.  The 
Committee may also like to recommend that the fisherm en and the coastal 
communities living in the coastal areas are the first t o notice any suspicious 
activity in area.  As such the confidence should be built in them so that they are 
more involved in intelligence gathering and sharing.  
 
FEDERAL APEX BODY  
27. Coastal Security involves many agencies and proper coordination among 
those agencies is quintessence for fool proof coastal security. And specially 
under the present circumstances, no stone may be left unturned to gear up zero 
tolerance coastal security network. The Committee comprehend  that lack of 
appropriate coordination and  information sharing between the concerned 
agencies is a relevant problem in strengthening the Coastal security chain.  This 
was previously apprehended in the Group of Ministers Report on Reforming the 
National Security System in 2001  wherein it was recomm ended to form a Single 
window federal apex body. However, no such body has yet been formed.  


69 
 
 
The Committee find that the recommendation made in the Group of 
Minister’s Report for a single window federal apex body merit consideration and 
as such the recomm endation should be considered positively by the Government.  
 
INTERNATIONAL  COOPERATION  
28. The Committee during the course of examination of the subject have been 
apprised that Indian Coast Guard has institutionalized joint exercise programme 
with Japan C oast Guard (JCG), Korea Coast Guard (KCG) and Maldives Coast 
Guard.   The service is also in the process of signing MoU ’s with Coast Guards of 
many countries for assisting each other in case of search and rescue, anti-piracy 
and other trans -national crimes  and issues pertaining to oil spill disaster.  The 
Committee again emphasize that sea has no boundaries and as such threat from 
the sea need to be addressed internationally.  While appreciating the aforesaid 
initiatives being taken by the Indian Coast Guar d, t he Committee may like the 
Indian Coast Guard to continue the efforts and joint exercise programme s may be 
undertaken more regularly and with other countries having coastal areas.  
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI;  
            SATPAL MAHARAJ,  
7 December, 2011                            Chairman,           
16  Agrahayana, 1933 (Saka)              Standing Committee on Defence 
  


70 
 
MINUTES OF THE SECOND SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE 
(2010-11) 
 
 The Committee sat on Thursday, the 21 st October, 2010 from 1500 to 1 745 hrs. in 
Committee Room `D ’, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.  
PRESENT 
Shri Satpal Maharaj    -      Chairman 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
2 Shri Harish Chaudhary  
3. Shri Kamal Kishor ‘Commando’  
4 Dr. Sucharu Ranjan Haldar  
5 Shri Kapil Muni Karwariya  
6 Shri Bhaskar Rao Patil Khatgaonkar  
7 Shri Asaduddin Owaisi  
8 Shri A.T. Nana Patil  
9 Shri Amarnath Pradhan  
10 Shri C. Rajendran  
11 Shri J. Ramesh  
12 Shri Mahabali Singh  
13 Rajkumari Ratna Singh  
 
RAJYA SABHA  
 
14 Shri Avinash Rai Khanna  
15 Prof. P.J. Kurien  
16 Shri Mukut Mithi  
17 Shri Birender Singh  
18 Shri M.V. Mysura Reddy  
 
SECRETARIAT  
 
1. Shri T. K. Mukherjee  - Joint Secretary 
2.  Smt. Sudesh Luthra   - Director 
  3. Smt. Jyochnamayi Sinha  - Deputy Secretary  
 
 


71 
 
NON OFFICIAL WITNESSES  
1. Dr. N.S. Sisodia, IDSA  
2. Shri Vinod Misra, IDSA  
WITNESSES 
 
REPRESENTATIVES OF THE MINISTRY OF DEFENCE  
1. Shri Pradeep Kumar  -  Defence Secretary  
2. Smt. Nita Kapoor   - Secretary (Def.Fin.)  
3.  Shri R.K. Mathur   - Addl Secy. (M)  
4.  Shri Vivek Rae,   - Director-General (Acquisition) 
5. Shri Binoy Kumar   - JS(O/N) 
6. Smt. Preeti Sudan   - JS&AM(MS) 
7. Shri Ramesh Kumar  - JS&Addl. FA(R)  
 
Representatives of the Indian Coast Guard  
1. V Adml. Anil Chopra, DGICG  
2. IG Rajendra singh, DDG CG  
3. IG S.K. Goyal, DDG (M&M)  
4. IG K. Natarajan, DDG ( P&P) 
5. IG VSR Murthy, TM, DDG (Ops)  
6. DIG B.K. Patasahani, PD (HRD)  
7. DIG K.R. Suresh, Director (Ops)  
8. Commdt T. Sashi Kumar, CGA to DG  
 
2. At  the outset Hon ’ble Chairman welcomed the members to the sitting of the 
Committee convened to take oral  evidence of the  representatives of the Institute of 
Defence Studies and Analyses on the subject ‘Performance of Defence Research 
Laboratories ’ with special reference to ‘Indigenisation and self reliance in Defence 
Production’ and also to take oral  evidence of the repres entatives of the Ministry of 
Defence on the subject `Performance of Coast Guard Organisation ’. 
‘The representatives of Institute of Defence Studies and Analyses  
were then called in ’ 
 


72 
 
3.  The Hon ’ble Chairman welcomed the witnesses and drew their attention  to the 
Direction 58 of the Directions by the Speaker, Lok Sabha regarding maintaining 
confidentiality of the deliberations and  requested them to furnish their views on the 
various aspects related to examination of the subject ‘Performance of Defence 
Research Laboratories with special reference to Indigenisation and self reliance in 
Defence Production. ’ 
4. Dr. N.S. Sisodia and Shri Vinod Misra, representatives of the Institute of 
Defence Studies and Analyses thereafter deposed before the Committee and made  
valuable suggestions for the effective functioning of DRDO Laboratories. One of the 
expert while presenting his views also made reference to Dr. P. Rama Rao Committee 
Report on restructuring of DRDO ’. The experts  also responded to the queries made 
by the members of the Committee during the deliberations.  
‘The representatives of Institute of Defence Studies and Analyses then 
withdrew.’ 
 
‘The Representatives of Ministry of Defence and Indian Coast Guard  
Organisation were then called in. ’ 
5.        The Hon’ble Chairman welcomed the representatives of the Ministry of Defence and 
Indian Coast Guard Organisation and drew their attention to Direction 58 of the Directions 
by the Speaker, Lok Sabha regarding maintaining confidentiality of the deliberations. The 
representatives then deposed before the Committee on the subject `Performance of Coast 
Guard Organisation ’. Various issues related to the functioning of the Coast Guard 
Organisation which include Organisational setup, roles and functions, enhanced role after  
26/11 Mumbai Attack, Recent  Coastal Security initiatives, pollution response, lead 
intelligence agency, community interaction, force level, infrastructure and manpower were 
elaborated by the witnesses through power point presentation. The representatives  also 
responded to the various queries raised by the members during the deliberations.  
 


73 
 
6.  The  members of  the Committee  expressed  serious  concern  over  the non -
availability of Dr. P. Rama Rao Committee Report  on  restructuring of DRDO by the 
Ministry of Defence as desired by the Committee on the earlier occasions due to 
confidentiality. The members observed that whereas the recommendations made in the 
aforesaid report are being quoted in the media  reports, they are being deprived of the  
same.  Th e Defence Secretary stated that the matter would be discussed with the Hon ’ble 
Minister of Defence due to report being classified in nature.  
The witnesses then withdrew  
7. The Committee after deliberations decided to undertake on the spot study visit to 
the Defence Research Laboratories  located in Delhi to know about the functioning of 
these laboratories in a better way which would help the Committee in making various 
recommendations in the report on the subject `Performance of Defence Research 
Laboratories with particular reference to indigenisation and self reliance in defence 
production’  taken by them for examination during the year 2010 -11. 
8. In connection with exam ination of the subjects ‘Functioning of Military Cantonment 
and Stations ’ and ‘Management of Defence Lands ’ which have been selected by the 
Committee (2010 -11) from the stage the predecessor Committee had left, the Committee 
desired to seek the opinion of the State Governments having large number of Military 
Cantonments, Stations and Defence Land  followed by evidence at a later stage to 
understand the problems of Military Cantonments as also decided by the predecessor 
Committee for better understanding of the subjects after obtaining the requisite 
permission of Hon ’ble Speaker in this regard.  
The Committee then adjourned.  
The verbatim record of the proceedings has been kept.  
………  


74 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE (2011 -12) 
 
MINUTES OF THE SECOND SITTING OF THE S TANDING COMMITTEE ON  
DEFENCE (2011 -12) 
 
 
 The Committee sat on Friday, the 4 th November, 2011 from 1500 hrs. to 1545 hrs. 
in Committee Room ‘B’, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.  
PRESENT 
 
Shri Satpal Maharaj    -               Chairman 
 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri Kamal Kishor `Commando ’  
3. Shri Harish Choudhary  
4. Shri Sher Singh Ghubaya  
5. 
6. 
7. 
8. 
Shri Ramesh Chandappa Jigajinagi  
Shri Ajay Kumar  
Shri Mithlesh Kumar  
Shri Sadashivrao Dadoba Mandlik  
9. Shri Asaduddin Owaisi  
10. 
11. 
Shri A.T. Nana Patil  
Shri Kadir Rana  
12 Shri Adhalrao Patil Shivaji  
13. Rajkumari Ratna Singh  
  
  RAJYA SABHA  
 
14. Shri Avinash Rai Khanna  
15. Professor P.J. Kurien  
16. Shri T.K. Rangarajan  
17. Shri Mukut Mithi  
18. Shri Birender Singh  
19. Shri Ram Kripal Yadav  
20. Shri Naresh Gujral  


75 
 
 
SECRETARIAT  
 
1. Shri T. K. Mukherjee   - Joint Secretary 
2.  Shrimati Sudesh Luthra   - Director 
3. Shri Sanjeev Sharma   - Deputy Secretary  
 
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the members to the sitting of the 
Committee. The Committee then took up for consideration and adoption the draft Report 
on the subject ‘Performance of Coast Guard Organisation ’. 
3.  After some deliberations the Committee adopted the report with the following 
modifications:- 
 (i)  Page 60, Para No. 2 6 last line 
After the words `in manning/handling ’, the words `and maintenance ’ be 
added to  read the sentence as `As such while signing various agreements 
for acquisitions it should be ensured that the deals contain provisions for 
training of the Coast Gua rd personnel in manning/handling as well as 
maintenance  of  the latest technology.  
 (ii) On page 60 Para No. 27 , 
    This para to be amplified  so as to emphasise to strengthen the anti -piracy   
initiatives being taken by the Coast Guard so as to ensure the release of 
the persons held hostages  by the pirates after getting the requisite 
information from the Ministry  on the number of Indians who  have been 
held hostages by the Somalian and other pirates  and the efforts  made  by 
the Government for releas e of the Indian hostages.  
  (iii) Page 48, Para No. 6,     
   After the end of the para 6,  a new para expressing the concerns of the 
Committee on the number of equipments, sensors, communication 
equipments, other sophisticated gadgets and fleet such as 


76 
 
helicopters/aircrafts with Coast Guard lying non -operational may be added 
after seeking the requisite information from the Ministry.  
4. The Committee also authorised the Chairman to finalise the above draft report 
and present the same to the House on a date c onvenient to him during the ensuing 
session of Parliament. The Committee, then, decided to hold their next sitting on 16 th 
November, 2011.  
  
The Committee then adjourned.  
 
