STANDING COMMITTEE
ON DEFENCE
(2012-2013)
FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA
MINISTRY OF DEFENCE
[Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations/observations contained in the
Thirteenth Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) on ‘Performance of Coast Guard Organization’]
SEVENTEENTH REPORT
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
February, 2013/Phalguna, 1934 (Saka)
17

SEVENTEENTH REPORT
STANDING COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE
(2012-2013)
(FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA)
MINISTRY OF DEFENCE
[Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations/observations
contained in the Thirteenth Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) on
‘Performance of Coast Guard Organization’]
Presented to Lok Sabha on 26.02.2013
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 26.02.2013
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
February, 2013/Phalguna, 1934 (Saka)

C.O.D. No. 135
Price : Rs. 79.00
© 2013 B Y L OK S ABHA S ECRETARIAT
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of
Business in Lok Sabha (Fourteenth Edition) and printed by National Printers,
New Delhi-110 028.

(i)
CONTENTS
PAGE
COMPOSITION OF THE C OMMITTEE (2012-2013) ......................................... (iii)
INTRODUCTION .............................................................................................. (v)
CHAPTER I Report ................................................................................. 1
CHAPTER II Recommendations/Observations which have been
accepted by the Government ......................................... 32
CHAPTER III Recommendations/Observations which the Committee
do not desire to pursue in view of the replies of
the Government ................................................................ 50
C
HAPTER IV Recommendations/Observations in respect of which
replies of the Government have not been accepted
by the Committee and which require reiteration ...... 51
C
HAPTER V Recommendations/Observations in respect of which
final replies of the Government are still awaited ...... 66
APPENDICES
I. Minutes of the Fourth Sitting of the Standing Committee
on Defence held on 18 December, 2012 ....................... 70
II. Analysis of Action Taken by the Government on
the recommendations contained in the Thirteenth
Report  of the Standing Committee on Defence
(Fifteenth Lok  Sabha) ..................................................... 72

COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE
(2012-13)
Shri Raj Babbar — Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Sameer Bhujbal
3. Shri Kamal Kishor ‘Commando’
4. Shri R. Dhruvanarayana
5. Shri Varun Gandhi
6. Shri P. Karunakaran
7. Shri Mithilesh Kumar
8. Shri Sidhant Mohapatra
9. Shri Saugata Roy
10. Shri Asaduddin Owaisi
11. Shri A.T. Nana Patil
12. Shri C.R. Patil
13. Smt. M. Vijaya Shanthi
14. Smt. Mala Rajya Laxmi Shah
15. Shri Mahabali Singh
16. Rajkumari Ratna Singh
17. Shri Uday Singh
18. Shri R. Thamaraiselvan
19. Vacant
20. Vacant
21. Vacant
(iii)

(iv)
Rajya Sabha
22. Shri Pankaj Bora
23. Shri Naresh Gujral
24. Shri Prakash Javadekar
25. Shri Hishey Lachungpa
26. Shri Mukut Mithi
27. Shri Mukhtar Abbas Naqvi
28. Dr. E.M. Sudarsana Natchiappan
29. Shri C.M. Ramesh
30. Shri T.K. Rangarajan
31. Shri Devender Goud T.
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Dr. R.K. Chadha — Additional Secretary
2. Shri R.K. Jain — Joint Secretary
3. Shri D.S. Malha — Director
4. Shri Sanjeev Sharma — Additional Director

INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairman of the Standing Committee on Defence (2012-13),
having been authorized by the Committee to present the Report on their
behalf, present this Seventeenth report on Action Taken by the Government
on the observations/recommendations contained in the Thirteenth Report
(Fifteenth Lok Sabha) on ‘The Performance of Coast Guard Organisation’.
2. The Thirteenth Report was presented to Lok Sabha and laid on
the Table of Rajya Sabha on 8 October, 2011. The Ministry of Defence
furnished their Action Taken Notes on the subject on 10 April, 2012.
3. The Report was considered and adopted by the Committee at
their sitting held on 18 December, 2012.
4. For facility of reference and convenience, the recommendations/
observations of the Committee have been printed in bold letters in
Part-I of the report.
5. An analysis of Action Taken by the Government on the
observations/recommendati ons contained in the Thirteenth Report
(Fifteenth Lok Sabha) of the Committee is given at Annexure II.
N
EW DELHI;  RAJ BABBAR,
19 December, 2012 Chairman,
28 Agrahayana, 1934 (Saka) Standing Comm ittee on Defence.
(v)

CHAPTER I
REPORT
This Report of the Standing Committee on Defence deals with action
taken by the Government on the recommendations/observations contained
in the Thirteenth Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) on ‘Performance of Coast
Guard Organisation’, which was presented to Lok Sabha and laid in
Rajya Sabha on 08.12.2011.
2. The Committee’s Thirteenth Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha)
contained 28 recommendations/observations on the following aspects:—
Sl.No. Recommendation/ Subject
Paragraph No.
1. 01 Setting up of Regional Headquarters (North-East)
2. 02 Adhocism in Long Term Plans
3. 03 Coastal Security Scheme Phase-I and Phase-II
4. 04 Under–Utilisation of outlay During Eleventh Plan
5. 05 Infrastructure
6. 06 Force Level
7. 07 Surface Platforms
8. 08 and 09 Issue of Biometric Identity Cards to Fishermen
9. 10 Registration of Fishing Boats
10. 11 Vessel Traffic Management
11. 12 and 13 Disaster Management
12. 14 Controlling Marine Pollution
13. 15 to 19 Oil Spill
14. 20 to 23 Manpower and Training
15. 24 and 25 Anti Piracy
16. 26 Lead Intelligence Agency
17. 27 Federal Apex Body
18. 28 International Cooperation

2
3. Action Taken Replies have been received from the Government
in respect of all the recommendations/observations contained in the Report.
These replies have been examined and the same have been categorized
as follows:—
(i) Recommendations/observations, which have been accepted
by the Government (Please see Chapter II):—
Para Nos. 1, 2, 7, 8, 12, 14, 17, 20, 21, 22, 23, 24, 26, 27, 28
(15 Recommendations)
(ii) R ecommendations/observations, which the Committee do not
desire to pursue in view of the replies of the Government
(Please see Chapter III):—
Para Nos. Nil
(Nil Recommendation)
(iii) Recommendations/observations in respect of which replies
of the Government have not been accepted by the Committee
and which require reiteration (Please  see Chapter IV):—
Para Nos. 3, 4, 5, 6, 11, 13, 18, 19, 25
(09 Recommendations)
(iv) Recommendations/observations in respect of which final
replies of the Government are still awaited (Please  see
Chapter V):—
Para Nos. 9, 10, 15, 16
(04 Recommendations)
4. The Committee expect that utmost importance would be
given to implementation of the recommendations/observations
accepted by the Government. In cases, where it is not possible for
the Department to implement the recommendations in letter and
spirit for any reason, the matter should be reported to the
Committee with reasons for non-implementation. The Committee
further desire that Action Taken Notes on the recommendations/
observations contained in Chapter-I should be furnished to them at
an early date.

3
A. SETTING UP OF REGIONAL HEADQUARTERS (NORTH-EAST)
Recommendation (Para No. 1)
5. The Committee had recommended as under:—
“The Committee observe that as per the existing Organisational
Structure, the Coast Guard operates from its headquarters located
at New Delhi. The field functions of the Coast Guard are executed
by the four Regional Headquarters located at Mumbai, Chennai,
Gandhi Nagar and Port Blair alongwith 12 District Headquarters
set up under these Regional Headquarters located at the Coastal
States of India. The Committee during the course of deliberations
have observed that the maritime States of Orissa and West Bengal
are located adjacent to Bangladesh and of late there has been a
large number of refugee influx and anti-national activities in this
area. Not only that the sea area adjoining these two maritime States
is rich in marine biotic resources and the Coast of Orissa is known
for nesting of endangered species of Olive Ridley Turtle which
needs to be protected. To add to the importance of this area the
Sand Heads approach in river Hooghly is the gateway to the ports
of Kolkata handling large amount of import-export trade. This being
the restricted water, there is persistent risk of oil pollution. Besides
large exploration activity is being undertaken in sea adjoining West
Bengal and Orissa. The Ministry itself has acknowledged that there
is inescapable need for establishing Regional Headquarters (North-
East). The Committee have further been informed that the case for
Regional Headquarters (North-East) along with co-located station
at Kolkata is being examined.
While taking note of the strategic and important location of the
maritime States of Orissa and West Bengal, the Committee are of
the firm view that there is an urgent need to take the immediate
action with regard to setting up of Regional Headquarter (North-
East) at the proposed site i.e. Kolkata so that the environment, sea
life and property are protected besides meeting the strategic need
of checking the influx of refugees, anti-national activities and
poaching. The expeditious decision in this regard should be taken
by the Government and the Committee informed accordingly.”
6. The Ministry in its action taken reply has stated as under:—
“Establishment of Regional Headquarters (North-East) alongwith
co-located station at Kolkata has been prioritised for establishment.
Five acres of land has been acquired in March 12 from the

4
Government of West Bengal to develop infrastructure for the
Headquarters.”
7. The Committee are happy to note that five acres of land has
been acquired in March 2012 from the Government of West Bengal to
develop infrastructure for the establishment of Regional Headquarters
(North-East). They also take note of the fact that land at Kolkata has
been prioritised for establishment as recommended by them in their
Thirteenth Report. While taking note of this development the
Committee feel that the Ministry could have provided details about
the project such as its time lines indicating clearly the date of
commencement, proposed date of completion, details of cost involved,
the detailed project report etc. The Committee as such would like the
Ministry to provide detailed information in this regard. Besides the
Committee would also like to be apprised of the environmental benefits
that are expected with the development of infrastructure with the
establishment of Regional Headquarter (North-East). The Committee
hope that the setting up of Regional Headquarter (North-East) would
help in better surveillance on the Eastern Maritime Borders of the
country and result into arresting infiltration through maritime borders.
B. COASTAL SECURITY SCHEME PHASE-I AND PHASE-II
Recommendation (Para No. 3)
8. The Committee had in their Thirteenth Report recommended as
under:—
“The Committee observe that a comprehensive and integrated
Coastal Security Scheme (CSS) was formulated in consultation with
all agencies concerned with the objective of strengthening
infrastructure of marine police force for patrolling and surveillance
of coastal areas, particularly in shallow water areas close to the
post. The CSS Phase-I was approved by the Cabinet Committee on
Security in January 2005 and was to be implemented over the five
years starting from 2005-06. The Committee further note that the
date of completion of CSS Phase-I has now been extended by one
year i.e. till March 2011. The data furnished by the Ministry with
regard to the physical progress of Phase-I further indicates that
there are gaps between the sanctioned buildings and the buildings
made operational. Such gap is of No. 2 with regard to coastal police
stations No. 5 in respect of check posts and out posts and
No. 2 with regard to barracks. Besides in a good number of projects

5
construction has not yet started. With regard to coastal police
stations although 71 out of the 73 sanctioned police stations have
been made operational, as per the information furnished by the
Ministry, the construction in respect of 42 out of 48 buildings has
been completed and for 11 buildings the construction is in progress.
In respect of 14 buildings the construction has not yet started. It
indicates that Phase-I may require further extensions. Not only that
a good number of police stations seems to be working without
buildings. With regard to Phase-II even the financial implications
have not been yet finalized and the approval of CCS is yet to be
obtained.
The Committee observe that post 26/11 scenario, there is an
urgent need to increase patrolling and surveillance infrastructure
in coastal areas. With the status of infrastructure projects, the
details of which have been given above it would take more years
to complete the projects targeted under Phase-I and Phase-II.
Keeping in view the strategic requirement, the Committee strongly
emphasize that the targeted projects under Phase-I should be
completed expeditiously. Besides financial allocations for Phase-II
should be finalized expeditiously so that Phase-II can start
expeditiously.”
9. The Ministry in its action taken reply, has stated as under:—
“1. Setting up of Coastal Police Stations:  MHA is the nodal
agency dealing with the setting up of Coastal Police Stations.
2. Status of Coastal Security Scheme Phase – II:  The scheme
has been approved by the Government and implementation
commenced w.e.f. 01 April, 2011. The Coastal Security Scheme
(Phase-II) aims to carry forward the objectives specified in
the Coastal Security Scheme (Phase-I) by way of providing
additional infrastructural support to coastal States/UTs for
marine patrolling and supplement other coastal security
initiatives taken by the Indian Navy and the Indian Coast
Guard. The scheme involves setting up of 131 Coastal Police
Stations and provisioning of 180 Interceptor Boats, 60 Jetties,
131 four wheelers and 242 Motor Cycles.”
10. The Coastal Security Scheme (CSS) assumes immense
significance especially in view of 26/11 scenario when insurgency took
place through the coastal boundaries of India. The Committee had
earlier found that Coastal Security Scheme Phase-I depicted several

6
gaps. Moreover it ran through an additional period of one year i.e.
March 2011. Such gaps as distinctly brought out by the Committee
were concerning sanctioned buildings and buildings made operational.
To quantify, precisely the gaps were about 02 Coastal Police Stations,
05 Check Post/Outpost and 02 Barracks. Eleven buildings were yet to
be completed and construction in respect of 14 buildings was still to
commence. The Committee had recommended that targeted projects
under Phase-I should be completed and financial allocations for
Phase-II be finalised expeditiously.
The Committee note that the reply of the Ministry is
conspicuously silent on setting up coastal police stations. Instead of
taking up the matter urgently with the Ministry of Home Affairs, the
nodal agency dealing with setting up of Coastal Police Stations in the
light of the concerns expressed by the Committee, the Ministry has
chosen to shift the responsibility by simply stating that MHA is the
nodal agency in this regard. The Ministry has not even bothered to
intimate about the state of implementation of Phase-I, particularly when
the extended deadline of Phase-I expired in March, 2011. It goes without
saying that national security is an issue which cannot be compromised
in any circumstances. The Committee, therefore, recommend that the
Ministry of Defence should take up this matter forthwith with MHA
for setting up of coastal police stations within the definite time frame
and the outcome be intimated to them.
The Committee find from the Action Taken Note that the Coastal
Security Phase-II has already been approved by the Government and
its implementation commenced from 1st April, 2011. Even when the
implementation has already commenced and more than one year has
elapsed since then, the Ministry has not bothered to furnish the details
about the financial allocations made for Phase–II of the project as
desired by the Committee in the earlier recommendation. The
Committee as such would like to be apprised of the outlay earmarked
along with the financial and physical achievements under Phase-II so
far. Besides the Committee would also like to be apprised of the details
of OEMs, the mechanism in place for post delivery maintenance and
if selection has already been made whether they are comparable with
the state-of-the-art technologies being used by most advanced Coast
Guard Organisations of the world such as USA, UK, etc. They,
accordingly, recommend that all these details be furnished to them
expeditiously.

7
C. UNDER–UTILISATION OF OUTLAY DURING ELEVENTH PLAN
Recommendation (Para No. 4)
11. The Committee had recommended as under:—
“The Committee note from the data furnished by the Ministry that
Rs. 20134.901 crore under the capital head for different projects
have been earmarked to be spent by the end of the Twelfth Plan.
Out of the allocated outlay, Rs. 5293.093 crore would be spent by
the end of the Eleventh Plan and Rs. 12855.982 crore would be
carried forward to Twelfth Plan. The detailed examination of the
data further reveals that likely expenditure for the new schemes
is Rs. 2631.270 crore out of Rs. 5293.093 crore for the Eleventh Plan
which means that almost 50 per cent of the outlay is earmarked
for meeting committed liability, replacement schemes and civil
works. The analysis further indicates that there is under utilization
of outlay, particularly under the capital schemes during each year
of Tenth Plan and Eleventh Plan. During the first three years of
Eleventh Plan overall expenditure is 92.81 per cent of the total
outlay whereas under the capital head, the expenditure is Rs. 1667.86
crore out of the allocation of Rs. 1916.71 crore i.e. 87.01 per cent.
The Committee at one place have been informed by the Ministry
that the annual allocations would depend upon resource availability.
On the one hand the allocations earmarked are not being fully
utilized on the other hand the deadlines for proposed upgradations
have been stated to be dependent upon resource availability. The
Committee again emphasize that there is an urgent need to ensure
that upgradation, modernization of various plans of Coast Guard
are completed within the stipulated deadline so as to address the
challenges before the Coast Guard Organization. As such all the
initiatives should be taken to ensure that the allocations made for
the different projects are fully utilized. Besides keeping in view the
long-term plans, the adequate outlay for the new schemes, should
be made available by the Government. The concerns of the
Committee in this regard should be duly communicated to the
Ministry of Finance.”
12. The Ministry in its action taken reply, has stated as under:—
“The approved Development Plan caters to proposals for acquisition
of new and replacement schemes, infrastructure development,
manpower augmentation and upgradation of existing assets. Post
approval, these proposals are again required to be processed

8
individually as per prevalent policies and procedures in force for
sanction of the Competent Financial Authority (CFA). As such, this
process involves time.
Further, ship-building is a very complex process with a gestation
period ranging from 2 to 3 years. Similarly, cases for acquisition
manufacture of aircraft involve a gestation period of 3 to 4 years.
Even after concluding contracts, the ability to spend money is
contingent upon the selected Firms’ ability to absorb funds based
on the actual physical progress made towards deliveries. Firms, in
turn, are highly dependent on issues of corporate governance,
availability of labour, material supplies from Original Equipment
Manufacturers (OEM), as also, on occasions, on acts of ‘Force
Majeure’.
Notwithstanding, the overall utilisation of funds during the
11th Plan has been satisfactory. Details of fund utilisation (as on
19 Mar. 2012) is as follows:—
Major Head Approved in Expenditure Shortfall/Excess
Revised 11th Plan  (Rs. in crore)
Capital 4662 4135 (88.7%) 527 (-11.3%)
Revenue 3268 3174 (97.2%) 94 (-2.8%)
Total 7930 7309 (92.2%) 621 (-7.8%)
13. A close scrutiny of the reply furnished by the Ministry clearly
indicates that the specific recommendation of the Committee has not
been adequately dealt with. The budgetary process is very complex
and time consuming exercise which involves making an in-depth
examination of all the projections any Ministry ought to propose. The
Committee had highlighted under utilization of funds and had
unambiguously recommended that the allocations made for the different
projects be fully utilized. Against this back drop, the Ministry has
furnished figures regarding the actual utilization against the approved
outlay in revised Eleventh Plan. The under-utilization in both the capital
and revenue heads comes to Rs. 621 crore which, in the opinion of the
Committee, is quite substantial. The country after 26/11 scenario cannot
afford such approach particularly related to coastal security. In the
opinion of the Committee this situation is not only appalling but will
put a question mark on the necessity and urgency of budgetary
demands. While reiterating their earlier recommendation that the
allocations should be fully utilised, the Committee want the Ministry
to furnish details of underutilisation of Rs. 621 crore both in Capital
and Revenue Head.

9
The Ministry in its reply has also stated that ship building is
a very complex process with a gestation period ranging from 2 to 3
years. The Committee would like to emphasize that the plans for
commissioning and decommissioning of ships should be formulated
keeping in mind the gestation period and accordingly expenditure
should be planned and projected. The budgetary projections/spending
are always undertaken keeping in view the time period involved for
various activities. The Committee, reiterate their earlier recommendation
that all out efforts be made by the Ministry to utilise their budgetary
allocations. The steps planned/taken in this regard should also be
communicated to them.
D. INFRASTRUCTURE
Recommendation (Para No. 5)
14. The Committee had, in their Thirteenth Report recommended
as under:—
“The Committee find that a lot of infrastructure is being upgraded
with a view to enhance the coastal surveillance network. At present,
there are 27 Coast Guard Stations along the coast line and as per
the information furnished by the Ministry, Coast Guard Station
generally covers a range of approx. 75 to 120 km. The Ministry
itself has acknowledged that the present arrangements are
considered inadequate for surveillance keeping in view the long
coast line of India and adverse topography. To monitor the coastal
boundaries, the Ministry has taken up the case with the Government
to enhance the stations from 27 to 41 by 2012. Besides, 204 Coastal
Police Stations have also been sanctioned which would be operating
in the Hub and Spoke concept with the Coast Guard Stations for
filling gap identified after carrying out vulnerability and gap
analysis by the State Government/Marine Police of the State along
with the Indian Coast Guard. With regard to upgrading Air Stations,
Air Enclaves and Squadrons, the Committee have been informed
that at present there are two Air Stations, three Air Enclaves and
three independent Squadrons operating from strategic locations
along the coast line. Additional three Air Stations and four Air
Enclaves are being planned to be established by 2012. As such by
2012 the Coast Guard would be having total five Air Stations, seven
Air Enclaves and one Helibase and two independent Squadrons
which according to the Ministry would meet the effective air
surveillance of the entire coast. In addition a total of 46 coastal
radar chains are in the process of being started.

10
The representatives of Coast Guard Organisation during the Study
Visit of the Committee to Mumbai, Goa, Bangalore and
Vishakhapatnam from 29 June to 04 July, 2011 made certain
suggestions to upgrade the infrastructure at each of the existing
port and airport. The suggestions made include providing
200 meters of dedicated jetty for unhindered 24x7 CG Operations,
5-10 acres of seafront land adjacent to jetty for creation of logistics,
administration and technical support complex to support
CG operations and 20-30 acres of land for creation of hoverport
within port limits. Suggestion was also made to provide
150-200 acres land for administrative complex for married
accommodation and other allied facilities outside port limits. For
airports, the representative suggested that 50-100 acres of land for
creating dedicated dispersal, hangers and air operation support
facilities should be provided. The Committee recommended the
Ministry of Defence to consider the suggestions of Coast Guard
Organisation.
The Committee during their study tour to Mumbai, Goa, Bangalore
and Vishakhapatnam from 29 June to 04 July, 2011 have observed
that keeping current security scenario into consideration, Coast
Guard force level is being enhanced at a much faster rate. Towards
this purpose the Coast Guard requires infrastructural facilities in
a larger scale viz., support for berthing place for ship place
for hovercraft operations, air operations, maintenance facilities, land
for creation of operation and communication centres, Administrative
Complexes, Married Accommodation. The present assets with the
Coast Guard are negligible and are on temporary arrangements
with other organizations at most of the places. Respective State
Governments port authorities and airport authorities are being
approached to provide such support. The Committee are of the
strong view that infrastructure are the backbone for maintaining
a strong force level for Coast guard organization to meet the current
security scenario. This type of stop-gap arrangement will weaken
not only the capacity of CG but also the morale of the Coast Guard
Personnel. This matter need to be dealt on war footing stage. The
State Governments have to play an important role in setting up the
proposed infrastructure primarily on the issue of acquisition of
land for various types of infrastructure projects. As such, there is
an urgent need to sensitize the State Governments about the urgency
of upgradation of coastal network. The issue needs to be taken up
at the highest level with the State Governments. The Ministry has
to play a proactive role in motivating the various State Governments.
Concrete initiatives on the suggested lines should be taken by the
Government and the Committee apprised accordingly.”

11
15. The Ministry, in its Action Taken Reply, has stated as under:—
“The ICG has 22 stations and 08 air units as on 25 November, 2008.
Post 26/11, renewed impetus was accorded to addressing
vulnerability gaps along the coast, and accordingly 20 additional
stations and 07 air units were sanctioned by the Government.
Of the total 42 stations and 15 air units sanctioned till date,
35 stations and 08 air u nits have already been activated. Of these,
13 stations were activated in just three years time. Stringent timeline
are being maintained for setting up of balance stations.
While efforts are in hand to expeditiously activate balance stations/
air units, most new stations are functioning from hired buildings
leased from other organisations. There is also inadequate land
holding and absence of dedicated berthing facilities for ICG Ships/
boats, which are essential for operational effectiveness of the force.
State Governments/Port Authorities are being impressed upon to
address deficiencies in land, berthing and infrastructure so as to
enable effective functioning of CG stations and basing of additional
assets in the larger interest of maritime security.”
16. The Committee in their 13th Report had highlighted the
vulnerability of Coast Guard infrastructure and stop gap arrangement
with which Coast Guard had to manage with State Governments/other
stakeholders. The Ministry in its Action Taken Replies have
acknowledged that most new stations are functioning from hired
buildings and there is also absence of dedicated berthing facilities for
Indian Coast Guard ships/boats, which are essential for operational
effectiveness of the Force. However, the Ministry has stated that State
Governments/Port Authorities are being impressed upon to address
deficiencies in land, berthing and infrastructure to enable effective
functioning.
The Committee would like to be apprised in detail regarding
all the measures/initiatives attempted by the Ministry in order to
sensitize/motivate all stakeholders/State Governments and at the same
time the results achieved thereof. The Committee find that the reply
of the Ministry is casual as the specific initiatives taken in order to
sensitize Central agencies/State Governments have not been given. The
Committee would also like to know the present status and the tangible
progress made in regard to Coastal Stations, Air Stations, Air Enclaves,
Heli base, Coastal Police Stations and Coastal Radar Chain as against

12
the targets to be achieved by 2012 which was 41 Coastal Staions,
5 Air Stations, 7 Air Enclaves, 1 helibase, 2 Independent Squardrons,
204 Coastal Police Stations and 46 Coastal Radar Chain.
E. FORCE LEVEL AND SURFACE PLATFORMS
Recommendation (Para Nos. 6 and 7)
17. The Committee had recommended as under:—
“The Committee observe that the existing strength of aircraft and
other surveillance force level of Indian Coast Guard includes
44 ships, 6 hovercrafts aircrafts, 24 boats, 20 Chetaks and 4 ALH.
The Coast Guard during the year 2007-08 had 42 ships, 18 boats
and 45 aircrafts as informed to the Committee during the course
of examination of Demands for Grants 2007-08. The comparison of
the status of surveillance force level of Coast Guard during the
year 2007-08 and the strength, at present, indicates that there has
been addition of only 2 ships and 6 boats during the past four
years. The Committee have been given the impression that a lot
of efforts are being made to upgrade the capacity of Coast Guard
Post 26/11 Mumbai attack. However, the aforesaid scenario with
regard to upgradation of force level indicates that the progress in
this regard is slow. Even if the data with regard to the existing
force level is compared to the assessed requirement during the
year 2007-08 as informed to the Committee during the course of
examination of Demands for Grants, the Committee note that there
are huge gaps between the required and the existing force level.
The assessed requirement of ships at that time was 154 and
93 boats while the Indian Coast Guard at present has only 45 ships
and 27 boats.
The Committee further note from the Information furnished by the
Ministry that a large number of gadgets/helicopters/aircrafts available
with Coast Guard Organisation are lying non-operational for long
time and repair/servicing seems to be a very slow process. The
Super Rapid Gun Mounting (SRGM) installed onboard ICG ships
Samar, Sangram are not working since 2006 and on ICG Sagar since
June, 2009. The SRGM onboard ICGS Sarang is partially operational.
The Electronically Operated Fire Control System (EOFCS) of all the
SRGM had become obsolete and OEM had expressed inability to
provide product support. The existing strength Donier and Chetak
are 28 and 20 respectively, out of which one-fourth of the fleet is
undergoing major servicing/repairs.

13
The Committee take serious note of the huge gaps between the
existing and the required force level as well as the slow progress
of acquisition of the force level in Coast Guard. Not only that
whatever limited capacity of force level the Coast Guard possesses,
is not fully operational as is apparent from the information furnished
by the Ministry. The Committee would like to emphasize that with
the increasing perceived threat levels from various quarters, the
country cannot afford delay and shifting of deadlines in respect
of acquisition of various types of force level. As such the Committee
strongly recommend that all out efforts should be made to ensure
that the inductions are in place within the stipulated time-frame.
The requisite allocation should be made available to Coast Guard
so as to meet the gaps between the required and existing strength
to enable the Coast Guard to meet the emerging security challenges
as well to handle the peace time operations particularly during
natural calamities. Besides, it should also be ensured that the various
systems and the aircraft, equipments, electronic gadgets, etc. which
become non-operational due to various reasons are repaired/serviced
within the shortest possible time. In this regard, the Defence capacity
to repair/service the various equipments, aircraft systems also need
to be augmented.
The Committee further express serious concern over almost one-
fourth of the total strength of Donier and Chetak undergoing major
services/repairs. The Committee would like to be informed whether
the Defence has tried to find out the reasons for such a large number
of aircraft going non-operational. The detailed reasons in this regard
should be furnished to the Committee so as to understand the
issue of such a large number of Donier and Chetak going non-
operational.
The Committee during the Study Visit to Goa observed that the
accommodation provided to the officials of Coast Guard
Organisation/Navy was in a dilapidated condition. The Committee
note that on the one hand there is shortage of accommodation for
the officials of the services, on the other hand, whatever
accommodation is provided is not being maintained properly. The
Committee take serious view of the poor maintenance of the
residential accommodation provided to the officials of Coast Guard
and Navy. The Committee strongly recommend the Ministry to
look into the matter urgently. Besides the outlay required for proper
maintenance of the residential accommodation should be provided.”

14
18. The Committee in regard to recommendation at Sl. No. 7 had
recommended as under:—
“SURFACE PLATFORMS
The Committee note that the Coast Guard has been performing the
delegated charter of duties with a force level of 72 commissioned
surveillance platforms out of which, as per the Ministry’s own
admission, 50 per cent of the platforms have exceeded their
designated life. The Ministry has informed that 131 surveillance
platforms are already under construction in Indian Shipyards and
another 200 platforms are in the process of being contracted. The
aforesaid position indicates that there are huge gaps between the
required and the existing strength of surface platforms. What is
more disturbing is the fact that whatever limited capacity of
platforms Coast Guard has, have already exceeded their life. While
expressing serious concern over the existing situation, the
Committee strongly recommend that all the initiatives should be
taken so that additional platforms are inducted within the stipulated
time frame and the out dated platforms are phased out thereby
strengthening the force level of Coast Guard.”
19. The Ministry in its action taken reply, has stated as
under:—
“1. The ICG had a surface force level of 60 ships/boats (42 ships
and 19 boats/hovercrafts) as on 25 November, 2008. Post 26/
11, induction of assets and augmentation of force levels
received undivided attention. Due to this, contracts for 104
platforms ( i.e.  36 ships and 68 boats/hovercraft) were
concluded by the Service during the period January, 2009 to
March, 2011.
2. Currently, acquisition cases for 46 platforms ( i.e. 26 ships and
20 boats) are being progressed, which are likely to conclude
by 2013. This acquisition programme also caters for
replacement of again platforms inducted in early eighties by
the ICG. By 2018, ICG would have a force level of about
150 ships/boats and 100 aircrafts, which would be adequate
for securing the maritime interests of India to a reasonable
level. The fully desired force level of 154 ships, 126 boats and
139 aircrafts is likely to be achieved by 2027.
3. The phase lag in ‘acquisition’ and ‘induction’, as brought out
in the Report, is unavoidable since ship construction is a
highly complex and time intensive process. Shipyards require

15
a minimum delivery period of 2-3 years from signing of
contract to affect the delivery of the first vessel of a class of
ships follow-on vessels need an additional 06 to 12 months
depending on size/complexity.
4. Operational status of Weapon/sensors. Effective maintenance
and optimal utilisation of weapons/sensors is accorded utmost
priority by the ICG. The ICG, accordingly, has an elaborate
maintenance philosophy for weapons/sensors/equipment
fitted on its sea going assets, with a mechanism to test their
operational effectiveness periodically.
5. As for the Super Rapid Gun Mound (SGRM), the non-
availability of the gun was mainly on account of the defective;
Electro Optical Fire Control System (EOFCS). The OEM/PAC
firm (M/s BHEL) had expressed inability to provide product
support for the EOFCS, in absence of which, operational
availability of the gun mount onboard ICG ships Samar and
Sangram was adversely affected.
6. Following remedial measures have been instituted for
operationalising the SRGM:—
(a) Early conclusion of periodic routines on the gun mounts
have been accorded high priority. Normal Routines of
SRGM on-board ICGS Samar have been completed by
M/s BHEL in Sep. 2011. Routines on ICGS Sangram
commences in January, 2012 and are likely to be
completed by end March, 2012. Routines on ICGS Sagar
and Sarang will follow on completion of Sangram.
(b) One Target Designator Sight (TDS) for each of the ships
fitted with SRGM have been procured from M/s BHEL,
Bangalore, and installation is in progress. The TDS will
enable manual exploitation of the SRGM upon
installation.
(c) Development of a new EOFCS for SRGM by M/s BHEL,
Bangalore is in progress as replacement for the obsolete
EOFCS.
7. Servicing/Repairs of Aviation Assets. The aviation fleet of the
ICG includes 28 Dornier aircraft and 24 Helicopters. Presently,
10 Dornier aircraft and 07 Chetak Helicopters are undergoing
mandatory servicing on completion of their respective flying

16
hours/stipulated calendar life inspections. Only two Chetaks,
viz. CG 808 and CG 821, are non-operational. Details, as on
08 March, 2012, are as under:—
Aircraft Total  Allotted toUndergoing Non- Remarks
Strength Frontline scheduled Operati-
Units Servicing onal
by
M/s HAL
Dornier 28 18(20) 10(08) — —
Chetak 20 11(13) 7(06) 02(01) CG 808. The
aircraft is non-
operational
since 21
January 2008,
post accident at
Port Blair. The
damage of
aircraft was
categorized as
Cat ‘ZZ’ i.e.
‘Total Loss’.
MoD approval
for
regularisation
of the loss is
awaited.
CG 821. The
aircraft is non-
operational
since 31 August
2011, post
accident at
Daman.
Presently, the
aircraft is
undergoing
repairs as M/s
HAL
(Barrackpore),
under warranty,
and the repairs
are likely to be
completed by
April, 2012.
8. Maintenance of Residential Accommodation : Funds for
maintenance and project work associated with coast guard
residential accommodation is allocated yearly as part of the

17
Annual Works Programme (AWP). This is a time-tested
system that ensures periodical and continuing maintenance
of CG infrastructure.
9. As for the Coast Guard residential accommodation at Goa,
concerned authorities have been directed to chart out a
detailed plan for refurbishment/maintenance of residential
accommodation through MES, which is the primary engineer
agency for maintenance of buildings and accommodation.”
20. In regard to the deficiencies concerning surface platforms the
Ministry replied as under:—
“Post 26/11, added impetus towards augmentation of assets resulted
in conclusion of contracts for 104 surface platforms (36 Ships and
68 Boats/Hovercraft) in just a period of two years from 2009 to
2011. Further, ICG is currently progressing acquisition of 46 Ships/
Boats (07 Offshore Patrol Vessels, 14 Fast Patrol Vessels, 01 Training
Ship, 04 Auxiliary barges and 20 Interceptor Boats). The contract
for acquisition of 06 additional Offshore Patrol Vessels on
nomination basis to M/s GSL, Goa is also likely to conclude in the
near future.
The acquisition programme of surface platforms is being progressed
as per a stringent timeline in accordance with the DPP. The
acquisition programme initiated by ICG would cater to capability
enhancement, as also phasing out of old platforms.
As a result of these acquisition initiatives, the gaps currently being
witnessed would be eliminated to a large extent with the induction
of 150 surface platforms by 2018. The fully desired level of
154 ships and 126 boats is likely to be achieved by 2027.”
21. While taking note of the appalling situation in regard to the
deficient force level the Committee had categorically recommended
that the requisite allocation be made available to Coast Guard to enable
them to meet the gaps between the required and existing strength so
that Coast Guard is well equipped to meet the emerging security
challenges and to handle the peace time operations particularly during
natural calamities. Such deficiencies were quantified in the Committee’s
Report and also the inoperability of the assets such as SRGM, EOFCS
and idling of Dornier Aircraft and Chetak Helicopters was deftly
brought out in the Report. They also took note of serious deficiencies
in regard to the surface platforms where huge gaps existed between
the required and the existing strength of surface platforms to be precise,

18
50% of the platforms exceeded their designated life and as such
131 surveillance platforms were under construction and another 200 in
the process of being contracted.
The reply of the Ministry has submitted information on the
conclusion of the contracts for 104 platforms during the period January
2009 to March 2011. It also states that the acquisition cases for
46 platforms were being progressed and were likely to conclude by 2013.
The Committee note that it is already more than one and a half years
since the contract for 104 platforms was entered into but the reply has
not thrown any light on the progress made in this regard. Also, they
believe that the acquisition for 46 platforms would be completed by
2013 i.e. after lapse of exactly two years. In the opinion of the Committee
the time for mere finalisation of the contract is too long which amounts
to compromising with the national security. Hence, they recommend
that the progress with regard to 104 platforms be communicated to
them and all out efforts be made to curtail the period for finalizing
the contract for acquisition of 46 platforms. They would also like to
have the complete details of the road map which would lead to
acquisition of 154 ships, 126 boats and 139 aircrafts to be achieved by
2027. While disagreeing with the casual response of the Ministry that
the acquisition programme of surface platforms was being progressed
as per the stringent time line, the Committee, in unequivocal terms
recommend that the contractual obligation for such acquisition be
culminated forthwith and strict guidelines for implementation be
framed so that induction of 150 surface platforms by 2018 becomes a
reality.
Coming to the inoperability of weapon/sensors the Committee
foresee a very dismal picture with regard to the efforts made by the
Ministry. The reply is again silent on important aspects such as penalty
clause being entered into with the OEMs and whether it was ever
invoked in this case. The reasons for showing inability in providing
product support should have been communicated to the Committee
specially highlighting the fact that whether the defective equipment
was supplied by the manufacturers. They would also like to be informed
about the status of the remedial measures taken for operationalising
the Super Rapid Gun Mount (SRGM). This is more alarming in view
of the fact that stringent and tedious acquisition processes are in place
and being practised by the Ministry.
The number of aviation assets at the disposal of Coast Guard is
very meagre and far from the targeted numbers aimed for achieving

19
by 2027. Notwithstanding the fact, two assets i.e. Chetak has been
damaged due to accidents. Out of these one CG 808 has been categorised
as a total loss and Ministry’s approval for regularising is still awaited.
The second, CGA 21, as per the reply of the Ministry was undergoing
repairs which were likely to be completed by April 2012. The Committee
are surprised to find that Ministry has not intimated them basic facts
such as when was the request for regularisation of the loss was
communicated to the Ministry and since when it was pending with
it. Also the Ministry has not been candid to reveal the status of
completion of repair of the second aircraft which was due for 2012.
Detailed information on both these points be communicated to the
Committee in order to enable them to ascertain the delays which are
taking place on both these counts.
The information furnished in respect of the maintenance of
residential accommodation at Goa is of routine nature and hides more
than it reveals. In this regard the Committee can only recommend that
the plan for refurbishment/maintenance be finalised without any further
loss of time and the accommodation be finally upgraded to the required
liveable conditions.
F. VESSEL TRAFFIC MANAGEMENT
Recommendation (Para No. 11)
22. The Committee had recommended as under:—
“The Committee have been informed during the course of
examination that the Coast Guard is coordinating with the Director-
General Shipping for fitment of vessel, tracking system on board
for all fishing vessels in accordance with the decisions taken by the
Cabinet Secretary post 26/11. To achieve the task, the Government
is examining some of the proposals to regulate the movement of
fishing boats in and out of all landing points along the Indian
Coast which include the fitment of shipping harbor/landing points
with Radio Frequency Identification Device (RFID), fitment of
satellite based transponder on each fishing boat below 20 mts. in
length, fitment of vessel monitoring system (VMS) for deep sea
fishing vessel and fitment of AIS(B) for all fishing vessels above
20 mts. in length.
The detailed examination of the subject by the Committee has
revealed that some headway has been achieved in respect of fitment

20
of vessel tracking system in fishing vessels less than 20 mtrs.
However, in respect of fitment of transponders for fishing vessels
above 20 mtrs. and for deep sea fishing vessels as well as for fitment
of RFID tags, the proposals seems to be still at the conceptual stage.
The Committee feel that an effective vessel monitoring and tracking
system is utmost necessary for monitoring the operation of all types
of vessels in the sea. As such there is an urgent need to fast track
the process of identification of technologies, trials so that various
types of proposed monitoring systems are fitted in all types of
vessels. So far as the constraint being felt with regard to the small
boats which do not have power supply to provide power to the
monitoring equipment is concerned, the Committee feel that the
constraint can be addressed by fitting the rechargeable batteries.
The Committee strongly recommend that all the proposed initiatives
should be fast tracked so that the monitoring and tracking systems/
transponders RFID tags are fitted in all types of vessels
expeditiously. The Committee may also like to recommend to take
the help of DRDO a premier Defence Research Organisation of the
country in identification of various technologies and to address to
the constraints being faced in various trials.”
23. The Ministry in its action taken reply, has stated as under:—
“The aspect of fitment of transponders for fishing vessels above
20 mtrs. length is governed by Ministry of Shipping (MoS)
Notification of May 2009 that makes fitment of AIS Class ‘ A’
mandatory for all fishing vessels above 20 m in length. MoS is the
nodal agency for progressing the fitment on such vessels.
All Deep Sea fishing Vessels are fitted with AIS. Voyage clearance
is not provided by ICG unless the Deep Sea fishing vessels are
fitted with AIS. Coast Guard ships and MRCCs are being equipped
with AIS for effective monitoring of these AIS fitted vessels.”
24. The Committee bearing in mind the security concerns, had
recommended that the help of DRDO be taken to address the constraints
being observed for fitment of transponders on fishing vessels above
20 meters in length and fitment of RFID Tags on deep sea fishing
vessels. In their reply the Ministry had now stated that Ministry of
shipping is the nodal agency for progressing the fitment on such vessels.
However, they have not categorically informed whether the two
equipments mentioned above have actually been installed on the
category of vessels recommended by the Committee. The Committee
had also recommended to take the help of DRDO a premier Defence

21
Research Organisation of the country in identification of various
technologies and to address to the constraints being faced in various
trials. In the reply of the Ministry there is no mention about considering
DRDO service for identifying technologies required for various type
of vessel monitoring systems. The reply of the Ministry is also silent
on this point and it goes without saying that no initiatives have been
commenced by the Ministry even after having been specifically
recommended. As such the Committee reiterate their earlier
recommendation that all the proposed initiatives should be fast track
so that the monitoring and tracking systems/transponders RFID Tags
are fitted in all types of vessels expeditiously.
G. DISASTER MANAGEMENT
Recommendation (Para No. 12)
25. The Committee had recommended as under:—
“One of the mandated duties of Coast Guard Organisation is to
provide assistance and protection to fishermen at sea while in
distress. As informed to the Committee during the course of
deliberations, humanitarian assistance, search and rescue and
fishermen helping are the daily operations of the Coast Guard. The
Committee note that at the time of a natural calamity in the coastal
areas, various Ministries/Departments play an important role. There
is a National Disaster Management Cell. The Indian Meteorological
Department, Lodhi Road, New Delhi is the main Department for
weather forecast for Tsunami. Besides, the Government of India
has got a Tsunami warning centre. The task of off-shore evacuation
has been stated to be the responsibility of the concerned State
Governments. The Committee find that a lot of lessons need to be
learnt post recent Tsunamis which have played havoc and costed
many lives. The most important task during a natural disaster like
tsunami is to disseminate the warning of impending disaster and
to evacuate the people residing in the area to a safe location so
as to avoid the large scale loss of life and destruction in such areas.
The Committee observe that during a natural calamity like Tsunami
the Coast Guard is the organisation which first comes in direct
contact with the coastal areas. As such all the initiatives should be
taken to have a full proof coordinating mechanism between the
various agencies, Ministries, Departments of Union Government
and State Governments. There should be a structured mechanism
whereby the Coast Guard Organisation is immediately alerted about
the predicted natural disaster. The warning of the natural disaster

22
should be telecast on real time basis on Radio and Doordarshan.
Coast Guard Organisation can also disseminate the warnings
through some other mechanisms like public address system, etc.
The Committee strongly recommend that the Ministry of Defence,
Coast Guard Organization should take up the issue with the
concerned Ministries, Departments, State Governments and related
organisations and convey the concern of the Committee so that the
immediate action is taken up.”
26. The Ministry in its action taken reply, has stated as under:—
“The Maritime Rescue Coordination Centres (MRCCs) operated by
the ICG coordinates rescue efforts in all Coastal States. Further,
each Coastal State has a Maritime Rescue Sub Centre which
complements the efforts of the MRCC. ICG maintains constant
liaison with the Indian National Centre for Ocean Information
Services (INCOIS), Hyderabad, which is the nodal agency with
requisite infrastructure for Indian Tsunami Early Warning Centre.
Regular mock exercises are conducted by INCOIS to establish
communication procedure, accurate flow of information and
mobilization of men and assets. The last Indian Ocean wide mock
Tsunami drill was conducted by INCOIS in collaboration with the
National Disaster Management Authority (NDMA) in October
2011.”
27. The Committee note that systems are in place for mitigation
of disasters in all coastal States to which Indian Coast Guard is also
contributing. They also take note that mock Tsunami drill was conducted
by INCOIS in October, 2011 in collaboration with the National Disaster
Management Authority. While taking note of the support which is in
place the Committee are astonished to find that the reply of the Ministry
throws no light on the specific recommendation of the Committee. The
fresh initiatives proposed/taken such as issuing warning of natural
disasters and telecasting them on mass communication system,
disseminating such warnings through PA system have not been
addressed to by the Ministry per se . The Committee, therefore,
recommend that their recommendation be followed in letter and spirit.
Recommendation (Para No. 13)
28. The Committee had recommended as under:—
“The Committee further observe that fool proof telecommunication
and internet connectivity is the pre-requisite for a proper

23
coordination mechanism amongst various Ministries, Departments,
State Governments and other authorities responsible for warnings,
evacuation and post Tsunami operations. The Coast Guard
Organisation can play an effective role in discharging its various
activities only when the warnings regarding disasters are instantly
communicated. Further, as suggested above, the news about the
expected disaster can be broadcast on Radio and Doordarshan on
real time basis, only when various technologies, telecom and internet
connectivity, power supply remains intact during a critical situation.
The Committee may further like to emphasize that the emerging
state-of-the-art technologies over the world have actually redefined
the emerging threats from the sea. The positioning of latest and
the state-of-the-art force levels on our coastal borders to some extent
act as a deterrent. However, for proper functioning of all the
technological equipments it is utmost necessary that our connectivity
which include telecommunication, internet and power connectivity
remains intact during the disaster which may be natural disaster
or a war like situation. As such there is an urgent need to have
layers of alternate telecommunication, internet and power supply
networks. The Ministry of Defence, Coast Guard Organisation
should take up the issue with the concerned Ministries/Departments
so that Coast Guard Organisation remains connected even in worst
situation, particularly in the natural disasters.”
29. The Ministry in its action taken reply, has stated as under:—
“ICG ships and boats are equipped with independent
telecommunication equipment and facilities, which are designed
to work even when shore based infrastructure is partially
affected.”
30. Consequent to the specific recommendation of the Committee
that the Ministry of Defence should take up the issue with the concerned
Ministries so that unhindered connectivity is available to the CG in
terms of functioning of technological equipment including
telecommunications, internet etc. which function on power supply, the
Ministry has simply stated that the ICG ships and boats are
independently equipped with such facilities and can work even when
shore based infrastructure is partially affected. It appears that the import
of the recommendation has not fully been comprehended by the
Ministry. The recommendation aimed to include both shore and
off-shore infrastructure as both are complementary to each other. Partial
connectivity on-shore would definitely hamper the rescue operations
during disasters and would eclipse the functioning of ICG ships and

24
boats. The Committee, therefore, reiterate that all efforts be made
to ensure unhindered power supply and alternate layers of
communications during natural disasters by taking up the issue with
the Ministries/Departments concerned.
H. OIL SPILL
Recommendation (Para No. 17)
31. The Committee had recommended as under:—
“The Committee further note that entry of the ships/vessels who
have outlived their life is one of the important factor for oil spill
in the ocean. When the issue was raised during the course of
deliberations, the Committee have been apprised that it is under
the administrative domain of the Ministry of shipping. One of the
suggestion made by the Coast Guard to prevent operation of sub-
standard ships is restriction of entry of vessels more than twenty
five years in territorial waters. The Committee find that sea has no
boundaries and as such the issue of entry of sub-standard ships
in the ocean need to be addressed internationally through various
conventions and treaties. The Committee during the course of
deliberations have been informed that India is likely to sign the
OPRC HNS 2010 Protocol. The Ministry of Defence/Coast Guard
should take up the issue with the Ministry of Shipping and the
issue of restricting entry of ships/vessels more than 25 years old
should be taken up at the international fora/conferences so that
some way out can be found to address the matter.”
32. The Ministry in its action taken reply, has stated as under:—
“The ICG has raised the issue of restricting entry of old and
unseaworthy ships in Indian waters on previous occasions with the
MoS/DG Shipping. This issue was also taken up by the ICG during
the meeting of Committee of Secretaries held on 02 December,
2011. MoS has been requested to take suitable action to prevent
unseaworthy ships from operating in Indian waters.”
33. The Committee note that ICG is taking up the issue of
restriction of entry of unseaworthy vessels in Indian waters at
various platforms as recommended by the Committee in their Report.
The Ministry has informed that ICG took up the matter during
the meeting of Committee of Secretaries held on 2nd December, 2011.
The Committee desire to know the outcome of the meeting.

25
The Committee also emphasize that the issue needs to be vigorously
taken up at international fora/conferences so that the same can be dealt
holistically.
Recommendation (Para No. 18)
34. The Committee had recommended as under:—
“The Coast Guard during the course of deliberations have made
various other suggestions to address the issue of operation of sub-
standard ships in the Indian waters. Such suggestions include
increasing the number of ship inspections, targeting the vessels
that are operated by flags which has history of violating the
standards of shipping vessels, strict checking of loading operations
at ports, avoiding loading operations of iron ore during monsoon
and establishing Emergency Towing Vessels during monsoon to
assist the vessels in emergency. The Committee feel that the aforesaid
suggestions merit consideration and need to be pursued with the
concerned Ministries/Departments. Besides guidelines need to be
prepared with regard to periodic checking, inspections of ships,
etc. The concrete initiatives in this regard should be taken and the
Committee informed accordingly.”
35. The Ministry in its action taken reply, has stated as under:—
“The matter related to ship inspections etc. are in the purview of
DG (Shipping) and Marine Mercantile Department.
DG (Shipping) hired and deployed Emergency Towing Vessel (ETV)
on the west coast of India during the monsoon season in 2011. The
ICG role is limited to operational deployment of the vessel under
the overall coordination by Marine Emergency Response System
Committee.
The ETV was successfully utilised during Monsoon in 2011.”
36. The Committee note that the matter related to ship inspections
etc. are in the purview of DG (Shipping) and Marine Mercantile
Department. Notwithstanding the fact the Committee once again  see
that the reply tends to shift responsibility on one ground or the other.
The Committee does not acquiesce with the stand taken by the Ministry
that the matter related to ship inspections are in purview of DG
(Shipping) and Marine Mercantile Department and feel that in the
normal course a spirit of camaraderie ought to exist between the
concerned Ministries on important issue such as prevention of oil spill.

26
Further, they feel that deployment of emergency towing vessel was a
stopgap arrangement and not a permanent solution. They, therefore,
reiterate their earlier recommendation that guidelines be prepared and
implemented effectively with regard to periodic checking, inspections
of ships which have history of violating the standards etc. and concrete
initiatives taken in this regard be communicated to them.
Recommendation  (Para No. 19)
37. The Committee had recommended as under:—
“The Committee have been apprised that the Coast Guard has
recommended MoS to establish the necessary framework and
modalities for implementation of the HNS response system, prior
acceding to the OPRC HNS protocol. In this connection, the
Committee find that the Coast Guard has certain constraints. The
Coast Guard has intimated MoS that the service is not ready at
present to shoulder the responsibility of HNS pollution as it requires
specialized training, skill, equipment, protective gears, monitoring
gadgets, availability of scientific inputs and enormous coordination
to undertake any response actions. The Committee may again like
to emphasise that the Coast Guard has been designated as the central
coordinating agency for combating oil spills in Indian waters. The
Coast Guard being not well-equipped to take up the responsibility
of HNS pollution is the matter of serious concern. The Committee
strongly recommend that capacity building of Coast Guard in this
direction should be given utmost importance and the officials should
be imparted specialized training, besides creating the desired
infrastructure so as to enable it to address for the challenge of HNS
pollution.”
38. The Ministry in its action taken reply, has stated as under:—
“The issue of HNS is being administered by MoS through DG
Shipping and MMD in accordance with the provision of MS Act,
1958. The OPRC-HNS 2000 protocol is likely to be ratified by India.
The Coast Guard has requested the MoS to establish necessary
frameworks and modalities for implementation of HNS response
system, prior acceding to OPRC-HNS protocol.”
39. In response to the specific recommendation of the Committee
that Coast Guard be given teeth to take up the responsibility of HNS
response system the Ministry have simply stated that this issue is
being administered by MoS through DG (Shipping) and MMD in
accordance with the concerned legislation. It is also learnt that

27
Coast Guard has requested MoS to establish necessary frameworks
and modalities for implementation of HNS response system, which it
seems is contingent to acceding to OPRC-HNS protocol. The Committee,
once again reiterate that this issue be followed vigorously and no stone
left unturned for putting the required infrastructure in place for
augmenting HNS response system and eventually signing of the
international protocol in this regard.
I. ANTI PIRACY
Recommendation (Para No. 24)
40. The Committee had recommended as under:—
“The Committee find that the constant piracy/robbery threats by
Somalian pirates in the Indian Ocean is an area of concern. The
major volume of India’s trade is through sea route. The issue of
vulnerability to piracy/robbery need to be addressed on an urgent
basis since it affects our strategic maritime interests. As such all
the desired initiatives need to be taken to create safe and secure
maritime environment. In this context, the Committee in 12th Report
on Demands for Grants (2011-12) have recommended the
Government to consider setting up of a separate unit to deal with
the anti piracy operations. The Committee while reiterating their
earlier recommendation would like the Government to consider
the aforesaid recommendation on an urgent basis.
The Committee find from the information furnished by the Ministry
of Defence that the Ministry of Defence/Coast Guard has not
maintained records/statistics for Indians taken hostages by Somalian
pirates. However, with regard to Indian crew, the Committee have
been informed that a total of 490 Indian crew were taken as hostages
by the Somalian pirates in the last three years. So far as the position
with regard to crew members still in the custody of the pirates is
concerned, the Committee have been informed that 437 crew
members have been released and 53 are still in captivity. The
Committee are concerned to note the response of the Ministry of
Defence that the Coast Guard has no role in negotiation with
Somalian pirates for the release of Indian crew. The negotiations
are initiated by the concerned shipping company. The Committee
observe that the efforts made by the Government for release of the
Indians held hostages by the Somalian Pirates are insufficient and
even today many of the Indians have been held hostages for
considerable period of time. The Committee would like to strongly

28
recommend to the Ministry to coordinate with the concerned
Ministries/agencies so as to ensure that the Indians held hostages
are released without any further delay.”
41. The Ministry in its action taken reply, has stated as under:—
“With regular anti-piracy patrols, the Coast Guard maintains a
proactive stance towards preventing and suppressing acts of piracy
and armed robbery at sea. With the designation of Maritime Rescue
Coordination Centres (MRCCs) under the Coast Guard as the
internationally recognised Piracy Reporting Centres by the IMO,
anti-piracy coordination efforts of the ICG have received the
requisite fillip. Proactive stance of the ICG and synergised operations
with the Indian Navy to counter piracy in the eastern Arabian Sea
have, in recent times, resulted in sinking of 3 somalian pirate mother
ships, apprehension of one ship and capture of 121 pirates in the
Indian EEZ off L&M Islands.
Presently, there is no dedicated legislation in India for prosecution
of offences related to piracy at sea. Further, there have been problems
related to exercise of jurisdiction by the Indian Courts for offences
committed on high seas. Though piracy cases are currently being
processed under the provisions of the Admiralty Act and the IPC,
handling of such cases has been complicated.
MEA is in the process of framing legislation on piracy. The
draft legislation deals with existing lacunae in the prosecution of
piracy and provides a framework for addressing offences related
to piracy.”
42. The Committee take note of the fact that regular anti-piracy
patrols are being conducted by the Coast Guard hence maintaining a
proactive stance towards preventing and suppressing acts of piracy
and armed robbery at sea. These synergised operations with the Indian
Navy has recently resulted in sinking of 3 Somalian pirate mother
ships, apprehension of one ship and capture of 121 pirates in the Indian
EEZ off L&M Islands as informed by the Ministry in Action Taken
Notes.
However, the fact, as intimated by the Ministry, that presently
there is no dedicated legislation in India for prosecution of offences
related to piracy at sea and there have been problems related to exercise
of jurisdiction by the Indian Courts for offences committed on high
seas are matter of serious concern. It has been further informed that

29
Ministry of External Affairs is in the process of framing legislation on
piracy. In this context, the Committee opine that Coast Guard should
convey detailed ground realities/situations to MEA so that the
legislation is able to provide teeth to the authorities dealing with cases
of prosecution of offences related to piracy at sea and should also take
measures in order to expeditious framing of the legislation.
Recommendation (Para No. 25)
43. The Committee had recommended as under:—
“The Committee may further like to refer to the Group of
Ministers Report, 2001 on Reforming the National Security
Systems, whereby it has been suggested that the laws and
procedures relating to detention and prosecution of poachers and
confiscation of boats need to be tightened and the concerned
Ministries/Departments of the Government of India should consider
setting up the Maritime Courts or alternatively giving powers of
prosecution and detention to the Coast Guard and the Marine Police.
The Committee while endorsing the views of the Group of Ministers
would like the Government to consider the aforesaid suggestion
keeping in view the increased threats of piracy and robbery by the
poachers/pirates.”
44. The Ministry in its action taken reply, has stated as under:—
“The recommendations/observations of the Committee’s Report
stands addressed in the following two Central Government
legislations.
The Maritime Zone of India (Regulation of Fishing by Foreign
Vessels) Act, 1981 and the Maritime Zone of India (Regulation of
fishing by Foreign Vessels) Rule, 1982, have been enacted by the
Ministry of Agriculture. These statutes provide for regulation of
fishing by foreign vessels in the Maritime Zones of India. All Coast
Guard Officers and Subordinate Officers are authorized under this
Act to stop, board and search a foreign vessel. Where such an
Officer has reason to believe that the foreign vessel has, or is being
used to or is about to be used to commit an offence under this Act,
he may with or without warrant, seize and detain such vessel and
direct the master to bring the vessel to any of the specified ports
notified in the Gazette of India under this Act. The offender is to
be tried in the Court of the Metropolitan Magistrate or Judicial
Magistrate First Class as notified in the Gazette of India under the
Act as the Designated Court. The Government, in a separate Gazette

30
Notification under this Act, has further delegated these powers to
the officers of Indian Navy, as also to Police officers of different
ranks belonging to coastal States.
The Suppression of Unlawful Acts Against Safety of Maritime
Navigation and Fixed Platforms on the continental Shelf Act, 2002
has been enacted by the Ministry of Shipping and has come into
force w.e.f. 01 Feb. 2003. Section 4(1) of this Act provides that the
Government may, by Notification in the official Gazette, confer on
any Gazetted officer of the Coast Guard or any other Gazetted
officer of the Central Government the powers of arrest, investigation
and prosecution exercisable by a Police officer under the CrPC. The
Central Government, vide Notification SO 137(E) dated 22 Jul 2004,
has conferred these powers on all Coast Guard Officers borne on
board a Coast Guard ship. The offences listed in Section 3 of this
Act are as under:—
(a) Committing an act of violence against a person on board a
fixed platform or a ship, which is likely to endanger the
safety of the fixed platform or safe navigation of the ship.
(b) Causing destruction/damage to a fixed platform or a ship or
its cargo in such a manner, which endangers the safety of
such platform or safe navigation of such ship.
(c) Seizing or exercising control over a fixed platform or a ship
by force or threatening/intimidating in any other form.
(d) Placing or causing to be placed on a fixed platform or a ship,
by any means, a device or substance which is likely to destroy/
damage that fixed platform or ship or endangers its cargo
or fixed platform or safe navigation of that ship.
(e) Destroying or damaging maritime navigational facilities or
interfering with their operation by an act which is likely to
endanger safe navigation of a ship.
(f) Knowingly communicating false information thereby
endangering the safe navigation of a ship.
(g) During course of commission or attempt to commit any of
the above offences:—
(i) Causing death to any person;
(ii) Causing grievous hurt to any person;

31
(iii) Causing injury to any person;
(iv) Seizing or threatening a person;
(v) Threatening/endangering a ship or a fixed platform;
In addition, this Section also states that acts of attempting or abetting
commission of any of these offences would also be punishable. The
act of unlawful or intentional threatening, which compels a person
to do or refrain from doing any act or to commit any offence, is
also punishable.”
45. After gleaning through the list of offences enacted  vide
notification SO 137(E) dated 22 July, 2004 as provided by the Ministry,
that Coast Guard can deal with, the Committee find that these offences
exclusively relate to smooth operations of Coast Guard ships and ignore
the suggestion given in the Report which relates to setting up of
maritime courts or alternatively giving powers, prosecution and
detention of poachers to the Coast Guard and marine police.
The Committee are perturbed at the dithering approach adopted
by the Ministry while replying to the specific suggestion of the
Committee and they reiterate their earlier recommendation relating to
setting up of maritime courts or giving powers of prosecution and
detention to the Coast Guard and marine police so that such cases can
be fast tracked and thereby create deterrence for perpetrators of crime
such as poachers/confiscators. The outcome may be communicated to
the Committee in due course.

32
CHAPTER II
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS, WHICH HAVE BEEN
ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT
Recommendation (Para No. 1)
The Committee observe that as per the existing Organisational
Structure, the Coast Guard operates from its headquarters located at
New Delhi. The field functions of the Coast Guard are executed by the
four Regional Headquarters located at Mumbai, Chennai, Gandhi Nagar
and Port Blair along with 12 District Headquarters set up under these
Regional Headquarters located at the Coastal States of India. The Committee
during the course of deliberations have observed that the maritime States
of Orissa and West Bengal are located adjacent to Bangladesh and of late
there has been a large number of refugee influx and anti-national activities
in this area. Not only that the sea area adjoining these two maritime
States is rich in marine biotic resources and the Coast of Orissa is known
for nesting of endangered species of Olive Ridley Turtle which needs to
be protected. To add to the importance of this area the Sand Heads
approach in river Hooghly is the gateway to the ports of Kolkata handling
large amount of import-export trade. This being the restricted water,
there is persistent risk of oil pollution. Besides large exploration activity
is being undertaken in sea adjoining West Bengal and Orissa. The Ministry
itself has acknowledged that there is inescapable need for establishing
Regional Headquarters (North-East). The Committee have further been
informed that the case for Regional Headquarters (North-East) along with
co-located station at Kolkata is being examined.
2. While taking note of the strategic and important location of the
maritime States of Orissa and West Bengal, the Committee are of the firm
view that there is an urgent need to take the immediate action with
regard to setting up of Regional Headquarter (North-East) at the proposed
site i.e. Kolkata so that the environment, sea life and property are protected
besides meeting the strategic need of checking the influx of refugees,
anti-national activities and poaching. The expeditious decision in this
regard should be taken by the Government and the Committee informed
accordingly.

33
Reply of the Government
3. “Establishment of Regional Headquarters (North-East) alongwith
co-located station at Kolkata has been prioritised for establishment. Five
acres of land has been acquired in March 12 from the Government of
West Bengal to develop infrastructure for the Headquarters.”
(Please see Para No. 7 of Chapter-I of the Report)
Recommendation (Para No. 2)
4. The Committee during the course of examination have been
informed that the long term planning for the Coast Guard Organisation
is being made since inception. The detailed analysis of the information
furnished by the Ministry indicates that various long-term plans envisaged
by the Coast Guard could not be finalized. The proposed Coast Guard
Perspective Plan (2007-22) initially had an outlay of Rs. 49377.33 crore
and post 26/11, it was decided to ensure a comprehensive CGPP 2012-27
instead of revising the CGPP 2007-22. As such, as per the Ministry, the
envisaged expenditure involved in the upgradation of ICG force level
during CGPP 2007-22 shall have no relevance. With regard to Five Year
Plans, the Committee on the one hand have been informed that Eleventh
Plan was approved by the Ministry of Finance with an outlay of Rs. 7,000
crore which was consequently revised to Rs. 7930.22 crore, on the other
hand, the approved figures have been stated to be purely indicative.
When the Committee specifically enquired about the deadline for the
proposed upgradations post 26/11 scenario, the Committee have been
informed that the deadline for upgradation would be made on the
approval of CGPP 2012-27. The Committee conclude from the aforesaid
scenario that long-term Plans envisaged are not being finalized and the
revised plans are taking so much time thereby leading to uncertainty
over the annual allocations for the Coast Guard and the whole plans of
upgrading the infrastructure and the force level.
5. While expressing serious concern over the ad-hocism in the whole
planning process, the Committee strongly recommend that Coast Guard
Perspective Plan 2012-27 should be finalised within the stipulated time-
frame. Besides the allocations for the Twelfth Plan according to the set
targets as per the CGPP 2012-27 should be finalized expeditiously by the
Coast Guard Organisation/Ministry of Defence so that the approval of
the Ministry of Finance is obtained before the start of the Twelfth Plan.
The Committee may again like to emphasize that there is an urgent need
to give more attention to the long-term plans so that the proposed

34
upgradations are made so as to enable Coast Guard Organisation of India
to meet the responsibilities bestowed to it owing to change in maritime
scenario and increased incidents of terrorism and poaching at sea over
the years.
Reply of the Government
6. 1. The Perspective Plan is a broad-based long term plan for
15 years prepared with due consideration to maritime security scenario
and the perceived threats. The Perspective Plan comprises of 3 five-year
Plans, christened as “Development Plans”. The first five year plan is
normally firm and thus called “Definitive Plan”; the second five year
plan is an “Indicative Plan”; and the third five year plan is a “Vision
Plan”. Thus, the overall projection in a Perspective Plan is always
indicative.
2. The Coast Guard Development Plan is formulated with
meticulous planning and strategic vision to develop desired capabilities
over time. Post preparation of the Plans at the CG Headquarters, these
plans are examined by various authorities keeping in view national goals
and priorities before the Governmen. As such, this process takes time
due to the scrutiny at various levels prior approval.
3. Nonetheless, various measures are taken to ensure timely
approval of plans. The 11th Development Plan (Apr. 2007-Mar. 2012) was
approved in Jun. 2007, almost at the beginning of the plan period. The
12th Development Plan (2012-17), carved out of the Perspective Plan (2012-27)
was finalised and approved by the Raksha Mantri and submitted to MoF
for accord of their approval prior commencement of the Plan Period
(i.e. Apr. 2012).
Recommendation (Para No. 7)
7. The Committee note that the Coast Guard has been performing
the delegated charter of duties with a force level of 72 commissioned
surveillance platforms out of which, as per the Ministry’s own admission,
50 per cent of the platforms have exceeded their designated life. The
Ministry has informed that 131 surveillance platforms are already under
construction in Indian Shipyards and another 200 platforms are in the
process of being contracted. The aforesaid position indicates that there
are huge gaps between the required and the existing strength of surface
platforms. What is more disturbing is the fact that whatever limited
capacity of platforms Coast Guard has, have already exceeded their life.
While expressing serious concern over the existing situation, the
Committee strongly recommend that all the initiatives should be taken

35
so that additional platforms are inducted within the stipulated time-frame
and the out dated platforms are phased out thereby strengthening the
force level of Coast Guard.
Reply of the Government
8. “Post 26/11, added impetus towards augmentation of assets
resulted in conclusion of contracts for 104 surface platforms (36 Ships
and 68 Boats/Hovercraft) in just a period of two years from 2009 to 2011.
Further, ICG is currently progressing acquisition of 46 Ships/Boats (07
Offshore Patrol Vessels, 14 Fast Patrol Vessels, 01 Training Ship, 04
Auxiliary barges and 20 Interceptor Boats). The contract for acquisition
of 06 additional Offshore Patrol Vessels on nomination basis to M/s GSL,
Goa is also likely to conclude in the near future.
The acquisition programme of surface platforms is being progressed
as per a stringent timeline in accordance with the DPP. The acquisition
programme initiated by ICG would cater to capability enhancement, as
also phasing out of old platforms.
As a result of these acquisition initiatives, the gaps currently being
witnessed would be eliminated to a large extent with the induction of
150 surface platforms by 2018. The fully desired level of 154 ships and
126 boats is likely to be achieved by 2027".
(Please see Para No. 21 of Chapter-I of the Report)
Recommendation (Para No. 8)
9. The Committee note that for centuries people were free to go
for fishing without any regulation. Post 26/11 scenario, the move to issue
license has started. The Committee appreciate that fishing community is
understanding the need to regulate the fishing. One of the initiative being
undertaken to regulate the fishing in the country is issue of biometric
identity cards to fishermen. So far as the status of the task in this regard
is concerned, the Committee find from the information furnished by the
Ministry that 16,75398 coastal fishermen have been identified for issue
of biometric identity card. Data in respect of 10,15,001 i.e. 64.34% of the
fishermen have been collected. So far as the issue of biometric identity
cards to the individuals is concerned, the Committee note that the position
is not very satisfactory. Only in Puducherry, Tamil Nadu, Gujarat and
Andhra Pradesh more than 30% of the identified fishermen have been
issued biometric identity card. In six States/UTs the percentage of the
task completed has been shown as nil, as per the data furnished by the
Ministry. In Karnataka, only 1.7% of the task has been completed.

36
In Kerala which has large number of fishermen population only 20.9%
of the task has been completed. The Committee express serious concern
over the tardy progress of the task of issue of biometric identity card
to fishermen. The Committee strongly recommend that Coast Guard
Organisation should monitor and pursue the State Governments and
Ministry of Agriculture so that the biometric identity cards are issued
within the stipulated timeframe. The concerns of the Committee in this
regard should be duly communicated to the respective Ministries/State
Governments.
Reply of the Government
10. The Indian Coast Guard is maintaining constant liaison with
the Ministry of Agriculture to monitor the status of implementation of
Biometric ID cards for fishermen. Coast Guard Regional Commanders
at Gandhinagar/Mumbai/Chennai/Port Blair are regularly taking up the
matter with the State Govts. within their Regions, particularly during the
periodic meetings on Coastal Security. Regional Commanders have also
apprised the State Govts. of the concerns expressed by the Standing
Committee.
Recommendation (Para No. 12)
11. One of the mandated duties of Coast Guard Organisation is
to provide assistance and protection to fishermen at sea while in distress.
As informed to the Committee during the course of deliberations,
humanitarian assistance, search and rescue and fishermen helping are the
daily operations of the Coast Guard. The Committee note that at the time
of a natural calamity in the coastal areas, various Ministries/Departments
play an important role. There is a National Disaster Management Cell.
The Indian Meteorological Department, Lodhi Road, New Delhi is the
main Department for weather forecast for Tsunami. Besides, the
Government of India has got a Tsunami warning centre. The task of off-
shore evacuation has been stated to be the responsibility of the concerned
State Governments. The Committee find that a lot of lessons need to be
learnt post recent Tsunamis which have played havoc and costed many
lives. The most important task during a natural disaster like tsunami is
to disseminate the warning of impending disaster and to evacuate the
people residing in the area to a safe location so as to avoid the large scale
loss of life and destruction in such areas. The Committee observe that
during a natural calamity like Tsunami the Coast Guard is the organisation
which first comes in direct contact with the coastal areas. As such all the
initiatives should be taken to have a foolproof coordinating mechanism
between the various agencies, Ministries, Departments of Union
Government and State Governments. There should be a structured

37
mechanism whereby the Coast Guard Organisation is immediately alerted
about the predicted natural disaster. The warning of the natural disaster
should be telecast on real time basis on Radio and Doordarshan.
Coast Guard Organisation can also disseminate the warnings through
some other mechanisms like public address system, etc. The Committee
strongly recommend that the Ministry of Defence, Coast Guard
Organization should take up the issue with the concerned Ministries,
Departments, State Governments and related organisations and convey
the concern of the Committee so that the immediate action is taken up.
Reply of the Government
12. “The Maritime Rescue Coordination Centres (MRCC) operated
by the ICG coordinates rescue efforts in all Coastal States. Further, each
Coastal State has a Maritime Rescue Sub Centre which complements the
efforts of the MRCC. ICG maintains constant liaison with the Indian
National Centre for Ocean Information Services (INCOIS), Hyderabad,
which is the nodal agency with requisite infrastructure for Indian Tsunami
Early Warning Centre.
Regular mock exercises are conducted by INCOIS to establish
communication procedure, accurate flow of information and mobilization
of men and assets. The last Indian Ocean wide mock Tsunami drill was
conducted by INCOIS in collaboration with the National Disaster
Management Authority (NDMA) in October 2011.”
(Please see Para No. 27 of Chapter-I of the Report)
Recommendation (Para No. 14)
13. The Coast Guard Act,1978 specifically mentions that one of the
roles and responsibilities of Coast Guard Organisation is taking such
measures as are necessary to preserve and protect the maritime
environment and to prevent and control marine pollution. The Coast
Guard besides the charter of duties enumerated in section 14(2) of the
Coast Guard Act, has to undertake many other duties. These include
Protection of endangered species such as Whale Sharks, Olive Ridley
Turtles, etc. and Coordination of international Coastal Clean-up Day in
September every year with the inter-governmental organization viz. South
Asia Cooperative for Environment Protection (SACEP).
The Committee appreciate the effort of the Coast Guard
Organisation regarding protection of the endangered species, viz. the

38
Olive Ridley turtles off Orissa coast. Such exclusive efforts may be initiated
in connection with protection of mangrove forests, coral reefs and other
onshore as well as offshore natural assets.
Reply of the Government
14. 1. The Ministry of Environment and Forests (MoEF) is the nodal
Ministry for appropriate legislation/policies towards protection of coral
reefs and mangrove forests. Concerned States/UTs are responsible for
implementation of policies promulgated by the Centre. Indian Coast Guard
is a member of the National Committee on Mangroves and Coral Reefs
and has been actively participating in various meetings on the issue.
2. In addition to the initiatives towards protection of Olive Ridley
turtles, the Coast Guard annually mobilises its own personnel, as also
local volunteers/college students/NCC cadets, for cleaning drives at various
beaches across the country on the occasion of International Coastal
Cleanup Day.
Recommendation (Para No. 17)
15. The Committee further note that entry of the ships/vessels who
have outlived their life is one of the important factor for oil spill in the
ocean. When the issue was raised during the course of deliberations, the
Committee have been apprised that it is under the administrative domain
of the Ministry of shipping. One of the suggestion made by the Coast
Guard to prevent operation of sub-standard ships is restriction of entry
of vessels more than twenty five years in territorial waters. The Committee
find that sea has no boundaries and as such the issue of entry of sub-
standard ships in the ocean need to be addressed internationally through
various conventions and treaties. The Committee during the course of
deliberations have been informed that India is likely to sign the OPRC
HNS 2010 Protocol. The Ministry of Defence/Coast Guard should take
up the issue with the Ministry of Shipping and the issue of restricting
entry of ships/vessels more than 25 year old should be taken up at the
international fora/conferences so that some way out can be found to
address the matter.
Reply of the Government
16. The ICG has raised the issue of restricting entry of old and
unseaworthy ships in Indian waters on previous occasions with the MoS/
DG Shipping. This issue was also taken up by the ICG during the meeting

39
of Committee of Secretaries held on 02 December, 11. MoS has been
requested to take suitable action to prevent unseaworthy ships from
operating in Indian waters.
(Please see Para No. 33 of Chapter-I of the Report)
Recommendation (Para No. 20)
17. The Committee have been informed that the acceptable teeth
to tail ratio maintained by any maritime force is normally 1:2 i.e. for
every one person at sea two are placed ashore, so that they can replace
man at sea at regular intervals. Whereas Indian Navy generally maintains
the set 1:2 ratio which is the minimum requirement but in case of
Coast Guard the teeth to tail ratio is 2:1 resulting into longer sea time
and frequent transfers. What is more disturbing is the fact that there are
huge gaps between the sanctioned and the existing strength of personnel
at various levels. The Coast Guard has a sanctioned strength for
12446 personnel whereas the borne strength is 8718, the overall shortage
being 34.94%. If the shortage category wise is taken into consideration,
the said shortage in civilian category is more acute i.e. 41.84%. In case
of officers the shortage is 36.23% and for enrolled personnel the shortage
is 26.77%.
The Committee during the course of deliberations have been
informed that the major constraint in bridging the gap between the
sanctioned and borne strength is non-availability of a dedicated training
academy for the Coast Guard Organisation. As per the existing system
the officers and enrolled personnel are sent to naval training establishment
for basic and downstream training. The Committee have further been
apprised that the setting up of dedicated Coast Guard academy has been
envisaged in Coast Guard revised Eleventh Plan and approval in principle
has been accorded by the Government on 12th October, 2010. Subsequently,
164 acre land has been acquired at the identified location at Azhikkal,
Kerala and even Hon’ble Raksha Mantri has also laid foundation stone
for the academy on 28th May, 2011. The Committee strongly recommend
that the dedicated Coast Guard Academy should be set up expeditiously
which would certainly pace up the induction of Coast Guard personnel
at various levels.
Reply of the Government
18. 1. As regards gap between sanctioned and existing strength the
ICG has enhanced annual intake of the officers from 60 to 130 per year

40
and Enrolled Personnel from 400 to 700. This will reduce the gap in
coming years.
2. The Indian Coast Guard came into being in 1978 with the
enactment of the CG Act in the Parliament. Basic/ab-initio training for CG
Officers/Enrolled Personnel is being undertaking in Naval training
facilities. This provides adequate synergy and it is also not cost effective
to have independent basic training schools. However, a need has been
felt for developing dedicated training infrastructure in certain niche
disciplines which the ICG exclusively deals with.
3. A Coast Guard Academy is planned to be setup. The Kerala
Government offered 164 acres land at Azhikkal, Kannur District for setting
up the CG Academy.
4. In order to provide structured training and achieve requisite
standards in performance of Coast Guard statutory duties, the Academy
is envisaged to have six schools as under:—
(a) Search and Rescue School
(b) School of Maritime and CG Law
(c) Marine Environment School
(d) Boarding Operations School
(e) Command and Staff School
(f) Technical and Management School
5. It is envisaged that the ICG Academy will be capable of training
a peak load of 650 trainees at any given time.
6. The Coast Guard academy is a significant Project and the ministry
is seized of the need for its expeditious execution. Necessary steps are
being taken for the establishment of the Academy at an early date.
Recommendation (Para No. 21)
19. The Committee have been apprised that efforts are being made
for filling up the post of 649 civilian personnel through SSC/local
recruitment which according to the Ministry would take considerable
time. The Committee may like to recommend that the vacancies should
be properly advertised through press and electronic media. The
advertisement may, particularly, be given in the regional newspapers.
With regard to the shortage of officers in the Coast Guard, the Committee
may like to emphasize for filling the vacancies by recruitment examination
and campus placements. The Committee feel that the Ministry/Coast

41
Guard may consider the persons living in shore areas/coastal villages
and river estuary areas for the post of sailors as they are well-versed with
water. The Committee strongly recommend that all the suggested measures
should be taken so as to fill the gap between the sanctioned and borne
strength of the Coast Guard at various levels within the definite time
frame.
Reply of the Government
20. 1. Publicity of vacancies for enrolment of Civilian personnel in the
ICG is done as per existing DoP&T guidelines on the subject. In order
to fully harness modern technology and means of communication,
electronic and computer-based media is increasingly employed to support
recruitment drives. At the same time, vernacular and local news/print
media remains a key element of recruitment efforts.
2. In order to bridge the gap between sanctioned and borne strength,
various measures have been instituted. These measures, inter alia ,
include:—
(a) Conduct of recruitment through 30 recruitment centers
optimally spread across the length and breadth of the country.
(b) Nationwide publicity through print/electronic media to
enhance awareness and attract talented youth towards the
Coast Guard; special emphasis is laid on remote/coastal areas
during such drives.
(c) Conduct of Special Recruitment Drives (SRDs)/Fast Track
Selection/in addition to regular recruitment drives, as also
for backlog of SC/ST candidates.
(d) Introduction of Short Service schemes in Officer cadre for
General Duty (Women) and Commercial Pilot License holders
as Asst. Comdt. (Pilot).
(e) Setting of maiden Coast Guard Selection Board (CGSB) at
Noida.
(f) Constant liaison with the Staff Selection Commission for
sponsoring candidates.
(g) Notification of unfilled vacancies in Employment News and
local newspapers for filling up through Employment
Exchange procedure for direct recruitment.

42
Recommendation (Para No. 22)
21. The Ministry during the course of deliberations has acknowledged
that there is no second alternative for physical patrolling at sea. Not only
that the incidents/threats from sea have increased over the years. The
challenges for the coast guard have increased manifold post 26/11 scenario.
The Committee, therefore strongly recommend that the existing teeth to
tail ratio of 2:1 with the Coast Guard should be immediately reviewed
to 1:2 i.e. at par with Navy and is the acceptable teeth to tail ratio for
any Maritme force.
Reply of the Government
The duties and responsibilities of Navy and Coast Guard are
different. However, augmentation of manpower at various shore units
will be considered to have an effective patrolling by Coast Guard units
at sea.
Recommendation (Para No. 23)
22. The Committee find that the Coast Guard Organisation is a
multi task agency. Besides, the challenging role of the Coast Guard in
war time situation, the mandate of Coast Guard includes multiple peace
time operations of various types like preservation and protection of marine
environment and anti smuggling operation, protection of fishermen at
sea, etc. To handle the multi task it is utmost necessary that Coast Guard
personnel are provided the requisite training. The Committee during the
course of examination have found that the service is not ready at present
to shoulder the responsibility of HNS pollution. As such the Committee
strongly recommend that the training curriculum of Coast Guard
personnel should be such that it results into capacity building of the
personnel to handle the multiple tasks which include certain technical
tasks. The Committee may further like to add that besides the proposed
inductions of latest state-of-the-art force level, it is utmost necessary that
persons behind these machines/equipments are well trained. As such
while signing various agreements for acquisitions it should be ensured
that the deals contain provisions for training of the Coast Guard personnel
in manning/handling and maintenance the latest technology.
Reply of the Government
23. 1. The Coast Guard shares a common training programme with
the Navy in order to optimally utilize training resources and achieve

43
greater on-ground synergy. The Coast Guard also undertakes capacity
building exercises through interaction with foreign nations/agencies such
as various Coast Guards, IMO and other maritime organizations. Once
initial expertise is developed abroad during such interactions, officers
‘train the trainee’ at the Coast Guard Training Centre (Kochi) on CG
roles, thus ensuring retentivity of expertise.
2. India is currently not a signatory to the HNS protocol. Present
day Coast Guard officers training programme includes an eleven week
package for the CG role which is revised regularly. The Coast Guard
would introduce more role specific courses for mid-level officers and
Enrolled Personnel at the proposed Coast Guard Academy in the near
future.
3. Coast Guard personnel are adequately trained to undertake first
line maintenance onboard ships and aircraft. Infrastructure and manpower
required for second and third line technical maintenance is, however, not
available with the Coast Guard. Nonetheless, incremental in-house
expertise is being developed on second line maintenance through
interactions with Original Equipment Manufacturers (OEMs) as part of
acquisition contracts. Efforts are in hand to progressively develop repair
and maintenance infrastructure.
Recommendation (Para No. 24)
ANTI PIRACY
24. The Committee find that the constant piracy/robbery threats by
Somalian pirates in the Indian Ocean is an area of concern. The major
volume of India’s trade is through sea route. The issue of vulnerability
to piracy/robbery need to be addressed on an urgent basis since it affects
our strategic maritime interests. As such all the desired initiatives need
to be taken to create safe and secure maritime environment. In this context,
the Committee in 12th Report on Demands for Grants (2011-12) have
recommended the Government to consider setting up of a separate unit
to deal with the anti piracy operations. The Committee while reiterating
their earlier recommendation would like the Government to consider the
aforesaid recommendation on an urgent basis.
The Committee find from the information furnished by the Ministry
of Defence that the Ministry of Defence/Coast Guard has not maintained
record/statistics for Indians taken hostages by Somalian pirates. However,

44
with regard to Indian crew, the Committee have been informed that a
total of 490 Indian crew were taken as hostages by the Somalian
pirates in the last three years. So far as the position with regard to crew
Members still in the custody of the pirates is concerned, the
Committee have been informed that 437 crew members have been released
and 53 are still in captivity. The Committee are concerned to note the
response of the Ministry of Defence that the Coast Guard has no role
in negotiation with Somalian pirates for the release of Indian crew. The
negotiations are initiated by the concerned shipping company. The
Committee observe that the efforts made by the Government for release
of the Indians held hostages by the Somalian Pirates are insufficient and
even today many of the Indians have been held hostages for considerable
period of time. The Committee would like to strongly recommend to the
Ministry to coordinate with the concerned Ministries/agencies so as to
ensure that the Indians held hostages are released without any further
delay.
Reply of the Government
25. 1. With regular anti-piracy patrols, the Coast Guard maintains a
proactive stance towards preventing and suppressing acts of piracy and
armed robbery at sea. With the designation of Maritime Rescue
Coordination Centres (MRCCs) under the Coast Guard as the
internationally recognised Piracy Reporting Centres by the IMO, antipiracy
coordination efforts of the ICG have received the requisite fillip. Proactive
stance of the ICG and synergised operations with the Indian Navy to
counter piracy in the eastern Arabian Sea have, in recent times, resulted
in sinking of 03 Somalian pirate mother ships, apprehension of one ship
and capture of 121 pirates in the Indian EEZ off L&M Islands.
2. Presently, there is no dedicated legislation in India for prosecution
of offences related to piracy at sea. Further, there have been problems
related to exercise of jurisdiction by the Indian Courts for offences
committed on high seas. Though piracy cases are currently being processed
under the provisions of the Admiralty Act and the IPC, handling of such
cases has been complicated.
3. MEA is in the process of framing legislation on piracy. The draft
legislation deals with existing lacunae in the prosecution of piracy and
provides a framework for addressing offences related to piracy.
(Please see para No. 42 of Chapter-I of the Report)

45
Recommendation (Para No. 26)
LEAD INTELLIGENCE AGENCY
26. The Coast Guard Organisation has been additionally designated
as the Lead Intelligence Agency for maritime, coastal and sea borders.
The representative of the Ministry has informed that the DGICG will be
designated as Commander Coastal Command and will be responsible for
overall coordination between Central and State agencies in all matters
related to Coastal security. Besides the Coastal security, other mandated
duties of the Organisation are providing assistance to customs and other
authorities in anti-smuggling operations, providing seaward security
during the VIP visits to the various metros as requested by various Police
Authorities/State Governments, seaward clearance around the area
whenever there is a satellite launch or missile is tested (Sriharikota and
Chandipur), enforcement of anti-poaching measures, monitoring and
surveillance of Deep Sea Fishing etc. All these tasks involve intelligence
gathering and quick dissemination of information.
In this connection, the Committee may like to observe that there
is an urgent need to have a structured mechanism whereby the information
by different intelligence gathering agencies is shared instantly with the
Coast Guard Organisation which has been designated as the lead
intelligence agency for maritime coastal and sea borders. Intelligence
gathering and sharing is a technical task and as such the Coast Guard
personnel need to be imparted specialized training to ensure that the
Coast Guard perform the task of lead intelligence agency for maritime
coastal and sea borders effectively. The Committee may also like to
recommend that the fishermen and the coastal communities living in the
coastal areas are the first to notice any suspicious activity in area. As such
the confidence should be built in them so that they are more involved
in intelligence gathering and sharing.
Reply of the Government
Enhancing Mechanism for Sharing of Information
27. 1. ICG, as Lead Intelligence Agency (LIA), has put in place suitable
mechanism for timely sharing of information in its area of responsibility.
Every month, LIA meetings are held at ICG Regional/Distt./Stn. Hqrs.
involving all stakeholders. In 2011, a total of 177 LIA meetings were
conducted. Through these meetings, the ICG has developed an efficient
mechanism for sharing actionable information among the various
stakeholders in the coastal security arena. The mechanism is validated
for its efficacy during periodic Coastal security Exercises and Operations,

46
and is further fine-tuned based on experience and lessons learnt. The
proposed secure connectivity of Multi Agency Centre (MAC)/IB with its
member agencies and SMAC also includes the Coast Guard for further
strengthening the information-sharing mechanism.
Training Efforts of CGIO
2. The Government has sanctioned 176 personnel for developing
the intelligence cadre in the Coast Guard. Training has been one of the
priority areas for CGIO. Even though manpower sanction for CGIO was
accorded in 2009, training efforts commenced in earnest in early 2003.
Officers and Enrolled Personnel have been trained in various facets of
Intelligence Operations including source running, interrogation, and
surveillance in general trade craft; and Sat imagery and Synthetic Aperture
Radar course in tech Int. Further, cases have also been taken up for Sat
Imagery Course with Air Force, Basic Int Course (BIC) for Officers with
IB and Synthetic Aperture Radar (SAR) course with NTRO.
Interaction with Fishermen
3. ICG has always regarded fishermen as an invaluable source of
information in coastal security operations. Interaction mechanism with
the fishermen has been institutionalised through the system of Community
Interactions, which are being regularly conducting in fishing villages/
hamlets across the coastline.
4. During such interaction programmes, fishermen are encouraged
to become the ‘EYES AND EARS’ of law-enforcement agencies at sea on
account of their constant and enlarged presence at sea. As fishermen are
most likely to notice any irregularity/suspicious activity at sea during its
early stages, they are guided about ways in which timely dissemination
of such information can help build actionable intelligence. This interaction,
over a period of time, has instilled confidence in the fishing community
and reinforced their commitment to participate in coastal security efforts.
So far, 429 Community Interaction programs have been conducted in
2011.
Recommendation (Para No. 27)
FEDERAL APEX BODY
28. Coastal Security involves many agencies and proper
coordination among those agencies is quintessence for fool proof coastal
security. And specially under the present circumstances, no stone may
be left unturned to gear up zero tolerance coastal security network. The

47
Committee comprehend that lack of appropriate coordination and
information sharing between the concerned agencies is a relevant problem
in strengthening the Coastal security chain. This was previously
apprehended in the Group of Ministers Report on Reforming the National
Security System in 2001 wherein it was recommended to form a Single
window federal apex body. However, no such body has yet been formed.
The Committee find that the recommendation made in the Group
of Minister’s Report for a single window federal apex body merit
consideration and as such the recommendation should be considered
positively by the Government.
Reply of the Government
1. The ‘National Committee on Strengthening Maritime and Coastal
Security (NCSMCS) against threats from the Sea’ was formed in August
2009 with a view to ensure timely implementation of important decisions
taken by the Government in respect of maritime and coastal security of
the country. The Committee is headed by the Cabinet Secretary as
Chairman, and the following as members:—
(a) Chief of Naval Staff.
(b) Foreign Secretary.
(c) Defence Secretary.
(d) Home Secretary.
(e) Secretary (Border Management), Ministry of Home Affairs.
(f) Secretary, Department of Shipping, Ministry of Shipping, Road
Transport and Highways.
(g) Secretary, Department of Animal Husbandry, Dairying and
Fisheries, Ministry of Agriculture.
(h) Secretary, Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas.
(i) Deputy NSA-cum-Secretary, NSCS.
(j) Secretary (R), Cabinet Secretariat.
(k) Director, Intelligence Bureau.
(l) Director General, Indian Coast Guard, Ministry of Defence.

48
(m) Chief Secretaries/Administrators of Coastal States and Union
Territories.
(n) Secretary, Department of Revenue, Ministry of Finance.
(o) Chairman, CBEC, Ministry of Finance.
2. The Terms of Reference of the NCSMCS include:—
(a) To review timely implementation of various proposals as
approved by Cabinet Committee on Security (CCS) in its
meeting held on 16 February, 2009 and other important
matters pertaining to Maritime and Coastal Security.
(b) To ensure effective coordination among various Central
Ministries and Agencies and the Coastal State Government/
Union Territories.
Recommendation (Para No. 28)
INTERNATIONAL COOPERATION
29. The Committee during the course of examination of the subject
have been apprised that Indian Coast Guard has institutionalized joint
exercise programme with Japan Coast Guard (JCG), Korea Coast Guard
(KCG) and Maldives Coast Guard. The service is also in the process of
signing MoU’s with Coast Guards of many countries for assisting each
other in case of search and rescue, anti-piracy and other trans-national
crimes and issues pertaining to oil spill disaster. The Committee again
emphasize that sea has no boundaries and as such threat from the sea
need to be addressed internationally. While appreciating the aforesaid
initiatives being taken by the Indian Coast Guard, the Committee may
like the Indian Coast Guard to continue the efforts and joint exercise
programmes may be undertaken more regularly and with other countries
having coastal areas.
Reply of the Government
30. 1. The Indian Coast Guard is seized of the growing relevance of
maritime cooperation in dealing with common maritime challenges.
Towards this, the ICG has a comprehensive interaction programme with
major Coast Guards across the globe. In addition to the more formalized
exercises with few select Coast Guards, informal interactions by way of
ship visits and participation in Seminars and training activities is also

49
pursued to develop closer ties and understanding. Few recent/forthcoming
interactions are highlighted for information in the succeeding paragraphs.
2. ICGS Samar with integral helicopter visited Thailand and
Indonesia 16–29 Jan. 12 for combined exercises with maritime law
enforcement agencies of the two countries as also to develop bilateral
and professional linkages.
3. A high level delegation led by Admiral Hisayasu Suzuki,
Commandant, Japan Coast Guard (a four-star General), along with seven
members, participated in a High Level Meeting between the ICG and the
JCG at New Delhi in Jan. 12. This was followed by the XIth Combined
Exercise between the two Coast Guards off Chennai during which Japanese
Coast Guard Ship SETTSU participated from the Japanese side.
4. ‘DOSTI-XI’ series joint exercises between the Indian Coast Guard
and the Maldivian National Defence Forces (MNDF) Coast Guard are
scheduled at Male (Maldives) in Apr. 12. The 5th Indian Coast Guard–
Korea Coast Guard combined exercise is planned to be conducted in
Aug. 12 in Korea.
5. Such visits enable interaction with Maritime Law Enforcement
Agencies of respective States and help ascertain the areas of common
concern/interest, as also evolve working and professional relationships
in the field of Maritime Search and Rescue, Pollution Response and other
duties related to Coast Guard charter.

50
CHAPTER III
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS, WHICH THE COMMITTEE
DO NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE REPLIES
OF THE GOVERNMENT
– Nil –

51
CHAPTER IV
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH
REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN
ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE AND WHICH
REQUIRE REITERATION
Recommendation (Para No. 3)
1. The Committee observe that a comprehensive and integrated
Coastal Security Scheme (CSS) was formulated in consultation with all
agencies concerned with the objective of strengthening infrastructure of
marine police force for patrolling and surveillance of coastal areas,
particularly in shallow water areas close to the post. The CSS Phase-I was
approved by the Cabin et Committee on Security in January, 2005 and
was to be implemented over the five years starting from 2005-06. The
Committee further note that the date of completion of CSS Phase-I has
now been extended by one year i.e. till March, 2011. The data furnished
by the Ministry with regard to the physical progress of Phase-I further
indicates that there are gaps between the sanctioned buildings and the
buildings made operational. Such gap is of No. 2 with regard to coastal
police stations No. 5 in respect of check posts and out posts and
No. 2 with regard to barracks. Besides in a good number of projects
construction has not yet started. With regard to coastal police stations
although 71 out of the 73 sanctioned police stations have been made
operational, as per the information furnished by the Ministry, the
construction in respect of 42 out of 48 buildings has been completed and
for 11 buildings the construction is in progress. In respect of 14 buildings
the construction has not yet started. It indicates that Phase-I may require
further extensions. Not only that a good number of police stations seems
to be working without buildings. With regard to Phase-II even the financial
implications have not been yet finalized and the approval of CCS is yet
to be obtained.
The Committee observe that post 26/11 scenario, there is an urgent
need to increase patrolling and surveillance infrastructure in coastal
areas. With the status of infrastructure projects, the details of which have
been given above it would take more years to complete the projects
targeted under Phase-I and Phase-II. Keeping in view the strategic
requirement the Committee strongly emphasize that the targeted projects

52
under Phase-I should be completed expeditiously. Besides financial
allocations for Phase-II should be finalized expeditiously so that
Phase-II can start expeditiously.
Reply of the Government
2. 1. Setting up of Coastal Police Stations: MHA is the nodal agency
dealing with the setting up of Coastal Police Stations.
2. Status of Coastal Security Scheme Phase – II: The scheme has
been approved by the Government and implementation commenced w.e.f.
01 Apr. 2011. The Costal Security Scheme (Phase-II) aims to carry forward
the objectives specified in the Coastal Security Scheme (Phase-I) by way
of providing additional infrastructural support to coastal States/UTs for
marine patrolling and supplement other coastal security initiatives taken
by the Indian Navy and the Indian Coast Guard. The scheme involves
setting up of 131 Coastal Police Stations and provisioning of 180
Interceptor Boats, 60 Jetties, 131 four wheelers and 242 Motor Cycles.
(Please see Para No. 10 of Chapter-I of the Report)
Recommendation (Para No. 4)
UNDER UTILISATION OF OUTLAY DURING ELEVENTH PLAN
3. The Committee note from the data furnished by the Ministry
that Rs. 20134.901 crore under the capital head for different projects have
been earmarked to be spent by the end of the Twelfth Plan. Out of the
allocated outlay, Rs. 5293.093 crore would be spent by the end of the
Eleventh Plan and Rs. 12855.982 crore would be carried forward to Twelfth
Plan. The detailed examination of the data further reveals that likely
expenditure for the new schemes is Rs. 2631.270 crore out of Rs. 5293.093
crore for the Eleventh Plan which means that almost 50 per cent of the
outlay is earmarked for meeting committed liability, replacement schemes
and civil works. The analysis further indicates that there is under
utilisation of outlay, particularly under the capital schemes during each
year of Tenth Plan and Eleventh Plan. During the first three years of
Eleventh Plan overall expenditure is 92.81 per cent of the total outlay
whereas under the capital head, the expenditure is Rs. 1667.86 crore out
of the allocation of Rs. 1916.71 crore i.e. 87.01 per cent.
The Committee at one place have been informed by the Ministry
that the annual allocations would depend upon resource availability. On
the one hand the allocations earmarked are not being fully utilized on

53
the other hand the deadlines for proposed up-gradations have been stated
to be dependent upon resource availability. The Committee again
emphasize that there is an urgent need to ensure that up-gradation,
modernization of various plans of Coast Guard are completed within the
stipulated deadline so as to address the challenges before the Coast Guard
Organization. As such all the initiatives should be taken to ensure that
the allocations made for the different projects are fully utilized. Besides
keeping in view the long-term plans, the adequate outlay for the new
schemes, should be made available by the Government. The concerns of
the Committee in this regard should be duly communicated to the Ministry
of Finance.
Reply of the Government
“The approved Development Plan caters to proposals for acquisition
of new and replacement schemes, infrastructure development, manpower
augmentation and upgradation of existing assets. Post approval, these
proposals are again required to be processed individually as per prevalent
policies and procedures in force for sanction of the Competent Financial
Authority (CFA). As such, this process involves time.
Further, ship-building is a very complex process with a gestation
period ranging from 2 to 3 years. Similarly, cases for acquisition/
manufacture of aircraft involve a gestation period of 3 to 4 years. Even
after concluding contracts, the ability to spend money is contingent upon
the selected Firms’ ability to absorb funds based on the actual physical
progress made towards deliveries. Firms, in turn, are highly dependent
on issues of corporate governance, availability of labour, material supplies
from Original Equipment Manufacturers (OEM), as also, on occasions,
on acts of ‘Force Majeure’.”
Notwithstanding, the overall utilisation of funds during the
11th Plan has been satisfactory. Details of fund utilisation (as on
19 March, 2012) is as follows:—
Major Head Approved in Expenditure Shortfall/Excess
Revised 11th Plan  (Rs. in crore)
Capital 4662 4135 (88.7%) 527 (-11.3%)
Revenue 3268 3174 (97.2%) 94 (-2.8%)
Total 7930 7309 (92.2%) 621 (-7.8%)
(Please see Para No. 13 of Chapter-I of the Report)

54
Recommendation (Para No. 5)
INFRASTRUCTURE
4. The Committee find that a lot of infrastructure is being upgraded
with a view to enhance the coastal surveillance network. At present,
there are 27 Coast Guard Stations along the coast line and as per the
information furnished by the Ministry, Coast Guard Station generally
covers a range of approx. 75 to 120 km. The Ministry itself has
acknowledged that the present arrangements are considered inadequate
for surveillance keeping in view the long coast line of India and adverse
topography. To monitor the coastal boundaries, the Ministry has taken
up the case with the Government to enhance the stations from 27 to 41
by 2012. Besides, 204 Coastal Police Stations have also been sanctioned
which would be operating in the Hub and Spoke concept with the Coast
Guard Stations for filling gap identified after carrying out vulnerability
and gap analysis by the State Government/Marine Police of the State
along with the Indian Cast Guard. With regard to upgrading Air Stations,
Air Enclaves and Squadrons, the Committee have been informed that at
present there are two Air Stations, three Air Enclaves and three
independent Squadrons operating from strategic locations along the coast
line. Additional three Air Stations and four Air Enclaves are being planned
to be established by 2012. As such by 2012 the Coast Guard would be
having total five Air Stations, seven Air Enclaves and one Helibase and
two independent Squadrons which according to the Ministry would meet
the effective air surveillance of the entire coast. In addition a total of 46
coastal radar chains are in the process of being started.
The Committee during their study tour to Mumbai, Goa, Bangalore
and Vishakhapatnam from 29 June to 4 July 2011 have observed that
keeping current security scenario into consideration, Coast Guard force
level is being enhanced at a much faster rate. Towards this purpose the
Coast Guard requires infrastructural facilities in a larger scale viz., support
for berthing place for ship place for hovercraft operations, air operations
maintenance facilities, land for creation of operation and communication
centres, Administrative Complexes, Married Accommodation. The present
assets with the Coast Guard are negligible and are on temporary
arrangements with other organizations at most of the places. Respective
State Governments port authorities and airport authorities are being
approached to provide such support. The Committee are of the strong
view that infrastructure are the backbone for maintaining a strong force
level for Coast guard organization to meet the current security scenario.

55
This type of stop-gap arrangement will weaken not only the capacity of
CG but also the morale of the Coast Guard Personnel. This matter need
to be dealt on war footing stage. The State Governments have to play
an important role in setting up the proposed infrastructure primarily on
the issue of acquisition of land for various types of infrastructure projects.
As such, there is an urgent need to sensitize the State Governments about
the urgency of upgradation of coastal network. The issue needs to be
taken up at the highest level with the State Governments. The Ministry
has to play a proactive role in motivating the various State Governments.
Concrete initiatives on the suggested lines should be taken by the
Government and the Committee apprised accordingly.
Reply of the Government
5. “The ICG has 22 stations and 08 air units as on 25 Nov. 2008. Post
26/11, renewed impetus was accorded to addressing vulnerability gaps
along the coast, and accordingly 20 additional stations and 07 air units
were sanctioned by the Government.
Of the total 42 stations and 15 air units sanctioned till date, 35
stations and 08 air units have already been activated. Of these, 13 stations
were activated in just three years time. Stringent timeline are being
maintained for setting up of balance stations.
While efforts are in hand to expeditiously activate balance stations/
air units, most new stations are functioning from hired buildings leased
from other organisations. There is also inadequate land holding and
absence of dedicated berthing facilities for ICG Ships/boats, which are
essential for operational effectiveness of the force.
State Governments/Port Authorities are being impressed upon to
address deficiencies in land, berthing and infrastructure so as to enable
effective functioning of CG stations and basing of additional assets in
the larger interest of maritime security.”
(Please see Para No. 16 of Chapter-I of the Report)
Recommendation (Para No. 6)
FORCE LEVEL
6. The Committee observe that the existing strength of aircraft and
other surveillance force level of Indian Coast Guard includes 44 ships,

56
6 hovercrafts aircraft, 24 boats, 20 Chetaks and 4 ALH. The Coast Guard
during the year 2007-08 had 42 ships, 18 boats and 45 aircrafts as informed
to the Committee during the course of examination of Demands for Grants
2007-08. The comparison of the status of surveillance force level of Coast
Guard during the year 2007-08 and the strength, at present, indicates that
there has been addition of only 2 ships and 6 boats during the past four
years. The Committee have been given the impression that a lot of efforts
are being made to upgrade the capacity of Coast Guard Post 26/11
Mumbai attack. However, the aforesaid scenario with regard to
upgradation of force level indicates that the progress in this regard is
slow. Even if the data with regard to the existing force level is compared
to the assessed requirement during the year 2007-08 as informed to the
Committee during the course of examination of Demands for Grants,
the Committee note that there are huge gaps between the required and
the existing force level. The assessed requirement of ships at that time
was 154 and 93 boats while the Indian Coast Guard at present has only
45 ships and 27 boats.
The Committee further note from the Information furnished by the
Ministry that a large number of gadgets/helicopters/aircraft available with
Coast Guard Organisation are lying non-operational for long time and
repair/servicing seems to be a very slow process. The Super Rapid Gun
Mounting (SRGM) installed onboard ICG ships Samar, Sangram are not
working since 2006 and on ICG Sagar since Jun. 2009. The SRGM onboard
ICGS Sarang is partially operational. The Electronically Operated Fire
Control System (EOFCS) of all the SRGM had become obsolete and OEM
had expressed inability to provide product support. The existing strength
Donier and Chetak are 28 and 20 respectively, out of which one-fourth
of the fleet is undergoing major servicing/repairs.
The Committee take serious note of the huge gaps between the
existing and the required force level as well as the slow progress of
acquisition of the force level in Coast Guard. Not only that whatever
limited capacity of force level the Coast Guard possesses, is not fully
operational as is apparent from the information furnished by the Ministry.
The Committee would like to emphasize that with the increasing perceived
threat levels from various quarters, the country cannot afford delay and
shifting of deadlines in respect of acquisition of various types of force
level. As such the Committee strongly recommend that all out efforts
should be made to ensure that the inductions are in place within the
stipulated time frame. The requisite allocation should be made available
to Coast Guard so as to meet the gaps between the required and existing
strength to enable the Coast Guard to meet the emerging security
challenges as well to handle the peace time operations particularly during

57
natural calamities. Besides, it should also be ensured that the various
systems and the aircraft, equipments, electronic gadgets, etc. which become
non-operational due to various reasons are repaired/serviced within the
shortest possible time. In this regard, the Defence capacity to repair/
service the various equipments, aircraft systems also need to be
augmented.
The Committee further express serious concern over almost one-
fourth of the total strength of Donier and Chetak undergoing major
services/repairs. The Committee would like to be informed whether the
Defence has tried to find out the reasons for such a large number of
aircraft going non-operational. The detailed reasons in this regard should
be furnished to the Committee so as to understand the issue of such a
large number of Donier and Chetak going non-operational.
The Committee would like to emphasize that with the increasing
perceived threat levels from various quarters, the country cannot afford
delay and shifting of deadlines in respect of acquisition of various types
of force level. As such the Committee strongly recommend that all out
efforts should be made to ensure that the inductions are in place within
the stipulated time frame. The requisite allocation should be made
available to Coast Guard so as to meet the gaps between the required
and existing strength to enable the Coast Guard to meet the emerging
security challenges as well to handle the peace time operations particularly
during natural calamities.
Reply of the Government
7. “1. The ICG had a surface force level of 61 ships/boats (42 ships
and 19 Boats/Hovercraft) as on 25 Nov., 2008. Post 26/11, induction of
assets and augmentation of force levels received undivided attention.
Due to this, contracts for 104 platforms ( i.e. 36 Ships and 68 boats/
hovercraft) were concluded by the Service during the period Jan., 2009
to Mar., 2011.
2. Currently, acquisition cases for 46 platforms ( i.e. 26 ships and
20 boats) are being progressed, which are likely to conclude by 2013. This
acquisition programme also caters for replacement of again platforms
inducted in early eighties by the ICG. By 2018, ICG would have a force
level of about 150 ships/boats and 100 aircraft, which would be adequate
for securing the maritime interests of India to a reasonable level. The
fully desired force level of 154 ships, 126 boats and 139 aircraft is likely
to be achieved by 2027.

58
3. The phase lag in ‘acquisition’ and ‘induction’, as brought out in
the Report, is unavoidable since ship construction is a highly complex
and time intensive process. Shipyards require a minimum delivery period
of 2-3 years from signing of contract to affect the delivery of the first
vessel of a class of ships. Follow-on vessels need an additional 06 to 12
months depending on size/complexity.
4. Operational status of Weapons/sensors. Effective maintenance
and optimal utilisation of weapons/sensors is accorded utmost priority
by the ICG. The ICG, accordingly, has an elaborate maintenance philosophy
for weapons/sensors/equipment fitted on its sea going assets, with a
mechanism to test their operational effectiveness periodically.
5. As for the Super Rapid Gun Mount (SGRM), the non-availability
of the gun was mainly on account of the defective; Electro Optical Fire
Control System (EOFCS). The OEM/PAC firm (M/s BHEL) had expressed
inability to provide product support for the EOFCS, in absence of which,
operational availability of the gun mount onboard ICG ships Samar and
Sangram was adversely affected.
6. Following remedial measures have been instituted for
operationalising the SRGM:—
(a) Early conclusion of periodic routines on the gun mounts
have been accorded high priority. Normal Routines of
SRGM onboard ICGS Samar have been completed by
M/s BHEL in Sep., 2011. Routines on ICGS Sangram
commences in Jan., 2012 and are likely to be completed by
end Mar., 2012. Routines on ICGS Sagar and Sarang will
follow on completion of Sangram.
(b) One Target Designator Sight (TDS) for each of the ships fitted
with SRGM have been procured from M/s BEL, Bangalore,
and installation is in progress. The TDS will enable manual
exploitation of the SRGM upon installation.
(c) Development of a new EOFCS for SRGM by M/s BEL,
Bangalore is in progress as replacement for the obsolete
EOFCS.
7. Servicing/Repairs of Aviation Assets. The aviation fleet of the
ICG includes 28 Dornier aircraft and 24 Helicopters. Presently, 10 Dornier
aircraft and 07 Chetak Helicopters are undergoing mandatory
servicing on completion of their respective flying hours/stipulated

59
calendar life inspections. Only two Chetaks, viz. CG 808 and CG 821, are
non-operational. Details, as on 08 Mar., 2012, are as under:—
Aircraft Total  Al lotted to Undergoing Non- Remarks
Strength Frontline scheduled Operati-
Units Servicing onal
by
M/s HAL
Dornier 28 18(20) 10(08) — —
Chetak 20 11(13) 7(06) 02(01) CG 808. The aircraft
is non-operational
since 21 Jan., 2008,
post accident at Port
Blair. The damage of
aircraft was
categorized as Cat
‘ZZ’ i.e. ‘Total Loss’.
MoD approval for
regularization of the
loss is awaited.
CG 821. The aircraft
is non-operational
since 31 Aug., 2011,
post accident at
Daman. Presently, the
aircraft is undergoing
repairs as M/s HAL
(Barrackpore), under
warranty, and the
repairs are likely to
be completed by Apr.,
2012.
8. Maintenance of Residential Accommodation: Funds for
maintenance and project work associated with Coast Guard residential
accommodation is allocated yearly as part of the Annual Works
Programme (AWP). This is a time-tested system that ensures periodical
and continuing maintenance of CG infrastructure.
9. As for the Coast Guard residential accommodation at Goa,
concerned authorities have been directed to chart out a detailed plan for
refurbishment/maintenance of residential accommodation through MES,
which is the primary Engineer agency for maintenance of buildings and
accommodation.”
(Please see Para No. 21 of Chapter-I of the Report)

60
Recommendation (Para No. 11)
8. The Committee have been informed during the course of
examination that the Coast Guard is coordinating with the Director-
General, Shipping for fitment of vessel, tracking system on board for all
fishing vessels in accordance with the decisions taken by the Cabinet
Secretary post 26/11. To achieve the task, the Government is examining
some of the proposals to regulate the movement of fishing boats in and
out of all landing points along the Indian Coast which include the fitment
of shipping harbor/landing points with Radio Frequency Identification
Device (RFID), fitment of satellite based transponder on each fishing boat
below 20 mts in length, fitment of Vessel Monitoring System (VMS) for
deep sea fishing vessel and fitment of AIS(B) for all fishing vessels above
20 mtrs. in length.
The detailed examination of the subject by the Committee has
revealed that some headway has been achieved in respect of fitment of
vessel tracking system in fishing vessels less than 20 mtrs. However, in
respect of fitment of transponders for fishing vessels above 20 mtrs. and
for deep sea fishing vessels as well as for fitment of RFID tags, the
proposals seems to be still at the conceptual stage. The Committee feel
that an effective vessel monitoring and tracking system is utmost necessary
for monitoring the operation of all types of vessels in the sea. As such
there is an urgent need to fast track the process of identification of
technologies, trials so that various types of proposed monitoring systems
are fitted in all types of vessels. So far as the constraint being felt with
regard to the small boats which do not have power supply to provide
power to the monitoring equipment is concerned, the Committee feel
that the constraint can be addressed by fitting the rechargeable batteries.
The Committee strongly recommend that all the proposed initiatives
should be fast tracked so that the monitoring and tracking systems/
transponders RFID tags are fitted in all types of vessels expeditiously.
The Committee may also like to recommend to take the help of DRDO
a premier Defence Research Organisation of the country in identification
of various technologies and to address to the constraints being faced in
various trials.
Reply of the Government
9. The aspect of fitment of transponders for fishing vessels above
20 mtrs. length is governed by Ministry of Shipping (MoS) Notification
of May 2009 that makes fitment of AIS Class ‘ A’ mandatory for all fishing
vessels above 20 mtrs. in length. MoS is the nodal agency for progressing
the fitment on such vessels.

61
2. All Deep Sea fishing Vessels are fitted with AIS. Voyage clearance
is not provided by ICG unless the Deep Sea fishing vessels are fitted with
AIS. Coast Guard ships and MRCCs are being equipped with AIS for
effective monitoring of these AIS fitted vessels.
(Please see Para No. 24 of Chapter-I of the Report)
Recommendation (Para No. 13)
10. The Committee further observe that fool proof telecommuni-
cation and internet connectivity is the pre-requisite for a proper
coordination mechanism amongst various Ministries, Departments,
State Governments and other authorities responsible for warnings,
evacuation and post Tsunami operations. The Coast Guard Organisation
can play an effective role in discharging its various activities only
when the warnings regarding disasters are instantly communicated.
Further, as suggested above, the news about the expected disaster can
be broadcast on Radio and Doordarshan on real time basis, only
when various technologies, telecom and internet connectivity,
power supply remains intact during a critical situation. The Committee
may further like to emphasize that the emerging state-of-the-art
technologies over the world have actually redefined the emerging
threats from the sea. The positioning of latest and the state-of-the-art
force levels on our coastal borders to some extent act as a deterrent.
However, for proper functioning of all the technological equipments it
is utmost necessary that our connectivity which include
telecommunication, internet and power connectivity remains intact
during the disaster which may be natural disaster or a war like situation.
As such there is an urgent need to have layers of alternate
telecommunication, internet and power supply networks. The Ministry
of Defence, Coast Guard Organisation should take up the issue with the
concerned Ministries/Departments so that Coast Guard Organisation
remains connected even in worst situation, particularly in the natural
disasters.
Reply of the Government
11. ICG ships and boats are equipped with independent
telecommunication equipment and facilities, which are designed to work
even when shore based infrastructure is partially affected.
(Please see Para No. 30 of Chapter-I of the Report)

62
Recommendation (Para No. 18)
12. The Coast Guard during the course of deliberations have made
various other suggestions to address the issue of operation of sub-standard
ships in the Indian waters. Such suggestions include increasing the number
of ship inspections, targeting the vessels that are operated by flags which
has history of violating the standards of shipping vessels, strict checking
of loading operations at ports, avoiding loading operations of iron ore
during monsoon and establishing Emergency Towing Vessels during
monsoon to assist the vessels in emergency. The Committee feel that the
aforesaid suggestions merit consideration and need to be pursued with
the concerned Ministries/Departments. Besides guidelines need to be
prepared with regard to periodic checking, inspections of ships, etc. The
concrete initiatives in this regard should be taken and the Committee
informed accordingly.
Reply of the Government
13. 1. The matter related to ship inspections etc. are in the perview
of DG(Shipping) and Marine Mercantile Department.
2. DG (Shipping) hired and deployed Emergency Towing Vessel
(ETV) on the west coast of India during the monsoon season in 2011.
The ICG role is limited to operational deployment of the vessel under
the overall coordination by Marine Emergency Response System
Committee.
3. The ETV was successfully utilised during Monsoon in 2011.
(Please see Para No. 30 of Chapter-I of the Report)
Recommendation (Para No. 19)
The Committee had recommended as under:—
14. The Committee have been apprised that the Coast Guard has
recommended MoS to establish the necessary framework and modalities
for implementation of the HNS response system, prior acceding to the
OPRC HNS protocol. In this connection, the Committee find that the
Coast Guard has certain constraints. The Coast Guard has intimated MoS
that the service is not ready at present to shoulder the responsibility of
HNS pollution as it requires specialized training, skill, equipment,
protective gears, monitoring gadgets, availability of scientific inputs and

63
enormous coordination to undertake any response actions. The Committee
may again like to emphasise that the Coast Guard has been designated
as the central coordinating agency for combating oil spills in Indian waters.
The Coast Guard being not well-equipped to take up the responsibility
of HNS pollution is the matter of serious concern. The Committee strongly
recommend that capacity building of Coast Guard in this direction should
be given utmost importance and the officials should be imparted
specialized training, besides creating the desired infrastructure so as to
enable it to address for the challenge of HNS pollution.
Reply of the Government
15. The issue of HNS is being administered by MoS through DG
Shipping and MMD in accordance with the provision of MS Act, 1958.
The OPRC-HNS 2000 protocol is likely to be ratified by India. The Coast
Guard has requested the MoS to establish necessary frameworks and
modalities for implementation of HNS response system, prior acceding
to OPRC-HNS protocol.
(Please see Para No. 39 of Chapter-I of the Report)
Recommendation (Para No. 25)
16. The Committee may further like to refer to the Group of
Ministers Report, 2001 on Reforming the National Security Systems,
whereby it has been suggested that the laws and procedures relating to
detention and prosecution of poachers and confiscation of boats need to
be tightened and the concerned Ministries/Departments of the Government
of India should consider setting up the Maritime Courts or alternatively
giving powers of prosecution and detention to the Coast Guard and the
Marine Police. The Committee while endorsing the views of the Group
of Ministers would like the Government to consider the aforesaid
suggestion keeping in view the increased threats of piracy and robbery
by the poachers/pirates.
Reply of the Government
17. “The recommendations/observations of the Committee’s Report
stands addressed in the following two Central Government legislations.
The Maritime Zone of India (Regulation of Fishing by Foreign
Vessels) Act, 1981 and the Maritime Zone of India (Regulation of Fishing

64
by Foreign Vessels) Rule, 1982, have been enacted by the Ministry of
Agriculture. These statutes provide for regulation of fishing by foreign
vessels in the Maritime Zones of India. All Coast Guard Officers and
Subordinate Officers are authorized under this Act to stop, board and
search a foreign vessel. Where such an Officer has reason to believe that
the foreign vessel has, or is being used to or is about to be used to
commit an offence under this Act, he may with or without warrant, seize
and detain such vessel and direct the Master to being the vessel to any
of the specified ports notified in the Gazette of India under this Act. The
offender is to be tried in the Court of the Metropolitan Magistrate or
Judicial Magistrate First Class as notified in the Gazette of India under
the Act as the Designated Court. The Government, in a separate Gazette
Notification under this Act, has further delegated these powers to the
officers of Indian Navy, as also to Police officers of different ranks
belonging to coastal States.
The Suppression of Unlawful Acts Against Safety of Maritime
Navigation and Fixed Platforms on the Continental Shelf Act, 2002 has
been enacted by the Ministry of Shipping and has come into force w.e.f.
01 Feb., 2003. Section 4(1) of this Act provides that the Government may,
by Notification in the official Gazette, confer on any Gazetted officer of
the Coast Guard or any other Gazetted officer of the Central Govt., the
powers of arrest, investigation and prosecution exercisable by a Police
officer under the CrPC. The Central Government,  vide Notification
SO 137(E) dated 22 July, 2004, has conferred these powers on all Coast
Guard Officers borne on board a Coast Guard ship. The offences listed
in Section 3 of this Act are as under:—
(a) Committing an act of violence against a person on board a
fixed platform or a ship, which is likely to endanger the
safety of the fixed platform or safe navigation of the ship.
(b) Causing destruction/damage to a fixed platform or a ship or
its cargo in such a manner, which endangers the safety of
such platform or safe navigation of such ship.
(c) Seizing or exercising control over a fixed platform or a ship
by force or threatening/intimidating in any other form.
(d) Placing or causing to be placed on a fixed platform or a ship,
by any means, a device or substance which is likely to destroy/
damage that fixed platform or ship or endangers its cargo
or fixed platform or safe navigation of that ship.

65
(e) Destroying or damaging maritime navigational facilities or
interfering with their operation by an act which is likely to
endanger safe navigation of a ship.
(f) Knowingly communicating false information thereby
endangering the safe navigation of a ship.
(g) During course of commission or attempt to commit any of
the above offences:—
(i) Causing death to any person;
(ii) Causing grievous hurt to any person;
(iii) Causing injury to any person;
(iv) Seizing or threatening a person;
(v) Threatening/endangering a ship or a fixed platform;
In addition, this Section also states that acts of attempting or abetting
commission of any of these offences would also be punishable. The act
of unlawful or intentional threatening, which compels a person to do or
refrain from doing any act or to commit any offence, is also punishable.”
(Please see Para No. 45 of Chapter-I of the Report)

66
CHAPTER V
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH
FINAL REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED
Recommendation (Para No. 9)
The Committee observe that the Ministry of Agriculture has
provided Rs. 72 crore to the consortium led by M/s BEL, Bangalore to
undertake the data gathering and issue of biometric identity cards to
more than four lakh fishermen. From the information furnished by the
Ministry, the Committee note that more than 16 lakh of the fishermen
have been identified for issue of biometric identity cards. The Committee
would like the Ministry to clarify whether the remaining task of issue
of biometric identity cards would be undertaken by BEL or some other
agency has been identified/proposed to be identified to undertake the
remaining task. The Committee would also like that the necessary outlay
should be provided to the Ministry of Agriculture so that the task is
completed within the stipulated time-frame.
Reply of the Government
Being the nodal Ministry for the project, Ministry of Agriculture
(MoA) has been requested to intimate the status of data-gathering and
issuance of Biometric Cards for fishermen being progressed by M/s BEL,
Bangalore. Further, on the recommendations of the Standing Committee,
MoA has been requested to allocate necessary outlay so that the project
is completed within the stipulated time 2012.
Recommendation (Para No. 10)
The Committee find that besides issue of Biometric identity cards
the Government is registering fishing boats for effective surveillance in
coastal areas. In this direction, the Government has given directives in
February, 2009 that all fishing boats should be registered under the
provisions of the Merchant Fishing Act, 1958. NIC in cooperation with
the State Governments is undertaking the task of registration of boats
and the necessary funding assistance has already been provided by the
Ministry of Agriculture in this regard. The Committee are concerned to
note that the initiative of registration of boats started in February 2009,

67
and even after passage of more than three years, the Coast Guard which
is the nodal organisation is not even aware about the number of fishing
vessels and their status of registration. The Committee believe that
identification and registration of boats is the first initiative to monitor/
track the vessels in the sea. As such it is utmost necessary that the task
is completed within the stipulated time frame. The Committee, therefore,
strongly recommend that Coast Guard Organisation should coordinate
with the respective Ministries/NICs/State Governments and monitor the
status of registration of boats in Coastal States. The periodic information
about the task being undertaken should be obtained by the Coast Guard
and furnished to the Committee. Besides the concerns of the Committee
in this regard should be conveyed to the concerned Ministries, State
Governments and NIC so that the task is completed within the definite
time frame.
Reply of the Government
1. As desired by the Standing Committee, the matter has been
taken up with the Ministry of Agriculture (MoA) for obtaining the status
of registration of boats in coastal States.
2. The aspect of registration of fishing boats has been accorded
high priority by the ICG during various meetings and interactions with
concerned Ministries/State agencies. Necessary instructions have also been
issued to CG Regional Commanders at Gandhinagar/Mumbai/Chennai/
Port Blair to coordinate with respective State Governments within their
Regions and monitor the status of registration of boats. Further, a case
has also been taken up with MoA informing them of the concerns of the
Standing Committee on the delay in registration of boats and the need
for completion of task within pre-defined time frame.
Recommendation (Para No. 24)
The Committee observe that oil spill is one of the major factor for
marine pollution. Besides, contaminating the sea water, oil spill causes
great environmental hazards and is harmful for flora and fauna in the
ocean. The Committee during the course of examination have been given
the detailed position of the oil leakage cases reported from 1982 to
15 August, 2010. The analysis of the information reveal that 80 cases of
oil spill have occurred in Indian water during the aforesaid period. The
Coast Guard coordinated oil spill response in 75 cases of oil spill incidents.
Out of these 75 cases in as many as 16 cases, the quantity and type of
oil spill could not be assessed. Besides only in 11 cases, the amount of
compensation could be received from the polluter. The aforesaid scenario
indicates that more needs to be done to strengthen our post oil spill

68
investigation and adjudication mechanism in case of oil spill. The various
laws related to compensation/adjudication need to be examined and
reviewed. As such the Coast Guard Organisation should take up the
issue strongly with the concerned Ministries, including the Ministry of
Shipping.
Reply of the Government
The Coast Guard has been taking up the issue of compensation
claims for oil spill response directly with the polluter ( i.e. ship owners),
and in case of no response from the owners, with the DG Shipping. The
recommendation of the Standing Committee with regards to the
strengthening of the post-oil spill investigation and adjudication
mechanism is being addressed with the Ministry of Shipping (MoS)/DG
Shipping.
Recommendation (Para No. 16)
The Committee understand that the Coast Guard is the Central
Coordinating Agency for combating oil spills in Indian waters in
accordance with ‘ Allocation of Business Rules, 1961’. One of the initiative
taken by the Coast Guard is to get established the contingency plan and
tier-I (upto 700 tonnes) pollution response facility by relevant ports, oil
handling agencies and the State Governments to enable them to take up
action systematically in the event of an oil spill. The Committee during
the course of deliberations have been informed that most of the ports
and oil handling agencies have established the contingency plan and
tier-I facility. However, the coastal States have not undertaken the task
so far. The Committee while expressing serious concern over the delay
in finalizing the contingency plans and establishing pollution response
facility by the State Governments would like the Ministry to pursue the
matter so that such contingency plan and pollution response facility are
established within the definite time period. Besides, the Committee would
also like to know the name of the ports and oil handling agencies which
have not established the contingency plan and the tier-I oil response
facility. The Committee would also like to emphasize that such ports and
oil handling agencies should be directed to finalize the contingency plan
and pollution response facility without any further delay.
Reply of the Government
On the issue of availability and maintenance of tier–I pollution
response facilities by ports, Oil Companies and Coastal States/UTs,
Government is considering to constitute an Inter-Ministerial Committee
headed by Ministry of Shipping with Ministry of Petroleum and Natural

69
Gas, Ministry of Defence and Ministry of Home Affairs as members, and
Indian Coast Guard as the convenor. Representatives of concerned State
Governments/UTs are also to be associated with the Inter-Ministerial
Committee. Ministry of Shipping and Ministry of Petroleum and Natural
Gas have also been mandated to issue necessary directives to Ports and
Oil Companies for preparation of Oil Spill Contingency Plans.
2. The Indian Coast Guard and the Ministry of Shipping will jointly
undertake inspection and audit of all major ports and oil companies
towards their preparedness for pollution response.
N
EW DELHI;  RAJ BABBAR,
19 December, 2012 Chairman,
28 Agrahayana, 1934 (Saka) Standing Comm ittee on Defence.

70
APPENDIX I
STANDING COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE
MINUTES OF THE FOURTH SI TTING OF THE STANDING
COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE (2012-13)
The Committee sat on Tuesday, the 18th December, 2012 from
1500 hrs. to 1515 hrs. in Committee Room ‘E’, Parliament House Annexe,
New Delhi.
PRESENT
Shri Raj Babbar — Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Kamal Kishor ‘Commando’
3. Shri R. Dhruvanarayana
4. Shri C.R. Patil
5. Shri Uday Singh
6. Shri R. Thamaraiselvan
Rajya Sabha
7. Shri Pankaj Bora
8. Shri Prakash Javadekar
9. Dr. E.M. Sudarsana Natchiappan
10. Shri C.M. Ramesh
11. Shri T.K. Rangarajan
12. Shri Devender Goud T.

71
SECRETARIAT
1. Dr. R.K. Chadha — Additional Secretary
2. Shri R.K. Jain — Joint Secretary
3. Shri D.S. Malha — Director
4. Shri Sanjeev Sharma — Additional Director
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members to the sitting
of the Committee. Thereafter, the Committee adopted the draft Report
on the Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations/
observations contained in the 13th Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) on
‘Performance of Coast Guard Organisation’ without any modification.
3. *** *** *** *** ***
The Committee then adjourned.
*** Not related with the subject.

72
APPENDIX II
ANALYSIS OF THE ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON
THE RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS CONTAINED IN
THE THIRTEENTH REPORT (FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA) ON
PERFORMANCE OF COAST GUARD ORGANISATION
1. Total number of recommendations: 28
2. Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted by
Government:
Para Nos. 1, 2, 7, 8, 12, 14, 17, 20, 21, 22, 23, 24, 26, 27, 28
Total : 15
Percentage : 54
3. Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do not desire
to pursue in view of Government’s replies:
- Nil -
Total : Nil
Percentage : 0%
4. Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of
Government have not been accepted by the Committee:
Para Nos. 3, 4, 5, 6, 11, 13, 18, 19, 25
Total : 09
Percentage : 32
5. Recommendations/Observations in respect of  which final replies of
Government are still awaited:
Para Nos. 9, 10, 15, 16
Total : 04
Percentage : 14

“All Parliamentary Publications including DRSC Reports are 
available on sale at the Sales Counter, Reception, Parliament House 
(Tel. Nos. 23034726, 23034495, 23034496), Agents appointed 
by Lok Sabha Secretariat and Publications Division, Ministry 
of Information and Broadcasting, CGO Complex, Lodhi Road, New 
Delhi (Tel. Nos. 24367260, 24365610) and their outlets. The said 
information is available on website ‘www.parliamentofindia.nic.in’.
The Souvenir Items with logo of Parliament are also available at Sales 
Counter, Reception, Parliament House, New Delhi. The Souvenir 
items with Parliament Museum logo are available for sale at Souvenir 
Shop (Tel. No. 23035323), Parliament Museum, Parliament Library 
Building, New Delhi. List of these items are available on the website 
mentioned above.”