CHAPTER ICHAPTER ICHAPTER ICHAPTER ICHAPTER I
REPORT
This Report of the Standing Committee on Defence deals with action
taken by the Government on the recommendations/observations con-
tained in their Thirty-sixth Report (Fourteenth Lok Sabha) on ‘Status of
Implementation of Unified Command for Armed Forces’, which was
presented to Lok Sabha and laid in Rajya Sabha on 24.02.2009.
2. The Committee’s Thirty-sixth Report (Fourteenth Lok Sabha)
contained observations/recommendations on the following aspects:—
Para Subject
No.
11. Need for promoting Jointness within the Services
12. Restructuring the Ministry of Defence
13. Chief of Defence Staff
14. Common Law for the Defence Services
15. Joint Training for the Services Personnel
16. Foreign Training for the Services Personnel
17. Joint Intelligence
18. Cross Attachments
19. Incentives
10. Jointness between Navy and Coast Guard
11. Deficiency of Staff at HQ ANC
12. Setting up of Indian National Defence University
13 Need for setting up a High Powered Expert Committee
1

2
3. Action taken replies have been received from the Government
in respect of all the recommendations/observations contained in the
Report. These replies have been examined and categorized as follows:—
(i) Recommendations/observations, which have been accepted by
the Government (Please see Chapter II):—
Para Nos. 1, 4, 6, 10 and 12
(05 Recommendations)
(ii) Recommendations/observations, which the Committee do not
desire to pursue in view of the replies of the Government
(Please see Chapter III):—
Para No. 5
(01 Recommendation)
(iii) Recommendations/observations in respect of which replies of
the Government have not been accepted by the Committee and
which require reiteration (Please see Chapter IV):—
Para Nos. 2, 3, 7, 11 and 13
(05 Recommendations)
(iv) Recommendations/observations in respect of which final
replies of the Government are still awaited (Please see
Chapter V):—
Para Nos. 8 and 9
(02 Recommendations)
4. The Committee desire that the Ministry’s response to their
comments made in Chapter-I and final replies to the recommen-
dations mentioned in Chapter-V of this Report be furnished to them
at the earliest and in any case not later than six months of the
presentation of this Report.
5. The Committee will now deal with the action taken by the
Government on some of their recommendations in the succeeding
paragraphs.

3
A. Restructuring the Ministry of Defence
Recommendation (Para No. 2)
6. The Kargil Review Committee (KRC) and the Group of
Ministers (GoM) in their reports had emphasized on reorganization of
the entire gamut of national security management and apex decision
making and the structure and interface between the Ministry of Defence
and the Armed Forces Headquarters so as to promote improved
understanding and the efficient functioning of the Ministry. Although
considerable time has elapsed since KRC and GoM submitted their
reports, the required level of interface between the Ministry of Defence
and the Armed Forces is still missing. While expressing concern over the
delay in implementation of the recommendation of KRC and GoM, the
Committee had strongly recommended that the staffing pattern in the
Ministry of Defence be suitably changed and the Armed Forces personnel
of requisite expertise at the level of Joint Secretary and/or Additional
Secretary should be appointed so that the Armed Forces Headquarters
are intrinsically involved in national security management and apex
decision making processes.
7. The Ministry in the action taken reply has stated as under:—
“The existing Manpower status of HQ IDS is as under:—
Sl. Details Sanctioned To tal Actual T otal
No. Strength Strength
Officers Man- Officers Man-
power power
1   2 34 5678
1. Three Services 117 105 222 117 105 222
2. MEA 02 - 02 - - -
3. DRDO 04 - 04 01 - 01
4. Civil Services 05* - 05 04 - 04

4
1  2 34 5678
5. DoD 01 - 01 - - -
6. AFHQ Cadre 02 123 125 05# 74 79
Total 131 228 359 127 179 306
*Including Civil Analyst (JS Equivalent) – 01 Not posted.
#Enhancement of Posts after cadre re-structuring by the Govt. within the authorized
strength of Civilians from AFHQ Cadre.
Aspects of the cross staff pattern, as suggested by the Committee,
have been enunciated in the structure of HQ IDS. The aforesaid
structure of HQ IDS includes the following posts from Ministry of
Defence (MoD), Ministry of External Affairs (MEA), Defence
Research and Development Organisation (DRDO) and Intelligence
Agencies:—
Joint Secretary (International Affairs) — from MEA
Joint Secretary (Administration & Personnel) — from MoD.
Scientific Advisor to Chief of Integrated Staff Committee (CISC)
(Joint Secretary level) — from DRDO.
Civil Analyst (Joint Secretary level) — from Intelligence Agency.”
8. The Kargil Review Committee (KRC) and Group of
Ministers (GoM) in their reports submitted long back had stressed
on the reorganization of the entire structure and interface between
the Ministry of Defence and the Armed Forces Headquarters. In this
regard, the mechanism suggested by the Committee in their
recommendation by way of appointing the Armed Forces personnel
of requisite expertise at the level of Joint Secretary and/or Additional
Secretary in the Ministry of Defence in order to involve Armed Forces
in national security management and apex decision making processes
does not seem to be acceptable to the Ministry. Instead of taking
the desired action in this regard, the cross staffing pattern in the

5
structure of HQ IDS, already known to the Committee, which too
is non represented from DoD, DRDO and MEA has been reproduced.
The Committee fail to understand how the cross staffing pattern
in the structure of HQ IDS can address to the recommendation of
the Committee which relate to the appointment of Armed Forces
personnel in the Ministry of Defence. While emphasizing the need
for effective interface between the MoD and the different services,
the Committee would like to reiterate their earlier recommendation
and expect the Ministry to take action on the suggested lines.
B. Chief of Defence Staff
Recommendation (Para No. 3)
9. The Committee had noted that the position of the Chairman,
Chiefs of the Staff Committee (COSC), a forum for the three Services to
discuss matter having a bearing on the activities of the Services and also
to advise the Ministry, presently devolves on a longest serving Chief of Staff
and consequently rotates amongst three Services. In the light of the fact
that the Chairman of the COSC has no command and control authority
over the Services other than his own, the Committee had expressed
doubts over the efficacy of the system in emergent situations by ensuring
quick response and coordinated action. In this regard, the Committee had
found that the post of Chief of Defence Staff (CDS) exists in 67 countries
including France, Germany, UK and USA and the system has proved its
efficacy in those countries. The Committee had recommended to take timely
and appropriate steps to revise the composition of the COSC by creating
a post of CDS to act as Chairman of COSC by evolving consensus on the
issue. The Committee had also recommended that the incumbent so
selected for the post may be a four-star officer drawn from the Services
in rotation and be appointed for a tenure of not less than two years and
the duties and responsibilities to be entrusted to the CDS may be decided
by the Government keeping in view the objectivity and independence
required for the purpose. The Committee had also recommended to give
appropriate authority to the Chairman COSC in the present set up to
command and control the resources of the Defence Services whenever the
situation so demands till such time the post of CDS is created.

6
10. The Ministry in the action taken reply has stated as under:—
“The institutional support and infrastructure has already been
created in the form of HQ IDS, to support the appointment of
Chief of Defence Staff (CDS).
Case for finding consensus on appointment of CDS, as suggested
by the Committee has been taken up with Political Parties by the
Raksha Mantri. Since a number of Political Parties are yet to
respond, a final reply can only be prepared on receipt of replies
from them.”
11. One of the important recommendations made by KRC and
GoM relating to the appointment of CDS could not be approved by
the Cabinet Committee on Security (CCS) in May 2001 since it was
decided that the Government would take a view after consulting the
political parties. In the long period of eight years that has passed
since then, political consensus on the issue still could not be evolved.
The Committee fail to understand the lack of political consensus on
such an important issue concerning the security of the nation,
particularly when the system of CDS is prevalent in 67 countries
of the world which include the developed countries like France,
Germany, UK and USA and had proved its efficacy. The Committee
conclude from what has been stated above that the concerted efforts
in this regard have not been made by the Government. Merely writing
letters even from the level of the Defence Minister is not sufficient.
There is an urgent need to use the various fora of interaction with
the leaders of the political parties. Besides the efforts can also be
made by deliberating the issue in Parliament through various
mechanisms available under the rules. The Committee expect the
Ministry to take the effective steps as suggested above so that the
institution of CDS is set up expeditiously.
The Committee further reiterate that there is an urgent need
to give appropriate authority to the Chairman, COSC in the present
set up to ensure quick response and coordinated action in the urgent
situations as an interim measure pending the decision on the
appointment of CDS. The Committee disapprove the way the

7
Ministry has chosen not to respond to the interim measure suggested
by the Committee in the recommendation and would like urgent
and immediate action on it.
C. Joint Intelligence
Recommendation (Para No. 7)
12. The Committee had strongly recommended to the Government
to take immediate steps to constitute a federal central intelligence agency
covering under its umbrella even the tri-services intelligence gathering
network particularly when the Kargil intrusion and terrorists’ attack in
Mumbai on 26 November, 2008 have brought out the instances of lack
of coordination among different intelligence gathering agencies.
13. The Ministry in the action taken reply has stated as under:—
“A ‘Multi Agency Centre’ (MAC) has been established under MHA
post 26/11. Information sharing is done at the MAC on daily basis
by all intelligence agencies. Two officers from the Armed Forces
have been posted to Defence Intelligence Agency (DIA), which is
a tri-Service Intelligence Agency of MoD, and are placed at MAC.”
14. The Committee find that a Multi Agency Centre (MAC)
has been established under MHA post 26 November, 2008 for the
purpose of information sharing on daily basis by intelligence agencies.
While noting that the setting up of MAC is a step in the right
direction, the Committee feel that still there is an urgent need for
having a federal central intelligence agency for better coordination
among different intelligence gathering agencies in various States and
the Centre as well as military intelligence. As such the Committee
reiterate their earlier recommendation and would like that the matter
should be taken up at the highest level and Committee apprised
about the concrete action taken in this regard.
D. Cross Attachments
Recommendation (Para No. 8)
15. The Committee had urged the Ministry to devise suitable
strategies to ensure cross attachment of officers in operational and

8
planning wings of different services at command level and above so as
to provide them an opportunity to gainfully utilize their experience in
promoting jointmanship among the forces.
16. The Ministry in the action taken reply has stated as under:—
“At present officers are being cross posted to Operations Branch
at other Service HQ, to foster jointness in planning. Also, requisite
component of Air Force (Advance HQ/Tactical HQ) are co-located
to achieve jointness at the Army Command HQ level. Furthermore,
selected officers who tenant important appointments in the
operational/planning branches at HQs are generally out of those
who have undergone premier courses like National Defence College
Courses, Higher Command/Higher Defence Management Courses
where emphasis is on jointness and integration.
The issue regarding Below Service HQ level is under examination
by respective Service HQs.”
17. The Committee observe that the issue regarding cross
attachment of officers in operational and planning wings of different
services below Service Headquarters level is under examination by
the respective Service Headquarters. The Committee expect the
Ministry to take necessary steps to complete this process in a time-
bound manner.
E. Deficiency of Staff at HQ ANC
Recommendation (Para No. 11)
18. While taking note of the fact that HQ ANC still continues to
be deficient of civilian support staff and the proposal for delegation of
powers to appoint civilian staff in HQ ANC through direct recruitment
was still pending for approval of the Department of Personnel and
Training, the Committee had recommended to take concerted steps to
ensure that the vacancies are filled up expeditiously.
19. The Ministry in the action taken reply has stated as under:—
“As per Peace Establishment (PE) authorization, HQ ANC was to
be provided civilian staff from the Service HQs. Service HQs having

9
indicated inability to provide the manpower owing to deficiencies,
the only option is to carry out amendment of PE transferring the
posts from the Services to HQ ANC and empowering Commander
in Chief ANC (CINCAN) to carry out recruitment at ANC. A
proposal for amendment of Peace Establishment of ANC was taken
up with MoD on 21 Oct. 2008. MoD desired that the issue of
delegation of powers of appointing authority be finalized before
amending the PE. The proposal was examined in detail in
consultation with Department of Personnel and Training. Final
proposal with draft Gazette Notification with approval of MoD and
Ministry of Law has been submitted to Department of Personnel
and Training on 09 Feb. 2009. Once notification is issued after
approval of competent authority Minister of State DOP&T (MoS
DOP&T), further action to fill up the posts can be initiated.”
20. The Committee are constraint to note that there is no
further progress on the issue of delegating HQ ANC to appoint
civilian staff through direct recruitment. Final proposal with draft
Gazette Notification with the approval of MoD and the Ministry
of Law is pending with the Department of Personnel and Training
since 9 February 2009. More than eight months have already elapsed
and approval of the competent authority 
i.e. Minister of State
DOP&T is still awaited. The Committee express concerns over the
delay in the matter and would like that concerns of the Committee
in this regard should be duly communicated to the Minister of State
DOP&T so that the notification is issued expeditiously and action
to fill up the civilian post is initiated.
F. Setting up of Indian National Defence University
Recommendation (Para No. 12)
21. Taking note of the fact that the proposal for the land needed
for setting up of the National Defence University to undertake long term
defence and strategic studies was awaiting Cabinet clearance, the
Committee recommended to take immediate steps so that the
Indian National Defence University is set up without any further loss
of time.

10
22. The Ministry in the action taken reply has stated as under:-
“The case has at present been put up for Cabinet approval.
Further actions will be initiated as per the directions during the
clearance.”
23. The Committee during the course of oral evidence had
been informed by the representative of the Ministry of Defence that
the land for setting up of National Defence University had been
identified and the proposal in this regard was awaiting Cabinet
clearance. The representative also stated that the Cabinet approval
was expected within a month or so. Even when more than eight
months have elapsed since the report of the Committee was
presented to Parliament, the Cabinet approval is still awaited. The
Committee understand that with the constitution of the Government
during the 15th Lok Sabha, the proposal may have been resubmitted
to Cabinet for approval. The Committee urge the Ministry to pursue
further in the matter so that the clearance is obtained from the
Cabinet and further action with regard to setting up of the Indian
National Defence University is taken expeditiously.
G. Need for setting up a High Powered Expert Committee
Recommendation (Para No. 13)
24. The Committee in the earlier report had recommended to
constitute a high powered expert Committee to reorganize, reform and
restructure the Armed Forces with a view to implement the recommen-
dations made on the subject matter by the GoM in its report submitted
in 2001 and the Standing Committee on Defence in their Thirty-sixth
Report (Fourteenth Lok Sabha) as well as earlier reports to enable the
Armed Forces to devise appropriate strategies to keep pace with the
innovations being made in conventional and unconventional modes of
warfare.
25. The Ministry in the action taken reply has stated as under:—
“The Parliamentary Standing Committee on Defence has sought a
review of the functioning of tri-Service Defence institutions.

11
Currently, an Internal Review of the Organization, role and
functions is under process. Consequently, HQ IDS would prepare
a detailed Paper to be deliberated by COSC which would then make
recommendations to the Ministry.”
26. The Committee had recommended to constitute a high
powered expert Committee to reorganize, reform and restructure the
Armed Forces in the light of the recommendations made by the GoM
in its report submitted in 2001 and by the Standing Committee on
Defence in their Thirty-sixth Report (Fourteenth Lok Sabha) as well
as earlier reports. Instead of taking action in the right direction, the
Ministry in the action taken reply has stated that internal review
of the organization was under process in pursuance of the
recommendation of the Committee to review the functioning of tri-
Services Defence institutions. The Committee express unhappiness
over the way the main issue raised in the recommendation has been
tried to be sidetracked. The Committee again emphasize that there
is an urgent need to continuously devise appropriate strategies to
keep pace with the innovations being made in conventional and
unconventional modes of warfare and as such there is an urgent
need to take action to implement the recommendations made by
the GoM and by the Standing Committee in their reports. The
Committee reiterate that the action in this regard for setting up a
high powered expert Committee should be taken immediately and
the Committee informed accordingly.

12
CHAPTER II
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN
ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT
Recommendation (Para No. 1)
Apart from a conventional war threat, the fast changing security
environment has been posing serious challenges before India in the form
of Internal situation of externally envisaged proxy war scenario, growing
menace of cross border terrorism and advancement in technology of
nuclear weapons and missiles particularly during the last two decades.
Undoubtedly, the modern day warfare techniques require synergised and
joint efforts on the part of different wings of the armed forces and the
time is now ripe when the traditional structures of the Armed Forces have
to be reorganized, integrated and geared up to meet the threat of growing
asymmetric challenges having serious security implications for the
nation. The Committee’s examination of the subject matter and their
interaction with the experts having experience of serving the Armed
Forces at the highest level has however, revealed that while certain steps
have been taken to promote the concept of jointness within the Services,
it is still at a nascent stage in the country. The Committee have dealt with
some of the important aspects related to the subject in the succeeding
paragraphs of the Report.
Reply of the Government
No Comments.
[MoD, OM No. H-11013/5/2009-D (Parl.), dated 12th May, 2009]
Recommendation (Para No. 4)
The Committee note that the Integrated Defence Staff (IDS) was
created in October, 2001 as a sequel to the decision by the Group of

13
Minister based on KRC. HQ IDS is presently functioning as staff in the
advisory mode to the Chairman, COSC and is headed by Chief of
Integrated Defence Staff (CISC). Considering the fact that one of the
primary objectives of HQ IDS is to entail bringing about transformation
and reforms within the armed forces, the Committee desire that the HQ
IDS should also be entrusted with the task of reviewing the existing Acts
applicable to the personnel serving in Army, Navy and Air Force with
a view to enacting a common law for defence services personnel taking
into account the present day requirements and the need for promoting
the concept of jointness within the Services.
Reply of the Government
Work on ‘Tri Service Act’ was commenced with effect from 2002.
Progress so far is as under:—
(a) A presentation on ‘Legal and Disciplinary Powers — Tri
Service Command’ was given by Judge Advocate General
{JAG (Army)} to Chiefs of Staff Committee (COSC) in
June 2002. Committee of JAG officers of three Services
was entrusted responsibility to prepare draft for Tri Service
Act.
(b) Issue was discussed by Principal Personal Officers Committee
(PPOC) in June 2006 under ‘Uniform Code of Military Justice
Bill 2002’. A Sub Committee headed by JAG (Navy) was
directed to examine the case.
(c) A draft of Tri Service (Discipline and Miscellaneous Provision)
Act 2006 was forwarded by JAG (Navy) to Deputy Chief of
Integrated Defence Staff [Doctrine, Organisation and Training
{DCIDS (DOT)}] in November 2006.
(d) Draft Tri Service Act was presented to PPOC by JAG (Navy)
in April 2008.
(e) Draft Tri Service Act 2008 forwarded to COSC Sectt. by PPOC
in August 2008.

14
(f) Draft ‘Tri Service Act’ and ‘Interim Powers and Procedures’
approved by COSC in September 2008.
(g) Clause by Clause ‘Statement of Objects and Reasons’ prepared
by JAG (Navy) and forwarded for approval of PPOC in
February 2009.
2. The present status is as under: -
(a) Ministry of Defence is awaiting the draft Tri Service Act
and ‘Statement of Objects and Reasons’ after scrutiny by
PPOC and COSC.
(b) As the Act is to be enacted as an Act of Parliament, steps
to do so will be initiated thereafter by Ministry of
Defence.
[MoD, OM No. H-11013/5/2009-D (Parl.), dated 12th May, 2009]
Recommendation (Para No. 6)
In the light of the fact that a number of countries such as France,
Germany, UK and USA have adopted the structure of jointness in their
armed forces the Committee desire that the Government should examine
the feasibility of seeking cooperation from such countries for imparting
training to senior level armed forces officers willing to serve in their
respective Services for at least two years after the training. The Committee
feel that such a training with focused attention on the concept of jointness
will go a long way in establishing the requisite level of synergy among
the Armed Forces.
Reply of the Government
A procedure for detailing officers of the three Services already exists
and is being followed. Secretary, Joint Training Committee at HQ IDS
is the nodal point. Courses subscribed are as suggested by the host
country. In addition, Military Attaches (MAs)/Defence Attaches (DAs) in
the Indian Embassies in USA, UK, Australia, France and Germany

15
have been requested to identify the courses with predominant joint
service content, which may be beneficial to our officers. The replies are
awaited.
[MoD, OM No. H-11013/5/2009-D (Parl.), dated 12th May, 2009]
Recommendation (Para No. 10)
Events in the recent past have highlighted lack of coordination
between Navy and Coast Guard resulting in national catastrophe. The
Committee strongly believe that it is high time that the Government
reviewed this issue in its entirety and initiated appropriate steps to put
in place an effective mechanism for establishing better coordination and
jointness between Navy and Coast Guard in the paramount interest of
the national security.
Reply of the Government
The maritime and coastal security against threats from the sea has
been reviewed and proposed measures to strengthen security have been
approved by CCS at a meeting held on 16 Feb. 2009.
[MoD, OM No. H-11013/5/2009-D (Parl.), dated 12th May, 2009]
Recommendation (Para No. 12)
The Committee note that the Group of Ministers in its report on
“Reforming the National Security System” had recommended for setting
up of a National Defence University to undertake long term defence and
strategic studies. The Committee are however, distressed to find that the
Ministry are still awaiting Cabinet clearance for the proposal for the land
needed for setting up of the proposed university and it would take
another three years to establish it. The Committee deplore such inordinate
delay on a matter so vital for fostering the necessary jointmanship in
the Armed Forces and they desire the Ministry to take immediate steps
to establish the Indian National Defence University without any further
loss of time. The Committee would also like to be apprised of the precise
steps taken in this regard.

16
Reply of the Government
The case has at present been put up for Cabinet approval. Further
actions will be initiated as per the directions during the clearance.
[MoD, OM No. H-11013/5/2009-D (Parl.), dated 12th May, 2009]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para 23 of Chapter I of the Report)

17
CHAPTER III
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE
COMMITTEE DO NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE IN
VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT REPLIES
Recommendation (Para No. 5)
The Committee understand that there are certain areas at the
operational and strategic level within the armed forces which are
common to two or more services. The Committee, therefore, recommend
that these areas be identified at the earliest so that duplication of efforts
and wasteful expenditure due to overlapping is avoided. The Committee
also recommend that the Ministry of Defence should review their present
policy of imparting joint training to the senior level officers in the Defence
Services with a view to introducing modern day performance manage-
ment processes aimed at fostering the spirit of jointness among them and
also to prepare them to assume greater responsibilities in the current and
envisaged environment of jointness within the Services.
Reply of the Government
1. A Tri Services Committee on Joint Training was constituted
under HQ IDS to identify areas at operational and strategic level within
the Armed Forces which are common to two or more Services.
2. The Committee identified 45 fields/areas where joint training
can/has been conducted so far. The following has been progressed on
these issues:—
(a) College of Joint Warfare: The issue was deliberated in COSC,
which directed that the present arrangement of conducting
High Command Courses by all three Services separately with
Service specific requirements is working well and conduct of
Joint Capsule (JOCAPSULE) is considered adequate.

18
(b) Amphibious: Action completed. Amphibious doctrine has
been released on 19 September 08. An Amphibious Warfare
Cell was created at HQ IDS to function under Operations
Branch. HQ ANC is designated as nodal agency to oversee
Amphibious training between three Services.
(c) Advanced Light Helicopter Technical Type Training
Academy (ALH TETTRA): The Institute has been established
and is functioning at 12 TETTRA at Air Force Station
Hakimpet.
(d) Missile Training:  COSC has directed that status quo be
maintained.
(e) Institute of Information Technology:  The raising of AIIT,
Secunderabad as a AFTI has been turned down by the
Government in Jan 04.
(f) Joint Services Coordinating Body for Information Warfare:
COSC directed that Defence Information War Agency (DIWA)
now DIARA (Defence Information Assurance & Research
Agency) will be nodal agency for joint coordination of IW
aspect, and there is no need for the separate group.
(g) Media: The case is being examined in consultation with
Principal Information Officer (PIO), MoD and their sugges-
tions are awaited. However, media training for officer of the
three Services is being conducted at Indian Institute of Mass
Communication (IIMC), New Delhi (JNU) coordinated by
HQ IDS.
(h) Software Development Cell: COSC directed that DIWA (now
DIARA) is seen as a major step towards this integration.
(i) Air Defence (C&R):  COSC approved training of instructors
of all three Services at Air Defence College, Memora under the
aegis of Air Force. Action completed.
(j) Bomb Disposal:  Nominated officers and PBOR of AF and
Navy should attend courses at College of Military Engineering
(CME). COSC directed that status quo to remain.

19
(k) Air Traffic Control: Approval was accorded by COSC for joint
ATC training at Air Traffic Controlling Officers Training
Establishment (ATCOTE), Hyderabad under the aegis of Air
Force. Action completed.
(l) Meteorology (Met): COSC directed that status quo to remain.
(m) Provost (Pro): Due to lack of commonality in role & syllabus,
Chairman COSC & CNS agreed that the case not be progressed
any further.
(n) Foreign Languages:  COSC directed that there is no need
for establishing a joint institute and status quo to be
maintained.
(o) Physical Training:  The Board of officers has recommended
setting up an AFTI as there was no commonality. COSC has
approved status quo.
(p) Cooks & Stewards:  Navy is offering vacancies to Army &
Air Force for training of cooks & stewards at their training
institute.
(q) Basic Training:  Combining basic training has not been
recommended, as present systems for training of officers &
PBOR recruits to remain largely unchanged. COSC directed
that status quo to remain.
(r) Disaster Management:  Disaster Management forms part of
the syllabus of Higher Command and Staff Courses and is
being covered as a capsule.
(s) Oceanography: No changes are recommended, as the Navy is
the sole user. Present system of training at National Institute
of Oceanography, Goa be continued. COSC directed that status
quo to remain.
(t) Drivers Training:  Driving training forms part of ab-initio
training in all Services. Not considered prudent to combine it.
COSC directed that status quo to remain.

20
(u) Music: Chairman Vice Chiefs Committee (VCC) directed that
status quo be maintained for Services Music Training
Institutes. However, more vacancies be allotted to Navy/Air
Force at Military Music Wing, Pachmari & avenues for more
cross attendance be explored.
(v) Medical: After the review of training of medical persons COSC
directed that current pattern of training is satisfactory.
(w) Engineering Education:  Graduate entry scheme not proved
completely successful due to lack of quality & Nos. Hence
need to develop Service oriented engineering systems that relies
on the intake from 10+2 stage or variation thereof, such as
NDA. Action completed as individual Services have gone in
for direct intake of Engineering students. Presently status quo
is being maintained.
(x) Post Graduate (PG) Courses: Presently Services are sending
officers to Indian Institute of Technologies & other equivalent
organisations for PG Engineering Studies. COSC directed that
present system be continued.
(y) NDA & Defence Services Staff College (DSSC):  These are
ongoing issues, status quo to remain till Indian National
Defence University (INDU) is established.
(z) Further Training of Gen/Flag/Air Officers: Presently there is
no structured training beyond Brig. other than Combined
Operational Review and Evaluation (CORE) programme,
hence, recommended that officers posted to joint staff
appointments undergo a short capsule. COSC directed that
the point be progressed once CCS approval for INDU is
received.
(aa) Joint Staff Appoints (JSAs) & Joint Staff Officers (JSOs)
COSC directed that 
status quo be maintained:  At present
requirement of JSOs for JSAs is small. JSOs training to be need
based. Implementation to be done by Service HQs.

21
(ab) Operation Related Training:  COSC directed that one war
game be conducted at Service HQ level each year & joint
exercises at Command HQ level once in two years. The
implementation is by JOCOM. Since 2003, exercises are being
regularly planned & conducted.
(ac) Special Forces (SF) Training:  COSC approved the conduct
of Inter-Services Joint Training exercises for cohesion in
Security Forces Operations. Exercises have been held in
2005 and 2007. Joint SF doctrine has also been issued in
Sep. 2008.
(ad) Staff Duties: Need to review Joint Service Staff Duties (JSSD)
manuals & Glossary of Military Terms. The same have been
done & new JSSD manual was issued by DSSC in Aug. 2006
& Aug. 2007. Glossary of Military Terms was published in
Mar. 2005.
(ae) Communication Protocols:  There is a need to formulate
Common Communication Methods, Protocols, Cipher Systems
etc. Based on the recommendations of the expert committee on
Standard Communication Procedures & Protocols for the three
Services, Joint Service Communication Pamphlets (JSCPs) are
being revised & new ones issued.
(af) Management of EM Spectrum: Need to review EM spectrum
Management System with a long term perspective and adopt
an integrated approach. A Committee has been formed to
progress the issue.
(ag) Logistics: The proposal for Joint Training of Logistics &
Material Management was discussed at COSC & dropped.
(ah) Joint Training Capsules at DSSC: Committee recommended
that capsule for three Services (Col. to Brig. & equivalent) be
conducted as a joint course at DSSC. Capsule was held in 2004
but due to difficulties experienced it was decided not to
conduct this capsule at DSSC.

22
(ai) Senior Officers Advance Strategic Programme:  COSC
recommended that status quo be maintained till INDU is
established.
(aj) Training of Senior Officers:  CORE programme is being
held every year under the responsibility of a Service HQ in
turn.
(ak) National Defence University (NDU):  All existing single &
joint training institutes to be affiliated to NDU for award of
degree. Affiliation of NDU for award of degree to be limited
to the institutions as envisaged within the scope of INDU.
Subsequent addition of institutions could be examined once
INDU is fully set up & functional.
3. Board of Officers (BOOs) in Advance Stage of Finalisation:
The BOOs which are in an advanced stage of finalization are as
follows: -
(a) Defence Institute of Nuclear Sciences (DINSs): Presentation
given to VCC on 09 Feb. 09. Review of the recommendations
is under progress due to shortcomings observed.
(b) Intelligence: A case has been taken up for the establishment
of a National Intelligence Academy with the Task Force on
Revamping of Intelligence Organizational to address joint
Intelligence Training at the National level. The proposal has
found ready acceptance. If approved by the PM it will serve
the Defence Services requirement adequately.
(c) Military Law: Services HQs have recommended that the IML
Kamptee should continue to function as an Army Training
Institute and the training requirement of Navy and AF can also
be met in a cost effective manner.
4. Board of Officers (BOOs) Currently in Progress:  BOOs on
Unmanned Aerial Vehicles (UAVs) and Helicopter Training are currently
in progress.

23
5. In addition, the following has been done regarding joint
training:—
(a) Revision of Syllabus:  A BOO has examined the syllabus of
DSSC, NDA & College of Defence Management (CDM). The
Joint contact of the issues has been increased substantially to
60% as in DSSC. In DSSC there are now certain tutorials which
are fully joint.
(b) CORE Programme:  A CORE programme is held every year
conducted in rotation by the three Services for training of
Senior Officers Lt. Gen. and equivalent of the three Services.
The aim is to expose officers to national strategic issues.
(c) Amphex: Amphex a Tri Services exercise has conducted off
the coast of Gujarat in Feb. 2009.
[MoD, OM No. H-11013/5/2009-D (Parl.), dated 12th May, 2009]

24
CHAPTER IV
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF
WHICH REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT
BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE
Recommendation (Para No. 2)
The Kargil Review Committee (KRC), constituted by the Government
after the Kargil war had observed in paragraph 14.19 of its report that
“India is perhaps the only major democracy where the Armed Forces
Headquarters are outside the apex governmental structure”. They had
also observed that “higher decisions on equipment, force levels and
strategy are not collegiate but command-oriented. The Prime Minister and
Defence Minister do not have the benefit of the views and expertise of
the Army Commanders and their equivalents in the Navy and Air Force
so that higher level defence management decision are more consensual
and broadbased”. The KRC had also expressed the view that: “Most
opposition to change comes from inadequate knowledge of the national
security decision-making process elsewhere in the world and a reluctance
to change the status quo….... In fact, locating the services Headquarters
in the Government will further enhance civilian supremacy”. It was in
this context that the KRC had recommended that that the entire gamut
of national security management and apex decision-making and the
structure and interface between the Ministry of Defence and the Armed
Forces Headquarters be comprehensively studied and reorganized. Even
the Group of Ministers. (GoM) in paragraph 6.4 of its report on
‘Reforming National Security System. had pointed out that the “concept
of “attached offices” as applied to Services Headquarters; problems of
inter-se relativities; multiple duplicated and complex procedures govern-
ing the exercise of administrative and financial powers; and the concept
of ‘advice’ to the Minister, have all contributed to problems in the
management of Defence. This situation requires to be rectified, to promote
improved understanding and efficient functioning of the Ministry.”

25
Although considerable time has elapsed since the KRC and GoM
submitted their reports, the Committee regret to observe that the required
level of interface between the Ministry of Defence and the Armed Forces
Headquarters is still missing as is evident from the candid admission
of the Ministry that renaming of Army and Naval Headquarters as
Integrated Headquarters is merely “cosmetic”. The Committee, therefore,
strongly recommend that the staffing pattern in the Ministry of Defence
be suitably changed to appoint the Armed Forces personnel of requisite
expertise at the level of Joint Secretary and/or Additional Secretary so
that the Armed Forces Headquarters may be intrinsically involved in
national security management and apex decision making processes.
Needless to say that such a system would not only provide an effective
interface between the MoD and the different Services but will also go
a long way in promoting and synchronizing jointness among the Services
Headquarters.
Reply of the Government
The existing Manpower status of HQ IDS is as under: -
Sl. Details Sanctioned To tal Actual T otal
No. Strength Strength
Officers Man- Officers Man-
power power
1. Three Services 117 105 222 117 105 222
2. MEA 02 - 02 - - -
3. DRDO 04 - 04 01 - 01
4. Civil Services 05* - 05 04 - 04
5. DoD 01 - 01 - - -
6. AFHQ Cadre 02 123 125 05# 74 79
Total 131 228 359 127 179 306
*Including Civil Analyst (JS Equivalent) – 01 Not posted.
#Enhancement of Posts after cadre re-structuring by the Government within the
authorized strength of Civilians from AFHQ Cadre.

26
2. Aspects of the cross staff pattern, as suggested by the
Committee, have been enunciated in the structure of HQ IDS. The
aforesaid structure of HQ IDS includes the following posts from
Ministry of Defence (MoD), Ministry of External Affairs (MEA), Defence
Research and Development Organisation (DRDO) and Intelligence
Agencies:—
(a) Joint Secretary (International Affairs)- from MEA
(b) Joint Secretary (Administration & Personnel) – from MoD.
(c) Scientific Advisor to Chief of Integrated Staff Committee
(CISC)(Joint Secretary level) – from DRDO.
(d) Civil Analyst (Joint Secretary level) – from Intelligence
Agency.
[MoD, OM No. H-11013/5/2009-D (Parl.), dated 12th May, 2009]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para 8 of Chapter I of the Report)
Recommendation (Para No. 3)
The Committee have been informed that the Chiefs of the Staff
Committee (COSC) is a forum for the three Service Chiefs to discuss
matter having a bearing on the activities of the Services and also to advise
the Ministry. The position of the Chairman of the COSC presently
devolves on a longest serving Chief of Staff and consequently rotates
amongst three Services. In the light of the fact that the Chairman of the
COSC has no command and control authority over the Services other than
his own, the Committee are unable to comprehend whether such a system
will prove efficacious enough to ensure quick response and coordinated
action in emergent situations. Considering the fact that the key to success
in modern day warfare operations is the ability of the different wings
of the Armed Forces to integrate their efforts under a single command
without any loss of time, the Committee are of the considered view that
the creation of an additional post of Chief of Defence Staff (CDS) to act
as Chairman of the COSC is essential to ensure optimum level of

27
jointness among the different wings of the Armed Forces and to provide
single-point military advice to the Government. During their examination,
the Committee have been given to understand that the post of CDS
presently exists in 67 countries including France, Germany, UK and USA
and the system has proved its efficacy in those countries. The Committee,
therefore, desire that the Government should pay serious attention
towards this aspect by evolving consensus on this issue and taking timely
and appropriate steps to revise the composition of the COSC by creating
a post of CDS to act as Chairman of COSC. The incumbent so selected
for the post may be a four-star officer drawn from the Services in rotation
and be appointed for a tenure of not less than two years. The duties and
responsibilities to be entrusted to the CDS may be decided by the
Government keeping in view the objectivity and independence required
for the purpose. The Committee are of the firm view that till such time
the post of CDS is created, the Government may take steps to give
appropriate authority to the Chairman COSC in the present set up to
command and control the resources of the Defence Services whenever the
situation so demands.
Reply of the Government
The institutional support and infrastructure has already been
created in the form of HQ IDS, to support the appointment of Chief of
Defence Staff (CDS).
2. Case for finding consensus on appointment of CDS, as
suggested by the Committee has been taken up with Political Parties by
the Raksha Mantri. Since a number of Political Parties are yet to respond,
a final reply can only be prepared on receipt of replies from them.
[MoD, OM No. H-11013/5/2009-D (Parl.), dated 12th May, 2009]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para 9 of Chapter I of the Report)
Recommendation (Para No. 7)
The events in the past including Kargil intrusion and terrorists’
attack in Mumbai on 26 November, 2008 have brought out the instances

28
of lack of coordination among different intelligence gathering agencies
including those of military intelligence resulting in loss of precious lives
of defence services and police force personnel as well as those of civilians.
While expressing their grave concern over the prevailing situation, the
Committee strongly recommend that the Government should take
immediate steps to constitute a federal central intelligence agency
covering under its umbrella even the tri-service intelligence gathering
network.
Reply of the GovernmentReply of the GovernmentReply of the GovernmentReply of the GovernmentReply of the Government
A ‘Multi Agency Centre’ (MAC) has been established under MHA
post 26/11. Information sharing is done at the MAC on daily basis by
all intelligence agencies. Two officers from the Armed Forces have been
posted to Defence Intelligence Agency (DIA), which is a tri-Service
Intelligence Agency of MoD, and are placed at MAC.
[MoD, OM No. H-11013/5/2009-D (Parl.), dated 12th May, 2009]
Comments of the CommitteeComments of the CommitteeComments of the CommitteeComments of the CommitteeComments of the Committee
(Please see Para 14 of Chapter I of the Report)
Recommendation (Para No. 11)Recommendation (Para No. 11)Recommendation (Para No. 11)Recommendation (Para No. 11)Recommendation (Para No. 11)
The Committee find it rather strange that even after eight years of
its creation, HQ ANC continues to be deficient of civilian support staff
with just seven officials in place as against the authorized strength of
115 posts. The Committee have been informed that the proposal for
delegation of powers to appoint civilian staff in HQ ANC through direct
recruitment is still under process for approval of Department of Personnel
& Training. While expressing their displeasure over lack of concrete steps
to make good the deficiency of staff in a timely manner, the Committee
hope that concerted efforts would at least now be made to fill up the
vacancies expeditiously so as to ensure that HQ ANC functions in an
efficient manner.

29
Reply of the GovernmentReply of the GovernmentReply of the GovernmentReply of the GovernmentReply of the Government
As per Peace establishment (PE) authorization, HQ ANC was to be
provided civilian staff from the Service HQs. Service HQs having
indicated inability to provide the manpower owing to deficiencies, the
only option is to carry out amendment of PE transferring the posts from
the Services to HQ ANC and empowering Commander in Chief ANC
(CINCAN) to carry out recruitment at ANC. A proposal for amendment
of Peace Establishment of ANC was taken up with MoD on 21 Oct. 2008.
MoD desired that the issue of delegation of powers of appointing
authority be finalized before amending the PE. The proposal was
examined in detail in consultation with Department of Personnel and
Training. Final proposal with draft Gazette Notification with approval
of MoD and Ministry of Law has been submitted to Department of
Personnel and Training on 09 Feb. 2009. Once notification is issued after
approval of competent authority Minister of State DOP&T (MoS DOP&T),
further action to fill up the posts can be initiated.
[MoD, OM No. H-11013/5/2009-D (Parl.), dated 12th May, 2009]
Comments of the CommitteeComments of the CommitteeComments of the CommitteeComments of the CommitteeComments of the Committee
(Please see Para 20 of Chapter I of the Report)
Recommendation (Para No. 13)Recommendation (Para No. 13)Recommendation (Para No. 13)Recommendation (Para No. 13)Recommendation (Para No. 13)
The Committee strongly feel that the country today faces entirely
new dimensions of security threats and challenges in the changing global
scenario and there is an imperative need to continuously devise
appropriate strategies to keep pace with the innovations being made in
conventional and unconventional modes of warfare. In the light of the
evidence tendered by the representatives of the Ministry of Defence and
after hearing the views of the experts having experience of serving the
armed forces at the highest level, the Committee strongly recommend that
the Government should constitute a high powered expert committee to
reorganise, reform and restructure the Armed Forces with a view to
implementing the recommendations made on the subject matter both by
the GoM in its report submitted in 2001 and the Standing Committee

30
on Defence in their earlier as well as this Report. The Committee
would like to be apprised of the steps taken by the Government in this
regard.
Reply of the GovernmentReply of the GovernmentReply of the GovernmentReply of the GovernmentReply of the Government
The Parliamentary Standing Committee on Defence has sought a
review of the functioning of tri-Service Defence institutions. Currently, an
Internal Review of the Organization, role and functions is under process.
Consequently, HQ IDS would prepare a detailed Paper to be deliberated
by COSC which would then make recommendations to the Ministry.
[MoD, OM No. H-11013/5/2009-D (Parl.), dated 12th May, 2009]
Comments of the CommitteeComments of the CommitteeComments of the CommitteeComments of the CommitteeComments of the Committee
(Please see Para 26 of Chapter I of the Report)

31
CHAPTER VCHAPTER VCHAPTER VCHAPTER VCHAPTER V
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH
REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED
Recommendation (Para No. 8)Recommendation (Para No. 8)Recommendation (Para No. 8)Recommendation (Para No. 8)Recommendation (Para No. 8)
The Committee feel that cross attachment of officers in operational
and planning wings of different Services at command level and above
will help the officers in not only understanding the capabilities and
limitations of different wings of the armed forces but also provide them
an opportunity to gainfully utilize their experience in promoting
jointmanship among the forces. The Committee, therefore, urge upon the
Ministry to devise suitable strategies in this regard.
Reply of the GovernmentReply of the GovernmentReply of the GovernmentReply of the GovernmentReply of the Government
At present officers are being cross posted to Operations Branch at
other Service HQ, to foster jointness in planning. Also, requisite
component of Air Force (Advance HQ/Tactical HQ) are co-located to
achieve jointness at the Army Command HQ level. Furthermore, selected
officers who tenant important appointments in the operational/ planning
branches at HQs are generally out of those who have undergone premier
courses like National Defence College Course, Higher Command/Higher
Defence Management Course where emphasis is on jointness and
integration. The issue regarding Below Service HQ level is under
examination by respective Service HQs.
[MoD, OM No. H-11013/5/2009-D (Parl.), dated 12th May, 2009]
Comments of the CommitteeComments of the CommitteeComments of the CommitteeComments of the CommitteeComments of the Committee
(Please see Para 17 of Chapter I of the Report)

32
Recommendation (Para No. 9)Recommendation (Para No. 9)Recommendation (Para No. 9)Recommendation (Para No. 9)Recommendation (Para No. 9)
In order to bring about synergy and to strengthen the jointness in
the structure of the armed forces in a more effective manner, the
Committee desire that the officers who have attended joint training
programmes and/or rendered services in the cross attachments should
be given incentives in the form of due weightage at the time of promotions
and postings.
Reply of the GovernmentReply of the GovernmentReply of the GovernmentReply of the GovernmentReply of the Government
Issue of giving incentives in the form of weightage at the time of
promotion for personnel who have attended joint training programmes
and/or rendered service in the cross attachments is being discussed by
the respective Service HQs as, postings & promotion issues are in their
domain. No tri-Service Policy has been formulated on the issue and the
subject is under consideration at Service HQrs.
[MoD, OM No. H-11013/5/2009-D (Parl.), dated 12th May, 2009]
 N EW DELHI; SATPAL MAHARAJ,
11 December , 2009 Chairman,
20 Agrahayana , 1931  (Saka) Standing Committee on Defence.

33
ANNEXURE
MINUTES OF THE SEVENTH SITTING OF THE STANDING
COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE (2009–10)
The Committee sat on Friday, the 11th December, 2009 from
1500 to 1600 hrs. in Committee Room ‘D’, Parliament House Annexe,
New Delhi.
PRESENT
Shri Satpal Maharaj— Chairman
M
EMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Kamal Kishor ‘Commando’
3. Shri Varun Gandhi
4. Dr. Sucharu Ranjan Haldar
5. Shri Arjun Ram Meghwal
6. Dr. Prasanna Kumar Patasani
7. Shri A.T. Nana Patil
8. Shri Bhaskarrao Bapurao Patil
9. Shri Ijyaraj Singh
10. Rajkumari Ratna Singh
Rajya Sabha
11. Shri Mukut Mithi
12. Smt. Shobhana Bhartia
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri T. K. Mukherjee — Joint Secretary
2. Smt. Sudesh Luthra — Director
3. Shri N.S. Hooda — Additional Director

34
2. At the outset, the Hon’ble Chairman welcomed the members
to the sitting of the Committee. The Committee then took up for
consideration the draft Report on ‘Demands for Grants (2009-10)’ of the
Ministry of Defence and adopted the same with a slight modification
in respect of recommendations at Para No. 17 relating to Sainik School.
3. The Committee thereafter took up for consideration the
draft action taken report on the observations/recommendations made by
the Committee in their Thirty-sixth Report (Fourteenth Lok Sabha) on
‘Status of implementation of Unified Command for Armed Forces’. After
deliberations the Committee adopted the report without any modification.
4. The Committee, then, authorised the Chairman to finalise the
above Draft Reports in the light of the factual verifications made by the
concerned Ministry and present the same to the House on a date
convenient to him.
The Committee then adjourned.

35
APPENDIXAPPENDIXAPPENDIXAPPENDIXAPPENDIX
ANALYSIS OF THE ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT
ON THE RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS CONTAINED
IN THE THIRTY-SIXTH REPORT OF THE STANDING
COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE
Percentage
of Total
1. Total number of recommendations 13
2. Recommendations/Observations which 5 38
have been accepted by Government
Para Nos. 1, 4, 6, 10 and 12
3. Recommendations/Observations which 1 8
the Committee do not desire to pursue
in view of Government’s replies
Para No. 5
4. Recommendations/Observations in respect 5 38
of which replies of Government have not
been accepted by the Committee
Para Nos. 2, 3, 7, 11 and 13
5. Recommendations/Observations in respect 2 16
of which final replies of the Government
are  still awaited
Para Nos. 8 and 9

SECOND REPORT
STANDING COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE
(2009-2010)
(FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA)
MINISTRY OF DEFENCE
Action Taken Report on the recommendations/observations
of the Committee contained in the Thirty-sixth Report
(Fourteenth Lok Sabha) on ‘Status of Implementation
of Unified Command for Armed Forces’
Presented to Lok Sabha on 16 December, 2009
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 16 December, 2009
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
December, 2009/Agrahayana, 1931 (Saka)
lR;esolR;esolR;esolR;esolR;eso t;rst;rst;rst;rst;rs


C.O.D. No. 112C.O.D. No. 112C.O.D. No. 112C.O.D. No. 112C.O.D. No. 112
Price : Rs. 42.00
© 2009 B Y LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of
Business in Lok Sabha (Thirteenth Edition) and printed by M/s. The
Indian Press, Delhi-110 033.

CONTENTSCONTENTSCONTENTSCONTENTSCONTENTS
(iii)
(v)
1
12
17
24
31
33
35
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (2009-2010) ................................................
INTRODUCTION.............................................................................................................
CHAPTER I Report..............................................................................................
CHAPTER II Recommendations/Observations which have been
accepted by the Government................................................
CHAPTER III Recommendations/Observations which the Committee
do not desire to pursue in view of Government’s
replies.............................................................................................
CHAPTER IV Recommendations/Observations in respect of which
replies of Government have not been accepted by the
Committee.....................................................................................
C
HAPTER V Recommendations/Observations in respect of which
final replies of Government are still awaited...............
ANNEXURE
Minutes of the Sitting of the Committee ......................
APPENDIX
Analysis of action taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations contained in the
36th Report of the Standing Committee on Defence
(Fourteenth Lok Sabha)...........................................................
PAGE

COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE
(2009-10)
Shri Satpal Maharaj —  Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Harish Choudhary
3. Shri Kamal Kishor ‘Commando’
4. Shri H.D. Devegowda
5. Shri Varun Gandhi
6. Dr. Sucharu Ranjan Haldar
7. Shri Ramesh Jigajinagi
8. Shri Kapil Muni Karwaria
9. Shri Arjun Ram Meghwal
10. Shri Asaduddin Owaisi
11. Dr. Prasanna Kumar Patasani
12. Shri A.T. Nana Patil
13. Shri Bhaskarrao Bapurao Patil
14. Shri Amarnath Pradhan
15. Shri C. Rajendran
16. Shri M. Raja Mohan Reddy
17. Shri Baju Ban Riyan
18. Shri Ijyaraj Singh
19. Shri Kalyan Singh
20. Shri Mahabali Singh
21. Rajkumari Ratna Singh
Rajya Sabha
22. Shri R.K. Dhawan
23. Prof. P.J. Kurien
(iii)

24. Shri Mukut Mithi
25. Shri Prakash Javadekar
26. Shri K.B. Shanappa
27. Shri T.K. Rangarajan
28. Shri Munquad Ali
29. Shri M.V. Mysura Reddy
30. Smt. Shobhana Bhartia
31. Shri Sanjay Raut
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri T.K. Mukherjee — Joint Secretary
2. Smt. Sudesh Luthra — Director
3. Shri N.S. Hooda — Additional Director
4. Smt. J.M. Sinha — Under Secretary
(iv)

INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairman of the Standing Committee on Defence (2009-2010),
having been authorised by the Committee to submit the report on their
behalf, present this Second Report on action taken by the Government
on the recommendations/observations contained in the Thirty-sixth
Report (Fourteenth Lok Sabha) on ‘Status of implementation of Unified
Command for Armed Forces’ relating to the Ministry of Defence.
2. The Thirty-sixth Report was presented to the Lok Sabha on
24 February, 2009 and laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha on the same
day. The Ministry furnished their Action Taken Notes on the
Recommendations/Observations contained in the Thirty-sixth Report on
12 May, 2009.
3. The Report was considered and adopted by the Committee at
their sitting held on 11 December, 2009.
4. For facility of reference and convenience, Recommendations/
Observations of the Committee have been printed in bold letters in the
Report.
5. An analysis of Action Taken by Government on the
Recommendations/Observations contained in the Thirty-sixth Report
(Fourteenth Lok Sabha) of the Committee is given at Appendix.
(v)
 N
EW DELHI; SATPAL MAHARAJ,
14 December , 2009 Chairman,
23 Agrahayana , 1931  (Saka) Standing Committee on Defence.

STANDING COMMITTEE ONSTANDING COMMITTEE ONSTANDING COMMITTEE ONSTANDING COMMITTEE ONSTANDING COMMITTEE ON
DEFENCEDEFENCEDEFENCEDEFENCEDEFENCE
(2009-2010)(2009-2010)(2009-2010)(2009-2010)(2009-2010)
FIFTEENTH LOK SABHAFIFTEENTH LOK SABHAFIFTEENTH LOK SABHAFIFTEENTH LOK SABHAFIFTEENTH LOK SABHA
MINISTRY OF DEFENCE
Action Taken Report on the recommendations/observations
of the Committee contained in the Thirty-sixth Report
(Fourteenth Lok Sabha) on ‘Status of Implementation
of Unified Command for Armed Forces’
22222
SECOND REPORTSECOND REPORTSECOND REPORTSECOND REPORTSECOND REPORT
LOK SABHA SECRETARIATLOK SABHA SECRETARIATLOK SABHA SECRETARIATLOK SABHA SECRETARIATLOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHINEW DELHINEW DELHINEW DELHINEW DELHI
December, 2009/Agrahayana, 1931 (Saka)
lR;eso t;rs


“All Parliamentary Publications including DRSC Reports are
available on sale at the Sales Counter, Reception, Parliament House
(Tel. Nos. 23034726, 23034495, 23034496), Agents appointed
by Lok Sabha Secretariat and Publications Division, Ministry
of Information and Broadcasting, CGO Complex, Lodhi Road,
New Delhi (Tel. Nos. 24367260, 24365610) and their outlets. The said
information is available on website ‘www.parliamentofindia.nic.in’.
The Souvenir Items with logo of Parliament are also available
at Sales Counter, Reception, Parliament House, New Delhi.
The Souvenir items with Parliament Museum logo are available for
sale at Souvenir Shop (Tel. No. 23035323), Parliament Museum,
Parliament Library Building, New Delhi. List of these items are
available on the website mentioned above.”