3
STANDING COMMITTEE
ON DEFENCE
(2009-2010)
FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA
MINISTRY OF DEFENCE
[Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations contained
in the Thirty-first Report of the Committee (Fourteenth Lok Sabha)
on ‘Stress Managment in Armed Forces’]
THIRD REPORT
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
January, 2010/Pausa, 1931 (Saka)

THIRD REPORT
STANDING COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE
(2009-2010)
(FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA)
MINISTRY OF DEFENCE
[Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations contained
in the Thirty-first Report of the Committee (Fourteenth Lok Sabha)
on ‘Stress Management in Armed Forces’]
Presented to Lok Sabha on .................
Laid  in  Rajya Sabha on ...................
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
January, 2010/Pausa, 1931 (Saka)


C.O.D. No. 109
Price : Rs. 84.00
© 2010 BY LOK SABHA S ECRETARIAT
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of
Business in Lok Sabha (Thirteenth Edition) and printed by Jainco Art India,
New Delhi-110 005.

(i)
CONTENTS
PAGE
COMPOSITION OF THE C OMMITTEE (2009-2010) ........................................ (iii)
INTRODUCTION .............................................................................................. (v)
CHAPTER I Report ............................................................................ 1
CHAPTER II Recommendations/Observations which have
been accepted by the Government ........................
CHAPTER III Recommendations/Observations which the
Committee do not desire to pursue in
view of Government’s replies .................................
CHAPTER IV Recommendations/Observations in respect of
which replies of Government have not been
accepted by the Committee .....................................
CHAPTER V Recommendations/Observations in respect of
which final replies of Government are still
awaited ..........................................................................
MINUTES OF THE S ITTING ............................................................................
ANNEXURE ....................................................................................................
APPENDIX Analysis of Action Taken by the Government
on the recommendations contained in the
22nd Report of the Standing Committee on
Defence (Fourteenth Lok Sabha) ............................

COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE
ON DEFENCE (2009-10)
  Shri Satpal Maharaj —  Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Harish Choudhary
3. Shri Kamal Kishor ‘Commando’
4. Shri H.D. Devegowda
5. Shri Varun Gandhi
6. Dr. Sucharu Ranjan Haldar
7. Shri Ramesh Jigajinagi
8. Shri Kapil Muni Karwaria
9. Shri Arjun Ram Meghwal
10. Shri Asaduddin Owaisi
11.D r. Prasanna Kumar Patasani
12. Shri A.T. Nana Patil
13. Shri Bhaskarrao Bapurao Patil
14. Shri Amarnath Prdhan
15. Shri C. Rajendran
16. Shri M. Raja Mohan Reddy
17. Shri Baju Ban Riyan
18. Shri Ijyaraj Singh
19. Shri Kalyan Singh
20. Shri Mahabali Singh
21. Rajkumari Ratna Singh
(iii)

Rajya Sabha
22. Shri R.K. Dhawan
23. Prof. P .J. Kurien
24. Shri Mukut Mithi
25. Shri Prakash Javadekar
26. SHri K.B. Shanappa
27. Shri T.K. Rangarajan
28. Shri Munquad Ali
29. Shri M.V . Mysura Reddy
30. Smt. Shobhana Bhartia
31. Shri Sanjay Raut
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri T.K. Mukherjee — Joint Secretary
2. Smt. Sudesh Luthra — Director
3. Shri N.S. Hooda — Additional Director
4. Smt. J.M. Sinha — Under Secretary
(iv)

(v)
INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairman of the Standing Committee on Defence (2009-10),
having been authorized by the Committee to present the Report on
their behalf, do present this Third Report of the Committee on Action
Taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the
of the Committee (Fourteenth Lok Sabha) on ‘Stress Management in
Armed Forces’.
2. The Thirty-First Report was presented to Lok Sabha and laid in
Rajya Sabha on 21 October, 2008. The Report contained 19
recommendations/observations and the Ministry of Defence have
furnished their Action Taken Replies on all the recommendations/
observations.
3. The Draft Action Taken Report was considered and adopted by
the Committee at their sitting held on 5, January 2010.
4. An analysis of action taken by the Government on
recommendations contained in Thirty-First Report of the Standing
Committee on Defence (Fourteenth Lok Sabha) is given in the
Appendix.
  N
EW D ELHI;S ATPAL MAHARAJ,
5 January, 2010 Chairman,
  Pausa, 1931 (Saka) Standing Committee on Defence.

CHAPTER I
REPORT
This Report of the Standing Committee on Defence deals with
action taken by the Government on the recommendations/observations
contained in their Thirty-first Report (14th Lok Sabha) on ‘Stress
Management in Armed Forces’ which was presented to Lok Sabha
and laid in Rajya Sabha on 21.10.2008.
2. The Committee’s Thirty-first Report (Fourteenth Lok Sabha)
contained observations/recommendations on the following aspects:—
Sl.No. Para No. Subject
 1. 1 Cases of suicides and fratricidal killings
 2. 2 Stress Management in the Armed Forces
 3. 3 Studies conducted on stress related incidents
 4. 4 Study Reports on Stress Management
 5. 5 Suicide in Peace Stations
 6. 6 Causes of Stress
 7. 7 Familial Reasons for Stress
 8. 8 Responsiveness of Civil Administration
 9. 9 Inter personnel relationship
10. 10 Abolition of practice of domestic ‘Sahayaks’
11.1 1 Basic Amenities
12. 12 Shortage of manpower
13. 13 Leave policy
14. 14 Reluctance in keeping Psychiatrist’s help
15. 15 Mental Health Professionals
16. 16 Establishment of Armed Forces Tribunal
1

2
3. Action Taken Replies have been received from the Government
in respect of all the recommendations/observations contained in the
Report. These replies have been examined and categorized as
follows:—
(i) Recommendations/observations, which have been accepted
by the Government (Please see Chapter II):-
Para No. 1, 3, 4, 7(iii), 8, 9, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16 and 17
(12 Recommendations)
(i) Recommendations/observations, which the Committee do
not desire to pursue in view of the replies of the
Government:-
-Nil-
(iii) Recommendations/observations in respect of which replies
of the Government have not been accepted by the
Committee and require reiteration (Pleasec see Chapter IV):-
Para No. 2, 5, 6, 7(i & ii), 10 and 11
(7 Recommendations)
(iv) Recommendations/observations in respect of which final
reply of the Government is still awaited:-
-Nil-
4. The Committee desire that the Ministry’s response to their
comments made in Chapter-I of this Report be furnished to them at
the earliest and in any case not later than six months of the
presentation of this Report.
5. The Committee will now deal with the action taken by the
Government on some of their recommendations in the succeeding
paragraphs.
A. Stress Management in the Armed Forces
Recommendation (Para No. 2)
6. The Committee in their 31st Report had recommended as under:-
“The Committee understand that the demand on the personnel of
Indian Armed Forces have been increasing over the years due to
changing operational commitments of diverse nature. At the same
time, they are required to meet aspirations of their family members

3
for a good quality life on account of rapidly changing socio-
economic conditions in the society. Undoubtedly, the inability of
soldiers to solve their family problems due to operational
requirements and other constraints within which they have to work
and non-fulfillment of some of their expectations in certain cases
results in enhanced negative stress leading to a variety of illnesses
and behavioral problems including suicide, fratricidal killing, early
mortality or desertion from the Armed Forces. The Committee wish
to point out that besides adversely affecting the efficiency and
performance of the defence personnel due to impaired motivation,
negative stress level also put additional burden on the public
exchequer in the form of man-days lost due to sickness, cost of
medical treatment and loss of trained officers and soldiers. To the
utter dismay of the Committee, the Ministry of Defence have made
an attempt to downplay the magnitude of the problem by putting
forth the plea that, “the overall psychiatric morbidity in the Armed
Forces has been less than the national figures”. Equally specious is
the plea advanced by the Ministry of Defence that these is a rising
trend of psychiatric illnesses in our country over the last few
decades and Armed Forces personnel being drawn from the same
society are not immune to these influences. The Committee consider
it lamentable that the Ministry of Denfece, rather than making an
earnest attempt to identify the precise reasons for untimely loss of
such a large number of precious lives of trained soldiers, have
taken recourse to drawing satisfaction from the facts that such
cases are on the rise in the society and the psychiatric morbidity
in Armed Forces is less than the national averages. In the opinion
of the Committee, the attitude of the Ministry not only displays
insensitivity towards the problem but also highlights their inaction
to improve conditions in the Armed Forces where soldiers are
trained enough to fight under adverse situations. The Committee
trusts that the Ministry of Defence would now make a realistic
assessment of the problems plaguing the Armed Forces personnel
with a view to identifying the areas needing urgent reforms in the
right direction. The Committee also suggest that the organisations
from both public and private sector having expertise in the area,
should be associated with such studies so that the causes of the
increasing stress are identified at its root in an independent manner
and appropriate solutions found to remedy the situation. The
Committee would like to be apprised of the precise action taken
in this regard.”
7. The Ministry in the action taken reply has stated as under:-
“There is no denial that even a single case of suicide and fratricide
in Armed Forces is a matter of concern for the Ministry despite

4
the fact that the overall psychiatric morbidity in the Armed Forces
is less than the national figures. However, the Armed Forces
personnel cannot be entirely immune to the influences of the
environment at their home and the rising aspirations of the
community as a whole. The Ministry/Armed Forces has not taken
recourse to drawing satisfaction from the fact that psychiatric
morbidity in Armed Forces is less than the national averages. The
Armed Forces have addressed the problem of stress/mental
disorders from time to time and have recently brought out a very
vibrant““Mental Health Programme for the Armed Forces”
highlighting the areas for promotion of mental health, prevention
and management of mental morbidity. However, the need for
involvement of outside organisations from public and private sector
is presently not felt as the forces have eminent specialists in the
field to monitor and execute any changes in the policies regarding
psychiatric illnesses.”
8. The Committee do not appreciate the reasons put forth by
the Ministry on the issue of involvement of outside agencies from
public and private sector while undertaking studies stress level
leading to suicides and fratricides in the armed forces. Even when
as many as 635 cases of suicides and 67 cases of fratricides killings
were reported during the years 2003 to 2007, the Ministry seems to
be contended with the recently brought out ‘Mental Health
Programme for the Armed Forces’. Such a high number of suicides
clearly indicate the inadequacy of the steps initiated by the Ministry
to address the malady. The Committee are of the strong opinion
that the involvement of outside agencies would certainly help in
understanding the issue objectively. The expertise and wide exposure
of outside experts would be of great help while extracting the
information from the armed forces personnel as they would feel
more comfortable in sharing the information with them with no
fear of ostracizing themselves or losing seniority or rank status. As
such the Committee would like to reiterate their earlier
recommendation that the Ministry would consider it positively so
that the root cause of the increasing stress level in the armed forces
is known and the corrective action taken to solve the problem.
B. Suicide in Peace Stations
Recommendation (Para No. 5)
9. The Committee in their 31st Report had recommended as
under:—
“Though a majority of suicide cases in Army are stated to be
taking place at peace stations, the Committee find it rather

5
surprising that no specific study on this aspect has been undertaken
to identify the exact causes for such a phenomenon. The Committee
feel that it is an important area requiring urgent attention of the
Ministry of Defence. They, therefore, desire that immediate steps
should be taken to make objective studies on the case of suicide
reported from peace stations with a view to identifying the main
reasons for prevalence of psychological problems in peace stations
and appropriate follow-up action taken to minimize such incidents.”
10. The Ministry in the action taken reply as stated as under:—
“The approximate average ratio of suicides in peace versus field
areas is 70:30. Also, measures for prevention of such illnesses are
taken both in field and peace areas. The studies conducted have
clearly brought out factors both in field and peace areas/home.”
11. The Committee note that the average ratio of suicides in
peace versus field areas in the ratio of 70:30 a matter of serious
concern. While noting that the studies conducted have clearly
brought out factors both in field and peace areas/home, the
Committee feel that there is an urgent need to take the effective
steps as suggested in the reports. The concrete action, therefore,
should be taken by all concerned and the Committee apprised
accordingly.
C. Causes of Stress
Recommendation (Para No. 6)
12. The Committee in their 31st Report had recommended as
under:—
“The studies on stress management in the Armed Forces have
identified certain causative factors for stress which are broadly
classifiable under the three categories namely, socio-economic
including familial reasons, and environmental/organizational and
medical/psychological causes. The Committee are in no doubt that
after having identified these specific causative factors for stress
among the Armed Forces personnel, the Ministry of Defence have
not contemplated multi-pronged strategies to address the problems
of negative stress behaviour of different ranks in the Armed Forces.
Though certain remedial measures have recently been initiated at
the Service Headquarters level and by the Ministry to manage
stress among the Defence personnel, the Committee feel convinced
that much is still left to be desired to address the organizational

6
issues like better manpower management, provisions for better
amenities and conducive climate to counter negative thinking
among the Defence service personnel at the lower ranks so as to
minimize the undesirable consequences of stress in the Armed
Forces in the long run. They trust that the Ministry of Defence
would at least now realize the gravity of the problem in all its
ramifications and take expeditious steps to bring about perceptible
improvement in the prevailing situation.”
13. The Ministry in the action taken reply has stated as under:—
“Ministry of Defence understands the gravity of the problem in all
its ramifications and has taken adequate steps to improve the
situation. Stress management is a continuous process and the steps
taken by the Government will yield more perceptible improvement
in the near future.”
14. The main focus of the recommendation of the Committee
was to address the organizational issues like better manpower
management, provisions for better amenities and conducive climate
to counter negative thinking among the Defence service personnel
at the lower ranks so as to minimize the consequences of stress in
the armed forces in the long run. The Ministry of Defence has not
replied to this aspect in the action taken reply. The Committee,
therefore, would like to reiterate their earlier recommendation and
desire to be apprised of the steps taken in this regard.
D. Familial Reasons for Stress
Recommendation [Para No. 7(I)]
15. The Committee in their 31st Report had recommended as
under:—
“The Committee have been given to understand that familial
reasons are one of the predominating causative factors of stress
among the Armed Forces personnel. These reasons include aspects
like separation from family, familial discords and disputes, concern
regarding children’s education and their upbringing and welfare
measures for the family. The Committee are of the firm view that
while Armed Forces personnel have to strike a balance between
their personal and military life within the constraints inherent in
the military service, the Government also cannot fully absolve
themselves of their responsibilities towards personnel engaged in
meeting diverse challenges before the nation. Undoubtedly, there

7
is an imperative necessity to address the legitimate needs of
Defence personnel and the Committee would strongly recommend
the following:-
The Government should make earnest efforts to provide family
accommodation at the station of choice of the Armed Forces
personnel deployed on operational duties in counter insurgency
and border areas. Married accommodation project should be
completed expeditiously and different categories of residential
accommodation lying vacant at various military stations should be
utilised for the purpose.”
18. The Ministry in the action taken reply has stated as under:—
“Families are permitted in peace areas only. Border areas and high
altitude areas are classified as field areas where families are not
permitted for operational reasons. No family accommodation exists
in these areas as it is not authorised. Local commanders at times
permit keeping of families in border areas for very short duration
in existing accommodation under formation arrangements.
Government is making all efforts to complete the “Married
Accommodation Project” ((MAP) on priority. In MAP , Phase-1, out
of 57875 Dwelling Units (DUs) under execution, 40123 DUs have
been completed and 12881 DUs (cumulative 53004 DUs) will be
completed by March, 2010. Balance 4871 DUs will be completed in
Financial Year 2010-11. In MAP Project Phase-2, work is likely to
commence by March, 2010.”
17. The Committee in the earlier recommendation had made
certain suggestions to address to the familial reasons which is one
of the predominating causative factors of stress among the Armed
Forces Personnel. These suggestions included providing (i) family
accommodation at the station of choice of the Armed Forces
personnel deployed on operational duties in counter insurgencies
and border areas (ii) completion of married accommodation project
expeditiously (iii) using different categories of residential
accommodation lying vacant at various military stations. With regard
to (i), the Ministry has responded that border areas and high altitude
areas are classified as field areas where families are not permitted
for operational reasons. The Committee feel that the Ministry has
not understood their recommendation in the right perspective. The
intention of the Committee was to provide accommodation to the
family at the station of the Committee was to provide
accommodation to the family at the station of the choice of the

8
Armed Forces Personnel when he is deployed on operational duties
in counter insurgency and border areas. The Committee never meant
to provide family accommodation in counter insurgency border areas
that are classified as field areas. In view of this, the Committee
would like the Ministry to take the desired action and apprise them
accordingly. With regard to the married accommodation project, the
Committee note the progress made in this regard as furnished in
the action taken reply. The Committee would like the Ministry to
take the desired action so that Phase I project is completed on
schedule followed by Phase II. In respect of the suggestion made
by the Committee to use residential accommodation lying vacant at
various military stations as given in (iii) above, the Ministry has
not responded to the suggestion. The Committee would like the
Ministry to take the concrete action and apprise them accordingly.
E. Familial Reasons for Stress
Recommendation [Para No. 7 (ii)]
18. The Committee in their 31st Report had recommended as
under:—
“Efforts should also be directed towards imparting skill
development and extending help to the children of Armed Forces
personnel in getting admission in schools and institutions of higher
professional and technical studies. Opening of institutions for
imparting higher technical education in different parts of the
country primarily for the wards of the Armed Forces personnel be
considered.”
19. The Ministry in the action taken reply has stated as under:—
“Army Welfare Education Society (AWES) has been established
under the aegis of Adjutant General’s Branch, Integrated HQ of
MoD (Army) to meet the educational needs of wards of Army
personnel. AWES has 126 schools with a population of 1.7 Lac
children and 13 professional colleges in majority of the popular
disciplines, spread across the country. AWES also runs 13
professional colleges exclusively for the wards of Armed Forces
personnel. List of these institutions may be seen at Annexure-I.
All these institutions have been established to meet the need for
higher professional and technical studies of wards of Armed Forces
personnel.”

9
20. The Committee note that 126 schools run by AWES for the
wards of Armed Forces Personnel all over India are not sufficient
to cater to the need of the wards of entire armed forces personnel.
Therefore, the Committee, desire the Ministry to increase the number
of schools and professional institutions accordingly, keeping in view
the demand for them under intimation to them.
F. Abolition of practice of domestic”‘Sahayaks’
Recommendation (Para No. 10)
21. The Committee in their 31st Report had recommended as
under:—
“The Committee understand that the practice of utilizing services
of Jawans as Sahayaks is prevalent in the Army in one form or
other since British days. It is learnt that numerous Jawans are
engaged at the residence of some of the senior officer for domestic
work and to serve the family members of officers. A representative
of the Army categorically deposed before the Committee that the
Jawans are not technically supposed to attend to the household
duties at the residence of the officers and the personnel attending
to such duties do so due to their reverence. The Committee hardly
need to stress that Jawans are recruited for serving the nation and
not to serve the family members of officers in household work
which is demeaning and humiliating. The Committee take a very
serious view of the shameful practice which should have no place
in the independent India. The Committee expect the Ministry of
Defence to issue instructions to stop the practice forthwith, as this
lowers the self-esteem of Jawan. Any officer found to be violating
the instruction in this regard should be dealt with severely. Similar
action needs to be taken by the Ministry of Home Affairs in respect
of para military organization and other organizations.”
22. The Ministry in the action taken reply has stated as under:—
“(a) Exhaustive instructions regarding appropriate employment of
Sahayaks have been issued from time to time by Army HQ.
Comprehensive instructions have been issued to the environment
vide letter No. B/32099/AG/PS-2© dated 27 July 2007 (Annexure-
II) highlighting the following aspects:—
(i) Sahayak is a comrade-in-arms to Officer/JCO symbolizing
trust, respect, warmth, confidence and interdependence,
which are the fundamentals of relations between the leaders
and the led.

10
(ii) Sahayak is a solider who is addition to his duties provides
the essential support to authorized Officers and JCOs, both
in peace and war to enable them to fully attend to their
assigned duty. He also provides leaders a direct contact with
men and thus enables officers and JCOs to gain an insight
into the state of morale and well being of men.
(iii) Sahayak will be attached to regular Army units and
provided proper living accommodation and messing
facilities. The officers to whom Sahayaks are provided will
ensure such facilities are arranged.
(iv) Sahayaks will not be employed for menial house-hold work.
(b) It has also been stressed that there is an urgent and continuous
need to impress upon on all concerned that Sahayaks being
combatant soldiers under no circumstances are to be employed on
a job, which is not in conformity with the dignity and self-respect
of a soldier. Therefore, it is the duty of all officers/JCOs and
Commanders in the chain to ensure that strict checks are instituted
to prevent misuse of Sahayaks and that any violation of existing
instructions and guidelines should be dealt with immediately.
(c) Any practice that lowers the self-esteem of a soldier is to be
abhorred. Formation and Unit Commanders uphold the honour
and dignity of job content of the individual soldiers. In this context,
it is always ensured and shall continue to be ensured that soldiers
are not employed on any demeaning or humiliating tasks.
(d) Exhaustive instructions for strict compliance of the guidelines
have been reiterated to the environment.”
23. While taking a serious view of criticizing the colonial practice
of utilizing the services of Jawans as Sahayaks to officers in the
Army, the Committee had desired the Ministry to issue instructions
to stop it forthwith. The Ministry while defending the use of
Sahayaks by Army officers has stated that comprehensive
instructions have been issued to regulate the work of Sahayaks.
The Committee are not able to understand the necessity of having
the services of Sahayaks by the Army officers particularlywhen the
sister services which Navy and Air Force have abandoned this
practice. While reiterating their earlier recommendation, the
Committee desire that Army may follow the examples set by their
counterparts Air force and Navy and stop the colonial practice with
immediate effect.

11
G. Basic Amenities
Recommendation (Para No. 11)
24. The Committee in their 31st Report had recommended as
under:—
“The Committee need hardly emphasize that the basic facilities for
the soldiers particularly those deployed at high altitudes or in
border areas need to be met in a most efficient manner. Delays in
supply of consumable and non-consumable items should be
avoided and they should not be deprived of better quality of
weather appropriate clothing and good quality of ration. The
requirement of such essential items must be reviewed at regular
intervals and the supply of items as per entitled scales must be
monitored at appropriate level. The Committee would like to be
apprised of the specific measures taken in this regard.”
25. The Ministry in the action taken reply has stated as under:—
“Based on the feed back from troops and formations commanders
at various levels following measures have been taken to enhance
the specification and scale of rations for the troops:—
(a) Upgradation and enhancement in specification of rice, pulses
and tea.
(b) Introduction of precooked chicken in retort pouches, broilers
in place of culled chicken and provision of chicken for all
days as against five days in a week earlier.
(c) Replacement of milk powder/tinned with TPM.
(d) Authorization of in lieu items like suji, flour, bread, coffee,
butter and eggs to PBOR so as to provide greater variety in
rations.
(e) Provisioning of special rations as being presently providing
in Op Meghadoot to all troops deployed above 12,000 ft. in
areas of Northern and Eastern Commands. The strength of
personnel authorized special rations has risen from an initial
strength of 2,850 to present strength of 28,644 personnel.
(f) Enhancing the condiment allowance by 84% and LPG scales
by 55%.
(g) Sanction has been given by MoD for procurement of
vegetables in retort pouches not exceeding 25% annual
requirement of existing varieties of vegetables tinned/
dehydrated.

12
(h) In order to improve quality and effect economy, procurement
of salt has been decentralized to Commands.
(i) Additional ration in desert areas consisting of Lime fresh,
Rooh Afza, TPM, and Fruit fresh for troops taking part in
exercise/collective training in desert/semi desert areas of
Rajasthan has been authorized.
(j) Sanction has been accorded for authorization of additional
1,40,300 of Meals Ready to eat per year for troops deployed
in Counter Insurgency operations in Eastern and Northern
Commands.”
26. In order to avoid delay in supply of consumable and non-
consumable items to the soldiers deployed at high-altitude and
boarder areas, the Committee had recommended to have review of
the supply of these items at regular intervals. The Committee note
that the Government has taken measures to enhance the specification
and seals of consumable items but the reply is silent in regard to
the steps taken to ensure supply of better quality of weather
appropriate clothing. Therefore, the Committee wish to reiterate their
earlier recommendation and would apprised like to be of the steps
taken in this regard.

CHAPTER II
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN
ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT
Recommendation (Para No. 1)
There were as many as 635 cases of suicide including attempted
suicides and 67 cases of fratricidal killings in the three services of the
Armed Forces during the years 2003 to 2007. These statistics also
indicate that Army was worst affected by this malady in terms of
number of cases of suicides and fratricide in each of the year during
the period. While expressing their grave concern over this alarming
trend of suicides and fratricidal killings in the Armed Forces during
the recent past, the Committee are in no doubt that this phenomenon
is attributable to increased stress environment leading to psychological
imbalance in the soldiers. The Committee have been informed that
seven studies on issues related to stress management have been
conducted by Army since 2005 besides an internal study by Air Force
on suicides reported during the period 2002-2007 and an in-house
study by Navy on ‘Occupational stress in Naval personnel’. The
Ministry of Defence have informed that the main causes for suicides
among troops identified on the basis of these studies are changing
socio-economic environment in the country and domestic problems
and there is a apparently no systemic failure as suicides attributable
to work related reasons are few. While certain measures are also stated
to have been initiated in the recent past to manage stress in the
Armed Forces, the Committee are of the considered view that it is
premature to ascertain the efficacy of these measures at this stage.
The Committee’s examination of the subject and there interaction with
the ex-servicemen, experts and organisations having experience in this
field has brought out that this issue has not been perceived by the
Ministry of Defence in its entirety with a view to devising appropriate
and timely strategies to minimize the stress level of serving personnel
of Armed Forces. The Committee have dealt with some of the
important aspects related to the subject in the succeeding paragraphs
of this Report.
Reply of the Government
Ministry of Defence shares the concern expressed by the
Committee. Ministry has viewed the situation seriously and has taken
necessary steps to reduce the stress among armed forces personnel,
and this is a continuous process.
13

14
Recommendation (Para No. 3)
There were as many as nine studies undertaken in the Armed
Forces on suicides and matters relating to stress management. Though
these studies reportedly identified specific causative factors for stress
among various ranks deployed in different areas in the three services,
the Committee received an impression that no effective follow up
action has been taken on crucial areas such as sensitizing the officers,
improving basic facilities in the field, etc. The Committee awaits the
outcome of specific action taken in pursuance of each of these studies.
Reply of the Government
The causative factors identified by these studies are being
addressed and remedial measures on the following lines have been
undertaken. Some of these measures are:—
(a) Sensitization of Commanders:  At every appropriate level,
the issue of stress and strain in service, is being addressed
by Commanders in a very comprehensive manner. Group
discussion, workshops, counseling sessions and stress
management courses have been conducted to sensitize the
Commanders and junior leaders for the need of sensitively
handling human resources under stressful conditions.
(b) Preventive measures:  Some of the preventive measures in
place for reducing stress levels and early identification of
psychiatry illnesses are being ensured at all times:
(i) Addressing the grievances  of service personnel by more
frequent interaction with Junior Leaders.
(ii) Personnel at high risk  of combat stress are identified
and counseled  by Unit Commanders, Regimental
Medical Officers and Junior Leaders.
(iii) Religious teachers  are utilized to preach and counsel
vulnerable troops.
(iv) Training of doctors and Junior Leaders  by service
psychiatrists have been undertaken, to deal with
personnel at high risk of stress related diseases.
(v) Regular and frequent spells of leave, turnover and
rotation of personnel deployed in sensitive and stressful
situations is ensured.
(vi) All personnel returning back to unit after leave are
interviewed and medically examined  by the Regimental
Medical Officers, who looks for any stress marker or
overt sign of psychiatry illness.

15
(vii) During routine medical care duties  Authorized Medical
Attendants are trained to keep an index of suspicion for
symptoms or signs of psychiatry illnesses or stress
disorders among the servicemen and promptly attend to
them/refer them to appropriate level of specialist care.
(viii) A ‘Buddy System’  has been introduced in training
establishment in Air Force since 1997, where persons
from the same state, ethnic backgrounds, etc. are
made’‘Buddies’ during their training stage. They are
expected to share their problems with each other and
take care of each other. This is also being actively
pursued in the Army specially in the combat CI Ops
loc.
(ix) The supervisory staff from training establishments
specially in Air Force are being trained to work as
‘Mentors’ for trainees of the training establishments
through the Mentors course run at Institute of Aerospace
Medicine, Bangalore. More than 950 Mentors have been
trained so far.
(c) Psychological counselors:  90 Psychological counselors from
paramedical staff have been trained through three courses
at various service hospitals, as a drive to combat psychiatry
and stress related problems in Armed Forces personnel for
early identification of such symptoms in service personnel
and to provide timely treatment to avoid loss to manpower.
Further training of Army Medical Corps personnel is being
regularly carried out.
In house training to selected Personnel Below Officer Rank (PBOR)
from non-medical units has also been undertaken, to augment the
existing trained counselors. The training in the form of short courses/
training capsules are being conducted at psychiatry centres at 7
Military Hospitals of the three services. A total number of 10 to 15
service personnel are imparted training in each batch. 233 personnel
have been trained so far.
To reduce the number of cases of suicides and fratricides, a Mental
Health Programme for the Armed Forces has been prepared and
approved. This programme alongwith action plan for its
implementation has been disseminated to all concerned on 2nd January,
2009. Army has been continuously evolving steps to improve the

16
mental health of our troops. Besides, the following courses have been
initiated for training of counselors:—
(a) Courses for training Psychological Counselors are being
conducted at Base Hospital Delhi Cantt, Command Hospital
(Eastern Command), Kolkata and Command Hospital
(Northern Command) Udhampur for 12 weeks since May
2007. 90 psychological counsellors have already been trained
and placed in Base/Field Hospitals to assist the
Commanders. The counsellors are trained to identify high
risk personnel and to provide timely counselling/referral
for treatment.
(b) 233 Non Medical Unit Counselors have already been trained
through courses conducted since 2007. It is planned to have
such trained personnel in all major and minor units to assist
the Commanding Officers.
(c) Religious Teachers (RT) Junior Commissioned Officers (JCO)
are also being trained to augment the availability of
psychological counsellors in units. It has been decided by
the Adjutant General that all existing RT JCOs will be
imparted training to function as psychological counsellors.
There are 1900 RT JCOs in the Army who will require to
be trained. 166 trained RT JCOs have moved into the
environment with effect from 17 April 2008 to bolster the
already existing efforts in the direction of stress management.
(d) A batch of 25 officers from Army Education Corps are being
training as Psychological counsellors by DIPR, Delhi.
All these actions will help in the identification of the stressed
troops and will show their impact gradually.
Recommendation (Para No. 4)
The Committee regret to point out that one copy each of the only
two Reports relating to suicide and fratricide and on stress
management was made available marked as
‘secret’. The Committee wonder why reports of these studies should
not be made public which do not appear to contain anything sensitive
or strategic. Such studies can yield desired results only if the reports
are made public and there is concerted action by all concerned. The
Committee, therefore, suggest that the veil of secrecy should be
removed from such studies and the reports placed in public domain.

17
Reply of the Government
These studies are marked ‘Secret’ or ‘Confidential’ as
sensationalisation or selective publicity of results of these studies could
have an adverse impact on the morale of personnel of Armed Forces.
Recommendation [Para No. (iii)]
The welfare organizations for Defence services personnel and their
family members should be financially strengthened to enable them to
extend necessary help to the distressed families of different ranks and
also to act as psychological Counsellors for soldiers and their family
members.
Reply of the Government
There are numerous agencies in the Armed Forces which take
care of the legitimate needs of Armed Forces personnel, Ex Servicemen
and their families.
Distressed families of serving personnel are provided requisite
help by the C&W Dte of AG’s Branch in the following manner:—
(i) Financial assistance based on requirement projected and
merits of the case.
(ii) Assistance in solving family problems due to criminal and
civil disputes of serving personnel by approaching concerned
authority of civil administration.
(iii) Grant of education scholarships to deserving children of
serving personnel.
(iv) To look after war widows, war widows, are disabled
soldiers and their dependents, Rehabilitation Welfare Section
has been established after OP VIJAY (Kargil).
In addition to the above, following measures are also taken by
units/formation HQ:—
(i) Psychological counselling is provided to serving personnel
by commanders at all levels and families by organization
like Army Wives Welfare Association (AWWA).
(ii) Financial assistances to distressed families are also provided
by the unit/formations HQ where the individual is serving.’

18
Similar facilities are available under Navy and Air Force also. The
Department of Ex-Servicemen’s Welfare (ESW) takes care of the welfare
activities of ESM under various schemes through the various
organisations under it like Kendriya Sainik Board, Directorate General
of Resettlement and Ex-Servicemen Contributory Health Scheme
(ECHS).
Recommendation (Para No. 8)
With a view to mitigating the hardships on account of family
problems due to criminal or civil disputes of serving Armed Forces
personnel deployed on hard duties at far flung places, the Defence
Minister sent a communication in December, 2006 to Chief Ministers
of all the States requesting them to instruct the district authorities
and the State Government officials to be more pro-active in giving
prompt response to the grievances and problems of the Defence
personnel and their families. The Committee are however, distressed
to find that this communication has not yielded desired results and
such matters are still treated in routine manner with no special priority
being given to such cases. The Committee are of view that such an
apathetic attitude to the part of the district authorities adversely affects
the morale of the entire force to the detriment of national interests.
They, therefore, recommend that the Ministry of Defence should once
again taken up this matter with all the State/Union Territory
Governments at appropriate level emphasizing the need for according
priority and considerate approach in all such cases. Specific steps
should be taken to pay greater attention at Tehsil/Block level in those
areas from where greater number of personnel traditionally join and
serve the Armed Forces. There should be statutory provisions
mandating the district authorities to address the problems and
grievances of serving Defence personnel with a stipulated time frame.
The Committee also desires the Ministry of Defence to make
institutionalized arrangements in close coordination with the State
Governments/officials and put in place a computerized and centralized
mechanism to monitor the progress of each complaint received from
Defence service personnel or their family members.
Reply of the Government
State Governments were requested in December, 2006 through
letters addressed to Chief Ministers and Chief Secretaries to be more
proactive in responding to the grievances and problems of Defence
Personnel and their families. Most of the State Governments had
responded positively and initiated action to tone up the grievance

19
redressal mechanism of the State to make them more responsive to
the problems of Defence personnel and their families. The matter is
given being taken up with the State Governments requesting them to
sensitise the officials at State and District levels and to set up and
strengthen institutional mechanisms to monitor and review the pending
cases relating to armed forces personnel and their families. The matter
relating to possibility of making statutory provisions in the Services
Acts has been examined in consultation with the Ministry of Home
Affairs. However, this has not been found advisable by MHA, as
public, police, local government, land and revenue etc. happen to be
state subjects.
Recommendation (Para No. 9)
Another major reason for stress in the Armed Forces relates to
conflict in interpersonal relationship. The Committee have been
informed that the Armed Forces Community has a culture of its own,
where sense of belonging and responsibility are cultivated in an
individual to display camaraderie. Admittedly, the existing mechanism
in this regard needs to be strengthened because of fresh environment
of stress and strain. Needless to say that the JCOs and the officers
posted at the unit/platoon level have to be sensitised towards the
needs of the soldiers both as an individual and group. This assumes
greater importance as the soldiers now being inducted in the Armed
Forces possess a higher educational level. Steps should also be taken
to impart necessary training to all these ranks with a view to making
them a source of guidance and assistance for the soldiers. The
Committee also feels that appropriate training is also needed to change
the mindset of senior officers in the Armed Forces. They trust that
appropriate improvements in the existing system will be made without
any further loss of time to ensure better interaction between Armed
Forces personnel of different ranks. The soldiers should be encouraged
to share their problems with their seniors and emphasis must be laid
on redressal of their genuine grievances.
Reply of the Government
Man management and inter personnel relationship have always
been an important part of training in the Army.
In the recent past, the subjects of ‘Stress Management and
Interpersonal Relationship’  have been discussed at the highest levels
and number of innovative training capsules have been introduced to
further train commanders at all levels so that they can view affected
cases in their correct perspective. Some of the measures that have

20
been adopted towards this end are highlighted in succeeding
paragraphs.
Institutionalized Training
To ensure effective man management and efficient inter personal
relationship, the Army is conducting well evolved and comprehensives
man management courses for the officers which include courses like
Senior Defence Management Course (SDMC) and Higher Defence
Management Course (HDMC). Further, Junior Commissioned Officers
(JCOs) and Non Commissioned Officers (NCOs) affected Junior Leaders
Courses, at Junior Leaders Academies at Bareilly , Platoon Commander
Wing at Belgaum, NCOs Academy at Binnuaguri and many other
institutions where the syllabus includes subjects pertaining to war
man management and interpersonal relation.
In addition to the above mentioned dedicated courses, adequate
emphasis is also given to man management, stress management,
leadership and interpersonal relationship in all other courses of
instructions. The process commences at pre-commissioning/recruit
training stage itself, where prospective officers/JCOs/NCOs are
exposed to these important facets of military life. There also exists
Institute of National Integration, which trains officers/JCOs/NCOs in
psychological strengthening through a specialized ‘Behavioural and
Social Science’ course. Army Institute of Physical Training at Pune
also provides nucleus of instructors in physical and recreational
training, Pranayam and Yoga which is undertaken in units through
out India.
Conduct of Seminars/Workshops:  Special workshops/seminars on
man management are being organised in each formation of the Army
to ‘train and trainers’, who have been further conducting such
workshops in their respective units. Specially selected teams including
psychologists are incorporated for training of trainers.
Case Studies:  Relevant case studies are analysed to drew lessons
and take remedial measures in cases where aspects pertaining to
leadership, interpresonal relations and man management need
attention.
Focus on Training of JCOs/NCOs on the importance of JCOs and
NCOs in leadership and interpresonal relations is well recognized
and training of junior leaders has been focused towards empowerment
of JCOs and NCOs especially to partially obviate the deficiency of
middle level officers.

21
Pre Induction Training to Units:  For units moving from peace to
field, leadership, man management, stress management and
interpersonal relationships training has been included as part of Pre
Induction Training.
Enhancement of Group Activities:  Traditional group activities such
as organised physical training, games, roll calls, Sainik sammelans,
sub unit level training, field firing and recreational activities such as
barakhanas, religious and social functions act as stress reliever and
foster esprit-de-corps. An added emphasis has, therefore, been given
to organise such activities to foster camaraderie, esprit-de-corps and
improve inter-personal relationships.
Other measures undertaken are given below:—
(a) Extra emphasis on training of Religious Teachers, Subedar
Majors, Junior Leaders, Regimental Medical Officers, Nursing
Assistance and Education Personnel; who can advise during
routine unit activities.
(b) Training of Medical Corps JCOs in psychiatry and their
posting as councilors in various formations and units.
(c) Open house discussions at junior leaders level.
(d) Introduction of capsules in important courses on ‘leadership,
improvement in interpersonal relationship, man management
and stress management.’
(e) Highlighting importance and effectiveness of Yoga and
Pranayam in addition to physical training.
Recommendation (Para No. 12)
Presently there is a shortage a approximately 12,000 officers in
the Army and this shortage is adversely affecting the functioning at
the unit level. The Committee have been informed during evidence
that this shortage of officers is leading to greater stress among junior
and middle level officers owing to the need to perform multiple
functions and inadequate time and opportunity for intimate
administration of personnel under Command. Considering the fact
that such shortages of officers coupled with stressful conditions in
the most inhospitable conditions particularly in counter insurgency
operational areas impinge upon performance of both officers and the
soldiers, the Committee are of strong view that it is high time that
concrete and result oriented steps are taken to reduce the stress at
the battalion/unit level. While the issue of shortage of officers

22
continues to remain an area of concern and the same is being dealt
with by the Committee in a separate Report, they would like that in
the meantime, the Ministry of Defence should take up this matter
with the Army Headquarter impressing upon them the need for
keeping the shortage of personnel at unit level to the barest minimum
particularly in the counter insurgency and border areas so that the
situation does not go worse.
Reply of the Government
Various measures have been taken to reduce the shortage of
officers by making service in Armed forces an attractive career option.
Some of the measures in this regard are; all officers including those
in Short Service Commission (SSC) are now eligible to hold substantive
rank of Captain, Major and Lieutenant Colonel after 2, 6 and 13 years
of reckonable service respectively. The tenure of SSC officers have
been increased from 10 years to 14 years. A total number of 750 posts
of Lt Colonel have been upgraded to Colonel towards implementation
of A V Singh Committee (Phase-I). Further, 1896 additional posts in
the ranks of Colonel, Brigadier, Major General and Lieutenant General
and their equivalent in the other two services have been upgraded.
The implementation of the recommendations of the VI Central Pay
Commission with substantial improvement in the pay structure of
officers of Armed Forces will also go a long way in making the
Services more attractive. Meanwhile, Army HQrs will ensure that
shortages of personnel at unit level are kept at the barest minimum
particularly in the Counter Insurgency and Border Areas.
Recommendation (Para No. 13)
The Committee also suggests that the duration of deployment of
Defence services personnel in the counter-insurgency or high altitude
operational areas should be reviewed and rationalized so as to contain
their stress levels. The Committee would like to be apprised of the
precise steps taken in this regard.
Reply of the Government
Tenures in Counter Insurgency and high altitude areas in respect
of officers have been validated with respect to operational and medical
requirements by the concerned authorities. Efforts are being made to
ensure that all officers are turned over promptly on completion of
their prescribed tenure.
Officers in the Indian Army are posted for tenure of approx two
years in each assignment. In the major ranks (upto five years service)
tenure of officers depends upon the tenure of unit they are posted to,

23
which is guided by GS Branch requirements as decided by SD Dte in
consultation with MO Dte. The current tenures of officers in difficult
areas has been validated by medical authorities and all efforts are
being made to turn over officers by due date. It is intimated that an
increase in high altitudes tenure of Infantry Battalions in certain areas
in Eastern, Western and Central Commands was examined and
approved by Army Hqrs. vide their letter No. 40202/POLICY/SD 4(A)
dated 25 October 2006 (copy enclosed at Annexure-III).
Recommendation (Para No. 14)
Yet another area causing stress to the personnel of Armed Forces
relates to the denial of leave even in times of extreme need ostensibly
on the grounds of exigencies of service, operational requirements and
shortage of manpower in the field units. Although liberalized leave
policy has been put in place permitting the officers to split their
annual leave in three parts with no restrictions on splitting of annual
leave by PBORs, the Committee are convinced that the ground realities
present a different picture. This is corroborated by the deposition of
the representative of the Army that there are certain issues involved
in the matters connected with rant of leave to a person deployed in
a battalion or a unit in the sense that certain tasks have to be
performed and other personnel may also at the same time go out on
training courses. The committee are also constrained to observed that
while no restrictions exist for PBORs to split their annual leave, no
commensurate facility of free warrants for the travel has been provided
for in the liberalised rules except grant of an additional rail warrant
to all ranks serving in field or counter insurgency operational areas.
The Committee, therefore, recommend that the entire issue of extending
benefits to the service personnel under liberalized leave policy should
be examined by the Ministry of Defence with an open mind so that
the benefits of this policy may percolate down at least to the lower
ranks in the Armed Forces.
Reply of the Government
(a) The management of leave of both officers and PBOR is an
important facet and the existing policy on Annual Leave has been
revised. Fresh guidelines have been issued emphasizing on various
aspects as mentioned below:—
(i) Leave, as such should not be denied to troops except under
exigencies of service or on operational grounds.
(ii) No local restrictions on grant of leave shall be imposed,
whatsoever, except with the explicit permission of the
competent authority at this HQ.

24
(iii) Officers may avail annual leave in three parts instead of
earlier two, subject to exigencies of service. There are no
restrictions on splitting of annual leave by PBOR.
(iv) Offices are entitled to 20 days casual leave in a calendar
year. At present officers can avail casual leave upto 20 days
at a time of the discretion of the leave sanctioning authority
instead of the earlier provision of 10 days normally and 14
days in exceptional cases.
(v) PBOR are entitled to 30 days casual leave in a calendar
year. At present PBOR can avail leave upto 30 days at a
time at the discretion of leave sanctioning authority instead
of the earlier provision of 10 days normally and extension
upto 20 days in exceptional cases.
(vi) The operational and functional requirements of the Armed
Forces demand that the quantum of leave available cannot
be stretched to an extent where it acts against the operation
preparedness and detrimental to its functioning, especially
in field areas wherein operational commitment have to be
met besides turnover of personnel earmarked for various
courses, TD and AL. The above arrangements are however
an excellent mix between the requirements of giving all
ranks a break from strenuous life as well as meet the
operational demands.
(b) The existing leave policy is being constantly monitored to
ensure that everyone gets his due leave without compromising the
operational requirement. Leave under normal circumstances is
generally not denied. However, as already mentioned that the
operational and functional requirement has to be kept in view while
granting leave. This aspect cannot be compromised.
(c) Under the existing rules, one passage in entitled mode and
class is authorized to all service personnel while proceeding on Annual
Leave. They can now be sent on Annual Leave in a maximum of 3
spells under the Liberalised Leave Policy recently issued by the
Government. For subsequent journeys during leave, the officers travel
on Form ‘D’ (40% concession) and PBOR travel on Concessional
Vouchers (50% concession).
Recommendation (Para No. 15)
The Committee’s examination has also revealed that personnel in
the Armed Forces are prompted to hide their mental problems as the
referral to a psychiatrist for treatment is considered a ‘stigma’ which
may adversely affect the career of a service personnel. Since such
cases have been identified as a causative factor for stress, the

25
Committee feel that the system of referring a person specifically or
psychiatrist’s evaluation by the commanding officer should be suitably
modified by ensuring that Defence personnel of all ranks undergo
such evaluation during medical examination in batches at fixed
intervals of time. While the modified system would take care of
distressed person or appropriate and timely treatment, he would at
the same time remain saved from being branded as an out case in
the eyes of the colleagues.
Reply of the Government
The feeling of being ‘stigmatized’ while seeking treatment/
consultation from the psychiatrist is a mind set of Indians in the
present times and is also seen among civil population. However, to
overcome this issue, medical authorities have dispensed with the
requirement of routinely filling up AFMSF-10, a form which was
mandatory to be filled whenever seeking medical attendance for
psychiatry disorders and could have led to a stigma. The form is
only required to be generated if the treating physician/psychiatrist
feels that it may provide additional information for better management
of an individual. Recommendations of Commanding Officer regarding
the’‘retention’ of such individuals in service has also been dispensed
with so as to avoid any bias while managing such cases. Besides this,
routine medical check up of all personnel reporting back from leave/
temp duty by MO/RMO/AMA is already in place besides Annual
Medical check up so as to facilitate early identification of symptoms
pertaining to stress disorders.
Recommendation (Para No. 16)
The Committee are concerned to note that the authorized strength
of mental health professionals in much lower than the felt need
particularly in view of the increasing instances of stress in the Armed
Forces. The Committee needs hardly point out that this difficulty is
not such which cannot be surmounted. The Committee hopes that the
Ministry will pay serious attention to this aspect and initiate
appropriate administrative action to remove bottlenecks being
experienced in this regard.
Reply of the Government
Armed Forces Medical Services have a robust system in place for
handling stress disorders among the serving personnel. There are
29 psychiatric centres in the three services which have sufficient
psychiatrists and paramedical staff for effective management of such
cases.

26
To augment the existing resources, following measures have been
initiated:—
(a) 90 counselor from medical units have been trained in
counseling and posted to Northern & Eastern Sectors.
(b) 217 Religious Teachers have also been imparted training in
counseling.
(c) 12 weeks training courses for counselors have been started
in selected Armed Forces hospitals under supervision of
psychiatrists. The training is provided to PBOR from non-
medical units. These PBOR are selected by Commanding
Officers of the concerned units based on their counseling
skills/abilities and utility in the units following the training.
These courses have started since Aug-Sept 2007 and 152
personnel from Army, 20 from Navy and 22 from Air Force
have been trained so far. These PBOR will act as first level
counselors and are a link between those requiring
psychological supports to cope with stress related disorders
and health professionals.
Recommendation (Para No. 17)
The Committee understands that one of the reasons for increasing
stress in Armed Forces relates to non-availability of quicker appellate
mechanism to deal with the service related problems and disputes,
etc. They are, however, distressed to note that despite notification of
Armed Forces Tribunal Act, 2007 on 28th December 2007, the Ministry
of Defence have not been able to establish the Tribunal even after
lapse of a period of over nine months. Keeping in view the fact that
a large number of cases relating to service matters of the personnel
from Armed Forces are pending for a long time in various courts of
law, the Committee are of firm belief that the Armed Forces Tribunal
is required to be set up expeditiously to provide quicker relief to the
aggrieved Defence service personnel. They, therefore, desire that the
Ministry of Defence should make earnest efforts for establishing the
Tribunal at the earliest.
Reply of the Government
The Armed Forces Tribunal Act 2007 (55 of 2007) has come into
force w.e.f. 15.06.2008 in terms of section 1(2) H of the Act. Tribunal
was inaugurated by the President of India on 8th August, 2009.
Apart from the Principal Bench at Delhi, regional Benches at
Chennai, Jaipur, Lucknow, Chandigarh, Kolkata and Kochi have already
been made functional. Two remaining Benches at Guwahati and
Mumbai will also be made function in due course.

CHAPTER III
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE
COMMITTEE DO NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE IN
VIEW OF GOVERNMENT REPLIES
-Nil-
27

CHAPTER IV
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF
WHICH REPLIES OF GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT
BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE
Recommendation (Para No. 2)
The Committee understand that the demand on the personnel of
Indian Armed Forces have been increasing over the years due to
changing operational commitments of diverse nature. At the same
time, they are required to meet aspirations of their family members
for a good quality life on account of rapidly changing socio-economic
conditions in the society. Undoubtedly, the inability of soldiers to
solve their family problems due to operational requirements and other
constraints within which they have to work and non-fulfillment of
some of their expectations in certain cases results in enhanced negative
stress leading to a variety of illnesses and behavioral problems
including suicide, fratricidal killing, early mortality or desertion from
the Armed Forces. The Committee wish to point out that besides
adversely affecting the efficiency and performance of the defence
personnel due to impaired motivation, negative stress level also put
additional burden on the public exchequer in the form of man-days
lost due to sickness, cost of medical treatment and loss of trained
officers and soldiers. To the utter dismay of the Committee, the
Ministry of Defence have made an attempt to downplay the magnitude
of the problem by putting forth the plea that, “the overall psychiatric
morbidity in the Armed Forces has been less than the national figures”.
Equally specious is the plea advanced by the Ministry of Defence
that these is a rising trend of psychiatric illnesses in our country over
the last few decades and Armed Forces personnel being drawn from
the same society are not immune to these influences. The Committee
consider it lamentable that the Ministry of Denfece, rather than making
an earnest attempt to identify the precise reasons for untimely loss of
such a large number of precious lives of trained soldiers, have taken
recourse to drawing satisfaction from the facts that such cases are on
the rise in the society and the psychiatric morbidity in Armed Forces
is less than the national averages. In the opinion of the Committee,
the attitude of the Ministry not only displays insensitivity towards
the problem but also highlights their inaction to improve conditions
in the Armed Forces where soldiers are trained enough to fight under
adverse situations. The Committee trusts that the Ministry of Defence
28

29
would now make a realistic assessment of the problems plaguing the
Armed Forces personnel with a view to identifying the areas needing
urgent reforms in the right direction. The Committee also suggest
that the organisations from both public and private sector having
expertise in the area, should be associated with such studies so that
the causes of the increasing stress are identified at its root in an
independent manner and appropriate solutions found to remedy the
situation. The Committee would like to be apprised of the precise
action taken in this regard
Reply of the Government
There is no denial that even a single case of suicide and fratricide
in Armed Forces is a matter of concern for the Ministry despite the
fact that the overall psychiatric morbidity in the Armed Forces is less
than the national figures. However, the Armed Forces personnel cannot
be entirely immune to the influences of the environment at their home
and the rising aspirations of the community as a whole. The Ministry/
Armed Forces has not taken recourse to drawing satisfaction from the
fact that psychiatric morbidity in Armed Forces is less than the national
averages. The Armed Forces have addressed the problem of stress/
mental disorders from time to time and have recently brought out a
very vibrant “Mental Health Programme for the Armed Forces”
highlighting the areas for promotion of mental health, prevention and
management of mental morbidity. However, the need for involvement
of outside organisations from public and private sector is presently
not felt as the forces have eminent specialists in the field to monitor
and execute any changes in the policies regarding psychiatric illnesses.
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para 8 of Chapter I of the Report)
Recommendation (Para No. 5)
Though a majority of suicide cases in Army are stated to be taking
place at peace stations, the Committee find it rather surprising that
no specific study on this aspect has been undertaken to identify the
exact causes for such a phenomenon. The Committee feel that it is an
important area requiring urgent attention of the Ministry of Defence.
They, therefore, desire that immediate steps should be taken to make
objective studies on the case of suicide reported from peace stations
with a view to identifying the main reasons for prevalence of
psychological problems in peace stations and appropriate follow-up
action taken to minimize such incidents.

30
Reply of the Government
The approximate average ratio of suicides in peace versus field
areas is 70:30. Also, measures for prevention of such illnesses are
taken both in field and peace areas. The studies conducted have clearly
brought out factors both in field and peace areas/home.
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para 11 of Chapter I of the Report)
Recommendation (Para No. 6)
The studies on stress management in the Armed Forces have
identified certain causative factors for stress which are broadly
classifiable under the three categories namely, socio-economic including
familial reasons, and environmental/organizational and medical/
psychological causes. The Committee are in no doubt that after having
identified these specific causative factors for stress among the Armed
Forces personnel, the Ministry of Defence have not contemplated multi-
pronged strategies to address the problems of negative stress behaviour
of different ranks in the Armed Forces. Though certain remedial
measures have recently been initiated at the Service Headquarters
level and by the Ministry to manage stress among the Defence
personnel, the Committee feel convinced that much is still left to be
desired to address the organizational issues like better manpower
management, provisions for better amenities and conducive climate
to counter negative thinking among the Defence service personnel at
the lower ranks so as to minimize the undesirable consequences of
stress in the Armed Forces in the long run. They trust that the Ministry
of Defence would at least now realize the gravity of the problem in
all its ramifications and take expeditious steps to bring about
perceptible improvement in the prevailing situation.
Reply of the Government
Ministry of Defence understands the gravity of the problem in all
its ramifications and has taken adequate steps to improve the situation.
Stress management is a continuous process and the steps taken by
the Government will yield more perceptible improvement in the near
future.
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para 14 of Chapter I of the Report)

31
Recommendation [Para No. 7(I)]
The Committee have been given to understand that familial reasons
are one of the predominating causative factors of stress among the
Armed Forces personnel. These reasons include aspects like separation
from family, familial discords and disputes, concern regarding
children’s education and their upbringing and welfare measures for
the family. The Committee are of the firm view that while Armed
Forces personnel have to strike a balance between their personal and
military life within the constraints inherent in the military service, the
Government also cannot fully absolve themselves of their
responsibilities towards personnel engaged in meeting diverse
challenges before the nation. Undoubtedly, there is an imperative
necessity to address the legitimate needs of Defence personnel and
the Committee would strongly recommend the following:-
The Government should make earnest efforts to provide family
accommodation at the station of choice of the Armed Forces personnel
deployed on operational duties in counter insurgency and border areas.
Married accommodation project should be completed expeditiously
and different categories of residential accommodation lying vacant at
various military stations should be utilised for the purpose.
Reply of the Government
Families are permitted in peace areas only. Border areas and high
altitude areas are classified as field areas where families are not
permitted for operational reasons. No family accommodation exists in
these areas as it is not authorised. Local commanders at times permit
keeping of families in border areas for very short duration in existing
accommodation under formation arrangements.
Government is making all efforts to complete the “Married
Accommodation Project” ((MAP) on priority. In MAP , Phase-1, out of
57875 Dwelling Units (DUs) under execution, 40123 DUs have been
completed and 12881 DUs (cumulative 53004 DUs) will be completed
by March, 2010. Balance 4871 DUs will be completed in Financial
Year 2010-11. In MAP Project Phase-2, work is likely to commence by
March, 2010.
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para 17 of Chapter I of the Report)

32
Recommendation [Para No. 7 (ii)]
Efforts should also be directed towards imparting skill
development and extending help to the children of Armed Forces
personnel in getting admission in schools and institutions of higher
professional and technical studies. Opening of institutions for imparting
higher technical education in different parts of the country primarily
for the wards of the Armed Forces personnel be considered.
Reply of the Government
Army Welfare Education Society (AWES) has been established
under the aegis of Adjutant General’s Branch, Integrated HQ of MoD
(Army) to meet the educational needs of wards of Army personnel.
AWES has 126 schools with a population of 1.7 Lac children and 13
professional colleges in majority of the popular disciplines, spread
across the country. AWES also runs 13 professional colleges exclusively
for the wards of Armed Forces personnel. List of these institutions
may be seen at Annexure-I. All these institutions have been established
to meet the need for higher professional and technical studies of wards
of Armed Forces personnel.
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para 20 of Chapter I of the Report)
Recommendation (Para No. 10)
The Committee understand that the practice of utilizing services
of Jawans as Sahayaks is prevalent in the Army in one form or other
since British days. It is learnt that numerous Jawans are engaged at
the residence of some of the senior officer for domestic work and to
serve the family members of officers. A representative of the Army
categorically deposed before the Committee that the Jawans are not
technically supposed to attend to the household duties at the residence
of the officers and the personnel attending to such duties do so due
to their reverence. The Committee hardly need to stress that Jawans
are recruited for serving the nation and not to serve the family
members of officers in household work which is demeaning and
humiliating. The Committee take a very serious view of the shameful
practice which should have no place in the independent India. The
Committee expect the Ministry of Defence to issue instructions to
stop the practice forthwith, as this lowers the self-esteem of Jawan.
Any officer found to be violating the instruction in this regard should
be dealt with severely. Similar action needs to be taken by the Ministry
of Home Affairs in respect of para military organization and other
organizations.

33
Reply of the Government
(a) Exhaustive instructions regarding appropriate employment of
Sahayaks have been issued from time to time by Army HQ.
Comprehensive instructions have been issued to the environment vide
letter No. B/32099/AG/PS-2© dated 27 July 2007 (Annexure-II)
highlighting the following aspects:—
(i) Sahayak is a comrade-in-arms to Officer/JCO symbolizing
trust, respect, warmth, confidence and interdependence,
which are the fundamentals of relations between the leaders
and the led.
(ii) Sahayak is a solider who is addition to his duties provides
the essential support to authorized Officers and JCOs, both
in peace and war to enable them to fully attend to their
assigned duty. He also provides leaders a direct contact with
men and thus enables officers and JCOs to gain an insight
into the state of morale and well being of men.
(iii) Sahayak will be attached to regular Army units and
provided proper living accommodation and messing
facilities. The officers to whom Sahayaks are provided will
ensure such facilities are arranged.
(iv) Sahayaks will not be employed for menial house-hold work.
(b) It has also been stressed that there is an urgent and continuous
need to impress upon on all concerned that Sahayaks being combatant
soldiers under no circumstances are to be employed on a job, which
is not in conformity with the dignity and self-respect of a soldier.
Therefore, it is the duty of all officers/JCOs and Commanders in the
chain to ensure that strict checks are instituted to prevent misuse of
Sahayaks and that any violation of existing instructions and guidelines
should be dealt with immediately.
(c) Any practice that lowers the self-esteem of a soldier is to be
abhorred. Formation and Unit Commanders uphold the honour and
dignity of job content of the individual soldiers. In this context, it is
always ensured and shall continue to be ensured that soldiers are not
employed on any demeaning or humiliating tasks.
(d) Exhaustive instructions for strict compliance of the guidelines
have been reiterated to the environment.
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para 23 of Chapter I of the Report)

34
Recommendation (Para No. 11)
The Committee need hardly emphasize that the basic facilities for
the soldiers particularly those deployed at high altitudes or in border
areas need to be met in a most efficient manner. Delays in supply of
consumable and non-consumable items should be avoided and they
should not be deprived of better quality of weather appropriate
clothing and good quality of ration. The requirement of such essential
items must be reviewed at regular intervals and the supply of items
as per entitled scales must be monitored at appropriate level. The
Committee would like to be apprised of the specific measures taken
in this regard.
Reply of the Government
Based on the feed back from troops and formations commanders
at various levels following measures have been taken to enhance the
specification and scale of rations for the troops:—
(a) Upgradation and enhancement in specification of rice, pulses
and tea.
(b) Introduction of precooked chicken in retort pouches, broilers
in place of culled chicken and provision of chicken for all
days as against five days in a week earlier.
(c) Replacement of milk powder/tinned with TPM.
(d) Authorization of in lieu items like suji, flour, bread, coffee,
butter and eggs to PBOR so as to provide greater variety in
rations.
(e) Provisioning of special rations as being presently providing
in Op Meghadoot to all troops deployed above 12,000 ft. in
areas of Northern and Eastern Commands. The strength of
personnel authorized special rations has risen from an initial
strength of 2,850 to present strength of 28,644 personnel.
(f) Enhancing the condiment allowance by 84% and LPG scales
by 55%.
(g) Sanction has been given by MoD for procurement of
vegetables in retort pouches not exceeding 25% annual
requirement of existing varieties of vegetables tinned/
dehydrated.
(h) In order to improve quality and effect economy, procurement
of salt has been decentralized to Commands.

35
(i) Additional ration in desert areas consisting of Lime fresh,
Rooh Afza, TPM, and Fruit fresh for troops taking part in
exercise/collective training in desert/semi desert areas of
Rajasthan has been authorized.
(j) Sanction has been accorded for authorization of additional
1,40,300 of Meals Ready to eat per year for troops deployed
in Counter Insurgency operations in Eastern and Northern
Commands.
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para 26 of Chapter I of the Report)

CHAPTER V
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH
FINAL REPLIES OF GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED
-Nil-
36

STANDING COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE
MINUTES OF THE EIGHT SITTING OF THE STANDING
COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE (2009-10)
The Committee sat on Tuesday, the 5th January, 2010 from 1500
to 1530 hrs. in Committee Room ‘C’, Parliament House Annexe, New
Delhi.
PRESENT
Shri Satpal Maharaj — Chairman
M
EMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Harish Choudhary
3. Shri Kamal Kishor ‘Commando’
4. Shri H.D. Devegowda
5. Dr. Sucharu Ranjan Haldar
6. Shri Ramesh Jigajinagi
7. Shri Arjun Ram Meghwal
8. Dr. Prasanna Kumar Patasani
9. Shri Amarnath Prdhan
10. Shri Baju Ban Riyan
11. Shri Mahabali Singh
Rajya Sabha
12. Shri R.K. Dhawan
13. Prof. P .J. Kurien
14. Shri Prakash Javadekar
15. SHri K.B. Shanappa
16. Shri M.V . Mysura Reddy
17. Smt. Shobhana Bhartia
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri T.K. Mukherjee — Joint Secretary
2. Smt. Sudesh Luthra — Director
3. Shri N.S. Hooda — Additional Director
37

38
2. At the outset, the Hon’ble Chairman welcomed the members to
the sitting of the Committee and wished them a very Happy New
Year 2010. The Committee than took up for consideration and adoption
of draft action taken report on the observations/recommendations
contained in the 31st report (14th Lok Sabha) on the subject ‘Stress
Management in Armed Forces’ and also to decide future course of
action of the Committee.
3. After deliberations the Committee adopted the report with slight
modifications.
4. The Committee, then, authorised the Chairman to finalise the
above Draft and present the same to the House on a date convenient
to him.
The Committee then adjourned.

ANNEXURE I
DETAILS OF PROFESSIONAL COLLEGES
Name of Institute Location Course Degree Annual Total Availability
Duration Awarded Intake Capacity of
(Yrs) Hostel
Army Institute of Pune 4 BE/Four 240 960 Yes
Technology (AIT) St reams
Army (CT) Bangalore 4 BHM 60 240 Yes
Army Institute Management Kolkata 2 MBA 120 240 Yes
Kolkata (AIMK)
Army Institute Law (AIL) Mohali 5 BA, LLB 80 400 Yes
(Integrated)
Army Centre of Panchmarhi 1 B.Ed. 60 60 Yes
Education (ACE) (Girls)
Army College of Dental Secunderabad 5 BDS 40 200 Yes
Sciences (ACDS) 3 MDS 02 6
Army Institute of Delhi Cantt 1 B.Ed. 100 100 Yes
Education (AIE)
Army Institute Management Gr eater 2 MBA 120 240 Yes
and Technology (AIMT) Noida
Army Institute of Fashion Bangalore 2/3 PG Dip/BS 30 270 Yes
Design (AIFD) Fashion Te.
Army College of Jalandhar 4 BSc 50 200 Yes
Nursing (ACN) Nursing (Girls)
Army Institute Higher Pathankot 1 B.Ed. 100 100 Yes
Education (AIHE)
Army Institute of Guwahati 4 BSc 400 160 Yes
Nursing (AIN) Nursing (Girls)
Army College of Medical Delhi Cantt 41/2 MBBS 100 500 Yes
Sciences (ACMS)
Total 102 3676
39

ANNEXURE II
Tele: 23011503 Adjutant General’s Branch
23013948 Personnel Services Directorate
Integrated HQ of MoD (Army)
‘A’ Wing, Sena Bhawan,
New Delhi-110011
B/32099/AG/PS-2 (c) 27 July, 2007
Headquarters
Southern Command (A)
Eastern Command (A)
Western Command (A)
Central Command (A)
Northern Command (A)
ARTRAC (A)
A & N Command (A)
South West Command (A)
PROVISION FOR SAHAYAKS TO OFFICERs/JCOs IN THE ARMY
1. Reference the Following:-
(a) AI 30/60
(b) 08877/32/AG/PS Coord dated 07 March 1990
(c) B/32099/AG/PS-2 (c) dated 18 October 1993
2. Sahayaks are authorised to Officers and JCOs in the Army
when serving with Units or HQ functioning on War Establishment
vide AI 30/69. Exhaustive instructions regarding appropriate
employmwnt of Sahayaks have been issued from time to time by this
Branch. However, aspects of their misuse do digure frequently in the
media. In addition some reports are also received through formation
HQ. Hence there is a need and scope to educate the officers and
JCOs about proper utilisation of Sahayaks.
3. Over a period of time, various guidelines on the employment
of Sahayaks have been issued. Some of the relevant aspects are
reiterated as under:—
(a) Sahayak is a comrade-in-arms to Officer/JCO symbolizing
trust, respect, warmth, confidence and interdependence,
which are the fundamentals of relations between the leaders
and the led.
40

41
(b) Sahayak is a solder who in addition to his duties provides
the essential support to authorised Officers and JCOs, both
in peace and war to enable to them to fully attend to their
assigned duty. He also provides leaders a direct contact with
men and thus enables officers and JCOs to gain an insight
into the state of morale and well being of men.
(c) Sahayaks will be attached to regular Army units and
provided proper living accommodation and messing
facilities. The officers to whom sahayaks are provided will
ensure such facilities are arranged.
(d) Professional efficiency of sahayaks will be maintained by
organising regular military training and relieving them for
professional promotion related courses and exams.
4. It is imperative to highlight that under no circumstances
sahayaks will be provided/used for the following purposes:—
(a) Separated families.
(b) Retired officers.
(c) Caddies in golf courses or pickers on tennis courts.
(d) Unauthorised guards and sentries.
(e) For men at household jobs.
5. The facility/provisions of sahayaks will not be extended to the
officers when working on deputations or attending courses. These are
further amplified as under:—
(a) Officers/ICOs permanently seconded to organisations not
under the Army DRDo DGI and Survey of India.
(b) Officers/ICOs posted on deputation to organisations like
NSG, SFF, BSI and Assam Rifles.
(c) Officers attending courses where to indicated in joining
instructions.
6. There is an urgent and continuous need to impress upon all
concerned that sahayaks being combatant soldiers under no
circumstances are employed on a job, which is not in conformity
with the dignity and self-respect of a soldier. Therefore it is the duty
of all officers/ICOs and CDPS in the ..................
(Thomas Mathew)
Lt. Gen.
Adjutant Genreal
Copy to:
All Dtes of Integrated HQ of MoD (Army)

ANNEXURE II
Tele: 23333458 Adjutant General’s of Staff Duties
General Staff Branch/SD 4,
Integrated HQ of MoD (Army)
DHQ PO New Delhi-110011
40202/POLICY/SD 4 (A) 25 October, 2006
Headquarters
Southern Command (GS/SD)
Eastern Command (GS/SD)
Western Command (GS/SD)
Central Command (GS/SD)
Northern Command (GS/SD)
South Western Command (GS/SD)
ARTRAC (A)
REVIEW OF HIGH ALTITUDE TENURE
1. Refs:—
(a) DGMO (MO 3A) this HQ letter No. A/35005/MO3A dt
Dec. 2005 and even dt. 29 April 2006 (not to all) and your
replies thereto.
(b) Our Policy letter No. 40202/Policy/SD 4(A) dt 4 January
2006.
2. Incr in HA tenure of Inf Bns was exam in consultation with
MO Dte and DGMS (Army) and the following has been approved:—
(a) Eastern Command:  All HAA loc in 4 Corps and 33 Corps
except Yangtse (2 yrs) and Plateau (1 yr) will be incr to 02
yrs 06 months. The details of locs are as follows:—
(i) Baisakhi
(ii) Lumpo
(iii) Klemta
(iv) Keretent
(v) Chaman Tol
42

43
(vi) Sirhi
(vii) Tr Junc
(viii) MS-13
(ix) Lachung
(x) Sunny Vale
(b) Western Command:  Tenure of unit at Poon (36 Sect) will
be incr to 02 yrs 06 months.
(c) Central Command:  Tenure of Unit at Harsil will be incr to
02 yrs 06 months.
3. The tenure of inf. Bns being slotted to locs at Para 2 above
starting from Inf Relief April-Sept 2007 will be 02 yrs and 06 months
for two successive tenures. However, the revenue of the units already
dply at these locs will continue to remain 02 yrs as hither-to-fore.
4. This policy will be reviewed after five yrs.
(D. Annu)
Col.
Offg. DDG SD (B)
Copty to:
Internal:
SO 1
SO 2
SO 3
INF 3
MS 2
DGMS 5 (B) (Army)— You are requested to carry out long term
Study on the incr in tenure of units in HAA as recommended vide
Para 5 of your Note No. 2590/19/DGAFMS/DG-3A dt 13 October
2005.

APPENDIX
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON
THE RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS CONTAINED
IN THE THIRTY-FIRST REPORT OF THE STANDING
COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE
Total Percentage
of Total
1. Total number of recommendations 19
2. Recommendations/Observations which have 12 63.12
been accepted by Government:
Para No. 1, 3, 4, 7(iii), 8, 9, 12, 13, 14, 15,
16 and 17
3. Recommendations/Observations which the Nil —
Committee do not desire to pursue in view
of Government’s replies:
4. Recommendations/Observations in respect of 7 36.90
which replies of Government have not been
accepted by the Committee:
Para No. 2, 5, 6, 7 (i & ii), 10 and 11
5. Recommendations/Observations in respect of Nil —
which final replies of the Government are
still awaited:
44