5
STANDING COMMITTEE
ON DEFENCE
(2009-2010)
FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA
MINISTRY OF DEFENCE
[Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations contained
in the Thirty-third Report (Fourteenth Lok Sabha) on ‘Indigenisation
of Defence Production—Public-Private Partnership’]
FIFTH REPORT
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
March, 2010/Phalguna, 1931 (Saka)


FIFTH REPORT
STANDING COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE
(2009-2010)
(FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA)
MINISTRY OF DEFENCE
[Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations contained
in the Thirty-third Report (Fourteenth Lok Sabha) on ‘Indigenisation
of Defence Production—Public-Private Partnership’]
Presented to Lok Sabha on 4.3.2010
Laid  in  Rajya Sabha on 4.3.2010
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
March, 2010/Phalguna, 1931 (Saka)


C.O.D. No. 1 15
Price : Rs. 44.00
© 2010 BY LOK SABHA S ECRETARIAT
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of
Business in Lok Sabha (Thirteenth Edition) and printed by Jainco Art India,
New Delhi-110 005.

(i)
CONTENTS
PAGE
COMPOSITION OF THE C OMMITTEE (2009-10) ............................................ (iii)
INTRODUCTION .............................................................................................. (v)
CHAPTER I Report ............................................................................ 1
CHAPTER II Recommendations/Observations which have
been accepted by the Government ........................ 14
CHAPTER III Recommendations/Observations which the
Committee do not desire to pursue in
view of Government’s replies ................................. 29
CHAPTER IV Recommendations/Observations in respect of
which replies of Government have not been
accepted by the Committee ..................................... 31
CHAPTER V Recommendations/Observations in respect of
which final replies of Government are still
awaited .......................................................................... 35
MINUTES OF THE S ITTING ............................................................................ 37
APPENDIX Analysis of Action Taken by the Government
on the recommendations contained in the
33rd Report of the Standing Committee on
Defence (Fourteenth Lok Sabha) ............................ 39

COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE
ON DEFENCE (2009-10)
  Shri Satpal Maharaj —  Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Harish Choudhary
3. Shri Kamal Kishor ‘Commando’
4. Shri H.D. Devegowda
5. Shri Varun Gandhi
6. Dr. Sucharu Ranjan Haldar
7. Shri Ramesh Jigajinagi
8. Shri Kapil Muni Karwaria
9. Shri Arjun Ram Meghwal
10. Shri Asaduddin Owaisi
11.D r. Prasanna Kumar Patasani
12. Shri A.T. Nana Patil
13. Shri Bhaskarrao Bapurao Patil
14. Shri Amarnath Pradhan
15. Shri C. Rajendran
16. Shri M. Raja Mohan Reddy
17. Shri Baju Ban Riyan
18. Shri Ijyaraj Singh
19. Shri Kalyan Singh
20. Shri Mahabali Singh
21. Rajkumari Ratna Singh
Rajya Sabha
22. Shri R.K. Dhawan
23. Prof. P .J. Kurien
24. Shri Mukut Mithi
25. Shri Prakash Javadekar
(iii)

(iv)
26. Shri K.B. Shanappa
27. Shri T.K. Rangarajan
28. Shri Munquad Ali
29. Shri M.V . Mysura Reddy
30. Smt. Shobhana Bhartia
31. Shri Sanjay Raut
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri T.K. Mukherjee — Joint Secretary
2. Shri Sudesh Luthra — Director
3. Shri N.S. Hooda — Additional Director
4. Shri Rahul Singh — Committee Officer

(v)
INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairman of the Standing Committee on Defence (2009-10),
having been authorized by the Committee to submit the Report on
their behalf, do present this Fifth Report of the Committee on action
taken by the Government on the recommendations/observations
contained in the Thirty-third Report of the Committee (Fourteenth
Lok Sabha) on ‘Indigenisation of Defence Production—Public-Private-
Partnership’.
2. The Thirty-third Report was presented to Lok Sabha and laid
on the Table of Rajya Sabha on 19 December, 2008. The Report
contained 23 recommendations/observations respect of which replies
have received from Ministry of Defence on 30 October, 2009.
3. The Draft Action Taken Report was considered and adopted by
the Committee at their sitting held on 8 February, 2010.
4. An analysis of action taken by the Government on
recommendations/observations contained in the Thirty-third Report of
the Standing Committee on Defence (Fourteenth Lok Sabha) is given
in the Appendix.
5. For facility of reference and convenience, the recommendations/
observations of the Committee have been printed in thick type in
Chapter-I of the Report.
  N
EW D ELHI;S ATPAL MAHARAJ,
25 February, 2010 Chairman,
6 Phalguna, 1931 (Saka) Standing Committee on Defence.

1
CHAPTER I
REPORT
This Report of the Standing Committee on Defence deals with
action taken by the Government on the recommendations/observations
contained in their Thirty-third Report (14th Lok Sabha) on
‘Indigenisation of Defence Production-Public-Private Partnership’, which
was presented to Lok Sabha and laid in Rajya Sabha on 19.12.2008.
2. The Committee’s Thirty-third Report (Fourteenth Lok Sabha)
contained twenty three observations/recommendations on the following
aspects:—
Para No. Subject
1. Need for taking steps to enhance Indigenisation in
Defence Production
2. Extent of Indigenisation
3, 4 & 5. Private Sector Participation
6. Defence Procurement Procedure
7. Review of ‘Make’ Category
8. Filed trials
9. Foreign Direct Investment (FDI)
10. Offset Provision
11. Level Playing Field
12. Financial Assistance to SMEs
13 & 14. Indigenisation of Defence equipment
15. Raksha Udyog Ratnas (RURs)
16 to 21. Research and Development Efforts
22. Autonomy to DPSUs and Ordnance Factories
23. General
3. Action Taken Replies have been received from the Government
in respect of all the recommendations/observations contained in the

2
Report. These replies have been examined and the same have been
categorized as follows:—
(i) Recommendations/observations, which have been accepted
by the Government (Please see Chapter II):—
Para Nos. 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 12, 13, 14, 16, 18, 20, 21, 22, & 23
(15 Recommendations)
(ii) Recommendations/observations, which the Committee do
not desire to pursue in view of the replies of the
Government (Please see Chapter III):—
Para Nos. 1, 9
(02 Recommendations)
(iii) Recommendations/observations in respect of which replies
of the Government have not been accepted by
the Committee and which require reiteration (Please see
Chapter IV):—
Para Nos. 2, 10, 11 & 17
(04 Recommendations)
(iv) Recommendations/observations in respect of which final
replies of the Government are still awaited (Please see
Chapter V):—
Para Nos. 15 and 19
(02 Recommendations)
4. The Committee desire the Ministry to furnish its response to
their comments made in Chapter-I of this Report at the earliest.
5. The Committee will now deal with the action taken by the
Government on some of their recommendations in the succeeding
paragraphs.
A. Extent of Indigenisation
Recommendation (Para No. 2)
6. The Committee had recommended as under:
“The Committee are constrained to observe that no scientific system
has been put in place by the Ministry of Defence to assess the
exact level of indigenisation achieved by defence production units

3
in the country. In fact, the statistical information on extent of
Indigenisation furnished to the Committee fail to reflect true picture
as some of these figures admittedly, do not include the quantum
of import content utilised in products manufactured by public sector
units. The Committee find it distressing that while one
representative of the Ministry of Defence claimed during evidence
that the share of indigenously produced items in defence production
was about 77 per cent in 2006-07, the Defence Secretary was candid
enough to admit that only 30 to 35 per cent of defence expenditure
on equipment was met from domestic manufacturers. Undoubtedly,
the quantum of financial outgo to the foreign and indigenous
sources for procurement of defence equipment continues to be the
primary criterion for evaluating the level of indigenisation in
defence sector in the country. The Committee wish to remind the
Ministry that the main plank of indigenisation in defence
production is to reach higher levels of self reliance in development
and production of state-of-the-art equipment and weapon systems
and this issue of national importance cannot be viewed in a mere
commercial and statistical jargon. The Committee express their
strong displeasure over the manner in which this data is being
maintained and they desire the Ministry to apply necessary
corrections in order to ensure an objective and incisive analysis of
the realities of the prevailing situation.”
7. The Ministry in its action taken reply has stated as under:
“There are two aspects to the issue viz. developing systems
indigenously and the level of indigenisation through the ToT route.
As regards indigenous R&D, major systems and deliverable are in
place, like Prithvi, MBT Arjuna and EW Systems for Army & Navy.
In the field of mission computers also considerable indigenous
capability has been built for major platforms. This process has to
be further strengthened.
As regards ToT, most of the manufacturing programmes in DPSUs
and OFB are under license production. The extent of indigenisation
depends on the depth of technology being transferred and stage
of transfer. For example in the case of SU-30Mkl, the indigenisation
percentage which was 13% during 2004-05 would go up to 43.4%
in phase IV of manufacturing this year. Similarly, in case of
HAWKAJT, the indigenisation percentage will increase from present
level of 12%-15% to 45% in the raw material phase of production.
In case of T-90 Tank, the indigenisation percentage in the current

4
year is 30% is likely to go up 70% by 2010-11. It is also relevant
to mention that as per provision of DPP-2008, minimum indigenous
content in case of ToT is 60% for Cat-I & II items and this is
insisted upon in the RFP for ‘Buy & Make’ cases.”
8. Expressing their strong displeasure over the manner in which
data is being maintained about the exact level of indigenisation of
defence production, the Committee had desired the Ministry to ensure
an objective and incisive analysis of the realities of level of
indigenisation. The Committee are not satisfied with the reply of
the Ministry as till date they have not done any assessment in this
regard. The Ministry has furnished information with regard to
indigenization percentage in respect of some of the selected major
systems developed through ToT. In the absence of such data on all
the systems, sub-systems and spare parts being developed by all
production agencies and R&D organisations, it would be inaccurate
to quantify the level of indigenization. The Committee, therefore,
would like to reiterate their earlier recommendation to maintain
scientific data on the level of indigenisation of defence production
in the country.
B. Offset Provision
Recommendation (Para No. 10)
9. The Committee had recommended as under:
“The Committee note that an ‘off-set’ provision applicable to all
capital acquisitions effective from July, 2005 has been incorporated
in the Defence Procurement Procedures (DPP) which stipulates a
minimum required offset of 30 percent of the indicative cost of the
acquisitions under ‘Buy (Global)’ category and 30 percent of the
foreign exchange component in ‘Buy and Make’ category in respect
of acquisitions valued at Rs. 3000 crore or more. The Committee
have been informed that although offset obligations have to be
discharged concurrently with the main contract, any failure on
this account attracts a meagre penalty of 5 percent and other action
can also be initiated against the defaulting compnay in case of
consistent failure. Strangely enough, extension of time for
implementing the offset obligation is also stated to be considered
with specific order. The Committee are in no doubt that such
options leave limited scope with the Government in strictly
enforcing the requirements under offset provision which ultimately
proves detrimental to the national interests. While certain changes
are stated to have been made in DPP-2008 in view of the

5
requirement of foreign manufacturers to speed up offset
implementation over a period of time, the Committee would like
to emphasise that time limit for discharging liabilities under the
offset provision have to be made essence of the relevant contracts.
They, therefore, desire that stringent and specific clauses should
be incorporated in the contracts for imposing heavy financial
penalties at the rate of a minimum of 15 per cent per annum in
all cases of default and no room is left for any discretion in such
matters.”
10. The Ministry in its action taken reply has stated as under:
“The Offset provision included in DPP-2008 has been amended
with reference to that included in DPP-2006. Action to revise the
penalty clause with reference to non-fulfilment of offset obligation
can be taken after some of the offset contracts have been
implemented and studied”.
11. The Committee note that the offset provision was initially
included in DPP 2006. Even after the passage of almost four years,
the Ministry need more time to study the offset contracts to revise
the penalty clause as recommended by the Committee. In this context,
the Committee may like to refer to Para No. 10 of Part II of first
report (15th Lok Sabha) of the Committee on Demands for Grants
2009-10 as reproduced below:
“In placing the order for the acquisition of 40 aircraft ‘M’, costing
Rs. 9,036.84 crore, Ministry/IAF failed to go in for the Offset
Clause as stipulated in the DPP . This led to the denial of
corresponding benefit amounting to Rs. 2,711 crore to Indian
Defence Industry and the objective of urgent acquisition has
also not been achieved.
In view of the above loss of benefit to Indian Defence industry,
the Committee recommend that the Ministry should ensure that
the DPP provisions are strictly implemented in all capital
acquisition cases.”
12. The aforesaid observation of the CAG reinforces the need
for stringent penalty measures. As such the Committee would like
to reiterate their earlier recommendation to impose heavy financial
penalties @ minimum of 15 per cent per annum in all cases of
default. The concrete action in this regard should be taken without
any further delay and the Committee informed accordingly.

6
C. Level Playing Field to private sector
Recommendation (Para No. 11)
13. The Committee had recommended as under:
“The Committee are fully conscious of the role being played by
the DPSUs and the Ordnance Factories in meeting the national
security requirements. However, they are at the same time of the
view that the contribution being made by the private sector in
defence production cannot be marginalised by the Ministry of
Defence in their capacity as the sole buyer of military equipment.
Although the long standing demand of private sector for providing
a level playing field vis-a-vis foreign suppliers is stated to have
since been addressed in DPP-2006, the Committee have been given
to understand that there are several areas where distinction is made
between the private and public sector while procuring defence
equipment. These are, inter-alia, (i) nomination for transfer of
technology where the foreign suppliers are specifically asked to
collaborate with an DPSU; (ii) discrepancy in tax structure for
exemption of customs and Central excise duties as well as foreign
exchange rate variation; and (iii) non-acceptances of corporate bonds
as collateral etc. The Committee consider that these issues need
urgent attention with a view to doing away with discriminatory
treatment so that the necessary thrust is provided to private sector
striving hard to augment indigenous defence production in the
country. The Committee are of strong view that level playing field
and equal opportunities would not only promote healthy
competition between the public and private sector but would also
result in cost effectiveness of indigenously produced defence
equipments. The Committee expect the Government to move in
the right direction expeditiously.”
14. The Ministry in its action taken reply has stated as under:
“In the matter of nominating Production Agency for receiving ToT,
it needs to be pointed out that certain technical senstivities,
maintenance of equipments for a lifetime, assured spares supports
and operation in times of war, have to be factored in while making
such nomination. Since Government pays for the ToT and the above
issues are paramount, DPSUs/OFB would have to be the primary
receivers of such technology to give credible guarantees to the
needs of national defence.

7
In so far as taxes are concerned, the evaluation of L1 is done
minus the taxes—so that there is a level playing field. In fact in
some cases the PSUs are at a disadvantage as they are not in a
position to take CENVAT credit.
ERV is admissible only to Defence PSUs wherever import
component is involved. However, in multi-vendor cases, no
advantage under ERV is admissible to DPSUs.”
15. While taking note of the fact that distinction is made between
the private and public sector at the time of procuring Defence
equipments, the Committee had recommended for level playing field
for the private sector while nominating Production Agency for
transfer of technology where the foreign suppliers are asked to
collaborate with DPSU. In this regard DPP 2008 specifically provides
that in cases where ToT is being sought, the appropriate Production
Agency (PA) could be selected from any of the public/private firms
including a joint venture company based on the inputs from DDP
and if required from DRDO. In spite of that, the Ministry in the
action taken reply has highlighted certain concerns for nominating
DPSUs/OFBs as primary receivers. The Committee understand that
it would always be safer to nominate DPSUs/OFBs as the primary
receiver of such technology. However, the total denial of the
opportunities to the private sector in this regard is not justified
particularly when the specific provision has been made in the DPP .
In view of this, the Committee while reiterating their earlier
recommendation would like the Ministry to take concrete step to
involve the private sector.
D. Research and Development Efforts—Payment of Royalty to
Scientists
Recommendation (Para No. 17)
16. The Committee had recommended as under:
“The Committee also wish to emphasise that innovative schemes
for promoting research and development activities in the defence
sector have to be devised by the Ministry of Defence to achieve
an enhanced level of self-reliance, in this area. The Committee
therefore, recommend that a comprehensive plan of action should
be formulated to recognize the research and development work
undertaken by the defence scientists/the industry by extending
them appropriate incentives for different projects and payment of
royalty, etc. The industry should also be assured of orders in case
of development of product within a given time frame in conformity
with the specific qualitative requirements of the users.”

8
17. The Minister in its action taken reply has stated as under:
“The Defence Acquisition Council (DAC) has accepted in principle
the concept of shared development cost. The 80:20 ratio for sharing
of development cost with the industry is included in DPP 2008 for
promoting research and development activities in the defence sector
by Indian Industries. There is no question of giving royalty to
defence scientists in the DRDO/PSUs as the entire cost of research,
including salary, is met by the Government and the fruits of the
research are Government property”.
18. The Committee disapprove the way the Ministry has
responded to one of the important recommendations of the
Committee with regard to providing appropriate incentives/royalty
to Defence scientists/industry for different projects. Instead of taking
the concrete action, the Ministry has outrightly rejected the
recommendation of the Committee by stating that the entire cost of
research including salary is met by the Government and the fruits
of the research are Government property. The Committee strongly
feel that extension of royalty will boost the original research and
development in defence production. Therefore, the Committee
reiterate their earlier recommendation to consider the payment of
royalty to scientists.
E. Research and Development Efforts—Involvement of Private Sector
in DRDO projects
Recommendation (Para No. 21)
19. The Committee had recommended as under:
“Since DRDO have a well-established and vast network of
laboratories spread over the country, feasibility of extending
research facilities to defence industries in private sector in DRDO
laboratories should also be examined in the interest of national
security. The Committee trust that this issue will be considered by
the Ministry of Defence in proper perspective so that the R&D
infrastructure created in the country is put to optimum use.”
20. The Ministry in its action taken reply has stated as under:
“DRDO has been involving Private Sector in almost all of the
DRDO projects. DRDO infrastructure is fully utilised by all these
participating industries. Further, DRDO has been extending support
to industry by providing its infrastructure and facilities, whenever
required by them.”

9
21. Though the Ministry in its reply has stated that DRDO has
been involving private sector in almost all of the DRDO projects but
it has not submitted any details about the industries which are being
benefitted in this regard. The Committee desire that a list containing
the names, extent of participation, product development by such
participation and benefit accrued by DRDO as well as private sector
in physical and intellectual terms may be furnished to the Committee
at the earliest.
F. Autonomy to DPSUs and Ordnance Factories
Recommendation (Para No. 22)
22. The Committee had recommended as under:
“The Committee are of strong view that there is also an imperative
need to improve the functioning of DPSUs and Ordnance Factories
Organisation by giving them more autonomy so that the defence
infrastructure created in public sector is exploited to its full
potential. In order to achieve this objective, the Committee would
like the Ministry of Defence to consider the following suggestions:
(i) The DPSUs and Ordnance Factories should be given
adequate freedom in decision making and to enter in joint
ventures with other companies having proven competence
in the defence sector.
(ii) DPSUs should be permitted to raise money through
borrowings by way of equity/bond/loan from the market
so that they do not face financial crunch for carrying out
their expansion plans and for investments in R&D activities.
(iii) The feasibility of reconstituting the Board of Directors of
DPSUs by nominating non-official Directors particularly
those having expertise in the area of specialization of
respective DPSUs should be examined in consultation with
the departments concerned.
(iv) After meeting their prime responsibility for production of
defence equipment, the DPSUs and Ordnance Factories
should be permitted to use their spare capacity if any, for
diversification in production with a view to optimally
utilizing the manpower available”.

10
23. The Ministry in its action taken reply has stated as under:
“The following is submitted with regard to the issues raised above
by the Committee:
(i) & (ii) Among the Defence PSUs, HAL and BEL are Nav Ratna
Companies, and bestowed with financial and operational
autonomy to facilitate decision making for entering into joint
ventures with other companies. As per DPE’s guidelines
the companies are empowered to raise funds from the
domestic market for its investments. HAL has 9 joint
Ventures in place, engaged in design and production of
aviation related products. Other DPSUs, as Mini Ratna
Companies, too have sufficient financial autonomy. Financial
powers have also been enhanced for OFB and the individual
ordnance factories to facilitate enhanced autonomy in
operation. Full financial powers have been delegated for
procurement of input material, except in single vendor cases.
Substantial powers have also been delegated for R&D work
in the factories.
(iii) The non-official Directors are selected on the basis of their
specialized domain knowledge in the product range of
DPSU, Finance, Academics and Strategic thinking.
(iv) DPSUs like BEL, after meeting the requirement of defence
fully has been able to achieve 19-20% of its turnover through
non-defence segment. HAL also has almost 10% of its order
book committed to aerospace structures for Deptt. of Space,
besides supplying a few helicopters to MHA, ONGC and
State Governments. OFB is also expected to supply products
worth Rs. 1298 crores to the non-defence sector during
2009-10 out of a total turnover of Rs. 9661 crores. Similarly,
GSL has diversified its activities in construction to GRP boats
and dedicated infrastructure facilities have been created at
the GSL Unit II and III at Goa. The company has further
created facilities for supply of spares and systems for Coast
Guard Vessels, as also simulators for ONGC etc.
Note on Autonomy to DPSUs and Ordnance Factories
OFB
Financial powers of OFB and Ordance Factories have been
enhanced for their operational needs. Full financial powers have
been delegated for procurement of input materials, except single
vendor cases. Substantial powers have been delegated for research

11
and development activities. In order to exploit installed capacity
in full after meeting the annual requirements projected by the
Defence forces. Ordnance Factories continuously endeavour to
diversify product range and expand customer base within the
limitation of available facilities being completely dedicated for
manufacture of arms and ammunitions only. This has resulted in
development and growth in supply to Non-Defence sector. The
organization is poised to supply products worth Rs. 1298.00 cr. to
Non-Defence sector during 2009-10 out of total turnover of
Rs. 9661 cr. registering a growth of 113.14% from 2000-01 (supply
to non-defence sector during 2000-01 was Rs. 609 cr.).
HAL
HAL, as the Navratna Company, has adequate Delegation of
Powers and freedom in decision making to enter in Joint Ventures
with other companies. HAL now has 9 Joint Ventures in place
engaged in design and production of aviation related products.
HAL has been financing its expansion plans and R&D requirements
through its internal resources and through customer financing for
dedicated facilities. HAL has the financial powers to borrow from
the market if required. HAL has been maintaining the highest credit
rating from CRISIL and ICRA for short term and long term
borrowings since last 5 years. HAL has autonomy to utilize its
resources and spare capacity for diversification into related areas.
With the current order book position, HAL does not envisage any
spare capacity during the next 10 years.
BEML
Mini Ratna status has been extended to BEML, thereby giving the
undertaking sufficient financial autonomy.
GSL
The company has diversified its activities in construction to GRP
boats and dedicated infrastructure facilities have been created at
GSL Unit II & III at Sancoale Industrial Estate, Goa. The
Government of India, Ministry of Home Affairs has placed orders
on the Company for Design, Construction and Supply of 116 Nos.
of GRP boats, i.e. 54 Nos. 5T and 62 Nos. 12T capacity, to the
Coastal Police in the States on the West Coast of India and Union
Territory of Lakshadweep. The Company has created facilities for
testing, assembly and supply of CPP spares and stern gear system
in the yard and presently executing prestigious stern gear supply

12
orders for Naval and Coast Guard vessels. The Company has also
diversified its activities in the manufacture of various raining
simulators for ONGC and Navy and is providing training on
Survival at Sea to ONGC personnel on their training ship Samudra
Shiksha. GSL has received project sanction to undertake on turn-
key basis the project of setting up Shore Based Training Facility at
INS Hansa, Goa, for Indian Navy’s LCA (N) project through
Aeronautical Development Authority, Banglore. The work on the
said project has commenced and is being implemented ahead of
schedule. The aforesaid general engineering project have been
undertaken through outsourcing and optimally utilizing its available
manpower.
MDL
Major equipment systems such as indigenous Rocket Launcher
(IRL), Indigenous Torpedo Tube Launcher (ITTL), Brahmos Missiles,
Hallow Transverse Systems, Steering Gear and Stabilizers, AC Plants
etc. are being supplied by private sector such as L&T, KPCL etc.
They are just not supplying components and sub-assemblies but
the complete system.
BEL
BEL being a Navratna company it is bestowed with better financial
and operational autonomy. In view of this, BEL is taking pro-
active steps to protect and consolidate its leadership positioning
the Indian Defence market while at the same time accelerate the
efforts to get into new business areas. The company is looking for
new growth opportunities in areas aligned with BEL’s core strengths
either through organic growth in existing/new areas and Inorganic
growth through Joint Ventures/Acquisitions. In this direction, BEL
is discussing with reputed players for forming joint ventures in
the area of Defence Electronics. Some of these proposals are in the
advanced stage of finalization. BEL being a Navratna company,
sufficient empowerment is available as per the DPE guidelines to
raise funds in domestic market for its investments. This will be
resorted by BEL whenever it is required. At present it is able to
cater fund requirements through its internal accruals. There is no
restriction on DPSUs to use spare capacity for diversification
activities. During the Annual Roll on Plan meetings, the order
availability in each of the Units/SBUs are discussed in detail. In
case of low order book position in some of the units/SBUs, the
projects are assigned for even distribution of load so as to ensure
optimal utilization of the available manpower. Besides fully meeting

13
the requirement of defence, company is able to achieve 20-25% of
its turnover through non-defence segment in our effort to improve
utilization of capacities built.”
24. The Ministry in its action taken reply has stated that the non-
official Directors are selected on the basis of their specialized domain
knowledge in the products range of DPSU, Finance, Academics and
Strategic thinking. In this regard, the Committee would like the Ministry
to furnish the list of Non-Official Directors selected, along with the
details of area of specialization of each Director. Besides, the details
about the selection procedure and the method of evaluation of
performance of the Directors should also be made available to the
Committee.

CHAPTER II
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN
ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT
Recommendation (Para No. 3)
The Committee have been informed that there has been a paradigm
shift in the role of private sector in the field of indigenisation
consequent upon Government’s decision in May, 2001 to open defence
industry for Indian private sector participation upto 100 per cent with
permissible limit of 26 per cent in Foreign Direct Investment (FDI).
Although several new policy initiatives have been taken for promoting
public-private partnership in defence production during the recent
years, the statistics furnished to the Committee reveal that the share
of private sector including small scale industries was a meager 23 per
cent of the total purchases made by DPSUs during 2006-07.
Undoubtedly, this situation is far from satisfactory particularly when
the Government aims at harnessing available expertise and the
capabilities of the private sector towards the total defence efforts and
search for self-reliance. The Committee are of firm view that there is
an imperative need for exploring further ways and means for
substantially increasing the indigenous efforts in development and
production of defence equipment by active participation of both the
public and the private industries so as to achieve greater self-reliance.
They feel that this task can be accomplished by taking timely and
appropriate initiatives to integrate the private industries of proven
capabilities in the defence sector without compromising national
security. Efforts are also required to be directed towards earnest
implementation of the policy framework envisaged from time to time
with a view to achieving the desired objectives.
Reply of the Government
The following provisions in DPP-2008, which inter-alia outlines the
policy framework of Ministry of Defence, have been made with a
view to increasing self-reliance/indigenisation in defence production
under the ‘Buy’ and ‘Buy and Make’ category:
(i) Inclusion of Joint Venture Company for absorption of
Transfer of Technology.
14

15
(ii) Pr ocurement of Products developed by Army Base
Workshops, Naval Dockyards and Air Force Repair Depots.
(iii) Banking of Offset Credits.
(iv) A joint venture company has been exempted from offering
offsets in case indigenous content in the product is more
than 50%.
(v) Requirement of industrial licence for a private industry to
participate in offset programmes for becoming eligible for
defence offsets has been dispensed with. Licensing will now
be required only if so stipulated under the guidelines/
licensing requirements for the defence industry issued by
the Department of Industrial Policy and Promotion.
(vi) A list of defence products have been added in DPP-2008, to
facilitate the foreign vendors in implementing their offset
obligations.
(vii) ToT for Maintenance Infrastructure to include Army Base
workshops/Naval Dockyards/Base Repair Depots of Air
Force in addition to Indian Public/Private firm.
Concerted efforts are being made to enhance self reliance in Defence
Products and following measures have been taken to integrate private
industries of proven capabilities in the defence sector:—
(a) Participation of the Indian Private Sector in the ‘MAKE’
procedure.
(b) Feasibility studies in respect of 06 projects are underway
and Integrated Project Management Teams (IPMTs) have
been constituted for two other projects. This is an ongoing
process and more feasibility studies and IPMTs are in the
pipeline. For these projects both the public and private sector
industries are considered.
[MoD ID No. 11013/25/2008/D (PARL.), Dated 30.10.2009]
Recommendation (Para No. 4)
The Committee understand that a congenial atmosphere has been
created for public-private partnership in defence production as a result
of several new policy initiatives taken by the Government in the recent
past. They feel that an enhanced participation by the private sector
would not only promote healthy competition between public and
private sector but would also give an impetus to industrial and

16
economic growth in the country. While commending the Government’s
decision to accept a majority of recommendations made by Kelkar
Committee for encouraging involvement of private sector in promoting
defence capacity building and high technology capabilities in defence
sector, the Committee strongly feel that a formal mechanism for sharing
information on the futuristic requirements and the perspective plans
of the users should be put in place in accordance with the practices
adopted by certain advanced countries. The Committee feel convinced
that such a mechanism would inspire the confidence of the private
industries and enable them to gear up their infrastructure well in
advance. The Committee, therefore, desire that the Ministry of Defence
should address this issue in the right perspective and apprise them of
the precise steps taken in this regard.
Reply of the Government
The following steps have been taken:
(a) Recommendations of the Committee have been addressed
by the HQ IDS document ‘Technology Needs to Achieve
Joint War-fighting Capability’, which has been placed on
the MoD website. The technology requirements of the
Services over the next 15 years have been spelt out therein.
(b) HQ IDS is also preparing a capability based revised Long
Term Integrated Prospective Plan (LTIPP) document, in
conjunction with the Services. Once this is cleared from the
“Security” angle, this also will be placed in the MoD
website.
(c) DRDO’s 11th Five Year Plan document is being integrated
into the Services procurement plan.
(d) Industry Associations would be allowed to make
presentation before the categorisation Committees.
[MoD ID No. 11013/25/2008/D (PARL.), Dated 30.10.2009]
Recommendation (Para No. 5)
During their interaction with Dr. Vijay Kelkar, the Committee have
been informed that Indian Space Research Organisation (ISRO)
embraced the private sector industries in the country to meet their
requirements in the high-tech area and their experience has been fruitful
both in terms of efficiency and economy. The Committee would,
therefore, like the Ministry of Defence to make an indepth study of

17
the practices and procedures being followed by ISRO with a view to
exploring the feasibility of adopting the same in defence sector.
Reply of the Government
An in-depth study of the practices and procedures being followed
by ISRO has been done by Kelkar Committee in its Report (Part-I) on
strengthening self-reliance in Defence Preparedness and
recommendations were accordingly made based on the lessons learnt
from ISRO’s Experience like need for a long-term approach and hand
holding of the private industry during development phase and
competitive environment later. The recommendations of the Kelkar
Committee have been accepted by the Government for implementation.
[MoD ID No. 11013/25/2008/D (PARL.), Dated 30.10.2009]
Recommendation (Para No. 6)
The Committee note that the Ministry of Defence have introduced
a revised Defence Procurement Procedure (DPP) in July, 2008. A scrutiny
of DPP-2008 reveals that while certain procedural changes have been
introduced with a view to strengthening the procurement framework
and transparency in operations, the procedure does not specifically
mention about the procurement policy of the Government for achieving
self-reliance and indigenisation in defence production. The Committee
are of strong view that the policy initiatives taken by the Government
in the recent past for creating public-private partnership and indigenous
development defence procurement procedures by clearly bringing out
the specific provisions made therein to facilitate indigenously developed
products. The Committee trust that the Ministry of Defence would
take appropriate steps in this regard.
Reply of the Government
As brought out in reply to para 3 above, several provision have
been made in DPP-2008 inter-alia with a view to increasing self-reliance/
indigenisation in defence production under the ‘Buy’, ‘Buy & Make’
and ‘Make’ categories.
[MoD ID No. 11013/25/2008/D (PARL.), Dated 30.10.2009]
Recommendation (Para No. 7)
The Committee note that the Kelkar Committee on review of
Defence Procurement Procedure had recommended and integrated
approach involving Users, Ministry of Defence and the Industry in the

18
‘Make’ procedure and the recommendations of the Kelkar Committee
have been accepted by the government for implementation. The
Committee have been informed that the procurement through
indigenous development would now be undertaken under three
categories. While strategic and security sensitive systems would be
undertaken by DRDO and managed through Defence R&D Board, the
projects under high technology complex systems would be undertaken
by RURs/Indian Industry/DPSUs/OFB/Consortia on a level playing
field and this procedure would also be adopted for all upgrades
categorised as ‘Make’. The projects under low technology mature system
would be categorised as ‘Buy Indian’ and must have a minimum of
50 per cent indigenous content. Considering the fact that the ‘Make’
category incorporated in the Defence Procurement Procedure way back
in 2006 has not yielded any tangible results despite the private
industries in the country having registered a significant growth in
indigenous capabilities in development and manufacture in the defence
sector, the Committee feel that there is an urgent need to fine tune
and rationalise the procurement procedures under ‘Make’ category so
as to achieve the goal of self-reliance in real sense. The Committee
therefore, desire that an expert Committee should be constituted at
the earliest to review the existing procurement procedures under ‘Make’
category so that the capabilities and expertise available with the defence
industries in the country can be gainfully utilized.
Reply of the Government
DPP-2008 provides for a periodic review of the procurement
procedure. The recommendation will be kept in view as a guidance
while undertaking the exercise for review of ‘Make’ procedure.
[MoD ID No. 11013/25/2008/D (PARL.), Dated 30.10.2009]
Recommendation (Para No. 8)
The Committee had observed in their Nineteenth Report
(Fourteenth Lok Sabha) that long evaluation trials by the Armed Forces
even in case of equipment produced indigenously has been one of the
major causes for delay in procurement of defence equipment. While
acknowledging the need for comprehensive evaluation of the new
equipment in different conditions, the Committee wish to point out
that the quality of indigenously produced equipment should be
conducted expeditiously so that the manufacture can make timely
efforts in finding out solutions to the shortcomings noticed during
field trials and the goal of self-reliance is achieved within shortest
possible time. The Committee, therefore, suggest that the Ministry of

19
Defence should consider procuring sufficient number of prototypes of
the indigenously produced defence equipment so that the field trials
can be conducted simultaneously in various terrains of the country
and inordinate delay in development and production of such equipment
could be avoided. Similar measures should also be contemplated for
procurement of defence equipment from abroad.
Reply of the Government
Provision exists in the DPP-2008 to ask for more tan one prototype
for simultaneous conduct of trials and the same is being done for
low-cost equipment as also in those cases where the quantities/financial
outlays are sufficiently large. The DPP provides for a time frame of 6/
12 months for completion of field trials and approval of staff evaluation.
As far as possible efforts are made to adhere to this time line both for
the imported systems and indigenously developed platforms, weapons
& systems.
[MoD ID No. 11013/25/2008/D (PARL.), Dated 30.10.2009]
Recommendation (Para No. 12)
Having recognized the potential of some of the small and medium
enterprises (SMEs) in the country, the Government have decided to
formulate a scheme for providing financial assistance to these
enterprises to take up design and development work in the defence
production. The Committee urge the Ministry of Defence to take care
that the scheme is finalised and implemented after due consultation
with the agencies concerned so that the potential of these enterprises
is utilised to its optimum level without any loss of time. The Committee
also desire that some institutional arrangement in collaboration with
DRDO and other research organisation should be put in place to
gainfully utilise the efforts of these enterprises in promoting indigenous
defence production.
Reply of the Government
The ‘Make’ procedure already provides for a sharing of
development cost between the Government and the Industry.
[MoD ID No. 11013/25/2008/D (PARL.), Dated 30.10.2009]
Recommendation (Para No. 13)
The Committee learn that certain equipment like night vision
devices, special clothing and mountaineering kits, etc. are being
imported for the use of defence service personnel deployed in high

20
altitude areas. While expressing their surprise over the continued import
of such basic equipment, the Committee feel that the Indian industries
have also attained capabilities in developing and manufacturing of
such types of items. They, therefore, urge the Ministry to explore the
feasibility of procuring such items from the indigenous manufacturers
within the country.
Reply of the Government
Efforts are made to source defence items from indigenous
manufacturers etc. subject to their meeting qualitative requirements of
the users. Often stringent military specifications do not enable
procurement commercially off the shelf.
[MoD ID No. 11013/25/2008/D (PARL.), Dated 30.10.2009]
Recommendation (Para No. 14)
Considering the fact that armed forces personnel are being
increasingly deployed in counter-terrorist and counter-insurgency
operations, the Committee strongly feel that there is imperative need
to provide body protective gears to soldiers and also to use robots for
handling hazardous tasks like laying and retrieving of land mines so
as to protect the precious lives of trained soldiers. The Committee,
therefore, desire that efforts should be made to encourage indigenous
development and manufacture of body protective gears and robots in
active participation of defence industries both in public and private
sector. The Committee would like to be apprised of the precise steps
contemplated in this regard.
Reply of the Government
A few Indian companies are involved in production of body
protective gear. Weight wise, they are sometimes heavier than imported
equipment for which efforts are on to indigenously develop light weight
yet robust body armour. Extensive utilisation of robotics for
conventional and (CI-CT) operations are also being planned through a
collaborative approach with the industry. Mine Protective Gears are
under procurement in ‘Make’ category. Remotely operated vehicles
developed by DRDO for detection, terrain, neutralisation and disposal
of IEPs are under use. Besides, boot anti mine engineers and boot anti
mine inflating used by soldiers are being procured under ‘Make’ ‘Buy
& Make’ category respectively.
[MoD ID No. 11013/25/2008/D (PARL.), Dated 30.10.2009]

21
Recommendation (Para No. 16)
The Committee have been given to understand that the new
procedures put in place enjoin upon DRDO to undertake research and
development in the areas where indigenous technologies may not be
available or may be cost exorbitant to develop by the Indian industry
because of their high research content. The projects covered under
‘Make’ category would be undertaken by defence industries in public
or private sector or consortia where fundamental research is not
required. Keeping in view these policy changes, the Committee would
like to stress that appropriate financial support systems must be put
in place to promote R&D both in public and private sector particularly
for projects relating to development of cutting-edge technologies. The
Committee also desire that the Ministry of Defence should themselves
take the onus of giving such grants to the defence industries and the
role of DRDO in such matters be eliminated to the extent possible.
Reply of the Government
Adequate R&D investment with a view to bolstering our indigenous
design capabilities and developing cutting edge technologies is a thrust
area of our DPSUs and OFs. A note on their R&D activities is enclosed.
DRDO has a separate budget for their strategic programmes. The
‘Make’ procedure provides for the funding mechanism for development
of new systems by the Industry, with the development cost being
shared on an 80:20 basis between the Government and the Industry.
Note on Research And Development Efforts by OFB & DPSUs
1. BEL
BEL’s forte is its strong R&D base spearheaded by two Central
Research Laboratories addressing futuristic technologies and R&D
Divisions spread across the 9 Units focusing on product design.
Indigenously developed products contributed to 83% of turnover during
2007-08. BEL engineers actively interact with different national design
& development centres like DRDO, ISRO, CSIR C-Dot, reputed
academic institutions like I.I.Ts. II/Sc etc., and R&D wings of various
Indian & Multi-national Companies and contribute significantly to
development of large number of state-of-the-art indigenous products
& systems, components & devices, core technology modules, embedded
software packages, enabling technology modules etc. During the year
2007-08, the company and its engineers received a number of awards/
recognitions for the R&D efforts. 23 scientific papers were presented/
published during 2007-08 in various national/international seminars,

22
conferences/journals by the scientists of BEL Central Research
Laboratories and the R&D Engineers. During the year 2007-08, BEL
spent 5.1% of its turnover on R&D and it proposes to invest more on
R&D in the coming years. In addition to the two Central Research
Laboratories at Bangalore and Ghaziabad, one more Central Research
Laboratory is planned to be set up at Hyderabad for focused research
work on Electro Optics and Electronic Warfare Systems.
2. HAL
HAL has R&D centres dealing with design & development of
aircraft, helicopters, aircraft accessories and avionics. Many important
development projects have been launched like ALH, IJT, LUH, LCH,
Mission Computer, Display systems, Hydro-mechanical systems etc.,
which will increase indigenous availability of these categories of aircraft
and equipment. HAL is also giving additional thrust to collaboration
with DRDO laboratories and private industries in terms of taking up
programmes like INGPS with RCI, Servo Actuators with VSSC &
Mission Computer with DARE & Display Systems with SAMTEL.
Around 7% of its turnover is spent on R&D.
3. BDL
With the technical capabilities available in-house, the Company
has proactively developed products to meet the customer’s
requirements. The Design & Engineering Division of the Company has
realised a few products which have been inducted into service, such
as:
(a) Fagot Launcher Adapted to Milan Equipment (FLAME)
(b) ATGM Out Door Simulator
(c) FLTE (Field Level Test Equipment for FLAME)
(d) KLTE & KMTE (Konkurs Launcher & Missile Test
Equipment)
(e) Counter Measure Dispensing System (CMDS)
4. GSL
GSL is in the forefront of design and R&D activities. Some of the
initiatives are 35 Knots Fast Patrol Vessels, built with GSL in-house
design, currently in service with Indian Coast Guard. Two 105 metres
advanced Offshore Patrol Vessels, built with GSL in-house design, have
been commissioned in the service of the Indian Coast Guard. Three
90M OPVs for Indian Coast Guard and four 105M Naval Offshore

23
Patrol Vessels (NOPVs) for Indian Navy, under different stages of
construction at GSL, are also indigenously designed by GSL. GSL also
proposes to undertake design & development for Patrol Vessels of
55-60 metres in length. As can be seen, most of GSL’s new shipbuilding
projects are based on its in-house design achieved after extensive R&D
efforts.
5. BEML
BEML has established Research & Development facilities in all the
three Manufacturing Units located at Bangalore, Mysore, & KGF. BEML
has the latest facilities including structural labs, power line labs, fluid
power labs, CAD/CAM facilities, etc., for taking up R&D development
of various products.
6. OFB
The Ordnance factories have a very high degree of self-reliance
(94%). OFB has decided to undertake ab-initio development of new
products and upgrades for sustained business growth and self-reliance.
Limitation of financial power for investment on R&D has been removed
and OFB has full power to invest in R&D. During last four years OFB
has developed a lot of new products and upgrades and has supplied
in-house developed products worth Rs. 714 crore during 2007-08.
[MOD ID No. 11013/25/2008/D (PARL.), Dated 30.10.2009]
Recommendation (Para No. 18)
The Ministry of Defence should also consider creation of a separate
head of account in their budget for grant of funds for R&D activities
undertaken by the Defence scientists in the public and private industries
in the Defence Sector.
Reply of the Government
The production agencies in the public sector already have a separate
budget head for R&D activities. Government meets part of the
development cost in the ‘Make’ procedure. Expenditure on R&D is
thus deductable.
[MOD ID No. 11013/25/2008/D (PARL.), Dated 30.10.2009]
Recommendation (Para No. 20)
The Committee also feel that the changing technological and
industrial scenario in defence sector warrant an imperative need for

24
removal of different kinds of control regimes in the R&D area. They
are of firm view that the R&D efforts being made by the private
industry, keeping pace with latest technological innovations in defence
sector, must be encouraged and supplemented by the Government
organisations particularly when infusion of foreign technology in
defence areas is leading to huge capital outgo from the country with
additional burden of heavy dependency on such sources in future.
The Committee would like to be apprised of the precise steps taken
in this regard.
Reply of the Government
To encourage the R&D efforts being made by the private industries
keeping pace with latest technological innovations in Defence Sector,
DRDO is planning to associate the industry partners both in Public
and Private Enterprises right from the beginning of the project through
the ‘Make’ Procedure so that they would be able to gain the domain
experience in defence technologies.
[MOD ID No. 11013/25/2008/D (PARL.), Dated 30.10.2009]
Recommendation (Para No. 21)
Since DRDO have a well-established and vast network of
laboratories spread over the country , feasibility of extending research
facilities to defence industries in private sector in DRDO laboratories
should also be examined in the interest of national security. The
Committee trust that this issue will be considered by the Ministry of
Defence in proper perspective so that the R&D infrastructure created
in the country is put to optimum use.
Reply of the Government
DRDO has been involving Private Sector in almost all of the DRDO
projects. DRDO infrastructure is fully utilised by all these participating
industries. Further, DRDO has been extending support to industry by
providing its infrastructure and facilities, whenever required by them.
[MOD ID No. 11013/25/2008/D (PARL.), Dated 30.10.2009]
Recommendation (Para No. 22)
The Committee are of strong view that there is also an imperative
need to improve the functioning of DPSUs and Ordnance Factories
Organisation by giving them more autonomy so that the defence
infrastructure created in public sector is exploited to its full potential.

25
In order to achieve this objective, the Committee would like the
Ministry of Defence to consider the following suggestions:
(i) The DPSUs and Ordnance Factories should be given
adequate freedom in decision making and to enter in joint
ventures with other companies having proven competence
in the defence sector.
(ii) DPSUs should be permitted to raise money through
borrowings by way of equity/bond/loan from the market
so that they do not face financial crunch for carrying out
their expansion plans and for investments in R&D activities.
(iii) The feasibility of reconstituting the Board of Directors of
DPSUs by nominating non-official Directors particualrly
those having expertise in the area of specialization of
respective DPSUs should be examined in consultation with
the departments concerned.
(iv) After meeting their prime responsibility for production of
defence equipment, the DPSUs and Ordnance Factories
should be permitted to use their spare capacity if any, for
diversification in production with a view to optimally
utilizing the manpower available.
Reply of the Government
The following is submitted with regard to the issues raised above
by the Committee:
(i) & (ii) Among the Defence PUSs, HAL and BEL are Nav Ratna
Companies, and bestowed with financial and operational
autonomy to facilitate decision making for entering into joint
ventures with other companies. As per DPE’s guidelines
the companies are empowered to raise funds from the
domestic market for its investments. HAL has 9 Joint
Ventures in place, engaged in design and production of
aviation related products. Other DPSUs, as Mini Ratna
Companies, too have sufficient financial autonomy. Financial
powers have also been enhanced for OFB and the individual
ordnance factories to facilitate enhanced autonomy in
operation. Full financial powers have been delegated for
procurement of input material, except in single vendor cases.
Substantial powers have also been delegated for R&D work
in the factories.

26
(iii) The non-official Directors are selected on the basis of their
specialized domain knowledge in the product range of
DPSU, Finance, Academics and Strategic thinking.
(iv) DPSUs like BEL, after meeting the requirement of defence
fully has been able to achieve 19-20% of its turnover through
non-defence segment. HAL also has almost 10% of its order
book committed to aerospace structures for Deptt. of Space,
besides supplying a few helicopters to MHA, ONGC and
State Governments. OFB is also expected to supply products
worth Rs. 1298 crores to the non-defence sector during
2009-10 out of a total turnover of Rs. 9661 crores. Similarly,
GSL has diversified its activities in construction to GRP boats
and dedicated infrastructure facilities have been created at
the GSL Unit II and III at Goa. The company has further
created facilities for supply of spares and systems for Coast
Guard Vessels, as also simulators for ONGC etc.
Note on Autonomy to DPSUs and Ordnance Factories
OFB
Financial powers of OFB and Ordnance Factories have been
enhanced for their operational needs. Full financial powers have been
delegated for procurement of input materials, except single vendor
cases. Substantial powers have been delegated for research and
development activities. In order to exploit installed capacity in full
after meeting the annual requirements projected by the Defence forces.
Ordnance Factories continuously endeavour to diversify product range
and expand customer base within the limitation of available facilities
being completely dedicated for manufacture of arms and ammunitions
only. This has resulted in development and growth in supply to Non-
Defence sector. The organization is poised to supply products worth
Rs.1298.00 cr. to Non-Defence sector during 2009-10 out of total turnover
of Rs. 9661 cr. registering a growth of 113.14% from 2000-01 (supply
to Non-Defence sector during 2000-01 was Rs. 609 cr.).
HAL
HAL, as the Navratna Company, has adequate Delegation of
Powers and freedom in decision making to enter in Joint Ventures
with other companies. HAL now has 9 Joint Ventures in place engaged
in design and production of aviation related products. HAL has been
financing its expansion plans and R&D requirements through its
internal resources and through customer financing for dedicated

27
facilities. HAL has the financial powers to borrow from the market if
required. HAL has been maintaining the highest credit rating from
CRISIL and ICRA for short-term and long-term borrowings since last
5 years. HAL has autonomy to utilize its resources and spare capacity
for diversification into related areas. With the current order book
position, HAL does not envisage any spare capacity during the next
10 years.
BEML
Mini Ratna status has been extended to BEML, thereby giving the
undertaking sufficient financial autonomy.
GSL
The company has diversified its activities in construction to GRP
boats and dedicated infrastructure facilities have been created at GSL
Unit II & III at Sancoale Industrial Estate, Goa. The Government of
India, Ministry of Home Affairs has placed orders on the Company
for Design, Construction and Supply of 116 Nos. of GRP boats, i.e.
54 Nos. 5T and 62 Nos. 12T capacity, to the Coastal Police in the
States on the West Coast of India and Union Territory of Lakshadweep.
The Company has created facilities for testing, assembly and supply
of CPP spares and stern gear system in the yard and presently
executing prestigious stern gear supply orders for Naval and Coast
Guard vessels. The Company has also diversified its activities in the
manufacture of various raining Simulators for ONGC and Navy and
is providing training on Survival at Sea to ONGC personnel on their
training ship Samudra Shiksha. GSL has received project sanction to
undertake on turn-key basis the project of setting up Shore Based
Training Facility at INS Hansa, Goa, for Indian Navy’s LCA (N) project
through Aeronautical Development authority, Banglore. The work on
the said project has commenced and is being implemented ahead of
schedule. The aforesaid general engineering project have been
undertaken through outsourcing and optimally utilizing its available
manpower.
MDL
Major equipment systems such as indigenous Rocket Launcher
(IRL), Indigenous Torpedo Tube Launcher (ITTL), Brahmos Missiles,
Hallow Transverse Systems, Steering Gear & Stabilizers, AC Plants etc.
are being supplied by private sector such as L&T, KPCL etc. They are
just not supplying components and sub-assemblies but the complete
system.

28
BEL
BEL being a Navratna company it is bestowed with better financial
and operational autonomy. In view of this, BEL is taking pro-active
steps to protect and consolidate its leadership positioning the Indian
Defence market while at the same time accelerate the efforts to get
into new business areas. The company is looking for new growth
opportunities in areas aligned with BEL’s core strengths either through
organic growth in existing/new areas and Inorganic growth through
Joint Ventures/Acquisitions. In this direction, BEL is discussing with
reputed players for forming joint ventures in the area of Defence
Electronics. Some of these proposals are in the advanced stage of
finalization. BEL being a Navratna company , sufficient empowerment
is available as per the DPE guidelines to raise funds in domestic market
for its investments. This will be resorted by BEL whenever it is
required. At present it is able to cater fund requirements through its
internal accruals. There is no restriction on DPSUs to use spare capacity
for diversification activities. During the Annual Roll on Plan meetings,
the order availability in each of the Units/SBUs are discussed in detail.
In case of low order book position in some of the units/SBUs, the
projects are assigned for even distribution of load so as to ensure
optimal utilization of the available manpower. Besides fully meeting
the requirement of defence, company is able to achieve 20-25% of its
turnover through non-defence segment in our effort to improve
utilization of capacities built.
[MoD ID No. 11013/25/2008/D (PARL.), Dated 30.10.2009]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para No. 24 of Chapter-I)

CHAPTER III
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE
COMMITTEE DO NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE IN
VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT’S REPLIES
Recommendation (Para No. 1)
The defence requirements of the country are presently met through
imports as well as indigenous production both in public and private
sector. According to the Ministry of Defence, it is the policy of the
Government to encourage indigenisation in the defence production and
various initiatives have been taken in the recent past for promoting
indigenisation and achieving self-reliance in the defence sector. The
Committee’s examination of the statistical data furnished to them,
however, reveals that the extent of import content in production of
various defence equipment by public sector defence production units
continues to be substantially high. Undoubtedly, there is still heavy
dependence on foreign suppliers and the goal of achieving self-reliance
in such an important area as defence remains elusive despite a well-
established network of the defence industries in the country. In the
light of the rapidly changing global security environment and its
implications on the national interests, the Committee strongly feel that
the Ministry of Defence should expeditiously conceptualise the realities
of the situation and contemplate concrete and result oriented steps
from time to time to harness and integrate the vast potential of the
increasing technical and manufacturing capabilities of both public and
private sector industries in the country so as to minimize the
dependence on foreign sources for defence procurement. The Committee
have death with some of the important aspects related to the subject
in succeeding paragraphs of this Report.
Reply of the Government
Govt. agrees with the views of the Committee that we should
bolster our indigenous capacity substantially by harnessing and
integrating the vast potential available. Government is taking steps to
address the concerns expressed by the Committee.
[MoD ID No. 11013/25/2008/D (PARL.), Dated 30.10.2009]
Recommendation (Para No. 9)
During their examination of the subject, the representatives from
FICCI and ASSOCHAM have expressed the view that the present limit
29

30
of 26 per cent FDI in defence sector needed to be enhanced to attract
foreign investors. On the other hand, the Ministry of Defence have
put forth the plea that any increase in FDI level beyond 50 per cent
would imply management control with foreign investors and such
ventures might fail to deliver at critical junctures due to factors such
as sanctions imposed by foreign governments etc. While giving due
weightage to the numerous benefits that would accrue to the industry
and economy as a result of increased in-flow of FDI, the Committee
are of the firm view that the possibility of increasing limit of FDI upto
49 per cent in defence sector should be examined by the Government
after keeping in view the fact that national interest must reign supreme
in defence related matters.
Reply of the Government
The matter has been examined and Ministry is of the view that as
defence is a strategic sector the foreign investment in joint ventures in
defence sector should be limited to 26%. Any FDI increase beyond
26% would be considered on a case to case basis.
[MoD ID No. 11013/25/2008/D (PARL.), Dated 30.10.2009]

CHAPTER IV
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH
REPLIES OF GOVERNMENT HA VE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY
THE COMMITTEE
Recommendation (Para No. 2)
The Committee are constrained to observe that no scientific system
has been put in place by the Ministry of Defence to assess the exact
level of indigenisation achieved by defence production units in the
country. In fact, the statistical information on extent of indigenisation
furnished to the Committee fail to reflect true picture as some of these
figures admittedly, do not include the quantum of import content
utilised in products manufactured by public sector units. The
Committee find it distressing that while one representative of the
Ministry of Defence claimed during evidence that the share of
indigenously produced items in defence production was about 77 per
cent in 2006-07, the Defence Secretary was candid enough to admit
that only 30 to 35 per cent of defence expenditure on equipment was
met from domestic manufacturers. Undoubtedly, the quantum of
financial outgo to the foreign and indigenous sources for procurement
of defence equipment continues to be the primary criterion for
evaluating the level of indigenisation in defence sector in the country.
The Committee wish to remind the Ministry that the main plank of
indigenisation in defence production is to reach higher levels of self
reliance in development and production of state-of-the-art equipment
and weapon systems and this issue of national importance cannot be
viewed in a mere commercial and statistical jargon. The Committee
express their strong displeasure over the manner in which this data is
being maintained and they desire the Ministry to apply necessary
corrections in order to ensure an objective and incisive analysis of the
realities of the prevailing situation.
Reply of the Government
There are two aspects to the issue viz. developing systems
indigenously and the level of indigenisation through the ToT route. As
regards indigenous R & D, major systems and deliverable are in place,
like Prithvi, MBT Arjuna and EW Systems for Army & Navy. In the
field of mission computers also considerable indigenous capability has
been built for major platforms. This process has to be further
31

32
strengthened. As regards ToT, most of the manufacturing programme
in DPSUs and OFB are under license production. The extent of
indigenisation depends on the depth of technology being transferred
and stage of transfer. For example in the case of SU-30Mkl, the
indigenisation percentage which was 13% during 2004-05 would go
up to 43.4% in phase IV of manufacturing this year. Similarly, in case
of HAWK AJT, the indigenisation percentage will increase from present
level of 12%-15% to 45% in the raw material phase of production. In
case of T-90 Tank, the indigenisation percentage in the current year is
30% is likely to go up 70% by 2010-11. It is also relevant to mention
that as per provisions of DPP-2008, minimum indigenous content in
case of ToT is 60% for Cat-I & II items and this is insisted upon in
the RFP for ‘Buy & Make’ cases.
[MoD ID No. 11013/25/2008/D (PARL.), Dated 30.10.2009]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para No. 8 of Chapter-I)
Recommendation (Para No. 10)
The Committee note that an ‘off-set’ provision applicable to all
capital acquisitions effective from July, 2005 has been incorporated in
the Defence Procurement Procedures (DPP) which stipulates a minimum
required off set of 30 per cent of the indicative cost of the acquisitions
under ‘Buy (Global)’ category and 30 percent of the foreign exchange
component in ‘Buy and Make’ category in respect of acquisitions valued
at Rs. 300 crore or more. The Committee have been informed that
although offset obligations have to be discharged concurrently with
the main contract, any failure on this account attracts a meagre penalty
of 5 per cent and other action can also be initiated against the
defaulting compnay in case of consistent failure. Strangely enough,
extension of time for implementing the offset obligation is also stated
to be considered with specific order. The Committee are in no doubt
that such options leave limited scope with the Government in strictly
enforcing the requirements under offset provision which ultimately
proves detrimental to the national interests. While certain changes are
stated to have been made in DPP-2008 in view of the requirement of
foreign manufacturers to speed up offset implementation over a period
of time, the Committee would like to emphasise that time limit for
discharging liabilities under the offset provision have to be made
essence of the relevant contracts. They, therefore, desire that stringent
and specific clauses should be incorporated in the contracts for
imposing heavy financial penalties at the rate of a minimum of
15 per cent annum in all cases of default and no room is left for any
discretion in such matters.

33
Reply of the Government
The off-set provision included in DPP-2008 has been amended with
reference to that included in DPP-2006. Action to revise the penalty
clause with reference to non-fulfillment of off-set obligation can be taken
after some of the off-set contracts have been implemented and studied.
[MoD ID No. 11013/25/2008/D (PARL.), Dated 30.10.2009]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para No. 11 & 12 of Chapter-I)
Recommendation (Para No. 11)
The Committee are fully conscious of the role being played by the
DPSUs and the Ordanance Factories in meeting the national security
requirements. However, they are at the same time of the view that the
contribution being made by the private sector in defence production
cannot be marginalised by the Ministry of Defence in their capacity as
the sole buyer of military equipment. Although the long standing
demand of private sector for providing a level playing field vis-a-vis
foreign suppliers is stated to have since been addressed in DPP-2006,
the Committee have been given to understand that there are several
areas where distinction is made between the private and public sector
while procuring defence equipment. These are, inter-alia, (i) nomination
for transfer of technology where the foreign suppliers are specifically
asked to collaborate with an DPSU; (ii) discrepancy in tax structure
for exemption of customs and central excise duties as well as foreign
exchange rate variation; and (iii) non-acceptance of corporate bonds as
collateral etc. The Committee consider that these issues need urgent
attention with a view to doing away with discriminatory treatment so
that the necessary thrust is provided to private sector striving hard to
augment indigenous defence production in the country. The Committee
are of strong view that level playing field and equal opportunities
would not only promote healthy competition between the public and
private sector but would also result in cost effectiveness of indigenously
produced defence equipments. The Committee expect the Government
to move in the right direction expeditiously.
Reply of the Government
In the matter of nominating Production Agency for receiving ToT,
it needs to be pointed out that certain technical senstivities, maintenance
of equipments for a lifetime, assured spares supports and operation in
times of war, have to be factored in while making such nomination.
Since Government pays for the ToT and the above issues are
paramount, DPSUs/OFB would have to be the primary receivers of
such technology to give credible guarantees to the needs of national
defence.

34
In so far as taxes are concerned, the evaluation of L1 is done
minus the taxes—so that there is a level playing field. In fact in some
cases the PSUs are at a disadvantage as they are not in a position to
take Cenvat credit. ERV is admissible only to Defence PSUs wherever
import component is involved. However, in multi-vendor cases, no
advantage under ERV is admissible to DPSUs.
[MoD ID No. 11013/25/2008/D (PARL.), Dated 30.10.2009]
Comments of the Committee
(Pleased see Para No. 15 of Chapter-I)
Recommendation (Para No. 17)
The Committee also with to emphasise that innovative schemes
for promoting research and development activities in the defence sector
have to be devised by the Ministry of Defence to achieve an enhanced
level of self-reliance, in this, area. The Committee therefore, recommend
that a comprehensive plan of action should be formulated to recognize
the research and development work undertaken by the defence
scientists/the industry by extending them appropriate incentives for
different projects and payment of royalty, etc. The industry should
also be assured of orders in case of development of product within a
given time frame in conformity with the specific qualitative
requirements of the users.
Reply of the Government
The Defence Acquisition Council (DAC) has accepted in principle
the concept of shared development cost. The 80:20 ratio for sharing of
development cost with the industry is included in DPP-2008 for
promoting research & development activities in the defence sector by
Indian Industries. There is no question of giving royalty to defence
scientists in the DRDO/PSUs as the entire cost of research, including
salary, is met by the Government and the fruits of the research are
Government property.
[MoD ID No. 11013/25/2008/D (PARL.), Dated 30.10.2009]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para No. 18 of Chapter-I)

CHAPTER V
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH
FINAL REPLIES OF GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED
Recommendation (Para No. 15)
In pursuance of the Kelkar Committee’s recommendation, the
Government constituted a selection committee in May, 2006 for
identification of companies of proven excellence in development and
production of major weapon systems and platforms for being accorded
the status of Raksha Udyog Ratnas (RURs). Although, this selection
committee was required to give its recommendations by 31 March,
2007 for acceptance of the Defence Acquisition Council, the issue has
been stated to be still under deliberations. In the absence of any
plausible explanation emanating from the Ministry of Defence in this
regard, the Committee express their displeasure over the manner in
which such important issues are being allowed to linger on. The
Committee, therefore, strongly desire that the Government should take
expeditious steps to select and notify RURs at the earliest so that the
misgivings among the defence industries are removed and they gear
themselves up for effective participation in the national efforts for self-
reliance. The Committee also recommend that the Ministry of Defence
should also put in place a scientific system for selection and notification
of RURs from time to time in future.
Reply of the Government
The Report of the Selection Committee is under examination with
the Government.
[MOD ID No. 11013/25/2008/D (PARL), Dated 30.10.2009]
Recommendation (Para No. 19)
The Committee understand that the Government extend certain
tax concessions to the companies for expenditure incurred by them on
research activities related to the business. The Committee desire that
in order to ensure that such concessions achieve the objectives of
indigenisation in the defence areas in a timely manner, the companies
availing such benefits should be made to complete their research
projects related to business in these areas within a fixed time frame.
They therefore, urge the Ministry of Defence to move the right quarters
for appropriate action in this regard.
35

36
Reply of the Government
The suggestion is noted.
[MOD ID No. 11013/25/2008/D (PARL), Dated 30.10.2009]
  N EW D ELHI;S ATPAL MAHARAJ,
25 February, 2010 Chairman,
6 Phalguna, 1931 (Saka) Standing Committee on Defence.

MINUTES OF THE TENTH SITTING OF THE STANDING
COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE (2009-10)
The Committee sat on Monday, the 8th February, 2010 from 1500
to 1530 hrs. in Committee Room ‘C’, Parliament House Annexe,
New Delhi.
PRESENT
  Shri Satpal Maharaj —  Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Kamal Kishor ‘Commando’
3. Shri H.D. Devegowda
4. Dr. Sucharu Ranjan Haldar
5. Shri Ramesh Jigajinagi
6. Shri Arjun Ram Meghwal
7. Shri A.T. Nana Patil
8. Shri Amarnath Pradhan
9. Shri M. Raja Mohan Reddy
10. Shri Baju Ban Riyan
11. Shri Kalyan Singh
12. Shri Mahabali Singh
13. Rajkumari Ratna Singh
Rajya Sabha
14. Shri R.K. Dhawan
15. Prof. P .J. Kurien
16. Shri Mukut Mithi
17. Shri Prakash Javadekar
18. Shri K.B. Shanappa
19. Shri T.K. Rangarajan
20. Shri M.V . Mysura Reddy
21. Shri Sanjay Raut
37

38
SECRETARIAT
1. Shri T.K. Mukherjee — Joint Secretary
2. Smt. Sudesh Luthra — Director
3. Shri N.S. Hooda — Additional Director
2. At the outset, the Hon’ble Chairman welcomed the members to
the sitting of the Committee. The Committee then took up for
consideration the letter dated 2 February, 2010 of Shri Rangarajan,
M.P . and member of the Committee as circulated to the members of
the Committee. After deliberations the Committee decided that the
suggestions made by the member in the letter should be forwarded to
the Ministry separately.
3. The Committee, then, took up for consideration the draft report
on action taken by the Government on the recommendations/
observations of the Committee in Thirty-third Report on ‘Indigenisation
of Defence—Production-Public-Private-Partnership’ and adopted the
same without any modification.
4. The Committee authorized the Chairman to finalize the report
and present the same to the House on a date convenient to him during
the Budget Session, 2010.
The Committee then adjourned.

39
APPENDIX
ANALYSIS OF THE ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON
THE RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS CONTAINED
IN THE THIRTY-THIRD REPORT OF THE STANDING
COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE
Total Percentage
of Total
1. Total number of recommendations 23
2. Recommendations/Observations which 15 65
have been accepted by Government
Para Nos. 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 12, 13, 14,
16, 18, 20, 21, 22 & 23
3. Recommendations/Observations which 02 9
the Committee do not desire to pursue
in view of Government’s replies
Para Nos. 1 & 9
4. Recommendations/Observations in 04 17
respect of which replies of Government
have not been accepted by the Committee
Para Nos. 2, 10, 11 & 17
5. Recommendations/Observations in respect 02 9
of which final replies of the Government
are still awaited Para No. 15 & 19