23 STANDING COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE
(2016-2017)
(SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA)
MINISTRY OF DEFENCE
PROXY AND POSTAL VOTING BY DEFENCE SERVICES
 PERSONNEL IN GENERAL ELECTIONS - AN EVALUATION
TWENTY - THIRD  REPORT
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
December, 2016/Agrahayana, 1938 (Saka)
1

TWENTY - THIRD  REPORT
STANDING COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE
(2016-2017)
(SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA)
MINISTRY OF DEFENCE
PROXY AND POSTAL VOTING BY DEFENCE SERVICES 
PERSONNEL IN GENERAL ELECTIONS - AN EVALUATION
Presented to Lok Sabha on 08.12.2016
Laid in Raiya Sabha on  08.12.2016
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
December, 2016/Agrahayana, 1938 (Saka)       
2

COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE (2016-17) 
Maj Gen B C Khanduri, AVSM (Retd) - Chairperson
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Dipak Adhikari (Dev)
3. Shri Suresh C Angadi
4. Shri Shrirang Appa Barne
5. Shri Thupstan Chhewang
6. Col Sonaram Choudhary(Retd)
7. Shri H D Devegowda
8. Shri Sher Singh Ghubaya
9. Shri G Hari 
10. Dr Murli Manohar Joshi
11. Km Shobha Karandlaje
12. Shri Vinod Khanna
13. Dr Mriganka Mahato
14. Shri Rodmal Nagar
15. Shri A P Jithender Reddy
16. Shri Ch Malla Reddy
17. Shri Rajeev Shankarrao Satav
18. Smt Mala Rajya Lakshmi Shah
19.@ Capt  Amarinder Singh(Retd)
20. Shri Dharamveer Singh
21. Smt Pratyusha Rajeshwari Singh
  Rajya Sabha
22. Shri K R Arjunan
23. Shri A U Singh Deo
24. Shri Harivansh
25.$ Shri Om Prakash Mathur
26.# Shri Rajeev Chandrasekhar
27. Shri Madhusudan Mistry
28. Shri Praful Patel
29. Shri Sanjay Raut
30. Dr Abhishek Manu Singhvi
31. Smt Ambika Soni
32. Dr Subramanian Swamy
@Capt   Amarinder  Singh(Retd),  MP  ceased  to  be  a  Member   consequent  upon  his
resignation  from Lok Sabha w.e.f. 23.11.2016 
$ Shri Om Prakash Mathur, MP ceased to be a Member of the Committee w.e.f. 06.10.2016
#Shri Rajeev Chandrasekhar, MP joined  the Committee w.e.f. 06.10.2016
3

SECRETARIAT
1. Smt Kalpana Sharma  - Joint Secretary 
2. Shri T G Chandrasekhar - Director 
3. Smt Jyochnamayi Sinha - Additional Director 
4. Shri Rahul Singh - Under Secretary
4

CONTENTS
PAGE.
Composition of the Committee (2016-17)..........................................................................
Introduction.........................................................................................................................
  
PART - I 
Background Analysis............................................................................................................
CHAPTER I   Perspective for the Study….....…………………….....…............................   
CHAPTER II   Voting procedure exclusive to Armed  Forces  Personnel and certain other       
Services...……………………………………….…............................. .............      
 CHAPTER III Voting methods for Service Personnel in  other Countries….....................
CHAPTER IV Recent developments in methods of voting for Service Voters
(Armed Forces)………………………..………………………….................. 
PART II
Observations and Recommendations ..............................................................................
APPENDICES
Minutes of the sittings  dated 13.02.2015, 08.07.2015, 09.10.2015, 
27.10.2015, 24.08.2016, 14.10.2016, 07.11.2016 and 05.12.2016...................................
5

INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairperson of the Standing Committee on Defence (2016-17), having been
authorised by the Committee, present this Twenty-third Report on 'Proxy and Postal voting
by Defence Services Personnel in General Elections - An evaluation'. 
2.       The subject, 'Proxy and Postal voting by Defence Services Personnel in General
Elections - An evaluation ' was, at first, selected for examination during the year 2014-15 .
The Committee pursued with the examination of the issues relating to the subject in the
years 2015-16 and 2016-17 as well.  The Committee called for evidence the representatives
of  the  Ministries  of  Defence,  Law  and  Justice  and  Home  Affairs  and  the  Election
Commission of India. In this connection, the Committee held their Sittings on 13.02.2015,
08.07.2015, 09.10.2015, 27.10.2015, 24.08.2016, 14.10.2016 and 07.11.2016.  The draft
Report was considered and adopted by the Committee at their Sitting held on 05 December
2016.
3. During the Sittings, the Committee had expressed concern over the cumbersome
procedure involved in Proxy and Postal Voting, for the Defence Services Personnel, which
mainly include postal delays. The Committee unanimously desired to have e-Postal Ballot
system introduced for the Defence Services Personnel to cut short the delay in the Postal
Ballot system and get the trial-run conducted at the earliest. The Committee vigorously
pursued the matter of bringing out necessary amendments in Rules 23 to 27 of the Conduct
of Election Rules, 1961 to provide for electronic transmission of the Postal Ballot papers and
get the trial-run conducted at the earliest. In this regard, letters were written to the Ministries
of Defence, Law and Justice and the Election Commission of India. As a consequence, the
Government has come out with a Gazette Notification on 21 October, 2016 to change the
Conduct of Election Rules, 1961 thereby fulfilling a long standing demand for allowing the
Service  voters  including  the  Defence  Forces  personnel  to  have  their  Ballot  Papers
transmitted through electronic means instead of regular post.  The E-Postal Balloting was
implemented in the bye-election held in Nellithope Assembly (Puducherry) Constituency on
19 November, 2016. This is a major breakthrough towards minimizing the delays in the
Postal Ballot system for the Defence Forces personnel. 
6

4. The Committee wish to express their sincere  thanks to the officers of the Ministries
of  Defence,  Law  and  Justice,  Home  Affairs  and  the  Election  Commission  of  India  for
appearing before the Committee and furnishing the material and information which the
Committee desired for in connection with examination of the subject.
5. For facility of reference and convenience, Observations/Recommendations of the
Committee have been printed in bold letters in Part II of the Report.
  NEW DELHI;                MAJ GEN B C KHANDURI, AVSM(RETD),
      6  December, 2016                         Chairperson,
  15 Agrahayana, 1938 (Saka)                     Standing Committee on Defence
7

REPORT 
PART - I
Background Analysis
India is the country having largest electorate in the world.  The whole edifice of Indian
democracy is built on the foundation of voting. Voting in India is a constitutional right as per
Article 326 of the Indian Constitution which reads as under:
“Elections to the House of the People and to the Legislative Assemblies of States to
be on the basis of adult suffrage The elections to the House of the People and to the
Legislative Assembly of every State shall be on the basis of adult suffrage; that is to
say, every person who is a citizen of India and who is not less than eighteen years of
age on such date as may be fixed in that behalf by or under any law made by the
appropriate Legislature and is not otherwise disqualified under this Constitution or
any  law  made  by  the  appropriate  Legislature  on  the  ground  of  non-residence,
unsoundness of mind, crime or corrupt or illegal practice, shall be entitled to be
registered as a Voter at any such election”
2. Members of the Armed Forces registered as the Service Voters can vote by Postal
Ballot or by Proxy. They can also vote in their place of posting if they are registered as
general Voters in that place for which the Election Commission of India (ECI) has laid down
certain stipulations relating to minimum tenure of posting (3 years), ‘Residents with Family’,
etc. However, it is paradoxical to note that an estimated 3 million service people and their
family members are unable to exercise the democratic right, i.e., 'Right to Vote' due to
cumbersome procedure involved in Proxy and Postal Voting which incidentally also include
the Postal delays. 
8

CHAPTER - I
Perspective for the Study
A Soldier leaves his native place between the age of 18 and 21 and returns after
serving 15 to 40 years in Defence Services depending upon the age at which he enrolled
himself and the rank which he attains in his service. During his absence from native place,
the entire area will obviously undergo drastic changes and the routine development of the
area is also not known to him. During the Service Career, a Soldier has limited knowledge of
the political parties or the contestants contesting the elections at his native place over the
years. Being far away from his hometown, he is oblivious to their political agenda, Election
Manifesto, past performances, criminal records etc. The political party or the candidates do
not even appeal to a Soldier on Postal Ballot to vote for him or to the party or canvass in
any manner to get the vote of this section of the society. The vote of a Soldier obviously has
no worth!!  Lack of any connects between the Soldier and his Elected Representative at his
native place is explicit. How can such a Contestant represent him in the State Assembly or
the Parliament?
1.2 At his place of posting, a Soldier has a number of local problems and services related
issues to contend with. His local issues include power supply, water supply and timings, law
and order situation in the civil areas where some of the Soldiers’ families reside, street
lighting,  road  conditions,  land  acquisition  for  training  infrastructure  such  as  ranges,
environment clearances etc. are just a few examples. On the career side, his problems
relating to promotion prospects, service conditions such as pay and allowances, prejudiced
Government edicts on issues such as Pay Commission Reports And Order Of Precedence;
civil  military  relations  etc.  need  resolution.  When  a  Soldier  approaches  his  elected
representative at his native place with the problems faced by him at his place of posting or
those related to his career and service conditions, he is brusquely advised to approach to
his elected representative at the place of his posting.
1.3 In the olden days the Service Chiefs used to attend to a soldier’s Service issues.
Presently, however, the only option available to the soldier is to take his problems to the
people’s court – the Parliament through his elected representative. It is at his place of
posting  that a soldier can maintain contact with  his  elected representative  through  his
Commanding Officer and Formation Commanders. Incidentally, every soldier will tell you
9

that during his Service career one rarely received his Postal Ballot papers in time to be of
any meaning in the election process.  
1.4 The reality is, the Service Voters do not constitute a significant sector to serve as a
pressure group. The administration and even local police ignore them and most of the time
humiliate them. It is, perhaps, appropriate to ensure that the Service Voters are empowered
to demand their rights and dues.
1.5 In light of the foregoing in particular, the Committee have selected the Subject for
detailed examination. In the succeeding paragraphs, inter-alia, details of  Procedure of
Proxy and Postal Voting is given as well as the difficulties faced by the Armed Forces
Personnel in casting their vote. Any simplification of present Procedure would not only help
the Armed Forces Personnel but also benefit other Service Voters i.e. Personnel of Central
Armed Police Force, Indian citizens in Missions abroad, Personnel deployed in election
duties etc. 
 
10

CHAPTER – II
Voting procedure exclusive to Armed  Forces  Personnel and certain other  Services
There are special provisions for voting by personnel of Armed Forces and para-
military and others, which are enumerated here. The Election Commission of India, while
replying to a question in this regard submitted:
 
'Section 20 (3) of Representation of Peoples Act, 1950 provides that Armed Forces
Personnel   may  register  their  names  in  the  electoral  roll  of  their  native  places
notwithstanding  that they are not ordinarily resident there.  This is a special facility
provided to  the Armed Forces Personnel and certain  other categories of persons in
the Service of Government. Apart from Armed Forces Personnel, this category (called
the `Service Voters')  includes (i) personnel  belonging to Para-Military Forces, (ii)
State Armed Police force serving outside the State and (iii) officials employed under
Government of India in a post outside India. They are shown in a separate (last) part
in the electoral roll (not attached to any polling station). The wife  of any such  Service
Voter is also eligible to be enrolled in this last part of the electoral roll,  if she is
ordinarily resident with her husband  at the place of his posting. All persons whose
names are included in the last part of the  electoral roll pertaining to Service Voters
are automatically entitled to the facility of voting by Postal Ballot. 
The  Armed Forces Personnel  can  also be enrolled in their place of posting (in a
peace station) as  ordinary (general) electors provided they are not already enrolled
as Service Voters. If they are enrolled as ordinary electors, they   vote in person in
the polling station of that area concerned at the place of their posting. 
Those personnel of Armed Forces and Para Military Forces enrolled in the  native
place as  Service Voters  have  the option of appointing  a Proxy of their   choice for
casting vote on their behalf.  In that case, the Proxy will vote in the local polling
station. Those who do not want to vote through Proxy, will be sent a   Postal Ballot by
the Returning Officer of the Constituency.'
a) Proxy Voting
2.2 On the Proxy Voting, the Election Commission of India further submitted:
'As per the provisions of clause (a) of Section of 60 of the 1951 Act (i) members of
the Armed Forces of the Union, and (ii) members of a force to which the provisions of
the Army Act 1950, are made applicable, with or without modifications, can vote (a)
either in person, or (b)  by Postal Ballot, or (c) by Proxy appointed under rule 27N of
Conduct of Elections Rules, 1961.  The person to be appointed as Proxy has to be
ordinarily resident in the constituency concerned and  of not less than 18 years of
11

age. It is not necessary  that the Proxy is  also registered as an elector in the roll but
must not be disqualified  for  registration in the roll.
The facility of appointment of Proxy for casting of vote on   behalf of the defence
personnel  was  introduced by amendment of Section 60 of the      RP Act 1951, by
the Election Law and Other Related Law (Amendment) Act, 2003  only to Service
Voters belonging to Armed Forces and Para-Military Forces. 
Appointment of Proxy is to be done in an application in a statutory format (Form 13F)
appended to the 1961 Rules. A copy of Form 13F is attached as Annexure-I. Both the
Service Voter appointing    the Proxy and the Proxy  so appointed have to put their
signatures on the  Form and get it attested by the Commanding officer/Notary public
or First Class magistrate. The Service Voter can get his signature attested by the
Commanding officer of the Unit and send  it to the Proxy being nominated by him.
The Proxy, on receipt of the form, can sign   and get the  attestation before  a
Notary/First Class Magistrate. (attestation of signature is a requirement under the
Rules and is not based on any direction of the Commission). Thereafter, the Form
13F can be delivered to the Returning Officer concerned. 
The Returning Officer is required to maintain a record of the Service Voters enrolled
in his constituency who have appointed Proxy.  The Proxy will vote on behalf of the
Service Voter as any other general voter in the polling station covering the place of
residence of the Service  voter concerned. The RO will send a polling station wise list
of proxies appointed by Service  voters   based on which the Presiding Officer will
permit the Proxy to cast vote. This polling station wise list of proxies will also be
treated as part of the marked copy of the electoral roll for the polling station for taking
the poll.
In the case of Service Voters who have appointed Proxy, the RO will make note of the
same in the last part of the electoral roll pertaining to Service Voters by writing "CSV"
against the name of the Service Voter. "CSV"  stands for `Classified Service Voter'
which is the terminology to refer to a Service Voter who has appointed Proxy.  The
RO will not send Postal Ballot paper to a Classified Service Voter as his vote will be
cast in the polling station  through the Proxy.'
2.3 On being asked about the  difficulties the Ministry of Defence may have identified in
casting of Proxy votes by the Armed Forces Personnel, it was informed as under:
'Exercise  of  franchise  through  Proxy  Voting  is  not  popular  amongst  the  Service
Voters.  Proxy  Voting  involves  completion  of  additional  formalities  of  verifying
signatures of the  individual and the Proxy through First Class  Magistrate, Notary or
Commanding Officer of the Units concerned. These procedures coupled with inherent
issues relating to confidentiality of the  choice of the Service Voter   discourage  the
individuals from casting vote through Proxy.'
12

2.4 During the oral evidence also, Adjutant General informed the Committee that the
Services  found  Proxy  Voting   cumbersome  and  suffering  from  inherent  problems  of
confidentiality, and was, therefore, not popular.
b) Postal Ballot Voting
2.5 The  Election  Commission  of  India  submitted  the  following  written  information  in
response to a question on Postal Ballot Voting:
'Rule  23 of the Conduct of Elections Rules, 1961, lays down the procedure to be
followed by the Returning Office (RO)  for sending postal  ballot  papers to Service
Voters and others entitled for Postal Ballot paper.  The RO is to  send the Postal
Ballot  alongwith  a  statutory  format  of  declaration  by  the  voter  (Form  13A),  an
envelope for placing the marked ballot paper to be returned to the RO (Form 13B)
and a self-addressed envelope (Form 13C) in which the declaration of the electro in
Form 13A and the smaller envelope (Form 13B) containing the marked ballot paper
are to be enclosed. The RO retains the counterfoil of each Postal Ballot paper on
which he records the electoral roll number of  the elector.
The procedure for the elector to record vote is laid down in  Rule 24 of the 1961
Rules. As per this Rule, Service Voter belonging to Armed Forces has  to sign the
declaration  in Form 13A in the presence of a competent officer appointed for this
purpose by the Commanding Officer of the Unit/Establishment who  will also sign on
the declaration by way of attestation. The Service Voter then marks the ballot paper
in favour of the candidate of his choice and places the marked ballot paper in the
smaller envelope (Form 13B) in the space provided for the purpose, and closes/seals
the said envelope. He then puts the attested declaration and the  envelope in which
ballot  paper marked by him is enclosed in the bigger envelope (Form 13C)  which
bears the address of the RO concerned, close  the envelope and post it back to the
RO for which the postal charges are paid by the RO.  It may be noted that the
requirement  of  declaration  in  Form  13A  and  its  attestation  is  an  essential
requirement to ensure that the postal vote  has been casted by the  genuine   elector.
These  requirements have been  provided  under the Rules and not by way of
instructions of the Commission. Any change in the procedure  can only be brought
about  by the Rules for which the Government of India in the Ministry of Law and
Justice is the competent authority'.
2.6 The procedure for Postal Ballot voting for Returning Officer and the elector to record
vote is laid down in Rule 23 and 24 respectively of the Conduct of Elections Rules, 1961.
The Ministry of Law and Justice was asked whether it has made any effort to simplify the
procedure so that ballots reach and were received back in the stipulated time period. The
13

Ministry was also asked whether any modification has been proposed so that votes were not
invalidated due to the necessities to be met. The Ministry of Law and Justice and Election
Commission of India  replied in a written note as under:
'Postal  Ballot  for  Service  Voters  (other  than  those  who  have  appointed
proxies): Under Rule 18 of the Conduct of Elections Rules, 1961, the Service
Voters who have not appointed Proxy, vote through Postal Ballot paper sent to them
by  the  Returning  Officer. The  instructions  of  the  Election  Commission  regarding
dispatch of Postal Ballot paper to Service Voters have factored in the inherent time
constraint and hence provide that:-
Postal Ballot Papers to Service Elector is to be given overriding priority in
Printing:
(i) Postal Ballot papers have to be sent to all Service electors, whose names are
included in last part of electoral roll except for those Service Voters who have
opted for Proxy Voting, with utmost promptitude. District Election Officer (DEO)
of the district has been entrusted with the primary responsibility of arranging
printing  of  Postal  Ballot  papers  for  all  Assembly  Constituencies  or
Parliamentary Constituencies comprised within the district. As soon as the  list
of contesting candidates for any such constituencies is drawn up after the
period for withdrawal of candidature is over, District Election Officer shall get
Postal Ballot paper for 'Service Voters' printed and arrange to dispatch Postal
Ballot papers to Service Voters for all Assembly Constituencies in his district.
Therefore, the printing of Postal Ballot papers for 'Service Voters' shall have to
be completed within 24 hours after the last hour for withdrawal of candidatures
and their dispatch to Service Voters be completed within the next 24 hours.
(ii) If  expeditious  printing  in  Government  press  is  not  possible,  Postal  Ballot
papers for Service Voters should be got printed locally in private printing press,
in view of the urgency. This should be done under close supervision of a senior
officer  appointed  as  nodal  officer  by  the  DEO  for  the  purpose,  ensuring
adequate fool-proof security arrangement are made.
(iii) Since the issue of Postal Ballot papers to Service Voter has to be completed
within  a  pre-determined  deadline, the  DEO  is  required  to  depute  team  of
officers with one of the Assistant Returning Officers alongwith an updated copy
of electoral roll of last part alongwith other papers required well in advance.
They shall report to a centralized place fixed by DEO well in time. The printing
of the Postal Ballot papers with counterfoils shall have to be completed within
24 hours after the finalisation of the list of contesting candidates. Any delay in
adhering to the schedule will make the entire process of using Postal Ballot
papers by Service Voters nugatory depriving them of their valuable right to
vote. Hence, advance preparatory action has to be taken to prepare necessary
statutory envelopes and connected papers.
(iv) As per the standing instructions, the senior most observer appointed by the
Commission  posted  in  that  district  headquarters  is  required  personally  to
14

monitor the entire process. The process of dispatch of Postal Ballot paper has
to be video-graphed.
(v) For each Service Voter an individual envelope is prepared in which the Postal
Ballot paper, the format for declaration to be given by the Service Voter (Form
13A), instructions for voting (Form 13D) and an envelope (Form 13B) in which
the marked Postal Ballot paper is to be placed and a bigger envelope (Service
unpaid)  (Form  13C)  bearing  the  full  address  of  the  Returning  Officer  for
sending back the Postal Ballot. The name and address of the Service elector
as per the entries in the last part of electoral roll are written on such individual
envelopes. These envelopes are sent to the respective record offices for the
Service Voters for onward transmission to the electors at the place where they
are posted.
(vi) Proper account of Postal Ballot paper issued to each Service Voter shall be
maintained in an issue register and the signature of postal official giving date
and time should be obtained in relevant column of register as receipt.
(vii) The Postal Ballot paper for the wife of a Service Voter (registered alongwith
him) should be sent in a separate cover and not in the cover addressed to her
husband.
(viii) For  sending  the  packets  addressed  to  various  record  offices,  the  Chief
Electoral Officer of the State is required to have a meeting with the head of the
postal  department  for  the  State,  and  work  out  an  arrangement  that   the
packets of Postal Ballots for Service Voters are handed over by the Returning
Officer/Asstt.  Returning  Officer   of  each  constituency  to  a  designated
employee  of  the  postal  department  nominated  for  this  purpose.  Postal
Department shall then ensure that all Postal Ballots for Service Voters are
delivered to the respective Record Offices within 48 hours.
(ix) The Record Office on receipt of the packets of Postal Ballots are required to
send  the  individual  envelopes  addressed  to  the  Service  Voters  to  the
respective units where the Service Voter concerned is posted at that point of
time through the Army Post Office (56 APO or 99 APO), as the case may be.
(x) On receipt of the Postal Ballot paper and the connected papers, the Service
Voter is required to cast the vote as per his own choice and the instructions
sent alongwith the Postal Ballot paper. The marked Postal Ballot paper is to be
placed by him in the smaller envelope and the same alongwith the declaration
duly filled in and attested is to be placed in the larger envelope bearing the
address of the RO and envelope is to be sent back to the RO through post. It
is to be noted that the Service Voter does not have to affix any stamp as the
postage is paid by the Government. In normal course, the gap between the
date of dispatch of Postal Ballot to Service Voters and the date of counting will
be about 15 to 16 days (when the election is held in a single phase).
(xi) Under rule 54A(2) of the Conduct of Elections Rules, 1961, the Postal Ballot
has  to  be  returned  to  the  Returning  Officer  before  the  time  fixed  for
15

commencement  of  counting  of votes.  Any  Postal  Ballot  returned  after  the
commencement of counting cannot be counted.
(xii) Effort of the election machinery and the postal authorities is to ensure that the
Postal Ballot for Service Voters is delivered to the Record offices within about
5 days after the preparation of list of contesting-candidates. This leaves about
10-12 days for the Record Office to send Postal Ballot to the electors and
thereafter for its return to Returning Officer.
The procedure to be followed as explained above are as laid down in the
Rules  (Rules  23  to  27)  of  the  Conduct  of  Elections  Rules)  and  these
procedures are uniformly applicable to all categories of electors who  vote
through Postal Ballot. The procedures prescribed in these rules are aimed at
ensuring that it is the genuine elector who has cast the vote and also to ensure
protection  of  secrecy  of  vote.  Any  modification  of  the  Rules  to  relax  the
procedures cannot overlook the said principles. As mentioned above, while
sending  the  Postal  Ballot  and  envelope  etc.  to  the  electors,  a  set  of
instructions explaining the procedure to be followed by the elector is also sent
so that the elector is aware of the same.
The Election Commission, on its part, has clarified to the Returning Officers
that while attesting the declaration of elector in Form 13A, even if the attesting
authority does not affix his/her rubber stamp, that in itself should not lead to
rejection of the ballot paper provided the designation, etc. of the attesting
officer is given.'
c) Steps taken to facilitate voting by Armed Forces Personnel 
2.7 In the background brief the Ministry of Defence stated that  Members of the Armed
Forces registered as Service Voters can vote by Postal Ballot or by Proxy. They can also
vote at their place of posting if they are registered as general voters in that place for which
the  Election  Commission  of  India  (ECI)  has  laid  down  certain  stipulations  relating  to
minimum tenure of posting (3 yrs),  'residence with family' etc.
2.8 As the minimum tenure of posting clause was  not suitable to the Armed Forces
Personnel, therefore, Ministry of Defence in consultation with the three Services and Coast
Guard had conveyed to the Election Commission of India (ECI) in the year 2013 that Armed
Forces Personnel should be allowed to register as general voters at their place of posting
without any clause of minimum period of stay. 
2.9 Subsequently, ECI vide their letter dated 17.10.2013 requested Ministry of Defence to
reconsider the matter in the light of judgment dated 22.08.2013  of  Hon'ble  High Court of
Punjab & Haryana  in CWP No. 3775 of 2009 (Brig. Ghuman Vs UOI) wherein the concerns
raised by Election Commission  have been found justified and conditions laid down by EC for
16

enrolment as local voters  had  been upheld by the Hon'ble  High Court inter alia citing
change of demographic character of the constituencies which may affect the local populace
and upset the electoral profile. The matter was reconsidered in consultation with ECI and the
Commission was requested in the year 2014 to incorporate the following provisions in their
rules:
(i) Definition of the term 'residing with family' may be extended to include group
residency in a unit/station in a common group accommodation for the purpose
of registration as general voter at place of posting.
(ii) The existing stipulation in the ECI instructions regarding minimum period of
tenure posting of 3 years may be revised downwards to at least 2 years.
(iii) So far as forward areas are concerned, ECI is requested to ensure timely
receipt of Postal Ballot papers by Service Personnel so that they are able to
cast their vote through Postal Ballot well in time.
   
2.10    Thereafter, the  Election  Commission  of  India  took  up  the  matter  with  the
Cabinet Secretariat. The Cabinet Secretariat sought the views of Ministry of Defence on the
following concerns of Election Commission of India:
(i) In many parts of the country like J&K and North Eastern States, enrolment of
large number of Armed Forces Personnel as general voters irrespective of their
period of posting may alter demographic characteristics of constituencies in
these States which have very small electorate and can upset electoral profile of
these constituencies.
 
(ii) Contesting candidates in these areas will approach Armed Forces Personnel to
garner their vote and support, thus, involving them in active politics which may
have an adverse impact on national security. 
(iii) The ECI feels that this matter requires consideration of Government of India in
several  Ministries  including  Ministry  of  Defence,  Ministry  of  Home  Affairs,
Ministry of North Eastern Affairs and Ministry of Law & Justice etc.
2.11 The Ministry of Defence responded to the concerns of Election Commission of India
and conveyed to the Cabinet Secretariat in early 2014 as under:
(i) As  regards  the  concern  of  ECI  regarding  altering  of  demographic
characteristics particularly in J&K and North East, in case local registration of
Armed Forces Personnel is allowed, it has been discussed in the meeting held
on 04.02.2014 in MoD with ECI and the Services Hqrs. that reducing the period
of tenure posting from 3 years to 2 years and extending the term 'residing with
family' to include common group residency will substantially address the issue
in peace areas. In so far as forward areas are concerned, ECI  have been
17

requested to take steps to ensure timely receipt of Ballot papers so that the
Service Personnel are able to cast their vote well in time. 
(ii) As  far  as  the  apprehensions  of  ECI  regarding  contesting  candidates
approaching Armed Forces Personnel for garnering votes is concerned, the
Services have indicated as under:
(a) Existing  rules  and  regulations  prevent  defence  personnel  from  being
member/canvassing for a political party. Their social structure, activities
and working environment do not allow them an opportunity to interact
with any political parties.
(b) Defence  personnel  largely  reside  in  secured  garrisons  wherein  no
political activities are permitted. Those who live in civil area under their
own  arrangements  are  also  kept  under  surveillance  and  they  are
regularly counselled/briefed to remain apolitical.
(c) No political rallies are permitted in the Cantonments/Military Stations.
However,  political  parties  may  be  permitted  to  display
posters/canvassing, material in a central place with due monitoring by
Local Military Authority (LMA).
2.12 Accordingly, it was conveyed that the Services have opined that adequate checks and
balances are already in place to insulate defence personnel from political influences.
d) Difficulties faced by Armed Forces Personnel in regard to Postal Voting Procedure
2.13 The Ministry of Defence was asked about  the procedure of postal voting followed by
the Armed Forces. It informed  as under:-
`The entire  process of dispatch of Postal Ballots of Service Voters, filling up of the
Ballot Paper by   the individual Service  voters and its receipt back by the Returning
Officer of the concerned constituency, is required to be completed within a short span
of 14 days  as list of  contesting candidates in a constituency is finalized  only 14
days prior to the date of polling. The Postal Ballot Papers are dispatched to the
Record Offices who sift these Postal Ballots unit-wise and dispatch them to various
units deployed in different field and peace stations through postal channels.  On
receipt  of Postal  Ballots  by various  units,  the  ballots  are  sent to  the  concerned
individuals  at the posts/their locations. After filling the ballot paper, the individual
dispatches the ballot paper to the concerned Returning Officer by post.'
2.14 On being asked about the  difficulties the Ministry of Defence has identified in casting
postal vote by the Armed Forces Personnel, it informed as under:
'Postal Ballot suffers from the inherent problem of delay in delivery of the documents
to  the  Service  Voters  due  to  postal  delays,  frequent change  in  address   of the
individuals and also non updation of electoral   rolls.   The Postal Ballots are received
at the record offices and then  dispatched to the Commands for onward dispatch to
18

the Unit and then finally to the individual. The entire process of delivery of the Postal
Ballot to the individual and final receipt of the cast ballot by the Returning Officer of
the constituency is very cumbersome as a result of which, many a times, it has been
observed that  the two weeks time available for casting Postal Ballot is  insufficient,
especially in case of units located in far flung areas/difficult terrain.' 
2.15 The Election Commission of India was also asked of the nature of difficulties it  see in
casting postal vote by the Armed  Forces personnel. In its written reply, ECI submitted as
under:
'The drawback of the Postal Ballot system, for Service Voters is that in many cases
the RO does not get it back in time before the time fixed for commencement of
counting of votes. Under  the law only those Postal Ballots which are returned before
the commencement of counting can be counted. Further, the Postal Ballot can be
printed and dispatched   only after the list of contesting candidates is finalized. The
Commission, on its part, has directed that ROs shall  dispatch the Postal Ballot
papers for Service   voters within 48 hours after  finalizing the list of contesting
candidates. The period between the date of dispatch of  Postal Ballots and the date
of  counting  would,  ordinarily  be  Assistant  Returning  Officerund  14-17  days.  The
period may be insufficient in the case of personnel posted in far away/border areas.
The  RO  sends  the  Postal  Ballots  (in  sealed  envelopes  addressed  to  individual
Service Personnel) to the Record Offices concerned. The record office further sends
the Postal Ballots to the personnel at their place of posting. Once the Postal Ballot
paper  and the accompanying   papers reach the Service Personnel, he has to follow
the statutory procedures mentioned above and post it back to the RO.
In  order  to  cut  the  delay  in  the  onward   transmission  of  the  Postal  Ballot,  the
Commission has directed that the dispatch should be from a centralized  location
under the supervision of the DEO and in the presence of the Election  Observer.  The
postal authorities are called to  the dispatch location and the envelopes are handed
over under acknowledgement.
Only  those  Postal  Ballots  which  are  received  before   the    commencement  of
counting of votes is counted. Those received thereafter are kept separately (without
being opened) and are not counted'. 
2.16 On the adequacy of 14 days period in printing and despatch of ballot papers, the
Adjutant General apprised the Committee as under:
"As already pointed out, the 14 days stipulation for the Postal Ballot to be dispatched
for example if it goes from Bangalore, it could be sent to Srinagar where the record
office exit and if the person is posted in Assam, it goes from Bangalore to Srinagar to
Assam and then it comes back to the Electoral Office Bangalore. It is said that it is
not possible for ballot to reach in 14 days."
19

2.17 On the existing procedure for the officers and Jawans posted in various UN Missions
and Embassies/High Commissions abroad in respect of their Postal Ballots, the Ministry has
stated as under:
'As per Section 20(8) (d) of the Representation of the People Act, 1950, a person
who is employed under the Government of India in post outside India is a Service
Voter.'
2.18 During deliberations held on a later date, the Committee were keen to know from the
representatives  of  the  Ministry  of  Defence,  the  process  of  counting  of  postal  votes  in
General  Elections   held  in  other  countries,   Adjutant  General  of  Army  apprised  the
Committee as under:
"...in many of these countries, the votes are accepted even after the date of voting.
In the United States, you can vote 15 days after the voting date is over, and the votes
would be counted.  All those systems are not relevant to our context. So, we are just
following it."  
e) Voting  records of Service Voters - Maintenance of
2.19 The Committee desired to know the  number of Armed Forces Personnel who do not
cast their votes in  general elections and the reason for the same. The Ministry in its reply
has stated as under:
`The number of Armed Forces Personnel who have not cast their votes and the
reasons therefore is not  maintained.  However, reasons for not casting their votes
could perhaps  be attributed to the  cumbersome procedure and delays in  casting of
vote through Postal Ballot.'
2.20 During oral evidence, representatives of the Ministry were also asked whether Army
maintained any data regarding number of Armed Forces Personnel as well as status of
20

voters as general voter or Service Voter. The Adjutant General apprised the  Committee as
under:
"For obvious reasons, we maintain no data.  It is a private issue.  Whether he does it
as a general voter or does it by sending a Postal Ballot, the record is not maintained.
Till date, no record has been maintained. "
2.21 The Committee desired to know  the statistics for some  constituencies, wherein the
number  and  percentage of votes  of the  Service  Personnel  actually  counted and also
whether they were invalidated for various reasons.  A representative of Election Commission
of India apprised the Committee as under:
"The Postal Ballot that we  send to Service  Voters, for that we  have  a separate
account.  But when it comes to counting, we also give Postal Ballot to our staff on
election duty.  That is the much larger number than the Service Voters.  So, perhaps
the  vote  that  we  have  actually  received  through  Postal  Ballot  may  not  be  very
representative of the actual vote received......  It is only that the Postal Ballot that has
been counted, that may also contain the Postal Ballot coming from  the staff on
election duty. "
f) Initiative of Election Commission of India to Educate Service Voters
2.22 During oral evidence on the steps taken by the Election Commission to increase
participation of the Services in general elections,  a representative of Election Commission
of India informed the Committee as under:
"In order to effectuate the rights of our Service Personnel to participate in the voting
process, there are basically two issues to be looked at. One is the issue of enrolment
and  the  other  is  the  issue  of their  participation  in  the  actual  vote.  In  so  far  as
enrolment goes, we have recently launched a de novo exercise for intensive revision
of the last part of the electoral rolls relating to Service Personnel with reference to 1st
January, 2015.  A programme has been rolled out and as per this programme, the
date by  which the record officers shall forward the verified forms to DEO's is 15 th
March and final publication of the last part of electoral roll will be on 15th June, 2015 .
I will submit a copy of the programme This has been undertaken after 2002 for the
first time, and our attempt would be to ensure that all our Service-personnel get
enrolled.
We run a programme by the name of Systematic Voters’ Education and Electoral
Participation (SVEEP), and as part of SVEEP initiative also special programmes have
been rolled out to see that the modalities with regard to enrolment as well as with
21

regard to voting get conveyed to the Service Personnel. The effect through SVEEP
will be to see that some of the issues, which are there that result in large number of
votes getting invalid, are substantially addressed."
2.23 During deliberations, the Committee, while acknowledging the importance of SVEEP,
were of the view that even SVEEP was inaccurate and so are the records of Election
Officers.   A representative  of  Election  Commission  of  India  clarified  the  issue  to  the
Committee as under:
"..... I get the point. In fact, that is what is sought to be addressed through this de
novo registration of Service Voters. SVEEP would be taking this message of voter
enrolment, voter participation and  voter education to the cantonments, etc., which
was not being addressed earlier."
2.24 On the limit of 14 days period for printing and despatch of ballot paper, postal delays
and  evolving  a  method  to  despatch  the  ballot  papers  through  electronic  mode,  a
representative of Election Commission of India apprised the Committee as under:
"..... as I was mentioning, we have to address it on both fronts, namely, of enrolment
as well as of participation. So far as enrolment goes, the points that you raised are
sought  to  be  addressed  by this  exercise  of  de  novo registration  which  is  being
undertaken after 2002. The last part of our rolls, that is, the Service Voters  part, will
actually reflect the  position  as  it obtains  on  the  ground  once  de  novo intensive
revision is over. For that, we are engaging with the Ministry of Defence and, through
them, with various Forces so as to ensure that. SVEEP is a concomitant process
which goes along with this enrolment process. While this 14-day time limit between
dispatch and return of Postal Ballot that we have is a limitation, but even if this time is
more,  which  happens  when  we  have  multi-phase  elections,  even  then  (1)
participation is limited; and (2) we have a number of invalid votes coming.  Hence
there is scope for improving things through educating the people who are responsible
for ensuring voting through Postal Ballot. Through the SVEEP initiative, we intend to
address this need.
Coming to the issue of actual participation, as I mentioned, there has been a slight
reworking of the Commission’s position. The initial position was that for enrolling as a
general voter, the person had to be a resident there for more than three years; and
the background to it were some judicial pronouncement with regard to elections that
took  place  in  North  East where  Service  Personnel  outnumbered  local  residents.
Accordingly,  Commission’s  initial  view  was  that  enrolling  Service  Personnel  as
22

general voters may result in change of the demographic profile of constituencies
which have very small number of voters and this, in turn, would vitiate the actual
mandate of the people. However, now the Commission has reworked its position
which we have intimated to the Hon. Supreme Court and to the Government also.
The Government is trying to reconcile the positions of the Ministry of Defence and
Ministry of Home Affairs, etc., through the intermediation of the Cabinet Secretary.
Now, our position is this that so far as peace stations go, we will be enrolling Service
Personnel who are willing to get themselves enrolled at their place of posting as
general voters. That process is going on. As was told in MoD presentation  about 3.9
lakh voters  have  got themselves  enrolled in this manner. In crux, for enhancing
participation of Service Voters, we are opening a window for enrolment of the Service
Voters as general voters in peace stations and this will address the situation partially. 
The option of Proxy, while it has been mentioned that it is not popular and we also
admit that in terms of purity of democracy, it is definitely a second best option, but still
we feel that it has scope and perhaps it has not been, made known to the voters to
the  extent  to  which  it  should  be.  So,  perhaps,  there  is  scope  of  enhancing
participation also by generating greater awareness about Proxy Voting.
On the issue of online voting, we have put our IT team on the job to examine its
feasibility.  They  have  engaged  with  the  people  from  the  Defence  Services  and
different options of transmitting Postal Ballot are being looked at, but at the same
time, I would like to place this caveat that the secrecy of vote and genuineness of
vote are absolutely non-negotiable items. The Commission has to satisfy itself that
the systems that have been worked out are such that they would ensure that the
secrecy of vote is not compromised and also that the security of this whole online
transaction cannot be breached. Once we  have satisfied ourselves  of these two
concerns of the Commission, then we would be proceeding ahead. However, our
team is on the job and they are engaging with the Defence personnel to see what
best can be done in this area."
23

CHAPTER- III
Voting methods for Service Personnel in other countries
The  Committee  desired  to  know  from  the  Ministry  of  Defence  and   Election
Commission of India whether they have  undertaken any study on the subject to know the
practices available in developed nations to know how the soldiers who were not at their
usual place of residence, vote in these countries. Both  Election Commission of India and
Ministry of Defence in a written note apprised the Committee that they have not carried out
any study in this regard.
3.2 However during the deliberations on a later date, when the issue was raised again,
the Adjutant General apprised the Committee as under:
"....... the issue is that we have, indeed, studied many countries.  Actually there are
nine countries,  who have gone in for some kind of an e-voting or internet voting.
They  are  Australia,  Brazil,  Canada,  Estonia,  France,  Netherlands,  UK, USA and
Venezuela, of which the United States has got a Federal Act, which is called ‘The
Uniformed and Overseas Citizens Absentee Voting Act.’  On this Act, the whole voting
system is based. Despite the United States having gone through an Act, each State
there has passed its own Act. The total electronic process is only with two States
there.  They are Alaska and Arizona.  Twenty States talk with email and fax.  Six
States talk with fax and 19 States have got no e-transmission at all there.   So, the
United  States  also,  which  is  the  most  advanced  country  electronically,  has  not
reached the state of total internet based system for carrying out electronic voting.
Alaska being so far away and separate, has actually gone into it. Estonia was the first
country to go in with internet based voting. 
There have been major problems brought out.  The Election Commission would be
better suited to answer it.  But you can make life difficult on internet voting totally also
because you can flood a computer by some denial schemes, by which, it makes sure
that at the time of voting, your vote is not able to cast.  So, the negatives also exist in
total electronic voting.  That is why all these countries are actually resorting to one
side voting. The vote is delivered by email or fax, but the vote is actually cast by hand
manually and posted. That is the system in a large number of countries including the
United States.
Sir, the United States has got one more system in which a man staying, say, in
Germany can draw a copy of the vote from, say, his Embassy in Germany and he
can cast a vote.  It is a blank vote.  It does not show the candidates.  It shows, the
man has just to write, okay.  I vote for so and so party; or I vote for so and so
gentleman. He votes for so and so party or so and so gentleman, whose name he
knows; and he posts it, which is not a classic type of vote.  But it is named as a
vote... "  
24

CHAPTER – IV
Recent developments in methods of voting for Service Voters (Armed Forces)
The Ministry of Defence having cited the reasons for Armed Forces Personnel not
casting votes to the cumbersome procedure and delays in casting of votes through Postal
Ballot, the  Ministry  was asked whether it has worked out the approximate `Time Frame'
required for Armed Forces Personnel (particularly Army Personnel  in `Field Area')  from the
day  the  Postal  Ballot  is  dispatched  by  the  respective  Regimental  Centre  to  units  in
Field/High Altitude Areas; to the time/date of counting.  The Ministry in its written reply stated
as under:
`Time frame required for Armed Forces Personnel from the day the Postal Ballot is
dispatched to the time of counting of votes varies from unit to unit  depending upon
the location of the unit'. 
4.2 On the difficulties faced by the Service Voters in casting their votes, Adjutant General
during deliberations held on a different date, further apprised the Committee as under:
"Talking of the Army, approximately four lakh personnel are in Jammu and Kashmir,
and three lakh are in the Eastern Command in the East. Each formation is split into
about 30-40 posts which are within 2 to 4 days or sometimes 21 days of walking
distance from the unit headquarters. In the glacier, a man walks for 21 days. So,
there is physicality involved into the entire issue. It can be very simply made. But if
the man is not accessible to the place of a battalion headquarters itself, if his own unit
headquarter  is  not  accessible,  then,  we  have  to  find  out  a  via  media.   While I
absolutely agree with what the hon. Member has said as also the hon. Chairman has
said, there are far too many ifs and buts. But we have to find at least a system that is
improvement of the existing one till the time we get to the final solution which could
be largely electronic.  Till the time we reach that stage, till the time the Election
Commission is able to do  so, we have to find out a via media. This is, as I first put,
for the interim before we come to some final solution."
4.3 There is advancement in technology and still most of the Servicemen could not
participate in general election due to postal delays and other technical/ procedural issues.
Therefore,  the  Ministry  of  Defence  was  asked   whether  the  Government  has  critically
examined the feasibility to use electronic voting system replacing postal voting for the Armed
Forces/Central Armed Police Forces personnel so that their votes can be cast at right time .
The Ministry in its reply submitted the following information:
`Election Commission of India has initiated discussions on a software developed by
Election Commission for online enrolment of Service Voters and preliminary  meeting
25

have  been  held  by  the  Commission  with  the  representatives  of  the  Services.
However, no proposal for electronic voting replacing postal voting has been received
from Election Commission of India.'
4.4 The Committee desired to know whether any method has been devised by ECI so
that  a voter   gets an opportunity to cast his vote in a reasonably simple method and his
vote gets counted. A representative of Election Commission of India informed the Committee
as under:
 "....... some of the systems, which are there are there for ensuring two things. One is
whether the vote is authentic, and second is that the vote is secret. We are willing to
have a re-look at our processes, but these two things are very sacrosanct for us, and
cannot be compromised. But given this limitation, whatever ways can be there of
simplifying the Postal Ballot process, we are very open to look at it. But one element
that we discovered was resulting in large number of votes getting invalid, etc. was
also that perhaps there was not lack of proper understanding of the systems that we
have for Postal Ballot to Service Personnel at the moment. So, we seek to address
that through the SVEEP initiative so that people are made aware. 
Further, we have instructions to the effect that declaring a vote as invalid should be a
matter of last resort. As you have mentioned, in case the signature is not at the
designated place but elsewhere on the page or the signature is there, but the office
stamp is not there, but we have ways of finding out that the person who has signed it
is the authorised one. These cases we have allowed through our instructions. "
4.5 During oral evidence, the Committee expressed the need for measures to resolve the
problem of sending postal votes to incorrect addresses and finding out a system so that
correct details are filled on the postal vote by Service Personnel. The Defence Secretary
apprised the Committee as under:
"Regarding the Record Offices, of course, the Adjutant General will elaborate on that.
One thing that I wanted to apprise the hon. Committee of is the effort that is being
made to digitise the whole process. Now, in connection with the disbursement of
pensions, we have detected a large number of problems.  In order to address those
problems, a large-scale digitisation exercise is  being carried  out. I am  sure  this
exercise is also progressing well. Once this exercise is completed, the entire system
will be in a position to deliver electronically. Number two is, of course, a point was
raised whether we would like to fine tune the system to the next stage. In fact, the
most ideal system for the ballot will be electronic system both ways. That means you
receive the electronic ballot and the Election Commission should create a Postal
Ballot highway or some such thing, which has a server in it where all the election
ballot papers can go and, thereafter it can be routed to various constituencies. Now,
this is technologically challenging proposition. But I am sure we will be able to find a
solution.  The  Ministry  would  like  to  work  with  the  Election  Commission  on  this.
Probably we have to organise some technical seminars to find out how this can be
brought about. But ultimately the solution will lie not in doing partial electronic transfer
and  partial  postal  transfer, but  full  electronic  transfer. The  Election  Commission
26

should  also  be  mentally  prepared  for  this  because  this  is  a  departure  from  the
existing procedure and the change of laws and change of procedure will be required.
I would like to mention that India is probably the most advanced country as far as
election is concerned. Even in United States I find people use paper ballots, but we
use electronic voting machines. So, I think we are sufficiently advanced and probably
do not have much lessons to learn from elsewhere."
4.6 During deliberations, the Committee were keen to know from the representatives of
the Ministry of Defence, Election Commission of India, Ministry of  Home Affairs and Ministry
of Law and Justice the efforts they were making to raise the level of participation of Service
Voters  in General Elections. In  this regard, the Adjutant General of Army apprised the
Committee as under:
"Let me start with the Record Offices. The Record Offices actually serve 25 lakh
pensioners for which they are made totally electronic and updated in the course of
the last one year. We have transited across to a great amount of computerisation and
digitisation because we have a major problem of paying pension. That forced us
down  to get into total electronic mode and everything  is digitised. Every man is
digitised  including  his  address.  Of  course,  there  are  glitches.  Those  things  are
happening. Every unit location, every man’s location presently is digitised and it is
available on digital mode in the Record Offices.  I would say that the transition has
been dramatic in the course of the last two years. So, they have the capacity of
knowing where a person is located in which unit he is located.
Second is the issue of security. Can we provide the location of all the units to the
Election Commission?  Is it a viable solution to say that the Election Commission
knows a man belongs to which unit and when he will be able to transit? That would
amount to providing the entire information of the 2000   odd units in the Indian Army
on the Internet saying this is how the Indian Army or the Air Force or the Navy is
arrayed.  That, I think, is a difficult proposition to be put across on the Net. There has
to be a de-link between it. Is it possible to have a de-link which is electronic in nature
where we can put a firewall between the Election Commission and the Units? Any
firewall can be broken. The way to segregate is to have an air gap between the
Internet and the Intranet. That air gap is being provided by the Records where the
information   which  the  Election  Commission  has  relates  to  regiments  like  ASC,
Ordnance, Rajputana Rifles, Rajput Regiment, Gorkha Regiment, etc. The Rajput
Regiment thereafter has the data of every man. The individual numbers are in blocks.
For example, my regiment starts with the number 94. That number is available with
the Election Commission. If anybody sends a vote which starts with 94,  that reflects
to 11 GR. It will go to 11 GR records. There is a system of giving Army numbers
across. So, it will go to the Records Office which knows the location of every man. It
is available in electronic format. They are able to sift it out. We have tried to put
ourselves.  So,  while  this  downloading  and  uploading  is  a  difficulty  yet  it  is  a
compulsion for us to provide security which has to be ensured in case of  Internet.
We cannot provide that information. So, we  are in the process  of doing it. The
Defence Secretary has already ordered a Technical Seminar to be conducted within
the Services. We are in the process of conducting it. The module of a short training
on election and how it will be carried out is already under preparation. Each unit will
27

have a  unit-designated electoral officer who will be based in the Base. So, there is
an  electoral  officer  based  in  each  Record  Office  and  each  unit  will  be  in  the
communication system. So, we are actually trying to empower an election system
within the Services. We are a large force. There will be an election system in place
where an electoral officer is available in case there is a query. So, the training and the
system within the Armed Forces will be executed thereafter.
Now, I come to return journey. It is an issue.  If an envelope is marked “Ballot”, it will
be carried by the fastest means available. The P&T Department is able to take it on
because the field post offices are available all over India. It is handed over to a field
post office. The people of the field post office also come from the P&T Department.
They take the vote and they know that it is addressed to a place, for example, in
Kerala. It will be transported by the fastest mode by the P&T people directly across
the State through the post bag. I think  within seven days in the present time of
communication, it is possible to deliver till the time when electronic return vote is
decided upon.. It is a separate issue.   The question is: whether the ballot will be
secret. The hon. Member has spoken about secrecy. The vote will be stamped and
sealed by the individual and handed over to the unit. The unit commander would put
his certificate on the top of that in the first envelop in a sealed condition. He will put it
inside the second envelop and send it. It may sound  tedious but the two-envelope
procedure is a  regular thing being carried out in the Armed Forces for carriage of
secret information. It is a standard procedure. It is nothing new for us.
The next question is: will there be safeguard of votes? The issue of the families
voting has also been raised.  Regarding the personnel who are located in the field
areas, the option for the family to exercise a Service vote or a general vote will have
to be exercised. As far as possible, the families will vote separately from the husband
or the wife deployed elsewhere because there is a physical segregation. The family
may be staying, say, in Chandigarh or Delhi while the gentleman or the lady officer is
posted in the field area. The exercise of the vote of the family, whether it is general or
Service, will have to be managed separately by us through the Record Office. It is a
tedious task. It looks Herculean but it is the only via media available. The families do
not stay with the husband. We have to create the system where the vote for a family
staying in Delhi while the unit is located in Manipur is transported to Delhi, to the
electoral officer in Delhi or to the Army electoral officer. It has to be handed over to
the families for voting and despatched in a similar mode. In fact, thought has to be
given on how the families would vote. It would be tedious. But, I think, that is the only
way we can find out in the immediate time-frame."
Initiatives taken by the Election Commission of India and the Armed Forces
4.7 The  Committee  also  wanted  to  know  the   initiatives    taken  by  the  Election
Commission of India in the direction for  making E-voting a reality. The Election Commission
of India replied as under:
'A Technical Expert Committee has been constituted by the Election Commission of
India for the purpose of development of Postal Ballot software application and for
online enrolment of Service Voters'. 
28

29

4.8 The Commission  had laid down time lines for various activities with regard to e-
postal voting viz. for e-postal ballot application development by 23 December, 2015, for
preparation of infrastructure and hosting of the application  by 7 January, 2016 completion of
Mock Drill by 10 January 2016, analysis and feedback gathering by 20 January, 2016 and
changes in application (if any) by 29 February 2016, etc.
4.9 In a written note, the Ministry of Defence informed that the following steps were being
taken to improve  the existing procedure so as to minimize the errors and delays:- 
'The Services HQ are considering ways of reducing the links in transmission of  the
Postal Ballot Paper to the individual's unit bypassing the Record Offices with the view
to minimize postal delays'. 
4.10 During  the  presentation  before  the  Committee,  a  representative  of  the  Ministry
apprised the Committee about the latest efforts being made to make e- Postal Ballot a
reality, as under:
(i) On receipt of registration application, the Records Office will generate xml files and
upload on ECI Site on internet after being digitally signed.
(ii) As soon as the registration No is updated in ECI server, the individual will also get
SMS to this effect.
(iii) The 'ECI Code of unit' will also form part of xml application.
(iv) The ECI will allot registration  number which will be available  subsequently for
download in batch XML file. 
(v) The registration for any type of voting  will be done through record offices only
due to:
(a)  Maintain up to date electoral roll status of all serving soldiers.
(b)  Very few soldiers to opt for registration as General Voter.
(c) The procedure proposed is easiest to follow for a serving soldier.
 During oral evidence Adjutant General apprise the Committee on  the registration of
Voters as under:-
“The registration of voters, which was being carried out manually previously, had to
be transformed into an electoral system by which the registration of voters would be
carried out by people who  would  send their registration online and it should be
acceptable in the software and in the timeframe by the Election Commission, and
then publication of the Electoral Lists.” 
30

Updation of Registered Data
4.11 On updation of registered data, it was further informed that the Record Officers will
generate two half yearly list in XML format in a file:
(i) ' List of effective personal containing Army No, ECI   Registration  No/EPIC No,
type of voter (Service / general) and unit ECI code.
(ii) List  of  personnel   left  Army  due  to  any
reason (discharge/dismissal / desertion/death etc) during the period containing
Army No, ECI Registration No, EPIC No. 
(iii) This XML file will be uploaded on the ECI node after digital signatures for
updation of ECI database.'
During oral evidence the Election Commission of India   informed the  Committee
about the  options available for the Service Voter to cast vote in General Election. 
“Actually, voter is a voter. In the case of voters, there are two categories. One is a
general voter and the one is a service voter. The law says that you are supposed to
be registered at a place where you are ordinarily a resident. Now in the case of
service voters, law has given a fiction that you may not be ordinarily a resident in your
own village, you may be posted somewhere. So, you have the option under the law
that you would not like to be registered at your place of posting in Hyderabad or
Siachin and you would like to vote in your village. So, you will be given the option of
registering yourself as a service voter. Once you are registered as a service voter,
then this facility will be given to you. You will be sent a postal ballot paper. Now we
are thinking of e-postal ballot paper. You will be casting your vote as a service voter.
In case you opt not to wait for ballot paper to come, in that case, you cease to be a
service voter and you will become a general voter and your name will come in the
general electoral roll of the constituency and not in the service part. 
Actually, revision  of  electoral  rolls  for  general  voters  is  already  on  in  the  entire
country. If you do not want to vote for November, you want that you want to be
registered as  a general voter, even now you can apply in the process of the normal
revision.”
Adjutant General  further apprised the Committee about the registration of Service
Voters as under:-
“…….the  point  is  genuine.  There  are  different  types  of  forms.  When  you  do  e-
registration  which  we  are  talking  of,  there  are  different  types  of  forms.  Now  the
Election Commission has laid down that the forms will be updated twice a year. A
person now has a choice whether he wants to be a service voter or a general voter
31

and he has to fill the corresponding form. So, he gets removed from general voter list
and puts himself in the service voter list. In every six months the updation would have
to take place. The wastage is so much with 80,000 people retiring a year among the
three services and the turnover is so large that we have to keep thinking. And then
postings also take place, the units change. Every six months all those changes have
to be updated. It is a colossal exercise and we will do it. 
As regards the issue that hon. Chairman raised about as to if there are 100 people
how many are the votes received, the receipt issue is what we are now working on to
get the answers. If 22 Punjab which is voting from Far East and their votes come to
Punjab as a State, how many actually reach here in various constituencies and how
many votes are actually sifted out and they are right and they are available, all these
answers will come out as time progresses. The exercise involves say in the total
Ladakh region how many people are from which constituency and they will be posting
votes which constituency is another line of thinking which we have not yet gone into.
For example, in glacier a unit changes every six months. So every six months with
units turning over, the data is not static by it is dynamic data which has to be worked
out.
we will be able to talk more after the electronic registration takes place properly. When
we say a unit, till the time registration is not recorded in their records, the Election
Commission cannot generate a vote for us.” 
Transmission of Ballot Papers
     
4.12 On transmission of ballot papers from the ECI to Units, the Committee were informed
as under:
(i) 'Since the  unit details a centrally controlled through ARPAN, allotment of a
cord specific for election purpose is planned. (eg. ECI1450)
(ii) Unit will log-in based on identification for each unit based on an OTP provided
initially, and electronically changed subsequently
(iii) Based on updated ECI code, on finalization of list of candidates, the ECI will
upload the e-ballot papers on this server.
(iv) The units will log on to the ECI site with the help of ECI code and download
and print the e-ballots pertaining to the personnel of their units.' 
4.13 The Ministry of Defence was asked whether the latest system has been tested for
real use or it is still at experimental stage.  The Ministry in its reply stated as under:
'A proposal for bringing about necessary procedural changes for making voting
by Service Voters more effective including electronic transmission of Postal Ballot
has been framed by Service HQ and submitted to Election Commission of India
(ECI). The proposal is under consideration of ECI for the system to be made
functional for which necessary coordination is being made with ECI. The timeline
for this implementation has not been estimated so far.'
32

4.14 During the deliberations, it came to the notice of the Committee that Record Office is
one of the bottlenecks for timely completion of voting process. The Ministry was asked
whether it  is going to take any steps to smoothen the system in Record Office so that the
postal votes reach the centre of counting before the counting begins.  The Ministry in its
reply stated as under:
'In the present system, Record Offices are involved in the process of registration of
Service Voters and in the chain of dispatch of Postal Ballots. In the new proposal, the
role of the Records will continue for registration. However, the provisioning of direct
addresses (postal/electronics) by the Record Offices on a  periodic basis/immediately
before elections to the ECI will obviate the requirement of sending ballot papers to
them; thereby reducing the channels of transmission and allied delays.'
4.15 The Committee also took note of the fact that sometimes the margin in election of
winning candidate is wafer-thin, therefore, the Ministry was asked to  apprise the Committee
of the steps taken by it  so that each and every vote sent by Service Voters reaches at the
place of counting and is actually counted. The Ministry replied as under:
 'Service HQ have proposed to ECI to move the Postal Ballots from the concerned
Electoral  Officers  to  the  Service  Voter  electronically  thereby  reducing  the
transmission channels and transmission time. The ballots would move by Post on
return  to  Electoral  Officers  concerned  through  Speed  Post  of  Army  Postal
Service/India Post as available. This would cut down the movement time drastically
and ensure that Postal Ballots reach District Election Officers for counting.'
4.16 The Committee noticed that some of the procedures and rules are too cumbersome
in enabling smooth conduct of elections. Therefore, the Ministry of Defence was asked
whether it has thought of requesting the Ministry of Law & Justice to amend or remove some
rules to help Service Voters. The Ministry, in a written note, apprised the Committee as
under: 
'Proposal for bringing about necessary procedural changes for making voting by
Service Voters more effective including electronic transmission of Postal Ballot is
presently under discussion/consultation with ECI. During the course of finalization of
revised procedures/initiatives, any amendment of rules, if so considered necessary
by the ECI, would be taken up by the Commission with their Nodal Ministry i.e.
Ministry of Law and Justice.'
33

4.17 During oral evidence, Director General, Election Commission of India apprised
the Committee on the development of technology to make e voting  a reality as under:
"Mr. Chairman, Sir, currently the Service Voters are provided the facility of Postal
Ballot system. The procedure of Postal Ballot is specified in the Act and in the Rules.
As per that procedure, for one way transfer, directly the Returning Officer has to
send the Postal Ballot to the individual elector, in this case, the Service Voter.
Now, based on the requirement, the Election Commission had taken the initiative
and  C-DAC  is  developing  the  technology  for  transmission  of  Postal  Ballots
electronically from the Returning Officer to the individual Service Voter. From the
Services, the request has come that instead of transmitting electronically to the
individual Service member, we may permit transferring bulk to the Unit Offices which
will then download it. The Unit Officer may be designated as the Assistant Returning
Officer and he can then issue the downloaded ballot papers to the individual Service
members who will, in turn, then transmit it back through the postal system. We have
recommended Speed Post based system for early receipt of ballot papers.
The  technology  for  doing  this  bulk  transfer  and  the  bulk  downloading  is  being
developed by C-DAC. The proto-type was developed for individual transmission.
They said that they would require Assistant Returning Officer and six months to
complete  this  process  of  developing  and  testing  and  then  the  field  testing  of
Assistant Returning Officer and three months the Election Commission would need
to see that the system actually works. This is about the technology. It will require
amendment to the Rules before which we can pilot in a by-election. We would like to
pilot it in a couple of by-elections before we are confident to roll it out across all the
elections. This is the current stage of the process."
4.18 He further apprised the Committee on the appointment of Unit Officer as Assistant
Returning Officer:
"....... as I have submitted transmission to individual voter, the technology is almost
ready.  We are in a position to start the testing in a month’s time.  But transmission as a
bulk and the procedure for that whether Commission will be in a position to appoint the
unit  officer  as  a  Assistant  Returning  Officer, that  has  to  be  examined.   That  the
Commission is still examining.  Once the decision is taken, the technology part, we are
already gone ahead and we are doing it, once the process is understood and agreed
that yes, the Assistant Returning Officer can be appointed in the Services and this
system can be rolled out, then we need three months time to complete the process."
4.19 During oral evidence, the Committee desired to know the action taken by the Election
Commission of India to amend the law to enable sending e Postal Ballots to the units.
Director General, Election Commission of India apprised the Committee as under:
       "........ technology is one part. Even we are going ahead with the development of the
technology but the law has to be amended first which permits us to roll that out. We
34

have already recommended to the Ministry permitting these amendments in the law.
Once that is ready then we will start the field implementation ..... on 16 th February,
2015, we have moved the amendment to the Ministry of Law and Justice."  
4.20 The  Committee  were  informed  in  a  written  note  about the  role  of the  Services,
Ministry of Defence, Election Commission of India and the Ministry of Law & Justice in
implementation  of new voting  system  and   step by step  action  to  be  taken by these
agencies in the process of implementing the new voting system as under: 
'The Services HQs and Ministry of Defence are in close coordination with the ECI for
the development of a prototype software module for integration between ECI server
and Services HQ networks. At present, this is in the developmental stage by the ECI.
As and when legislation allowing online registration of Service Voters and e-Postal
Ballot for Service Voters is passed by the Parliament, this would be implemented by
the ECI.
Further, step by step actions to be taken by the Services in the process of new voting
system are as under:
(a) Registration of Service Voters : On receipt of registration applications from Service
Voters, Record offices will generate XML (Technology described in point no. 10 reply)
files and upload on ECI Site on internet after being digitally signed. The XML format
and fields would  be coordinated between  Record offices and the ECI to  ensure
smooth flow of data, iteration and accuracy. Each individual along with his permanent
personal number suffixed with Unit Code will form the unique ID and will be part of
XML application. As soon as the registration number is updated in ECI server, the
individual will also get an SMS to this effect. This unique ID of an individual will
facilitate the ECI for preparation of unit wise batch files.
(b)  Periodic Updation of Data : The Record Offices will update data of Army personnel
containing  Army  Number/ECI  Registration  Number/EPIC  Number,  type  of  voter
(Service/general) and unit ECI Code directly unto ECI server with a secure login
provided  by ECI on  half  yearly  basis  and  also  at the  time  of announcement of
election. This would update the ECI databases with respect to the type of voters and
their details ensuring consistency and accuracy, thereby helping ECI in regularly
cleaning and updating the last part of the electoral roll.
(c) Assignment of Unique ECI unit ID to each unit : Since the unit details are centrally
controlled  through  an  in-house  tailor-made  software  programme,  allotment  of  a
Unique Code for each unit, specifically for election purpose is planned. The details of
the same will be shared with ECI. This code will assist the units as well as ECI in
identifying the pertinent unit and accordingly handle documents.
(d) Nomination  of  Unit  Nodal  Officer :  All  units  have  a  nodal  officer  who  will  be
responsible for all election related issues. The nodal officer will be responsible for
receipt  of  each  batch  files  of  ballot  papers,  its  printing  and  providing  ballots  to
individuals and dispatch of ballot papers to the District Election Officer (DEO). The
35

nodal officer will also maintain record of all ballot papers and forward the same to the
DEO.
(e) Dispatch of Cast E-Ballot Papers: After exercise of franchise by the individuals, the
votes will be returned to the respective constituencies through speed post of Army
Postal Service/India Post as available; thereby reducing the channels of transmission
and allied possible delays. The same will be monitored by the nodal officer.'
4.21 The Committee desired to know the  time frame by when Election Commission of
India will bring the concept of the Services to the implementation stage as well as the
progress made by the Commission on the suggestion of the Services till date. The   Election
Commission of India  have  also been enquired whether it has fixed any timelines for
themselves  for the implementation of new voting system so the Committee may have the
opportunity  to  witness  the  trial  of  voting.  The  Ministry  of  Defence  in  consultation  with
Election Commission of India  in a written note apprised the Committee as under:
'Election Commission of India have replied that the Record Office is to send the Postal
Ballot paper addressed to each individual Service Voters. Accordingly, technology for
electronic transmission of Postal Ballot from the Returning Officer to the elector is
under development. In the case of the Army Units, the proposal made by the Army is
to provide for a system where the Record Office of each constituency sends the Postal
Ballot papers of all Service Voters serving in the unit to the Unit Commander for bulk
downloading at the Unit level.
During the sitting of the Committee held on 27.10.2015, the Committee had sought
information  about  the  timeline  for  putting  into  use  the  system  of  electronic
transmission of Postal Ballot paper from the Returning Officer to the Units and about
the various stages of activities involved in the process. The Committee was informed
that detailed response on the points raised by the Committee would be submitted
separately later.'
4.22 On the  type  of Software  and Hardware   required by the Services and Election
Commission of India and whether the Services and ECI have identified the system so that
process of acquisition may begin, the Ministry has replied as under:
'The ECI have stated that this can be specified and explained after the technology for
electronic transmission of Postal Ballot papers for bulk downloading at the Unit level
is finalized.'
4.23 The Committee were surprised to find that the amendment was moved long ago and
no action has been taken by the Ministry of Law and Justice to pursue the matter. A
representative of the Ministry of Law and Justice apprised the Committee as under:
36

"........ the note for the Cabinet is ready.  We forwarded advance copy to the PMO.  
They  suggested  that  domestic  migrant  labourers  should  also  be  given  these  
facilities.  For this purpose, a Committee of Ministers is appointed.  It is in the  
purview of the said  Committee. As  and when the policy is finalized, the Bill will be  
ready within two to three days."  
4.24  The Committee were of the view that PMO should be asked to delink the issue of
domestic migrant labours with that of Service Personnel. A representative of the Ministry of
Law and Justice apprised the Committee as under:
 "......... as per the direction of the Hon'ble Committee, we will forward a note to the  
PMO." 
4.25 The Committee were informed later by the Ministry of Law and Justice that it  has
already  conveyed the feeling of the Committee to delink the issue to the PMO and response
from them is awaited. The Committee also wanted to know that  time, the Ministry of Law
and  Justice will  take  to move the amendment by after getting the proposal from the ECI.
The Ministry replied as under:
"In this regard, it may be stated that a Cabinet Note for amplifying the existing
modes of voting available to overseas electors and Service Voters, including Armed
Forces Personnel has already been finalized. However, the matter has been referred
to an Inter-Ministerial Committee of Ministers chaired by the Hon'ble FM, which was
appointed as per the directions of the PM0 to examine the feasibility of extending
similar  facilities  to  domestic  migrant  labourers/workers  also.  After  receipt  of  the
recommendations of the Committee of Ministers, the matter will be further examined.
In case similar facilities are. to be extended to domestic migrant labourers/workers
also, a revised draft Cabinet Note will be prepared and circulated for inter-ministerial
consultation. Thereafter, the matter will be further processed for seeking approval of
the  Cabinet..  However, no specific time-frame  can be indicated  this case  since
finalization of the policy is dependent on the receipt of the recommendations of the
Inter-Ministerial Committee of Ministers which is to be followed by Inter-ministerial
consultation also in the form of a revised draft Note for the Cabinet."
4.26 On 24 August, 2016 during the oral evidence of the Ministry of Defence, Ministry of
Law and Justice and Election Commission of India, The Committee were apprised that a
decision was taken to de-link the issue of Migrant  Labourers & Service Personnels.
4.27  The Ministry of Law and Justice has taken following action in consultations with the
Election Commission of India on the issue and informed :-
37

`As directed by the Hon’ble Standing Committee on Defence in the meeting held on
24.08.2016, a meeting of the  Committee of Ministers was convened on  29.09.2016
wherein a decision was taken to process the proposal  to facilitate e-postal ballot
system for the Armed forces Personnel separately by delinking the same from other
related issues.
(ii) In the meanwhile, based on ECI’s proposal that the e-postal ballot system
could be extended to the Service Voters by amending the  relevant provisions of the
Conduct  of  Election  Rules, 1961,  the  necessary   amendment  was  made  to  the
Conduct  of  Election    Rules,  1961  and  published  in  the  Gazette  of  India  on
21.10.2016.
(iii) The crore issue of introducing e-postal ballot system has been addressed by
amending the Conduct of  Elect ion Rules, 1961’.
4.28 The Committee desire to know about the  definite time bound  and resulted oriented
programme  for conducting the  trial run on the ground.  The Ministry in its reply stated as
under:-
`The trial for one way e-movement of postal ballot commenced on 19.08.2016 with
the registration of Army personnel from two Units and one Record Office. So far, this
has included Units from various parts of the country and troops for at lealest two
different Constituencies. The system is in place and practical voting is planned to be
conducted in the Bye elections at Puducherry, scheduled to be held on 19.11.2016.
The counting of the votes is scheduled to take place on 22.11.2016.  The Service HQ
plan to send its representatives  to the Returning Officer after the  election to take
stock of which Postal Ballots reached on time and were found valid for the purpose of
counting’.  
4.29 On the status of trials  in units situated in far flung/difficult areas having large
number of troops, the Ministry replied as under:-
`Troops were chosen from  the deployment in extreme East (Dinjan), West (Bhuj),
North (Partapur/Leh) and South (Thiruvananthapuram) for the trials, The trials were
found effective and the  postal ballots reached  the Returning Officer   within 05-06
days, which is  well within the stipulated time for 14 days period from the date of
uploading of the ballot papers by Election Commission of India’.
4.30  The Committee desired to know about the areas/issues needed to be sorted out at
present. The Ministry replied as under:-
 `The  following  aspects  are  being  sorted  out   in  consultation  with  the  Election
Commission of India (ECI).
(a) To reduce the size of e-postal ballot files by the Election Commission of India to
permit easy downloading even where internet    data transfer speeds are marginal.
(b)  To Finalise the Standing Operating Procedure(SOP) for on-line registration
and one way e-movement of postal ballot for effective implementation of the System.
(c ) To devise and promulgation of unique service  numbers  for service e voters,
so as to provide these unique  numbers to voters after successful registration’. 
38

4.31 In a written note the Ministry of Defence has submitted the following measures being
taken by the service HQrs. to ease the system of e-postal voting:
`(a) Sharing of Data of Army Personnel with ECI: Necessary  clearance from  
military security point of view has been obtained. 
(b) NIC E-mail IDs of Units and Record Offices: The issue regarding opening of
NIC e-mail IDs in respect of units is under process. So far 4346 NIC  email IDs
have been created for units. Allotment of NIC email IDs to  all Record offices
has been completed. This would permit the Record offices to update data on
the Election Commission of India servers  as proposed.
(c) Registration, updation of data   and allotment of unit code: Service HQ has
prepared  unit  codes  and  processes  to  generate  data  of  personnel  on  a
periodic basis and incorporated the same in  an Integrated Software. Software
for updating data with Record  offices by Units has already been completed
and processed for  cyber clearance. Software for updating data on Election
Commission of India servers is under trial by Election Commission of India
since March, 2016.
(d) Dispatch of Cast e-postal ballot paper:  The  Army Postal Service ahs vetted
the proposal with regard  to returning of cast e-ballot papers through speech
post by the units to respective constituencies. This would reduce the time
taken for the return movement of e-ballot papers. 
(e) Identification of units & records for conduct of Mock Drill:  One Records Office
(Signal Records) and one Signal unit located in Delhi have been indentified for
the purpose of conduct of mock drill of  `one way e-transmission’ of postal
ballots as planned by Election Commission of India.
(f) Obtaining Cell Phone Nos. of all units: As per  the proposal, District Electoral
Officer will prepare batch files unit-wise and upload requisite   number of e-
ballot papers in the Election Commission of India server for access by the
units. Units would download their batch files through access by a OTO (One
Time Password) provided by the ECI.  The OTP would be sent both as an
SMS and to the E-mail ID of the unit. There is a need for units to have a
permanent  mobile number of their own for this purpose. All units have been
asked to obtain a permanent mobile  number at the earliest possible time. The
same record is also being updated by the Record Offices.' 
Imperative to use  existing database of service voters built over decades  
concurrently clean.
Periodic updation of service voters  to ensure updated  voter list at all times.
Service  Voters  Electoral  Educations  Programme  (SVEEP)  by  Election
Commission of India.
o Computer-based training packages.
o Film to educate service voters.
o In house dissemination of implementations of Electoral Process.
4.32 A representative of Election Commission of India apprised the Committee on the 
latest developments in respect of e-postal voting as under:-
39

 “ I  would  like  to  enlighten  the  Committee  as  to  what  are  the  developments,  if
permitted by the hon. Chairman. First of all, let me congratulate the Committee and
all  the  participants.  It  is  a  historic  moment.  Yesterday,  at  1307  hours,  the  first
electronically transmitted postal ballot has been uploaded by the RO of 17 Nellithope
Assembly Constituency in the bye election. It may be a small constituency of about
40,000 voters but the Service voters represent the Army, the Air Force and also the
Coast Guard. It has been uploaded. The electronic encrypted file of electronically
transmitted postal ballot is available for all the voters with the respective ROs. The
PIN and the OTP has been generated and sent to them. We are very sure that all the
Service  voters  would  be  participating  in  this  election.  We  are  tracking  every
milestone. This is possible only because we got the legal empowerment in the ECI.
The ECI is always ready to include everybody. There are certain issues which we
have to thrash out regarding registration which has been very clearly brought out by
the Adjutant General. As the hon. Chairman last time was asking about the return
journey, Postal Department is now in the loop. So, those operational things would be
carried out.
 
One more point that I would like to add is that if we want the system to be successful,
every Service voter has to be properly enrolled in the electoral roll. In these bye
elections, when we were seeing the record, I think it is not up to date. Even the
Record Officer names are not clear. I also would like to add here that once we send
the details to the Record Officer, there has to be a proper linking for which Service
voter it is going. On 5 th, that is, Friday, the Commission has taken a decision that
EPIC number would be given even to the Service voters with which this problem
would be taken care of. We can leave the individual Service voter number on the
EPIC". 
Canvassing by political parties inside the Cantonments
4.33 Political parties and their  candidates are not allowed  inside the  Cantonments  to
canvass to garner votes. During oral evidence, on the issue, Adjutant General  stated as
under: 
"...the issue about allowing the canvassing to take place inside cantonment.  In larger
number of cantonments for example in Delhi or in Chandigarh, there is sufficient
inter-mingling of the Service in the cities where  they stay.  We have  very good
reasons we have not permitted canvassing to take place inside the cantonments.
There are issues relating to security.  There are many other issues of the Service life.
The people who are eligible to vote do go outside and I think we should not under-
write the competence of a Service Voter not to understand the competencies each
one of the candidates that is listed on the voter.  Fairly educated people are coming
nowadays.   If  you  see  the  voting  patterns  that  have  taken  place  in  the  Delhi
cantonment elections last year, you know the trends how it has changed in Delhi
cantonment.  People have exercised their vote understandably on the merits of the
candidate which took place despite the fact no canvassing took place.  So, I think the
present  system  on  this  account  has  worked  fairly  alright.   We will  request  the
Committee to allow us to retain the kind of modicum of security that we have in the
cantonments as far as possible.  It will facilitate us to manage our cantonments
better."    
40

4.34 During the presentation before the Committee on a later date, a representative of
Army informed the Committee that A2  and  B4  lands are  permitted  to  be  used on the
requisition by the District Magistrate concerned, however,  A1 and analogous lands are not
permitted to be used for canvassing. 
4.35 During oral evidence, on the issue,  a representative of Army on a later date apprised
the Committee as under: 
"....... just a pointed answer to what you have asked. There are existing instructions
of the MoD already, which are in place, wherein the campaigning can be done in the
existing cantonments.  It is only on the A2 and B4   vacant lands that you can come.
But door-to-door campaigning is not as yet permitted.  So, you can come inside the
cantonments in A2 and B4 vacant land  and carry out a public meeting as per
existing policy.  It is up to the people to go there and be part of whatever rally or
anything that you are addressing.  But Sir, just a pointed answer to what you have
asked.  There  are  existing  instructions  of  the  MoD  already, which  are  in  place,
wherein the campaigning can be done in the existing cantonments.  It is only on the
A2 and B4   vacant lands that you can come.  But door-to-door campaigning is not
as yet permitted.  So, you can come inside the cantonments in A2 and B4 vacant
land  and carry out a public meeting as per existing policy.  It is up to the people to
go there and be part of whatever rally or anything that you are addressing.  But
otherwise, the instructions exist as far as the  political parties are concerned.  They
can come into the cantonment area, into the vacant A2 and B4  lands only and also
carry out the similar kinds of activities what they are doing outside."
4.36 On a later date during oral evidence Adjutant General further apprised the Committee
as under:-
“.......Canvassing is a new issue but not so new issue also. We had previously not
permitted canvassing inside the cantonments and military stations. I will defer to the
hon. Defence Secretary to make a canvassing condition which we will promulgate in
times to come but substantially, in the last elections we had permitted certain grounds
outside the cantonments where canvassing could take place through the Station
Commanders or the Cantonment Executive Officers, and we will now, as due advice
from the hon. Members, come up with some kind of policy on this issue which we will
get the Ministry to approve and submit formally”. 
4.37 Defence Secretary further clarified the matter as under:-
 “I think the step that we have now initiated and brought it to a logical conclusion is
certainly a very radical step, a very revolutionary step in the sense that it is enabling
41

the Service voters to really cast their votes and be felt in the system. That is a great
change”. 
It is because when you cast your vote and it does not reach, it is not reality. So, if a
vote is cast and it reaches the ballot box at the right time, then only one acquires the
power to participate in the electoral process. We have created a lot of positivity by
this step. But when we think of campaigns and other things we should be extremely
careful. I entirely agree with the views expressed against campaigning because it can
be very divisive and we want a united Force. So, this step could have a negative
impact. The positivity should not be neutralized overwhelmingly by negativity which
results in bad consequences. 
In this regard, I would also like to point out that the voters of a particular constituency
are so widely dispersed that it may not be practical to come and campaign. This is
one part of the story. It may have to be done, if at all there is anything practical, by
the party”. 
Cases filed in Supreme Court
4.38 In the meantime,  WP(C) No.1005/2013 – Neela Gokhale Vs. UOI & Anr. tagged with
SLP(C) No. 6554/2014 – Rajeev Chandrasekhar Vs. UOI & Ors came up for hearing in the
Hon'ble Supreme Court.   In these court cases, issues relating to registration of Service
Personnel as voters in the place of posting  and creating effective mechanism for the Armed
Forces  Personnel  and  their  families  to  exercise  their  right to  adult suffrage  easily  and
effectively were raised. The Hon'ble Supreme Court  passed an interim order on 24.3.2014
inter alia directing as under:-
(i) 'The Service Personnel posted in peace station as on 1.1.2014 and continued
to be posted on the date of commencement of the Election process for such
constituency  may register themselves as general voters;
(ii) The ECI's order dated 28.12.2008, prescribing the condition of tenure posting
of three years and such Service Personnel residing with family,  shall not be
insisted upon;
(iii) Union of India to furnish the details of Peace Stations to ECI within two days
from the date of the order of SC; 
(iv) Union of India to provide all necessary assistance to ECI in making the Postal
Ballot effective for Service Personnel; and 
(v) Counter affidavit by respondents be filed within 08 weeks.'
4.39 In its written note, the Ministry has stated that it, while complying with the orders of
Supreme Court provided with the details of peace stations in respect of Army, Navy, Air
Force and Coast Guards to the Election Commission and requisite directions have been
42

issued to the Services and Coast Guards towards compliance of Supreme Court directions
regarding making Postal Ballot effective. 
4.40 In so far as filing of Counter affidavit in terms of directions of Hon'ble Supreme Court
at para  7(v) above is concerned, the same is being filed by Ministry of Law & Justice in
terms of decision taken by the Committee of Secretaries (CoS)  in its meeting held on
28.3.2014.   
4.41 The Ministry of Defence has informed that it has taken appropriate steps for facilitating
registration  and  voting   by   Armed  Forces  Personnel  as  per  extant  rules  and   for
implementation of interim orders  dated 24.3.2014 of the Hon'ble Supreme Court.
4.42 The Ministry of Defence was asked whether any  action has been taken by  it so that
Armed  Force personnel  can effectively cast their votes in the General Elections after the
Supreme Court's direction on 24.03.2014. The Ministry was also asked whether the system
is considered appropriate  and if not, whether any steps has been taken by it to modify the
system. The Ministry  in its written reply has stated as under:-
`The  Hon'ble  Supreme  Court  of  India  in  Writ  Petition  (C)  1005  of  2013  (Neela
Gokhale vs UOI & Anr) and Special Leave  Petition (C) No. 6554/2014 (Rajeev
Chandrasekhar vs UOI & Ors) relating to registration of Service Personnel as voters
in  the  place  of  posting  and  creating  effective  mechanism  for  the  Armed  Force
personnel  and  their  families  to  exercise  their  right  to  adult  suffrage  easily  and
effectively, passed  an interim order date 24.03.2014.  In compliance of the aforesaid
interim order, details of peace stations and `modified field stations' (in respect of
Army) `hard areas' (in respect of Navy and Coast Guards) and stations with `limited
area tenure for two years'  (in respect of Air Force), (these being akin to the `peace
stations'), have been provided to the Election Commission of India.  In addition,
requisite directions  have been issued to the Services and Coast Guards to make
Postal Ballot effective in terms of ibid directions of Supreme Court. The matter is
subjudice before the Hon'ble Supreme Court of India.'
4.43 The Ministry later informed about the latest developments in  the Hon’ble Supreme
Court and quoted Interim Judgment date 8 March 2016:-
`(a) Certain inherent deficiencies/restraints in voting by postal ballot, proxy voting or
by voting in person in peace stations by members of armed  forces and family
members.   This  need  to  be  addressed  by  Election  Commission  of  India  in
consultation with all stakeholders. 
43

(b) In far flung areas, serving personnel not to be deprived of their right to vote on
the grounds of small civilian  population and largest population of service personnel. 
(c) Union of India to examine whether it is  possible to ensure that postal ballots
where such option is to be exercised by an intending voter, can be reached and
retrieved within the window period or if some other mechanism like  e-voting can be
introduced for this category of voters. 
(d) UoI to consider feasibility  of permitting registration of service voter in a peace
station by waiving or reducing the period of three years of residence.
(e) To file suggestions after an objective examination of the entire gamut of the
issues arising and involved in the form of a report supported  by  an affidavit within a
period of three months from the date of pronouncement of the judgement.
(f) It will also be open for Election Commission of India to lay before the Court its
views on the A/m issues.
Interim Judgement dated 15 July, 2016:-
The case  was heard by the three judge  Branch on 15 July, 2016. Based on
the submission made by Union of India (Ministry of Law and Justice), the Apex court
granted four months time to Union of India to take a decision on the  issue and submit
its report in the next date of hearing which is likely to be in November, 2016’.
44

PART II
OBSERVATIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS
Need to consider the Spouse  of Service Personnel as General Voters 
1. The  Committee  note  that  there  are  special provisions  for  personnel  of  the
Armed and Para-Military Forces etc., to vote.  As per Section 20 (3) of Representation
of  Peoples  Act,  1950, Armed  Forces  Personnel   may  register  their  names  in the
electoral roll of their native place, whether or not they are ordinarily residing there.
The Committee further note that apart from Armed Forces Personnel, this category
(called the `Service Voters')  includes (i) personnel  belonging to Para-Military Forces,
(ii) State Armed Police Force serving outside the State, and (iii) officials employed
under Government of India in a post outside India. The wife of any such Service Voter
is also eligible to be enrolled (in this last part of the electoral roll), if she is ordinarily
residing with her husband  at the place of his posting. However, the Committee find
that it is not the other way round.  Therefore, the Committee are of the view that in
cases where  the husband of a lady officer is staying at the place of  posting, he may
also be treated as Service Voter.
Criteria for Voting by Service Voters at the place of posting 
2. The Committee note that the Armed Forces Personnel  can  also be enrolled in
their place of posting (in Peace Stations) as  ordinary (general) electors provided they
are not already enrolled as Service Voters.  Otherwise, they  have to  vote in person in
the  polling  station  of  the  area  concerned  at  the  place  of  their  posting.  For  the
purpose, the Election Commission of India has laid down certain stipulations, which
include, having a minimum tenure of posting of 3 years, residence with family, etc..
As the stipulation of minimum tenure of 3 years in particular, was not appropriate and
suitable  to  the  Armed  Forces  Personnel  owing  to  their  frequent  transfers  and
deployment, the Ministry of Defence, in consultation with the three Services  and
Coast Guard had conveyed to the Election Commission of India in the year 2013 that
45

Armed Forces Personnel should be allowed to register as ‘general voters’ at their
place of posting without any conditionality. 
3. Subsequently,  the  ECI,  however,  vide  their  letter  dated  17  October,  2013
requested  the  Ministry  of  Defence  to  reconsider  the  matter  in  the  light  of  the
judgement dated 22.08.2013  of  Hon'ble  High Court of  Punjab & Haryana  in CWP
No. 3775 of 2009 (Brig. Ghuman Vs UOI) wherein the concerns raised by Election
Commission were found justified and conditions laid down by EC for enrolment as
local voters  had  been upheld by the Hon'ble  High Court inter-alia by citing possible
change of demographic character of the constituencies which may affect the local
populace and upset the electoral profile.  The matter was, therefore, reconsidered in
consultation with ECI and a  request  was made in the year 2014 for incorporating the
following provisions in the rules:
(i) Definition of the term 'residing with family' may be extended to include
group residency in a unit/station in a common group accommodation for
the purpose of registration as general voter at place of posting.
(ii) The existing stipulation in the ECI instructions regarding minimum period
of tenure of posting of 3 years may be revised downwards to at least 2
years.
4 Thereafter,  the  Election  Commission  of  India  took  up  the  matter  with  the
Cabinet Secretariat. The Cabinet Secretariat again sought the views of Ministry of
Defence which in turn stated that reducing the period of tenure of posting from 3
years to 2 years and extending the term 'residing with family' to include ‘common
group residency’ would, to a substantial extent, address the issue in peace areas. 
5. The Committee  note from the information supplied by the Ministry on  latest
developments  in   the  Hon’ble  Supreme  Court  wherein  Interim  Judgement/Ruling
dated 8 March 2016 speaks about certain inherent deficiencies/restraints in voting by
postal ballot, proxy voting or by voting in person in peace stations by members of
Armed   Forces  and  family  members,  which  needs  to  be  addressed  by  Election
Commission of India in consultation with all stakeholders; In far flung areas, serving
personnel not to be deprived of their right to vote on the grounds of small civilian
46

population and largest population of service personnel; Union of India to examine
whether  it  is   possible  to ensure that  postal ballots  where such option  is  to be
exercised by an intending voter, can be reached and retrieved within the window
period or if some other mechanism like  e-voting can be introduced for this category
of voters; UoI to consider feasibility  of permitting registration of service voter in a
peace  station by waiving or reducing the period of three years of residence; to file
suggestions after an objective examination of the entire gamut of the issues arising
and involved in the form of a report supported  by  an affidavit within a period of three
months from the date of pronouncement of the judgement.
 In the Interim Judgement dated 15 July, 2016,  heard by the three judge  Branch
based on the submission made by UoI( Ministry of Law and Justice), the Apex court
granted four months time to UoI to take a decision on the  issue and submit its report
in the next date of hearing which is likely to be in November, 2016.
The Committee desire that they may be apprised of the progress of the case 
periodically.
6. Further, it has been informed that the Election Commission of India was of the
opinion  that  this  matter  is  required  to  be  considered  by  several  Ministries  of
Government of India including the Ministries of Defence, Home Affairs, North Eastern
Affairs  and  Law  &  Justice  etc.  Considering  the  importance  of  the  matter,  the
Committee would like to see that the issue is resolved at the earliest  especially in the
light of  the decision/ruling  by  Hon’ble Supreme Court  and introduction of e-postal
voting. 
Proxy Voting
7. The Armed Forces and Para Military Forces personnel enrolled as electors in
their native place have the option of appointing a Proxy of their   choice for voting on
their behalf.  In such cases, the Proxy will vote at the local polling station. Others,
who do not want to vote through Proxy, will be sent a  Postal Ballot by the Returning
Officer of the constituency.
47

8. The Committee note that the facility of appointing a Proxy for exercising the
franchise on behalf of the defence personnel (Service Voters belonging to Armed
Forces and Para Military Forces) was  introduced by way of amending of Section    60
of  the  Representation  of  People  Act  1951,  through  the  Election  Laws and  Other
Related Laws (Amendment) Act, 2003. To be appointed as Proxy, a person has to be
ordinarily resident in the constituency concerned and of not less than 18 years of
age. While it is not necessary that the Proxy is also registered as an elector in the roll,
at the same time, he must not be disqualified to be registered. 
9. The Committee further note that the process of appointing a Proxy involves,
inter-alia, filling an application in the statutorily prescribed format (Form 13F), which
is appended to the 1961 Rules. Both the Service Voter appointing  the Proxy and the
Proxy  so appointed have to put their signatures on the  Form and have it attested by
the Commanding Officer/Notary public or First Class Magistrate. As per the procedure
laid down, the Service Voter has to get his signature attested by the  Commanding
Officer of the Unit and send it to the Proxy being nominated by him.  The Proxy, on
receipt  of  the form, can sign   and get the attestation from a Notary/First  Class
Magistrate. It is only after completing the process, as prescribed under the rules, that
Form 13F can be delivered to the Returning Officer concerned. 
10. The  Committee  find  from  the  information  furnished,  that  the  procedure
involved  in  voting  through  Proxy  can  be  daunting,  both  for  the  Service  Voter
appointing the Proxy as well as the Proxy. The process can also be taxing for the
Returning Officer (RO) as he is required to maintain a record of the Service Voters
who have appointed Proxies.  The Proxies will vote on behalf of the Service Voter as
any other general voter in the polling station covering the place of residence of the
Service Voter concerned. The RO is required to send a polling station wise list of
Proxies  appointed  by  Service  Voters,  based  on  which,  the  Presiding  Officer  will
permit the Proxy to cast the vote.  
 11. As evident from the depositions made, the representatives of the Ministry of
Defence and the Services too find the process of voting through Proxy cumbersome.
The process involves adhering to a variety of formalities which include, verifying
48

signatures of the individual and the Proxy through First Class Magistrate, Notary and
the Commanding Officer of the Unit concerned. The elaborate procedures, coupled
with inherent issues relating to ‘confidentiality of the choice of the Service Voter’
discourage the individual voters from casting their vote through Proxy. Therefore, the
process is not popular among the Service voters.  
12. The Committee note that the intention behind introducing the facility of Proxy
Voting  was  to  help  the  Service  Personnel  in  casting  their  vote.  Nevertheless,
considering the stringent procedure the Serving Armed Forces Personnel have to
follow in appointing the Proxy; the processes the Proxy has to, in turn, follow for
voting;  as  well as  the  intrinsic  nature  of  Proxy  Voting  -  which  can  compromise
aspects of confidentiality - the Committee are of the view that serious efforts need to
be made towards developing an alternative to the system of Proxy Voting. A better
method for enabling the Service Personnel to exercise their franchise is a necessity.
13. The Committee feel that this move will also contribute in easing the burden on
the Returning Officers as well as the Presiding Officers.  Presently, these officials
have to channelize their time and energy on keeping track of Service Voters opting for
Proxy Voting and as well as the Proxies appointed. 
Need to utilize the services of uniformed Service Personnel in conducting elections in
difficult and forward areas:
14. As per the stipulations prescribed by the Election Commission, the ROs are to
dispatch the Postal Ballot papers for Service   voters within 48 hours following the
finalization  of  the  list  of  contesting  candidates.  The  period  between  the  date  of
dispatch of Postal Ballots and the date of counting would ordinarily be about 14-17
days. The representatives of the Commission admitted that this period is insufficient,
and  more  so, in  the  case  of  personnel  posted in  far  away/border  areas.   In  the
process  of  Postal  Voting,  the  RO  sends  the  Postal  Ballots  (in  sealed  envelopes
addressed to individual Service Personnel) to the Record Offices concerned. The
Record Offices, in turn, send the Postal Ballots to the personnel at their place of
posting.  Once  the  Postal  Ballot  paper  and  the  accompanying  papers  reach  the
Service  Personnel, they have  to follow  the procedure prescribed in returning the
papers back to the RO.
49

15. The Committee also note that with a view to cutting down the delay in the
onward  transmission  of  Postal  Ballots,  the  Commission  has  directed  that  the
dispatch should be made from a centralized location under the supervision of the
District  Election Officer (DEO) and in the presence of the Election  Observer.  The
postal authorities are called to the dispatch location and the envelopes are handed
over under acknowledgement. 
16. The Committee also note that the process of issuing Postal Ballot papers to
Service Voters has to be completed within a pre-scheduled time-frame. The DEO is,
therefore, required to depute a team of officers with one of the Assistant Returning
Officers alongwith an updated copy of last part of the electoral roll and other papers
prescribed well in advance. For enabling completion of the process within time, the
printing of the Postal Ballot papers along with the counterfoils has to be completed
within 24 hours following the finalisation of the list of contesting candidates. Any
delay in adhering to the schedule will make the entire process of using Postal Ballot
papers by Service Voters nugatory and thereby deprive them of the right to vote.
Hence, advance  action has to be taken to prepare the envelopes prescribed and
connected papers.  Besides this, as per the standing instructions, the senior most
observer  posted  in  the  district  headquarters  concerned  by  the  Commission  is
required personally to monitor the entire process. Also, the process of dispatch of
Postal Ballot papers has to be video-graphed. 
17. The  Committee  understand  that  conducting  the  General  Elections  is  an
onerous task for the Election Commission of India. To fulfil the task,  manpower is
acquired from different Central and State Government departments.  The manpower
so acquired is also to be trained for ensuring smooth conduct of elections.   The
uniformed  Service  Personnel  being  a disciplined  lot,  the  Committee  feel that the
Services of these personnel can be utilised to conduct the elections, in a fair and
transparent manner for Service Voters, particularly in the difficult and forward areas. 
18. The Committee recommend that ECI should appoint some Service Officers as
Honorary Election Commission Officers and entrust them with the duty of conducting
50

the elections.   This step would also facilitate in ensuring  maximum participation of
Service Voters   in  future.
Need to study the best practices of other countries
19. The intention of the various stakeholders including the Services, the Ministry of
Law and Justice and the Election Commission of India is for giving the Services
Personnel a fair and full opportunity to exercise their franchise.  However, postal
delays as well as the elaborate procedural aspects prescribed for postal voting make
the exercise of right to adult suffrage in respect of Service Voters as also the officials
on  election  duty  very  difficult.  Therefore,  the  Committee  desire  that  the  Election
Commission of India  should take concrete measures towards resolving the problems
inter alia by way of using advanced technology as a means of ensuring that the votes
reach back the Returning Officers in minimum possible time.
20. India has made significant strides in terms of technological advancement.  The
Mangal Yan reaching the destination in the first attempt itself  without much money
spent  on  the  expedition  can  be  cited  as  an  apt  example   in  this  regard.  The
Committee, therefore, feel that developing and implementing a foolproof and reliable
system to help Service Voters in exercising their franchise should be an easy, and
definitely not a difficult task. 
21. The Committee find it surprising  that the  Ministry of Defence and  Election
Commission of  India   have not undertaken any exercise to learn about the practices
prevalent in developed nations in particular, for enabling the soldiers, who are not at
their usual place of residence, to exercise their franchise. On a later date, however,
the Adjutant General admitted that some understanding has been developed in this
regard.
51

22. The Committee desire that the Election Commission of India and the Ministry of
Defence together should undertake a study of the electoral  practices prevalent in
countries where ‘internet voting’ or chip based ‘identity card voting system’ exists
viz., Australia, Brazil, Canada, Estonia, France, Netherlands, UK, USA,  Switzerland,
Venezuela, etc., The best practices followed in this regard need to be identified and
developed to suit the requirements of Indian election process. 
Non - maintenance of Records of Service Voters (Armed Forces)
23. It came as a surprise to the Committee that details of the number of Armed
Forces  Personnel  not  having  cast  their  vote  in  the  elections;   and  the  reasons
therefor have not been  maintained, either by the Election Commission of India or the
Services. 
24. The  Committee  also  note  from  the  information  furnished  by  the  Election
Commission of India that a separate record of dispatch of Postal Ballots to Service
Voters  is maintained.  W hen it comes to the issue of counting however, the Postal
Ballots as a whole, which may include the Postal Ballots of the staff on election duty
are taken up together. The Committee desire that a mechanism be devised so as to
enable in knowing the number of Service Votes received, counted, invalidated and the
reasons for the invalidation of votes.  Such a measure would act as an aid in enabling
the Services as well as the Election Commission of India to take remedial measures
for ensuring maximum participation of the Forces in the electoral process.
Enrolment of Service Voters
25. The Committee note that in order to ensure effective participation of Service
Personnel in the electoral process, enrolment of all Personnel needs to be ensured.
The  Committee were apprised in this regard that the ECI had recently, i.e., on 1
January, 2015 launched a de novo exercise for intensive revision of a large part of the
electoral rolls relating to Service Personnel. The programme, inter alia envisages the
Election Commission of India to start registering of troops in coordination with the
Armed Forces HQs and use local units Commanders List of serving men/women as
electoral list. Every unit is to designate one officer as Unit Regimental Officer (URO)
52

whose job would be to ensure that fresh enumeration is carried out. It is also to be
ensured that there is adequate awareness regarding voting methods and also about
online  voting. The Committee, while appreciating the steps taken by the Election
Commission of India desire to be kept apprised of the progress made in this regard.   
26. Now Amendments to the electoral Rules have been carried out and the aim of
E-Postal Ballot System   is to ensure effective participation  by the Service Voters  in
all the elections, it is imperative to use  the existing database of the Service Votes
built over  decades  by scrutinizing and reviewing the same. There should be periodic
updation of Service Voters to ensure updated voters list in every six months.  The
Committee also desire that issues related to large database, internet connectivity in
far flung areas to the Server, physical connectivity between the unit and the election
form should be addressed at the earliest in a  time bound manner for smoother
updation of Service Voters list.  
27. The Committee are also of the view that   while the Internet is a necessity for
turning e-voting into  reality, it is also essential that the   information regarding the
units in the Indian Army or the Air Force or the Navy is not shared.  Thus, there has to
be a ‘de-link’ between the Election Commission and the Units/Establishments of the
Services.  The  Committee  would  emphasise  on  ensuring  that  confidentiality  is
maintained when the internet is used for facilitating the electoral process. 
Educating the Service Voters
28. The  Committee  note  that  a  large  number  of  ‘Service  Votes’ get  invalidated
mainly due to lack of basic awareness amongst the Personnel about the procedure of
enrolment and voting pattern. The Committee, in this regard appreciate the fact that
the ECI has launched a de novo exercise, termed Systematic Voters’ Education and
Electoral Participation (SVEEP). As part of SVEEP, special programs have been rolled
out for ensuring that modalities with regard to enrolment as well as voting pattern get
53

conveyed to the Service Personnel. Through this program, the issue of invalidation of
Service votes would be addressed to a substantial extent. Further, ECI has issued
instructions to the effect that declaring a vote as invalid should be a matter of last
resort. The Committee also note in this regard that issues such as the signature and
office stamp being in the right place, etc. are not being emphasized upon much and
the ECI is only keen on ensuring that the signatory is an authorized one. In this way,
the percentage of  invalidation would definitely come down.  The  Committee also
desire  that  a  short  educational  film  depicting  all  the  aspects  concerned   with
registration and E-Postal Ballot System  may be produced  and  screened in each and
every unit of the Services so that Service Voters  become well aware and their votes
are not invalidated due to lack of procedural  knowledge.
 The  Committee  are  of  the  view  that  periodic  computer  based  training
programme should be conducted for educating the Service Voters as well as officers
deployed in the Record offices. The Committee  also desire that such programmes/
screening  of  educational  film  should  be  made  part  of  the  training  curriculum  of
Officers and Jawans.
29. The Committee are happy to note the reforms being carried out in the Postal
Ballot system for maximizing participation of Service Voters. However, in the light of
the fact that Service Personnel are constantly on the move and deployed at several
places, an element of doubt creeps in on the authenticity or accuracy with which
electoral rolls are maintained/prepared.  Therefore, there is a need on the part of the
Ministry  of  Defence  as  well  as  ECI  to  ensure  that  the  electoral  rolls  of  every
constituency in the country truly represent the voters of the Armed Forces. They
further desire that these issues should be sorted out in a time-bound manner; and
well before the next General Election. 
30. The Committee feel it to be necessary that every voter – be it a General Voter or
a  Service  Voter  -  be  linked  with  his  Aadhar  Number.  This  could  enable  in
authentication  of  the  Service  Voters  by  means  of  measures  such  as  One  Time
Passwords  (OTPs)  as  done  by  banks  in  the  case  of
financial transactions. This general idea, which can prove to be reliable and less time
54

consuming  can  be  worked  upon  and  developed  by  the  IT  experts/  Election
Commission of India.
31. The  Committee  appreciate  the  efforts  being  made  by  the  ECI  in  regard  to
developing  ‘e-balloting’  and  ‘e-voting’.  Nevertheless,  the  Committee  cannot  help
being skeptical on whether the technology would work in  the remote and forward
areas. For addressing the matter, the Committee are of the strong view that the ECI
needs  to  explore  the  possibility  of  designating  some  uniformed  Servicemen  as
honorary  ECI  officials  for  the  specific  purpose  of  proceeding  to  the  posts  for
attending  to  the  work  of  printing  of  forms  and  conducting  the  elections.  These
uniformed officials could be taken on oath by the ECI to conduct the elections in a
free and fair manner in the forward units. 
In this regard, it would be worthwhile to note that the Adjutant-General too
admitted before the Committee that if a man is not accessible to the HQs of the
battalion itself, a via media, which is an improvement over the existing system has to
be worked out as an ad hoc measure till such time a final solution which could be, by
and large, electronic oriented is evolved. Therefore, the Committee desire that the
Ministry of Defence as well the Services to work out a viable solution at the earliest
and apprise the Committee of the same.
Canvassing inside the Cantonments
32. The Committee also considered the issue of allowing canvassing to take place
inside Cantonments.  The Committee note in this regard that  for canvassing, A2 and
B4 lands are permitted to be used on the basis of requisition of the District Magistrate
concerned.  However,  A1  and  analogous  lands  are  not  permitted  to  be  used  for
canvassing. 
33.  The Committee are convinced that there may be  issues relating to security
and  many  such  other  concerns  pertaining  to  service  life  in  the  Cantonments.
Therefore, the Services may be allowed to retain the kind of modicum of security that
the Services want in the Cantonments as far as possible.   The Committee  also desire
that appropriate  guidelines be issued to all concerned,  so  that permission for
55

canvassing inside  the Cantonments   is not   dependant   on the sole  decision of
Station Commander. 
Cases filed in Supreme Court
34. The Committee note that cases have been filed in the Supreme Court  on issues
relating to registration of Service Personnel as voters in the place of posting  and
creating an effective mechanism for the Armed Forces Personnel and their families to
exercise their right to adult suffrage easily and effectively. 
35. The Committee also note that the Ministry has  issued  requisite directions   to
the Services and the Coast Guard on complying with the Supreme Court’s direction
for making Postal Ballot effective. The Committee are not in favour of the idea of
people having to approach the courts for correcting the systems and processes. The
Committee, therefore, are of the view that once the attention of the Ministry is drawn
to an issue or a problem that merits consideration, top most priority should be given
to address the grievance.
Counting of Postal Votes
36. The Committee note that as per the Election Commission’s Rules, counting of
votes  commences  with  the  Postal  Ballots  taken  up  at  first,   i.e.,  at   
8 ‘o’ clock. The entire lot of ballot papers received up to 8 A.M. are taken up for
counting at first.  The Postal Ballots received thereafter are kept separately and are
not counted. As per the present system under the Rules which came into force from
the year 1952, the votes contained in the EVMS will be counted after completion of the
counting of the postal votes. 
37. The aspect of a large number of Postal Ballots not reaching the Returning
Officer  (RO) in time  because  of  postal delays  as well as delays  in rail and road
transport  systems  has  already  been  highlighted.  These  delays,  coupled  with  the
56

unjustified Rule, i.e., not permitting counting of postal votes that reach after 8 A.M.
results in declaring the votes cast as invalid and thereby deprives the Service voters
in participating in the democratic process. 
38. Questioned on the justification for taking up counting of Postal Ballots at first,
the representatives of Election Commission of India informed that this was perhaps,
being a small number, it may have been felt in the beginning to be appropriate to take
up this task at first. However, as there has been an upward rise of trend in the number
of Postal Ballots, it is now taking a substantial time. It has also been admitted that the
Rules can be amended to provide for simultaneous counting of the postal and the
general ballots; and that the ECI would make a recommendation to the Law Ministry
for carrying out necessary amendments to this effect in the Rules. 
39. The Committee find it to be intriguing  that although there has been a manifold
increase in the number of Servicemen, in the last 34 years, i.e., since 1952, the Rule
providing for counting of postal votes of the Servicemen at first – which lacks sound
reason or rationale - has not been amended. On the other hand, in countries like
United States of America, the Postal Ballots are accepted up to 15 days after the
completion  of  voting,  and  the  votes  cast  are  counted.  Therefore,  the  Committee
strongly urge upon the ECI and Law Commission to bring in necessary changes in the
Rules at the earliest to do away with the stipulation of taking up Postal Ballots for
counting at first. And  enable for simultaneous counting of the Postal Ballots and
general votes.  The Committee also feel that there is a need for bringing in an element
of flexibility in the ‘time bar’ presently applicable for receipt of Postal Ballots. 
Electronic Voting System 
40. The Committee feel seriously concerned to note that approximately 90per cent
of the Service Personnel are denied the right to exercise their franchise owing to the
inadequacies of the Postal Ballot system.  This is mainly on account of the 14 day
time stipulation for dispatching and returning  the ballot papers, i.e., the time period
between the last date for withdrawal of candidature and the date of election. In most
cases, the Service Personnel do not receive the Postal Ballot papers on time, or even
57

if they receive them, the completed ballot papers do not reach back the R.O. on time,
thereby impacting the exercise of franchise. Therefore, the Committee strongly feel
that reforming the Postal Ballot system is an immediate necessity. 
Logically, the  solution  to  the  inadequacies  of  Postal Balloting  would  come
through  an  e-technology  enabled  means,  i.e.,  an      
e-Portal, which can do away with multiple layers of papers being printed, forwarded,
receipted, collated and sent back to the Returning Officer. The Defence Secretary too,
while tendering  evidence  opined that in the era of rapid advances  in information
technology, a solution can surely be found through a combination of technology and
procedural changes in the law.  In short, the means for overcoming the limitations and
challenges posed by Postal Balloting would be in switching over to ‘e-ballot papers’
and ‘e-voting’.
41. The Committee have also been apprised by the representatives of the ECI that
they had initiated work on developing ‘e-Postal Ballot’ as the first step or prelude to
the switch-over to, or initiation of ‘e-voting’. The software and tools for facilitating
transmission and receipt back of Postal Ballots electronically was being developed
under the supervision of a Committee. As informed, the Commission would be ready
to roll out the system in a few months time following the amendments to the rules. 
42. The Committee have also been informed that the Services preferred a system
whereby the Postal Ballots  could  be, instead of  being  transmitted directly to the
Service Member, transferred in bulk to the unit officers, who would download them.
The  Unit  Officers  (UOs)  could  be  designated  as  the  AROs  (Assistant  Returning
Officers)  and  be  responsible  for  issuing  the  downloaded  ballot  papers  to  the
individual  Service  members,  who would,  in  turn,   transmit  them  back  to  the  RO
concerned by speed post. The technology to enable this bulk transfer, downloading
and transmission is being developed by C-DAC. As informed, the process of testing
and developing the system, including the field trials would take a few months to be
completed.  The plan is to try out and test the system in a couple of by-elections
before rolling it out as a practice in all the elections.  It is, however, essential to have
the  rules  amended  before  trying  out  the  system.   As  for  the  current  stage  of
58

developing the system, as per the information furnished, the Commission was in the
process of examining whether or not the UO could be appointed as an Assistant
Returning Officer. 
43. As  regards the issue of amendments needed in the electoral laws/rules, for
facilitating ‘e-voting’, as informed, the Commission had moved a proposal to this
effect with the Ministry of Law and Justice. On the current status of the matter, as
informed by the Ministry of Law and Justice, a Cabinet note has been readied and an
advance copy thereof sent to the PMO. However, the PMO has, in turn, suggested that
domestic migrant laborers too needed to be extended the facility of ‘e-voting’.  For the
purpose of assessing the matter, a Committee of Ministers had been appointed.  
59

44. The Committee felt anguished over the merger of the issue  of Service Voters
with that of the migrant workers.  The  Committee were  of the unanimous view on the
need for  urgently  introducing  the  `e-balloting  system’  to the  `Service’ personnel
without associating  the matter with other issues. During the oral evidence of the
representatives of Election Commission of India, Ministry of Defence  and Ministry of
Law & Justice, the Committee were apprised that on 29  September, 2016, a decision
was taken to de-link the issue of Migrant Labourers and `Service’  personnel.  The
Committee persistently took up the issue to bring out an executive order to this effect.
As  a consequence, the  necessary amendment was made to the Conduct of
Election Rules, 1961 and notified in the Gazette of India  on 21 st    October, 2016.
Finally, the core issue of introducing e-postal ballot system has been addressed. 
45. The Committee note that the following areas/issues need to be sorted  out at
present by the Ministry of Defence in consultation  with the Election Commission of
India(ECI).
(a) To reduce the size of e-postal ballot files by the Election Commission of India
to permit easy downloading even where internet    data transfer speeds are
marginal.
(b) To finalise the Standing Operating Procedure(SOP) for on-line registration and
one  way  e-movement  of  postal  ballot  for  effective  implementation  of  the
System.
(c ) To devise and promulgation of unique service  numbers  for service voters, so
as to provide these unique  numbers to voters after successful registration’. 
46. The Committee desire that immediate steps  should be taken to remove the
above bottlenecks and they may be informed accordingly.
60

47.  The E-Postal balloting was implemented in the bye-election held in Nellithope
Assembly   (Puducherry)  on  19 th November,  2016.   The  Committee  welcome  this
historic step. However, they desire to be informed about the number of Service Voters
in the constituency,  number  of E-ballot  papers transmitted to the Unit, time taken to
download the  ballot papers, time taken in the return  journey from the Unit office to
the  RO concerned,  actual number of votes cast, actual number of valid/invalid votes
and the reasons for the invalidation  of votes etc.
 
  NEW DELHI;                MAJ GEN B C KHANDURI, AVSM(RETD),
    5  December, 2016                         Chairperson,
  14 Agrahayana, 1938 (Saka)                     Standing Committee on Defence
61

STANDING COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE 
MINUTES OF THE ELEVENTH SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE  
ON DEFENCE (2014-15)
The Committee sat on Friday, the 13 th February, 2015 from 1100 hrs. to 1245
hrs. in Main Committee Room, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
PRESENT
MAJ GEN B C KHANDURI AVSM (RETD)       - CHAIRPERSON
MEMBERS
LOK SABHA
2. Shri Dharambir
3. Shri Thupstan Chhewang
4. Shri H.D. Devegowda
5. Shri Sher Singh Ghubaya
6. Shri G. Hari
7. Shri Ramesh Jigaginagi
8. Shri Vinod Khanna
9. Dr. Mriganka Mehato
10. Shri Tapas Paul
11. Smt. Mala Rajya Laxmi Shah 
         RAJYA SABHA
12. Shri Rajeev Chandrasekhar
13. Shri Harivansh
14. Shri Vinay Katiyar
15. Shri Madhusudan Mistry
16. Smt. Ambika Soni
SECRETARIAT
1. Shri P.K. Misra - Additional Secretary
2. Shri D.S. Malha - Director
3. Shri Lovekesh Kumar Sharma - Additional Director 
4. Shri Rahul Singh - Under Secretary
62

WITNESSES
REPRESENTATIVES FROM THE MINISTRY OF DEFENCE
Sl. 
No.
Name                                                      Designation 
1 Shri Ravikant           -          Additional Secretary
2 Shri Himanshu Kumar     - Joint Secretary
3 Lt Gen Philip Campose - Vice Chief of Army Staff
4 Lt Gen Rakesh Sharma -  Adjutant General
5 Maj Gen Sanjiv Varma                  -           ADG Personnel Services
6 Col Charanjeev Manju -  Director PS-2
7 V Adm P Murugesan -  Chief of Personnel, Navy
8 R Adm P Ashokan -  ACPS
9 Cmde Atul Kumar -  PDPS
10 V Adm HCS Bisht -  DG, Indian Coast Guard
11 IG K C Pande -  DDG (HRD)
12 Air Marshal H B Rajaram,  AVSM, VSM
13 Air Vice Marshal P R Sinha, VSM
REPRESENTATIVES FROM THE MINISTRY OF HOME AFFAIRS 
Sl. 
No.
Name  Designation 
1 Shri Shailesh     - Joint Secretary
2 Shri Dinesh Mahur -  Director (Pers)
REPRESENTATIVES FROM THE MINISTRY OF LAW & JUSTICE
 Sl. 
No.
Name Designation 
1 Dr. Reeta Vasishta -  Joint Secretary & Legislative Counsel
l
REPRESENTATIVES FROM THE ELECTION COMMISSION OF INDIA
Sl. 
No.
Name  Designation 
1 Shri S.K. Mendiratta -  Legal Advisor
2 Shri Sudhir Tripathi -  Deputy Election Commissioner
3 Shri V.N. Shukla -  Director (IT)
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members and representatives of the
Ministry  of  Defence,  Ministry  of  Home  Affairs,  Ministry  of  Law  &  Justice  and  Election
Commission of India to the sitting of the Committee and drew their attention to Direction
55(1)  of  the  Directions  by  the  Speaker,  Lok  Sabha  regarding  confidentiality  of   the
63

Committee's  proceedings.  The  Chairperson  initiated  the  discussion  and  requested  the
representatives of the Ministry of Defence and other stakeholders to brief the Committee on
the existing system, its major lacuna and methodology of overcoming the problem to the
extent possible.  
3. After the witnesses  introduced themselves, the representatives of the Ministry of
Defence gave a power point presentation on the subject.  The Committee had detailed
deliberations on the various issues in the context which include sanctity of order of Election
Commission  for  creating  a  separate  category  of  voters  comparing  of  Armed  Forces
personnel and their families without Parliamentary sanction, simplification of existing postal
ballot system, introduction of electronic voting to avoid unnecessary hurdles and delays, etc.
4. The representatives of the Ministry of Defence and Election Commission of India
responded to the queries raised by the Members during the deliberations.  As regards, the
points on which the representatives could not readily respond, they promised to furnish
written information at the earliest.
5. The  Chairperson,  thereafter,  thanked  the  witnesses  for  appearing  before  the
Committee as well as for furnishing the valuable  information to the Committee. 
A copy of verbatim record of the proceedings has been kept.
The Committee then adjourned.
64

STANDING COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE 
MINUTES OF THE EIGHTEENTH SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE  
ON DEFENCE (2014-15)
The Committee sat on Wednesday, the 08 th July, 2015 from 1100 hrs. to 1230 hrs. in
Committee Room, 'D'  Parliament  House  Annexe, New Delhi.
PRESENT
MAJ GEN B C KHANDURI AVSM (RETD)       - CHAIRPERSON
MEMBERS
LOK SABHA
2 Shri Suresh C Angadi 
3 Shri Dharambir
4 Col Sonaram Choudhary (Retd)
5 Smt Pratyusha Rajeshwari Singh
6 Shri H D Devegowda
7 Shri Sher Singh Ghubaya
8 Shri G Hari
9 Shri Ramesh Jigaginagi
10 Shri Vinod Khanna
11 Dr Mriganka Mahato
12 Shri Tapas Paul
13 Smt  Malla Reddy
14 Shri A P Jithender  Reddy
         RAJYA SABHA
15 Shri Rajeev Chandrasekhar
16 Shri Harivansh
17 Shri Vinay Katiyar
18 Shri Hishey Lachungpa
19 Shri Madhusudan Mistry
20 Smt Ambika Soni
21 Shri Tarun Vijay
SECRETARIAT
1. Shri D S Malha - Director
2. Shri A K Srivastava - Additional Director 
3. Shri Rahul Singh - Under Secretary
65

WITNESSES
REPRESENTATIVES FROM THE MINISTRY OF DEFENCE
Sl. 
No.
Name                                                      Designation 
1 Shri G Mohan Kumar                   -          Defence Secretary
2 Shri Ravikant                   -          Additional Secretary
3 Shri Suresh Kumar                       -         JS (E)
4 Shri UK Tiwary                             -          Director AG-II  
5 Lt Gen Rakesh Sharma           -         Adjutant General
6 Brig Sanjay Singh                         -         Offg ADG PS 
7 Col S Banerjee                             -         Dir. PS 2
8 V Adm HCS Bisht           -         DG, Indian Coast Guard
9 IG KC Pande           -         DDG (HRD)
10 V Adm P Murugesan           -         Chief of Personnel, Navy
11 V Adm AK Jain                             -         CPS
12 Cmde Atul Kumar           -         PDPS
13 Air Marshal BBP Sinha                 -         Air Officer In-charge 
14 Gp Capt A Chaturvedi                  -         Dir. Personal Serviced 
REPRESENTATIVE FROM THE MINISTRY OF HOME AFFAIRS 
Name  Designation 
Shri Shailesh     - Joint Secretary (P-II)
REPRESENTATIVE FROM THE MINISTRY OF LAW & JUSTICE
 Name Designation 
Dr. Mulkulita Vijaywargiya            -         Additional Secretary 
REPRESENTATIVES FROM THE ELECTION COMMISSION OF INDIA
Sl. 
No.
Name  Designation 
1 Shri Sudhir Tripathy - Deputy Election Commissioner 
2 Shri Umesh Sinha - Deputy Election Commissioner
3 Shri VN Shukla - Director (IT)
4 Shri RK Srivastava             -          Principal Secretary
5 Shri KF Wilfred                   -          Principal Secretary
6 Shri NN Butolia                   -         Secretary
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members and representatives of the
Ministry  of  Defence,  Ministry  of  Home  Affairs,  Ministry  of  Law  &  Justice  and  Election
66

Commission of India to the sitting of the Committee and drew their attention to Direction
55(1)  of  the  Directions  by  the  Speaker,  Lok  Sabha  regarding  confidentiality  of   the
Committee's  proceedings.  The  Chairperson  initiated  the  discussion  and  requested  the
representatives of the Ministry of Defence and Election Commission of India to brief the
Committee  on  the  existing  system,  improvements  that  can  be  made  by  the  Election
Commission of India and the Ministry of Defence so that more number of Armed Forces
Personnel can contribute in general elections.  
3. After the witnesses  introduced themselves, the representatives of the Ministry of
Defence gave a power point presentation on the subject.  The Committee had detailed
deliberations on the various issues in the context which include switching over to e-ballot
and e-voter from postal ballot in order to overcome the challenges posed by limited time and
distance, reason of having two categories of voters; updating of names, location, list of
service voters in the Record Office; and steps being taken to increase number of service
voters  allowing campaigning inside the cantonments, etc.
4. The representatives of the Ministry of Defence and Election Commission of India
responded to the queries raised by the Members during the deliberations.  As regards, the
points on which the representatives could not readily respond, they promised to furnish
written information at the earliest.
5. The  Chairperson,  thereafter,  thanked  the  witnesses  for  appearing  before  the
Committee as well as for furnishing the valuable  information to the Committee. 
A copy of verbatim record of the proceedings has been kept.
The Committee then adjourned.
*******
67

STANDING COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE
MINUTES OF THE SECOND SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE  
ON DEFENCE (2015-16)
The Committee sat on Friday, the 9th October, 2015  from 1100 hrs. to 1220 hrs. in
Main Committee Room, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
PRESENT
MAJ GEN B C KHANDURI AVSM (RETD)       - CHAIRPERSON
   MEMBERS
     LOK SABHA
2. Shri  Shrirang Appa Barne
3. Col   Sonaram Choudhary(Retd)
4. Shri  H D Devegowda
5. Shri  Sher Singh Ghubaya
6. Shri  G Hari 
7. Shri  Ramesh Jigajinagi
8. Smt  Mala Rajya Lakshmi Shah
9. Smt  Pratyusha Rajeshwari Singh
                  RAJYA SABHA
10. Shri  A U Singh Deo
11. Shri  Vinay Katiyar
12. Shri  Madhusudan Mistry
13. Smt  Ambika Soni
SECRETARIAT
1. Smt  Kalpana Sharma - Joint Secretary
2. Shri D S Malha  - Director 
3. Shri Rahul Singh - Under Secretary
68

WITNESSES
REPRESENTATIVES OF THE MINISTRY OF DEFENCE
69
Sl.No Name of Officer    Designation
1. Shri G Mohan Kumar Defence Secretary
2. Shri Ravi Kant Addl Secretary
3. Shri Ashok Dongre Joint Secretary
4. Shri U K Tiwary Dir. AG-II
5. Lt Gen Rakesh  Sharma Adjutant General of Indian Army
6. Maj Gen Gopal R, SM,  ADG PS
7. Brig Sanjay Singh, DDG PS 
8. Col S Banerjee, Dir PS 2
9. Col S S Pundir SO to AG
10. Vice Adm HCS Bisht DG ICG
11. IG KC Pande DDG (HRD)
12. V Adm A R Karve COP
13. V Adm A K Jain CPS
14. Cmde Atul Kumar PDPS
15. Air Marshal BBP Sinha Air Officer In-charge administration
16. Gp Capt A Chaturvedi Dir Personnel Service
REPRESENTATIVES OF ELECTION COMMISSION OF INDIA
S.No Name of Officer    Designation
1. Shri Umesh Sinha Deputy Election Commission
2. Shri S K Mehendiratta Legal Advisor
3. Shri V N Shukla Director (IT)
4. Shri K F Wilfred Principal Secretary
5. Shri N N Butolia Secretary
REPRESENTATIVES OF MINISTRY OF HOME AFFAIRS
Name of Officer    Designation
Shri Dinesh Mahur Director (Police - II)

2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members of the Committee to the
Sitting  convened  for  examination  the  Subject  `Proxy  and  postal  voting  by  Defence
Services Personnel in General Election - An Evaluation'. Thereafter, the representatives
of the Ministry of Defence, the Election Commission of India  and the Ministry of Home
Affairs  were  ushered  in.   After  welcoming  the  representatives  to  the  Sitting  of  the
Committee,  the  Chairperson  drew  their  attention  to  Directions  55(1)   and  58  of  the
Directions by the Speaker, Lok Sabha regarding confidentiality of proceedings.  The
Chairperson initiated the discussion and  conveyed the displeasure of the Committee
over the vague replies received from the Ministry of Defence to the List of Points on the
subject.
3. The  representatives  of  Ministry  of  Defence  through  Power  Point  Presentation
apprised the Committee about the new system proposed by them to shorten the time period
of postal voting by introducing e-postal vote. 
4. Thereafter,  the  Committee  inter-alia  discussed   several  issues/points  as  briefly
mentioned below and sought clarifications/information from the  Ministry of Defence, the
Election Commission of India  and the Ministry of Home Affairs:
I. Reasons behind delay in receiving postal votes.
II. Need to take steps to improve efficiency of Postal Ballot Service.
III. Different  practices  of voting  e.g.  e-voting  and  internet voting  in   other
countries.
IV. Acceptance of votes even 15 days after the voting.
V. Importance of counting all the postal votes received in view of wafer-thin
margin deciding  the fate of candidates. 
VI. Non-popularity of proxy voting among the Services.
VII. Inclination of the service voters to vote for their domicile candidates.
VIII. Need to change the rules for making postal votes  countable  even after
commencement of counting.
IX. Need to evolve a system in the Army so that battle exercises do not take
place on election day.
70

X. Early  registration  of  troops  in  coordination  with  Armed  Forces  HQs  to
prepare electoral list. 
XI. Need to take steps to improve efficiency of Army Postal Service.
XII. Need to educate Service Voters after changes are made in the system. 
XIII. Appointment of Unit Nodal Officer for election purpose.
XIV. Need to improve the System of postal voting so  that  the rate of rejection
come down.
XV. Need to remove bottlenecks in Record Office to make  the system quick
and effective.
5. The representatives of the Ministry responded to the queries raised by the Members
during the deliberations.  As regards, the points on which the representatives could not
readily respond, they promised to furnish written information at the earliest.
The witnesses then withdrew
6. A copy of verbatim record of the proceedings has been kept.
The Committee then adjourned.
71

STANDING COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE 
MINUTES OF THE THIRD  SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE  
ON DEFENCE (2015-16)
The Committee sat on Friday, the 27th  October, 2015  from 1100 hrs. to 1205 hrs. in
Main Committee Room, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
PRESENT
MAJ GEN B C KHANDURI AVSM (RETD)       - CHAIRPERSON
LOK SABHA
2. Shri Dharambir 
3. Shri Thupstan Chhewang
4. Smt  Pratyusha Rajeshwari Singh
5. Shri H D  Devegowda
6. Shri Sher Singh Ghubaya
7. Shri G  Hari
8. Shri Ramesh Jigajinagi
9. Km  Shobha Karandlaje
10. Shri Tapas Paul
11. Shri  C H Malla Reddy
12. Shri Rajeev Satav
13. Shri A P Jithender Reddy
RAJYA SABHA
14. Shri Anand Sharma
15. Shri A  U Singh Deo
16. Shri Vinay Katiyar 
17. Shri Madhusudan Mistry
18 Smt  Ambika Soni
19. Shri Tarun Vijay
SECRETARIAT
1. Smt  Kalpana Sharma - Joint Secretary
2. Shri D S Malha  - Director 
3. Shri Rahul Singh - Under Secretary
72

WITNESSES
REPRESENTATIVES OF THE MINISTRY OF DEFENCE
S.NO NAME OF OFFICER DESIGNATION
1. Shri Ashok Dongre Joint Secretary
2. Lt Gen Rakesh Sharma DG (MP & PS) Indian Army
3. Maj Gen Gopal R SM,  ADG PS
4. Brig Sanjay Singh DDG PS (B)
5. Col S Banerjee Dir PS 2
NAVY
1. Cdr  Atul Kumar 
2. Capt RK Yadav
AIR FORCE
1. Gp Capt A Chaturvedi Dir. Personal Service
2. Gp Capt. Arvind Luther Joint DPS
REPRESENTATIVES OF ELECTION COMMISSION OF INDIA
S.NO NAME OF OFFICER DESIGNATION
1.      Shri Sudeep Jain Director General
2.      Shri V N Shukla Director (IT)
3.      Shri K F Wilfred Principal Secretary
4.      Shri S K Mendiratta Legal Advisor
REPRESENTATIVES OF MINISTRY OF LAW AND JUSTICE
S.NO NAME OF OFFICER DESIGNATION
1.      Shri N R Battu JS & LS 
2.      Shri Jose Thomas Director (P)
73

2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members of the Committee to the
Sitting convened for examination the Subject `Proxy and postal voting by Defence Services
Personnel  in  General  Election  -  An  Evaluation'.  Thereafter, the  representatives  of  the
Ministry of Defence, the Election Commission of India  and the Ministry of Law and Justice
were ushered in.  After welcoming the representatives to the Sitting of the Committee, the
Chairperson  drew  their  attention  to  Directions  55(1)   and  58  of  the  Directions  by  the
Speaker, Lok Sabha regarding confidentiality of proceedings.  
3. After  the  witness  introduced  themselves,  the  Chairperson  and  Members  of  the
Committee  raised  several  issues/points  as  briefly  mentioned  below  and  sought
clarifications/information from the Ministry of Defence, the Election Commission of India and
the Ministry of Home Affairs thereon:
i. Steps taken by the Election Commission of India through C-DAC in developing
the  technology  for  transmission  of  postal  ballots  electronically  from  the
Returning Officer to the individual Service voter.
ii. Need for Speed Post based system for early receipt of ballots papers.
iii. Need for developing  the technology for bulk transfer and bulk downloading of
postal ballots.
iv. Details regarding date, timelines drawn etc, where  Election Commission of
India approached the C-DAC for developing the technology and start of the
trials.
v. Assistance required by the Election Commission of India from the stakeholders
to facilitate the trials and difficulties  so experienced.
vi.  Issues related to appointment of Unit Officer as an ARO. 
vii. Need  for  regular updation about the progress made by the Commission in the
implementation of the technology in question to the Committee.
viii. Reach of political parties inside cantonments during campaigning.
ix. Time taken and process followed before moving a Bill for amendments.
x. Supreme Court Judgment reg. NRI vs. proxy voting by Defence Personnel. 
xi. Fixing dead line or time limit for implementing Proxy and postal voting. 
4. The representatives of the Ministry  of the Defence, Election Commission of India and
Ministry of Law and Justice responded to the queries raised by the Members during the
74

deliberations.   As  regards,  the  points  on  which  the  representatives  could  not  readily
respond, they promised to furnish written information thereon  at the earliest.
The witnesses then withdrew
5. A copy of verbatim record of the proceedings has been kept.
The Committee then adjourned.
.
75

STANDING COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE 
MINUTES OF THE NINETEENTH SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON
DEFENCE (2015-16)
The Committee sat on Wednesday, the 24 th August, 2016 from 1100 hrs. to
1230 hrs. in Main Committee Room, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.  
PRESENT
Maj Gen B C Khanduri, AVSM (Retd) - Chairperson
LOK SABHA
2. Shri Suresh C Angadi
3. Shri Dharambir 
4. Shri G Hari
5. Smt Pratyusha Rajeshwari Singh
6. Shri H D Devegowda
7. Shri Rajeev Satav
8. Shri Vinod Khanna
9. Shri Sher Singh Ghubaya
10. Shri C H Malla Reddy
11. Shri Thupstan Chhewang
                                   RAJYA SABHA
12. Shri Rajeev Chandrasekhar
13. Shri Harivansh
14. Shri Vinay Katiyar
15. Shri Madhusudan Mistry
16. Shri Anand Sharma
17. Shri Om Prakash Mathur
 SECRETARIAT
1. Smt  Kalpana Sharma - Joint Secretary
2. Shri T G Chandrasekhar - Director
3. Smt  Jyochnamayi Sinha - Additional Director
4. Shri Rahul Singh -  Under Secretary
76

WITNESSES
77
S.No Name of Officer Designation
MINISTRY OF DEFENCE
1 Shri G Mohan Kumar Defence Secretary 
2 Shri Suresh Kumar Addl Secretary
3 Shri M Subbarayan JS(PG/Coord)
Army
4 Lt Gen Rakesh
 Sharma 
Adjutant General
5 Maj Gen Gopal R  ADG PS
6 Brig Sanjay Singh DDG PS
Navy
7 V Adm Anil Kumar 
Chawla
Chief of Personnel
8 RAdm K K Pandey ACPS
9 Cmde Atul Kumar PDPS
Air Force
10 Air Marshal M K Malik Air Officer In-charge 
Administration
11 AVM S K Dey ACAS(P&D)
12 Gp Capt T N Pandey Dir Personal Services
Indian Coast Guard
13 Rajendra Singh DG ICG
14 N K Paul DIG PD (Pers)
15 J Singh DIG D (Pers)
MINISTRY OF LAW & JUSTICE
16 Dr Reeta Vasishta Additional Secretary
17 Shri K K Saxena Deputy Secretary
18 Shri Jose Thomas Consultant
ELECTION COMMISSION OF INDIA 
19 Sandeep Saxena Deputy Election Commissioner
20 Vijay Kumar Pandey Director
21 VN Shukla Director

At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members of the Committee to the
Sitting convened to obtain oral evidence of the representatives of the Ministry of Defence,
Ministry of Law and Justice and the Election Commission of India on the progress in regard
to 'E-Postal Ballot' in connection with the examination of the Subject, `Proxy and Postal
Voting by Defence Services Personnel in General Elections - An Evaluation'. The Committee
then invited representatives of the Ministry of Defence, including representatives of Army,
Indian  Coast  Guard,  Navy  &  Air  Force,  the  Ministry  of  Law  &  Justice  and  Election
Commission of India. The Chairperson drew their attention to Directions 55(1) and 58 of the
Directions by the Speaker, Lok Sabha regarding confidentiality of proceedings.  
2. After the witnesses  introduced themselves, the representatives of the Ministry of
Defence, Ministry of Law & Justice and the Election Commission of India  briefed the
Committee  on the following issues:-
i.  The data relating to Service Voters in Army being handed over to the Election
Commission of India for mock drill of 'E-Postal Ballot';
ii. The delay in the development of  'E-Postal Voting System' was due to Security
issues;
iii. Alpha numeric code has been developed and identified to resolve the Security
issues;
iv. Trial of 'E-Postal Ballot' has been started w.e.f. 23 August, 2016. Indian Coast
Guard has been selected for the trials due to its small strength of voters;
v. Precise date for implementation of trials in a General Election is still to be
determined.
78

3. The Chairperson and Members of the Committee raised the following issues/points
as briefly mentioned below and sought clarifications/information from the representatives:
(i) For delinking the issue of migrant labour and overseas voters with that of Service
Personnel and bringing in the amendments required in the Representation of the People Act
for facilitating ‘e-postal balloting system’;
(ii) Need for developing a technologically viable system of ‘e-balloting’ that would ensure
timely transmission of the ballot papers for counting; etc.
(iii) Need  for  fixing  time  frame  for  completion  of  trials  of  the  newly  developed  'E-
Postal Ballot System'.
4.  The representatives of the Ministry of the Defence, Ministry of Law & Justice and the
Election Commission of India then responded to the queries raised by the Members. The
Chairperson directed the representatives of the Ministry to furnish written replies/information
on the points raised by the Members, which was assured by the representatives.
5. A copy of verbatim record of the proceedings has been kept.
******
79

STANDING COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE
MINUTES OF THE SECOND SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE  
ON DEFENCE (2016-17)
The Committee sat on Friday, the 14 th October, 2016 from 1100 hrs. to 1245 hrs. in
Main Committee Room, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
PRESENT
MAJ GEN B C KHANDURI AVSM (RETD)       - CHAIRPERSON
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Dharambir
3. Shri Thupstan Chhewang
4. Shri H.D. Devegowda
5. Shri Sher Singh Ghubaya
6. Shri G. Hari
7. Shri Rodmal Nagar
8. Shri Vinod Khanna
9. Dr. Mriganka Mehato
10. Shri Shri Suresh C Angadi
11. Smt. Mala Rajya Laxmi Shah 
12. Shri Shrirang Appa Barne
13. Col Sonaram Choudhary(Retd)
14. Km Shobha Karandlaje
15. Shri A P Jithender Reddy
16. Shri Ch Malla Reddy
17. Shri Rajeev Shankarrao Satav
      Rajya Sabha
18. Shri Rajeev Chandrasekhar
19. Shri A U Singh Deo
20. Shri Harivansh
21. Shri Madhusudan Mistry
22. Smt. Ambika Soni
23. Shri Sanjay Raut
24. Dr Subramanian Swamy
SECRETARIAT
1. Smt. Kalpana Sharma  - Joint Secretary 
2. Smt. Jyochnamayi Sinha - Additional Director 
3. Shri Rahul Singh - Under Secretary
80

LIST OF WITNESS
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members and representatives of the
Ministry of Defence and Services to  the Sitting of the Committee. The Chairperson drew
their attention to Directions 55(1)  and  58 of the  Directions  by the Speaker, Lok  Sabha
regarding  confidentiality  of  proceedings.   Thereafter, the  Vice-chief  of  Army  briefed  the
Committee on the surgical strike carried out by Indian Defence Forces on  29.09.2016 across
the Line of Control.
3. Afterward, the representatives of Ministry of Law & Justice and Election Commission
of India were invited to the sitting of the Committee. The Chairperson drew their attention to
Directions 55(1) and 58 of the Directions by the Speaker, Lok Sabha regarding confidentiality
of proceedings.  The representatives of the Ministry of Defence and other stakeholders were
requested  to  brief the  Committee  on  the  progress  made  with  regard  to  'E-postal  ballot
system'  in  connection  with  the  examination  of  the  subject  'Proxy  and  Postal  Voting  by
Defence Services Personnel in General Elections - An Evaluation'.
81
S.No Name of Officer Designation
Ministry of Defence
1 Shri G Mohan Kumar Defence Secretary 
2 Shri Ravindra Panwar Addl Secretary
3 Lt Gen Bipin Rawat VCOAS
4 Lt Gen Rakesh  Sharma Adjutant General
5 V Adm Anil Kumar Chawla Chief of Personnel
6 Air Marshal M K Malik Air Officer In-charge Adm
7 Shri VSR Murthy ICG
8 Shri V. Anandarajan Joint Secretary(E)
   Ministry of Law & Justice 
9 Dr G Narayana Raju Secretary
10 Dr Reeta Vasishta Additional Secretary
Election Commission of India 
11 Sandeep Saxena Deputy Election Commissioner
12 Shri S K  Mendiratta Legal Advisor
13 Shri K F Wilfred Principal Secretary
14 Shri V N  Shukla Director(IT)

4. The representatives of the Ministry of Defence gave a Power Point Presentation on
the subject.  The Committee had detailed deliberations on various issues in the context
which included: -
(i) progress made in connection with provision of law delinking  migrant labourer 
from service voters. In this connection, draft notification was ready and sent to 
Election Commission for their confirmation;   
(ii) differentiation of service voter from general voter;
(iii) methodology of overcoming the problem of excessive  time taken in passage 
of postal ballot from remote areas to the counting table;
(iv) ongoing development of software to establish direct communication between 
Record Offices and Election Commission;  
(v) creations of new systems under which the Election Commission puts the votes
into a cloud where it is downloaded at the units themselves and thereby one 
side of travel of the vote is cut out;
          (vi)  the  ongoing  process  of  online  registration  of  the  Service  Voter  so  that  
there are clear footprints available about the Record Office and the Unit Office 
which will be downloading the form. Accordingly, the Pin and OTP are to be 
sent to  those officers who are authorised by the Ministry of Defence in each of
the Service to download these applications;  
(vii) choosing  a difficult station for trial run of e-postal ballot;
(viii) determination of precise date for implementation of e-postal ballot in  General 
Elections. etc.
5. The representatives of the Ministry of Defence, Ministry of Law & Justice and Election
Commission  of  India  responded  to  the  queries  raised  by  the  Members  during  the
deliberations.   As  regards,  the  points  on  which  the  representatives  could  not  readily
respond, they promised to furnish written information at the earliest.
A copy of verbatim record of the proceedings has been kept.
The Committee then adjourned.
82

*******
83

STANDING COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE 
MINUTES OF THE THIRD  SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE  
ON DEFENCE (2016-17)
The Committee sat on Monday, the 7th, November, 2016  from 1100 hrs. to 1200 hrs.
in Committee Room`C', Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
PRESENT
MAJ GEN B C KHANDURI AVSM (RETD)       - CHAIRPERSON
   MEMBERS
     LOK SABHA
2. Shri Dipak Adhikari (Dev)
3. Shri Suresh C Angadi
4. Shri Shrirang Appa Barne
5. Shri Thupstan Chhewang
6. Col Sonaram Choudhary(Retd)
7. Shri Sher Singh Ghubaya
8. Shri G Hari 
9. Shri Vinod Khanna
10. Shri Rodmal Nagar
11. Shri Ch Malla Reddy
12. Shri Rajeev Shankarrao Satav
13. Smt Mala Rajya Lakshmi Shah
14. Smt Pratyusha Rajeshwari Singh
RAJYA SABHA
15. Shri Rajeev Chandrasekhar
16. Shri Praful Patel
17. Shri Sanjay Raut
18. Dr Subramanian Swamy
SECRETARIAT
1. Smt Kalpana Sharma  - Joint Secretary 
2. Shri T G Chandrasekhar - Director 
3. Smt Jyochnamayi Sinha - Additional Director 
4. Shri Rahul Singh - Under Secretary
84

LIST OF WITNESSESS
85
S.NO NAME OF OFFICER DESIGNATION
MINISTRY OF DEFENCE
1 Shri G Mohan Kumar Defence Secretary 
2 Shri Ravindra Panwar Addl Secretary
3 Lt Gen Rakesh  Sharma Adjutant General
4 V Adm Anil Kumar Chawla Chief of Personnel
5 Air Marshal M K Malik Air Officer In-charge Adm
6 Shri Rajendra Singh Director General ICG
7 Shri V. Anandarajan Joint Secretary(E)
8 Brig Sanjay Singh DDG PS
9 Shri K C Pande IG Indian Coast Guard
10 AVM S K Dey ACAS (P
11 Cmde Atul Kumar PDPS
MINISTRY OF LAW & JUSTICE (LEGISLATIVE DEPARTMENT ) 
Name of Officer Designation
Dr Reeta Vasishta Additional Secretary
ELECTION COMMISSION OF INDIA 
S.No Name of Officer Designation
1 Shri Sandeep Saxena Deputy Election Commissioner
2 Shri S K  Mendiratta Legal Advisor
3 Shri K F Wilfred Principal Secretary
4 Shri V N  Shukla Director(IT)

2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members and representatives of the
Ministry of Defence, Ministry of Law & Justice and Election Commission of India to the sitting
of the Committee. The Chairperson drew their attention to Directions 55(1) and 58 of the
Directions  by  the  Speaker,  Lok  Sabha  regarding  confidentiality  of  proceedings.   The
representatives of the Ministry of Defence and other stakeholders were requested to brief the
Committee on the progress made with regard to 'E-postal ballot system' in connection with
the examination of the subject 'Proxy and Postal Voting by Defence Services Personnel in
General Elections - An Evaluation'.
3. The representatives of the Ministry of Defence  through a power point presentation on
the subject briefed by the Committee on the following points which inter alia  include:- 
(i) Notification published in the Gazette of India on 21 October, 2016 to amend the
conduct of Election Rules 1961 for enabling electronic transmission of ballot papers of
Service Voters.
(ii) Coordination  meetings  with  Election  Commission  of  India  on  21  October  and  4
November 2016 to discuss about the implementation strategy.
(iii) Apex level conference  was  held  on 4 November, 2016    is discuss  the  revised
Standard Operative Procedure (SOP). 
(iv) The training of Record office Representatives by the Election Commission of India  to
be held on 23 November, 2016. 
(v) Commitment from dept of posts for delivery of cast ballots anywhere in the country in
a time span of 5 days.
(vi) Imperative to use existing database of Service Voter built over decades by cleaning
the same.
(vii)  Periodic updation  of Service Votes to ensure updated voters list  at all times. 
(viii) To educate the Service Voters. 
4.   The Committee had detailed deliberations on various issues in the context which
included: -
(i) Clear guidelines for canvassing inside the Cantonments;   
86

(ii) Beginning of new era in the Voting  as first electronically transmitted postal  
ballot uploaded by the RO of  17 Nellithope Assembly Constituency in the bye 
election ;
(iii) Provision of EPIC (Electors Photo Identity Card) number to the Service Voters;
(iv) Security aspect relating to the Server and e-Postal Ballot System;
(v) Sharing of details of proposed E-Postal Voting System run to be conducted on 
19 November, 2016 by the Ministry at in the Pondicherry Branch.
5. The Committee  welcomed the efforts made by the Ministry of Defence, Ministry of
Law & Justice and Election Commission of India, which resulted  in bringing out the Gazette
Notification  to  amend  the  Conduct  of  Election  Rules,  1961  for  enabling  electronic
transmission of ballot papers of Service Voters.
6. The representatives of the Ministry of Defence, Ministry of Law & Justice and Election
Commission  of  India  responded  to  the  queries  raised  by  the  Members  during  the
deliberations.   As  regards,  the  points  on  which  the  representatives  could  not  readily
respond, they promised to furnish written information at the earliest.
A copy of verbatim record of the proceedings has been kept.
The Committee then adjourned.
******
87

STANDING COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE 
MINUTES OF THE FOURTH SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE  ON 
DEFENCE (2016-17)
The Committee sat on Monday, the 5th December, 2016 from 1030 hrs. to 1100 hrs. in 
Room No. 62, Parliament House, New Delhi.
PRESENT
MAJ GEN B C KHANDURI AVSM (RETD)       - CHAIRPERSON
   MEMBERS
     LOK SABHA
2. Shri Shrirang Appa Barne
3. Shri Thupstan Chhewang
4. Km Shobha Karandlaje
5. Shri Rodmal Nagar
6. Shri AP Jithender Reddy
7. Shri Ch Malla Reddy
8. Shri Rajeev Satav
9. Smt Mala Rajya Lakshmi Shah
10. Shri Dharamveer
11. Smt Pratyusha Rajeshwari Singh
RAJYA SABHA
12. Dr Subramanian Swamy
SECRETARIAT
1. Smt Kalpana Sharma  - Joint Secretary 
2. Shri T G Chandrasekhar - Director 
3. Smt Jyochnamayi Sinha - Additional Director 
2. At  the  outset,  the  Chairperson  welcomed  the  Members  of  the  Committee  and
informed them about the agenda for the Sitting. The Committee then took up the draft
88

Report on 'Proxy and Postal Voting by Defence Services Personnel in General Elections-An
evaluation' for consideration and unanimously adopted the same. 
3. The  Chairperson  thanked  the  Members  for  their  valuable  contribution  and
congratulated them for their sincere efforts that led to the introduction of E-Postal Ballot
System for the Defence Services personnel. The Chairperson, on behalf of the Committee,
and on his own personal behalf expressed thanks to the Ministries concerned i.e. Ministries
of Defence and Law and Justice, and the Election Commission of India in particular for their
efforts towards bringing out the amendments in the Conduct of Election Rules enabling for
electronic  transmission  of  the  ballot  papers  of  Defence  Services  Personnel.  The
Chairperson opined that today is a historic day as the Service voter shall be able to exercise
his right to vote from now onwards.
4. The Members complimented the Chairperson for tirelessly pursuing the matter of
introducing  a  viable  method  for  the  Defence  Services  Personnel  in  exercising  their
franschise i.e. E-Postal Ballot System.
5. The Committee authorized the Chairperson to finalise and present the Report to
Parliament on a convenient date.
6. The Chairperson invited suggestions of the Members regarding the study visit of the
Committee and requested them to send their suggestions to the Secretariat at the earliest.
The Committee then adjourned.
*********
89