32
STANDING COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE
(2016-2017)
(SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA)
MINISTRY OF DEFENCE
CREATION OF NON-LAPSABLE CAPITAL FUND ACCOUNT, INSTEAD OF THE
PRESENT SYSTEM
THIRTY SECOND REPORT
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
August, 2017 / Shravana, 1939 (Saka) 

THIRTY SECOND REPORT
STANDING COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE
(2016-2017)
(SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA)
MINISTRY OF DEFENCE
CREATION OF NON-LAPSABLE CAPITAL FUND ACCOUNT, INSTEAD OF THE
PRESENT SYSTEM
Presented to Lok Sabha on 10 .08. 2017
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 09.08. 2017
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
August, 2017 / Shravana, 1939 (Saka) 


CONTENTS
                                            PAGE
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (2016-17)…………………………………………..
INTRODUCTION ………………………………………………………………………………..
   REPORT
      PART I                                           
                PART II
Observations/Recommendations      
APPENDICES
Minutes of the Sittings of the Standing Committee on Defence (2016-17) held on          
23.12.2016 and 02.08.2017………………………………………………

COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE (  2016-17  )
Maj Gen B C Khanduri, AVSM (Retd) - Chairperson
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Dipak Adhikari (Dev)
3. Shri Suresh C Angadi
4. Shri Shrirang Appa Barne
5. Shri Thupstan Chhewang
6. Col Sonaram Choudhary(Retd)
7. Shri H D Devegowda
8. Shri Sher Singh Ghubaya
9.* Shri B. Senguttuvan 
10. Dr Murli Manohar Joshi
11. Km Shobha Karandlaje
12.♦ Shri Vinod Khanna
13. Dr Mriganka Mahato
14. Shri Rodmal Nagar
15. Shri A P Jithender Reddy
16. Shri Ch Malla Reddy
17.+ Shri Rajeev Shankarrao Satav
18. Smt Mala Rajya Lakshmi Shah
19.# Shri Partha Pratim Ray
20. Shri Dharambir Singh
21. Smt Pratyusha Rajeshwari Singh
22.** Shri G Hari
23.$ Capt Amarinder Singh
24.♠ Shri Gaurav Gogoi
Rajya Sabha
1. Shri K R Arjunan
2. Shri A U Singh Deo
3. Shri Harivansh
4.^ Shri Rajeev Chandrasekhar
5. Shri Madhusudan Mistry
6. Shri Praful Patel
7. Shri Sanjay Raut
8. Dr Abhishek Manu Singhvi
9. Smt Ambika Soni
10. Dr Subramanian Swamy
11.@ Shri Om Prakash Mathur
* Nominated w.e.f on 13.02.2017
** Ceased to be Member of the Committee w.e.f. 13.02.2017
$ Ceased to be Member of the Committee w.e.f. 23.11.2016
# Nominated w.e.f. 02.01.2017
@ Ceased to be Member of the Committee w.e.f. 10.10.2016
^ Nominated w.e.f. 10.10.2016
♠ Nominated w.e.f. 28.03.2017
♦ Sad Demise of Member on 27.04.2017
+ Ceased to be Member of the Committee w.e.f. 28.03.2017

SECRETARIAT
1   Smt Kalpana Sharma - Joint Secretary
2 Shri T G Chandrasekhar  - Director
3 Smt Jyochnamayi Sinha - Additional Director
4 Smt Preeti Negi - Executive Assistant 

INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairperson of the Standing Committee on Defence (2016-17), having
been authorised by the Committee, present this Thirty-Second Report on 'Creation of
Non-Lapsable Capital Fund Account, instead of the present system'. 
2. The subject 'Creation of Non-Lapsable Capital Fund Account, instead of the
present  system'  was  selected  for  examination  during  the  year  2016-17.  The
Committee took evidence of the representatives of the Ministries of Defence and
Finance (Department of Economic Affairs) on 23 December, 2016. The draft Report
was considered and adopted by the Committee at their Sitting held on 2 August,
2017. 
3. The Committee wish to express their thanks to the officials of the Ministries of
Defence and Finance (Department of Economic Affairs) for appearing before the
Committee and furnishing the material and information which the Committee desired
in connection with examination of the subject. 
4. For facility of reference and convenience, Observations/Recommendations of the
Committee have been printed in bold letters in Part II of the Report. 
New Delhi;                     MAJ GEN B C KHANDURI, AVSM (RETD)
4 August, 2017                               Chairperson
13 Shravana, 1939(Saka)                                    Standing Committee on Defence

REPORT
PART I
Capital and Revenue segments are the main components of Defence Budget. Under
the Revenue segment, provision is first made for salary and other obligatory expenses. The
balance  allocation  available  is  distributed  to  meet  the  requirement  of  stores  (including
ordnance), transportation (of personnel and stores), revenue works and maintenance, etc.
Allocations are reviewed at the Revised Estimates stage to cater for requirements which
cannot  be  met  by  the  Budget  Estimates  allocations.  The  Capital  component  provides
allocation for Land and Construction Works of the three Services, capital expenditure of
various Defence Departments and for Capital acquisitions of the Services, etc.  In so far as
the Capital segment is concerned, funds are first set aside to meet the projected Committed
Liabilities that are likely to materialise during the year. The remaining allocation is distributed
to  meet  the  projected  requirement  for  other  items.  The  procurement  plan  for  Capital
modernization schemes may have to be reviewed and re-prioritized, based on available
funds.
2. The Committee, in their Reports presented to Parliament on earlier occasions on the subject
matter, recommended having Capital Budget as ‘Non Lapsable’ and ‘Roll on’.  Initially, the
Committee in their 19th Report (13th Lok Sabha-April 2003) had recommended that the funds
collected from the National Security Surcharge must be placed in a separate `Non Lapsable
Fund’ to be utilized by the Ministry of Defence for capital expenditure. In reply, Ministry of
Defence had, inter alia, stated after consulting the Ministry of Finance that creation of such a
fund would not only violate the extant financial rules but also not serve any purpose, besides
adding to the fiscal deficit. 
3. The issue was again raised in the 21 st Report (13 th Lok Sabha- December 2003) of the
Committee, the Ministry of Finance had agreed in December 2003 to creation and operation
of Non-lapsable fund. This was taken note by the Standing Committee in para 11 of its 21 st
Report, in reply to which MoD intimated the Committee in December 2003 that the detailed
accounting procedure had been drawn up for operationalising Defence Modernization Fund

and it had been forwarded to the Controller General of Accounts and Comptroller & Auditor
General and further action would be taken after their approval. 
4. While the process of getting approvals and opening of relevant accounting heads was
underway, the  then  Finance  Minister  announced  the  creation  of  Non-lapsable  Defence
Modernization Fund with a corpus of Rs. 25,000 crore in the Interim Budget speech of  
2004-05.  However, in the General Budget 2004-05, there was no provision made for the
said fund.  Therefore, with the approval of the then Defence Secretary, it was decided to not
to  pursue  the  proposal  further  for  opening  of  new  heads  of  account  required  for
implementation of the proposal. 
5. The issue was then raised by the Committee in their 1st Report (14th Lok Sabha-August
2004). The observations of the Committee were as under :
“The Committee note that during the last five years, i.e. from 1999-2000 to 2003-
2004,  substantial  allocations  amounting  to  Rs.  32,740.26  crore  for  Capital
expenditure has lapsed due to non fructification of the defence modernisation and
procurement  plans.  The  Committee  are  conscious  that  the  modernisation  of  the
Defence Services is a continuous process and the acquisition proposals which do not
or cannot fructify in a financial year are processed/finalised in subsequent years but
feel that the ritual of approaching the Ministry of Finance, every financial year, for re-
allocation of lapsed fund for the same project, is dilatory and completely redundant.
The Committee also feel that under-utilisation/non-utilisation of allocations do not
augur well for defence preparedness and seriously undermine the capabilities of the
Defence Forces. 
The Committee were informed subsequently that the Ministry of Finance had, in
principle, agreed to the creation of the Defence Modernisation Fund which would be
available  for  utilisation  over  the  coming  three  years.  The  Ministry has, however,
surprisingly conveyed that no allocation for this fund has been made in General
Budget 2004-2005 and that the Government has yet to take a decision to set up the
said fund. The Committee are extremely dismayed at this abrupt policy reversal by
the Ministry and express their deep anguish that a well considered decision which
was  taken  after  a  lot  of  deliberations  has  been  reversed  without  any  justifiable
reason. The Committee would, therefore, like the Ministry to set up at once the
Defence Modernisation Fund with committed allocations for a period of five years.'
6. In response, the Ministry of Defence had, inter alia, stated that:
'It  emerged  while  formulating  the  modalities  for  creation/operationalisation  of  the
Defence Modernization Fund in consultation with the concerned authorities that the
unspent  funds  in  the  Defence  Modernization  Fund  would  not  be  automatically
available to the Ministry of Defence for utilization in a subsequent financial year.
Ministry of Defence would be required to seek the approval of Ministry of Finance and
Parliament  at  the  stage  of  Budget  Estimates  as  well  as  for  any  supplementary
Demands for Grants for utilization of Funds out of Defence Modernization Funds……

.. in this backdrop, the utility of Defence Modernization Fund in addressing the issue
of assured availability of funds will be rather limited and hence the proposal is not
being pursued further for the present.  ./….'
7. Not convinced with this, the Standing Committee on Defence raised this issue again in their
3rd Report (April 2005). In its reply of July 2005, the Ministry of Defence,  inter alia, stated as
follows:
'The question of creation of Defence Modernization Fund has been reconsidered as
desired by the Standing Committee. The Ministry of Finance in January 2005 issued
fresh  guidelines/instruction  on  the  creation  of  Reserve/Corpus  Funds.  These
instructions impose a virtual ban on the creation of new funds.  Further, as per these
instructions, the transfers to such funds and transfers from this fund will be decided
as part of the budgetary process.  This implies that approval of Ministry of Finance
and Parliament has been made mandatory for any transfers of money to such funds
and utilization of money out of such funds.  In the light of this instruction, it is not
possible  to  create  a  Fund  which  does  not  require  approval  of  Ministry  of
Finance/Parliament for transfers of money or for its utilization.'
8. This stand was reiterated in the Statement laid by the then Hon’ble Raksha Mantri (RM) in
Rajya Sabha on 14 th December, 2005 and in Lok Sabha on 15 th December 2005 on the
implementation status of the recommendation made by the Standing Committee on Defence
(14th Lok Sabha) in their Third Report. The then Hon’ble RM had intimated the House that
recommendation regarding creation of Defence Modernization Fund was `not feasible’. The
key arguments given by the MoD in support of its stated position as above had been (a)
Utility of such a fund would be limited as Parliamentary approval would be required for
appropriating any sum from the Fund (b) As per guidelines of MoF, Reserve Funds are
created when Government has surplus funds to spare on specific objects of expenditure.
Considering prevailing fiscal situation, setting up of such Fund may not be advisable and (c)
MoF has assured of availability of additional funds, if required, for the modernization of
Services. This stand has been reiterated till recently. 
9. Not convinced with the response of the Ministry of Defence and Ministry of Finance, the
Committee while examining the Demands for Grants during 2014-15, 2015-16, 2016-17 and
2017-18 have been relentlessly advocating for creation of 'Capital non-lapsable Fund' for
Defence modernisation.  The Ministry of Defence, in its brief, has submitted as under:
‘Utilisation of the Defence Capital Budget must be viewed in its entirety. Focussing only
on a particular service, or year, of underspending may not be appropriate as it gives a
distorted picture. It is more appropriate to focus on underspending, if any, under the
capital budget as a whole rather than any one Service. Underspending by one Service is
usually counterbalanced by excess spending by another Service.'

10.However, in  contrast  to  the  brief  submitted  by  the  Ministry  stating  that  no  substantial
amounts were available as surplus for rolling over, during the Sitting of the Committee on 
4 April, 2016 for discussing Demands for Grants (2016-17) of the Ministry of Defence, a
representative of the Ministry himself conceded that the Ministry had not been able to fully
utilize capital budget:
'So far as the capital funds are concerned, we have not been able to expend full
amount even when it has been given or reduced in the RE stage.  The question of
non-lapsable or roll on funds obviously come into the picture provided we expect to
spend more and the Ministry of Finance is not able to give us.  I will give you a small
example to clarify this.  The capital budget for this year was Rs. 77,000 crore.  That is
a  modernisation  budget.   During  the  RE  they  reduced  it  because  of  different
constraints  that  the  Ministry  of  Finance  knows  best.  They  reduced  it  to  
Rs. 65,400 crore.  In the capital component we have got two issues.  One of them is
the committed liability that is the different milestone payments that we have to make
from time to time to the vendors. Then, there are new schemes and these are all
for  the  respective  services.   We  got  it  reduced  from  Rs.  77,000  crore  to  
Rs.  65,400  crore.  I  said:  “If  we  are  in  a  position  to  spend  much  more  than  
Rs. 65,400 crore, what are you able to give us?”  They said: “That is not an issue. We
can even go up to Rs. 77,000 crore because that is your BE.”  On the final analysis,
there are differences.  As the Hon. Member mentioned, there are a lot of issues which
come about during the capital acquisition, the contracts signed which take about five
to seven or to ten years also to materialise.  There are also lapses from time to time
on the part of the vendors.  So, when the milestones are not achieved, we are not in
a position to release the payment.  Coming back to the numbers that I gave as an
example, at Rs. 65,400 crore, I think, we have been able to spend only about Rs.
61,000 crore.'
11.Thus, the Ministry of Defence in the information furnished to the Committee on the subject
matter in the past had, in general, not favoured the proposal for constituting a Non-Lapsable
Defence  Capital  Fund  Account.   The  Ministry, submitting  the  following  data  for  capital
budget, had stated that there had been no occasion in the last few years where any 
substantial amounts were available as surplus for rolling over:
Year Budget
Estimates
Revised
Estimates Actuals %age utilisation
2010-11 60,000.00 60,833.26 62,056.00 102.01
2011-12 69,198.81 66,143.81 67,902.38 102.65
2012-13 79,578.63 69,578.63 70,499.12 101.32
2013-14 86,740.71 78,872.23 79,125.05 100.32
2014-15 94,587.95 81,965.24 81,887.42 99.91

2015-16 94,588.00 81,400.00
79,483.28
(Modified
Appropriation)
80,081.64 98.38% (Revised
Estimates)
100.75% (Modified
Appropriation)
2016-17 86,340.00
12.The Committee, referring to the above data, observed that when compared to BE allocation
from 2011-12 onwards, it was quite clear that percentage utilization of capital budget was
never 100 percent. In this regard, the Committee desired to know as to how could the
Ministry plead that no substantial amounts were available for rolling over to the next year.
The Ministry, in their response, stated as under:
'It may be seen from the above data that except for 2010-11, every year Ministry of
Finance had imposed a cut on BE allocations at RE stage.  Due to cut imposed by
Ministry of Finance, expenditure had to be restricted to Revised Estimate figures. The
figures indicated above clearly indicate that except for 2014-15 and 2015-16, there
has been over-spending in comparison to RE allocations. In 2014-15 and 2015-16
also more than 99 percent and 98 percent respectively of the funds allocated funder
RE have been expended.'  
13.The details of additional allocation sought by the three Services under RE 2016-17, as
furnished by the Ministry of Defence, are as under: -
14. W
h
e
n
Budget 
Estimate
 2016-17
Projected 
Revised 
Estimates 
2016-17
Additionality
projected
Revised 
Estimate 
allocation
 
Army
Revenue (Net) 113,732.72 1,34,870.40 21,137.68 1,18,908.19
Capital 26,943.08 34,706.12 7,763.04 24,026.86
Total 140675.80 169576.52 28,900.72 1,42,935.05
Navy
Revenue (Net) 17,424.79 19,348.23 1,923.44 17,813.99
Capital 22,000.09 22,530.04 529.95 19,596.28
Total 39,424.88 41,878.27 2,453.39 37,410.27
Air Force
Revenue (Net) 23655.83 23817.22 161.39 23,817.52
Capital 29795.42 36512.95 6717.53 28,239.86
Total 53451.25 60330.17 6878.92 52,057.38

asked to provide reasons for reduction in budget allocation for Revised Estimates 2016-17,
the MoD submitted as under: 
'While conveying the reduced ceilings, Ministry of Finance did not give any reason.  
Inspite of taking up the matter of reduced allocations with the Ministry of Finance at 
the highest level, the request of this Ministry for additional funds was not acceded to 
by the Ministry of Finance. 
However, during budget discussion with MoF, the slow pace of expenditure was  
cited  by  MoF  as  the  reason  for  reducing  allocations/  not  granting  additional  
allocations.'
15.Contrary to the stance taken in the past, the Ministry of Defence has, in its Brief submitted to
the Committee on 22 December, 2016, favoured creation of 'Non-Lapsable Defence Capital
Modernization Fund'. The Ministry of Defence, in the said brief, submitted as under: 
'....the issue regarding creation of a non-lapsable Defence Modernization Fund has
gone through three different phases in the past. While initially it was not favoured by
the Ministry of Defence, MoD later on drew up a detailed accounting procedure for
operationalising the Fund with the approval of Ministry of Finance and processed the
proposal for opening of the accounting heads. A provision was also made for the said
Fund in the interim Budget of 2004-05 but not in the General Budget presented in
July 2004 by which time it was again felt that the usefulness of such a Fund would be
limited. In January 2005, Ministry of Finance had issued guidelines on creation of
Reserve/Corpus Funds, which imposed a virtual ban on creation of new funds. As per
these instructions, transfer to and from such funds is to be decided as part of the
budgetary process. This implies that approval of the Ministry of Finance and the
Parliament is mandatory for any transfers of money to such Funds and utilization of
money out of these Funds. Consequently, it was felt that creation of a Fund that does
not require approval of Ministry of Finance/ Parliament for transfer of money or its
utilization will not be possible. This was also conveyed to the Standing Committee.
Thus, since July 2004, MoD has been taking the stand that the utility of such a Fund
is limited and therefore, the proposal is not being pursued. This has been stated in
response to various Parliament questions and in the status report on implementation
of  the  recommendations  of  the  Standing  Committee  on  Defence.  However  the
Honourable Standing Committee has time and again raised the issue of setting up of
a non-lapsable Defence Capital (Modernization) Fund.  O  n further consideration in
consultation with the Services and after taking into account the views of various think
tanks, it has been felt that the utility of creation of a non-lapsable, roll over fund for
Capital cannot be completely negated as the same would help in eliminating the
prevailing  uncertainty  in  providing  adequate  funds  for  various  defence  capability
development  and  infrastructure  projects.  The  Ministry  therefore  has  reviewed  its
stated position taken so far and proposes to take up the case for setting up of a
capital non-lapsable, roll–on fund afresh with Ministry of Finance immediately.'

16.Intimating the latest position in regard to creation of 'Non-Lapsable Capital fund Account' for
the Services, the MoD has submitted as under: 
'A proposal for obtaining 'in-principle' approval of Ministry of Finance on creation on
Non-lapsable  Capital  Fund  Account  has  been  sent  on  9.2.2017  after  obtaining
approval of Hon’ble Raksha Mantri.  Response from Ministry of Finance is awaited.'
17.The Committee also sought the comments of the Ministry of Finance on the Ministry of
Defence's opinion that the utility of creation of a Non-Lapsable, roll over fund for meeting
capital expenditure cannot be completed negated as the same would help in eliminating the
prevailing uncertainty in providing adequate funds. The Ministry of Finance, in this regard,
submitted as under: 
'The perceived advantage in creation of a dedicated reserve/corpus fund in the Public
Account is the non-lapsability of balances available in the corpus at the close of the
financial  year. However, the  balance  available  in  the  corpus/reserve  fund  at the
commencement of the financial year is not available automatically for being spent by
any  Ministry/Department  on  the  intended  schemes.  For  spending  the  balance
available  in  any  reserve/corpus  fund,  approval  of  the  Parliament  through  valid
appropriation is necessary. 
Standing Committee on Finance, in one of its recommendations, recommended that
the unutilized balances lying in the reserve/corpus fund kept in the Public Account be
written back to Consolidated Fund of India for being utilized on the schemes where
additional funds are required. 
This Ministry has also been advocating against creation of reserve/corpus fund in the
Public Account without matching receipts either in the form of tax receipts, cess
receipts or any form of levy etc. 
It may not be advantageous in creating a reserve/corpus fund in the Public Account.
The requirement of Ministry of Defence for meeting its Capital Modernisation and
acquisitions can be addressed through normal budgetary mechanism.'
18.When asked to delineate the measures by way of which a Non-Lapsable Capital Fund
Account could be created/operationalised for the Defence Services, the Ministry of Finance
submitted as under:  
'The  desired  objectives  of  Ministry  of  Defence  towards  meeting  its  contractual
liabilities,  acquisitions,  defence  mordernisation  can  be  achieved  through  normal
budgetary mechanism. There is no specific advantage for creating a reserve/corpus
fund for this objective. 

The Ministry would consider recommendations made in this regard with an open mind
with a view to evolving an effective and efficient arrangement.'
19.A representative  of  the  Ministry  of  Finance,  on  the  issue  of  creation  of  Non-Lapsable
Defence Capital Fund Account, deposed as under: 
' Now, the basic issue is that the funds in public accounts are generally created when 
there are dedicated receipts. But in this case there are no dedicated receipts which 
merit the creation of a separate public account. The second point is, even if there are 
balances in the non-lapsable  fund, they will be  not available to  the  Ministry of  
Defence automatically. We have to still come for appropriation to the Parliament. So, 
that will be done on a year to year basis. And the same thing we are doing it currently
through the Budget. So, it would really not make any material difference. 
The other issue is the Budgetary provision for the year is discussed in detail with the 
Ministry of Defence by the Ministry of Finance. Then, accordingly the Budget is  
provided. In case there are some excess expenditure, the position gets reviewed at 
the stage of the Revised Estimates and additional funds are provided to the Ministry 
of Finance in case the need so arises. 
From the year 2005, the Fiscal Responsibility and Budget Management (FRBM)
regime has come into full force. With the result, we are required to maintain fiscal
prudence and we are expected to do fiscal consolidation so that there is no excess
funds which get unutilised and are parked elsewhere. In fact, the Standing Committee
on Finance of the Parliament had also raised the issue that funds should not be left
unnecessarily parked  in  public  accounts  and  that they should  be  utilised  at the
earliest possible time. In case, funds are lying unutilised, they should be transferred
back to Consolidated Fund of India and used there from. 
The  Ministry of  Finance, based  on  the  FRBM  and  the  Report of  the  Standing  
Committee on Finance, issued instructions that the reserve fund should be minimised
and they should be created only when there are dedicated receipts which are coming 
in. That, in brief, is my submission.'
20.  When asked specifically whether lack of finance decreases effectiveness at the ground
level, the Defence Secretary responded as under: 
' That is a leading question because if money is not available, definitely it will affect
the preparedness. The whole process of defence acquisition and budgeting is a
complex system. For so many years now, we have been finding that the cycle of
acquisition has been very long and it is not in anybody’s interest to see that the cycle
is as long as it is now. With a lot of efforts, we have now tried to bring it down. 
The cycle is affected in three or four stages. First, of course, at the initial stage when
the Acceptance of Necessity is given, we need to issue the request for proposal and
normally  the  request  for  proposal  takes  a  considerable  time.  Now  we  have
streamlined  it. The  request for  proposal  is  floated  along  with  the  Acceptance  of
Necessity (AoN) so that the time lag between the AoN and the request for proposal is
considerably reduced now.
Similarly, the second part is, of course, when the proposals are received from the
vendors, there is a field evaluation trial to be held. Now the field evaluation trails are
protracted because of the various stringent necessities of the Services. The SQRs
are  to  be  complied  with.  The  field  evaluation  trials  are  quite  long.  They  take
considerable time. Now we also need to see that in some Services, of course, like in
the Air Force they have a system which is designed to complete the trials faster but

maybe, in the Army, they have to test the equipment in different circumstances like
different weather conditions and temperatures. So, naturally, it takes a longer time.
But on average the field evaluation trials take considerable time – maybe, two years,
three years or even more. That is one part of the story. 
Third part is when the commercial negotiations take place. Usually the commercial
negotiations  are  very  prolonged.  It  takes  quite  some  time  before  Commercial
Negotiation Committee (CNC) is concluded. Cumulatively, all these processes lead to
a very long procurement cycle. 
Of course, we have also the other side of it. Before the proposal is sent, it also goes
to the Ministry of Finance where assessment of the proposal is done by the Ministry.'  
21.When asked to respond to the Ministry of Defence's constant submissions to the Committee
that  the  ceiling  imposed  by  the  Ministry  of  Finance  adversely  affects  the  acquisition
plans/programmes of the Ministry, the MoF submitted its opinion which is given below: 
'This  Ministry  has  been  providing  budget  provisions  towards  the  schemes
implemented by the Union Ministries/Departments based on the absorptive capacity
of the Ministry/Department and also towards the committed/contractual liabilities of
the line Ministries/Departments. The budget allocations also depend on resource
position of the Government. The resource position include the tax receipts, non tax
receipts,  non-debt  capital  receipts  and  the  borrowings  allowed  under  Fiscal
Responsibility and Budget Management Act 2003.
As far as allocations for the Defence Ministry, the Finance Minister has, at the time of
presenting  the  Union  Government  budget,  been  emphasizing  the  importance  of
budget allocation of Ministry of Defence on the ground of national security. It has
been  stressed  from  time  to  time  that  additional  provision,  if  required,  would  be
provided to the Ministry of Defence.
It may also be pertinent to submit that the revised estimates during the course of the
year after mid-year review are made based on the progress of expenditure and it may
sometime result in reduction in the budgetary outlays depending on the immediacy of
requirement.'
22.While the Ministry of Finance has stated that the requirements of the Ministry of Defence are
a priority, the data on budgetary allocations of the last several years reveal that substantial
cuts are imposed at the Revised Estimates stage. Responding to this issue, the Ministry of
Finance submitted as under: 
'During  the  course  of  year,  the  budgetary  outlays  provided  to  each
Ministry/Department  are  reviewed.  While  making  such  a  review, the  progress  of
expenditure  in  the  first  six  months  and  the  absorptive  capacity  of  the  Ministry/
Department are taken into account. Based on these two main factors, the revised
estimates (the revised budgetary outlays) of any Ministry are fixed. This exercise is
basically for identifying and locating savings available in any Grant/Appropriation and
redistributing  such  resources,  where  additionalities  are  required,  through
Supplementary Demands for Grants.

Such readjustments through Supplementary Demand for Grants are necessary for
utilizing the available resources in a best possible manner.'
Non-lapsable Central Pool of Resources for the North Eastern region
23.It is pertinent to mention in this context that in the Union Budget 1998-99, the Non-lapsable
Central Pool of Resources for the North Eastern region was constituted with approval of
Parliament. The broad objective of the Non-lapsable Central Pool of Resources scheme is
to ensure speedy development of infrastructure in the North Eastern Region by increasing
the flow of budgetary financing for new infrastructure projects/schemes in the Region. Both
physical  and  social  infrastructure  sectors  such  as  Irrigation  and  Flood  Control,  Power,
Roads and Bridges, Education, Health, Water Supply and Sanitation - are considered for
providing support under the Central Pool, with projects in physical infrastructure sector
receiving priority. 
24.Funds from the Central Pool can be released for State sector as well as Central sector
projects/schemes. However the funds available under the Central Pool are not meant to
supplement  the  normal  Plan  programmes  either  of  the  State  Governments  or  Union
Ministries/ Departments/ Agencies.
25.During the year, the institutional arrangements for administering the Non-lapsable Central
Pool have been streamlined. The guidelines to administer the Pool have been revised. The
Committee to administer the Non-Lapsable Central Pool of Resources (NLCPR) has been
reconstituted. The reconstituted Committee is headed by Secretary, Ministry of Development
of North Eastern Region and has representation from Ministries of Finance, Home Affairs
and  Planning  Commission.  Financial  Advisor  to  the  Ministry  of  Development  of  North
Eastern  Region  has  been  included  as  a  member.  Representatives  of  Union
Ministry/Departments,  whose  proposals  are  to  be  considered  in  a  particular  sitting  for
funding under NLCPR, are also invited. 
26.For identification of projects under Non-Lapsable Central Pool of Resources, States are
asked to submit, before the beginning of the financial year, a prioritized list of projects with a
short write up on each project. The earlier practice of receiving projects throughout the year
directly from the various state departments concerned has been stopped. Now the Planning
and Development Department of the State concerned is the nodal department for NLCPR
and that department is DoNER's interface with all other departments of the State. The

priority accorded by the State to the projects in the 'priority list' is only suggestive and the
Committee scrutinizes the projects in the lists in order to identify and finally retain the
suitable projects for detailed examination. In examining the priority, the Committee is, inter-
alia, guided by considerations such as:
 Projects of economic infrastructure are given priority;
 In the social sector, priority to drinking water supply and other health and sanitation
projects;
 Projects in Autonomous District Council (VIth Schedule of the Constitution) are given
priority;
 Past performance of a State in implementing projects in the particular sectors to
which the projects belong is also considered; and
 The overall utilisation and absorption of funds by a particular State in the past years
also guide the overall quantum of projects to be undertaken for that State in a year.
27.Detailed  Project  Report(s)  for  such  retained  projects  are  then  prepared  by  the  state
concerned.  These  project  proposals  are  thereafter  examined  in  consultation  with  the
concerned  Central  Ministry/Department.  The  recommendations/views,  thus  received  are
placed before the Committee to administer the Non-Lapsable Central Pool, which considers
the proposal and accords approval.
28.After approval of the Committee, funds are sanctioned and released by the Ministry of
Development  of  North  Eastern  Region  on  submission  of  an  implementation  schedule.
Subsequent releases are made only after receipt of Utilisation Certificate of earlier releases.
                                                          
 
PART - II
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS
1. The  Committee,  in  their  Reports  presented  on  earlier  occasions,  have  recommended
making  the  Capital  allocations  for  Defence  acquisition  as  'Roll  on'  and  'Non-Lapsable’
following the ending of the financial year. In the information furnished to the Committee on
the subject matter in the past, the Ministry of Defence had, in general, not favoured the
proposal for constituting a Non-lapsable Defence Capital Fund Account. 

The reasons cited by the Ministry for not favouring the proposal for having a non-
lapsable  fund  include  (a)  limitations  of  the  utility  of  such  a  proposal  as  Parliamentary
approval would be required for appropriating any sum from the Fund; (b) guidelines of
Ministry  of  Finance  (MoF)  which  stipulate  that,  Reserve  Funds  can  be  created  when
Government has surplus funds to spare on specific objects of expenditure and the fiscal
situation was not suitable for setting up such a Fund; (c) assurance of the Ministry of
Finance that additional funds for the modernization of Services would be made available,
and (d) there being no occasion in the last few years where any substantial amounts were
available as surplus for rolling over to the subsequent years. 
While deposing before the Committee (2016-17), the Defence Secretary highlighted
the  complexities  involved  in  Defence  acquisition  and  budgeting.  The  aspect  of  likely
adverse affect of lack of financial resources on defence preparedness has been brought to
light in specific terms. Consequently, as a follow up,  the Ministry has now reviewed its
stated position and has admitted that the utility of creation of a non-lapsable, roll over fund
for  Capital  cannot  be  completely  negated  as  the  same  would  help  in  eliminating  the
prevailing  uncertainty  in  providing  adequate  funds  for  various  defence  capability
development and infrastructure projects. 
2. A proposal for obtaining 'in-principle' approval of the Ministry of Finance on creating a Non-
lapsable Capital Fund Account has been sent on 9 February, 2017 by the Ministry of Defence
with the approval of the then Hon’ble Raksha Mantri.
3. The Committee are despondent to note that the Ministry of Finance has not been in favour
of creating a ' Non-lapsable Defence Capital Fund Account '. As per the Ministry of Finance,
the perceived advantage in creating a dedicated reserve/corpus fund in the Public Account
is the non-lapsability of balances that would be available in the corpus at the close of the
financial  year.  However,  the  balance  available  in  the  corpus/reserve  fund  at  the
commencement of the new financial year would not be available automatically for being

expended by any Ministry/Department on the intended schemes. For spending the balance
available in any reserve/corpus fund, approval of the Parliament through valid appropriation
would be necessary. The Ministry of Finance has also been opposing the proposal for
creation of a reserve/corpus fund in the Public Account without matching receipts either in
the form of tax receipts, cess receipts or any form of levy etc. It has also been stated that it
may not be advantageous to create a reserve/corpus fund in the Public Account and the
requirements  of  the  Ministry  of  Defence  for  meeting  its  Capital  Modernisation  and
acquisition plans could be addressed through the normal budgetary mechanism. 
4. The Committee would in this regard, draw the attention of the Ministry of Finance to the fact
that in last few years, the allocations for the Ministry of Defence under the 'Capital' head
have inevitably been lesser than the projection, not only at the Budget Estimates stage but
also  at  Revised  Estimates  stage.  To  illustrate,  against  a  projection  of  
Rs. 1,46,155.54 crore for Capital Budget in 2017-18, only Rs. 86,528.65 crore have been
allocated at the BE 2017-18 for the Defence Services (Army, Navy, Joint Staff, Air Force,
DGOF, R&D and DGQA). Inadequacy of the allocation for Capital acquisition vis-à-vis the
projections, affects several procurement proposals and contracts relating inter alia to Land,
Aircraft  and  Aeroengines,  Heavy  and  Medium  Vehicles,  Equipments,  Military  Farms,
Procurement  of  Rolling  Stock,  Ex-Servicemen  Contributory  Health  Scheme,  Rashtriya
Rifles,  National  Cadet  Corps,  Construction  Works,  National  Defence  Academy, Married
Accommodation Project, North Eastern Projects and Special Projects, etc. which are stated
to be finalised in 2017-18.
Therefore, the contention of the Ministry of Finance that the desired objectives of
Ministry of Defence towards meeting its contractual liabilities, acquisitions and defence
mordernisation can be achieved through normal budgetary mechanism does not hold much

ground.  Defence  procurement  and acquisition  is  a  complicated  process  involving  long
gestation periods and funds allocated for capital acquisition in a particular financial year
are not necessarily consumed in that year and ultimately have to be surrendered by the
Ministry  of  Defence.  The  intention  of  the  Committee  in  recommending  having  a  Non-
Lapsable Capital fund account for Defence modernization is primarily for ensuring that the
money allocated for a particular item is spent on the specified item only, not necessarily in
the  same  Financial  year.  Further,  the  Defence  Secretary  himself  has  been  candid  in
submitting  before  the  Committee  that  lack  of  finance  definitely  affects  our  operational
preparedness. 
5. The Committee are of the opinion that creation of a non-lapsable Defence Capital Fund
Account is an imperative need for enhancement and heightened operational preparedness
of our Defence Forces. They feel that even if certain financial rules and regulations have to
be amended for creation of a    '  Non-lapsable Defence Capital Fund Account  ' to meet the
requirements of our Defence forces, it can and should be done in the interest of the nation.
Therefore, the Committee are of the view that the Ministry of Finance should not have any
rigid  view  in  this  regard.  Moreover,  creation  of  such  a  fund  would  also  ensure  that
procurement of equipments, arms and ammunition for our Defence Forces which are in the
pipeline and in the stage of fructification is not delayed because of lack of money due to
technicalities of rules and regulations.  Hence, the Committee would like the Ministry of
Finance to work out the modalities for creation of a  'Non-lapsable Defence Capital Fund
Account' in consultation with the Ministry of Defence and apprise the Committee of the
progress made in this direction at the earliest, and not later than three months of the
presentation of this Report to Parliament.
6. The Committee find it pertinent to mention in this context that in the Union Budget 1998-99,
the Non-lapsable Central Pool of Resources for the North Eastern region was constituted

with the approval of Parliament.  The broad objective of the Non-lapsable Central Pool of
Resources scheme is to ensure speedy development of infrastructure in the North Eastern
Region  by  increasing  the  flow  of  budgetary  financing  for  new  infrastructure
projects/schemes in the Region. Both physical and social infrastructure sectors such as
Irrigation and Flood Control, Power, Roads and Bridges, Education, Health, Water Supply
and Sanitation - are considered for providing support under the Central Pool, with projects
in physical infrastructure sector receiving priority.  Funds from the Central Pool can be
released for State sector as well as Central sector projects/schemes. However the funds
available under the Central Pool are not meant to supplement the normal Plan programmes
either of the State Governments or Union Ministries/ Departments/ Agencies.
7. The Committee to administer the Non-Lapsable Central Pool of Resources is headed by
Secretary, Ministry of Development of North Eastern Region and has representation from
Ministries of Finance, Home Affairs and Planning Commission. Financial Advisor to the
Ministry  of  Development  of  North  Eastern  Region  has  been  included  as  a  member.
Representatives of the Union Ministry/Departments concerned, whose proposals are to be
considered in a particular sitting for funding under Non-Lapsable Central Pool of Resources
(NLCPR), are also invited. For identification of projects under NLCPR, States are asked to
submit, before the beginning of the financial year, a prioritized list of projects with a short
write up on each project. In examining the priority, the Committee is, inter-alia, guided by
considerations such as economic infrastructure, drinking water supply and other health and
sanitation  projects  etc.  Past  performance  of  a  State  in  implementing  projects  in  the
particular sectors to which the projects belong is also considered. The overall utilisation
and absorption of funds by a particular State in the past  years  also guide  the  overall
quantum of projects to be undertaken for that State in a year. Detailed Project Report(s) for
such retained projects are then prepared by the State concerned. These project proposals

are thereafter examined in consultation with the concerned Central Ministry/Department.
The recommendations/views, thus received are placed before the Committee to administer
the Non-Lapsable Central Pool, which considers the proposal and accords approval. After
approval  of  the  Committee,  funds  are  sanctioned  and  released  by  the  Ministry  of
Development  of  North  Eastern  Region  on  submission  of  an  implementation  schedule.
Subsequent releases are made only after receipt of Utilisation Certificate of earlier releases.

8. The Committee recommend that the Ministry of Defence, in consultation with the Ministry of
Finance, and by taking inspiration from the ‘Non-lapsable Central Pool of Resources for the
North  Eastern  region’,  should  institute  streamlined   arrangements  for  administering  the
'Non-Lapsable' and 'Roll on' Capital Budget for defence acquisitions.
New Delhi;                     MAJ GEN B C KHANDURI, AVSM (RETD)
4 August, 2017                                                                    Chairperson
13 Shravana, 1939(Saka)                                    Standing Committee on Defence
STANDING COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE 
MINUTES OF THE FIFTH  SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE  
ON DEFENCE (2016-17)
The Committee sat on Friday, the 23rd December, 2016 from 1500 hrs. to 1630 hrs. in
Committee Room 'B', Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
PRESENT
MAJ GEN B C KHANDURI AVSM (RETD)       - CHAIRPERSON
   MEMBERS
     LOK SABHA
2. Shri Shrirang Appa Barne
3. Shri Thupstan Chhewang
4. Shri H D Devegowda
5. Shri G Hari 
6. Dr Murli Manohar Joshi
7. Dr Mriganka Mahato
8. Shri Rodmal Nagar

9. Shri A P Jithender Reddy
10. Shri Ch Malla Reddy
RAJYA SABHA
11. Shri A U Singh Deo
12. Shri Harivansh
13. Shri Rajeev Chandrasekhar
14. Shri Madhusudan Mistry
15. Shri Sanjay Raut
SECRETARIAT
1 Smt Kalpana Sharma  - Joint Secretary 
2 Shri T G Chandrasekhar - Director 
3 Smt Jyochanamayi Sinha - Additional Director 
LIST OF WITNESSESS

At  the
outset, the
Chairperson welcomed the Members and representatives of the Ministries of Defence and Finance
to the sitting of the Committee convened to take oral evidence on the subject, 'Creation of Non-
Lapsable  Capital  Fund  Account,  instead  of  the  present  system'.  The  Chairperson  drew  their
S.NO NAME OF OFFICER DESIGNATION
MINISTRY OF DEFENCE
1 Shri G Mohan Kumar Defence Secretary 
2 Shri S K Kohli Financial Advisor (DS)
3 Shri Ravi Kant Additional Secretary (R)
4 Ms. Smita Nagaraj DG(Acq)
5 Ms. Anuradha Mitra AS & FA (Acq)
6 Shri A N Das FA(AN) & JS
7 Ms. Maulishree Pande Director (Budget)
8. Maj Gen Sanjay Thapa DG FP
9. Maj Gen Anil Puri DDG (A)
10. Cmde Sanjay Vatsayan PDNP
11. Cdr Ravi S Nair JDNP
12. AVM BR Krishna SC ACAS (Plans)
13. AVM P SubhashBabu ACAS (Fin P)
14. Air Cmde DK Sharma PD Fin P
15. Air Cmde Devender Sharma DACIDS (FP)
16. Gp Capt Updesh Sharma Director Budget
MINISTRY OF FINANCE (DEPARTMENT OF ECONOMIC AFFAIRS)
1. Shri Prashant Goyal Joint Secretary (Budget)
2. Shri N M Jha Director (Budget)
3. Shri T Uthaya Kumar Additional Budget Officer

attention  to  Directions  55(1)  and  58  of  the  Directions  by the  Speaker, Lok  Sabha  regarding
confidentiality of proceedings.  
2. Thereafter, the representatives of the Ministry of Defence made a Power Point Presentation
on the Subject.  The Committee had detailed deliberations on various issues in the context which
included: -
(i) Non-fructification of the Defence modernization and procurement plans due to 
inadequate funds available with the Ministry of Defence;   
(ii) Need for creation of a 'Non-Lapsable, roll on fund for capital expenditure' to help in 
eliminating the prevailing uncertainty in providing adequate funds for various Defence
capability development and infrastructure projects; and
(iii) Reservations of the Ministry of Finance for creation of Non-lapsable Defence Capital 
Fund Account even though other non-lapsable accounts also exist. 
3. The representatives of the Ministries of Defence and Finance responded to the queries
raised by the Members during the deliberations. 
4. The Committee desired the Ministry of Finance to explore modalities which include changes
in the Rules for facilitation of creation of Non-Lapsable Defence Capital fund Account.
5. As regards the points on which the representatives could not readily respond, they promised
to furnish written information at the earliest.
A copy of verbatim record of the proceedings has been kept.
The Committee then adjourned.
STANDING COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE 
MINUTES OF THE TWELFTH SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON
DEFENCE (2016-17)
The Committee sat on Wednesday, the 2nd August, 2017 from 1000 hrs. to 1020  hrs. in
Committee Room`C', Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
PRESENT

Maj Gen B C Khanduri, AVSM (Retd) - Chairperson
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Suresh C Angadi
3. Shri Shrirang Appa Barne
4. Shri Thupstan Chhewang
5. Col Sonaram Choudhary(Retd)
6. Km Shobha Karandlaje
7. Shri Rodmal Nagar
8. Shri A P Jithender Reddy
9. Shri Ch Malla Reddy
10. Smt Mala Rajya Lakshmi Shah
11. Shri Dharambir Singh
12. Smt Pratyusha Rajeshwari Singh
  Rajya Sabha
13. Shri K R Arjunan
14. Shri Rajeev Chandrasekhar
15. Shri Sanjay Raut
16. Smt Ambika Soni
17. Dr Subramanian Swamy
SECRETARIAT
5 Smt. Kalpana Sharma - Joint Secretary
6       Shri T.G. Chandrasekhar - Director
7 Smt. Jyochanmayi Sinha - Additional Director
8 Shri Rahul Singh - Under Secretary
2. At  the  outset,  the  Chairperson  welcomed  the  Members  of  the  Committee  and
informed  them  about  the  agenda  for  the  sitting.  The  Committee  then  took  up  for
consideration the following draft Reports on:-
i) 'Creation of Non-lapsable Capital Fund Account, instead of the present system'
ii) 'Resettlement of Ex-servicemen'
iii) 'Provision of Medical Services to Armed Forces including Dental Services'
3. After deliberations the Committee adopted the above Reports.

4. The Committee, then, authorized the Chairperson to finalise the above draft Reports
and present the same to the House on a date convenient to him.
The Committee then adjourned.