26
STANDING COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE
(2016-17)
(SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA)
MINISTRY OF DEFENCE
[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations contained in
the Twenty First Report of the Standing Committee on Defence(16th Lok Sabha)  on
'Demands for Grants (2016-17) of the Ministry on Defence on Ordnance Factory Board,
Defence Research and Development Organisation, 
Ex-Servicemen Contributory Health Scheme,  Directorate General of Quality Assurance
and National Cadet Corps (Demand No. 20)']
TWENTY SIXTH REPORT
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
March, 2017/ Phalguna, 1938 (Saka)
1

TWENTY SIXTH REPORT
STANDING COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE
(2016-17)
(SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA)
MINISTRY OF DEFENCE
[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations contained in
the Twenty First Report of the Standing Committee on Defence(16th Lok Sabha)  on
'Demands for Grants (2016-17) of the Ministry on Defence on Ordnance Factory Board,
Defence Research and Development Organisation, 
Ex-Servicemen Contributory Health Scheme,  Directorate General Quality Assurance and
National Cadet Corps (Demand No. 20)']
Presented to Lok Sabha on 09.03.2017
Laid in Rajya Sabha on ……….
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
March, 2017/ Phalguna, 1938 (Saka)


CONTENTS
PAGE
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (2016-17) …………………………………….
INTRODUCTION …………………………………………………………………………...
CHAPTER I Report………………………………………………….…………….....      
CHAPTER II (A) Observations/Recommendations which have been 
                   accepted by the Government…………………………………..........
(B) Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the 
Government and to be commented upon………........................... 
CHAPTER III Observations/Recommendations which the Committee
do not desire to pursue in view of the replies of the 
Government ………………………………….....................................   
CHAPTER IV Observations/Recommendations in respect of which 
Replies of the Government have not been accepted by
the Committee which require reiteration and commented upon......... 
CHAPTER V Observations/Recommendations in respect of which 
       Government have furnished interim replies/ replies awaited.........
APPENDICES
I     Minutes of the sixth sitting of the Standing Committee on
               Defence (2016-17) held on 16.01.2017 .………………...............63
II    Analysis of Action Taken by the Government on the 
      Observations/Recommendations   contained   in the Twenty First
Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee 
on Defence (2016-17)...................................................................65 

COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE (  2016-17  )
Maj Gen B C Khanduri, AVSM (Retd) - Chairperson
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Dipak Adhikari (Dev)
3. Shri Suresh C Angadi
4. Shri Shrirang Appa Barne
5. Shri Thupstan Chhewang
6. Col Sonaram Choudhary(Retd)
7. Shri H D Devegowda
8. Shri Sher Singh Ghubaya
9.* Shri B. Senguttuvan 
10. Dr Murli Manohar Joshi
11. Km Shobha Karandlaje
12. Shri Vinod Khanna
13. Dr Mriganka Mahato
14. Shri Rodmal Nagar
15. Shri A P Jithender Reddy
16. Shri Ch Malla Reddy
17. Shri Rajeev Shankarrao Satav
18. Smt Mala Rajya Lakshmi Shah
19.# Shri Partha Pratim Ray
20. Shri Dharambir Singh
21. Smt Pratyusha Rajeshwari Singh
22.** Shri G Hari
23.$ Capt Amarinder Singh
    Rajya Sabha
1. Shri K R Arjunan
2. Shri A U Singh Deo
3. Shri Harivansh
4.^ Shri Rajeev Chandrasekhar
5. Shri Madhusudan Mistry
6. Shri Praful Patel
7. Shri Sanjay Raut
8. Dr Abhishek Manu Singhvi
9. Smt Ambika Soni
10. Dr Subramanian Swamy
11.@ Shri Om Prakash Mathur
* Nominated w.e.f on 13.02.2017
** Ceased to be Member of the Committee w.e.f. 13.02.2017
$ Ceased to be Member of the Committee w.e.f. 23.11.2016
# Nominated w.e.f. 02.01.2017
@  Ceased to be Member of the Committee w.e.f. 10.10.2016
^ Nominated w.e.f. 10.10.2016

SECRETARIAT
1  Smt. Kalpana Sharma - Joint Secretary
2 Shri T.G. Chandrasekhar - Director
3 Smt. Jyochnamayi Sinha - Additional Director
4   Shri Rahul Singh - Under Secretary
5  Shri Harish Chandra - Executive Assistant

INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairperson of the Standing Committee on Defence ( 2016-17), having been
authorised  by  the  Committee,  present  this  
Twenty-Sixth  report  on  Action  Taken  by  the  Government  on  the
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Twenty First Report of the Standing
Committee  on  Defence(16th  Lok  Sabha)   on  'Demands  for  Grants  ( 2016-17)  of  the
Ministry on Defence on  Ordnance Factory Board , Defence Research and Development
Organisation, Ex-Servicemen Contributory Health Scheme, Directorate General Quality
Assurance and National Cadet Corps (Demand No. 20)'.
2.       The  Twenty First Report was  presented  to Lok  Sabha / laid on the Table  of
Rajya   Sabha  on  03  May,  2016.  The  Report  contained  50
Observations/Recommendations.  The   Action  Taken  Notes  on  the
Observations/Recommendations  were  received  from  the  Ministry  of  Defence  in
November, 2016.
3.  The Committee considered and adopted this Report at their Sitting held on 16
January, 2017.
4. An  analysis  of   action  taken  by  the  Government  on  the
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Twenty First Report of the Committee is
given in Appendix II.
5. For facility of reference and convenience, Observations/Recommendations of the
Committee have been printed in bold letters in the Report.
New Delhi;                                                          Maj Gen  B C Khanduri, AVSM (Retd),  
1 February, 2017                     Chairperson,   
12 Magha, 1938 (Saka)                                              Standing Committee on Defence

REPORT
CHAPTER I
This report of the Standing Committee on Defence deals with action taken by the
Government on the observations/recommendations contained in the  Twenty First Report
(16th Lok Sabha) on 'Demands for Grants of the Ministry of Defence for the year 2016-17
on  Ordnance  Factory  Board ,  Defence  Research  and  Development  Organisation,  
Ex-Servicemen Contributory Health Scheme, Directorate General Quality Assurance and
National Cadet Corps  (Demand No. 20) ' which was presented to Lok Sabha and laid in
Rajya Sabha on 03 May, 2016.
2. The  Committee's  Twenty  First  Report  (16th  Lok  Sabha)  contained  50
observations/recommendations on the following aspects:-
Para No. Subject
ORDNANCE FACTORY BOARD
1 Budgetary Provisions 
2 Delays in Projects undertaken by Ordnance Factories Board
3 Under Spending on Modernization of infrastructure
4 Research and Development (R&D) Activities
5 Manpower Shortage in Ordnance Factories
6 Restructuring of Ordnance Factories
DEFENCE RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT ORGANISATION
7, 8, 9, 10, 11,
12
Budgetary provisions for Defence Research and Development
13, 14 Need to Prepare a Technological Road Map
15, 16, 17 Manpower in DRDO
18, 19 Projects abandoned/closed by DRDO
20, 21, 22, 23,
24
Delays in Projects
25, 26 Kaveri Engine
27 Indigenisation of Research and Development Activities
28, 29 Quality Control
30, 31 Public Private Partnership
32, 33, 34, 35 Collaboration with universities/academic institutions
EX-SERVICEMEN CONTRIBUTORY HEALTH SCHEME(ECHS)
36, 37, 38, 39,
40, 41, 42, 43
Ex-Servicemen Contributory Health Scheme
44, 45, 46, 47 Directorate General Quality Assurance
48, 49, 50 National Cadet Corps

3. Action Taken Replies have been received from the Government in respect of
all the observations/recommendations contained in the Report.  The replies have
been examined and the same have been categorised as follows:-
 (a) Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the Government:
Para Nos. 3,  5, 20, 25, 28,  31, 32, 33, 34, 35, 36, 37, 38, 39, 40, 41,42, 46, 
47, 48, 49  and 50
(22 Recommendations)
These may be included in Chapter II of the Draft Report.
(b) Observations/Recommendations  which  have  been  accepted  by  the
Government and to be  commented upon:
Para Nos.  4, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 16, 17, 18, 19, 21, 22, 23, 24, 26, 27 and 29 
(18  Recommendations)
  These may be included in Chapter II of the Draft Report.
 (ii)  Observations/Recommendations  which the  Committee do not desire to pursue in
view of the replies received from the Government:
Para Nos. Nil
 (00  Recommendations)
  These may be included in Chapter III of the Draft Report.
 
(iii) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of   Government have 
not been accepted by the Committee which require reiteration and commented 
upon:
   
Para  Nos.   1, 2, 12, 13, 14, 15, 30, 44 and 45 
 (09 Recommendations)
              This may be included in Chapter IV of the Draft Report.
           
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which Government have  furnished
interim replies/ replies awaited:
Para No.   43
(01 Recommendation)

4. The Committee desire that the Ministry's response to the comments made in
Chapter I of this Report be furnished to them at the earliest and in any case not
later than six months of the presentation of this Report. 
A. Budgetary Provisions
Recommendation (  Para  No.1)
5. The Committee had recommended as under: - 
'The allocation at BE 2015-16 for Directorate General of Ordnance Factories was
Rs. 3,644.30 crore. This has been reduced to Rs. 1,752.53 crore at RE stage. The
reduction is Rs. 1,891.77 crore. The BE for the year 2016-17 is Rs. 1,953.29 crore.
There is Rs. 1,691.01 crore less allocation during the year 2016-17 in comparison
to BE 2015-16. In their earlier reports, the Committee have been expressing their
concern over wide variations between the projections and actual allocations at the
stage of BE and RE. The Committee in their 9th Report had desired that deduction
from the Budget Estimate be kept to minimum and only on account of very valid
justifiable reasons. The Committee are apprised that due to constraints of funds,
Ordnance Factories Board was directed to prioritize its Capital fund requirement. In
their 7th Report on Action taken by the Government on the recommendations
contained  in  the  9th  Report  on  Demands  for  Grants  (2015-16)  on  Ordnance
Factories  and  DRDO,  the  Committee  had  observed  that  the  allocations  for
Ordnance Factories Board were sanctioned late, thereby compelling it to cut short
its Committed Liabilities and thereby falling short of the financial targets. This
further  led  to  application  of  cut  by  the  Ministry  of  Finance.  Therefore,  the
Committee had desired that the timely allocations at BE stage should be provided.
During  2015-16,  Ordnance  Factories  Board  was  considering  to  increase  the
supplies in excess of  Rs. 11,266 crore on the basis of requirements of Armed
Forces. Ordnance Factories Board required an additional budget of Rs. 1,321
crore for an increased supply of Rs. 2,271 crore. However, at RE stage during
2015-16, there was reduction of Rs. 1,891.77 crore. This is a sorry state of affair.
The Committee also observe that there is large scale deficiency of equipment in
Army  due  to  inadequate  production  capacity  of  Ordnance  Factories  Board.
Therefore, there is a strong need to ramp up the capacity of Ordnance Factories
Board. The value of production during the year 2015-16 up to Feb, 2016 is Rs.
10,925 crore against the target of Rs. 13,514 crore. The value of production during
the year 2015-16 is higher in comparison to that in the year 2012-13, 2013-14 and
2014-15. Against the planned supplies of Rs. 64,870 crore, the actual supplies
made during first four years of 12 th plan is Rs. 45,387 crore. In view of the above
deficiency of Ordnance Factories Board, need to further enhance its capacity to
arrest shortage of ammunition and Vehicles of Army, the Committee are of the
strong view that due importance should be given to Ordnance Factories Board and
adequate budgetary provisions should be provided at the RE stage.'

6. The Ministry in its Action Taken Reply has stated as under:-
'The  recommendations  of  the  Committee  are  noted  and  it  is  assured  that
projections/requirements of the Ordnance Factories will be forwarded to Ministry of
Finance for consideration at RE stage.  In case the funds are not provided as per
projections by the Ministry of Finance, the available resources will be optimally
utilized based on prioritized requirements of Ordnance Factories.'
7. The  Committee  while  examining  the  Demands  for  Grants  2015-16  and  
2016-17 had observed that due to delayed sanction of allocations and cuts imposed
at  RE  stage,  the  Ordnance  Factories  Board  was  compelled  to  cut  short  its
Committed Liabilities which resulted in shortfalls in meeting the financial targets.
Ordnance Factories Board was considering to increase the supplies on the basis of
the requirements of the Armed Forces.  As a consequence of the cut applied at RE
stage  and mismatch between the  projections  and actual allocations, Ordnance
Factories Board could not produce the equipment as per the orders placed by
Army. Therefore, the Committee had desired that there is a need to further enhance
its capacity to arrest shortage of ammunition and vehicles and adequate budgetary
provision should be provided at RE stage. The Committee are not happy with the
routine nature of reply which merely indicates that the projections/requirements of
Ordnance Factories Board will be forwarded to Ministry of Finance at RE stage. In
case, the funds are not provided, the available resources will be optimally utilised
based on prioritized requirements of Ordnance Factories. This is reflective of the
helplessness  of  Ordnance  Factories. There  is no question that  the  problem of
shortage of ammunition with the Armed Forces cannot  be minimised with this
reduced  allocations.  Therefore,  the  Committee  once  again  emphasise  that
adequate budgetary allocations should be provided to the Ordinance Factories
Board.

B. Delays in Projects undertaken by Ordnance Factories Board
Recommendation (Para No. 2)
8. The Committee had recommended as under: -
‘The Committee note that there is long delay in completion of projects related to T-
72 variants, engines  for Armoured Vehicles, spares for T-72 and T-90 tanks, Akash
Booster and Sustainer, large caliber weapons,  HMX  Plant, Pinaka, Ammonium
Percolate, MPV and 125 mm FSAPDS. The delay ranges from 3 to 9 years. The
major reasons for delay of these projects are due to delay in procurement of plant
and  machinery  and  delay  in  completion  of  civil  works  by  MES.   Against  the
required investment of Rs.2,394 Cr., the investment made till  February, 2016 is
Rs.683.55 Cr. The Committee are concerned to note that Rs.1,710.45 Cr. are
yet  to  be  allocated.  The  important  projects  have  already  been  delayed
considerably.  During the course of deliberations with the representatives of Army
and Ministry of Defence, the Committee were apprised that due to inadequate
production  capacity, there  is  a  shortage  of  Armoured  Vehicles  with  the  Army.
During examination of Demands for Grants in the year 2015-16, the Committee
had  observed  that  due  to  non-availability  of  funds  as  well  as  absence  of
commensurate  load  from  Army,  expenditure  for  augmentation  of  capacity  for
manufacturing of T-90 tanks from 100 to 140 Nos. was prioritized. The Committee
are concerned to note that all this important items approved are nowhere near
completion. The construction work of Ordnance Factory at Nalanda has also been
carried forward to 12th Plan though it was initiated during the 10th Plan. The
Committee also note that Ordnance Factories depend to a large extent on Military
Engineering Services (MES) for execution of civil works related to their projects.
Delay in completion of Civil Works by MES is one of the major reasons affecting
the timely completion of the projects. The Committee view this delay very seriously
which is affecting the operational preparedness of Army and other consumers of
Ordnance Factories. The Committee feel that proper planning at the initial stage in
consultation with all the stakeholders should be undertaken thoroughly deliberating
upon the negative factors causing delays and a comprehensive strategy chalked
out  for  timely  completion  of  the  projects  within  a  realistic  time-frame.  The
Committee desire that action taken in this regard may be communicated to them.’  
9. The Ministry in its Action Taken Reply has stated as under:-
‘The sanctioned investment, expenditure incurred till March 2016 and future plan of
expenditure in respect of Projects related to T-72 variants, engines for armored
vehicle, spares for T-72 & T-90 tanks, Augmentation of production capacity of T-90
Tanks, Large Caliber Weapons, HMX Plant are enclosed as Annexure – Proj.
   
Major reasons for delay in procurement of P&M are:
Tendering Stage:
 Limited vendor base since majority of the machine requirement is for customized
SPMs/tooled up machine and very few offers are received in spite of repeated

Tender  Opening  Date  (TOD)  extensions  to  avoid  Single  Offers  and  promote
competition.
 Global Tenders for high value and high-tech Plant & Machinery [P&M] (like Forging
Plant, Chemical Plants, Metallurgical Plants etc.) and because of financial crisis in
Europe during 2011-2013, some of the European suppliers failed to respond to
Tender Enquiries(TEs) leading to retendering the cases. 
 Till  2013,  there  was  no  provision  for  advance  payment.  Hence  many  P&M
suppliers, particularly in case of high value P&M did not participate in TEs.
 Restrictions of export licence in respect of European countries, mainly Germany,
Italy by their respective Government for supplying P&M to OFB.
Project of Nalanda: 
The civil works for O F Nalanda initiated in 10 th Plan was shifted to 12th Plan due to
following circumstances:- 
 Cancellation  of  Transfer  of  Technology  (TOT)  contract  for  Bi-Modular  Charge
System (BMCS) Plant with M/s Denel, South Africa in 2003, firm barred in June 2005.
Technology absorption adversely effected.
 Suspension of project activities during June 05 to July 06 led to retendering of
BMCS Process plants.
 Supply order on M/s IMI, Israel for supply of BMCS Plant put on hold in June 2009
and cancelled in March 2012.   
 The  civil  works  except  for  BMCS  Plant  has  been  completed.  Administrative
approval for civil works related to BMCS Plant was issued to DRDO for Rs. 226 Crore in
January, 2014. Simultaneously, procurement process for BMCS Plant through indigenous
sources was being progressed. 
       Efforts  for  Indigenous  procurement  of  BMCS  Plant  failed  as  no  offer  was
technically acceptable. Global tendering (with Approval of Project Monitoring Board) is in
progress. As the civil works related to BMCS Plant are required to be in synchronization
with the design of BMCS Plant, the same shall be progressed after finalization of contract
for BMCS Plant through GTE. 
Execution of Civil Works through MES:
In order to execute civil works without time over run, following actions have
been put in to place:  
a) General  Manager  (GM)  of  factories  have  been  authorized  to  issue
Administrative Approval (AA) for execution of civil works related to MOD/DDP/OFB
sanctioned  projects  to  be  executed  through  MES/DRDO/Public  Works
Organizations. Thus, factory need not refer to OFB for convening the siting board
to finalize scope of work, scrutiny of the same and issue of Administrative Approval
(AA). This saves considerable processing time.
b) Standard Operating Procedure (SOP) for civil works has been published in
January 2014. Factories have been issued guidelines for measures to be taken
while preparing Draft Project Report (DPR) so that variation in the scope of work
envisaged in the DPR and to be executed remains minimum and variation between
estimated cost and the AA remains within permissible limit.
c) Financial Powers for execution of civil woks departmentally by GMs, have
been enhanced from Rs. 25 lakhs to Rs.5 Crore for Production Buildings.
d) DRDO is also being roped in to execute specialized, high value and time-
bound Civil Works. OF Nalanda, OF Korwa and major civil works related to Pinaka
project have been assigned to DRDO.’

ANNEXURE – PROJ
 (Rs. in Crore)
Sanctione
d
investmen
t
Likely  Total
Expenditure *
Expenditure
Up to Feb’16
Expenditure
Up  to
Mar’2016
Cumulative  Expenditure
Plan
2016-17 2017-18 2018-19
2394 2038.66 683.55 732.83 1096.08 1644.08 2038.66
*  Likely  total  expenditure  is  based  on  actual  against  the  sanction  based  on
estimates
  Major components for the gap between sanctioned and expenditure (Rs. 1661.17 Crore)
are:
Sl.
No.
Item Amount
(Rs. Crore)
Remarks
1 Difference  between
estimates  and  actual  on
the project cost
355.34 Due  to  actual  costs  being  lower  than
estimated costs
2 Engine  Augmentation
(EFA)
168 Cost of Flexible Machining System (FMS);
order  already  placed  in  Aug,15;  DP:  Two
years
3 T-90  Tank  –  100  to  140
per annum
850 Project put on hold by MOD from Feb,14 to
Oct,14.  MES  has  already  concluded  civil
works contract for Rs.281 Crore in Feb,16.
P&M under various stages of procurement
4 Large Calibre Weapons 277 Out of Rs.250 Crore of P&M, order already
placed  for  Rs.100  Crore;  balance  Rs.50
Crore  P&M  under  advance  stages  of
procurement
10. The Committee had noted that there was long delay in completion of projects
related to T-72 variant engines for armoured vehicles, spares for T-72 and T-90
tanks, Akash  Booster and Sustainer, large caliber weapons,  HMX  Plant, Pinaka,
Ammonium Percolate, MPV and 125 mm FSAPDS. The delay ranges from 3 to 9
years. Therefore, the Committee had  desired  that proper planning at the initial
stage in consultation with all the stakeholders should be undertaken by thoroughly
deliberating  upon  the  negative  factors  causing  delays  and  a  comprehensive
strategy be chalked out for timely completion of the projects within a realistic time-
frame. In the action taken replies, the Ministry has only repeated the reasons for
the  delay. On  the  remedial  actions,  the  Ministry  has  just  stated  that  financial
powers of GMs for execution of civil works have been enhanced from Rs. 25 lac to
5 crore for production buildings. The Committee are perturbed to note that their

main recommendation for taking actions for proper planning at the initial stage in
consultation  with  all  the  stakeholders  has  not  been  answered.  Therefore,  the
Committee desire the Ministry to furnish the action taken thereon.
C. Research and Development (R&D) Activities
Recommendation (Para No. 4)
11. The Committee had recommended as under: -
'During the year 2015-16, the allocation for R&D in the Ordnance Factories at BE
stage  was  Rs. 75  Crore.  The  allocation  at RE  stage  was  Rs. 85  Crore. The
allocation at BE stage during the year 2016-17 is Rs. 67.12 Crore. In comparison
to BE 2015-16 and BE 2016-17, there is a reduction of Rs.7.88 Crore. Against the
allocation of Rs. 370.79 Crore during the 12th Plan period, Ordnance Factories
Board has undertaken in-house R&D projects of Rs. 416.79 Crore for development
of the products indigenously which are at various stages. The Committee note that
some efforts are being made by Ordnance Factories to develop new products
through in-house R&D efforts. However, the Committee are dismayed to note that
the total allocation towards R&D continues to be on the lower side. The Ministry
has furnished the percentage of R&D expenditure and compared with value of
production produced during the years. The Committee feel that the allocations of
funds should not be linked to the turnover of the Ordnance Factories rather it
should be steadily increasing over the years. The Committee also note that while
the Ministry is emphasizing on 'Make in India' projects, at the same time the
allocations under R&D is not in commensuration with the avowed mission of the
Government.  Therefore,  the  Committee  strongly  recommends  that  adequate
budgetary  support  should  be  provided  for  undertaking  R&D  activities  by  the
Ordnance Factories.'
12. The Ministry in its Action Taken Reply has stated as under:-
'As recommended by the Standing Committee, allocation of funds towards R&D is
not linked to the turnover of the Ordnance Factories and it has been steadily
increasing over the years. Expenditure on R&D during 2015-16 has been Rs. 85
Crore (i.e. full amount of RE allocation has been used), which is approx. 52%
higher than the expenditure on R&D in the year 2014-15 (i.e. Rs.55.82 Crore, all
time high till 2014-15). 
During 2016-17, although BE allocation is Rs. 67.12 Crore, it is expected that
budgetary constraint shall not come in way in achieving targeted R&D expenditure
of Rs. 96 Crore by suitable enhancement at RE stage.'
13. The  Committee  take  note  of  the  assurance  given  by  the  Ministry  that
budgetary  constraints  shall  not  come  in  the  way  of  achieving  targeted  R&D
expenditure of Rs. 96 crore by way of suitable enhancement at RE stage. The

Committee would like the Ministry to furnish the details of allocations made at RE
stage. The Committee would also like to be kept apprised of the R&D initiatives
taken by the Ordnance Factories Board.
D. Restructuring of Ordnance Factories 
Recommendation (Para No. 6)
14. The Committee had recommended as under: -
 ‘The Committee in their 9th report had recommended for constitution of a high-
level committee to go into the functioning and organizational structure of Ordnance
Factories  Board  and  give  its  recommendations  on  restructuring  of  Ordnance
Factories to make them more professional to meet the present day requirements.
However, the Committee are concerned to note that there are no known plans for
restructuring of Ordnance Factories, hence, no budgetary provisions have been
planned for the same. The Committee wish to mention that the Kelkar Committee
had emphasized on restructuring of Ordnance Factories. The recommendations of
importance as made by the Committee have not been taken into cognizance by
the Ministry till date. The Committee deplore such casual approach of the Ministry
and  strongly  recommend  that  credentials  should  be  accorded  to  the  Kelkar
Committee recommendations on restructuring of Ordnance Factories. Action taken
in this regard must be intimated to the Committee.’
15. The Ministry in its Action Taken Reply has stated as under:-
‘The issue of corporatization of Ordnance Factories has been deliberated upon in
the past by several Committees set up by the Government. The Kelkar Committee
had emphasized on restructuring of Ordnance Factories with the aim that it would
enable the OFB to refocus on its areas of operation in a flexible manner so as to
respond not only to market but also to strategic interests without compromising the
interest of the labor.
 
In order to achieve the above aim and in order to keep pace with the rapid
technological  advancement  and  changing  business  scenario,  OFB's  role  now
includes:
 Focus on In-house R&D including process improvement and design
 Quality Management including Input material inspection
 Customer Diversification
 System Integration of platforms
To achieve the above role, the following activities have been initiated with
the aim of providing greater autonomy in functioning to OFB in order to improve
efficiency together with accountability:-
Strengthening  of  in-House  R&D  -  Focus  on  in-House  R&D  has  been
identified.  Twelve  (12) Ordnance Development Centres have been opened in
various  locations/  divisions  for  major  products  and  up-gradation  activities.  To
strengthen and consolidate R&D functions, OFB further plans the following:-

a) Upgrade Infrastructure in ODCs
b)  Research Assistance from Academic Institutes like IITs etc.
c) Association with DPSU and DRDO – One MoU has been signed with BEL.
Increased  outsourcing  and  vendor  development  –  OFB  Procurement
Manual is being revised with emphasis on 'Make in India' and facilitating long term
procurement. 
Quality Management including Input material Inspection – OFB is being
entrusted with 1 st Party QA functions in addition to existing responsibility for input
material  inspection,  as  part  of  implementation  of  Raman  Puri  Committee
recommendations on QA functions, in the pilot project mode. This is aimed at
making  OFB  accountable  for  the  Quality  of  its  products  with  DGQA  being
responsible for FAI (Final Acceptance Inspection) as in the case of supplies from
the private sector. 
Adoption of Commercial Format of Accounts to ensure accountability – OFB
has started preparing Annual accounts in commercial format and a formal approval
of the same is being obtained from C&AG. 
The successful implementation of the above mentioned measures will make
the OFB more professional, efficient and accountable.’
16. The Committee have noted that the Ministry has taken various steps in order
to keep pace with the rapid technological advancements like focusing on In-house
R&D including process improvement and design ,  Quality Management including
Input  material  inspection,  Customer  Diversification  and  System  Integration  of
platforms.  The  Committee  also  note  that  Ordnance  Factories  Board  is  being
provided  greater  autonomy  in  order  to  improve  efficiency  together  with
accountability.  However,  the  Committee  would  like  to  know  whether  the
implementation of the steps as narrated by the Ministry of Defence, would amount
to complete adherence with the recommendations made by the Kelkar Committee. 

E. Budgetary Provisions for Defence Research and Development
Recommendation (Para Nos. 7 to 11)
17. The Committee had recommended as under: -
‘The  Committee  note  that  there  has  always  been  a  mismatch  between  the
projected amount and allocation made at BE as well as RE stages and actual
expenditure.  During  the  year  2016-17,  against  the  projected  demand  of  Rs.
18,782.86 crore, the allocation, at BE is Rs. 13,593.78 crore. The BE during 2015-
16 was Rs. 14,358.49 crore and the final allocation at RE was Rs. 124,91.21 crore.
The difference between BE and RE is Rs. 1,867.28 crore.  As against this, the
actual expenditure is Rs, 11,603.11 crore.  Thus, there is a surrender of funds to
the tune of Rs. 888.1 crore. The allocation at BE has been continuously reduced
from BE 2014 -15 to 2015-16 (Rs.15, 282.92 crore to 14,358.49 crore) and from
2015- 16 to 2016-17 (Rs. 4,358.49 crore to Rs. 13,593.78 crore). The difference
between BE 2015-16 and 2016-17 is Rs. 764.71 crore. 
The Committee also note that out of the total Defence Budget, the share of
DRDO which was 5.79per cent in 2011-12 was reduced to 5.34per cent in 2013-
14. This share had slightly improved to 6.05 per cent in 2014-15, but was again
reduced to 5.52 per cent in 2015-16. The Budget Estimates for 2016-17 amount to
5.46 per cent of the Defence Budget. The share of (R&D) budget in the GDP of the
Nation has also been declining over the years. It has reduced to 0.10 per cent in
2012-13 from 0.13 per cent in 2010-11.  However, this share has slightly improved
to 0.11 per cent and 0.12 per cent in 2013-14 and 2014-15 respectively. But it has
reduced  to  0.11  per  cent  in  the  Budget  Estimates  for  2016-17.  As  for  the
percentage share of R&D activities with respect to overall R&D Budget during
2016-17, it is only Rs. 64.40 per cent in comparison to 71per cent during 2014-15
and 67.60 per cent during 2015-16.
Of the 64.40 per cent funds earmarked for R&D activities, the requirement
of funds for strategic schemes is Rs. 5,200 crore which is about 60 per cent. Rest
of the allocations will be spent on infrastructure, pay and allowances and other
items  of  expenditure.  The  Committee  also  note  that  each  year,  the  budget
requirement is projected by DRDO based on the ongoing projects/programmes
and future requirements and nearly 80per cent of total budget is being utilised on
Mission Mode (MM) Projects with deliverables for Armed Forces. Short falls in
budget  affect  Technology  Development  (TD),  Science  and  Technology  (S&T),
Development of Infrastructure and Facilities (IF), and projects related to Product
Support (PS). Due to shortage of funds, projects and other ongoing activities are
re-prioritized. Government is making all possible efforts to meet the budgetary
requirement  of  DRDO,  within  the  available  resources,  so  that  its  flagship
programmes do not suffer due to lack of funds.  
During the course of deliberations, the representatives of DRDO admitted
that the current budgetary allocation will not suffice even for ongoing projects and
revenue  commitments.  Major  projects  for  futuristic  technology requirements  of

tomorrow  have  been  put  on  hold  due  to  pending  allocation  of  funds  and
infrastructure  activities  planned  for  future  need  additional  funding.  Therefore,
DRDO require sustained annual commitment of funds year on year for taking up
new projects. There is also an imperative need to carry out research and cutting
edge technology development for building a strong indigenous technology base.
The Committee strongly feel that undertaking these activities requires adequate
budgetary  support.  The  Committee  are  disappointed  to  view  the  depletion  of
budgetary allocation for DRDO which has the effect of jeopardizing the scientific
and technological base of Defence forces. The Committee therefore, strongly feel
that all possible measures must  be taken  immediately to meet the budgetary
requirements of DRDO.  
The Committee have been further apprised that for high value projects,
DRDO has started the ground work which includes peer review of project proposal
as these are of high priority category. The projects would be taken up once the
allocation has been secured. The Committee strongly urge the Ministry to provide
adequate funds for these high value and high priority projects so that the work
already  done  on  these  projects  does  not  go  waste.  The  Committee  may  be
apprised of the steps taken in this regard.’
18. The Ministry in its Action Taken Reply has stated as under:-
‘In the light of the Committee recommendation for additional funds for DRDO, it is
stated that a case has been initiated to request for additional funds from MoD(Fin)
to meet the additional budgetary requirements of DRDO.
For high value projects/high priority projects which are awaiting sanction for
want to additional funds, DRDO has initiated a case to request for additional funds
from MoD(Fin) to meet the additional budgetary requirements of DRDO.’
19. The  Committee  had  expressed  concern  over  the  inadequate  budgetary
support for ongoing projects and revenue commitments as a result of which major
projects  involving  futuristic  technology  were  put  on  hold.  The  Committee,
therefore, recommended that all possible measures must be taken to meet the
budgetary  requirements  of  DRDO.  The  Ministry,  in  its  ATR,  has  apprised  the
Committee that a request has been made for additional funds from Ministry of
Defence (Finance) to meet the additional budgetary requirements of DRDO. The
Committee may be apprised of the actual allocations provided additionally.

Recommendation (Para No. 12)
20. The Committee had recommended as under: -
‘Keeping  in  mind  the  depletion  of  allocation  for  R&D,  both  in  absolute  and
percentage terms and depletion of the percentage share of R&D activities w.r.t.
overall  R&D  Budget and  overall  resource  crunch  of Government of India, the
Committee desire that the Ministry should explore the possibility of considering the
budget for R&D platform development as a sum of R&D Budget of DRDO, DPSUs
and Ordnance Factories as well as the Private Sector. The Committee are of the
view  that  due  care  should  be  taken  to  synergize  the  R&D  activities  being
undertaken by all these organizations in order to avoid duplication of Research and
Development and saving on cost and time. As a consequence thereof, more funds
can be made available for undertaking research work. The Committee also note
that DRDO’s products and systems are being developed with partnership of more
than 1000 industries including small and medium enterprises (SEM). In view of
limited funds available with DRDO, the Committee are of the view that there is
need  to  re-look  at  this  aspect,  as  to  how  the  industries  will  sponsor  for
manufacturing  the  products  and  DRDO  will  only  assist  them  in  design  and
development assignment, without spending from its own budget. The Committee
desire that DRDO should take necessary steps in this regard under intimation to
them.’
21. The Ministry in its Action Taken Reply has stated as under:-
`We do agree with the suggestions of the Committee and the same needs to be re-
looked as to how the industries will sponsor for manufacturing the products. DRDO
has implemented the same in  certain cases, examples of these include the case
of development of Rustom-II wherein the industry partners are seeding in Rs 300
Cr in design & development activities which is ~20% of the product cost. Also in
certain cases, the production contract has been taken up by PSUs which have
sought design consultancy from DRDO. A policy regarding the same needs to be
framed up.’
22. Keeping  in  mind  the  depletion  of  resource  allocation  for  R&D,  both  in
absolute  and  percentage  terms  and depletion of  the  percentage  share  of  R&D
activities w.r.t. overall R&D Budget and overall resource crunch of Government of
India, the Committee had  desired that the Ministry should explore the possibility of
considering the budget for R&D platform development as a sum of R&D Budget of
DRDO,  DPSUs  and  Ordnance  Factories  as  well  as  the  Private  Sector.  This
synergisation  of  R&D  budget  of  all  the  organisations  will  help  in  avoiding
duplication of Research and Development activities and thereby save on cost and
time.  The  Ministry’s  reply  is  silent  on  the  action  taken  on  this  aspect  of  the

recommendation. Therefore, the Committee desire that the Ministry furnish action
taken replies in this regard within three months of the presentation of this report.
 With regard  to the Committee’s recommendation for having the modalities
for  sponsoring  of  the  work  of  manufacturing  of  the  products  by  SEMs  and
restricting the job of DRDO to design aspects only, the Ministry has stated that
DRDO has implemented the policy in certain cases, where the industry partner has
borne  20% of the product cost.  However, a policy regarding the same needs to be
framed up.  Keeping in view the snail paced progress of work, the Committee
strongly  desire  that  the  Ministry  frames  a  policy  at  the  earliest  so  that
manufacturing of the products is sponsored to an adequate extent. 
F. Need to prepare a Technological Road Map 
Recommendation (Para Nos. 13 and 14)
23. The Committee had recommended as under: -
`The Committee observe that DRDO has developed the following major systems
for the Forces viz. Army, Navy and Air force - Army: Prithvi, Agni, Akash, BrahMos,
Lakshya  Nishant,  MBT  Arjun  Mk-I,  AAD  Mk-I,  AERV, Sarvatra,  Pinaka,  ROV,
Radar-3D TCR, WLR, BFSR, Samyukta EW, DivyaDrishti and Samvahak. Navy:
Dhanush, LRSAM, BrahMos, Sangraha EW, Varuna ESM, Dolphin ESM, Humsa
NG,  USHUS,TAL,  Revathi  –  Radar,  Maareech,  Varunasta,  Submarines  and
Escape Set. Air Force: Prithvi, Akash, MRSAM, Lakshya, Eagle EW, LCA Tejas,
AEW&C,  Rohini,  Aslesha,  SAR-Radars,  Avionics  for  MiG  29,  Su-30,  Laser
Designator cum TI, Aerial Delivery Systems and CPSS. 
The Committee, while appreciating the work done by DRDO, nevertheless,
also  feel  concerned  to  note  that  even  after  58  years,  there  is  no  clear  cut
technological road map prepared. DRDO is creating a platform and integrating a
number  of  sub-components.  But,  R&D  is  about  developing  certain  key
technologies  akin  to  that  of  ISRO’s  capability  in  space  which  has  not  been
developed by DRDO so far. The Committee are of the view that as the custodian of
R&D for national security, while laboratories are expanded, technologies too need
to  be  developed,  or  else,  no  useful  purpose  will  be  served.  Therefore,  the
Committee feel the need to emphasize on the Ministry that it is high time for DRDO
to prepare a technological road map and develop certain key technologies on the
lines of ISRO so as to strengthen our Defence base. The Committee further are of
the view that DRDO should focus on key high technologies in coordination with
DPSUs and the low end technologies can be assigned to capable reputed Private
Sector by involving them in the system integration and providing adequate financial
support.  This  will  minimize  the  delay  and  limitations  posed  due  to  financial
constraints.  This  will  also  further  facilitate  in  creating  a  R&D  network.  The
Committee desire to be apprised about the action taken in this direction.’

24. The Ministry in its Action Taken Reply has stated as under:-
`Initiatives were taken by DRDO after the presentation on Demand for Grants were
presented and all the Seven clusters DGs have given a technology roadmap for
each of the cluster for the next Ten years. This will be put up to Secretary, DR&D
and will be finalized by end July 2016 for implementation.’
25. The Committee note that after the presentation of Report on Demands for
Grants, all the seven cluster DGs have been given a technology roadmap for each
cluster for the next ten years.  In the action replies furnished to the Committee, it
has been stated that this will be put up to Secretary DE&D and will be finalized by
the end of July 2016 for implementation. The Ministry may furnish the updated
replies in this regard.  
In  their  earlier  recommendation,  the  Committee  had  expressed  concern
about DRDO not developing certain key technologies akin to that of ISRO, even
after long years since its establishment.  Therefore, the Committee had desired that
DRDO  should focus  on  developing  key high technologies  in  coordination  with
DPSUs and the low end technologies could be assigned to capable private sector
by  involving  them  in  the  system  integration  and  providing  adequate  financial
support.  The Ministry has not replied on this aspect of the recommendation. The
Committee desire the Ministry to furnish the requisite information relating to action
taken in this regard.
G. Manpower in DRDO
Recommendation (Para No. 15)
26. The Committee had recommended as under: -
'Committee  are  happy  to  note  that  in  DRDO,  the  existing  strength  of  7863
scientists, is almost equal to the sanctioned strength of 7878. Thus, the shortfall in
manpower in the organisation is negligible. Also, the Committee appreciate the fact
that from the year 2011 to 2015, the rate of exodus of scientists from the DRDO
has decreased. This is a welcome development. The Committee feel in this regard
that positive steps such as the ‘Incentive Scheme’ for Scientists could be initiated
in the DRDO so as to minimize the attrition of Scientists from the organization to
zero percent.'
27. The Ministry in its Action Taken Reply has stated as under:-
'Seventh  Central  Pay  Commission  (CPC)  has  not  recommended  Performance
Related  Incentive  Scheme  (PRIS)  for  Defence  Research  and  Development

Organisation (DRDO) employees as given to Department of Atomic Energy (DAE)
and Indian Space Research Organization (ISRO).' 
28. The Committee had recommended initiation of positive steps such as the
Incentive Scheme for scientists so as to minimise the attrition of Scientists. The
Ministry  has  stated  that  Seventh  Central  Pay  Commission  (CPC)  has  not
recommended  Performance  Related  Incentive  Scheme  (PRIS)  for  DRDO.   The
Committee find the decision of the Government in not providing incentives, similar
to those being provided to the scientists of Department of Atomic Energy (DAE)
and Indian Space Research Organization (ISRO) questionable.  The Committee, in
this regard wish to reiterate their earlier recommendation for pursuing the matter at
the appropriate level so that the Scientists of DRDO too are provided performance
related incentives.
Recommendation (Para No. 16)
29. The Committee had recommended as under: -
'The  Committee,  however,  feel  concerned  to  note  that  there  has  been  no
review/increase in scientific manpower of DRDO since 2001, though the number of
projects  as  well  as  technological  and  tactical  Defence  requirements  have
increased manifold. The Ministry has intimated in this regard that the proposal is
pending with the Ministry of Finance. The Committee recommend that this matter
may be taken up with the Ministry of Finance on top priority so that the manpower
requirements of DRDO and India’s strategic needs can be taken care of properly.
This will further enhance research capability which can be exported and revenue
earned thereof can be used for more R&D.'
30. The Ministry in its Action Taken Reply has stated as under:-
'The Cabinet Note seeking approval for authorisation of 436 additional posts in the
first phase, out of total requirement of 1316 posts was forwarded to Cabinet on 08
Jun 2015.  Prime Minister’s Office vide PMO ID No. 4221110/Pol/2015 dated 31 Jul
2015 sought for the action taken report on the directions of Cabinet Committee on
Security and the same was forwarded by DRDO on 14 Aug 2015 to PMO.
The 1316 additional posts as and when sanctioned are proposed to be filled
up in a phased manner in three recruitment years as under:-
S.
No.
Year No. of Scientists Work Cadre Officers Total
(i) First 420 16 436
(ii) Second 420 20 440
(iii) Third 420 20 440

Total 1260 56 1316
In the first phase, Scientists will be inducted in the following disciplines as under:-
S. No. Discipline Numbers
(i) Electronics & Communication 122
(ii) Mechanical Engineering 108
(iii) Computer Science 75
(iv) Chemistry / Chemical Engineering 35
(v) Armaments / Material Science 28
(vi) Physics 20
(vii) Aeronautical / Aerospace 19
(viii) Life Sciences 10
(ix) Naval Architecture 3
420
(x) Critical Immediate requirement of works 
officers cadre
16
Total 436
Normally, the recruitment process takes 12 months to complete i.e. from
notification of vacancy to joining of selected candidates. Thereafter, the selected
young scientists are detailed for induction training of the 6 months duration before
they are deployed in research projects.'  
31. The Committee appreciate that a note for the Cabinet, seeking approval for
authorisation of 436 additional posts in the first phase, out of total requirement of
1316 posts has been forwarded on 08 July, 2015. Prime Minister's Office, vide PMO
ID 4221110/POL/2015 dated 31st July, 2015 had sought for the action taken report on
the directions of the Cabinet Committee on Security and the same was forwarded
by DRDO on 14th August, 2015 to PMO. The Committee would like to be informed in
detail of the progress made in this regard. The Committee would like the Ministry of
Defence to take up this matter at the appropriate level so that the 436 posts are
filled up in the first phase.  The Committee desire to be intimated of the action
taken / progress made in this regard.

Recommendation (Para No. 17)
32. The Committee had recommended as under: -
'On the requirement of scientists, the Committee note that various steps are being
taken by DRDO to generate interest in Defence technologies among school and
college students with the aim of encouraging them to take up Defence R&D as a
career. While the Committee appreciate the efforts being made in this direction
they feel that concerted efforts are needed to attract genuine young talent to opt for
Defence R&D as a career. In this regard, the Committee opine that a detailed
research of the best practices being followed by the major countries in the world be
undertaken and an action plan based on this study drawn up for consideration. The
viability of the practices followed internationally vis-à-vis the local scenario may be
worked  upon  and  shared  with  the  Committee  for  their  information  and
consideration and further examination in this regard. '
33. The Ministry in its Action Taken Reply has stated as under:-
'Proposal for augmentation of scientific manpower in DRDO is still pending with the
Cabinet. In this regard the Action Taken Report sought by the PMO has already
been submitted in August 2015.
As regards fellowships programmes, DRDO awards fellowships in a large
number of areas of interest of the Organisation pertaining to different Clusters i.e.
Armament  &  Combat  Engineering  System,  Life  Sciences,  Electronics  &
Communication System, Missiles & Strategic System, Micro Electronic Device &
Computational System, Naval Systems & Materials, and Aeronautical System.  As
on date, approximate 950 fellowships awarded by the Department are in progress.
In the preceding year, the department has awarded as many as 96 fellowships.
However, as per the existing recruitment policy and also due to the shortage of
vacancies, it is not possible to necessarily absorb the fellows in DRDO.  In this
regard, they have to compete with other candidates.   
As regards performance accountability of personnel, DRDO has a merit
based promotion scheme wherein promotions are granted to scientists/technical
staff only after a rigorous assessment by subject experts/external members. In the
process, non-meritorious scientists/ technical staff do not get promotions and get
eliminated.  The 7 th CPC has also made certain recommendations in this regard
which are under consideration of the Central Government.  As and when decision
of the Central Government is notified in this regard, the department will accordingly
develop its mechanism for further dealing with nonperforming personnel.'

34. The Committee appreciate the fact that DRDO follows an internal mechanism
of merit based promotion scheme in regard to performance accountability whereby
promotions are granted to scientists/technical staff only after rigorous assessment
by subject experts/external members.
The  Committee in this  regard, desire to be apprised of the proposal for
augmentation  of  scientific  manpower  in  DRDO  which  is  still  pending  with  the
Cabinet,  so  as  to  have  an  assessment  of  the  effectiveness  of  the  steps  for
augmenting the scientific manpower in DRDO. 
The Committee would also like to be apprised of the recommendations of the
7th Central Pay Commission in this regard which are under consideration by the
Central  Government  so  as  to  enable  in  assessing  the  effectiveness  of  the
recommendations in respect of performance accountability.
H. Projects abandoned/closed by DRDO
Recommendation (Para No. 18)
35. The Committee had recommended as under: -
'The Committee express their deep concern on the wasteful expenditure incurred
by DRDO on closure of major projects like Airborne Surveillance Platform, Cargo
Ammunition,  GPS  based  system  as  an  Alternative  to  Fire  Direction  Radar,
Development of 30mm Fair Weather Towed AD Gun System, Light towed AD Gun
system  and  30  mm  Light Towed  AD  Gun  System  after  getting  these  projects
sanctioned. The Committee desire that they be informed of the basis on which
these projects were chosen and the specific reasons which forced the Government
to close them. The Committee fail to understand as to why, at the initial stage itself,
before the projects were sanctioned, the possible constraints and bottlenecks were
not foreseen. The Committee opine that the reasons attributed for the closure of
various projects like Probable Duration of Completion(PDC), extension not being
approved, one out of two parallel methods being found more feasible, requirement
of additional funds, etc. cited by the Ministry could have been tackled better at the
initial stage itself through proper planning and following a concurrent engineering
and development approach.'
36. The Ministry in its Action Taken Reply has stated as under:-
'DRDO  has  taken  the  following  steps  to  minimize  short  closures  of  
projects:-

 While  undertaking  new  projects  pre-project  activity  including  preliminary
design is being given greater focus.
 More stringent review mechanisms have been put in place e.g. various high
level committees including, Steering Committees Advisory Committees and
Monitoring Boards (Apex Board Executive Boards).
 Involvement of Services and production partners during development process
and reviews -To know their views in advance including finalisation of GSQRs.
 Synergy among stakeholders - Quarterly interaction meetings.
 Increase in allocation is made in the next financial year and subsequently in
the 13th Five year plan period ahead.  Efforts for the same will be made.'
37. The Committee appreciate the fact that DRDO has taken various steps to
minimise short closures of projects. However, the Committee feel the need for
being apprised of the effectiveness of the measures, so as to have a clear idea of
their impact in minimising short closure of projects.
Recommendation (Para No. 19)
38. The Committee had recommended as under: -
'The Committee recommend that in future there should be a scientific, technical
and concurrent audit of every ongoing project by an independent agency so that
such closures are avoided in future. The Committee also strongly feel that the
Ministry should re-evaluate the reasons and also seek expert advice before taking
a decision towards closing down any project of DRDO in future so as to avoid
wastage of public funds as also help in sustaining the projects, which can prove to
be beneficial for the country.'
39. The Ministry in its Action Taken Reply has stated as under:-
'Defence Research and Development Organization (DRDO) has already started
taking concrete steps to conduct the Project Monitoring Board meetings, which is
chaired by Secretary, DR&D and Executive Board which is chaired by cluster DG
to minimize slippages at the initial stage itself. This is being done so that projects
are not closed down abruptly without achieving the desired goals. To ensure the
same, alerts are being sent for reviews due and approaching imminent milestones.
Also, every project is monitored through RFD in which annual target is fixed for
every project.
In continuation to the efforts to minimize delays, DRDO has revised the
‘Procedures for Project Formulation and Management’ (PPFM) effective from April
2016 onwards. Some of the major changes brought out in the revised PPFM

document  include  selection  of  projects  based  on  attribute  scale  and  ongoing
workload,  greater  emphasis  on  pre-project  activity,  risk  management,  linking
procurement plan with project sanction to avoid delays, in-depth costing guidelines
and stringent review mechanism. Apart from this, increased attention is being given
in the 13 th Five Year Plan (FYP) wherein background details are being asked
related to proposed new projects.
DRDO has also a mechanism, wherein before the closure of the project,
the highest monitoring body reviews the projects, assess the status of completion
and gives appropriate directives.'
40. The Committee appreciate the measures taken by  Defence Research and
Development  Organization  (DRDO)  such  as  holding Project  Monitoring  Board
meetings, revision of the ‘Procedures for Project Formulation and Management’
(PPFM), increased attention being given in the 13 th Five Year Plan (FYP), reviews of
the projects by the highest monitoring body  before the closure of the project to
minimise slippages at the initial stage etc.  Nevertheless, the Committee feel that a
scientific,  technical  and  concurrent  audit  of  every  ongoing  project  by  an
independent agency is a necessity for the purpose of carrying out a strategy for
avoiding such closures in future.
Recommendation (Para No. 21)
41. The Committee had recommended as under: -
'During  the  course  of deliberations,  the  Defence  Secretary acknowledged  that
DRDO, by itself, is also responsible for delay in its research work. The Committee,
in this regard, take note of the problems faced by DRDO in the matter of non-
availability of platform for trials. The Committee feel that a better coordination
between DRDO and the Services could easily solve this bottleneck and also cut
short the time frame in the development and testing of weapon systems. The
Committee, therefore, feel that the Ministry should make concerted efforts in this
direction so that testing and trial platforms are always available to them for crucial
research and development work.'
42. The Ministry in its Action Taken Reply has stated as under:-
'A new category “Mission Mode-User Trials” have been introduced in order to
expedite trials of developed systems/products.'
43. The Committee, in their 17 th Report had noted that DRDO has established
mechanisms for better coordination between the organisation and the Services and

the issue of trial platforms is being raised at various fora. The Committee also note
that 'A new category, “Mission Mode-User Trials” has been introduced in order to
expedite trials of developed systems/products.' The Committee, however, would
like to be apprised of the progress made by DRDO in actuality so as to help in
analysing whether the efforts, as stated to have been taken have helped in bridging
the  gap  in  so  far  as  the  issue  of  delays  in  research  work  is  concerned.  The
Committee  feel  that  if  the  present  mechanism  and efforts  are  not  yielding  the
desired results, additional measures need to be initiated and taken up so as to
avoid delays in implementation of projects.
Recommendation (Para No. 22)
44. The Committee had recommended as under: -
'The  Committee  note  with  immense  surprise  that  although  an  elaborate
mechanism  is  in  place  which  includes  adequate  financial  and  administrative
powers  to  Directors  General  of technology clusters  to  carry out research  and
development as per the mandate of DRDO, monitoring of all Cabinet Committee
on Security (CCS) projects by the Cabinet Secretariat, etc., the projects are being
delayed. The Committee, in this regard, feel that there is some lacuna in the
implementation of this system. The Committee, therefore, recommend that more
effective efforts are required to be made for ensuring timely completion of each
project.'
45. The Ministry in its Action Taken Reply has stated as under:-
'DRDO feels that financial powers also need to be delegated down the line to Lab
Directors and Programme/Project Directors with adequate checks. Procurement
process  also  needs  to  be  streamlined  by  cutting  down  on  repeated  approval
processing which lead to time delays.
Action is being pursued for positioning of Financial Advisors (FAs) in labs
and independent IFAs with cluster DGs so as to enable speedy processing of file.
Revision of delegation of financial powers is also under process which is expected
to improve the functioning.' 
46. The  Committee  appreciate  the  fact  that  the  DRDO  has  accepted  the
recommendation of the Committee and various steps are being taken to ensure
timely completion of each project by way of Delegation of financial powers to Lab
Directors and Programme/Project Directors with adequate checks, bringing about
improvement in procurement processes, positioning of Financial Advisors (FAs) in

labs  and  independent  IFAs  with  cluster  DGs,  and  revision  of  financial  powers
delegated. Further, the Committee would like to be apprised of the progress made
in  effective  implementation  of  these  measures  in  ensuring  timely  execution  of
projects.
Recommendation (Para No. 23)
47. The Committee had recommended as under: -
'The Committee agree with the suggestions of the Defence Secretary and strongly
recommend  that  a  mechanism  should  be  developed  so  that  the  DRDO,  the
production  agency  and  the  user  agency  work  in  tandem  right  from  the
conceptualization stage, which it is felt, can result in preventing unnecessary delay
in the implementation of various projects of vital importance.'
48. The Ministry in its Action Taken Reply has stated as under:-
'We have taken the Services on board this time well ahead of time and involved
them in formulating 13th FYP of DRDO. Inputs have been received which are under
consideration before finalization of plan document.'
49. The Committee are happy to note that in pursuance of the suggestions and
recommendations made, the Ministry has taken the Services on board this time and
involved  them  in  formulating  the  13th Five  Year  Plan  of  DRDO,  and  have  also
received inputs from the Services which are under consideration before finalisation
of  Plan  document.  This,  the  Committee  hope,  would  help  in  preventing
unnecessary delays in implementation of projects. However, the Committee would
like to be apprised of the actual results achieved through these measures so as to
have a correct assessment of the impact of these mechanisms and to make an
assessment of further steps that would be required to be taken in case of any
inadequacies that may remain. 
Recommendation (Para No. 24)
50. The Committee had recommended as under: -
'The Committee also recommend that keeping in view the huge public money
involved  in  these  projects  and  the  fact  that  these  directly  affect  the  Defence
preparedness of the country, accountability must invariably be fixed in case of
inordinate delays in executing projects.'

51. The Ministry in its Action Taken Reply has stated as under:-
'No enhanced authority has been given to Project Directors till date. Accountability
without authority is not fair. Delegation of financial powers, 2010 is getting revised.'
52. The Committee appreciate that DRDO concurs with their recommendations
regarding  increasing  accountability  in  case  of  inordinate  delays  in  Defence
projects  by  the  way  of  giving  additional  authority  to  the  Project  Directors  by
revising the Delegation of Financial Powers, 2010. Besides, the Committee feel that
strict internal checks and balances are required to be maintained for monitoring
the work of the program/project directors. The Committee expect that this aspect
would  be  looked  into  with  due  seriousness.   The  Committee  also  expect  that
appropriate measures are taken for strengthening the mechanism of accountability.
I. Kaveri Engine
Recommendation (Para No. 26)
53. The Committee had recommended as under: -
'The  Committee  desire  that  infrastructure  to  test aero-engines  should  also  be
created within the country so that flying testing of engines can be done in a timely
manner without carrying the engine to a foreign country and finding availability of
slot testing agency etc.'
54. The Ministry in its Action Taken Reply has stated as under:-
1 'The design improvement and validation of aero engine components and
modules  through  testing  is  a  continuous  activity  to  enhance  and
demonstrate  engine  performance  and  reliability. At  present,  only  limited
aerodynamic and structural testing can be conducted within the country.
Hence, the required component testing facilities at an estimated cost of
Rs.1330 crore are planned to be established by DRDO at Rajanakunte,
Bengaluru for development of Ghatak engine and all future generation aero
engines.
2 The  existing  Fan  &  Compressor  Test  Facility at Gas  Turbine  Research
Establishment (GTRE) has inadequate capacity and has become obsolete.
To carry out testing of Fan & Compressor for existing and future generation
gas turbine engine programmes of GTRE, it is essential to have a dedicated
Fan & Compressor test facility at GTRE. GTRE is working out the budgetary

cost of this facility to be established ‘on turnkey basis’ with an objective to
initiate EPC approval by end of Oct 2016.
3 DRDO is planning to establish a twin test cell at GTRE to carry out the
performance testing of gas turbine engines upto 130 kN thrust class. The
proposed engine test cells will cater for performance and endurance test
requirements of the present and future engines. One of the test cell will
have the capability of testing engine with thrust vector nozzle. The cost of
establishing this test cell (including the building) is estimated to be Rs.300
crore. GTRE has published a Global RFI for setting up of twin test cell in
July.  Response to RFI is expected by end Aug 2016.
4 Boeing Inc. USA has offered to establish a High Altitude Engine Test Facility
(HAETF) of 90kN capacity in India for testing Gas turbine engine as an
offset obligation in C17 Globemaster Acquisition Programme of MoD.  US
Government is requested to issue necessary approval (licence), when M/s.
Boeing  submits  Technical  Assistance  Agreement  (TAA)  for  HAETF, as
Boeing needs to complete the offset credits against the subject programme.
For this purpose, DRDO has acquired 100 acres of land at NagarjunaSagar,
Telangana.
5   DRDO is studying the indigenous Flying Test Bed (FTB) requirements, for
which a Joint Committee consisting of members from DRDO, IAF, HAL and
DGAQA will be constituted.'
55. The  Committee appreciate  the fact  that  Component  Testing Facilities  are
planned to be established by DRDO at Rajanakunte, Bengaluru for development of
Ghatak engine and all future generation aero engines, dedicated Fan & Compressor
test  facility  at  GTRE.  Further, the  Committee  would  like  to  be  apprised  of  the
progress made on account of the steps being taken in this regard.
J. Indigenisation of Research and Development Activities
Recommendation (Para No. 27)
56. The Committee had recommended as under: -
'The  Committee  appreciate  the  fact  that  Defence  Research  and  Development
Organisation  (DRDO)  has  a  number  of  achievements  to  its  credit  like  the
development of the strategic Agni class of missiles, a family of radars and sonars
for  virtually  every platform/application,  Electronic  Warfare  (EW)  systems,  Main

Battle Tank (MBT), development of combat aircraft, etc. However, the Committee
note that it is also a fact that the country is still heavily dependent on imports to
meet  its  Defence  requirements.  Given  the  fact  that  technologically  advanced
countries  are  reluctant  to  part  with  their  critical  technologies  with  developing
countries like India, it becomes all the more essential for our labs to develop each
systems, sub-systems, component  ab-initio  including information, infrastructural
and testing facilities. The Committee are also of the view that as original research
takes a long time, therefore, DRDO may also think of developing a product through
reverse  engineering.  The  Committee  recommend  that  the  Ministry  of  Finance
should provide adequate budgetary support in this regard so that indigenization of
R&D activities can be taken up by DRDO on a war footing. The Committee also
feel that there is a need for an increase in the budget for R&D activities of DRDO
specifically targeted at reducing dependency on other countries in critical and high
technology areas, which can lead to the country becoming self-reliant in Defence
Production.'
57. The Ministry in its Action Taken Reply has stated as under:-
'Case has been initiated to request for additional funds form MoD(Fin) to meet the
additional budgetary requirements of DRDO.' 
58. The Committee note that a case has been initiated to request for additional
funding  from  Ministry  of  Defence  (Fin)  to  meet  the  enhanced  budgetary
requirements of DRDO. Further, the Committee would like to be apprised of the
progress  made  in  this  regard.  The  Committee  further  reiterate  that  as  original
research  takes  a  long  time,  DRDO  may  also  consider  developing  the  product
through reverse engineering.
K. Quality Control
Recommendation (Para No. 29)
59. The Committee had recommended as under: -
'The Committee also feel it to be desirable on the part of DRDO to, at first, develop
a  product  and  later  keep  on  improving  on  it  by  the  way  of
‘categorizations/markings’ viz. Mark I, II, III, IV etc, so that there is continuity in the
assigned tasks to  some extent. This approach would be preferable instead of
aiming to  create  a ‘perfect product’ in one  go. This  will  need a proper  policy
directive as also building the stages of the production systems for the initial and
final products.'
60. The Ministry in its Action Taken Reply has stated as under:-

'As per recommendation of Standing Committee on Defence, DRDO proposed a
Spiral Development Model in line with Mark I, II, III and so on to be included as a
part  of  ‘Make  DRDO’  category  during  amendment  of  Defence  Procurement
Procedure  (DPP).  DPP-2016  has  been  issued  without  inclusion  of  the  same
procedure.  However, DRDO  is  still  making  all  efforts  to  implement  the  same
procedure by approaching MoD.'
61. The  Committee  appreciate  the  fact  that  DRDO  has  proposed  a  Spiral
Development  Model  with  categorisations  such  as  Mark  I,  II,  III  and  so  on  for
inclusion in the  'Make DRDO' category as part of the amendments to Defence
Procurement Procedures (DPPs). While this is in tune with the recommendation of
the Committee, at the same time, however, the Committee feel that it would have
been appropriate to include this as a part of the Defence Procurement Procedure –
2016.  As a consequence of not including this in the revised DPP, the DRDO is still
making all efforts to implement the same procedure by approaching Ministry of
Defence. The Committee would like to be apprised of the progress made in the
implementation of ‘Spiral Development Model’, as proposed by DRDO.
L. Public Private Partnership
Recommendation (Para No. 30)
62. The Committee had recommended as under: -
`During  the  deliberations,  the  Committee  pointed  out  the  gigantic  gap  in  the
availability of regular arms, ammunition and equipment ranging from 30 to 70 per
cent, which adversely affects the ability to the combat our prime adversaries. The
Committee stressed on the need for a complete revamp and re-orientation on how
the DRDO functions and one of the major initiatives suggested by the Committee
in this regard was to facilitate the active involvement of private sector, Universities,
Indian Institute of Technologies and Indian Institute of Science which could play a
major role in the resurgence of DRDO.’
63. The Ministry in its Action Taken Reply has stated as under:-
`DRDO is working in close synchronization with all its stakeholders through its
programmes/  projects.   Accordingly, it  has  developed,  built  and  upgraded  its
industrial partner base.  Today, over 1000 private industries and SMEs are vital
partners in DRDO’s development programmes. This number covers the entire
spectrum  ranging  from  Defence  Public  Sector  Undertakings  (DPSUs)  and
Ordnance Factory Board (OFB) to private industries, all of them have played a
crucial role in the development programs of DRDO.

In  addition, DRDO  collaborates  with  other  science  &  Technology (S&T)
Organisation,  like  Department  of  Space  (DoS),  Department  of  Atomic  Energy
(DAE)  and  Council  of  Scientific  &  Industrial  Research  (CSIR)  for  common
requirements  and  applications.   DRDO  has  set  up  specialized  centres  of
technology  in  select  academic  institutions  of  repute  to  work,  e.g.  IIT  Madras
Research Park, DRDO has also selectively chosen its global partners and has
Memorandum of Undertakings (MoUs) with over 30 countries worldwide for joint
collaboration in requisite areas with complementary work share.’
64. The Committee, in their earlier recommendation had observed that there was
gigantic gap in the availability of regular arms, ammunition and equipment, which
ranges from 30 to 70 percent. The Committee have been apprised that DRDO is
working in close coordination with all the stakeholders such as those from the
private  industry,  SMEs,  DPSUs,  OFB,  Science  &  Technology  Organisations,
Universities, IITs and by way of collaborations involving about 30 counties etc. The
Committee are perturbed to note that despite several measures, there is still a
shortage ranging from 30 to 70 percent. The Committee strongly feel in this regard
that there is some lacunae in implementation. Therefore, the Committee desire that
the  Ministry  takes  corrective  action  so  as  to  minimise  the  gap,  which  is
substantive. 
M. Directorate General Quality Assurance
Recommendation (Para Nod. 44 and 45)
65. The Committee had recommended as under: -
`The Committee note that for the year 2016-17, DGQA has been allocated Rs.
1,075.37 crore against the projection of Rs. 1,099.99 crore. However, when asked
if any compromises had been made or are likely to be made due to reduced
budgetary allocation  against  the  projections  made  by  the  DGQA,  it  replied  in
negative. The Committee also note that DGQA carries out inspection of defence
stores supplied by Ordnance Factories, DPSUs, Trade Firms and ex-import. These
inspections are done at various stages of –manufacture and at Final Acceptance
stage. On an average, DGQA carries out approx. 18,000 inspections per month.
Further, whenever a new system is inducted into the Army, DGQA is an integral
part of the process and plays a pivotal role in all stages of induction right from the
General  Staff  Qualitative  Requirement  (GSQR)  formulation  stage  till  the  Joint
Receipt  Inspection  of  the  store.  Since  DGQA  seems  to  be  satisfied  with  its
budgetary allocation,  the  Committee  hope  that  DGQA would  continue  in  their
efforts  in  taking  all  actions  necessary  to  ensure  that  the  Arms,  Ammunitions,
Equipments and Stores being inducted in the Armed Forces are superlative in
quality and highly reliable in war/warlike situations.

The  Committee  note  that  DGQA suffered  deficiency in  manpower  because  of
various cuts during initial stages and recruitment ban, especially in group ‘C’ and
‘D’ posts. As per the submission of the Ministry, the ban has been lifted and the
process  of  recruitment  has  started.  The  Committee  hope  that  the  recent
recruitment undertaken by DGQA addresses the problem of shortage of manpower
adequately and they be apprised of the tangible outcome thereof.'
66. The Ministry in its Action Taken Reply has stated as under:-
`It is confirmed that the DGQA allocation for the year 2016-17 as well as projection
thereof are correct.’
Manpower recruitment for DGQA has been initiated with the concerned authorities
to the extent permissible.'
67. The Ministry has not touched upon the part of the recommendation wherein
the Committee recommended taking `all necessary steps to ensure that the Arms,
Ammunition, Equipments and Stores being inducted in the Armed Forces are of
superior quality and reliable in war/warlike situations. The Committee desire to be
apprised of the action taken by the Ministry and DGDQ in particular for supplying
high quality reliable stores to the Army. 

CHAPTER II
A) OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED
BY THE GOVERNMENT
Recommendation (Para No. 3)
The Committee note that modernization of infrastructure is a continuous  process
in Ordnance Factories with a view to update the plants and machineries matching both
the qualitative and quantitative requirements of the products projected in the prospective
plans.  During  the  years  2010-11  to  2014-15,  the  Capital  Outlay  for  modernization
programme  was  Rs.  2,348.45  Crore,  against  which  the  actual  expenditure  was  Rs.
2226.31 Crore. The Committee observed that Rs. 122.14 Crore has remained unutilized
although Ordnance Factories Board manages 41 manufacturing units where the amount
could  have  been  utilized.  During  the  years  2015-16,  Rs.  5  00.05  Crore  has  been
provided. The BE for the year 2016-17 is Rs. 735.68 Crore. The delays in many important
projects  like  Pinaka  Rocket  Systems,  T-90  tanks  have  resulted  due  to  delay  in
augmentation  of  capacity  for  manufacturing  by  the  Ordnance  Factories  Board.  The
Committee are not happy with the pace of modernization and under-utilization of funds by
Ordnance Factories Board. The Committee opine that optimum utilization should also be
given  due importance and desire that appropriate steps  should  be taken to  achieve
modernization.
Reply of the Government
Reasons for shortfall are indicated in the table below:
Expenditure
Head
2011-12 to 2014-15 ( Rs. in Crore)
Fund
availa
ble
Actual
Expenditur
e
Shortfal
l
Reason for shortfall
M&E 593.64 592.52 1.12
Works 709.81 699.87 9.94 Less expenditure by MES in 2014-15
RR 1045.0
0
933.92 111.08 Less  expenditure  in  RR  due  to
reasons stated above.
RR  (Renewal  &  Replacement)
expenditure is booked under Revenue
Head and is met from self-generated
Annual  Depreciation  Fund  of  OFB.
The  accumulated  depreciation  fund
gets carried over to the next financial
year.
Total 2348.4
5
2226.31 122.14
MOD allotment for 2015-16 was increased from Rs. 500.05 Crore to Rs. 648 Crore
in capital outlay which has been fully utilized. 

Capital Outlay (BE) for 2016-17: 
Values (Rs. in Crore)
Head Approved BE Committed liability
M&E 490.00 514.19
Works 229.67 556.60
TOTAL 719.67 1070.79
It is apparent that committed liability already exceeds the approved BE for 2016-17.
Recommendation (Para No. 5)
The Committee had recommended as under: -
The Committee note that Ordnance Factories are suffering from acute shortage of
manpower.  The  Committee  found  that  against  a  sanctioned  strength  of  1,37,474
technical personnel in various Ordnance Factories, the actual strength is only 71,576 as
on January, 2016. This shows that there is a huge gap of almost 52.07 percent between
the sanctioned and actual strength of technical personnel. The existing strength of non-
technical staff is only 17,113 as against the sanctioned strength of 23,500 which is a
significant shortfall. Similarly, the sanctioned strength of Group ‘A’ officers is 2,123. The
actual  strength  is  just  1,797.  The  Committee  are  concerned  to  note  that  this  huge
shortage of manpower in Ordnance Factories, particularly in the technical category will
have a negative impact on manufacturing and ensuring improvement in the products.
Therefore, the Committee recommend that immediate steps should be taken to bridge the
huge gap between the sanctioned and actual strength in order to achieve manufacturing
of technically advanced products by Ordnance Factories. The Committee will also like to
know when the last exercise for manpower planning was conducted and whether the
modern technology and computerization of processes resulting into improved efficiencies
were taken into account.
The Ministry in its Action Taken Reply has stated as under:-
With regard to the shortfall in existing strength as against sanctioned strength, it is
hereby intimated that the sanctioned strength of Ordnance Factories is intended towards
catering to peak load requirements of Indian Armed Forces while existing strength is
maintained  for  meeting  the  current load  of the  Armed  Forces  on  annual  basis. The
flexibility is required to help Indian Ordnance Factories to augment the manpower at a
very short notice in times of exigency. Further, promotions to the Employees are given
based on the sanctioned strength of each cadre. As such the sanctioned strength is
required for maintaining a healthy career progression of the work force while the existing
strength is maintained to meet the work load requirements.
However, manpower  is  being  sanctioned  every  year  in  respect  of  all
categories of employees based on vacancies available in the recruitment grade and work
load requirement. Last manpower sanction for direct recruitment in various technical &
non-technical posts (total 4033 Industrial Employees & 965 Non-Industrial Employees)
was accorded in May, 2016.

Recommendation (Para No. 20)
There are 93 ongoing major projects in different DRDO labs. These include Agni
IV, Agni V, Nirbhay Cruise Missile, K-15, Nag, Astra, AWACS, Arjun Main Battle Tank,
Tejas LCA, etc. The Committee are dismayed  to note that out of 45 major ongoing
projects (costing more than Rs. 100 crore), there have been cost revisions in 11 and time
revisions in 16 projects. Besides, 13 projects are more than 5 years old, i.e. sanctioned
prior to 2010. While 17 major projects (costing more than Rs. 100 crore) were sanctioned
during the 11th Five Year Plan (April 2002 to March 2007), none has yet been completed.
Moreover, three of these have been under closure, two under short closure and three
under  evaluation.  The  Committee  are  perturbed  to  observe  that  the  projects  being
undertaken are not executed as per schedule and inordinate delay in execution of almost
all the projects has become a common phenomenon. The Committee, while deploring this
attitude, desire that concrete steps be taken to put in place a mechanism to oversee
project  execution  so  that  they  are  implemented  in  a  stipulated  time-frame.  Steps
proposed to be taken in this direction may be intimated to the Committee.
Reply of the Government
As on date, there are 43 ongoing major projects (cost >Rs 100 Cr) in different
DRDO labs (excluding strategic projects). Also, only 4 major projects sanctioned during
the 11th FYP (Apr 2002 – Mar 2007) have not been completed so far. These are: LCA
Navy, Astra, AEW&C System and LRSAM. All these projects are in advanced stages of
testing and will be offered to User by end of 2017. 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 25)
During the course of deliberations, the Committee expressed apprehension over
the perennial delay in the development of the indigenous Kaveri engine to meet the
requirement  of  LCA which  was  sanctioned  way  back  in  1989.  The  Committee  was
informed by the Defence Secretary that a total amount of Rs. 2100 crore had been spent
on this Project till date. The Committee was also apprised by the representatives of
DRDO of the current status of the Project and the fact that solutions were being evolved
with support of some experts within the country as well as outside for the completion of
this project.
Reply of the Government
1 Kaveri Engine Development Project completed two important milestones i.e. altitude
testing  and  Flying  Test  Bed  (FTB)  trials  during  the  year  2009-10  and  2010-11
respectively. As on date, a total of 2687 hours of engine testing have been completed
since inception of the project (1989).  The project technical activities are continuing
with the approval of Hon’ble RM within project cost ceiling of Rs 2105 crore.
2 Subsequent to the deployment of Light Combat Aircraft (LCA) ‘Tejas’ with General
Electric (GE) engines, DRDO decided to power an Indian Unmanned Combat Air
Vehicle (UCAV) ‘Ghatak’ with Kaveri ‘dry’ engine (without afterburner system) at an
estimated  cost  of  Rs.  2652  crore  and  PDC  of  84  months  from  project  sanction.
Accordingly,  DRDO  submitted  a  project  proposal.  The  Hon’bleRakshaMantri  and
Ministry of Finance approved the proposal. The same was submitted to the Office of

the Prime Minister (PMO), prior to consideration of Cabinet Committee of Security
(CCS).
3 The Office of Prime Minister (PMO) constituted an Independent Committee, consisting
of Dr. R. Chidambaram (Principal Scientific Advisor), Dr. V. K. Saraswat (Member, NITI
Ayog) and Dr. K. Radhakrishnan (Former Secretary, Department of Space) to review
the project proposal on the feasibility and desirability of the Ghatak aircraft and engine
programmes.  The  Report  of  this  Committee  has  been  submitted  to  the  PMO  for
approval prior to submission to CCS.  The Committee recommended ‘in-principle’
approval  of  UCAV  ‘Ghatak’  development  programme  and  immediate  sanction  of
Ghatak (Kaveri ‘dry’) engine project with PDC of 84 months from sanction at a project
cost of Rs.2652 crore.
4   This project proposal contains two segments, the first segment being the development
of Kaveri engine flight demonstration with Flying Test Bed (FTB) trials in IL-76 aircraft
and the second segment for the development of Kaveri ‘dry’ engine for powering
UCAV ‘Ghatak’.  In order to meet this challenging task of aero engine development,
DRDO has proposed to seek assistance from world’s reputed engine houses for joint
development.
Recommendation (Para No. 28)
The Committee feel that one of the important factors for quality management is the
extent of knowledge of a user of the product to be produced for a specific project. So is
the extent of his involvement in the conceptualization stage of the project on a permanent
basis so that defects, if any, may be rectified during production stage itself and delivery of
the product to the user may not get delayed for a long time. In this way, there would be a
better  scope  for  fixation  of  accountability,  if  the  user  does  not  suggest  corrective
measures/improvements and the product is not developed as per GSQR.
Reply of the Government
All  Capital  Acquisition  under  the  Defence  Procurement  Policy  (DPP)  2013,
presently,  follows  the  categorization  viz  Buy  (Indian),  Buy  &  Make  (Indian),  Make
(Indian), Buy & Make and Buy (Global), where Defence Research and Development
Organisation (DRDO) falls into the category of Make project (Strategic, Complex and
Security sensitive system). The Defence Procurement Policy (DPP) only stipulate that it
follows the Procedure for Project Formulation and Management (PPFM) procedure and
is not elaborate.
DRDO agrees that the involvement of the user from the conceptualization stage to
development,  prototype  testing,  User  trials  leading  to  Limited  Series  Production
(LSP)/Bulk Production is essential for induction of a safe and reliable system/product into
the Services. To achieve this, the following steps are being suggested to be introduced
as ‘Make DRDO’ category during the amendment of DPP:-
(a) The User Trials and DGQA trials procedures need to be evolved at the beginning
itself along with formulation of  Preliminary Staff Qualitative Requirement  (PSQR).
DRDO will define technical and environmental specifications based on the PSQR.

This would help in designing and developing a robust system, which would meet all
reliability & safety conditions as well.
(b) User will be participating in all stages to provide necessary inputs as follows:-
(i)   Vendor survey and identification of Development cum Production Partner.
(ii)  Project monitoring as Committee Member
(iii) Development trial followed by User Assisted Technical Trial (UATT) & final User
Trial.
(iv) Progress Review during LSP/Bulk Production leading to induction.
With  the  participation  throughout  at  each  stage  from  Conceptualization  to
Induction, the mistrust and gap between DRDO and User Services will be removed and a
reliable and safe product/system can be inducted.
As per PPFM in DRDO promulgated in Feb 2016 for all Mission Mode (MM)
projects, User is involved in all projects costing more than Rs 5 crores starting from
feasibility study itself till User Evaluation trials.
In  addition,  Development  cum  Production  Partner  from  PSU/OFB/Private
Industries  are  also  associated  during  development/prototype  stage  selected  on
competitive basis to have continuity and realization of quality products after satisfactory
User Trial.
Recommendation (Para No. 31)
The Committee recommend that an environment may be created where Public
Sector and Private Sector can work in collaboration, so that the R&D activities can be
synergized and better coordination achieved. The Committee also feel that a level playing
field needs to be provided to the Indian Private Industry and they may be allowed to tie up
with foreign manufacturers to develop certain equipment based on the requirements of
users.
Reply of the Government
DRDO is working in close synchronization with all its stakeholders through
its programmes/ projects.  Accordingly it has developed, built and upgraded its industrial
partner base.  Today, over 1000 private industries and SMEs are vital partners in DRDO’s
development programmes. This number covers the entire spectrum ranging from Defence
Public  Sector  Undertakings  (DPSUs)  and  Ordnance  Factory  Board  (OFB)  to  private
industries, all of them have played a crucial role in the development programs of DRDO.
Recommendation (Para No.32)
The  Committee  note  that  the  budgetary  provision  to  the  Universities  (under
Extramural Research) has shown a decrease in the range of 30 per cent to 40 per cent in
2014-15 (Allotment – Rs.40.63 crore, Released Grant – Rs.38.9100 crore) as compared
to the provision in 2013-14 (Allotment – Rs.60.00 crore, Released Grant – Rs.57.5998
crore). This has a negative connotation.
Reply of the Government

In the period 2015-16, the allotment was Rs. 45 Cr. and Release was Rs.
40.16 cr. In the period 2016-17, the Allotment is Rs. 65 Cr.
Research in niche areas of S&T is being pursued and the outcome is used in
current and futuristic DRDO projects.
Recommendation (Para No.33)
The Committee had earlier recommended the opening of additional centres in
various parts of the country, besides the seven centres of excellence established by
DRDO at various institutions/universities in Bangalore, Chennai, Hyderabad, Coimbatore,
Mumbai and Kolkata. The Committee felt that this initiative can foster knowledge-based
growth  of Defence-related  discipline in the country, strengthen  National resources  of
knowledge, know-how, experience, facilities and infrastructure. This will also catalyze the
much needed cross-fertilization of ideas and experiences between DRDO and outside
experts in scientific and technical fields that contribute to Defence technology.
Reply of the Government
DRDO has received approval from the Government to establish ‘Jagadish
Chandra Bose Centre Bose Centre for Advanced Technology’ at Jadavpur University
Kolkata.
This Centre will address DRDO research requirements in the following three areas:-
(a)  Secure System and Cognitive Technologies
(b)  Directed Energy Technologies and
(c)  Unmanned and Robotic Technologies.
DRDO has also received Government approval for establishing advanced
technology research  centre  at  IIT Bombay and  the  Centre  will  address  the  defence
research  requirements  in  the  areas  of  Aero  Propulsion,  Hypersonic  and  Morphing
Technology.
Creation of Joint Advanced Technology Centre at IIT Delhi is under process
for the Government sanction.
Recommendation (Para No. 34)
The Committee recommend that the allotment of funds in this regard may be
increased substantially for extension of such centers of excellence in various parts of the
country as without the inflow of funds these projects will become unsustainable. The
Ministry of Defence should accordingly take initiatives in this regard and the Committee
intimated of the same.
Reply of the Government
DRDO has already received approval of the Government for establishing two new
advanced technology centres namely 
 (a)  Jagadish  Chandra  Bose  Centre  for  Advanced  Technology  at  Jadavpur
University, Kolkata, and

 (b)  Centre for Propulsion Technology at IIT-Bombay.
Proposed outlay for expenditure through projects and programs including research
infrastructure at these two centres amount approx. Rs. 36 cr.For financial year 2016-17.
Recommendation (Para No. 35)
The Committee also note the findings of CAG as enumerated in Para VII
of the Annual Report of the Ministry, wherein it is stated that DRDO gave Grants-in- Aid to
IITs, University, etc. without proper monitoring and the money was utilized against the
provisions of the scheme. The Committee are also of the view that proper care should be
taken by the personnel involved in DRDO monitoring system so that such instances do
not recur.
Reply of the Government
To mitigate the observations by CAG, following measures have been taken:
 (a) General  Financial  Rules  (GFR)  are  being  followed  for  sanctioning  and  
management of the projects under Grant-in-Aid scheme of DRDO.
 (b) Standard  Operating  Procedure  (SOP)  has  been  reviewed  by  the  Competent  
Financial  Authority  (CFA),  observations/suggestions  are  being  incorporated  
before it is put up for vetting.
  (c) Projects are being monitored through periodic reviews.
Recommendation (Para No. 36)
The Ex-servicemen Contributory Health Scheme (ECHS) was launched with effect
from 01 Apr 2003. With the advent of this scheme, Ex-servicemen pensioners and their
dependents  who  were  only  entitled  for  treatment  in  Service  hospitals  are  now  also
authorized for treatment in those civil/private hospitals which are specifically empanelled
with ECHS.  
Reply of the Government
The contents are factual in nature and no comments are offered.
Recommendation (Para No. 37)
The committee note from the data supplied by the Ministry that only Rs. 2,363.54
crore are allocated against the projection of Rs. 3,600 crore in the Revenue Head of
ECHS  for  the  year  2016-17.   The  difference  in  the  projection  and  allocation  is  a
substantial amount of Rs. 126.46 crore, which would affect the overall working of ECHS in
the field of Transportation, Stores, Information Technology, Medical Treatment Related
Expenditure and Revenue works etc. In this regards, the Ministry submitted that the
reduction in BE 2016-17 was based on the trend of expenditure as the expenditure in
2014-15 was to the extent of Rs. 2236.17 crores. However, the progress of expenditure
will be monitored regularly during 2016-17 and additional allocation will be sought from
the Ministry of Finance, if required, during the year at RE/supplementary stage. The

Committee have  learnt that ECHS  organization, which  was  part of the  Army budget
earlier, has now been shifted to Grant No. 20 - Ministry of Defence (Miscellaneous). The
Financial  Advisor  (Defence  Service),  in  his  oral  deposition  before  the  Committee,
submitted that this is the first year of rationalizing the Grants and provision of funds for
ECHS should be taken care of at a later stage. The Committee would refrain from making
any comment in this regard as of now as they have been assured by the Ministry, both in
writing and during oral deposition, that the additional funds required by ECHS would be
provided at the Revised Estimate or supplementary stage. 
Reply of the Government
The contents are factual in nature and no comments are offered.
Recommendations (Para No. 38)
The committee note that in the Capital Head, Rs. 30 crore has been allocated for the year
2016-17 against the projection of Rs. 50 crore.  However, Revised Estimate for     2015-
16 was only Rs. 13 crore. When queried in this regard, the Ministry submitted that ECHS,
being a growing scheme, various procurement processes are under progress at different
stages with procuring authorities assisting the ECHS namely Directorate General Defence
Estates,  Directorate  General  Armed  Forces  Medical  Services,  Military  Engineering
Services and Master General of Ordnance. The lead time involved in adherence to all
procedural  requirements  contributes  toward  element  of  delay/non  expenditure.  The
Committee would urge that budgetary planning should be done in a highly professional
manner for achieving optimum utilization of funds. They also desire that the Ministry being
the umbrella authority, should ensure timely and coordinated efforts expeditiously with
various  organisations  assisting  ECHS  and  involved  in  procurement  process  and
infrastructure building.
Reply of the Government
The contents are factual in nature. The observations of the committee have been noted
for compliance.
Recommendation (Para No. 39)
All 28 Regional Centres of ECHS, with effect from 01 Apr 2015, have been brought under
online bill processing system. The Committee appreciate this effort of the Ministry which
was much required to speed up the processing and payment of empanelled hospitals
bills. They further desire that a review of the online bill processing system be made at
regular intervals with a view to updating the system accordingly.
Reply of the Government
Review of BPA’s portal is being carried out regularly and 77 changes/modifications in
BPA’s application have been carried out since Apr 2012. 
The observations of the committee have been noted for compliance.
Recommendations (Para No. 40)

The Committee have learnt that presently, only 339 districts out of 675 district of the
Country are covered by the ECHS. As submitted by the Ministry, since ECHS is structured
on the lines of Central Government Health Scheme (CGHS), the existing provision in
CGHS for grant of Fixed Medical Allowance (FMA) to CGHS beneficiaries residing in non-
CGHS cities is proposed to be extended to ECHS.  The Committee desire that keeping in
view the inability of the Ministry to cover all the districts under ECHS even after a lapse of
thirteen years since advent of this scheme and welfare of ECHS beneficiaries living in
such  district,  the  proposal  for  grant  of  appropriate  Fixed  Medical  Allowance  be
expeditiously  approved  and  accordingly  funds  be  released  to  ECHS.  Moreover, the
Committee would like the Ministry to set a timeline for covering all the districts under
ECHS and the Committee be apprised.
Reply of the Government
CGHS is optional scheme whereas ECHS is a mandatory scheme.  Granting of
FMA to ESM requires framing new policy in consultation with different Ministry/Deptt. and
approval of cabinet, is required.  The proposal for granting FMA to ESM whose area is not
covered by ECHS is under active consideration.
Recommendations (Para No. 41)
The Committee note that a total of 15,21,563 Ex-servicemen have enlisted with the
ECHS alongwith 32,02,610 dependents. The beneficiaries of the scheme thus amount
total to 47,24,173 as on 31 May 2015.  ECHS membership is growing exponentially which
calls for corresponding upgradation of infrastructure and service for ensuring acceptable
satisfaction  level  among  ECHS  beneficiaries.   The  Ministry itself  has  submitted  that
existing  system  of  medicines  supply/issue  is  not  commensurate  with  the  actual
requirement of medicines in ECHS.  In view of the growing dissatisfaction among Ex-
servicemen with regard to non availability/short supply of medicines, it was proposed to
outsource pharmacy operations on pilot project basis at Polyclinics under two Regional
Centres.  The Committee would like to be apprised of the outcome of this pilot project
within one month of the presentation of this Report.
Reply of the Government
Non issue/short supply of medicines is an issue that has been confronted since long.
Outsourcing of Pharmacy operations is viable option and accordingly to overcome the
above challenge, a proposal for Outsourcing of Pharmacy Operations in two Regional
Centres as a Pilot Project is under consideration. 
Since DGAFMS is not able to provide/provision medicines to all ECHS Polyclinics, an
alternate  solution  like  Outsourcing  of Authorisation  of  Local  Chemist  is  under  active
consideration. 
 
Recommendations (Para No. 42)
The Committee note that at present medicines are available to veterans from Polyclinics.
Option of reimbursement for specific limited condition is also available in ECHS.  ECHS
Polyclinics  get  their  supply  of  medicines  from  Armed  Forces  Medical  Stores  Depot
(Essential Drug List), Senior Executive Medical Officers (Other than EOL) and limited
local purchase. The Ministry is of the opinion that CGHS has a better medicine supply
system by adopting the concept of Authorised Local Chemist (ALC) in addition to Central
procurement and the proposal for adopting same methodology is under consideration.

The concept of ALC entails that chemists are empanelled locally by means of tender
enquiry and Polyclinics indent the medicines not available from these ALCs for issue to
beneficiaries.  The Committee would support the Ministry in any effort for welfare of those
who make or are ready to make the supreme sacrifice for our country.  Hence, they would
like  a  status  report  at  the  earliest  on  the  proposal  for  adoption  of  the  concept  of
Authorised Local Chemist in ECHS.
Reply of the Government
A case for introducing the concept of ALC (Authorised Local Chemist) is under active
consideration in consultation with MoD (Finance).
Recommendation (Para No. 46)
The Committee had recommended as under: -
The oral deposition of the Defence Secretary before the Committee indicated a
paradigm shift being planned in the role of DGQA from quality assuring and managing to
audit the system. The Committee would like to have a detailed note from the Ministry on
this perceived policy change for DGQA.
Reply of the Government
Detailed note is enclosed as Annexure 1
Annexure 1
PARADIGM SHIFT FROM QUALITY ASSURANCE TO QUALITY AUDIT
1. There has been paradigm shift from Quality Assurance to Quality Management and
Process Audit of the manufacturer with a view that a controlled system would give Quality
product automatically. To this the following process audits of various Ordnance Factories
have been carried out in the year as shown against each:-
a) 2014-15 - 146
b) 2015-16 - 282
2. Raman Puri Committee was setup in Apr 2015 to draw up a strategy to transform
the internal quality processes and to institute structural changes required in OFB system
to achieve improvement in Quality of the products of OFB. The Committee submitted its
report to the Ministry in Feb 16 which has been examined by the department of Defence
Production and a decision has been taken to implement certain recommendations of the
Report in a Pilot project mode in the select six ordnance Factories i.e. Ordnance Factory
Khamaria  (OFK),  Ordnance  Factory  Badmal  (OFBL),  Gun  Carriage  Factory
Jabalpur(GCFJ), Ordnance Factory Medak (OFM), Ordnance Factory Ambajhari (OFA),
and Ordnance Factory Kanpur(OFC), to assess the impact of the recommendations on
the Quality system in OFB. 
3. With the approval of the competent authority, it has been decided to implement the
following  recommendations  made  by  the  Raman  Puri  Committee  in  six  selected
Ordnance Factories as a pilot project, with immediate effect :-

a) Six  Ordnance  Factories  selected  for  pilot project are  Ordnance  Factory
Khamaria, Ordnance Factory Badmal, Gun Carriage Factory Jabalpur, Ordnance
Factory Medak, Ordnance Factory Ambajhari, and Ordnance Factory Kanpur.
b) Each factory will set up an execution team  under the overall supervision of
General  Manager  of  respective  factory  for  implementation  of  the
recommendations.
c) Accounts and Financial functions are to be separate in these factories and
Integrated Financial Authority (IFA) system will be followed.
d) Critical material inspection, Control Point (CP) inspection and Surveillance
Point (SP) check would be the responsibility of the concerned Ordnance Factory.
The Ordnance Factory will maintain the records of above inspections / checks.
Manpower of DGQA establishments deployed in these Ordnance Factories would
be under administrative control of the General manger of the Factory for the period
of the pilot project.
e) DGQA will conduct Final acceptance Inspection (FAI) in respect of the six
select Ordnance Factories. DGQA will provide Proof ranges to OFB for conducting
proof testing before submission of  the stores to DGQA for FAI.
f) To start with, Acceptance Test Procedures (ATPs) followed for inspection by
DGQA while  carrying  out  FAI  shall  remain  the  same.  DGQA will  permit  one
Request in respect of a lot submitted for FAI by OFB and lots resubmitted after
RFR will be either as ACCEPTED or REJECTED by DGQA. In case of such
rejections, OFB will take appropriate action for loss statement in respect of the
store.
g) User  will   conduct  accelerated  exploitation  of  stores  of  the  six  select
Ordnance Factories as & when received after acceptance by DGQA.
4. With regard to the above, an implementation committee under the chairmanship of
member (A&E)/OFB  has been  constituted in the Department of Defence  Production,
Ministry of Defence with following composition:-
(a) Member (A&E)/OFB - Chairman
(b) Economic Advisor(DDP) - Member
(c) Addl DGQA (PP&T) - Member
(d) OSD(LS) - Member Secretary
5. The Terms of Reference of the Committee are as follows:-
(a) To monitor and review the progress of the pilot project on regular basis
during the period of the project.
(b) To issue necessary instructions to the concerned agencies for implementing
the decisions arising out of such reviews.
(c) To apprise Hon’ble RM about the progress of project at regular intervals.
(d) Redressal of issues arising out of implementation of the pilot project in the
selected Ordnance Factories. 

6. To review the progress of the implementation of the Pilot project, the Committee
has visited the following OFs / Estts so far :-
(a) GCF Jabalpur - 21 Sep 2016
(b) Ord Factory Khamaria - 22 Sep 2016
(c) OrdFyAmbajhari - 23 Sep 2016
(d) OrdFy Kanpur - 28 Sep 2016
(e) OrdFyBadmal - 04-05 Oct 2016
7. Modalities  of  transfer  of  responsibilities  from  DGQA  to  OFB  in  the  selected
Ordnance Factories for the pilot project, are being worked out.
8. Timelines have been set upto Oct 17 for decision to continue or otherwise with the
new system.  
Recommendation (Para No. 47)
The committee note that during the year 2011-12, NCC was allocated Rs. 984.01
crore, however, the actual were Rs. 713.81 crore; during he year 2012-13, NCC was
allocated Rs. 1,128.80 crore, however, the actual were Rs. 791.87 crore; during the year
2013-14, NCC was allocated Rs. 887.12 crore, however, the actual were Rs. 874.03
crore. During the year 2014-15 NCC had been allocated  Rs. 1,025.17 crore, however,
actuals were Rs. 965.84 crore. During the year 2015-16, NCC had been allocated Rs.
1,021.39 crore, however, actuals were 950.15 croretill  January 2016. For 2016-17 funds
allocated to NCC are Rs. 1,188.23 crore and Rs. 1.15 crore for Revenue and Capital
segments, respectively. The Committee’s scrutiny of the above data revealed that NCC
has been guilty of under spending every year. Therefore, the Committee desire that the
Ministry and NCC Directorate should introspect on this trend and prepare the NCC budget
based on realistic and achievable targets. 
Reply of the Government
(i) It is submitted that the budgetary figures mentioned in the reports are what 
was allotted in the beginning of the financial year at the BE stage.  However, the 
actual budget after the supplementaries and the RE and the total expenditure
thereafter is as given below:-
FY Budget allotted       Actual Expenditure Expenditure
(%)age
2011-12 898.48 713.81
79.45
2012-13 821.65 791.87
96.38
2013-14 954.06 874.03
91.61
2014-15 954.10 965.84
101.23
2015-16           1084.37 1113.76 102.71
(ii) As  can  be  seen,  there  had  been  under  spending  by DGNCC  vis-à-vis
allocated budget during financial years 2011-12, 2012-13 & 2013-14.  To improve
this situation, various steps in consultation and guidance of MoD were initiated to
ensure that the budget allotted is optimally utilized and it can be seen from the

above table that the budget has been utilized fully during the FY 2014-15 and
2015-16.  
(iii) As for the financial year 2016-17, a very realistic Budget projection of Rs
1139.07 crores under the head Revenue and Rs 13.80 crores under Capital Head
was made by the DGNCC. However, while, budget under Revenue Head has been
provided  more  than  the  projected  due  to  likely  escalation  on  account  of
implementation  of  7th Central  Pay  Commission  recommendations.  Against  the
projection of Rs. 13.80 crore   under Capital Head,  onlyRs 1.15 Crores has been
provided. 
2. It may be pertinent to point out here that there is an inescapable requirement to
provide  adequate  funds  under  Capital  new  acquisition  head  as  a  Contract  for
procurement of 110 microlights stands signed between Government of India and M/s
Pipistrel, Slovania on 12 Oct 2015 under which Rs 9.63 crores inclusive of Custom Duty
is required to be paid during the current financial year.  Similarly, non provisioning of
adequate funds under Capital Works is also likely to affect a number of works which are
under progress/process. 
3. Further,  against  a  projection  of  Rs 308.19  crore  at  Revised  Estimates  (RE)
stage for financial year 2015 -16, an allocation of Rs 250.48 crore only was made under
budget head of ‘Revenue – Non salary’.  Therefore, to meet the spillover liabilities of FY
2015-16, an additional budget of Rs 5.00 Cr is required on immediate basis.
4. Keeping all above factors in mind, following requirements of additional budget as
detailed below has been projected under 1st batch of supplementary:- 
 (i) Capital New Acquisition Rs 9.63 Crore
(ii) Capital Works Rs 1.00 Crore
(iii) Revenue Non-Salary Rs 5.00 Crore
5. The balance of requirements would be projected to the Ministry of Defence at RE
stage.
Recommendation (Para No. 48)
National Cadet Corps (NCC) was established under the NCC Act, 1948. Today it
has presence in 670 districts of the country with authorised cadet strength of 15 lakh.
NCC aims at creating a pool of organized, trained and motivated youth with leadership
qualities in all walks of life, so that they become useful citizens and serve the Nation with
all their might regardless of the career they choose.  According to the data furnished by
the Ministry, the total number of educational institutions at present covered by NCC is
10372 Schools and 5444 Colleges.  In all, 4893 schools and 2966 colleges are presently
waitlisted.  The ongoing Expansion Plan is likely to be completed  by 2018-19 and would
reduce the current waiting list marginally as this expansion is based  on priorities laid
down by the Government.
Reply of the Government
1. Government sanction was accorded on 9 th August, 2010 for increase in sanctioned
strength of NCC from 13 to 15 lakh over a period of 5 years. Two phases of the expansion

plan of NCC have been completed and the enrolment for the third phase has already
commenced. The final phase is likely to be completed by 2018-19.    
2.    The proposal on future ‘Expansion Plan’ by way of increasing 10 lakh cadet strength
from 15 lakh to 25 lakh is under examination. 

Recommendation (Paras No. 49 and 50)
The Committee are of the view that at this time when our Defence Services are
confronting the problem of shortage of personnel and staff, inducting more schools and
colleges into NCC, an institution aiming at developing character, comradeship, discipline,
a secular outlook, the spirit of adventure and ideals of selfless service amongst young
citizens,  is  crying  need  of  the  hour. Therefore,  the  Committee  recommend  that  the
expansion plan of the NCC be extended and adequate budgetary and logistic support
from the Ministry be provided. The Committee may be apprised of the steps taken in this
regard. They also desire that the State Governments should encourage NCC in their
respective States and extend resources in this regard. 
Reply of the Government
A proposal on future ‘Expansion Plan’ by way of increasing NCC cadet strength
further from 15 lakh to 25 lakh cadets is under consideration with the Government. This
expansion plan will considerably reduce the waiting list if not cover all the waitlisted
institutions. It is worthwhile to mention that the State Government pay for their share of
the expenditure and provide resources as and when the NCC units are raised and allotted
to them.

B)  RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN
ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT AND TO BE COMMENTED UPON
Recommendation (Para No. 4)
During the year 2015-16, the allocation for R&D in the Ordnance Factories at BE
stage was Rs. 75 Crore. The allocation at RE stage was Rs. 85 Crore. The allocation at
BE stage during the year 2016-17 is Rs. 67.12 Crore. In comparison to BE 2015-16 and
BE 2016-17, there is a reduction of Rs.7.88 Crore. Against the allocation of Rs. 370.79
Crore during the 12th Plan period, Ordnance Factories Board has undertaken in-house
R&D projects of Rs. 416.79 Crore for development of the products indigenously which are
at various stages. The Committee note that some efforts are being made by Ordnance
Factories  to  develop  new  products  through  in-house  R&D  efforts.  However,  the
Committee are dismayed to note that the total allocation towards R&D continues to be on
the  lower  side.  The  Ministry  has  furnished  the  percentage  of  R&D  expenditure  and
compared with value of production produced during the years. The Committee feel that
the allocations of funds should not be linked to the turnover of the Ordnance Factories
rather it should be steadily increasing over the years. The Committee also note that while
the Ministry is emphasizing on 'Make in India' projects, at the same time the allocations
under  R&D  is  not  in  commensuration  with  the  avowed  mission  of  the  Government.
Therefore, the Committee strongly recommends that adequate budgetary support should
be provided for undertaking R&D activities by the Ordnance Factories.
Reply of the Government 
As recommended by the Standing Committee, allocation of funds towards R&D is
not linked to the turnover of the Ordnance Factories and it has been steadily increasing
over the years. Expenditure on R&D during 2015-16 has been Rs. 85 Crore (i.e. full
amount  of  RE  allocation  has  been  used),  which  is  approx.  52%  higher  than  the
expenditure on R&D in the year 2014-15 (i.e. Rs.55.82 Crore, all time high till 2014-15). 
During 2016-17, although BE allocation is Rs. 67.12 Crore, it is expected that
budgetary constraint shall not come in way in achieving targeted R&D expenditure of Rs.
96 Crore by suitable enhancement at RE stage.
For comments of the Committee, please see para no. 13 of Chapter I.

Recommendation (Para No. 6)
The Committee in their 9th report had recommended for constitution of a high-level
committee to go into the functioning and organizational structure of Ordnance Factories
Board and give its recommendations on restructuring of Ordnance Factories to make
them more professional to meet the present day requirements. However, the Committee
are  concerned  to  note  that there  are  no  known  plans  for  restructuring  of Ordnance
Factories,  hence,  no  budgetary  provisions  have  been  planned  for  the  same.  The
Committee wish to mention that the Kelkar Committee had emphasized on restructuring
of Ordnance Factories. The recommendations of importance as made by the Committee
have not been taken into cognizance by the Ministry till date. The Committee deplore
such casual approach of the Ministry and strongly recommend that credentials should be
accorded  to  the  Kelkar  Committee  recommendations  on  restructuring  of  Ordnance
Factories. Action taken in this regard must be intimated to the Committee.
Reply of the Government
The issue of corporatization of Ordnance Factories has been deliberated upon in
the past by several Committees set up by the Government. The Kelkar Committee had
emphasized on restructuring of Ordnance Factories with the aim that it would enable the
OFB to refocus on its areas of operation in a flexible manner so as to respond not only to
market but also to strategic interests without compromising the interest of the labor.
In  order  to  achieve  the  above  aim  and  in  order  to  keep  pace  with  the  rapid
technological advancement and changing business scenario, OFB's role now includes:
 Focus on In-house R&D including process improvement and design
 Quality Management including Input material inspection
 Customer Diversification
 System Integration of platforms
To achieve the above role, the following activities have been initiated with the aim
of  providing  greater  autonomy  in  functioning  to  OFB  in  order  to  improve  efficiency
together with accountability:-
Strengthening of in-House R&D - Focus on in-House R&D has been identified.
Twelve (12) Ordnance Development Centres have been opened in various locations/
divisions for major products and up-gradation activities. To strengthen and consolidate
R&D functions, OFB further plans the following:-
a Upgrade Infrastructure in ODCs
b  Research Assistance from Academic Institutes like IITs etc.
c Association with DPSU and DRDO – One MoU has been signed with BEL.
Increased outsourcing and vendor development – OFB Procurement Manual is
being revised with emphasis on 'Make in India' and facilitating long term procurement. 

Quality Management including Input material Inspection – OFB is being entrusted
with  1st Party  QA  functions  in  addition  to  existing  responsibility  for  input  material
inspection, as part of implementation of Raman Puri Committee recommendations on QA
functions, in the pilot project mode. This is aimed at making OFB accountable for the
Quality of its products with DGQA being responsible for FAI (Final Acceptance Inspection)
as in the case of supplies from the private sector. 
Adoption of Commercial Format of Accounts to ensure accountability – OFB has
started preparing Annual accounts in commercial format and a formal approval of the
same is being obtained from C&AG. 
The successful implementation of the above mentioned measures will make the 
OFB more professional, efficient and accountable.
For comments of the Committee, please see Para No. 16 of Chapter I.
Recommendation (Para No. 10)
During the course of deliberations, the representatives of DRDO admitted that the
current  budgetary  allocation  will  not  suffice  even  for  ongoing  projects  and  revenue
commitments. Major projects  for futuristic technology requirements of tomorrow have
been put on hold due to pending allocation of funds and infrastructure activities planned
for  future  need  additional  funding.  Therefore,  DRDO  require  sustained  annual
commitment of funds year on year for taking up new projects. There is also an imperative
need to carry out research and cutting edge technology development for building a strong
indigenous technology base. The Committee strongly feel that undertaking these activities
requires  adequate  budgetary  support.  The  Committee  are  disappointed  to  view  the
depletion  of budgetary allocation  for DRDO which  has  the effect of jeopardizing  the
scientific and technological base of Defence forces. The Committee therefore, strongly
feel  that  all  possible  measures  must  be  taken  immediately  to  meet  the  budgetary
requirements of DRDO.
Reply of the Government
In the light of the Committee recommendation for additional funds for DRDO, it is
stated that a case has been initiated to request for additional funds from MoD(Fin) to
meet the additional budgetary requirements of DRDO.
For comments of the Committee, please see Para No. 19 of Chapter I.
Recommendation (Para No. 11)
The Committee have been further apprised that for high value projects, DRDO has
started the ground work which includes peer review of project proposal as these are of
high priority category. The projects would be taken up once the allocation has been
secured. The Committee strongly urge the Ministry to provide adequate funds for these
high value and high priority projects so that the work already done on these projects does
not go waste. The Committee may be apprised of the steps taken in this regard.
Reply of the Government
For high value projects/high priority projects which are awaiting sanction for want
to  additional  funds,  DRDO has  initiated  a case  to  request  for  additional  funds  from
MoD(Fin) to meet the additional budgetary requirements of DRDO.
For comments of the Committee, please see Para No. 19 of Chapter I.

 Recommendation (Para No. 16)
The  Committee,  however,  feel  concerned  to  note  that  there  has  been  no
review/increase  in  scientific  manpower  of  DRDO  since  2001,  though  the  number  of
projects  as  well  as  technological  and  tactical  Defence  requirements  have  increased
manifold. The Ministry has intimated in this regard that the proposal is pending with the
Ministry of Finance. The Committee recommend that this matter may be taken up with the
Ministry of Finance on top priority so that the manpower requirements of DRDO and
India’s strategic needs can be taken care of properly. This will further enhance research
capability which can be exported and revenue earned thereof can be used for more R&D.
Reply of the Government
The Cabinet Note seeking approval for authorisation of 436 additional posts in the
first phase, out of total requirement of 1316 posts was forwarded to Cabinet on 08 Jun
2015.  Prime Minister’s Office vide PMO ID No. 4221110/Pol/2015 dated 31 Jul 2015
sought for the action taken report on the directions of Cabinet Committee on Security and
the same was forwarded by DRDO on 14 Aug 2015 to PMO.
The 1316 additional posts as and when sanctioned are proposed to be filled
up in a phased manner in three recruitment years as under:-
S.
No.
Year No. of Scientists Work Cadre Officers Total
(i) First 420 16 436
(ii) Second 420 20 440
(iii) Third 420 20 440
Total 1260 56 1316
In the first phase, Scientists will be inducted in the following disciplines as under:-
S. No. Discipline Numbers
(i) Electronics & Communication 122
(ii) Mechanical Engineering 108
(iii) Computer Science 75
(iv) Chemistry / Chemical Engineering 35
(v) Armaments / Material Science 28
(vi) Physics 20
(vii) Aeronautical / Aerospace 19
(viii) Life Sciences 10
(ix) Naval Architecture 3
420
(x) Critical Immediate requirement of works 
officers cadre
16
Total 436
Normally,  the  recruitment  process  takes  12  months  to  complete  i.e.  from
notification of vacancy to joining of selected candidates. Thereafter, the selected young
scientists are detailed for induction training of the 6 months duration before they are
deployed in research projects.
For comments of the Committee, please see para no. 31 of Chapter I.

Recommendation (Para No. 17)
On the requirement of scientists, the Committee note that various steps are being
taken by DRDO to generate interest in Defence technologies among school and college
students with the aim of encouraging them to take up Defence R&D as a career. While
the Committee appreciate the efforts being made in this direction they feel that concerted
efforts are needed to attract genuine young talent to opt for Defence R&D as a career. In
this regard, the Committee opine that a detailed research of the best practices being
followed by the major countries in the world be undertaken and an action plan based on
this study drawn up for consideration. The viability of the practices followed internationally
vis-à-vis the local scenario may be worked upon and shared with the Committee for their
information and consideration and further examination in this regard.
Reply of the Government 
Proposal for augmentation of scientific manpower in DRDO is still pending with the
Cabinet. In this regard the Action Taken Report sought by the PMO has already been
submitted in August 2015.
As regards fellowships programmes, DRDO awards fellowships in a large number
of areas of interest of the Organisation pertaining to different Clusters i.e. Armament &
Combat  Engineering  System,  Life  Sciences,  Electronics  &  Communication  System,
Missiles & Strategic System, Micro Electronic Device & Computational System, Naval
Systems & Materials, and Aeronautical System.  As on date, approximate 950 fellowships
awarded by the Department are in progress. In the preceding year, the department has
awarded as many as 96 fellowships.  However, as per the existing recruitment policy and
also due to the shortage of vacancies, it is not possible to necessarily absorb the fellows
in DRDO.  In this regard, they have to compete with other candidates.   
As regards performance accountability of personnel, DRDO has a merit based
promotion scheme wherein promotions are granted to scientists/technical staff only after a
rigorous  assessment  by  subject  experts/external  members.  In  the  process,  non-
meritorious scientists/ technical staff do not get promotions and get eliminated.  The 7 th
CPC  has  also  made  certain  recommendations  in  this  regard  which  are  under
consideration  of  the  Central  Government.   As  and  when  decision  of  the  Central
Government  is  notified  in  this  regard,  the  department  will  accordingly  develop  its
mechanism for further dealing with nonperforming personnel.
For comments of the Committee, please see para no. 34 of Chapter I.
Recommendation (Para No. 18)
The Committee express their deep concern on the wasteful expenditure incurred
by  DRDO  on  closure  of  major  projects  like  Airborne  Surveillance  Platform,  Cargo
Ammunition, GPS based system as an Alternative to Fire Direction Radar, Development
of 30mm Fair Weather Towed AD Gun System, Light towed AD Gun system and 30 mm
Light Towed AD Gun System after getting these projects sanctioned. The Committee
desire that they be informed of the basis on which these projects were chosen and the
specific reasons which forced the Government to close them. The Committee fail to
understand as to why, at the initial stage itself, before the projects were sanctioned, the
possible constraints and bottlenecks were not foreseen. The Committee opine that the
reasons  attributed  for  the  closure  of  various  projects  like  Probable  Duration  of

Completion(PDC), extension not being approved, one out of two parallel methods being
found more feasible, requirement of additional funds, etc. cited by the Ministry could have
been tackled better at the initial stage itself through proper planning and following a
concurrent engineering and development approach.
Reply of the Government 
DRDO has taken the following steps to minimize short closures of projects:-
 While  undertaking  new  projects  pre-project  activity  including  preliminary
design is being given greater focus.
 More stringent review mechanisms have been put in place e.g. various high
level committees including, Steering Committees Advisory Committees and
Monitoring Boards (Apex Board Executive Boards).
 Involvement of Services and production partners during development process
and reviews -To know their views in advance including finalisation of GSQRs.
 Synergy among stakeholders - Quarterly interaction meetings.
 Increase in allocation is made in the next financial year and subsequently in 
the 13th Five year plan period ahead.  Efforts for the same will be made.
For comments of the Committee, please see Para No. 37 of Chapter I.
Recommendation (Para No. 19)
The Committee recommend that in future there should be a scientific, technical
and concurrent audit of every ongoing project by an independent agency so that
such closures are avoided in future. The Committee also strongly feel that the
Ministry should re-evaluate the reasons and also seek expert advice before taking
a decision towards closing down any project of DRDO in future so as to avoid
wastage of public funds as also help in sustaining the projects, which can prove to
be beneficial for the country.
Reply of the Government 
Defence Research and Development Organization (DRDO) has already started
taking concrete steps to conduct the Project Monitoring Board meetings, which is
chaired by Secretary, DR&D and Executive Board which is chaired by cluster DG
to minimize slippages at the initial stage itself. This is being done so that projects
are not closed down abruptly without achieving the desired goals. To ensure the
same, alerts are being sent for reviews due and approaching imminent milestones.
Also, every project is monitored through RFD in which annual target is fixed for
every project.
In continuation to the efforts to minimize delays, DRDO has revised the
‘Procedures for Project Formulation and Management’ (PPFM) effective from April
2016 onwards. Some of the major changes brought out in the revised PPFM
document  include  selection  of  projects  based  on  attribute  scale  and  ongoing
workload,  greater  emphasis  on  pre-project  activity,  risk  management,  linking
procurement plan with project sanction to avoid delays, in-depth costing guidelines
and stringent review mechanism. Apart from this, increased attention is being given

in the 13 th Five Year Plan (FYP) wherein background details are being asked
related to proposed new projects.
DRDO has also a mechanism, wherein before the closure of the project,
the highest monitoring body reviews the projects, assess the status of completion
and gives appropriate directives.
For comments of the Committee, please see para no. 40 of Chapter I.
Recommendation (Para No. 21)
During  the  course  of  deliberations,  the  Defence  Secretary  acknowledged  that
DRDO, by itself, is also responsible for delay in its research work. The Committee, in this
regard, take note of the problems faced by DRDO in the matter of non-availability of
platform for trials. The Committee feel that a better coordination between DRDO and the
Services could easily solve this bottleneck and also cut short the time frame in the
development and testing of weapon systems. The Committee, therefore, feel that the
Ministry should make concerted efforts in this direction so that testing and trial platforms
are always available to them for crucial research and development work.
Reply of the Government
'A new category “Mission Mode-User Trials” have been introduced in order to
expedite trials of developed systems/products.'
For comments of the Committee, please see Para No. 43 of Chapter I.
Recommendation (Para No. 22)
The Committee note with immense surprise that although an elaborate mechanism
is in place which  includes adequate financial  and administrative  powers  to  Directors
General  of  technology  clusters  to  carry  out  research  and  development  as  per  the
mandate of DRDO, monitoring of all Cabinet Committee on Security (CCS) projects by
the Cabinet Secretariat, etc., the projects are being delayed. The Committee, in this
regard,  feel  that  there  is  some  lacuna  in  the  implementation  of  this  system.  The
Committee, therefore, recommend that more effective efforts are required to be made for
ensuring timely completion of each project.
Reply of the Government
DRDO feels that financial powers also need to be delegated down the line to Lab
Directors and Programme/Project Directors with adequate checks. Procurement process
also needs to be streamlined by cutting down on repeated approval processing which
lead to time delays.
Action is being pursued for positioning of Financial Advisors (FAs) in labs and
independent IFAs with cluster DGs so as to enable speedy processing of file. Revision of
delegation of financial powers is also under process which is expected to improve the
functioning. 
For comments of the Committee, please see Para No. 46 of Chapter I.

Recommendation (Para No. 23)
The Committee agree with the suggestions of the Defence Secretary and strongly
recommend that a mechanism should be developed so that the DRDO, the production
agency and the user agency work in tandem right from the conceptualization stage, which
it is felt, can result in preventing unnecessary delay in the implementation of various
projects of vital importance.
Reply of the Government
We have taken the Services on board this time well ahead of time and involved
them in formulating 13 th FYP of DRDO. Inputs have been received which are under
consideration before finalization of plan document. 
For comments of the Committee, please see Para No. 49 of Chapter I.

Recommendation (Para No. 24)
The  Committee also  recommend that keeping in view the  huge  public  money
involved in these projects and the fact that these directly affect the Defence preparedness
of the country, accountability must invariably be fixed in case of inordinate delays in
executing projects.
Reply of the Government
No enhanced authority has been given to Project Directors till date. Accountability
without authority is not fair. Delegation of financial powers, 2010 is getting revised. 
For comments of the Committee, please see Para No. 52 of Chapter I.
Recommendation (Para No. 26)
The  Committee  desire  that  infrastructure  to  test  aero-engines  should  also  be
created within the country so that flying testing of engines can be done in a timely manner
without carrying the engine to a foreign country and finding availability of slot testing
agency etc.
Reply of the Government
1. 'The  design  improvement  and  validation  of  aero  engine  components  and
modules through testing is a continuous activity to enhance and demonstrate
engine performance and reliability. At present, only limited aerodynamic and
structural testing can be conducted within the country.  Hence, the required
component testing facilities at an estimated cost of Rs.1330 crore are planned
to be established by DRDO at Rajanakunte, Bengaluru for development of
Ghatak engine and all future generation aero engines.
2. The  existing  Fan  &  Compressor  Test  Facility  at  Gas  Turbine  Research
Establishment (GTRE) has inadequate capacity and has become obsolete. To
carry out testing of Fan & Compressor for existing and future generation gas
turbine engine programmes of GTRE, it is essential to have a dedicated Fan &
Compressor test facility at GTRE. GTRE is working out the budgetary cost of
this facility to be established ‘on turnkey basis’ with an objective to initiate EPC
approval by end of Oct 2016.
3. DRDO  is  planning  to  establish  a  twin  test  cell  at  GTRE  to  carry  out  the
performance  testing  of  gas  turbine  engines  upto  130  kN  thrust  class.  The
proposed  engine  test  cells  will  cater  for  performance  and  endurance  test
requirements of the present and future engines. One of the test cell will have
the  capability  of  testing  engine  with  thrust  vector  nozzle.  The  cost  of
establishing this test cell (including the building) is estimated to be Rs.300
crore. GTRE has published a Global RFI for setting up of twin test cell in July.
Response to RFI is expected by end Aug 2016.
4. Boeing Inc. USA has offered to establish a High Altitude Engine Test Facility
(HAETF) of 90kN capacity in India for testing Gas turbine engine as an offset
obligation  in  C17  Globemaster  Acquisition  Programme  of  MoD.   US
Government is requested to issue necessary approval (licence), when M/s.
Boeing submits Technical Assistance Agreement (TAA) for HAETF, as Boeing
needs to complete the offset credits against the subject programme.  For this
purpose, DRDO has acquired 100 acres of land at NagarjunaSagar, Telangana.

5.  DRDO  is  studying  the  indigenous  Flying  Test  Bed  (FTB)  requirements,  for
which a Joint Committee consisting of members from DRDO, IAF, HAL and
DGAQA will be constituted.
For comments of the Committee, please see Para No. 55 of Chapter I.
Recommendation (Para No. 27)
The  Committee  appreciate  the  fact  that  Defence  Research  and  Development
Organisation (DRDO) has a number of achievements to its credit like the development of
the strategic Agni class of missiles, a family of radars and sonars for virtually every
platform/application,  Electronic  Warfare  (EW)  systems,  Main  Battle  Tank  (MBT),
development of combat aircraft, etc. However, the Committee note that it is also a fact
that the country is still heavily dependent on imports to meet its Defence requirements.
Given the fact that technologically advanced countries are reluctant to part with their
critical technologies with developing countries like India, it becomes all the more essential
for  our  labs  to  develop  each  systems,  sub-systems,  component  ab-initio  including
information, infrastructural and testing facilities. The Committee are also of the view that
as original research takes a long time, therefore, DRDO may also think of developing a
product through reverse engineering. The Committee recommend that the Ministry of
Finance should provide adequate budgetary support in this regard so that indigenization
of R&D activities can be taken up by DRDO on a war footing. The Committee also feel
that there is a need for an increase in the budget for R&D activities of DRDO specifically
targeted at reducing dependency on other countries in critical and high technology areas,
which can lead to the country becoming self-reliant in Defence Production.
Reply of the Government
'Case has been initiated to request for additional funds form MoD(Fin) to meet the
additional budgetary requirements of DRDO.' 
For comments of the Committee, please see Para No. 58 of Chapter I.
Recommendation (Para No. 29)
The Committee also feel it to be desirable on the part of DRDO to, at first, develop
a product and later keep on improving on it by the way of ‘categorizations/markings’ viz.
Mark I, II, III, IV etc, so that there is continuity in the assigned tasks to some extent. This
approach would be preferable instead of aiming to create a ‘perfect product’ in one go.
This will need a proper policy directive as also building the stages of the production
systems for the initial and final products.
Reply of the Government
As per recommendation of Standing Committee on Defence, DRDO proposed a
Spiral Development Model in line with Mark I, II, III and so on to be included as a part of
‘Make DRDO’ category during amendment of Defence Procurement Procedure (DPP).
DPP-2016 has been issued without inclusion of the same procedure. However, DRDO is
still  making  all  efforts  to  implement  the  same  procedure  by approaching  Ministry of
Defence.
For comments of the Committee, please see Para No. 61 of Chapter I.

CHAPTER III
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE REPLIES RECEIVED FROM THE
GOVERNMENT
-NIL-

CHAPTER IV
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES
OF GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE WHICH
REQUIRE REITERATION AND COMMENTED UPON
Recommendation (Para No. 1)
The allocation at BE 2015-16 for Directorate General of Ordnance Factories was
Rs. 3,644.30 crore. This has been reduced to Rs. 1,752.53 crore at RE stage. The
reduction is Rs. 1,891.77 crore. The BE for the year 2016-17 is Rs. 1,953.29 crore. There
is Rs. 1,691.01 crore less allocation during the year 2016-17 in comparison to BE 2015-
16. In their earlier reports, the Committee have been expressing their concern over wide
variations between the projections and actual allocations at the stage of BE and RE. The
Committee in their 9th Report had desired that deduction from the Budget Estimate be
kept to minimum and only on account of very valid justifiable reasons. The Committee are
apprised that due to constraints of funds, Ordnance Factories Board was directed to
prioritize  its  Capital  fund  requirement.  In  their  7th  Report  on  Action  taken  by  the
Government  on  the  recommendations  contained  in  the  9th  Report  on  Demands  for
Grants (2015-16) on Ordnance Factories and DRDO, the Committee had observed that
the allocations for Ordnance Factories Board were sanctioned late, thereby compelling it
to cut short its Committed Liabilities and thereby falling short of the financial targets. This
further led to application of cut by the Ministry of Finance. Therefore, the Committee had
desired that the timely allocations at BE stage should be provided. During 2015-16,
Ordnance Factories Board was considering to increase the supplies in excess of  Rs.
11,266 crore on the basis of requirements of Armed Forces. Ordnance Factories Board
required an additional budget of Rs. 1,321 crore for an increased supply of Rs. 2,271
crore. However, at RE stage during 2015-16, there was reduction of Rs. 1,891.77 crore.
This is a sorry state of affair. The Committee also observe that there is large scale
deficiency of equipment in Army due to inadequate production capacity of Ordnance
Factories Board. Therefore, there is a strong need to ramp up the capacity of Ordnance
Factories Board. The value of production during the year 2015-16 up to Feb, 2016 is Rs.
10,925 crore against the target of Rs. 13,514 crore. The value of production during the
year 2015-16 is higher in comparison to that in the year 2012-13, 2013-14 and 2014-15.
Against the planned supplies of Rs. 64,870 crore, the actual supplies made during first
four years of 12 th plan is Rs. 45,387 crore. In view of the above deficiency of Ordnance
Factories Board, need to further enhance its capacity to arrest shortage of ammunition
and Vehicles of Army, the Committee are of the strong view that due importance should
be given to Ordnance Factories Board and adequate budgetary provisions should be
provided at the RE stage.

Reply of the Government 
The recommendations of the Committee are noted and it is assured that
projections/requirements  of  the  Ordnance  Factories  will  be  forwarded  to  Ministry  of
Finance  for  consideration  at RE  stage.   In  case  the  funds  are  not provided  as  per
projections by the Ministry of Finance, the available resources will be optimally utilized
based on prioritized requirements of Ordnance Factories.
For comments of the Committee, please see Para No. 7 of Chapter I.
Recommendation (Para No. 2)
The Committee note that there is long delay in completion of projects related to T-
72 variants, engines  for Armoured Vehicles, spares for T-72 and T-90 tanks, Akash
Booster  and  Sustainer,  large  caliber  weapons,   HMX   Plant,  Pinaka,  Ammonium
Percolate, MPV and 125 mm FSAPDS. The delay ranges from 3 to 9 years. The major
reasons  for  delay  of  these  projects  are  due  to  delay  in  procurement  of  plant  and
machinery  and  delay  in  completion  of  civil  works  by  MES.   Against  the  required
investment of Rs.2,394 Cr., the investment made till  February, 2016 is Rs.683.55 Cr.
The Committee are concerned to note that Rs.1,710.45 Cr. are  yet to be allocated.
The important projects have already been delayed considerably.  During the course of
deliberations with the representatives of Army and Ministry of Defence, the Committee
were  apprised  that  due  to  inadequate  production  capacity,  there  is  a  shortage  of
Armoured Vehicles with the Army. During examination of Demands for Grants in the year
2015-16, the Committee had observed that due to non-availability of funds as well as
absence of commensurate load from Army, expenditure for augmentation of capacity for
manufacturing of T-90 tanks from 100 to 140 Nos. was prioritized. The Committee are
concerned to note that all this important items approved are nowhere near completion.
The construction work of Ordnance Factory at Nalanda has also been carried forward to
12th Plan though it was initiated during the 10th Plan. The Committee also note that
Ordnance Factories depend to a large extent on Military Engineering Services (MES) for
execution of civil works related to their projects. Delay in completion of Civil Works by
MES is one of the major reasons affecting the timely completion of the projects. The
Committee view this delay very seriously which is affecting the operational preparedness
of Army and other consumers of Ordnance Factories. The Committee feel that proper
planning at the initial stage in consultation with all the stakeholders should be undertaken
thoroughly deliberating upon the negative factors causing delays and a comprehensive
strategy chalked out for timely completion of the projects within a realistic time-frame. The
Committee desire that action taken in this regard may be communicated to them.  
Reply of the Government
The  sanctioned  investment,  expenditure  incurred  till  March  2016  and  future  plan  of
expenditure in respect of Projects related to T-72 variants, engines for armored vehicle,
spares for T-72 & T-90 tanks, Augmentation of production capacity of T-90 Tanks, Large
Caliber Weapons, HMX Plant are enclosed as Annexure – Proj.
Major reasons for delay in procurement of P&M are:
Tendering Stage:
 Limited  vendor  base  since  majority  of  the  machine  requirement  is  for  customized
SPMs/tooled up machine and very few offers are received in spite of repeated Tender
Opening Date (TOD) extensions to avoid Single Offers and promote competition.

 Global Tenders for high value and high-tech Plant & Machinery [P&M] (like Forging Plant,
Chemical Plants, Metallurgical Plants  etc.)  and because  of financial  crisis  in Europe
during  2011-2013,  some  of  the  European  suppliers  failed  to  respond  to  Tender
Enquiries(TEs) leading to retendering the cases. 
 Till 2013, there was no provision for advance payment. Hence many P&M suppliers,
particularly in case of high value P&M did not participate in TEs.
 Restrictions of export licence in respect of European countries, mainly Germany, Italy by
their respective Government for supplying P&M to OFB.
Project of Nalanda: 
The civil works for O F Nalanda initiated in 10 th Plan was shifted to 12th Plan due to
following circumstances:- 
 Cancellation of Transfer of Technology (TOT) contract for Bi-Modular Charge System
(BMCS) Plant with M/s Denel, South Africa in 2003, firm barred in June 2005. Technology
absorption adversely effected.
 Suspension of project activities during June 05 to July 06 led to retendering of BMCS
Process plants.
 Supply order on M/s IMI, Israel for supply of BMCS Plant put on hold in June 2009 and
cancelled in March 2012.   
 The civil works except for BMCS Plant has been completed. Administrative approval for
civil works related to BMCS Plant was issued to DRDO for Rs. 226 Crore in January,
2014. Simultaneously, procurement process for BMCS Plant through indigenous sources
was being progressed. 
 Efforts for Indigenous procurement of BMCS Plant failed as no offer was technically
acceptable. Global tendering (with Approval of Project Monitoring Board) is in progress.
As the civil works related to BMCS Plant are required to be in synchronization with the
design of BMCS Plant, the same shall be progressed after finalization of contract for
BMCS Plant through GTE. 
Execution of Civil Works through MES:
In order to execute civil works without time over run, following actions have been
put in to place:  
a) General Manager (GM) of factories have been authorized to issue Administrative
Approval (AA) for execution of civil works related to MOD/DDP/OFB sanctioned projects
to be executed through MES/DRDO/Public Works Organizations. Thus, factory need not
refer to OFB for convening the siting board to finalize scope of work, scrutiny of the same
and issue of Administrative Approval (AA). This saves considerable processing time.
b) Standard  Operating  Procedure  (SOP)  for  civil  works  has  been  published  in
January 2014. Factories have been issued guidelines for measures to be taken while
preparing Draft Project Report (DPR) so that variation in the scope of work envisaged in
the DPR and to be executed remains minimum and variation between estimated cost and
the AA remains within permissible limit.
c) Financial Powers for execution of civil woks departmentally by GMs, have been
enhanced from Rs. 25 lakhs to Rs.5 Crore for Production Buildings.
d) DRDO is also being roped in to execute specialized, high value and time-bound
Civil Works. OF Nalanda, OF Korwa and major civil works related to Pinaka project have
been assigned to DRDO.
Sanctione
d
Likely Total
Expenditure *
Expenditure
Up to Feb’16
Expenditure
Up to
Cumulative Expenditure
Plan

investmen
t
Mar’2016 2016-17 2017-18 2018-19
2394 2038.66 683.55 732.83 1096.08 1644.08 2038.66
ANNEXURE – PROJ
(Rs. in Crore)
* Likely total expenditure is based on actual against the sanction based on 
estimates
Major components for the gap between sanctioned and expenditure (Rs. 1661.17 Crore)
are:
Sl.
No.
Item Amount
(Rs. Crore)
Remarks
1 Difference  between
estimates  and  actual  on
the project cost
355.34 Due  to  actual  costs  being  lower  than
estimated costs
2 Engine  Augmentation
(EFA)
168 Cost of Flexible Machining System (FMS);
order  already placed  in  Aug,15;  DP: Two
years
3 T-90  Tank  –  100  to  140
per annum
850 Project put on hold by MOD from Feb,14 to
Oct,14.  MES  has  already  concluded  civil
works contract for Rs.281 Crore in Feb,16.
P&M under various stages of procurement
4 Large Calibre Weapons 277 Out of Rs.250 Crore of P&M, order already
placed  for  Rs.100  Crore;  balance  Rs.50
Crore  P&M  under  advance  stages  of
procurement
For comments of the Committee, please see Para No. 10 of Chapter I.
Recommendation (Para No. 12)
Keeping  in  mind  the  depletion  of  allocation  for  R&D,  both  in  absolute  and
percentage terms and depletion of the percentage share of R&D activities w.r.t. overall
R&D Budget and overall resource crunch of Government of India, the Committee desire
that the Ministry should explore the possibility of considering the budget for R&D platform
development as a sum of R&D Budget of DRDO, DPSUs and Ordnance Factories as well
as the Private Sector. The Committee are of the view that due care should be taken to
synergize the R&D activities being undertaken by all these organizations in order to avoid
duplication  of  Research  and  Development  and  saving  on  cost  and  time.  As  a
consequence thereof, more funds can be made available for undertaking research work.
The Committee also note that DRDO’s products and systems are being developed with
partnership of more than 1000 industries including small and medium enterprises (SEM).
In view of limited funds available with DRDO, the Committee are of the view that there is
need to re-look at this aspect, as to how the industries will sponsor for manufacturing the
products and DRDO will only assist them in design and development assignment, without

spending from its own budget. The Committee desire that DRDO should take necessary
steps in this regard under intimation to them.
Reply of the Government
We do agree with the suggestions of the Committee and the same needs to be re-
looked as to how the industries will sponsor for manufacturing the products. DRDO has
implemented  the  same  in   certain  cases,  examples  of  these  include  the  case  of
development of Rustom-II wherein the industry partners are seeding in Rs 300 Cr in
design & development activities which is ~20% of the product cost. Also in certain cases,
the  production  contract  has  been  taken  up  by  PSUs  which  have  sought  design
consultancy from DRDO. A policy regarding the same needs to be framed up.
For comments of the Committee, please see Para No. 22 of Chapter I.
Recommendation (Para No. 13)
The Committee observe that DRDO has developed the following major systems for the
Forces viz. Army, Navy and Air force - Army: Prithvi, Agni, Akash, BrahMos, Lakshya
Nishant, MBT Arjun Mk-I, AAD Mk-I, AERV, Sarvatra, Pinaka, ROV, Radar-3D TCR, WLR,
BFSR, Samyukta EW, DivyaDrishti and Samvahak.        
Navy: Dhanush, LRSAM, BrahMos, Sangraha EW, Varuna ESM, Dolphin ESM, Humsa
NG, USHUS,TAL, Revathi – Radar, Maareech, Varunasta, Submarines and Escape Set.
Air Force: Prithvi, Akash, MRSAM, Lakshya, Eagle EW, LCA Tejas, AEW&C, Rohini,
Aslesha,  SAR-Radars,  Avionics  for  MiG  29,  Su-30, Laser  Designator  cum  TI,  Aerial
Delivery Systems and CPSS.
For comments of the Committee, please see Para No. 25 of Chapter I.
Recommendation (Para No. 14)
The Committee, while appreciating the work done by DRDO, nevertheless, also
feel concerned to note that even after 58 years, there is no clear cut technological road
map  prepared.  DRDO  is  creating  a  platform  and  integrating  a  number  of  sub-
components.  But,  R&D  is  about  developing  certain  key technologies  akin  to  that  of
ISRO’s  capability  in  space  which  has  not  been  developed  by  DRDO  so  far.  The
Committee are of the view that as the custodian of R&D for national security, while
laboratories are expanded, technologies too need to be developed, or else, no useful
purpose will be served. Therefore, the Committee feel the need to emphasize on the
Ministry that it is high time for DRDO to prepare a technological road map and develop
certain key technologies on the lines of ISRO so as to strengthen our Defence base. The
Committee further are of the view that DRDO should focus on key high technologies in
coordination with DPSUs and the low end technologies can be assigned to capable
reputed  Private  Sector  by  involving  them  in  the  system  integration  and  providing
adequate financial support. This will minimize the delay and limitations posed due to
financial  constraints.  This  will  also  further  facilitate  in  creating  a  R&D  network.  The
Committee desire to be apprised about the action taken in this direction.

Reply of the Government
Initiatives were taken by DRDO after the presentation on Demand for Grants were
presented and all the Seven clusters DGs have given a technology roadmap for each of
the cluster for the next Ten years. This will be put up to Secretary, DR&D and will be
finalized by end July 2016 for implementation.
For comments of the Committee, please see Para No. 25 of Chapter I.
Manpower in DRDO
Recommendation (Para No. 15 )
Committee  are  happy  to  note  that  in  DRDO,  the  existing  strength  of  7863
scientists, is  almost equal  to  the  sanctioned  strength  of 7878.  Thus,  the  shortfall  in
manpower in the organisation is negligible. Also, the Committee appreciate the fact that
from  the  year  2011 to  2015,  the  rate  of  exodus  of  scientists  from  the  DRDO  has
decreased.  This  is  a  welcome  development.  The  Committee  feel  in  this  regard  that
positive steps such as the ‘Incentive Scheme’ for Scientists could be initiated in the
DRDO so as to minimize the attrition of Scientists from the organization to zero percent.
Reply of the Government
Seventh  Central  Pay  Commission  (CPC)  has  not  recommended  Performance
Related Incentive Scheme (PRIS) for Defence Research and Development Organisation
(DRDO) employees as given to Department of Atomic Energy (DAE) and Indian Space
Research Organization (ISRO).
For comments of the Committee, please see Para No. 28 of Chapter I.
Public Private Partnership
Recommendation (Para No. 30)
During  the  deliberations,  the  Committee  pointed  out  the  gigantic  gap  in  the
availability of regular arms, ammunition and equipment ranging from 30 to 70 per cent,
which adversely affects the ability to the combat our prime adversaries. The Committee
stressed  on  the  need  for  a  complete  revamp  and  re-orientation  on  how the  DRDO
functions and one of the major initiatives suggested by the Committee in this regard was
to  facilitate  the  active  involvement  of  private  sector, Universities,  Indian  Institute  of
Technologies  and  Indian  Institute  of  Science  which  could  play  a  major  role  in  the
resurgence of DRDO.
Reply of the Government
DRDO is working in close synchronization with all its stakeholders through its
programmes/ projects.  Accordingly, it has developed, built and upgraded its industrial
partner base.  Today, over 1000 private industries and SMEs are vital partners in DRDO’s
development  programmes.  This  number  covers  the  entire  spectrum  ranging  from
Defence Public Sector Undertakings (DPSUs) and Ordnance Factory Board (OFB) to
private industries, all of them have played a crucial role in the development programs of
DRDO.

In  addition,  DRDO  collaborates  with  other  science  &  Technology  (S&T)
Organisation, like Department of Space (DoS), Department of Atomic Energy (DAE) and
Council  of  Scientific  &  Industrial  Research  (CSIR)  for  common  requirements  and
applications.  DRDO has set up specialized centres of technology in select academic
institutions of repute to work, e.g. IIT Madras Research Park, DRDO has also selectively
chosen its global partners and has Memorandum of Undertakings (MoUs) with over 30
countries worldwide for joint collaboration in requisite areas with complementary work
share.
For comments of the Committee, please see Para No. 64 of Chapter I.
Recommendation (Para No. 44 )
The Committee note that for the year 2016-17, DGQA has been allocated Rs.
1,075.37 crore against the projection of Rs. 1,099.99 crore. However, when asked if any
compromises  had  been  made  or  are  likely  to  be  made  due  to  reduced  budgetary
allocation  against  the  projections  made  by  the  DGQA,  it  replied  in  negative.  The
Committee also note that DGQA carries out inspection of defence stores supplied by
Ordnance Factories, DPSUs, Trade Firms and ex-import. These inspections are done at
various stages of –manufacture and at Final Acceptance stage. On an average, DGQA
carries out approx. 18,000 inspections per month. Further, whenever a new system is
inducted into the Army, DGQA is an integral part of the process and plays a pivotal role in
all  stages of induction right from  the General Staff Qualitative  Requirement (GSQR)
formulation stage till the Joint Receipt Inspection of the store. Since DGQA seems to be
satisfied with its budgetary allocation, the Committee hope that DGQA would continue in
their  efforts  in  taking  all  actions  necessary  to  ensure  that  the  Arms,  Ammunitions,
Equipments and Stores being inducted in the Armed Forces are superlative in quality and
highly reliable in war/warlike situations.
Reply of the Government
It is confirmed that the DGQA allocation for the year 2016-17 as well as projection
thereof are correct.
For comments of the Committee, please see Para No. 67 of Chapter I.
Recommendation (Para No. 45 )
The  Committee  note  that  DGQA suffered  deficiency in  manpower  because  of
various cuts during initial stages and recruitment ban, especially in group ‘C’ and ‘D’
posts. As per the submission of the Ministry, the ban has been lifted and the process of
recruitment has started. The Committee hope that the recent recruitment undertaken by
DGQA addresses the problem of shortage of manpower adequately and they be apprised
of the tangible outcome thereof.
Reply of the Government
Manpower recruitment for DGQA has been initiated with the concerned authorities
to the extent permissible.
For comments of the Committee, please see Para No. 67 of Chapter I.

CHAPTER V
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH GOVERNMENT
HAVE FURNISHED INTERIM REPLIES/REPLIES AWAITED
Recommendation (Para No. 43)
The  Committee note that a Comprehensive  Policy on Procedure for  Procurement of
Drugs  and  Consumables  for  ECHS  was  issued  by  Government  of  India/Ministry  of
Defence on 25 November, 2003. At present, the financial limits per month, for  local
purchase of emergent, life saving and essential drugs, of Type A and B Non Military
Polyclinics and Military Polyclinics without service Hospitals is Rs. 50,000 and that of
Type C and D Non Military Polyclinics and Military Polyclinics without service hospitals is
Rs. 30,000. The Committee are concerned to note that even after lapse of 13 years the
above  mentioned  Financial  limits  have  not  been  reviewed  despite  the  matter  being
brought into the notice of the Ministry of Defence by the ECHS. Presently, on exhausting
this monthly ceiling by Polyclinic, incidence for additional need arising in that month for
procurement of emergent, lifesaving and essential drug in not addressed. Therefore, the
Committee are of the strong view that due to growth  of this scheme and prevailing
inflationary trend there is a need to increase the current monthly ceilings. They also
desire the Ministry to look into this matter seriously and revise the present ceiling in order
to facilitate the officers in charge of Polyclinics to purchase the emergent, life saving and
essential drugs.
NEW DELHI;      MAJ GEN B C KHANDURI, AVSM (RETD),
16 January, 2017                    Chairperson,
26 Pausa, 1938 (Saka)                                             Standing Committee on Defence

APPENDIX I
STANDING COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE 
MINUTES OF THE SIXTH SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE  
ON DEFENCE (2016-17)
The Committee sat on Friday, the 16 th January, 2017 from 1130 hrs. to 1400 hrs. in
Main Committee Room, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
PRESENT
MAJ GEN B C KHANDURI AVSM (RETD)       - CHAIRPERSON
Lok Sabha
2. Shri H.D. Devegowda
3. Shri G. Hari
4. Shri Rodmal Nagar
5. Smt Pratyusha Rajeshwari Singh
6. Shri Partha Pratim Ray
7. Smt. Mala Rajya Laxmi Shah 
8. Shri Shrirang Appa Barne
9. Col Sonaram Choudhary(Retd)
10. Km Shobha Karandlaje
11. Shri A P Jithender Reddy
      Rajya Sabha
12. Shri Harivansh
13. Shri Madhusudan Mistry
14. Smt. Ambika Soni
15. Shri Sanjay Raut
SECRETARIAT
1 Smt Kalpana Sharma  - Joint Secretary 
2 Shri T G Chandrasekhar            - Director
3 Smt Jyochnamayi Sinha            - Additional Director 
4 Shri Rahul Singh - Under Secretary

2. At  the  outset,  the  Chairperson  welcomed  the  Members  to  the  Sitting  of  the
Committee and briefed about the Draft reports. 
3. The Committee then took up for consideration the following draft Reports on the
action taken by the Government on the observations/recommendations contained in the
following:
(i) Nineteenth Report (16th Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants of the Ministry 
of Defence(2016-17)  on  General  Defence  Budget, Civil  Expenditure  of  
Ministry of Defence (Demand No. 20) and Defence Pension(Demand No. 
21);
(ii) Twentieth Report (16th Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants of the Ministry 
of Defence (2016-17) on Army, Navy and Air Force (Demand No. 22); 
(iii) Twenty-first Report (16th Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants of the Ministry
of Defence (2016-17) on Ministry of Defence (Miscellaneous) (Demand No. 
20); and
(iv) Twenty-second Report (16th Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants of the  
Ministry of Defence (2016-17) on Capital Outlay on Defence Services,  
Procurement Policy and Defence Planning (Demand No. 23).
4. After deliberation, the Committee adopted the above Reports and authorized the
Chairperson to finalize the Reports in the light of the suggestions as may be received
from the Members within a week.
5. *
*******
A copy of verbatim record of the proceedings has been kept.
The Committee then adjourned.
* Does not pertain to this Report.

APPENDIX II
ANALYSIS  OF  THE  ACTION  TAKEN  BY  THE  GOVERNMENT  ON  THE  OBSERVATIONS/
RECOMMENDATIONS  CONTAINED  IN  THE  TWENTY  FIRST  REPORT  OF  THE
STANDING COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE(16TH LOK SABHA)   ON 'DEMANDS FOR
GRANTS  (2016-17) OF THE  MINISTRY ON DEFENCE ON  ORDNANCE  FACTORY
BOARD,  DEFENCE  RESEARCH  AND  DEVELOPMENT  ORGANISATION,  
EX-SERVICEMEN CONTRIBUTORY HEALTH SCHEME,  DIRECTORATE GENERAL
QUALITY ASSURANCE AND NATIONAL CADET CORPS (DEMAND NO. 20)'
1. Total number of recommendations                    50
2. Observations/Recommendations  which  have  been  accepted  by  the  Government  
(please see Chapter II A):
Recommendation Nos. 3, 5, 20, 25, 28,  31, 32, 33, 34, 35, 36, 37, 38, 39, 40, 41,42, 
46, 47, 48, 49  and 50
Total :      22
Percentage:   44%   
3. Observations/Recommendations  which  have  been  accepted  by  the  Government  and
commented upon (please see Chapter II B):
Recommendation Nos. 4, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 16, 17, 18, 19, 21, 22, 23, 24, 26, 27 and 29
Total :      18
Percentage:     36%
4. Observations/Recommendations which the Committee  do not desire to pursue in view of
the replies received from the Government (please see Chapter III):
Recommendation - NIL
Total :        00
Percentage:     0%
5. Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of Government have not been
accepted by the Committee which require reiteration and commented upon (please see
Chapter IV):
Recommendation Nos.  1, 2, 12, 13, 14, 15, 30, 44 and 45
Total :       09
Percentage:    18%
6. Observations/Recommendations in respect of which Government have furnished interim
replies/replies awaited (please see Chapter V):
Recommendation No.  43
Total :    01 
   Percentage:   2%