TENTH REPORT
STANDING COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE
(2014-2015)
(SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA)
MINISTRY OF DEFENCE
[Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations/observations
contained in the Twenty-second Report (15th Lok Sabha) on Threat
Perception and preparedness of the Forces including incursion
on borders, coordination mechanism with the Central
Armed Police Forces and Border connectivity
through Road, Air and Rail]
Presented to Lok Sabha on 13.08.2015
Laid  in  Rajya Sabha  on  13.08.2015
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
August, 2015/Shravana, 1937 ( Saka)


C.O.D. No. 145
Price : R  118.00
© 2015 B Y L OK SABHA S ECRETARIAT
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct
of Business in Lok Sabha (Fifteenth Edition) and printed by
Jainco Art India, New Delhi-110 005.

CONTENTS
PAGE
COMPOSITION OF THE C OMMITTEE (2014-15) ................................ (iii)
INTRODUCTION ................................................................. (v)
CHAPTER I R eport .......................................................... 1
CHAPTER II Recommendations/Observations which have been
accepted by the Government ............................ 26
CHAPTER III Recommendations/Observations which the Committee
do not desire to pursue in view of the replies of the
Government .................................................. 68
CHAPTER IV Recommendations/Observations in respect of which
Replies of the Government have not been accepted
by the Committee and which require reiteration ... 80
C
HAPTER V Recommendations/Observations in respect of which
Government have furnished interim replies .......... 84
APPENDICES
I. Minutes of the Nineteenth sitting of the Standing
Committee on Defence (2014-15) held on
10.08.2015 ................................................... 85
II. Analysis of Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations contained in the
T wenty-second Report (15th Lok Sabha) of the
Standing Committee on Defence ........................ 87
(i)

COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE
ON DEFENCE (2014-15)
  Maj Gen B C Khanduri, AVSM (Retd) —  Chairperson
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Suresh C. Angadi
3. Shri Shrirang Appa Barne
4. Shri Dharambir
5. Shri Thupstan Chhewang
6. Col. Sonaram Choudhary (Retd.)
7. Shri H.D. Devegowda
8. Shri Sher Singh Ghubaya
9. Shri G. Hari
10. Shri Ramesh Jigajinagi
11. Dr. Murli Manohar Joshi
12. Km. Shobha Karandlaje
13. Shri Vinod Khanna
14. Dr. Mriganka Mahato
15. Shri Tapas Paul
16. Shri Malla Reddy
17. Shri Rajeev Satav
18. Smt. Mala Rajya Lakshmi Shah
19. Capt. Amarinder Singh (Retd.)
20. Shri A.P . Jithender Reddy
21. Shri Hemendra Chandra*
22. Shri Rajyavardhan Singh Rathore**
23. Smt. Pratyusha Rajeshwari Singh
$
(iii)
* Sad Demise on 05.09.2014.
** Ceased to be Member of the Committee on 09.11.2014.
$ Nominated w.e.f. 22.12.2014.

(iv)
Rajya Sabha
24. Shri K.R. Arjunan
25. Shri Anand Sharma #
26. Shri Rajeev Chandrasekhar
27. Shri A.U. Singh Deo
28. Shri Harivansh
29. Shri Vinay Katiyar
30. Shri Hishey Lachungpa
31. Shri Madhusudan Mistry
32. Smt. Ambika Soni
33. Shri Tarun Vijay
34. Shri Narendra Budania
@
SECRETARIAT
1. Smt. Kalpana Sharma — Joint Secretary
2. Shri D.S. Malha — Director
3. Shri A.K. Srivastava — Additional Director
4. Shri Rahul Singh — Under Secretary
5. Smt. Rekha Sinha — Executive Assistant
# Nominated w.e.f. 08.10.2014.
@ Ceased to be Member of the Committee on 08.10.2014.

(v)
INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairperson of the Standing Committee on Defence (2014-15)
having been authorized by the Committee to present the Report on
their behalf, present this Tenth Report of the Committee on ‘Action
Taken by the Government on the recommendations/observations
contained in the Twenty-second Report (15th Lok Sabha) on Threat
Perception and preparedness of the Forces including incursion on
borders, coordination mechanism with the Central Armed Police Forces
and Border connectivity through Road, Air and Rail ’.
2. The T wenty-second Report was presented to Lok Sabha and laid
in Rajya Sabha on 18 February 2014. It contained 41 recommendations/
observations. The Ministry of Defence furnished Action Taken Replies
on all the recommendations/observations on 15 July 2014.
3. The Draft Action Taken Report was considered and adopted by
the Committee at their sitting held on 10 August 2015.
4. An analysis of action taken by the Government on the
recommendations/observations contained in the T wenty-second Report
of the Standing Committee on Defence (15th Lok Sabha) is given in
Appendix-II.
   N
EW D ELHI; MAJ GEN B C KHANDURI, AVSM (RETD),
10 August, 2015 Chairperson,
19 Shravana, 1937 (Saka) Standing Committee on Defence.

CHAPTER I
REPORT
This Report of the Standing Committee on Defence deals with
Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations/observations
contained in the Twenty-second Report (15th Lok Sabha) on ‘Threat
Perception and preparedness of the Forces including incursion on
borders, coordination mechanism with the Central Armed Police Forces
and Border connectivity through Road, Air and Rail ’, which was
presented to Lok Sabha and laid in Rajya Sabha on 18.02.2014.
2. The Committee ’s Twenty-second Report (15th Lok Sabha)
contained 41 recommendations/observations on the following aspects:—
Para No./Nos. Subject
1, 2 & 3 Introductory
4 Truncated Defence Force Strength
5 Strength of Equipments
6 Role of Indian Army
7, 8 & 9 Role of Research Establishment and Other
Organisation
10 Role of Indian Air Force
11 & 12 Inordinate delay in induction of Light
Combat/Other Aircraft
13 Procurement Procedure
14, 15, 16, 17 & 18 Role of DRDO
19 Insufficient Indigenization in HAL
20 Safety of Indian Water
21 & 22 Effective coordination mechanism
23 Expeditious installation of Radars
24 Safety of Vessels
25 International Cooperation and Goodwill
26, 27 & 28 C oordination Mechanism with Central Armed
Police Forces
29, 30, 31, 32, 33, 34, Border Connectivity
35, 36, 37, 38, 39,
40 & 41

2
3. Action Taken Replies have been received from the Government
in respect of all the recommendations/observations contained in the
Report. The replies have been examined and the same have been
categorised as follows:—
(i) (a) Recommendations/Observations which have been
accepted by the Government (please see Chapter II):
Para Nos. 1, 2, 3, 7, 8, 9, 10, 12, 16, 18, 19, 21, 24, 25,
26, 30, 31, 32, 33, 36, 37, 38, 41
(23 Recommendations)
(b) Recommendations/Observations which have been
accepted by the Government and commented upon
(please see Chapter II):
Para No. 4, 6, 13, 15, 17, 20, 23, 40
(8 Recommendations)
(ii) Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do not
desire to pursue in view of the replies received from the
Government (please see Chapter III):
Para No. 5, 14, 27, 28, 39
(5 Recommendations)
(iii) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies
of Government have not been accepted by the Committee
which require reiteration and commented upon (please see
Chapter IV):
Para Nos. 11, 22, 29, 34, 35
(5 Recommendations)
(iv) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which
Government have furnished interim replies (please see
Chapter V):
Para No. Nil
(00 Recommendation)
4. The Committee desire that the Ministry ’s response to their
comments made in Chapter 1 of this Report to be furnished to them
at the earliest and in any case not later than six months of the
presentation of this Report.

3
A. Truncated Defence Force Strength
Recommendations/Observations of the Committee (Para No. 4)
5. The Committee had recommended as under:—
“The Committee are dismayed to learn that against the satisfactory
picture given by the Ministry, the three forces are deficient in its
strength of officers. The strength of other ranks, Sailors and Airmen
are also short then the authorized strength. Against the sanction
strength of 52859, the held strength of officers in the Army is
43475. It is apparent that the Army is a truncated force having a
recorded shortage of 9384 officers. Similarly, in the other ranks
the Army short of 20561 personnel. Likewise, the Navy is short of
1561 officers and 11825 sailors. The position of Air Force is relatively
eased, though they also have shortage of 659 officers and 3674
Airmen. In the opinion of the Committee no force can perform
effectively unless they have the requisite numbers. India is a fast
developing country which does not have dearth of talent. A wide
network of Sainik Schools already exists, which is supplemented by
Rashtriya Military School and Rashtriya Indian Military College. The
Committee fail to understand the existing shortage in spite of
numerous entry schemes. They, therefore, recommend that a
scientific study be conducted to find out the optimum number of
force needed also the methodology, as to how this shortage could
be tackled in the minimum prescribed period. On the obverse,
increasing the number of officers is very essential specially when
China has a sizeable Army of 2.3 million and Pakistan has 0.52
million. Our strength of Army is just 1.2 million which is a
discouraging figure given to conventional warfare. The Committee
feel and leave it to the discretion of forces whether the system of
selection for entry of officers be also reviewed in order to enable
them to find the right talent. ”
6. The Ministry, in its Action Taken Reply, has stated as under:—
“(I) Government has taken a number of steps to reduce shortage
of officers in the Armed forces and to attract youth to join Armed
forces. Some of these are as under:
(a) A Committee under the Chairmanship of Shri Ajay Vikram Singh,
the then Special Secretary was constituted to look into various
issues inter-alia including to make the organization more
effective in fulfilling the individual career aspirations of
officers. Based on the recommendations of Ajay Vikram Singh

4
Committee, following major initiatives have already been
taken to improve the service conditions in the Officers’ cadre
in Armed Forces:
(i) All officers including those in Short Service Commission
(SSC) are now eligible to hold substantive rank of Captain,
Major and Lieutenant Colonel after 2, 6 and 13 years of
reckonable service respectively.
(ii) A total number of 750 posts of Lt. Colonel have been
upgraded to Colonel towards implementation of A V Singh
Committee Report (Phase-I).
(iii) Further , 1896 additional posts in the ranks of Colonel,
Brigadier , Major General and Lieutenant General and their
equivalents in the other two Services have been upgraded
towards implementation of A V Singh Committee Report
(Phase-II).
(iv) Colonel (Time Scale) rank was introduced for those
Lt. Colonel, who cannot make for Colonel (Select Rank),
after completion of 26 years.
(v) The implementation of recommendations of the VI Central
Pay Commission with substantial improvement in the pay
structure of officers of Armed Forces has made the
Services more attractive;
(vi) The tenure of Short Service Commissioned Officers has
been increased from 10 years to 14 years;
(vii) Setting up of seven new Service Selection Boards (SSBs)
[2 for Army, 3 for Navy and 2 for Air Force] have been
approved by the Government which will enable
expeditious selection of large number of candidates for
induction of officers into the Armed Forces and will thus
held in reducing shortage of officers;
(viii) The UPSC is now recommending candidates in higher
ratio for one vacancy for interview at Service Selection
Boards;
(ix) A second Officers ’ Training Academy for induction of
SSCOs at Gaya has been set up in respect of Army so as
to impart pre-commissioning training for large number
of cadets.
(II) ARMY
(a) Army is selecting adequate number of candidates every year
as per planned intake to make up the deficiency over a
period of time. Besides, presently following two studies are

5
underway to review the intake of officers and the selection
process:
(i) Study by Indian Institute of Management (IIM),
Ahmedabad: A Study is being carried out by the Army
Headquarters through IIM, Ahmedabad to review the
Officers Selection Process.
(ii) De novo Selection System: A project has been undertaken
by Defence Institute of Psychological Research (DIPR) to
develop a De novo Selection System for the officers of
the Armed Forces.
(b) Recruitment of Other Ranks (ORs) in Army is a continuous
and an ongoing process. The present deficiency in ORs is
14659 (1.28%) against which 71644 recruits are under training.
As such, there is no problem of shortage in the ORs in Army.
(III) NAVY
(a) Manpower Planning and Recruitment: Manpower Planning and
Recruitment Policies in the Navy have been formulated
depending upon operational and administrative requirements
of the Service.
(b) Perspective Planning: Manpower Planning is carried out on
the basis of long term reviews at a macro level, covering a
period of approximately 15 years, whereas the short–term
review looks at a scenario of two to five years. In order to
decide the number of personnel to be recruited, the following
are taken into account:
(i) Current shortages
(ii) Number of personnel in the training process
(iii) Anticipated growth in the sanctioned strength
(iv) Wastages/Outgo
(c) Calculation of Intake Levels: The current shortages in officers
and sailors are 1839 and 12884 respectively. However, around
700 officers and 7500 sailors are undergoing training and will
be available for deployment shortly. Till 2011, IN was inducting
about 500 officers and 3400 sailors per year based on the
available selection infrastructure and training capacity. As
per the long term Human Capital Strategy (HCS), 2012-17,
the IN is presently inducting 850 officers and 4450 sailors
every year. The number of officers inducting is planned to be

6
increased to 1000 per year from 2016, based upon the planned
enhancement in the recruitment and training infrastructure.
These measures are expected to reduce shortage of manpower
in the IN, subject to other factors such as resource allocation,
accord of manpower sanctions and commissioning/de-
commissioning of ship/submarines as per schedule.
(IV) AIR FORCE
(a) Present Establishment and Strength of Officers as on 1 April,
2014 are 12606 and 12071 respectively. The shortfall of 535
officers relates to the existing establishment laid down to
meet present requirements. Various measures have been taken
to overcome the shortage of officers.
(b) As regard Airmen, the Establishment and Strength of airmen
as on 1 March, 2014 is 134349 and 131181 respectively, leading
to deficiency of 3168. As on 1 March, 2014, a total of 5262
trainees are undergoing various phases of training. This caters
for the deficiency as well as the discharges during the
intervening period till pass out of trainees. Induction is
planned regularly catering to the discharges as well as
accretion vacancies if any. ”
7. Keeping in mind the shortage of manpower in the three
Services, the Committee had recommended to conduct a scientific
study to find out the optimum number of forces needed and adopt
a methodology to fill up the shortage in a minimum prescribed
period. The Committee are informed that the Government has taken
a number of steps to reduce shortage of officers in the Armed
forces and to attract the talented youth to join Armed forces as per
the Ajay Vikram Singh Committee Report. The Committee are
informed that setting up of seven new Service Selection Boards(SSBs)
[2 for Army, 3 for Navy and 2 for Air Force] have been approved
by the Government which will enable expeditious selection of large
number of candidates for induction of officers into the Armed forces
and will reduce the shortage of officers. The Committee would like
to be informed about the status of these seven SSBs. The Committee
have been given to understand that a study is being carried out by
the Army Headquarters through IIM, Ahmedabad in order to review
the officers Selection Process. However, the Committee desire that
necessary action be taken to expedite the recruitment and training
of officers.

7
B. Role of Indian Army
Recommendations/Observations of the Committee (Para No. 6)
8. The Committee had recommended as under:—
“Another disquieting feature has surfaced during the course of
Committee ’s examination of the subject. Our defence forces,
especially Army has certain extraneous duties to perform, which
are not related to its primary responsibilities. Though these duties
assume great significance as far as the security of the country is
concerned, the Committee have every reason to believe that
insurgent activities are a form of proxy war instigated by
neighbouring countries against our nation to destabilize peace,
tranquillity and growth. It is astonishing to find that as many as 78
insurgent active groups have been earmarked in one State of the
North East. Our neighbouring countries are espousing a form of
perennial and subtle war in which a substantial amount of
operational preparedness is absolutely essential. The factual position
on the repeated incursion/infiltrations on the western border are
the recent examples where our Army also suffered losses. In the
Keran and Samba Sectors, our Army was engaged to dissuade militant
groups coming from Pakistan who were successful in the breaking
our security cordons. The incidents which happened in the border
areas where the terrorists not only inflicted casualties on the
Armed Forces but Police Personnel as well. The Committee are not
oblivious of the fact that several times not only these infiltrators
but also the regular Pakistan Army has blatantly broken the rules
of engagement in an inhuman manner. To quote another example
of belligerence and unbridled aberration by Pakistan, during the
years 2009-13, a total of 214 cases of ceasefire violations were
recorded across the Indo-Pak Border.
Weighing all the pros and cons of the insurgent activities taking
place on our borders, the Committee recommend that Army should
not supplant the responsibility of the Central Armed Police Forces
like Border Security force but supplement all that is required. As
strong and modern Army is the need of the hour which should have
optimum operational and strike capabilities to face any aggression
by the enemies. The Committee would like to see our Army having
a fine balance of teeth and tail ratio and finest officer/men
relationship. All the required help should be extended by the
Ministry to the Army is terms of finance and infrastructure so that
it becomes a force to reckon with. Checking infiltrations is not the

8
sole responsibility of the Army but concerted efforts have to be
made by the other concerned Ministries like Ministry of Home
Affairs. The Committee also recommend that the Military
Intelligence Network especially the signal Intelligence should be
strengthened and made state-of-the-art to oversee the movements
of the insurgent groups before intruding into borders rather than
combating them on our soil. The Committee also recommend that
gathering intelligence inputs from local population and through
modern equipment should be shared by Army and CAPFs so that
any kind of movement be monitored and corrective action taken
by the responsible agency. ”
9. The Ministry, in its Action Taken Reply, has stated as under:—
“Border guarding responsibility during peace time falls in domain
of the Ministry of Home Affairs. It is also provided in the
International conventions that the guarding of the International
Borders should be managed by Specialized Police or Para Military
Force and not by the Army.
In accordance with the international convention, the International
Borders of India are guarded by the Central Armed Police Forces
viz. Border Security Force (BSF), Indo-Tibetan Border Police (ITBP),
the Sashastra Seema Bal (SSB), and the Assam Rifles. Government
of India is following “one border one force ” principle. Under this
policy, the BSF has been deployed on Indo-Pakistan Border and
Indo-Bangladesh Border , the SSB has been deployed on Indo-Nepal
and Indo-Bhutan Border, the ITBP on Indo-China Border , and the
Assam Rifles has been entrusted with the task of guarding Indo-
Myanmar Border.
While, Assam Rifles is under the operational control of Army/MoD,
the other border guarding forces  i.e. BSF , ITBP and SSB are under
the operational control of the Ministry of Home Affairs. Recently,
Ministry of Defence has agreed to transfer the border guarding
duties of Indo-Myanmar border from Assam Rifles to BSF . A proposal
for approval of the Government to this effect is under consideration
in the Ministry of Home Affairs.
Besides, border guarding duties, BSF , ITBP , SSB and Assam Rifles
have also been entrusted with counter insurgency (CI) duties in
their area of deployment.
Therefore, except for LOC & LAC where Army is deployed along-
with BSF and ITBP respectively and Indo-Myanmar border where

9
Assam Rifles is deployed under the Operational Control of Army/
MoD, the border guarding and Counter Insurgency (CI) duties is
being taken care of by the Ministry of Home Affairs. Army is
therefore only supplementing the efforts of CAPFs in border guarding
and CI duties and not supplanting the responsibility of border
guarding.
All the Border Guarding Forces (BGFs) have been entrusted with
the responsibility to protect India ’s international borders. The
responsibility includes prevention of illegal migration, anti-smuggling
activities, checking infiltration and collection of intelligence.
Accordingly, necessary powers under Cr.PC and Custom Act are
available to all the BGFs (powers under the Custom Act are not
available to Assam Rifles and SSB at this point). The primary
responsibility to check infiltration is on BGFs and the Army share
this responsibility with BGFs only on active borders for example,
active border of Jammu & Kashmir where the Indian army is guarding
the border along with BSF .
There exists an inbuilt mechanism in the role and functions of
CAPFs for intelligence sharing and operational coordination with
the concerned agencies including Army for better operational
achievements in the bordering area. Each of the BGF has been
nominated as Lead Intelligence Agency (LIA) for the border of its
deployment to ensure co-ordination of activities of intelligence
agencies operating in the border and to share actionable intelligence
with all the agencies concerned including Military intelligence.
Since the BGFs have already been gathering inputs from the local
population and sharing with army and other agencies concerned,
the recommendation of the Committee has already been acted
upon. The modernization of the intelligence network of the BGFs
through the acquisition of latest surveillance equipment is an
ongoing process and being undertaken periodically.
In the context of Signal Intelligence, it is stated that the role of
the Signal Intelligence Organisation is to acquire intelligence of
strategic and tactical military nature and as such, an evolutionary
growth model is the basis for modernisation plans. The 12th Plan
of Signal Intelligence Directorate is being implemented to acquire
state-of-the-art interception systems to equip field units to gather
quality intelligence in CI/CT scenario. Further, mandated external
intelligence agencies play an active and dominant role to support
the intelligence gathering on the targets before and after their
intrusion into India during CI/CT scenario. Hence, closer cooperation

10
between various intelligence agencies is emphasised regularly.
Technological updation of SI Equipment normally takes 4-6 years
and therefore efforts to keep pace with the technology through
speedy procedures for procurement of niche technologies are of
vital importance. ”
10. To keep the Army out of certain extraneous duties like to
contain insurgent activities taking place on our borders, the
Committee had recommended that Army should not supplant the
responsibility of the Central Armed Police Forces (CAPFs) but
supplement if required. The Committee are informed that except
for Line of Control (LOC) & Line of Actual Control (LAC), where
Army is deployed along with Border Security Force (BSF) & Indo-
Tibetan Border Police (ITBP) respectively and Indo-Myanmar border
where Assam Rifles is deployed under the operational control of
Army/Ministry of Defence (MoD), the border guarding and Counter
Insurgency (CI) duties are being taken care of by the Ministry of
Home Affairs. The Committee are further informed that recently
Ministry of Defence had agreed to transfer the border guarding
duties of Indo-Myanmar border from Assam Rifles to BSF. A proposal
for approval of the Government is under consideration in the Ministry
of Home Affairs. The Committee desire that the Ministry of Defence
should pursue the Ministry of Home Affairs to come to a early
decision in this regard and Army be absolved of the duties of guarding
the border.
With regard to the Committee ’s recommendation to strengthen
the Military Intelligence Network especially the signal intelligence
and to make it state-of-the-art to oversee the movements of the
insurgent groups before intruding into borders rather than combating
them on our soil, the Ministry reply is silent. The Ministry has
stated that the primary responsibility to check infiltration is on
Border Guarding Forces (BGFs) and the Army share this responsibility
with BGF only on active borders. The Committee, therefore, desire
the Ministry to furnish reply in this aspect.
In the Action Taken replies, the Ministry has also informed that
in the context of Signal Intelligence (SI) closer cooperation among
various intelligence agencies is emphasised regularly. Technological
upgradation of SI equipment normally takes 4-6 years and therefore,
efforts to keep pace with the technology through speedy procedures
for procurement of nice technologies are of vital importance. The
Committee desire the Ministry to initiate immediate action in this
direction under intimation to them.

11
C. Inordinate delay in Induction of Light Combat/other Aircraft
Recommendations/Observations of the Committee (Para No. 11)
11. The Committee had recommended as under:—
“Likewise, the Committee recommend that the Light Combat Aircraft
(LCA) be inducted in the Forces as per the given dates besides
maintaining and the flight operation clearance expeditiously. The
Committee also recommend in unequivocal terms that Research
and Development activities should be given a fillip by the Defence
production side/Defence Research and Development Organisation
so that dependence on foreign sources be minimized and complete
self-reliance is achieved within a well defined period. If required,
more areas be opened to private Vendor base within India as is the
case in the leading aircraft manufacturing countries of the world. ”
12. The Ministry, in its Action Taken Reply, has stated as under:—
“Initial Operation Clearance (IOC) of Light Combat Aircraft (LCA)
was issued in December , 2013 and M/s. Hindustan Aeronautical
Ltd. (HAL) has commenced the production of aircraft against the
first contract. The deliveries of these aircraft are scheduled to
commence from 2014-15 and conclude by 2016-17. Aeronautical
Development Agency (ADA) is the Project Management Agency for
the design and development activities. Final Operational Clearance
(FOC) is under progress jointly by ADA and HAL. The deliveries
against the second contract (FOC standard) is scheduled to
commence from 2016-17 and conclude by 2018-19.
HAL has identified Research & Development (R&D) as one of the
thrust areas to be focused in order to achieve self reliance. HAL
has been encouraging private sectors both in development and
manufacturing programs. In case of development programs, private
industries have been involved in development of systems, equipment
and software modules etc. In addition, the following actions have
been initiated in R&D.
• Design and Development activities of Medium Transport
Aircraft and Fifth Generation Fighter Aircraft have been taken
up with international partners.
• Design of a medium thrust class (25 kN) turbofan engine for
fixed wing aircraft (trainers, small business jets, etc.) has
been taken up. A gas turbine engine of 1200 kW shaft power
for helicopters is also under consideration.

12
• MoUs have been signed with premier institutions/organisation
for design and development activities.
• The Board of Directors of HAL has decided to create an R&D
corpus and to spend 10% of operational Profit after tax on
R&D and development of indigenous vendors. ”
13. The Committee find the reply of the Ministry is vague and
routine in nature. The Committee had recommended that Research
& Development (R&D) activities should be given a fillip by the Defence
production side/Defence Research & Development Organisation to
minimize the dependence on foreign sources and achieve complete
self-reliance within a well defined period. However, in the action
taken reply, the Ministry has stated that M/s. Hindustan Aeronautical
Ltd. (HAL) has stated identified R & D as one of the thrust areas to
be focussed in order to achieve self-reliance. More areas will also
be opened up for private sector for this purpose. However, the
Ministry’s reply is not specific to this point and no time frame has
been fixed for achieving self-reliance.
With regard to induction of Light Combat Aircraft (LCA) in the
forces, the Committee note that Initial Operation Clearance (IOC) of
LCA was issued in December 2013 and HAL has commenced the
production of aircraft against the first contract. The deliveries of
these aircrafts are scheduled to commence from 2014-15 and
conclude by 2016-17. The Committee would like to know the
indigenisation percentage of LCA and also a break up of important
parts with regard to the content which are imported/produced via
Transfer of Technology (ToT) and those which are indigenously
developed. The Committee would also like to be informed about
the role of Aeronautical Development Agency (ADA) in the
development activities of LCA which is distinct from HAL.
D. Procurement Procedure
Recommendations/Observations of the Committee (Para No. 13)
14. The Committee had recommended as under:—
“Although the Ministry has informed the Committee that the
procurement procedure adopted by the Indian Air Force is one of
the best in the world, the Committee find that considerable delays
do take place in procurement and final induction of the machines
in the Air force. The Committee desire that red-tapism, if any,
avoided and best use of procurement procedures be made. All the

13
items planned in the Long Term Integrated Perspective Plan (LTIPP)
2012-2027 should move at the desired pace scrupulously. This would
help in countering threat perception and enhancing operational
capabilities of the Indian Air Force against its adversaries. ”
15. The Ministry, in its Action Taken Reply, has stated as under:—
“All defence capital procurements are conducted in accordance
with the Defence Procurement procedures, which conform to the
highest standards of transparency, probity and public accountability.
The Long Term Integrated Perspective Plan (LTIPP) 2012-2027 lays
down the roadmap for capability-building of the Indian Air Force
(IAF) over the next three Plan periods based on our threat
perceptions, however , the procurements for capability-building are
also linked to the annual budgetary allocations. Shortfall in
budgetary support may adversely affect the capability-building
process, though available funds are optimally utilised for timely
implementation of the projects. ”
16. The Committee agree with the views expressed by the
Ministry on the adherence of capital procurement procedure and
Long Term Integrated Perspective Plan (LTIPP). However, they are
constrained to note that shortfall in annual budgetary support
adversely affect the capability building process. The Committee
strongly desire that the Ministry should take up this issue with the
Ministry of Finance for providing adequate allocations for capacity
building of armed forces because country ’s security at any cost
should not be compromised.
E. Role of Defence Research and Development Organisation (DRDO)
Recommendations/Observations of the Committee (Para No. 15 )
17. The Committee had recommended as under:—
“One of the most important aspects in which Indian Air Force is
found to be lacking is acute shortage of trainer aircraft of all three
categories, viz. basic, intermediate and advance. The Committee
feel that training of pilots is the vital requirement of any Air Force
in the world. Unless we have the requisite number of trained pilots
in all flying streams, all the paraphernalia of the Air Force becomes
redundant. The Committee call upon the Ministry to take the
necessary steps in this regard urgently. ”
18. The Ministry, in its Action Taken Reply, has stated as under:—
“Trainer Aircraft (BTA): To meet IAF’s flying training requirements,
IAF needs 181 BTA, for which Acceptance of Necessity (AON) was

14
accorded in December 2009 to procure 75 aircraft from the global
market, whereas the remaining 106 aircraft were to be
manufactured by Hindustan Aeronautical Ltd. (HAL). However, this
was subject to condition that in case, HAL does not fly its first
aircraft by the time the first aircraft of the 75 aircraft arrives,
then the option clause would be invoked and numbers to be made
by HAL would be reviewed.
2. The ‘Buy (Global) ’ case was progressed and a contract was
signed with Pilatus for supply of 75 aircraft. The deliveries of
aircraft and equipment have started and delivery of all 75 aircraft
would be completed by August, 2015. HAL is going ahead with
development of indigenous BTA (HTT40) with its internal resources.
In the meanwhile, Indian Air Force has proposed to acquire balance
106 PC-7 MK II BTA in ‘Buy and Make (Indian) ’ category from Pilatus
Aircraft Ltd.
3. Intermediate Jet Trainer (IJT): The IJT aircraft has been under
development since 1999. The Initial Operational Clearance (IOC)
date for IJT by HAL was March, 2004 and since then, this date has
been revised several times to March, 2007, June, 2011, December,
2012 and December , 2013. As informed by HAL, the expected revised
date for IOC for IJT is December , 2014. HAL has signed the contract
to supply 85 IJT . The present status of development of IJT by HAL
is that all activities required for IOC have been completed except
for refinement of ‘stall characteristics ’ and ‘spin testing ’. HAL is
now using consultancy from M/s. BAe Systems, UK for the ‘stall
and spin characteristics ’ of the IJT .”
19. The Committee are dismayed over the delay in development
of Basic Trainer Aircraft (BTA) and Intermediate Jet Trainer (IJT) by
HAL. In the action taken reply, the Ministry has stated that HAL is
going ahead with development of indigenous BTA (HTT40) with its
internal resources. The Ministry has neither indicated the status of
development nor given any time-frame for its completion. As a
result, Air Force has proposed to acquire the balance 106 BTA in
Buy and Make (Indian) category from Pilatus Aircraft Ltd. Pertaining
to IJT, the Committee are informed that after passing of 15 years
ever since the sanction of the project in 1999, HAL has completed
the Initial Operational Clearance (IOC) for IJT except for refinement
of stall characteristics and spin testing. It is now using consultancy
from M/s. BAe Systems, United Kingdom in this regard. The
Committee are of the view that in the absence of any credible
trainer, it would be very difficult for the young trainees to gradually
move to advanced learning stage of Advance Jet Trainer (AJT). The
Committee desire that development of IJT should be given top
priority by HAL and it should overcome its difficulties such as stall
& spin characteristics, etc.

15
Recommendations/Observations of the Committee (Para No. 17)
20. The Committee had recommended as under:—
“The committee have been informed by the ministry that sanction
to develop Intermediate Jet Trainer was given by Cabinet Committee
on Security (CCS) in 1999, wherein a lead time of 15 years was
given to HAL. However , in 2013, after nine years of first prototype
was flown in 2004, HAL sought expertise of BAES after the Steering
Committee consisting of members of Ministry of Defence, IAF ,
certifying agency and HAL has decided in its favour. However , this
resulted in exceeding their original timeline by 9 years and
exhausting total development period of 23 years, thereby making
it very difficult for Indian Air Force to continue second stage
training of pilots. The Committee, therefore, recommend that
various efforts be made either to procure IJT from foreign sources
or HAL may impressed upon to adhere to the timelines given in last
extension. The committee are also dismayed over the fact that
even after knowing well in advance about the ageing fleet of Kiran
aircraft, the ministry has not taken any effective steps to procure
IJT , jeopardizing the life of young trainees. The committee find
that after this inordinate delay, HAL has now given to understand
that efforts are being made for achieving the Final Operational
Clearance (FOC) by Dec. 2014 which would eventually lead to
production of aircraft. Hence, the committee recommend that
without compromising the safety features, all out efforts should be
made by all stake holders so that targeted date of December 2014
is met and this project finally sees the light of the day. The
Committee would also like to be informed of the timelines also
when the production would actually start and induction would take
place. The committee would be failing in their duty, if they do not
caution the ministry and HAL that in future no delays should take
place. It goes without saying that cascading effect of this caution
should be applicable on all defence public sector undertakings/
organization including ordnance factory Board as well as the
research organizations such as DRDO. ”
21. The Ministry, in its Action Taken Reply, has stated as under:—
“The IJT project was sanctioned in 1999 with a lead time of
5 years to operational clearance. This was under the assumption
that the aircraft will be using an existing off the shelf engine.
Accordingly two prototypes were developed using off-the-shelf
LARZAC engine. The first Prototype aircraft flew in March 2003 and
the second in March 2004. The LARZAC engines turned out to be
under powered to meet the performance requirements and so a
higher thrust engine was required to be integrated. Since no suitable
engine was available off-the-shelf, an engine of required thrust

16
needed to be developed. The sanction was revised in 2005 to
include the higher thrust engine and advanced avionics. The
schedule was then revised to March 2007 for Initial Operational
Clearance and March 2008 for Final Operational Clearance.
The delays in IJT project were due to the delay in development
of higher thrust engine (AL 55I) & various accidents/incidents during
the development Flight testing.
All efforts are being made to ensure Certification of IJT by Dec.
2014 without compromising any safety issues.
Concurrent to D&D phase, setting up of facilities for and
manufacturing of 12 LSP aircraft have been initiated by HAL. In
addition, IAF has placed an order on HAL for production of
73 Series aircraft. HAL has initiated the production processes for
this batch also in order to ensure deliveries to customer without
any delay after the certification of IJT .
Among the 12 LSPs, 5 are already flying and remaining will be
ready by Dec. 2014. This can be delivered to customer for service
use by March 2015 if the Certification is completed in Dec. 2014.
Similarly, the delivery of series production aircraft is likely to
commence from 2015-16 onwards.
To mitigate the delay in IJT development, the Life of Kiran aircraft
has already been extended by 500 hours, due to which IAF will be
able to operate Kiran fleet till 2019. ”
22. The Committee are perturbed to note that even after lapse
of 15 years ever since the sanction of the project in 1999, the IJT
has not seen the light of the day. The LARZAC engine which was
bought off the shelf was not further developed in the action taken
replies, the Ministry has stated that concurrent to Design and
Development (D&D) phase, setting up of facilities for and
manufacturing of 12 Large Scale Planes (LSP) aircraft have been
initiated by HAL. Indian Air Force (IAF) has placed an order on HAL
for production of T3 series aircraft. HAL has initiated the production
processes for this batch in order to ensure deliveries to customer
for service use by March, 2015 if the certification is completed by
December, 2014.
However, in the action taken replies to the recommendation
No. 15, it has been stated that the present status of development
of IJT by HAL is that all activities required for IOC have been

17
completed except for refinement of stall characteristics & spin testing
for which HAL is using consultancy from M/s BAe systems, UK to
mitigate the delay in IJT development. The life of Kiran aircraft has
already been extended by 500 hours as a result IAF will be able to
operate Kiran fleet till 2019.
The Committee disapprove the over-delayed production of IJT
and relying upon the extended life of an obsolete Kiran fleet. The
Committee, therefore, desire that effective steps should be taken
by HAL for production of IJT without any further delay.
F. Safety of Indian Water
Recommendations/Observations of the Committee (Para No. 20)
23. The Committee had recommended as under:—
“Coming to the part of the Navy and the Coast Guard, the
Committee is perturbed to note that any foreign ship could enter
Indian shores with sophisticated load of arms and ammunitions.
The Committee is worried to discover that the amount of floating
armouries contained in the ship was approx, 5000 rounds of
ammunition & sophisticated weapons where each weapon could
fire a distance of 3-4 kilometres. In the opinion of the Committee,
such a scenario is appalling especially when the country is fraught
with threats and news of bomb blasts are a frequent happening to
internal security. As such, the role of Navy and Indian Coast Guard
becomes very challenging and loaded with multifarious
responsibilities. The Committee concurs in totality that the present
system of prior notification needs to be changed expeditiously to
Pre Approval Notification System (PANS). Since all these aspects
are covered in the Coastal Security Bill which has been drafted by
the Navy and is under consideration at the Ministry of Defence, the
Committee recommends in unequivocal terms that the Bill should
be proceeded with utmost priority since it is concerned with the
matter as serious as coastal security vis-a-vis threat perception to
our motherland and the innocent citizens. It is needless to say that
the steps initiated, progress made and finality reached in regard
to the Bill be communicated to the Committee. Also, the Committee
urges upon the Indian Navy & Coast Guard Organisation, which are
responsible for overall maritime security in the Indian Exclusive
Economic Zone, to take up the matter emphatically with the
international community. Since the subject is related to the Ministry
of Shipping (MoS), it is pertinent for the Ministry of Defence to

18
impress upon Ministry of Shipping that mere guidelines are not
sufficient. The security companies in the business should be
registered with international bodies as the unregulated floating
armouries in sea and their access to our coastal regions are a
matter of great concern. ”
24. The Ministry, in its Action Taken Reply, has stated as under:—
“Floating Armouries: The continued threat of piracy has led to the
proliferation of Private Maritime Security Companies (PMSC), Private
Contracted Armed Security Personnel (PCASP) and floating armouries
in International Waters. Freedom of navigation in high seas, and
the lack of international regulatory framework to deal with the
floating armouries in our region has led to fear of these being used
by terrorist/anti national elements. The issue of floating armouries
as well as revision of the piracy highrisk area are being taken up
by India in International fora for adoption of a common regulatory
framework.
Coastal Security (CS) Bill: Naval Headquarters have suggested
consideration of Coastal Security Bill for enactment of a law to
delineate the responsibilities and duties of various agencies involved
in Coastal Security of the country as this will lead to better
coordination and provide legal basis for actions of Indian Navy. The
issue was considered during a review meeting on Coastal Security
taken by Raksha Mantri and it was decided that as per Allocation
of Business rules the draft Coastal Security Bill will be coordinated
by M/o Home Affairs in consultation with MoD and the Coastal
State Government. A paper listing the concerns and need for a
Coastal Security Bill prepared by Indian Navy has been forwarded
to M/o Home Affairs for further action.
Pre-Arrival Notification for Security (PANS):  The issue of prior
approval in lieu of prior notification by Merchant Vessels carrying
armed detachments onboard has been considered. However , very
limited rights are available to Coastal States beyond Territorial
Waters. This issue is being raised at International fora like IMO,
CGPCS for consideration of guidelines. ”
25. (A) Floating Armouries: The Committee understand that
floating armouries, Private Maritime Security Companies (PMSCs)
and Private Contracted Armed Security Personnel (PCASPs) in
international waters have become a quintessence due to threats of
piracy. The Ministry has submitted that lack of international
regulatory framework to deal with the floating armouries in our
region has lead to the fear for these being used by terrorists/anti-
national elements. The Committee are dismayed to find that even

19
after facing Mumbai terrorist attacks in November 2008, our forces
are struggling at international fora for adoption of a common
regulatory framework. National security is paramount and any
compromises on this front cannot be even thought of. Therefore,
the Committee opine that the Ministry of Defence in coordination
with Ministry of External Affairs must work towards achieving tangible
results in this regard. Internationally centralised registration of such
security agencies and necessary communication between shipping
companies and Naval Forces could be considered as some of the
suggestions in this area.
(B) Coastal Security: The Committee would like to know the
dates when the paper listing the concerns and needs for a Coastal
Security Bill prepared by Indian Navy was forwarded to the Ministry
of Home Affairs and how the matter was followed up. The Committee
duly acknowledge the need for better coordination and legal basis
for action by Indian Navy. While examining the subject, the
Committee found that there are certain issues such as piracy,
confiscation of smuggled and incorporating punishment to culprits
etc. are not well defined under law. The Committee desire that
tangible result should be achieved in this respect.
G. Effective Coordination Mechanism
Recommendations/Observations of the Committee (Para No. 22)
26. The Committee had recommended as under:—
“The Committee are aware of many agencies functioning in coastal
and ocean region falling under jurisdiction of the country. These
include Indian Navy, Coast Guard Organisation, Ministry of Shipping,
Customs Department, Marine Police, Ministry of Environment and
Forests, Intelligence Agencies, offshore exploration departments
etc. What the Committee would like that co-ordination between
all the maritime agencies should be very effective. The Committee,
as such, recommends that a Maritime Commission or any other
such agency should be established so that the objectives could be
met. The role of Intelligence Agencies is of vital importance and
hence the Committee desire that intelligence sharing should be
strengthened and be made state-of-the-art in terms of infrastructure
as well as equipment. ”
27. The Ministry, in its Action Taken Reply, has stated as under:—
“The issue of creation of Maritime Security Adviser/Apex Maritime
Security Advisory Board (MSAB) was considered by the Cabinet
Committee on Security in Feb. 2009 while considering the issue of

20
coastal security post 26/11 and not found desirable. Presently, the
task of coordination/monitoring of Coastal Security (CS) issues is
being dealt with by the National Committee for Strengthening
Maritime and Coastal Security (NCSMCS) under the chairmanship of
the Cabinet Secretary which meets at least twice a year. Issues
and aspects related to CS are also reviewed periodically by the
Hon’ble Raksha Mantri. ”
28. The Committee notice that way back in February 2009, the
issue of creation of Maritime Security Adviser/Apex Maritime Security
Advisory Board (MSAB) was found undesirable. The Committee are
dismayed to note that the Ministry has not informed the reasons
behind such undesirability. The Committee further take note that
the Ministry has remained silent on the issues of establishing Maritime
Commission or any other such agency and also on strengthening of
intelligence sharing. The Ministry may inform the same while
furnishing the action taken notes.
H. Expeditious installation of Radars
Recommendations/Observations of the Committee (Para No. 23)
29. The Committee had recommended as under:—
“The Committee are perturbed to note that the issue regarding the
establishment of radars in the Nicobar Islands has staggered and
has not reached finality yet. This issue needs to be addressed
earnestly and expeditiously especially when our neighbour China
has been undertaking various activities in its areas of interest like
South-China Sea and deploying of naval ships in the Gulf of Eden
as parts of its anti-piracy operations. During evidence, the
Committee desired to know about the present status of installation
of radar in Nicobar Islands, which matter had come to their notice
during their study visit to Andaman and Nicobar Islands in February
2013. Consistent with admission of naval officials, the Committee
comprehend that Narcondum Island is strategically very crucial
because it is in the Andaman sea, almost 130-140 miles from our
nearest island and about 50-60 miles from other side. The
Committee were dismayed to know that the radar project at
Narcondum could not get Government approval and Navy was asked
to look for an alternate location. Subsequently, the Committee
were apprised that Navy has identified an alternate location though
not strategically as befitting as the Standalone Island. The
Committee sense that Indian Navy is gearing up towards Maritime

21
Capability Perspective Plan and taking up maritime challenges along
with security threats emanating from regional interests and such
denials/delays will hamper the country ’s defence preparedness.
Even in their 20th report on examination of demands for grants
2013-14, the Committee had categorically observed that due to
such delays many important projects are hindered affecting overall
development of surveillance network and operational preparedness
of country ’s defence issues. On this point, the Committee insist
that the Government should take initiatives/measures towards
strengthening strategic needs of Defence. Consequently, the
Government may reconsider the project of installation of naval
equipment in Narcondum Island and environmental clearances be
aptly undertaken with the intention that strategic defence
installations/establishments are not derailed. ”
30. The Ministry, in its Action Taken Reply, has stated as under:—
“Construction work at three sites in Andaman and Nicobar Island
viz. East Island, Sandy Point and Keating Point for setting up of the
Radar Stations is being progressed. Narcondum Island being not
available due to environmental concerns, Indian Coast Guard is
looking at alternate sites for setting up the Radar Station in A&N
Islands.”
31. The Committee take note of the reply of the Ministry of
Defence and desire that the identification of alternate sites for
setting up Radar station in A&N Islands may be expedited and
completed in a time bound manner. The Committee be informed
about the development in this regard.
I. Border Connectivity
Recommendations/Observations of the Committee (Para No. 29)
32. The Committee had recommended as under:—
“It is disquieting for the Committee to note that no direct response
has been given by the Ministry in regard to pin-pointed query of
the Committee as to what difficulties were faced by India due to
poor network of road, rail, airports/helipads. To this specific query,
the Ministry has given a rhetorical reply that despite the lack of
adequate infrastructure along the Northern borders, the Army has
been effective in monitoring Peoples Liberation Army ’s activities
along the Line of Actual control. The Committee do not agree with
the contention of the Ministry in this regard and they have every
reason to believe that our development in regard to road, rail and
airport is slumber and behind schedules in all the respects. The

22
Committee repudiate the claims of the Ministry that our
infrastructure development is being implemented in consonance
with our threat perception. The detailed analysis in this regard are
contained in the successive paragraphs. ”
33. The Ministry, in its Action Taken Reply, has stated as under:—
“This para is only observatory in nature. ”
34. The Committee would like to be informed about the response
of various bordering States in forming Empowered Committee. The
Committee are concerned to note that even after making pin-point
query regarding difficulties faced by the country due to poor network
of road, rail, airports/helipads, the Government has given an evasive
reply that the comments of the Committee are observatory in nature.
The Committee once again reiterate that they may be informed
about the specific difficulties being faced as mentioned above and
the corrective steps being envisaged to be taken by the Government
in this regard.
Recommendations/Observations of the Committee (Para No. 34)
35. The Committee had recommended as under:—
“The Indo-Pakistan Border in the opinion of the Committee is also
very sensitive. The Committee in this regard would like to
recommend that construction of 610 km. in Punjab and 1207.42 km.
in Rajasthan of lateral axial road in this border area be given final
approval in the shortest possible time which is stated to be pending
under consideration of the Ministry. They also recommend that all
four road projects viz. Chetak, Sampark, Beacon and Vijayak be
completed hundred per cent under intimation to the Committee.
Also the composite scheme which is an appreciable scheme
comprising of fencing flood lighting, construction of roads,
connecting border out posts along Indo-Pak border be completed
within a fixed target as its accomplishment has inordinately been
delayed in various accounts. The Ministry should pull out a specific
proposal on this scheme as it was approved by Cabinet Committee
on Security as early as January 2000 with the initially proposed
completion in five years. The period of delay of almost nine years
is serious delay and Committee would like to know why the cost
and time overruns have taken place. ”
36. The Ministry, in its Action Taken Reply, has stated as under:—
“1. Construction of 610 Km. road in Punjab and 1207.42 Km. road
in Rajasthan pertains to MHA.

23
2. As regards roads in Project Chetak, Sampark, Beacon and Vijayak
are concerned it is stated that a long term roll on works plan for
BRO has been drawn up in keeping with the priorities of Army and
works are accordingly been planned for expeditious completion.
3. No works for fencing flood lighting is entrusted to BRO. ”
37. The Committee note that as regards completion of all four
road projects viz. Chetak, Sampark, Beacon and Vijayak, the Ministry
has given an evasive reply stating that a long term roll on works
plan has been drawn up. The Committee would like to reiterate
that a concrete plan with specific targeted dates of completion of
all these four road projects may be intimated to the Committee.
Recommendations/Observations of the Committee (Para No. 35)
38. The Committee had recommended as under:—
“In the Indo-Bangladesh Border , out of three phases, the Committee
find neither Phase-1 nor Phase-2 could be completed. Since approval
of Cabinet Committee on Security for completion of these projects
by 31.03.2014 has been accorded, the Committee hope and
recommend that these are completed by this new date and any
lapse be intimated to the Committee. ”
39. The Ministry, in its Action Taken Reply, has stated as under:—
“1. As regards IBB fencing, it is stated that because of huge strategic
work load it was decided that BRO would focus on core strategic
functions. Accordingly no works in Phase-II were taken up by BRO
for MHA.
2. The status of Indo–Bangladesh fencing entrusted to BRO is given
as under:—
Item Total Completed Balance        Remarks
scope (km.) (km.)
(km.)
IBB Fence 104 96 8 Balance not feasible
due to alignment close
to 150 yards of IB.
IBB Roads 567 498 69 Balance not taken up
due to insurgency, and
no security cover.
3. Ministry is in constant liaison with MHA for release of funds. ”

24
40. The Committee note that as regards taking up of the
Phase-II work in the Indo-Bangladesh Border, the Ministry has cited
huge strategic work load as the reason for the delay in taking up of
this work. The Committee would like to reiterate that given the
strategic importance of the completion of this work, the Ministry
may set out specific deadlines for this project under intimation to
this Committee.
Recommendations/Observations of the Committee (Para No. 40)
41. The Committee had recommended as under:—
“The Committee would like the Ministry of Railways to keep itself
abreast with the technological development taking place in the
field of railways specially regarding the high altitude developments
not only in the neighbouring countries like China but throughout
the world. Knowledge exchange in this era is no big task. Although
it has been stated that Ministry of Railways possesses the required
know how for executing these proposed 14 lines yet the Committee
recommend that our railways lines in border areas should be the
most sophisticated ones so that the forces do not face any difficulty
and their accomplishments are not compromised. This
recommendation is applicable generally for the purposes of road
construction also where project should be undertaken with the
best available technology in the world. ”
42. The Ministry, in its Action Taken Reply, has stated as under:—
“1. Ministry of Railway has informed that it is keeping abreast with
technological development taking place in the field of Railways
especially regarding high altitude developments. Indian Railways is
already undertaking challenging construction work in Himalayas
right from Jammu & Kashmir to North-East and have got sufficient
experience in construction in hilly region at high altitude. Moreover,
it is also ensuring that its personnel are trained in such construction
regularly.
2. Ministry of Railways would like to assure the Committee that
the 14 strategic lines once sanctioned and fully funded by Ministry
of Defence or Ministry of Finance will be constructed with State of
the art technology and will be sophisticated to ensure speedier
mobilization of military cargo.
3. As far as road construction in high altitude areas is concerned,
a decision has been taken to adopt internationally proven best
practices and try new technology, material and equipment. Towards

25
this, 10% of Border Roads Organization (BRO) funds are being
earmarked. Furthermore, a collaborative measure has been initiated
to establish a multi-discipline-technical expert group with experts
from Ministry of Science and Technology (CRRI, CSIR, GSI etc.) to
assist Border Roads Organisation in technical matters. ”
43. Proper flow of funds should be ensured by the Ministry of
Defence in consultation with the Ministry of Finance so that the
work on strategic lines is not hampered or derailed for want of
funds. The Committee appreciate the collaborative measure to
establish a multi-discipline technical expert group with experts from
the Ministry of Science and Technology and are hopeful of tangible
outcome.

CHAPTER II
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS, WHICH HAVE BEEN
ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT
Recommendation (Para No. 1)
The Committee had recommended as under:—
The Committee while taking note of the threats, both conventional
and modern, being faced by India from her difficult neighbours in the
form of repeated incursions and transgressions coupled with infiltration/
insurgencies, selected the subject ‘Threat Perception and preparedness
of the Forces including incursion on borders, coordination mechanism
with the Central Armed Police Forces and Border connectivity through
Road, Air and Rail ’ for examination in order to give comprehensive
outlook of the security scenario prevailing in the country. Given the
nature of issues coming under the purview of this subject, the
Committee have taken a selected view in their inquiry by avoiding the
routine issues which have been generally covered in the Reports of the
Committee. The findings of the Committee are brought out in the
successive paragraphs of this Report.
The Ministry, in its Action Taken Reply, has stated as under:—
This para is only observatory in nature.
Recommendation (Para No. 2)
The Committee had recommended as under:—
The threats perceived by India are not only due to the reasons
stated above, India ’s slow pace in keeping herself abreast of the
technological and infrastructural advancement in comparison to our
territorial neighbours, especially China is equally responsible. Be it the
issues relating to borders, non–demarcation of Line of Actual Control,
limited connectivity through Rail, Road and Air , ambivalent claims in
our defence production, inadequate delivery in Research and
Development, lack of oversight mechanism on the part of Administrative
Departments, etc., require substantial improvement and achieving
stipulated targets within a timeframe and avoiding cost escalations.
26

27
The Ministry, in its Action Taken Reply, has stated as under:—
This para is only observatory in nature.
Recommendation (Para No. 3)
The Committee had recommended as under:—
The Committee find that keeping in view the evolving security
scenario in the South Asian Region; the Ministry is continuously reviewing
its Defence strategy and plans. Also, the accretion and modernisation
plans are stated to be implemented in consonance with our threat
perception. While taking note of the submission made by the Ministry,
the Committee feel that this reply is routine in nature and does not
reveal in detail the specific steps initiated, progressed and achievements
made thereto. The reply that steps are continuously being taken to
strengthen and to optimise the force structure and capabilities is quite
vague. The Committee, therefore, recommend in no uncertain terms,
that detailed defence strategy along with the plans which are being
reviewed and comprehensive details which are being reviewed, finality
accomplished in any area on all infrastructural developments, etc. as
mentioned above be intimated to them at the earliest. The Committee
would like to glean through this information and guide a trajectory to
be taken so that the threats could be effectively countered. The
Committee would like to extend all desired help to the Ministry and
complement and supplement its efforts in achieving these common
objectives.
The Ministry, in its Action Taken Reply, has stated as under:—
India’s defence policy includes defence of our national territory,
including island territories, offshore resources and assets, maritime
trade routes and airspace and whenever required, securing our internal
environment whereby our nation is insured against any threat to its
unity, core values and peaceful development. The Defence forces are
structured, equipped and trained to carry out the task assigned to
them in the defence of our country. Funds commensurate with the
requirement as assessed by the Government are provided in the Defence
budget.
2. The security scenario, technological environment and threat
perceptions are being reviewed from time to time and depending on
the changing scenario, the forces are augmented/restructured and
modernised on need basis. This is an ongoing process.

28
3. Government is taking steps to ensure that the capabilities of
the Armed Forces are enhanced in a planned and integrated manner.
An institutionalised planning process is in place for capability
development and modernisation of the Indian Armed Forces. As part
of this process, the Armed Forces are implementing a focused plan to
build up the capability of the Armed Forces by force accretions and
force modernisation. This is based on a Long Term Integrated Perspective
Plan covering a period of 15 years (2012-27), five year Services Capital
Acquisition Plan (SCAP) and Annual Acquisition Plan (AAP). The planning
process is under the overall guidelines of Defence Acquisition Council
(DAC). The Armed Forces remain in a state of operational readiness to
meet any eventuality through a planned capability building and
modernisation. While formulating the Long Term Integrated Perspective
Plan (LTIPP), a holistic view is being taken towards identifying threats/
challenges of the future and the capabilities required to meet the
same.
4. Government is focussing on the modernisation of our Defence
Forces. Funds have been optimally utilised to equip the Armed Forces
with state-of-the-art equipment. The budget estimates (BE), revised
estimates (RE) and the actual expenditure on Capital acquisition for
modernisation of Armed Forces (Army, Navy, Air Force and Joint Staff)
as also as percentage of total defence expenditure during the years
2007-2008 to 2011-2012 are as below:—
Year 2007-08 2008-09 2009-10 2010-11 2011-12
Budget 32826.80 37482.77 40367.72 43799.21 52998.02
Estimates
(in crores)
Revised 28110.00 30614.64 35146.88 44440.63 47409.45
Estimates
(in crores)
Actual 27903.42 30000.42 38427.00 45686.77 50723.97
Expenditure
(in crores)
Army 7.30% 4.71% 5.75% 4.68% 3.10%
Navy 9.17% 7.73% 8.93% 10.45% 10.47%
Air Force 13.79% 13.71% 12.30% 14.39% 15.89%
Joint Staff 0.17% 0.11% 0.12% 0.12% 0.21%
Total 30.43% 26.26% 27.10% 29.64% 29.67%

29
5. In addition to the above, to ensure timely operational
preparedness of the Armed Forces to meet the threat perceptions,
Ordnance Factory Board comprising of 39 Factories and 9 Defence
Public Sector Undertakings (DPSUs) Government are being modernised
on continuous basis. Defence Research and Development Organisation
(DRDO) which has more than 50 laboratories, is engaged in design and
development of strategic, complex and security sensitive systems for
the Armed Forces. The option of importing defence equipment is being
resorted to, whenever indigenous capabilities are not available.
6. Some of the noteworthy modernisation schemes underway or
planned in the 12th Plan period are as under:—
Army:
(a) Induction of T-90 and MBT Arjun.
(b) Consolidation and enhancement of fire power through
induction of SMERCH, Brahmos and Pinaka rocket systems.
(c) Improved battlefield transparency by induction of UAVs.
(d) Augment Air Defence capability with MRSAMs/SRSAMs to meet
threat in the Tactical Battle Area.
(e) Modernisation of Army Aviation with induction of variants of
Advanced Light Helicopters.
(f) Modernisation of Infantry to enhance lethality, night fighting
capability, communication and personal protection.
(g) Modernisation of selected Central Ordnance Depots,
establishment of overhaul facility and procurement of critical
rolling stock.
Navy:
Ships and Submarines:
(a) Aircraft Carrier
(b) Destroyers
(c) Frigates
(d) Submarines
(e) Mine Counter Measure Vessels
(f) Shallow Water Anti-submarine Craft
(g) Fast Attack Crafts
(h) Survey Ships

30
Aviation:
(a) P 8I, Long Range Maritime Reconnaissance and Anti Submarine
Warfare Aircraft
(b) Medium Range Maritime Reconnaissance Aircraft
(c) Deck based fighters
(d) Light Combat Aircraft (LCA)
(e) Multi-Role Helicopter (MRH)
(f) Naval Multi-Role Helicopter (NMRH)
(g) KA 31, Air Early Warning Helicopter
(h) Naval Utility Helicopter (NUH)
(i) UAVs (HALE/MALE/VTOL/NR)
Air Force:
(a) Procurement of additional Su-30 MKI, Light Combat Aircraft,
Medium Multi Role Combat Aircraft, very Heavy Transport
aircraft, attack helicopters, heavy lift helicopters,
intermediate as well as advanced trainer aircraft.
(b) The air defence system is also being made robust with the
induction of short and medium range surface to air , low
level quick reaction missiles and integrating these weapons
with modern sensors.
Border Infrastructure
7. Government is continuously monitoring the situation along the
borders and the activities of neighbouring countries and is fully seized
of the security imperatives. The threat perception is reviewed from
time to time, including the need for developing requisite infrastructure
in the border areas.
8. Necessary steps have been initiated through development of
infrastructure as well as operational capabilities of the Armed Forces
to secure the desired national security objectives. As part of Capability
Development along the Northern borders, accretions having a financial
outlay of Rs. 64,678.17 Crores have been approved on 03 Oct., 2013
for execution over a period of 8 years. Concomitantly, the case of
infrastructure development for the above accretions is in final stages
of approval.

31
9. Reliable and quality roads are also being laid for ensuring rapid
mobilisation and demobilisation of our forces. A large number of roads
in Arunachal Pradesh, Manipur, Sikkim, Himachal Pradesh and J&K have
been constructed by the Border Roads Organisation (BRO) for
construction and improvement. These measures will go a long way in
addressing external security threats in a significant manner.
10. In order to strengthen our borders, apart from manning, physical
barriers are raised selectively and this is further accentuated by the
electronic sensors as dictated by sensitivity of the stretch. The
electronic surveillance is both of the ground based and air/space based
varieties. Efforts are underway to network these sensors so as to allow
quick synthesis and dissemination of the information. ”
Recommendation (Para No. 4)
The Committee had recommended as under:—
The Committee are dismayed to learn that against the satisfactory
picture given by the Ministry, the three forces are deficient in its
strength of officers. The strength of other ranks, Sailors and Airmen
are also short then the authorized strength. Against the sanction strength
of 52859, the held strength of officers in the Army is 43475. It is
apparent that the Army is a truncated force having a recorded shortage
of 9384 officers. Similarly, in the other ranks the Army short of 20561
personnel. Likewise, the Navy is short of 1561 officers and 11825
sailors. The position of Air Force is relatively eased,through they also
have shortage of 659 officers and 3674 Airmen. In the opinion of the
Committee no force can perform effectively unless they have the
requisite numbers. India is a fast developing country which does not
have dearth of talent. A wide network of Sainik Schools already exists,
which is supplemented by Rashtriya Military School and Rashtriya Indian
Military College. The Committee fail to understand the existing shortage
in spite of numerous entry schemes. They, therefore, recommend that
a scientific study be conducted to find out the optimum number of
force needed also the methodology, as to how this shortage could be
tackled in the minimum prescribed period. On the obverse, increasing
the number of officers is very essential specially when China has a
sizeable Army of 2.3 million and Pakistan has 0.52 million. Our strength
of Army is just 1.2 million which is a discouraging figure given to
conventional warfare. The Committee feel and leave it to the discretion
of forces whether the system of selection for entry of officers be also
reviewed in order to enable them to find the right talent.

32
The Ministry, in its Action Taken Reply, has stated as under:—
(I) Government has taken a number of steps to reduce shortage of
officers in the Armed forces and to attract youth to join Armed forces.
Some of these are as under:
(a) A Committee under the Chairmanship of Shri Ajay Vikram
Singh, the then Special Secretary was constituted to look
into various issues inter-alia including to make the organization
more effective in fulfilling the individual career aspirations
of officers. Based on the recommendations of Ajay Vikram
Singh Committee, following major initiatives have already
been taken to improve the service conditions in the Officers ’
cadre in Armed Forces:
(i) All officers including those in Short Service Commission
(SSC) are now eligible to hold substantive rank of Captain,
Major and Lieutenant Colonel after 2, 6 and 13 years of
reckonable service respectively.
(ii) A total number of 750 posts of Lt. Colonel have been
upgraded to Colonel towards implementation of A V Singh
Committee Report (Phase-I).
(iii) Further , 1896 additional posts in the ranks of Colonel,
Brigadier , Major General and Lieutenant General and their
equivalents in the other two Services have been upgraded
towards implementation of A V Singh Committee Report
(Phase-II).
(iv) Colonel (Time Scale) rank was introduced for those
Lt. Colonel, who cannot make for Colonel (Select Rank),
after completion of 26 years.
(v) The implementation of recommendations of the VI Central
Pay Commission with substantial improvement in the pay
structure of officers of Armed Forces has made the
Services more attractive.
(vi) The tenure of Short Service Commissioned officers has
been increased from 10 years to 14 years.
(vii) Setting up of seven new Service Selection Boards (SSBs)
[2 for Army, 3 for Navy and 2 for Air Force] have been
approved by the Government which will enable
expeditious selection of large number of candidates for
induction of officers into the Armed Forces and will thus
held in reducing shortage of officers.

33
(viii) The UPSC is now recommending candidates in higher
ratio for one vacancy for interview at Service Selection
Boards.
(ix) A second Officers ’ Training Academy for induction of
SSCOs at Gaya has been set up in respect of Army so as
to impart pre-commissioning training for large number
of cadets.
(II) ARMY
(a) Army is selecting adequate number of candidates every year
as per planned intake to make up the deficiency over a
period of time. Besides, presently following two studies are
underway to review the intake of officers and the selection
process:
(i) Study by Indian Institute of Management (IIM),
Ahmedabad: A Study is being carried out by the Army
Headquarters through IIM, Ahmedabad to review the
Officers Selection Process.
(ii) De novo Selection System: A project has been undertaken
by Defence Institute of Psychological Research (DIPR) to
develop a De novo Selection System for the officers of
the Armed Forces.
(b) Recruitment of Other Ranks (ORs) in Army is a continuous
and an ongoing process. The present deficiency in ORs is
14659 (1.28%) against which 71644 recruits are under training.
As such, there is no problem of shortage in the ORs in Army.
(III) NAVY
(a) Manpower Planning and Recruitment: Manpower Planning and
Recruitment Policies in the Navy have been formulated
depending upon operational and administrative requirements
of the Service.
(b) Perspective Planning: Manpower planning is carried out on
the basis of long term reviews at a macro level, covering a
period of approximately 15 years, whereas the short–term
review looks at a scenario of two to five years. In order to
decide the number of personnel to be recruited, the following
are taken into account:
(i) Current shortages.
(ii) Number of personnel in the training process.

34
(iii) Anticipated growth in the sanctioned strength.
(iv) Wastages/Outgo.
(c) Calculation of Intake Levels: The current shortages in officers
and sailors are 1839 and 12884 respectively. However , around
700 officers and 7500 sailors are undergoing training and
will be available for deployment shortly. Till 2011, IN was
inducting about 500 officers and 3400 sailors per year based
on the available selection infrastructure and training capacity.
As per the long term Human Capital Strategy (HCS),
2012-17, the IN is presently inducting 850 officers and 4450
sailors every year. The number of officers inducting is planned
to be increased to 1000 per year from 2016, based upon the
planned enhancement in the recruitment and training
infrastructure. These measures are expected to reduce
shortage of manpower in the IN, subject to other factors
such as resource allocation, accord of manpower sanctions
and commissioning/de-commissioning of ship/submarines as
per schedule.
(IV) AIR FORCE
(a) Present Establishment and Strength of Officers as on April 1,
2014 are 12606 and 12071 respectively. The shortfall of 535
officers relates to the existing establishment laid down to
meet present requirements. Various measures have been taken
to overcome the shortage of officers.
(b) As regard Airmen, the Establishment and Strength of airmen
as on March 1, 2014 is 134349 and 131181 respectively, leading
to deficiency of 3168. As on March 1, 2014, a total of 5262
trainees are undergoing various phases of training. This caters
for the deficiency as well as the discharges during the
intervening period till pass out of trainees. Induction is
planned regularly catering to the discharges as well as
accretion vacancies if any.
(Please see Para No. 7 of Chapter-1 of the Report)
Recommendation (Para No. 6)
The Committee had recommended as under:—
Another disquieting feature has surfaced during the course of
Committee’s examination of the subject. Our defence forces, especially
Army has certain extraneous duties to perform, which are not related

35
to its primary responsibilities. Though these duties assume great
significance as far as the security of the country is concerned, the
Committee have every reason to believe that insurgent activities are
a form of proxy war instigated by neighbouring countries against our
nation to destabilize peace, tranquility and growth. It is astonishing to
find that as many as 78 insurgent active groups have been earmarked
in one State of the North East. Our neighbouring countries are espousing
a form of perennial and subtle war in which a substantial amount of
operational preparedness is absolutely essential. The factual position
on the repeated incursion/infiltrations on the western border are the
recent examples where our Army also suffered losses. In the Keran and
Samba Sectors, our Army was engaged to dissuade militant groups
coming from Pakistan who were successful in the breaking our security
cordons. The incidents which happened in the border areas where the
terrorists not only inflicted casualties on the Armed Forces but Police
Personnel as well. The Committee are not oblivious of the fact that
several times not only these infiltrators but also the regular Pakistan
Army has blatantly broken the rules of engagement in an inhuman
manner. To quote another example of belligerence and unbridled
aberration by Pakistan, during the years 2009-2013, a total of 214
cases of ceasefire violations were recorded across the Indo-Pak Border.
Weighing all the pros and cons of the insurgent activities taking
place on our borders, the Committee recommend that Army should not
supplant the responsibility of the Central Armed Police forces like
Border Security force but supplement all that is required. As strong
and modern Army is the need of the hour which should have optimum
operational and strike capabilities to face any aggression by the enemies.
The Committee would like to see our Army having a fine balance of
teeth and tail ratio and finest officer/men relationship. All the required
help should be extended by the Ministry to the Army in terms of
finance and infrastructure so that it becomes a force to reckon with.
Checking infiltrations is not the sole responsibility of the Army but
concerted efforts have to be made by the other concerned Ministries
like Ministry of Home Affairs. The Committee also recommend that the
Military Intelligence Network especially the signal Intelligence should
be strengthened and made state-of-the-art to oversee the movements
of the insurgent groups before intruding into borders rather than
combating them on our soil. The Committee also recommend that
gathering intelligence inputs from local population and through modern
equipment should be shared by Army and CAPFs so that any kind of
movement be monitored and corrective action taken by the responsible
agency.

36
The Ministry, in its Action Taken Reply, has stated as under:—
Border guarding responsibility during peace time falls in domain of
the Ministry of Home Affairs. It is also provided in the International
conventions that the guarding of the International Borders should be
managed by Specialized Police or Para Military Force and not by the
Army.
In accordance with the international convention, the International
Borders of India are guarded by the Central Armed Police Forces viz.
Border Security Force (BSF), Indo-Tibetan Border Police (ITBP), the
Sashastra Seema Bal (SSB), and the Assam Rifles. Government of India
is following “one border one force ” principle. Under this policy, the
BSF has been deployed on Indo-Pakistan Border and Indo-Bangladesh
Border , the SSB has been deployed on Indo-Nepal and Indo-Bhutan
Border , the ITBP on Indo-China Border, and the Assam Rifles has been
entrusted with the task of guarding Indo-Myanmar Border.
While, Assam Rifles is under the operational control of Army/MoD,
the other border guarding forces i.e. BSF , ITBP and SSB are under the
operational control of the Ministry of Home Affairs. Recently, Ministry
of Defence has agreed to transfer the border guarding duties of
Indo-Myanmar border from Assam Rifles to BSF . A proposal for approval
of the Government to this effect is under consideration in the Ministry
of Home Affairs.
Besides, border guarding duties, BSF , ITBP , SSB and Assam Rifles
have also been entrusted with Counter Insurgency (CI) duties in their
area of deployment.
Therefore, except for LOC & LAC where Army is deployed along-
with BSF and ITBP respectively and Indo-Myanmar border where Assam
Rifles is deployed under the Operational Control of Army/MoD, the
border guarding and Counter Insurgency (CI) duties is being taken care
of by the Ministry of Home Affairs. Army is therefore only supplementing
the efforts of CAPFs in border guarding and CI duties and not supplanting
the responsibility of border guarding.
All the Border Guarding Forces (BGFs) have been entrusted with
the responsibility to protect India ’s international borders. The
responsibility includes prevention of illegal migration, anti-smuggling
activities, checking infiltration and collection of intelligence.
Accordingly, necessary powers under Cr.PC and Custom Act are available
to all the BGFs (powers under the Custom Act are not available to
Assam Rifles and SSB at this point). The primary responsibility to check

37
infiltration is on BGFs and the Army share this responsibility with BGFs
only on active borders for example, active border of Jammu & Kashmir
where the Indian army is guarding the border along with BSF .
There exists an inbuilt mechanism in the role and functions of
CAPFs for intelligence sharing and operational coordination with the
concerned agencies including Army for better operational achievements
in the bordering area. Each of the BGF has been nominated as Lead
Intelligence Agency (LIA) for the border of its deployment to ensure
co-ordination of activities of intelligence agencies operating in the
border and to share actionable intelligence with all the agencies
concerned including Military intelligence. Since the BGFs have already
been gathering inputs from the local population and sharing with army
and other agencies concerned, the recommendation of the Committee
has already been acted upon. The modernization of the intelligence
network of the BGFs through the acquisition of latest surveillance
equipment is an on-going process and being undertaken periodically.
In the context of Signal Intelligence, it is stated that the role of
the Signal Intelligence Organisation is to acquire intelligence of strategic
and tactical military nature and as such, an evolutionary growth model
is the basis for modernisation plans. The 12th Plan of Signal Intelligence
Directorate is being implemented to acquire state-of-the-art
interception systems to equip field units to gather quality intelligence
in CI/CT scenario. Further, mandated external intelligence agencies
play an active and dominant role to support the intelligence gathering
on the targets before and after their intrusion into India during CI/CT
scenario. Hence, closer cooperation between various intelligence
agencies is emphasised regularly. Technological updation of SI Equipment
normally takes 4-6 years and therefore efforts to keep pace with the
technology through speedy procedures for procurement of niche
technologies are of vital importance.
(Please see Para No. 10 of Chapter-1 of the Report)
Recommendation (Para No. 7)
The Committee had recommended as under:—
The Committee further recommend that the Research Establishments
working for the forces should either develop the most sophisticated
projects/products in achieving this objective or by acquiring the
technologies from the countries where such projects are in use.

38
The Ministry, in its Action Taken Reply, has stated as under:—
Defence Research and Development Organisation (DRDO) is already
engaged in design and development of strategic, complex and security
sensitive systems for the Armed Forces. A large number of systems/
products/technologies developed by DRDO have been productionised
and inducted into Armed Forces and many are in the process of trials/
production/induction, which include missiles; multi-barrel rocket
launcher; unmanned aerial vehicles; radars; electronic warfare systems;
sonars; torpedos; combat vehicles; bridging systems; combat aircraft;
sensors; NBC technologies; parachutes; combat free fall system;
propellants and explosives; detonators; communication systems;
armaments systems; etc. The value of systems/products/technologies
developed by DRDO stands at over 
R  1.60 lakh cr. Some of the major
systems which have been developed by DRDO and inducted into Armed
Forces are:—
• Prithvi, Surface-to-Surface Missile.
• Dhanush, Naval version of Prithvi Missile.
• Akash Weapon System.
• BrahMos, Supersonic Cruise Missile.
• Pinaka, Multi Barrel Rocket Launcher.
• INSAS Weapons (Rifle & LMG).
• Ammunitions, Explosives and Mines.
• Under Barrel Grenade Launcher (UBGL).
• Arjun, Main Battle Tank Mk-I.
• Remotely Operated Vehicle.
• NBC Recce Vehicle.
• Sarvatra, MultispanMobile Bridging System.
• Bridge Layer Tank (BLT) T-72.
• Armoured Ambulance.
• Electronic Warfare Suite for Fighter Aircraft (EWSFA).
• Pilotless Target Aircraft, Lakshya-I.
• Samyukta and Sangraha EW Systems for Army and Navy,
respectively.
• Samvahak, Command Information Decision Support System.

39
• DivyaDrishti, Integrated COMINT System.
• Battle Field Surveillance Radar (BFSR).
• Rohini, Revathi, Rajendra, Bharani, Aslesha, Weapon Locating
and Tactical Control Radars.
• NBC Defence Items.
• Combat Free Fall System.
• Integrated Shelter.
• HUMSA, USHUS, HUMVAD and Panchendriya Sonars.
• Torpedoes.
DRDO has speeded up the process of developing sophisticated
products in achieving the objective of self-reliance in defence
technology or acquiring the technologies from foreign countries where
such technologies are in use. DRDO is making efforts in adopting
‘concurrent engineering ’ and ‘joint venture’ approach for development
and production to avoid any delay. A few collaborative programmes
with foreign private companies are also supported by the respective
MoDs. Several projects are being done in foreign countries and in India
in the collaborative mode. The foreign countries include Israel, Russia,
France, Belarus, USA, etc. ”
Recommendation (Para No. 8)
The Committee had recommended as under:—
The role of Ministry of External Affairs in containing the anti-India
sentiments, particularly in our neighbouring countries is also very
important. They should present propitious conditions for diplomatic
talks at all times and address the issues such as handling of Prisoners
of War (PoW) and taking up the issues relating to ceasefire violations
at the highest possible level. Such confidence building measures would
result in a cordial atmosphere which would definitely reduce the hostile
activities like infiltrations. The Committee would desire the Ministry
also indulge in serious dialogue with the international community so
that pressure could be exerted on the neighbours to dissuade from
such nefarious activities. This exercise should not be limited only to
our neighbours on the western side but also with our neighbour in the
North-East.
The Ministry, in its Action Taken Reply, has stated as under:—
China
India follows a policy of engagement with China. There are elements
of both cooperation and competition with that country. Regular high

40
level exchanges between the two countries, increased strategic
communication and enhanced dialogue mechanisms have ensured a
steady improvement in India-China relations. PM visited China in
October, 2013 and had good discussions with Chinese President Xi Jinping
and Premier Li Keqiang. The Border Defence Cooperation Agreement
was one of several Agreements signed during the visit. The 17th meeting
of the Special Representatives of India and China on the Boundary
Question took place at Delhi on February 10-11, 2014. The Government
of the two counties have decided to mark 2014 as the Year of
India-China Friendly Exchanges.
Nepal and Bhutan
India has excellent cooperation with Nepal and Bhutan in the area
of security and has a range of bilateral mechanisms which are held
regularly, including on border management, border infrastructure project
and bilateral trade, transit and investment.
Pakistan
India has repeatedly emphasised, including at the highest level
that Pakistan must abide by its commitment not to allow its territories
as well as territories under its control to be used for terrorism against
Indian or other anti-India activity. The Government have also repeatedly
conveyed that Pakistan ’s hostile propaganda against India, as well as
its sponsorship of cross border terrorism in Jammu and Kashmir and
elsewhere in India is a violation of the Simla Agreement and the
Lahore Declaration.
India has conveyed the need for Pakistan to uphold the sanctity of
the Line of Control and abide by its ceasefire commitment of 2003
along the international border and Line of Control. The Government
has also repeatedly taken up with Pakistan the issue of release of
74 Missing Defence Personnel believed to be in Pakistani jails, including
54 Prisoners of War (PoW). However, Pakistan does not acknowledge
the presence of any Missing Defence Personnel in its custody.
The Government has highlighted before the international community
the facts regarding Pakistan ’s attempts to interfere in the internal
affairs of India and working against Indian interests in Afghanistan.
The international community recognises the impact this has on the
security of our country and the region. India will continue to take all
necessary measures to protect the territorial integrity of the nation
and ensure the safety and security of all our citizens.

41
Bangladesh
India’s links with Bangladesh are civilisational, cultural, social and
economical. India follows a policy of constructive engagement with
Bangladesh through several institutional mechanisms of regular
interaction. India is also a partner in development of Bangladesh with
several development projects being executed with the help of Indian
aid. In the area of security cooperation, a Mutual Legal Assistance
Treaty, an MoU for Transfer of Sentenced Prisoners and an Extradition
Treaty with Bangladesh, was signed recently.
Myanmar
Myanmar, India ’s neighbour in the east, shares a land border of
over 1600 km. as well as a maritime boundary in the Bay of Bengal,
with India. Security cooperation is an important aspect of India-Myanmar
engagement. The need for enhanced cooperation between security
forces and border guarding agencies for securing peace, security and
stability in the border areas has been underlined at the highest levels
by both the countries. During the Prime Minister’s State Visit to Myanmar
in May, 2012, an MoU on Border Area Development was signed, under
which India is financing construction of schools, hospitals and bridges.
Both India and Myanmar have assured that territories of either
country would not be allowed to be used for activities inimical to the
other , including for training, sanctuary and other operations by terrorist
and insurgent organisations and their operatives. Various bilateral
institutional mechanisms have been developed for regular interaction
in this regard. All the aspects of bilateral relations, including those
related to defence and security are discussed between the two sides
at Foreign Office Consultations, led by Foreign Secretary.
Recommendation (Para No. 9)
The Committee had recommended as under:—
It is astonishing that a large number of insurgent groups are active
in the North-East States and it only reflects the lack of effective
co-ordination between the State, Central Armed Police Force and
Military Intelligence. The Committee desire that besides tackling the
hostile activities on the borders, CAPFs should be made fully empowered
with the latest technology and search powers to deal with the insurgent
groups and Army should be gradually devoid of internal security duties.
Efforts in this regard should be communicated to the Committee within
three months of presentation of this Report.

42
The Ministry, in its Action Taken Reply, has stated as under:—
As per available information, 78 insurgent groups are operating in
the North-East region and out of which 48 insurgent groups are active
in Manipur. The insurgent groups are active in North-Eastern States due
to various socio-economic problems and not because of lack of
coordination between State Police, CAPF and military intelligence.
In North Eastern region, the dynamics of dealing with insurgency
is totally different from other parts of the country. A number of terrorist
groups in the NE region are in Suspension of Operations (SoO)
agreement/Memorandum of Understanding (MoU)/awaiting talks with
Central/State Government. These terrorist groups have Designated
Camps where they can stay and keep their weapons. Whenever a
terrorist group decides to come for peace talks, some cadres float a
new faction/group which has led to creation of numerous minor/major
insurgent groups/factions. Analysis of such splinter groups indicates
that they lack adequate strength/weapons but tend to fulfil local
aspirations of a handful of leaders.
Though there may be a rise in the number of groups, the scale of
violence in affected North-Eastern States has considerably reduced.
This is solely attributed to effective coordination between various
agencies, and security forces and proactive approach of the Government.
As regards coordination amongst the CAPFs and Military Intelligence,
there has been no problem regarding coordination at the ground level.
The border guarding forces are equipped with the modern
equipments and are being further modernized to meet the challenges
of the border management and counter insurgency operations. CAPFs
have also been delegated powers under various Central Acts viz. Cr.P .C.
Act, Customs Act, Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic Substances (NDPS)
Act, Armed Forces Special Powers Act (AFSPA) in disturbed areas,
Passports Act, Foreign Exchange Management Act (FEMA) etc. to deal
with the insurgent groups in the bordering States and to check the
criminal and other illegal activities along the International Borders of
India.
A Unified Command structure already exists in North East to counter
the insurgent activities. Besides, Co-ordination Committees at various
levels comprising the State Governments and CAPFs have also been set
up for better monitoring. The Committees meet on regular basis and
supervise the various operations in close coordination with local
authorities as well as intelligence agencies from time to time.

43
The Border Guarding Forces (BGFs) are performing internal security
duties along the international border and the Army shares such
responsibility only on active borders. The Army has not been entrusted
with internal security duty along the border during peace times. Legal
framework in the border area to deal with trans-border criminal and
anti-national elements by BGFs is already in place and a robust
mechanism to share intelligence is in place as discussed above. The
Government appreciates suggestions/recommendations of the
Committee. In this regard, the recommendation of the Committee that
Internal Security responsibility should gradually be assumed by CAPF ,
is agreed to in principle.
Recommendation (Para No. 10)
The Committee had recommended as under:—
The role of Indian Air Force in securing our borders through air is
equally important. It has numerous challenges to address both during
the war as well as peace time, like Counter Air Operations, Counter
Surface Force Operations, Air Defence, Maritime Operations,
Intelligence/Surveillance/Recce, Strategic Operations, Space Operations,
Air Defence, Intelligence/Surveillance/Recce Air Maintenance, High
Availability Disaster Recovery (HADR), Training etc. To carry out these
roles and responsibilities the first and foremost requirement, in the
opinion of the Committee is to achieve the optimum number of
squadrons which as authorized strength stands at 42. The Committee
are surprised to learn that against this authorized strength, the held
strength is only 34 which means that the force is short of eight
squadrons. What can be more baffling to the Committee than the fact
that Air Force has informed that even after inclusion of 13 Su-MKI
squadrons by the end of 12th Defence Five Year Plan, i.e. 2012-2017,
the number of squadrons would continue to be the same. The reasons
for this scenario is stated to be the phasing out of MiG series of
aircraft. In the opinion of the Committee, this apparently shows lack
of foresight amongst the decision makers. The Committee have every
reason to believe that had advance planning being done, resources
augmented in a timely fashion and concerted efforts undertaken, the
Air Force would have squadron strength of 42 by the end of 2017. The
Committee at this stage cannot but recommend that the phasing out
programme should be implemented as planned in order to minimize
losses to the man and machinery and hasten up the acquisition of new
aircraft as planned. In regard to acquisition, the Committee are very
particular about the ‘Rafale’ Medium Multi Role Combat Aircraft (MMRCA)
about which they recommend that negotiations should be completed
at the earliest, procurement to be accelerated and every effort be
made to avoid any kind of delay.

44
The Ministry, in its Action Taken Reply, has stated as under:—
All efforts are being put in to enhance the all-round operational
capability of the Indian Air Force (IAF). IAF has achieved an increase
in heli-lift and air-lift capability with the induction of Mi-17 V-5
helicopters, C-17 and C-130J-30 aircraft in line with Long Term
Perspective Plan (LTPP). At present, IAF has 34 fighter squadrons against
the authorised strength of 42 fighter squadrons. Of these 34 fighter
squadrons, 10 are equipped with MiG-21 variants and 4 with MiG-27
variants. These 14 MiG-21 and MiG-27 squadrons will phase out over
the next few years.
2. The Contract Negotiation Committee (CNC) in respect of the
Medium Multi-Role Combat Aircraft (MMRCA) procurement case is
presently negotiating various aspects of the contract with the L1 vendor
M/s Dassault Aviation of France. The ‘Maintenance ’ and ‘Offset ’
sub-Committees of the CNC have completed their task and their reports
have been signed. The ‘Transfer of Technology ’ (ToT) sub-Committee
is likely to finalise its report shortly. These sub-Committees have
referred some issues to the CNC for resolution. The Contract
sub-Committee will commence its work on receipt of draft contract
and Joint Cooperation Agreement (JCA) from Dassault Aviation and
HAL, the Lead Production Agency (LPA) in this procurement case. All
efforts are being made to expedite conclusion of the contract
negotiations.
Recommendation (Para No. 12)
The Committee had recommended as under:-
The Committee would also like to have complete details in regard
to the achievements made so far for the Research and Development
phase contract for the Fifth Generation Fighter Aircraft (FGFA). Such
details should pronounce the dates when negotiations started and by
when it was likely to be finalized. The Committee are satisfied to
learn that a contract for 42 more Su-30 MKI aircraft was signed on
24 December , 2012 and induction of these aircraft were expected to
be completed by 2019-20. In this addition to the force, the Committee
would like to see a scenario where no time and cost escalations take
place and the contract proceeds within the dates specified above. The
Committee would also like this be monitored on quarterly basis by an
officer of the Ministry not below the rank of Additional Secretary.
The Ministry, in its Action Taken Reply, has stated as under:—
FGFA
The following milestones have been completed in respect of the
FGFA project.
➢ IGA signed — October 2007

45
➢ Confidentiality Agreement signed — July 2008
➢ General Contract signed — December 2008
➢ IAF Technical Requirements Finalized — August 2009
➢ Work share finalized — November 2009
➢ Joint Specification document (TTA) signed — March 2010
➢ CCS Approval for PD Stage — December 2010
➢ Preliminary Design (PD) Contract negotiated & signed —
21 December 2010
➢ T0 for PD Stage — 25 February 2011
➢ PD Stage completed — 19 June 2013
During the PD stage, the basic technical configuration of the FGFA
has been completed jointly by Indian team led by HAL and Sukhoi
Design Bureau of Russia. An elaborate set of design documentation has
been delivered to HAL in two stages during the PD stage. From the
Indian side, in addition to HAL, the following agencies had participated
during PD stage:
➢ DARE, DRDO: Low & High Band Jammers, Dual Colour IR
Missile Approach Warning System, Laser Warning Receiver,
modules of the Mission Computer
➢ LRDE, DRDO: Side AESA Arrays, ISAR Algorithm for the main
Radar
➢ ADE, DRDO: Second Flight Control Computer
➢ BDL: CMDS
➢ System Control: Weapon Bay Door Control System
Anticipating a long lead time for drawing up and finalization of the
R&D Contract, HAL initiated discussions with the Russian side as early
as in September 2011. Substantial progress has been achieved in drawing
up the R&D Contract as a result of the discussions so far. The progress
is summarized as follows:
• Eight rounds (Sep. 2011, Dec. 2011, Mar. 2012, Apr. 2012,
July 2012, Apr. 2013, Sep. 2013, Oct. 2013) of technical
discussions held between the two sides to define the
deliverables and principles of cooperation.
• Contract has been discussed clause by clause towards
resolution of issues and to clearly define the terms of
agreement. Unresolved issues has been highlighted for taking
up in the CNC.

46
• CNC headed by JS (Aero) was formed by MoD in March 2012.
• CNC set up Expert Group of Cost Analysts in Oct. 2012 to
verify the cost details, to collect breakup of costs and to
make recommendations.
• Four rounds (Oct. 2012, Nov. 2012, Jan. 2013 and
March 2013) of bilateral discussions held between expert
group & the Russian side.
• After submission of report by Expert Group, four rounds of
bilateral negotiations (July 2013, Oct. 2013, Feb. 2014, March
2014) were held by the CNC. Next bilateral CNC is planned
during April 2014.
• Recently, IAF has voiced certain concerns on the technical
capabilities and features of the PMF aircraft. These issues
have been formally taken up with the Russian side through
the CNC. During the recent bilateral CNC meeting in
March 2014, 19 clarifications provided by Russian side as
against the 27 concerns/points raised by IAF . Balance
clarifications are to be provided by Russian side.
• In view of the complexity of the project and the extent of
cost negotiations involved, it is estimated that the process of
finalization of the R&D Contract will take at least 3-4 months
provided the technical issues are resolved to the satisfaction
of the Indian Side.
• Subsequently, the approval of CCS will be sought for formal
sanction to go ahead with the R&D stage.
• SU-30 MKI
The observations made by the Committee regarding the
SU-30 MKI contract have been noted. As regards, the
monitoring on quarterly basis as suggested by the Committee,
HAL have been advised to strictly adhere to the timelines
stipulated in the contract and send a quarterly report to the
Department in the matter.
Recommendation (Para No. 13)
The Committee had recommended as under:—
Although the Ministry has informed the Committee that the
procurement procedure adopted by the Indian Air Force is one of the
best in the world, the Committee find that considerable delays do
take place in procurement and final induction of the machines in the

47
Air force. The Committee desire that red-tapism, if any, avoided and
best use of procurement procedures be made. All the items planned
in the Long Term Integrated Perspective Plan (LTIPP) 2012—27 should
move at the desired pace scrupulously. This would help in countering
threat perception and enhancing operational capabilities of the Indian
Air Force against its adversaries.
The Ministry, in its Action Taken Reply, has stated as under:—
All defence capital procurements are conducted in accordance
with the Defence Procurement procedures, which conform to the highest
standards of transparency, probity and public accountability. The Long
Term Integrated Perspective Plan (LTIPP) 2012—27 lays down the
roadmap for capability-building of the Indian Air Force (IAF) over the
next three Plan periods based on our threat perceptions, however , the
procurements for capability-building are also linked to the annual
budgetary allocations. Shortfall in budgetary support may adversely
affect the capability-building process, though available funds are
optimally utilised for timely implementation of the projects.
(Please see Para No. 16 of Chapter I of the Report)
Recommendation (Para No. 15)
The Committee had recommended as under:—
One of the most important aspects in which Indian Air Force is
found to be lacking is acute shortage of trainer aircraft of all three
categories, viz. basic, intermediate and advance. The Committee feel
that training of pilots is the vital requirement of any Air Force in the
world. Unless we have the requisite number of trained pilots in all
flying streams, all the paraphernalia of the Air Force becomes
redundant. The Committee call upon the Ministry to take the necessary
steps in this regard urgently.
The Ministry, in its Action Taken Reply, has stated as under:—
Trainer Aircraft (BTA): To meet IAF ’s flying training requirements,
IAF needs 181 BTA, for which Acceptance of Necessity (AoN) was
accorded in December 2009 to procure 75 aircraft from the global
market, whereas the remaining 106 aircraft were to be manufactured
by Hindustan Aeronautical Ltd. (HAL). However , this was subject to
condition that in case, HAL does not fly its first aircraft by the time
the first aircraft of the 75 aircraft arrives, then the option clause
would be invoked and numbers to be made by HAL would be reviewed.

48
2. The ‘Buy (Global) ’ case was progressed and a contract was
signed with Pilatus for supply of 75 aircraft. The deliveries of aircraft
and equipment have started and delivery of all 75 aircraft would be
completed by August 2015. HAL is going ahead with development of
indigenous BTA (HTT40) with its internal resources. In the meanwhile,
Indian Air Force has proposed to acquire balance 106 PC-7 MK II BTA
in ‘Buy and Make (Indian) ’ category from Pilatus Aircraft Ltd.
3. Intermediate Jet Trainer (IJT): The IJT aircraft has been under
development since 1999. The Initial Operational Clearance (IOC) date
for IJT by HAL was March 2004 and since then, this date has been
revised several times to March 2007, June 2011, December 2012 and
December 2013. As informed by HAL, the expected revised date for
IOC for IJT is December 2014. HAL has signed the contract to supply
85 IJT . The present status of development of IJT by HAL is that all
activities required for IOC have been completed except for refinement
of ‘stall characteristics’ and ‘spin testing’. HAL is now using consultancy
from M/s BAe Systems, UK for the ‘stall and spin characteristics ’ of the
IJT .
(Please see Para No. 19 of Chapter I of the Report)
Recommendation (Para No. 16)
The Committee had recommended as under:—
The Committee find that for basic training, Indian Air Force has a
requirement of 181 basic trainer aircraft to replace HPT-32 aircraft,
therefore, Air Force was granted permission to buy Pilatus PC-7 Mk-II
trainers outright from the global market and rest of them were to be
produced by HAL. Meanwhile, HAL has started process of developing a
new basic trainer aircraft termed as HTT-40 thereby forcing the Indian
Air Force to have two sets of basic trainer aircraft in near future. The
situation becomes more critical when they have to maintain two sets
of technical personnel, two sets of simulators and two sets of supply
and logistic chain management resulting in non-standardization in
training. Therefore, the Committee recommend that the Ministry should
help the Indian Air Force to come out of this predicament and decide
clearly which Basic Trainer Aircraft to retain after the retirement of
current basic trainer.
The Committee also recommend frequent and effective coordination
between Indian Air Force and Hindustan Aeronautics Limited should be
ensured by way of constitution of a Monitoring Committee so as to
enable the user, i.e., Indian Air Force to have a better progress of HAL
service delivery and plan its own procurement policy.

49
The Ministry, in its Action Taken Reply, has stated as under:—
In view of the IAF ’s urgent requirement for Basic Trainer Aircraft
(BTA), M/s Pilatus Aircraft Ltd. delivered the first two PC-7 Mk-II aircraft
at T 0 + 8 months as against the contracted delivery schedule of
T 0 + 15 months. As a result of the early delivery, IAF commenced the
first ab initio Pilots’ course on a BTA, PC-7 Mk-II, in July 2013, which
was successfully completed in December 2013. The deliveries of aircraft
and equipment have progressed ahead of schedule and as of 28th April
2014, 35 aircraft have arrived. Delivery of all 75 aircraft would be
completed by August 2015. The case for manufacture of Basic Trainer
Aircraft by Hindustan Aeronautics Limited (HAL) has not yet fructified,
although HAL is going ahead with development of indigenous BTA
HTT-40 with its internal resources. In the meanwhile, Air HQ proposed
to acquire balance 106 PC-7 Mk-II Basic Trainer Aircraft ‘Buy and Make’
from M/s Pilatus Aircraft Ltd. through Transfer of Technology (ToT) to
5 Base Repair Depot of IAF . In its meeting held on 11th March, 2014,
the Services Capital Acquisition Categorisation Committee (SCAPCC)
has recommended accord of Acceptance of Necessity (AoN) for 106
PC-7 Mk-II aircraft with the categorisation of ‘Buy and Make (Indian) ’.
The Committee, inter alia , also recommended that the IAF would
explore all possibilities including response from Indian private industry.
The case is now to be fielded in Services Capital Acquisition
Categorisation Higher Committee (SCACHC).
Recommendation (Para No. 17)
The Committee had recommended as under:—
The Committee have been informed by the ministry that sanction
to develop Intermediate Jet Trainer was given by Cabinet Committee
on Security (CCS) in 1999, wherein a lead time of 15 years was given
to HAL. However, in 2013, after nine years of first prototype was flown
in 2004, HAL sought expertise of BAES after the Steering Committee
consisting of members of Ministry of Defence, IAF , certifying agency
and HAL has decided in its favour. However , this resulted in exceeding
their original timeline by 9 years and exhausting total development
period of 23 years, thereby making it very difficult for Indian Air Force
to continue second stage training of pilots. The Committee, therefore,
recommend that various efforts be made either to procure IJT from
foreign sources or HAL may impressed upon to adhere to the timelines
given in last extension. The Committee are also dismayed over the
fact that even after knowing well in advance about the ageing fleet
of Kiran aircraft, the ministry has not taken any effective steps to

50
procure IJT , jeopardizing the life of young trainees. The Committee
find that after this inordinate delay, HAL has now given to understand
that efforts are being made for achieving the Final Operational
Clearance (FOC) by December 2014 which would eventually lead to
production of aircraft. Hence, the Committee recommend that without
compromising the safety features, all out efforts should be made by
all stakeholders so that targeted date of December 2014 is met and
this project finally sees the light of the day. The Committee would
also like to be informed of the timelines also when the production
would actually start and induction would take place. The Committee
would be failing in their duty, if they do not caution the ministry and
HAL that in future no delays should take place. It goes without saying
that cascading effect of this caution should be applicable on all defence
public sector undertakings/organization including ordnance factory Board
as well as the research organizations such as DRDO.
The Ministry, in its Action Taken Reply, has stated as under:—
The IJT project was sanctioned in 1999 with a lead time of 5 years
to operational clearance. This was under the assumption that the
aircraft will be using an existing off the shelf engine. Accordingly two
prototypes were developed using off-the-shelf LARZAC engine. The
first Prototype aircraft flew in March 2003 and the second in
March 2004. The LARZAC engines turned out to be under powered to
meet the performance requirements and so a higher thrust engine was
required to be integrated. Since no suitable engine was available off
the shelf, an engine of required thrust needed to be developed. The
sanction was revised in 2005 to include the higher thrust engine and
advanced avionics. The schedule was then revised to March 2007 for
Initial Operational Clearance and March 2008 for Final Operational
Clearance.
The delays in IJT project were due to the delay in development
of higher thrust engine (AL 55I) & various accidents/incidents during
the development Flight testing.
All efforts are being made to ensure Certification of IJT by
December 2014 without compromising any safety issues.
Concurrent to D&D phase, setting up of facilities for and
manufacturing of 12 LSP aircraft have been initiated by HAL. In addition,
IAF has placed an order on HAL for production of 73 Series aircraft.
HAL has initiated the production processes for this batch also in order
to ensure deliveries to customer without any delay after the certification
of IJT .

51
Among the 12 LSPs, 5 are already flying and remaining will be
ready by December 2014. This can be delivered to customer for service
use by March 2015 if the Certification is completed in December 2014.
Similarly, the delivery of series production aircraft is likely to
commence from 2015-16 onwards.
To mitigate the delay in IJT development, the Life of Kiran aircraft
has already been extended by 500 hours, due to which IAF will be able
to operate Kiran fleet till 2019.
(Please see Para No. 22 of Chapter I of the Report)
Recommendation (Para No. 18)
The Committee had recommended as under:—
The Committee ’s enquiry reveals that HAL signed a contract with
NPO-Saturn of Russia for the Design and development of AL-55i engine
for the IJT with a scope to licence manufacture upto 1000 AL-55i
engines at HAL Koraput. In this respect, the Committee want the
ministry to ensure that before designing an aircraft, the details of the
engine should also be finalized otherwise, the project may have to be
remain contented only with the available engine, i.e. AL-55i.
The Ministry, in its Action Taken Reply, has stated as under:—
As brought above, the IJT was designed and the prototype aircraft
commenced flying with an off-the shelf LARZAC engine. However , the
thrust of LARZAC engine was found wanting to meet the performance
requirements of the aircraft. Accordingly a higher thrust engine needed
to be integrated for meeting the performance requirements of the
aircraft. Since no engine of the required thrust rating was readily
available in the market, a higher thrust engine was required to be
developed. Accordingly the AL-55i engine to be developed by NPO
Saturn of Russia was selected after the due commercial procedures
pursuant to decision in the Steering Committee and CCS approval.
The Ministry will endeavour to comply with the recommendation
taking into account the technical feasibility and time schedule for
implementation of the IJT Project.
Recommendation (Para No. 19)
The Committee had recommended as under:—
The Committee find from the information supplied to them that
the ratio of indigenous and imported materials utilized for production

52
and repair activities in HAL is around 15% and 85% by value respectively,
which seems to be very meagre in achieving selfreliance by the premier
aircraft manufacturing company. The Committee desire that HAL should
look into this aspect also so that dependence on foreign countries can
be reduced.
The Ministry, in its Action Taken Reply, has stated as under:—
The materials used for production of aircraft can broadly be
classified into:
— Raw Materials
— Standard Parts
— Line Replaceable Units (LRUs)
Raw materials: Materials being used in the aircraft industries are
Aluminiun Alloys, Steel alloys, Titanium & Nickel alloys etc.
Indigenisation of raw materials involves substantial financial investments
and is also a long drawn process due to certification procedure and
low volume requirement.
An initiative has been taken for indigenisation of materials and
accordingly a Committee is constituted by MoD with the members from
MoD, HAL, Midhani, OFB, DRDO with an aim to study, analyse and
recommend ways and means to indigenously develop the advanced
materials in the Country. The Committee submitted its report to the
Ministry in Feb. 2014. The report of the Committee is being analysed
for feasibility of implementation.
Recommendation (Para No. 20)
The Committee had recommended as under:—
Coming to the part of the Navy and the Coast Guard, the Committee
is perturbed to note that any foreign ship could enter Indian shores
with sophisticated load of arms and ammunitions. The Committee is
worried to discover that the amount of floating armouries contained
in the ship was approx., 5000 rounds of ammunition & sophisticated
weapons where each weapon could fire a distance of 3-4 kilometres.
In the opinion of the Committee, such a scenario is appalling especially
when the country is fraught with threats and news of bomb blasts are
a frequent happening to internal security. As such, the role of Navy
and Indian Coast Guard becomes very challenging and loaded with
multifarious responsibilities. The Committee concurs in totality that

53
the present system of prior notification needs to be changed
expeditiously to Pre Approval Notification System (PANS). Since all
these aspects are covered in the Coastal Security Bill which has been
drafted by the Navy and is under consideration at the Ministry of
Defence, the Committee recommends in unequivocal terms that the
Bill should be proceeded with utmost priority since it is concerned
with the matter as serious as coastal security vis-a-vis threat perception
to our motherland and the innocent citizens. It is needless to say that
the steps initiated, progress made and finality reached in regard to
the Bill be communicated to the Committee. Also, the Committee
urges upon the Indian Navy & Coast Guard Organisation, which are
responsible for overall maritime security in the Indian Exclusive
Economic Zone, to take up the matter emphatically with the
international community. Since the subject is related to the Ministry
of Shipping (MoS), it is pertinent for the Ministry of Defence to impress
upon Ministry of Shipping that mere guidelines are not sufficient. The
security companies in the business should be registered with
international bodies as the unregulated floating armouries in sea and
their access to our coastal regions are a matter of great concern.
The Ministry, in its Action Taken Reply, has stated as under:—
Floating Armouries: The continued threat of piracy has led to the
proliferation of Private Maritime Security Companies (PMSC), Private
Contracted Armed Security Personnel (PCASP) and floating armouries
in International Waters. Freedom of navigation in high seas, and the
lack of international regulatory framework to deal with the floating
armouries in our region has led to fear of these being used by terrorist/
anti-national elements. The issue of floating armouries as well as
revision of the piracy high-risk area are being taken up by India in
International fora for adoption of a common regulatory framework.
Coastal Security (CS) Bill: Naval Headquarters have suggested
consideration of Coastal Security Bill for enactment of a law to delineate
the responsibilities and duties of various agencies involved in Coastal
Security of the country as this will lead to better coordination and
provide legal basis for actions of Indian Navy. The issue was considered
during a review meeting on Coastal Security taken by Raksha Mantri
and it was decided that as per Allocation of Business rules the draft
Coastal Security Bill will be coordinated by M/o Home Affairs in
consultation with MoD and the Coastal State Government. A paper
listing the concerns and need for a Coastal Security Bill prepared by
Indian Navy has been forwarded to M/o Home Affairs for further action.

54
Pre-Arrival Notification for Security (PANS): The issue of prior
approval in lieu of prior notification by Merchant Vessels carrying armed
detachments onboard has been considered. However , very limited rights
are available to Coastal States beyond Territorial Waters. This issue is
being raised at International fora like IMO, CGPCS for consideration of
guidelines.
(Please see Para No. 25 of Chapter I of the Report)
Recommendation (Para No. 21)
The Committee had recommended as under:—
In accomplishing the objectives of maritime and coastal security,
the Committee also concur with the suggestion of the Ministry that
Naval and Coast Guard Officers be delegated with more powers under
the Maritime Zones of Indian Act which would enable them to take
decisions expeditiously and help in checking the menace of
transgression. The responsibilities of other concerned Departments such
as Customs, Immigration and Directorate of Revenue Intelligence (DRI),
in the opinion of the Committee also needs to be redefined. Hence,
the Committee emphasize that the Ministry of Defence take a befitting
decision while considering the legislation on empowerment of Navy
and Coast Guard officials and officers of other organisations/
departments.
The Ministry, in its Action Taken Reply, has stated as under:—
Though very limited rights are available to Coastal States beyond
Territorial Waters under UNCLOS, the request for empowerment under
the Maritime Zones of India Act (MZI) Act, 1976 has been taken up with
MEA.
Recommendation (Para No. 23)
The Committee had recommended as under:—
The Committee are perturbed to note that the issue regarding the
establishment of radars in the Nicobar Islands has staggered and has
not reached finality yet. This issue needs to be addressed earnestly
and expeditiously especially when our neighbour China has been
undertaking various activities in its areas of interest like South-China
Sea and deploying of naval ships in the Gulf of Eden as parts of its
anti-piracy operations. During evidence, the Committee desired to
know about the present status of installation of radar in Nicobar Islands,

55
which matter had come to their notice during their study visit to
Andaman and Nicobar Islands in February 2013. Consistent with
admission of naval officials, the Committee comprehend that Narcondum
Island is strategically very crucial because it is in the Andaman sea,
almost 130-140 miles from our nearest island and about 50-60 miles
from other side. The Committee were dismayed to know that the
radar project at Narcondum could not get Government approval and
Navy was asked to look for an alternate location. Subsequently, the
Committee were apprised that Navy has identified an alternate location
though not strategically as befitting as the Standalone Island. The
Committee sense that Indian Navy is gearing up towards Maritime
Capability Perspective Plan and taking up maritime challenges along
with security threats emanating from regional interests and such denials/
delays will hamper the country ’s defence preparedness. Even in their
20th report on examination of demands for grants 2013-14, the
Committee had categorically observed that due to such delays many
important projects are hindered affecting overall development of
surveillance network and operational preparedness of country’s defence
issues. On this point, the Committee insist that the Government should
take initiatives/measures towards strengthening strategic needs of
Defence. Consequently, the Government may reconsider the project of
installation of naval equipment in Narcondum Island and environmental
clearances be aptly undertaken with the intention that strategic defence
installations/establishments are not derailed.
The Ministry, in its Action Taken Reply, has stated as under:—
Construction work at three sites in Andaman and Nicobar Island
viz. East Island, Sandy Point and Keating Point for setting up of the
Radar Stations is being progressed. Narcondum Island being not available
due to environmental concerns, Indian Coast Guard is looking at
alternate sites for setting up the Radar Station in A&N Islands.
(Please see Para No. 31 of Chapter I of the Report)
Recommendation (Para No. 24)
The Committee had recommended as under:—
The Committee deeply regrets the sinking of INS Sindhurakshak
along with all the men on board in August 2013. In this context, the
Committee was anxious and keen to know the causes of disaster. It is
baffling for the Committee to find that this vessel had recently returned
from Russia after servicing. How a vessel could meet a disaster of this
kind almost immediately after its maintenance. The Committee learns

56
that the cause of accident is under investigation. It is yet to be
salvaged and only after the submarine is salvaged, can the actual
cause of accident be establishment. The Committee also find that
specialised equipments are required for salvaging the submarine and
tendering is in process. The whole matter is being dealt with by the
Western Naval Command. The Committee observes that it is of utmost
importance for the Navy to ascertain the exact cause of accident as
such incidents would be catastrophic and adversely affect the morale
of naval personnel working on different vessels. The Committee
recommends that requisite precautionary measures are put in place to
ensure safety of the personnel on board and equipment placed on
various submarines at different locations. The Navy should take all
necessary steps to obviate accidents in order to safeguard the trained
manpower and sophisticated machines.
The Ministry, in its Action Taken Reply, has stated as under:—
“After the incidents onboard submarines, extensive checks on
weapon related safety systems and audit of Standard Operating
Procedures on all operational ship and submarines have been
instituted. To ensure that all naval operations are undertaken within
a well defined safety operating envelope, Safety Class Authorities
(SCAs) experts in their respective fields have been introduced.
Subsequently, in February 2014, a comprehensive framework for
safety audit of all operational units has also been promulgated to
be implemented at Command Headquarters levels. ”
Recommendation (Para No. 25)
The Committee had recommended as under:—
The Committee is happy to learn that our Navy is engaging itself
in exercises with the Navies of friendly countries, which is a right step.
Such exercises not only enhance the capabilities of our force but also
create an atmosphere of goodwill and friendship. They, therefore,
desire that more engagements of this nature be undertaken in future.
The Ministry, in its Action Taken Reply, has stated as under:—
Bilateral Naval Exercises with the navies of friendly foreign countries
are decided on yearly basis keeping in view all relevant factors.
Recommendation (Para No. 26)
The Committee had recommended as under:—
The Committee find that there lies a very close interaction between
the Army and the Central Armed Police Forces (CAPFs). The Army is

57
expressly responsible for guarding the borders along the Actual Ground
Position Line and Line of Control which gets a backing by the Border
Security Force which guards the remaining international boundary.
Like-wise, the Army is engaged with Indo-Tibetan Border Police in the
border management of India-China border. In the rest of the borders
like India-Nepal Sashastra Seema Bal, India-Myanmar Assam Rifles,
India-Bhutan Sashastra Seema Bal and India-Bangladesh Border Security
Force are engaged. They protect a vast boundary line stretching over
thousands of kilometres.
The Ministry, in its Action Taken Reply, has stated as under:—
The observations of the Committee has been noted by the Ministry.
Recommendation (Para No. 30)
The Committee had recommended as under:—
It is shocking to note that only one road out of 27 ITBP roads is
complete and as many as 11 roads are behind schedule and not even
the Detailed Project Reports have been finalized. Out of these delayed
roads, 2 fall in Himachal Pradesh, 4 in Arunachal Pradesh, 2 in
Uttarakhand and 3 roads in Sikkim. For 14 roads, the completion date
are not too far and most of them are to be completed by March 2014,
October 2014, December 2014, October 2015, March 2016,
December 2016, etc. This is a scenario of the roads in progress which
pertain to the ITBP . The Committee are very emphatic in their
recommendation and desire that at least now after their intervention,
the Detailed Project Report be finalized without any further loss of
time. They also recommend that the new dates should register very
realistic targets in regard to the availability of finance, technology,
manpower , etc. The usual handicaps which have been referred in regard
to other roads such as lack of environmental clearance, problems in
land and acquisitions should be taken care in advance so that further
delays do not occur. If need be a high-level task force of the senior
most officers of the Ministry of Defence, Ministry of Home Affairs and
Railways be constituted to execute the land connectivity to the border
which should monitor the progress on a monthly basis and report the
shortcomings in order to obviate them in a timely manner. Here, the
Committee also emphasize that strict compliance should be made in
regard to the 14 roads, the completion dates of which is not too far
from now. Any delays that would come to the notice of the Committee
would be abjured and taken seriously as this issue relate to a matter
as high as ‘Threat Perception ’ to the nation.

58
The Ministry, in its Action Taken Reply, has stated as under:—
1. Out of 27 roads identified for development for ITBP as ICBRs,
BRO has been entrusted with the construction of 15 No. of roads with
a total length of 397.28 Km. Out of these 15 Nos. roads, the following
02 Nos. roads have already been completed.
(a) Sugar PtLepcha 7.55 km.
(b) Chuppan-Shipkila 5.28 km.
2. The overall progress on ITBP roads entrusted to BRO up to
March 2014 is as under:
(a) Formation work of 270.57 Km. (68%)
(b) Surfacing work of 100.75 Km. (25.3%)
3. The problems being faced in construction of roads in the border
region are as under:-
(a) Lack of stone quarries from State Governments.
(b) Delay in Forest/wild life cases.
(c) Land Acquisition.
(d) High Altitude areas resulting in reduced efficiency.
(e) Limited working season.
(f) Paucity of heavy lift Air Effort.
(g) Shortage of equipment and skilled manpower.
4. The bottlenecks which have affected the progress of works are
as follows:
(i) In Arunachal Pradesh formation works got delayed due to
inadequate air effort, labour shortage and difficult terrain.
(ii) In Uttarakhand, surfacing work has been ceased as quarrying
and HMP installation are not allowed in Gangotri National
Park.
(iii) Due to inadequate air effort, formation works of the following
roads are delayed in Uttarakhand:
(a) Sumna-Rimhim
(b) Gunji-Kutti
(c) Munsiari-Bugdhiar-Milam.

59
5. The schedule of completion for the remaining roads is as under:
(a) 1 road by 2014 (Road Sugar Pt-Pong-Pt 4840).
(b) 3 roads by 2015 (Road Zimithang-Khinzemane, Road Bona-
Gelling and Road Koyul-Photile-Chusumle-Zarasar).
(c) 3 roads by 2016 (Road Shungatsar-Kharsangla, Road Naga-
Jadhang and Road All Weather Road across Marsimikla).
(d) 1 road by 2017 (Road Yarlung-Lamang).
(e) 2 road by 2019 (Road Ghastoli-Rattakona and Road Sumna-
Rimkhim).
(f) 1 road by 2020 (Road Munsiari-Bugdhiar-Milam).
(g) 1 road by 2022. (Road Gunji-Kuthi-Jolingkong).
(h) Construction of road Thimbu-Mango-Chuna cannot be
commenced as initial 34 Km. is under construction by
Arunachal Pradesh PWD and as such no connectivity exists to
the start point as of now.
6. The issues affecting progress of works are being addressed by
the Ministry by taking up the case with State Government for necessary
allotment of quarries and grant of permission for establishing Hot Mix
Plants for surfacing works. State Chief Secretaries have been requested
to form Empowered Committees under their chairmanship and to hold
regular meetings to address bottlenecks that impact progress of BRO
works.
7. Besides monitoring of border infrastructure works by the
Empowered Committee on Border Infrastructure (ECBI) under the
Chairmanship of Cabinet Secretary, a special cell called Performance,
Coordination and Monitoring Cell (PCMC) has been raised in Border
Roads Development Board (BRDB) Secretariat in Ministry to closely
monitor the progress of works on important roads and facilitate in
resolution of issues affecting progress. The progress on all ICBRs was
reviewed by Defence Secretary in March-April 2014. BRO has been
asked to try new technologies like modern soil stabilizing materials,
use of precast concrete blocks/slabs etc. wherever there is problem in
conventional road construction. Special emphasis is also being given to
provide air efforts to BRO through an intensive induction Operation by
Indian Air Force and efforts are being made to supplement air efforts
through outsourcing. Further a Working Group has been constituted
under the Chairmanship of Secretary, MoEF with members from MoD,
MHA and other stakeholders to periodically review progress of forest/
wild-life clearances required for development of border infrastructure
projects.

60
Recommendation (Para No. 31)
The Committee had recommended as under:—
The Committee now take a bird ’s eye view of other delays of
border roads. The Committee find that Ministry of Home Affairs is
candid in its admission before the Committee that ‘lack of development
on our side is in sharp contrast to infrastructure development on the
Chinese side ’. The Committee have also taken a serious note of the
contention of the Ministry that China has over a period of time taken
a large scale road construction and developed a network of highways
which are also linked to feeder and arterial roads. What can be more
appalling for the Committee to learn that many of border passes from
China side are now connected by road. The Committee are cautiously
optimistic as to what would happen to our nation in case of any
eventuality such as war specially when our side has a very dismal
network of roads as well as rail connections which could be effective
in mobilizing man and machine.
Talking of the BRO projects a sorry figure depicts that out of
8 Border Road Projects such as Himank, Swastik, Shivalik etc. along
the Indo-China Border none is hundred per cent complete. The
Committee also find that there is a network of agencies planning,
executing and monitoring these road projects such as CPWD, National
Project Construction Corporation (NPCC), State Public Works
Department, Directorate-General (DGMO), concerned Ministries, etc.
The Committee wonder how a coordination mechanism is established
between all these agencies. Not going into the finer details of each
and every vis-à-vis projects, the Committee here recommend strongly
that all the projects along Indo-China Border should be executed with
a new zeal and they be completed as planned. The task force should
monitor the progress of all the roads. Also the Committee would like
to be informed that the process which has been started for seeking
approval for construction of 34 roads in Phase–II and additionally
73 proposed by ITBP should be given approval/endorsement at the
minimum possible time under intimation to the Committee so that the
ball can be set rolling form the projects of Phase-II.
The Ministry, in its Action Taken Reply, has stated as under:—
1. Due to inherent delays in land acquisition, forest clearance and
other terrain related issues like hard rock stretches, limited working
period the commencement and progress of works were delayed.
Moreover most of these roads in 8 BRO projects were sanctioned from
2006 onward. In fact, 01 of these roads Thimbu-Mango-Chuna under
construction by Arunachal Pradesh PWD not yet sanctioned as no
connectivity exists to the start point from where BRO is entrusted
work. However , work on most of these roads is now well under way.

61
2. As brought out in the reply to Para 30, it is again stated that
the progress of roads is closely monitored by ECBI at the highest level
and initiatives have been taken to expedite the completion of these
roads.
3. No works under phase–II are entrusted to BRO.
Recommendation (Para No. 32)
The Committee had recommended as under:—
Gleaning through the replies of the Ministry, the Committee find
that the situation of the construction of roads in Indo-Nepal and
Indo-Bhutan border is also a bane. On Indo-Nepal Border , the percentage
of completion of Hirak and Swastik is as low as 41 and 45 per cent
respectively. What can be more disturbing than the fact out of 6286
border pillars, 1273 are damaged, 1397 missing and only 3616 are in
good condition. The Government has, as informed to the Committee,
given approval and upgradation of 1377 kms. of roads along this border
which fall in three States — Uttar Pradesh, Bihar and Uttarakhand. The
Committee are perturbed to note that out of 1377 kms., a part approval
has been accorded through DPRs. The Committee recommend that
final approval be granted before the finalization of Acton Taken Note
on this Report and also the status of the work initiated be intimated
to the Committee.
The Ministry, in its Action Taken Reply, has stated as under:—
1. In Indo-Nepal border progress of work of BRO project Hirak is
given as under along with reasons for low performance:—
Project Hirak (Indo-Nepal Border)
Sl. Road under %age of Reason for slow Date of PDC
No. ICBR Physical progress Commen-
Programme Progress cement
1. Munsiari- 42% High altitude, 2006 2020
Bugdhiar— inadequate air
Milam effort
2. Gunji-Kuthi- 40% HAA, adverse 2007 2017
Jolingkong ground
conditions
3. Tawaghat- 75% Adverse ground 2005 2017
Ghatibagarh condition LA/FC
problems
4. Ghatibagarh- 30% Delay in FC, 2005 2020
Lipulekh inadequate Air
Effort

62
2. No works regarding border pillars and roads in Uttar Pradesh,
Bihar has been entrusted to BRO.
Recommendation (Para No. 33)
The Committee had recommended as under:—
On Indo-Bhutan Border, the Committee would like to know first the
reason why Swastik Project could be completed only 35 per cent and
Dantak only 90 per cent. They would like the dates since when these
roads are pending and by when they would be finally completed. Also
what the Ministry are doing for 542 missing border pillars and 457
damaged pillars out of a total of 1861 pillars. In the opinion of the
Committee, whether these are executed by State Public Works
Department or there is a shortage of funds which is proposed to be
met by Department of North-Eastern Regions (DONER), the final
responsibility lies with the Ministry of Defence as they are the one who
have to secure our border against any odd. The Committee are perplexed
that the work is held on account of bearing the cost of land and as
such recommend that not only now, in future also before according
final approval to any project all these issues should be sorted out
before hand. They fail to understand that why they have been intimated
of one difficulty or the other when the projects have already been
approved.
The Ministry, in its Action Taken Reply, has stated as under:—
1. The progress of Indo-Bhutan border works of project Swastik is
given as under along with reason for low performance:
(i) Project Swastik (Indo-Bhutan Border):
Sl. Name of % age of Reason for Date of PDC
No. road Physical slow progress Commen-
Progress cement
1. Tr.-Jn.- 70% Change in alignment 2005 2018
Bheembase- & scope of work,
Dokala adverse climatic
conditions
2. Flag Hill-Dokala Nil NBWL clearance 2011 2022
and FC with CEC,
SC
3. Katao-Bump IV 100% Completed — —

63
(ii) Project Dantak: The roads in project Dantak are progressing as
per schedule and are likely to be completed within scheduled completion
dates.
2. No works regarding border pillars has been entrusted to BRO.
Recommendation (Para No. 36)
The Committee had recommended as under:—
The Committee learn that on Indo-Myanmar Border there is a
comprehensive proposal for creation for border infrastructure which
envisages not only construction of new roads upgradation of existing,
helipads and helibases in the State of Manipur, Nagaland, Mizoram and
Arunachal Pradesh. Assam Rifles is the Border Guarding Force along
the Indo-Myanmar border. Assam Rifles has informed that there are
76 Company Operating Bases (COBs)/Border Out Posts (BOPs) along
Indo-Myanmar border of which, 56 have moderate connectivity and the
remaining 20 have very poor connectivity. They also find that there is
a comprehensive proposal involving construction of 4585 km of roads,
113 helipads and 02 heli bases during the period 2013—25 in two
phases. The Committee are perturbed to note that the year 2013 has
already elapsed and action is still being taken by the Ministry to
commission the prefeasibility study through CPWD. The Committee
deprecate the delay in commencement of this study and desire that
it be completed soon. They would also like to have a complete picture
on how this project along with the cost and time lines in different
sectors of this project.
The Ministry, in its Action Taken Reply, has stated as under:—
1. Status of Progress of Indo-Myanmar Border Fencing entrusted to
BRO is as under:
(i) Total Sanctioned — 15.73 Km.
(ii) Total Constructed — 4.50 Km.
2. Work delayed due to non-allotment of funds.
Recommendation (Para No. 37)
The Committee had recommended as under:—
Again, for strengthening the connectivity in the sensitive hill areas
of North-East, the Committee recommended that planning on the

64
alternate access route through Bagrakot-AlagarhRhenok-Rorathang-
Ranipul be completed within a defined period and the alternate
alignment, namely, Balipara-Chardar-Tawang which is under construction
be completed soon. Any obstacles being faced be communicated to
the Committee so that they can find the right trajectory to be followed
by the Ministry.
The Ministry, in its Action Taken Reply, has stated as under:—
1. Alternate access route for Sikkim through Bagrakot-
AlagarhRhenok- Rorathang–Ranipul is being planned by MoRT&H and
only part of route, from Alagarh to Rishi of length 21.00 km. is entrusted
to BRO. The DPR preparation is under progress.
2. Work on Road Balipara-Charduar-Tawang of length 317.28 km. is
under progress and the progress as on March 14 is as under:
(a) Formation – 191.36 km.
(b) Surfacing - 139.29 km.
(c) likely to be completed within PDC i.e. 2016.
Recommendation (Para No. 38)
The Committee had recommended as under:—
The Committee do not share the contention of the Ministry that in
construction of border roads, the problems such as lack of stone
quarries, delay in environmental clearances, land acquisition, shortage
of labour are faced. The Committee would like to know that why these
were not envisaged initially prior to starting of the work than halting
it midway due to such problems. They recommend that these issues
may effectively be taken up with the Chief-Secretaries of various
States and also with the Ministries of Environment and Forests both at
the Centre and States. On the inadequate heavy air lift support by
Indian Air Force, the Committee take a serious view. The Committee
would like the reasons from the Ministry on the shortfalls on the air
lift which affects construction connectivity and also the remedial
measures thereof. In this regards, the proposal of BRO for inviting
expression of interest from private agencies must be viewed very
seriously by the Ministry and full support be given for fructifying this
proposal.
The Ministry, in its Action Taken Reply, has stated as under:—
1. Issues related to land acquisition, environmental clearance, lack
of quarries etc. are impediments to the smooth progress of work.
Chief Secretaries of various State Governments have been requested

65
to constitute Empowered Committees under their Chairmanship with
secretaries of concerned departments as members to resolve issues
that affect progress of works by BRO.
2. Various measures have been adopted for quick and time bound
disposal of forest clearance cases by MoEF:
(i) Single window system established at District, State and MoEF
levels to fast track processing of forest clearance cases on
28th January 2010.
(ii) Simplified and unified Proforma adopted for processing both
forest and wild life clearance simultaneously.
(iii) Regular review meeting is being held at Ministry of Defence
to review progress of pending cases with representatives of
State Government MoEF and BRO.
(iv) A Working Group has been constituted on 03.06.2013 by
Ministry of Environment and Forests under the Chairmanship
of Secretary MoEF to review the forest clearance cases.
3. As regards air efforts requirement of BRO is concerned the same
is generally met by IAF . But due to capacity constraints of IAF ,
particularly in heavy lift capacity, it has been decided that BRO would
outsource the same. An Empowered Committee under the chairmanship
of DG (Air Ops) has been constituted which would carry out the task
of outsourcing.
Recommendation (Para No. 40)
The Committee had recommended as under:—
The Committee would like the Ministry of Railways to keep itself
abreast with the technological development taking place in the field
of railways specially regarding the high altitude developments not only
in the neighbouring countries like China but throughout the world.
Knowledge exchange in this era is no big task. Although it has been
stated that Ministry of Railways possesses the required know how for
executing these proposed 14 lines yet the Committee recommend that
our railways lines in border areas should be the most sophisticated
ones so that the forces do not face any difficulty and their
accomplishments are not compromised. This recommendation is
applicable generally for the purposes of road construction also where
project should be undertaken with the best available technology in the
world.

66
The Ministry, in its Action Taken Reply, has stated as under:—
1. Ministry of Railways has informed that it is keeping abreast with
technological development taking place in the field of Railways
especially regarding high altitude developments. Indian Railways is
already undertaking challenging construction work in Himalayas right
from Jammu & Kashmir to North East and have got sufficient experience
in construction in hilly region at high altitude. Moreover , it is also
ensuring that its personnel are trained in such construction regularly.
2. Ministry of Railways would like to assure the Committee that
the 14 strategic lines once sanctioned and fully funded by Ministry of
Defence or Ministry of Finance will be constructed with state-of-the-
art technology and will be sophisticated to ensure speedier mobilization
of military cargo.
3. As far as road construction in high altitude areas is concerned,
a decision has been taken to adopt internationally proven best practices
and try new technology, material and equipment. Towards this, 10% of
Border Roads Organization (BRO) funds are being earmarked.
Furthermore, a collaborative measure has been initiated to establish
a multi-discipline-technical expert group with experts from Ministry of
Science and Technology (CRRI, CSIR, GSI etc.) to assist Border Roads
Organisation in technical matters.
(Please see Para No. 43 of Chapter I of the Report)
Recommendation (Para No. 41)
The Committee had recommended as under:—
The importance of air connectivity in the borders cannot be left
out even if we have a strong road and rail connectivity in place. It is
encouraging to learn that substantial tonnage of material is lifted
annually to advance landing grounds in Ladakh. The Committee learnt
that feasibility of a new Advanced Landing Ground (ALG) at Padam
(South West of Leh) is being examined. The Committee would like to
know whether more Advanced Landing Grounds are planned in future.
Apart from completing the feasibility study for Padam expeditiously,
the Committee recommend that construction of Advanced Landing
Grounds be done with pace so that the desired aim of air connectivity
to border to transport men and machine may be achieved. Also at
Nyoma and eight other airfields construction activity should be started
as sanctions have already being given. They would also like to have
the details of all Advanced Landing Grounds which require upgradation
along with their costs and time schedules.

67
The Ministry, in its Action Taken Reply, has stated as under:—
The proposal for Kargil ALG is being examined in the Ministry in
consultation with IAF and Army. Nyoma, in eastern Ladakh, is planned
to be developed into a full-fledged airbase. The infrastructure planned
includes an extended runway of 11300 ft., hardened aircraft shelters,
aprons and all other requirements of an operational base. ‘In Principle’
approval for development of Nyoma ALG has been accorded by RM.
Draft CCS note in this regard has been prepared. Observations of
Ministry of Finance on the draft CCS note are being addressed. The
semi-prepared ALG at Daulat Beg Oldi is suitable for limited operations
by AN-32 and C-130J. Various infrastructure projects at Leh and Thoise
are being planned in Annual Major Works Programme (AMWP) 2014-15
and AMWP 2015 -16. Padam had been identified as a probable location
for an airbase but was given a lower priority (below Kargil and Nyoma)
due to its location which would entail difficulty for wide-bodied aircraft
to land.
Brief on Eight ALGs of NE Project.Works Services in respect of
seven ALGs viz. Ziro, Passighat, Mechuka, Walong, Along, Tuting and
Tawang have been sanctioned. Work at Vijayanagar ALG has been
postponed/deferred due to lack of road connectivity to the ALG. Out
of the seven ALGs, work Services have commenced at all the ALGs
except Tawang. The current status of the eight projects is as follows:—
Name of the Sanctioned P hysical Progress PDC
Works cost
(Rs. in cr.)
Ziro 158.87 25% 03 April 15
Passighat 179.48 @ 8% 03 April 15
Mechuka 155.22 6% 03 April 15
Walong 82.40 18% 03 April 15
Along 81.95 6% 03 April 15
Tuting 129.64 6% 03 April 15
Tawang 141.46 Works not yet commenced. 130 weeks
Administrative Approval/sanction from date of
for works services at Tawang was issue of
issued on 27.08.2013. However , Revised Admn.
since the L-1 tender is higher than Approval.
the sanctioned cost. Revised
Administrative Approval at the
revised cost of Rs. 141.16 crore
is being issued.
@Construction of security wall at Passighat ALG at a cost of Rs. 9.21 crore was separately
sanctioned on 23.12.2010 in view of encroachment problems. Construction of security
wall has been completed.

CHAPTER III
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS, WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT
Recommendation (Para No. 5)
The Committee had recommended as under:—
The Committee ’s examination remains inconclusive and no
recommendation can be made in regard to the authorized and held
strength of equipments including Tanks, Aircraft Carriers etc. The
Ministry has simply informed the Committee that induction of these
assets in the inventories of the armed forces is an ongoing process and
further details regarding holding cannot be divulged in the interest of
national security. The Committee do not want to press the Ministry on
divulging the exact numbers of these equipments but at least, in the
normal course they expected that some kind of trend should be made
available to them along with the efforts being made to match the
optimum numbers. It goes without saying the role of the Committee
and the Ministry are complementary to each other. There is no
contradiction of any objective between the two. At this stage, they
would like the Ministry of amplify their information on the lines desired
above while sending the action taken notes.
The Ministry, in its Action Taken Reply, has stated as under:—
A well-structured process is in place for capability development
and modernization of the Armed Forces. As part of this process, the
Government is implementing a focused plan to build up the capability
of Armed Forces through force accretions and force modernisation.
The modernization plan is based on developing force capability in
consonance with the National Security requirement with the intent of
effectively dealing with the current, as well as emerging threats and
challenges.
2. The required force level, armaments and equipments are based
on the need for defence preparedness to meet any threats. Indian
defence forces are fully equipped to meet all contingencies and are
concurrently augmenting themselves by acquiring state-of-the-art
weapons and systems. Major acquisitions by three services during recent
past are:
Army:
1. T-90 Tanks
68

69
2. Main Battle Tank (MBT) Arjun
3. Radar Systems
4. Missiles etc.
Navy:
1. Missiles
2. Sonobuoys
3. Torpedoes
4. Surveillance Radar Systems
5. Training Equipment etc.
6. Ships
Air Force:
1. Aircrafts and associated equipment
2. Helicopters
Weather Radar System
3. All acquisitions are in line with the planned requirements and
projections of the Armed Forces.
4. Budgetary allocations are made based on the requirement
projected by Armed Forces and depending on the utilization of funds
allocated and progress of various Capital Acquisition Schemes, Additional
funds, if required, are made available either with re-adjustments within
or additional allocations made at the revised estimate (RE) stage.
5. During the years 2011-12 and 2012-13, the allocated funds have
been optimally utilized for capital acquisitions. The budget estimates
(BE), revised estimates (RE) and the actual expenditure on Capital
acquisition for modernization of Armed Forces (Army, Navy, Air Force
and Joint Staff) was as under:
(Rs. in crore)
Year Budget Revised Actual
Estimates Estimates Expenditure
2011-12 52998.02 47409.45 50723.97
2012-13 66032.24 57599.46 58768.86

70
6. The Budget allocation for capital acquisition of Armed Forces
for the financial year 2013-14 was Rs. 73,444.59 crore.
Recommendation (Para No. 14)
The Committee had recommended as under:—
Also, the Committee recommend that the ballistic missile defence
system which is being developed by DRDO should not hang up in
bottlenecks and the set deadlines be met. The radar coverage at all
levels on a pan India basis be built up within the set time-frame and
induction should proceed as planned in the Long Term Integrated
Perspective Plan. The Committee would in no way appreciate any
delays on one ground or the other as had happened in many DRDO
product deliveries in the past, to quote one specific instance of Kaveri
Engine.
The Ministry, in its Action Taken Reply, has stated as under:—
The Ballistic Missile Defence (BMD) system and the radar coverage
at all levels on a pan India basis developed and built up, respectively
by Defence Research and Development Organisation (DRDO) are classified
and security sensitive in nature.
(SA to RM will brief the Chairman Parliamentary Standing Committee
on Defence in person as this project falls under the strategic category.)
Recommendation (Para No. 27)
The Committee had recommended as under:—
The Committee also find that five Central Armed Police Forces  viz.
CRPF , BSF , CISF , ITBP and SSB are under administrative as well as
operational jurisdiction of Ministry of Home Affairs whereas, Assam
Rifles is under the operational jurisdiction of Ministry of Defence. In
executing the counter insurgency and counter terrorism operations in
Jammu and Kashmir and North-East a Unified Headquarter mechanism
exists in J&K as well as North-East. The operations are presently
conducted by Army and also the Headquarter level fortnightly meetings
are organised between ITBP and Intelligence Bureau. The Committee
feel that such a multiplicity in coordination and planning and that too
with several forces is a feature to be relooked into. At the core level
Army is playing a very crucial role in guarding the Line of Control in
the two difficult borders. The Committee also do not understand why
most of these forces are under the administrative and operational

71
jurisdiction of Ministry of Home Affairs whereas Assam Rifles is operating
under Ministry of Defence. Working with so many agencies for the
same goal is bound to create confusion. The Committee therefore
recommend that one single uniform command be established for
effective and easy coordination between Army and all the Central
Armed Police Forces. As recommended in the earlier part of this report,
the Committee would also like that Army should be absolved of border
management responsibilities in a planned manner and the various
Central Armed Police Forces should be trained to take over this difficult
task.
The Ministry, in its Action Taken Reply, has stated as under:—
As observed by the Committee, in J&K, Army is deployed on LoC
(along Indo-Pakistan) for guarding the LoC and also for CI/Ops duties
in the State. Similarly, in the North-East, Army is also deployed for CI/
Ops duties and guarding the LAC (along Indo-China border in Sikkim &
Arunachal Pradesh) along with the CAPFs. Due to multiplicity of forces
in J&K and in some parts of the North-East, the unified headquarter
mechanism has been established in these areas where forces are
deployed in CI (Ops)/IS duties, to take care of the special needs of the
area through better coordination among various agencies. However , in
other areas of the international border of the country a single CAPF ,
under ‘One Border One Force ’ Policy, has been deployed for guarding
the international border under the administrative and operational
control of the Ministry of Home Affairs. The existing arrangement is
working well and therefore, there does not appear to be any
requirement of introduction of uniform command as proposed by the
Committee. Further, MHA proposal to transfer the India-Myanmar BG
responsibility to BSF has been endorsed by DGMO. Seeing the dynamics
and its requirements, BG issues are handled in an objective manner so
that security apparatus along LAC functions to its optimum potential.
Recommendation (Para No. 28)
The Committee had recommended as under:—
The Committee also find that there is very limited interdependency
between the Army and the Central Armed Police Forces. Expressly,
there is no interdependency for equipment, ammunition, infrastructure
etc. and for training as well. Although at the field level, it is stated,
that zonal Inspector General of Police and their counterpart of CAPFs
have perfect coordination mechanism in place for conducting joint
Anti-terrorist operations, the Committee have not been intimated the
mechanism in place with the Army. The situation becomes all the more

72
difficult when the Committee learnt that the State Governments are
primarily responsible for countering internal disturbances, terrorists
and naxalites activities and as such the CAPFs work in close coordination
with the State Governments. Even for the border guarding duties CAPFs
have to work in close coordination with local police forces in tackling
different illegal activities such as drugs, smuggling etc.
Once again the Committee find that more and more agencies are
clubbed in for the same function i.e., guarding the borders taking
commands from the State Government officials, their own commandants,
other senior officers may become difficult for the forces at the ground
level. The Committee strongly reiterate the recommendation that there
should be uniformity of command and enhanced interdependency
between all the CAPFs. They should be trained on the lines of the
Army in order to enable them to enhance their operational capabilities.
The Committee would like a detailed note to be sent with Action
Taken Notes on the interdependency on real operational front between
the Army, CAPFs and State Government officials and then the Committee
would like to revisit this issue. Such a note should inter-alia contain
the targeted and actual numbers of Army vis-à-vis CAPFs deployed on
the borders, the communication methodology, intelligence set up of
each of the Central Armed Police Force and the information sharing
between all the agencies.
The Ministry, in its Action Taken Reply, has stated as under:—
The observations of the Committee regarding limited
interdependency between the Army and the Central Armed Police Forces
and also that CAPFs work in close coordination with the
State Governments, has been noted. The Army in J&K carries out
Counter Terrorist (CT) training for various CAPFs in CT schools as well
as in formations.
Border Guarding Forces (BGFs) have been assigned specific border
and their responsibility to protect the border in the peace time under
the administrative and operational control of MHA is unambiguous and
total. However, on active border and during war time, the operational
controls of BGFs shift to the Army. Accordingly, chain of command is
clearly defined.
The training of BGF is on the line of the Army incorporating all the
essential elements of the Army training. The intelligence set up of
each of the BGF is well defined.
Each CAPF performs its specific duties as mandated in their Acts
which includes internal security and border guarding duties. The BSF ,
SSB and ITBP have been raised as full-fledged cohesive force with an

73
inbuilt mechanism to cater to its operational and administrative
requirement in terms of equipment, ammunition and infrastructure
etc. Their day to day operational and administrative needs are well
addressed by the Ministry of Home Affairs. Therefore, there is no
scope for inter dependency between BSF , SSB, ITBP & Army in terms
of equipment, ammunition and infrastructure. However, at ground level
there is functional and operational coordination with the concerned
agencies including Army and other CAPFs for better operational
achievements in the border areas.
Therefore, it is opined that introduction of uniform command will
not yield any benefit to the existing command structure, except for
adding one more channel of superintendence.
It is also opined that time tested functional coordination
arrangement between CAPF and Army may not be disturbed and
different forces raised for specific purpose after due consideration
should not be allowed to lose their identity and purpose. However,
during operations, there is need to ensure compatibility, inter operability
and seamless integration to harness the strengths of both Army and
CAPFs.
As desired a Note on CAPFs deployed on borders, the communication
methodology and Intelligence set up is at Annexure.
Annexure to Para No. 28
Note on CAPFs deployed on borders, the communication
methodology and Intelligence set up.
1. BSF
1. Uniformity of Command & enhanced interdependency
1.1.1 As enabled by its mandate BSF has been raised as an independent
force to look after the border management issue on its own, under the
guidance and direction of Ministry of Home Affairs, Government of India.
1.1.2 There is no inter-dependency between BSF and Army in terms of
equipment, communication, infrastructure etc. being an independent
organization under MHA. All the aspects of its day to day Operational
and Administrative needs are well addressed by the Government.
1.1.3 However , at the functional level, BSF battalions deployed on Line
of Control and Anti-Infiltration role of J&K are already under operational
control of Army.

74
1.2 Training of CAPFs on the line of Army:—
BSF troops and officers are already being imparted training on
Army line incorporating all essential elements of Army training required
to perform the mandated duty  i.e. peace time as well as war time role
of BSF .
1.3 Deployment of BSF on border: BSF is mandated to guard following
borders:
1.3.1 Indo-Pak International border:
Total length of IB — 2300.16 km.
Manned by BSF — 2289.66 km.
Manned by Army — 10.5 km.
Total Bns sanctioned — 71 (01 Bn. temporarily transferred to
Indo-BD border)
Total Bn deployed — 70
On LC — 14
On IB — 50
On AI — 06
1.3.2 Indo-Bangladesh International Border:—
Total length of IB — 4096.70 km. (The whole IB is manned
by BSF)
Total Bns sanctioned — 82 (05 Bns being raised by the end of
FY-2015-16)
Total Bns deployed — 77
1.3.3 Hot war allocation of BSF Bns under the Army is as under:—
Northern command — 22 Bns
Western Command — 20 Bns
South Western Command — 08 Bns
Southern command — 19 Bns
Eastern Command — 69 Bns
Army Hq. Res. — 10 Bns

75
1.4 Communication methodology: BSF having STARS V 5/25 Watt Radio
sets which are interoperable with Army BSF having VHF/UHF 5/25 watt
and HF 15/100 watt radio sets which can be programmed with the
frequency of others CAPF for communication.
2. ITBP
2.1 Deployment of ITBP on Border: ITBP along with Army is guarding
3488 Kms. of India-China border from Karakoram Pass in Ladakh to
Jechap La in Arunachal Pradesh by manning Border Out Posts (BOPs)
in the State of J&K, Himachal Pradesh, Uttarakhand, Sikkim and
Arunachal Pradesh. 28 Bns. have been deployed in these states along
the Indo-China border to manage the border.
2.2 Communication Methodology: ITBP is using HF/VHF , POL Net, DSPT
sets and Field telephone for communications with Higher HQrs. and
other sister organization. Regular meetings on monthly and quarterly
basis also in co-located locations of ITBP , Army and other CAPFs for
coordination and sharing information with each other.
2.3 Intelligence Set up: Intelligence set up of ITBP has dedicated
intelligence persons posted from Force HQ to Coy level. These persons
are collecting and sharing intelligence inputs from field at appropriate
levels like LIA, SMAC and MAC. Information is also shared with nearby
sister organization and LIA meetings are held on regular basis with
them. ITBP is Lead Intelligence Agency in Western and Middle Sectors
and is part of MAC at Delhi and SMACs in 20 different locations across
the country.
3. SSB
3.1 Deployment of SSB on border:—
SSB has been deployed along the 1751 Kms. long Indo-Nepal border
in the States of Uttarakhand, UP , Bihar, West Bengal and Sikkim and
699 Kms. long Indo-Bhutan border in the States of Sikkim, West Bengal,
Assam and Arunachal Pradesh. SSB has so far established 616 BOPs (446
on Indo-Nepal border, and 150 on Indo-Bhutan border) for carrying out
its mandated border guarding duties. 41 Bns. of SSB have been deployed
along Indo-Bhutan and Indo-Nepal border to guard these borders.
3.2 Communication Methodology:—
The interface mechanism between the State Government and SSB
is quite organized and well spelt out to the field formations of SSB at

76
all levels. At the ground level i.e. BOP/Coy commanders carry out
regular coordination meeting with the local authorities of the State
Government like BDOs, SDOs, SHOs and DSPs in their respective Distts.
Commandants and DIGs of SSB have regular meeting with the SPs/DMs/
Divisional Commissioners of the State Government This is in addition
to the established mechanism/system of regular meetings with State
Government Police officials during Lead Intelligence Agency (LIA)
meetings, Border Districts Co-ordination Committee (BDCC) meetings,
monthly coordination meetings etc.
3.3 Intelligence Set up:—
(i) The intelligence set up of the Force is being controlled by Ops
and Int. Directorate at Force HQ. which is headed by IG (Ops & Int.).
There are 25 area offices manned by non-combatised staff of the
Force which are solely engaged for intelligence collection work besides
Perception Management. The intelligence inputs (both strategic &
tactical) forwarded by these field units to FHQ are analyzed and
disseminated to the concerned users.
(ii) SSB being Lead Intelligence Agency for Indo-Nepal and
Indo-Bhutan border share intelligence with the sister agencies of
respective borders as well as the agencies across the border in the
following platforms:
(a) Quarterly Ftr. level LIA meetings.
(b) Monthly Sector level LIA meetings.
(c) Monthly Commandant level informal coordination meetings
with the Nepali counterparts (on INB).
(d) District level quarterly meetings with Nepali authorities (CDOs)
(on INB).
(e) Border Districts Co-ordination Meetings (BDCMs) (on IBB).
(f) Quarterly Commandant level co-ordination and intelligence
sharing meetings with Bhutanese counterparts (on IBB).
4. Assam Rifles
4.1 Deployment of Assam Rifles on border:—
Assam Rifles is mandated to guard the 1631 Km. long Indo-Myanmar
Border. Keeping in view the peculiarity of the Border and the Counter
Insurgency/Counter Terrorism/Internal Security situation in the North-
East, all the Assam Rifles units and formations operate under the

77
operational control of the Army. 15 Battalions of Assam Rifles with
77 Company Operating Bases (COBs) are deployed along the 1631 Km.
long Indo-Myanmar Border. Other than the Assam Rifles, no other CAPF/
Army is deployed on this Border. The State-wise deployment of these
15 Border Guarding Battalions is as under:—
(a) Manipur : 07
(b) Nagaland : 03
(c) Arunachal Pradesh : 02
(d) Mizoram : 03
4.2 Communication Methodology:—
(a) Since, all the Assam Rifles Formations/Units are under
operational control of the Indian Army, the chain of
communication is as under:—
Army ➞ Inspector General Headquarters (IG HQ) ➞ Sector
HQ (Sect. HQ) ➞ Battalion HQ (Bn. HQ) ➞ COBs/Border
Operating Post (BOPs).
(b) The communication from Army to IG HQ is on a secured Army
Net which is being provided and maintained by the Army.
(c) The communication from IG HQ to Sector HQ and Sector HQ
to Bn. HQ is presently on Optical Fibre Cable (OFC) and from
Bn. HQ to COBs/BOPs is on High Frequency (HF) and Very
High Frequency (VHF) Radio communication. In addition,
satellite terminals are deployed at tactically important
locations, which presently are 82 in numbers (including 41
Polnet and 41 VSAT terminals).
(d) Currently, projects to have four layered secured
communication down the COB/BOP are in progress,
consequent to which the communication will be based on
OFC, Broadband, Radio & VSAT terminals right from IG HQ
upto COBs/BOPs.
4.3 Intelligence Set up:—
4.3.1 Assam Rifles Field Intelligence Unit (ARFIU) : The ARFIU Unit was
raised on 01.03.2010 with the sanction of MHA to provide Intelligence
support to Assam Rifles Formations/Units deployed in counter insurgency
and Border Guarding (BG) role in their respective areas of responsibility.
Accordingly, the ARFIU has been organized in Detachments and teams

78
which are suitably deployed to establish effective Intelligence grid
which is dynamic based on the operation and intelligence reports. The
existing State-wise deployment of ARFIU Detachments/Teams along
the Indo-Myanmar Border is as under:—
(i) Manipur : One Detachment and Six Teams.
(ii) Nagaland : One Detachment and five Teams.
(iii) Arunachal Pradesh : Three Teams.
(iv) Mizoram : T wo Teams.
4.3.2 In addition each Assam Rifles unit has its own Battalion Intelligence
Team which augments the intelligence requirements of the Field units.
4.4 Information Sharing : Inputs at ground level are shared by way of
liaison, coordination and periodic meetings amongst the intelligence
agencies. These inputs are shared during following meetings:—
(i) MAC meetings.
(ii) SMAC meetings.
(iii) Focus group meetings.
(iv) LIA meetings.
5. All the communication between the State Government and border
guarding forces normally takes place through MHA Government of India,
being controlling authority of all CAPFs and the decisions taken upon
are communicated to the field office for implementation. However , at
times, the local authorities of State Government interact with the
Comdt. and field officers to address any immediate/emergent matter.
In case of requirement and requisition from the State Government,
CAPF coys are being deployed for law and order duty to assist the local
Police and their work have been appreciated by the State Governments.
Recommendation (Para No. 39)
The Committee had recommended as under:—
What can be more disturbing to the Committee than the fact that
our nation is lagging behind in all areas of connectivity whether it be
road, rail or air as far as our borders are concerned. The picture of
South-Asia is not very conducive for India. In regard to rail connectivity
also our success is negligible. Notwithstanding the fact that 14 lines
have been earmarked and also prioritized, the actual achievement is nil.

79
The Ministry of Railways have categorically stated that they would not
be able to proceed with these 14 lines unless it is fully funded either
by the Ministry of Defence or Ministry of Finance. Railways has also
stated that these lines are highly unremunerative and they would be
incurring operational losses on these lines. The Committee have been
given to understand that the issue of provisioning of funds for
construction of these Railway lines have been active consideration of
the Government and Empowered Committee on Border Infrastructure
(ECBI) headed by Cabinet Secretary. They also learnt that a
recommendation has been made by the ECBI to hold a separate meeting
to resolve the issue of funding between Finance Secretary, Secretary
(Planning Commission), Chairman, Railway Board and Deputy National
Security Advisor.
The Committee are baffled to learn that an issue so serious as
providing border connectivity through rail in the North-East Region and
other strategic places is taking rounds on the bureaucratic tables. The
Committee in no uncertain words state that Ministry of Finance, Ministry
of Defence and Railway Board have erred in this decision making which
is causing delays specially when 14 lines have been earmarked. They
are perhaps oblivious of the developments taking place across the
borders which is not even a match with India to compare. The
Committee emphatically recommend that the issue of funding be
resolved forthwith and if needed should be shared by all the three
Ministries but it should be materialized. The Committee would not like
to be informed of shifting of responsibilities on flimsy grounds as to
who shall be spending the money but of the final via media that from
where the moneys have been finally earmarked. Any delay in this
regard would be viewed very seriously by the Committee.
The Ministry, in its Action Taken Reply, has stated as under:—
Reply of Para No. 39 has already been sent directly to Standing
Committee on Defence by the concerned D(Mov) Wing of Ministry of
Defence vide their O.M. 7 (3)2014-D(Mov) dated 19.5.2014 because the
matter regarding Strategic Railway Lines Project is classified as ‘Secret’.

CHAPTER IV
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF
THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE
AND WHICH REQUIRE REITERATION
Recommendation (Para No. 11)
The Committee had recommended as under:—
Like-wise, the Committee recommend that the Light Combat Aircraft
(LCA) be inducted in the Forces as per the given dates besides
maintaining and the flight operation clearance expeditiously. The
Committee also recommend in unequivocal terms that Research and
Development activities should be given a fillip by the Defence production
side/Defence Research and Development Organisation so that
dependence on foreign sources be minimized and complete self-reliance
is achieved within a well defined period. If required, more areas be
opened to private Vendor base within India as is the case in the
leading aircraft manufacturing countries of the world.
The Ministry, in its Action Taken Reply, has stated as under:—
Initial Operation Clearance (IOC) of Light Combat Aircraft (LCA)
was issued in December, 2013 and M/s Hindustan Aeronautical Ltd.
(HAL) has commenced the production of aircraft against the first
contract. The deliveries of these aircraft are scheduled to commence
from 2014-15 and conclude by 2016-17. Aeronautical Development
Agency (ADA) is the Project Management Agency for the design and
development activities. Final Operational Clearance (FOC) is under
progress jointly by ADA and HAL. The deliveries against the second
contract (FOC standard) is scheduled to commence from 2016-17 and
conclude by 2018-19.
2. HAL has identified Research and Development (R&D) as one of
the thrust areas to be focused in order to achieve self reliance. HAL
has been encouraging private sectors both in development and
manufacturing programmes. In case of development programmes,
private industries have been involved in development of systems,
equipment and software modules etc. In addition, the following actions
have been initiated in R&D.
• Design and Development activities of Medium Transport
Aircraft and Fifth Generation Fighter Aircraft have been taken
up with international partners.
80

81
• Design of a medium thrust class (25 kN) turbofan engine for
fixed wing aircraft (trainers, small business jets, etc.) has
been taken up. A gas turbine engine of 1200 kW shaft power
for helicopters is also under consideration.
• MoUs have been signed with premier institutions/organisation
for design and development activities.
• The Board of Directors of HAL has decided to create an R&D
corpus and to spend 10% of operational Profit after tax on
R&D and development of indigenous vendors.
(Please see Para No. 13 of Chapter I of the Report)
Recommendation (Para No. 22)
The Committee had recommended as under:—
The Committee are aware of many agencies functioning in coastal
and ocean region falling under jurisdiction of the country. These include
Indian Navy, Coast Guard Organisation, Ministry of Shipping, Customs
Department, Marine Police, Ministry of Environment and Forests,
Intelligence Agencies, offshore exploration departments etc. What the
Committee would like that coordination between all the maritime
agencies should be very effective. The Committee, as such, recommends
that a Maritime Commission or any other such agency should be
established so that the objectives could be met. The role of Intelligence
Agencies is of vital importance and hence the Committee desire that
intelligence sharing should be strengthened and be made state-of-the-
art in terms of infrastructure as well as equipment.
The Ministry, in its Action Taken Reply, has stated as under:—
The issue of creation of Maritime Security Adviser/Apex Maritime
Security Advisory Board (MSAB) was considered by the Cabinet
Committee on Security in Feb., 2009 while considering the issue of
coastal security post 26/11 and not found desirable. Presently, the
task of coordination/monitoring of Coastal Security (CS) issues is being
dealt with by the National Committee for Strengthening Maritime and
Coastal Security (NCSMCS) under the chairmanship of the Cabinet
Secretary which meets at least twice a year. Issues and aspects related
to CS are also reviewed periodically by the Hon ’ble Raksha Mantri.
(Please see Para No. 28 of Chapter I of the Report)

82
Recommendation (Para No. 29)
The Committee had recommended as under:—
It is disquieting for the Committee to note that no direct response
has been given by the Ministry in regard to pin-pointed query of the
Committee as to what difficulties were faced by India due to poor
network of road, rail, airports/helipads. To this specific query, the
Ministry has given a rhetorical reply that despite the lack of adequate
infrastructure along the Northern borders, the Army has been effective
in monitoring Peoples Liberation Army ’s activities along the Line of
Actual Control. The Committee do not agree with the contention of
the Ministry in this regard and they have every reason to believe that
our development in regard to road, rail and airport is slumber and
behind schedules in all the respects. The Committee repudiate the
claims of the Ministry that our infrastructure development is being
implemented in consonance with our threat perception. The detailed
analysis in this regard are contained in the successive paragraphs.
The Ministry, in its Action Taken Reply, has stated as under:—
This para is only observatory in nature.
(Please see Para No. 34 of Chapter I of the Report)
Recommendation (Para No. 34)
The Committee had recommended as under:—
The Indo-Pakistan Border in the opinion of the Committee is also
very sensitive. The Committee in this regard would like to recommend
that construction of 610 kms. in Punjab and 1207.42 kms. in Rajasthan
of lateral axial road in this border area be given final approval in the
shortest possible time which is stated to be pending under consideration
of the Ministry. They also recommend that all four road projects viz.
Chetak, Sampark, Beacon and Vijayak be completed hundred per cent
under intimation to the Committee. Also the composite scheme which
is an appreciable scheme comprising of fencing flood lighting,
construction of roads, connecting border out posts along Indo-Pak border
be completed within a fixed target as its accomplishment has
inordinately been delayed in various accounts. The Ministry should
mull out a specific proposal on this scheme as it was approved by
Cabinet Committee on Security as early as January 2000 with the
initially proposed completion in five years. The period of delay of
almost nine years is serious delay and Committee would like to know
why the cost and time overruns have taken place.

83
The Ministry, in its Action Taken Reply, has stated as under:—
1. Construction of 610 Km. road in Punjab and 1207.42 Km.
road in Rajasthan pertains to MHA.
2. As regards roads in Project Chetak, Sampark, Beacon and
Vijayak are concerned it is stated that a long term roll on
works plan for BRO has been drawn up in keeping with the
priorities of Army and works are accordingly been planned
for expeditious completion.
3. No works for fencing flood lighting is entrusted to BRO.
(Please see Para No. 37 of Chapter I of the Report)
Recommendation (Para No. 35)
The Committee had recommended as under:—
In the Indo-Bangladesh Border, out of three phases, the Committee
find neither Phase-I nor Phase-II could be completed. Since approval
of Cabinet Committee on Security for completion of these projects by
31.03.2014 has been accorded, the Committee hope and recommend
that these are completed by this new date and any lapse be intimated
to the Committee.
The Ministry, in its Action Taken Reply, has stated as under:—
1. As regards IBB fencing, it is stated that because of huge
strategic work load it was decided that BRO would focus on
core strategic functions. Accordingly no works in Phase-II
were taken up by BRO for MHA.
2. The status of Indo–Bangladesh fencing entrusted to BRO is
given as under:
Item Total Completed Balance          Remarks
scope (km.) (km.)
(km.)
IBB Fence 104 96 8 Balance not feasible due
to alignment close to 150
yards of IB.
IBB Roads 567 498 69 Balance not taken up due
to insurgency, and no
security cover.
3. Ministry is in constant liaison with MHA for release of funds.
(Please see Para No. 40 of Chapter I of the Report)

CHAPTER V
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH
GOVERNMENT HAVE FURNISHED INTERIM REPLIES
-Nil-
   N EW D ELHI; MAJ GEN B C KHANDURI, AVSM (RETD),
10 August, 2015 Chairperson,
19 Shravana, 1937 (Saka) Standing Committee on Defence.
84

APPENDIX I
MINUTES OF THE NINETEENTH SITTING OF THE STANDING
COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE (2014-15)
The Committee sat on Monday, the 10th August, 2015 from
1000 hrs. to 1045 hrs. in Room No. ‘62’, Parliament House, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Maj Gen B C Khanduri AVSM (Retd)— Chairperson
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Suresh C Angadi
3. Shri Dharambir
4. Shri Thupstan Chhewang
5. Col Sonaram Choudhary (Retd)
6. Smt Pratyusha Rajeshwari Singh
7. Shri G Hari
8. Km Shobha Karandlaje
9. Shri Tapas Paul
10. Shri Malla Reddy
11. Smt Mala Rajya Laxmi Shah
12. Shri A P Jithender Reddy
Rajya Sabha
13. Shri K R Arjunan
14. Shri Rajeev Chandrasekhar
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Smt Kalpana Sharma — Joint Secretary
2. Shri D S Malha — Director
3. Shri A K Srivastava — Additional Director
4. Shri Rahul Singh — Under Secretary
85

86
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the members to the
sitting of the Committee and briefed about the reports.
3. The Committee then took up for consideration and adoption of
the draft Report on ‘Action Taken by the Government on the
recommendations/observations contained in the T wenty-second Report
(15th Lok Sabha) on Threat Perception and preparedness of the Forces
including incursion on borders, coordination mechanism with the Central
Armed Police Forces and Border connectivity through Road, Air and
Rail’.
4. Thereafter, the Committee took up for consideration and adoption
of the draft Report on ‘Action taken by the Government on the
recommendations/observations contained in the Third Report of the
Standing Committee on Defence (16th Lok Sabha) on Demands for
Grants of the Ministry of Defence for the year 2014-15 on Army (Demand
No. 22) ’.
5. The Committee, then, adopted the above Reports and authorized
the Chairperson to finalize the Reports in the light of the suggestions
received from the Members.
The Committee then adjourned.

APPENDIX II
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS CONTAINED IN THE TWENTY SECOND
REPORT OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE (15TH LOK SABHA)
ON ‘THREAT PERCEPTION AND PREPAREDNESS OF THE FORCES INCLUDING
INCURSION ON BORDERS, COORDINATION MECHANISM WITH THE CENTRAL
ARMED POLICE FORCES AND BORDER CONNECTIVITY THROUGH ROAD,
AIR AND RAIL ’
(i) Total number of recommendations: 41
(ii) Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted by
the Government (please see Chapter-II):
Para Nos. 1, 2, 3, 4, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 12, 13, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19,
20, 21, 23, 24, 25, 26, 30, 31, 32, 33, 36, 37, 38, 40, 41
Total : 31
Percentage : 76%
(iii) R ecommendations/Observations which the Committee do not
desire to pursue in view of the replies received from the
Government (please see Chapter-III):
Para Nos. 5, 14, 27, 28, 39
Total : 5
Percentage : 12%
(iv) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of
Government have not been accepted by the Committee which
require reiteration and commented upon (please see
Chapter-IV):
Para Nos. 11, 22, 29, 34, 35
Total : 5
Percentage : 12%
(v) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which Government
have furnished interim replies (please see Chapter-V):
Para No. Nil
Total : Nil
Percentage : 0
87