1
14
STANDING COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE
(2015-2016)
(SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA)
MINISTRY OF DEFENCE
[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations contained in the 
Second Report of the Standing Committee on Defence(16th Lok Sabha)  on 'Demands for 
Grants (2014-15) of the Ministry on Defence on General Defence Budget (Demand No. 20, 
21 and 27)]
FOURTEENTH REPORT
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
February, 2016/ Phalguna, 1937 (Saka)


2
FOURTEENTH REPORT
STANDING COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE
(2015-2016)
(SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA)
MINISTRY OF DEFENCE
[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations contained in the 
Second Report of the Standing Committee on Defence(16th Lok Sabha)  on 'Demands for 
Grants (2014-15) of the Ministry on Defence on General Defence Budget (Demand No. 20, 
21 and 27)]
Presented to Hon'ble Speaker, Lok Sabha on 27.01.2016
Presented to Lok Sabha on 26.02.2016
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 26.02.2016
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
February, 2016/ Phalguna, 1937 (Saka)


3
CONTENTS
PAGE.
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE(2015-16).……………………….....…...........4-5      
INTRODUCTION..…………………………………………………….….….................. 6     
CHAPTER I Report………………………………………………………………….......7
      
CHAPTER II a) Recommendations/Observations which have been 
accepted by the Government ……………………………………...41-68
b) Recommendations/Observations which have been
accepted by the Government and commented upon....................69-82
CHAPTER III Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do not
desire to pursue in view of the replies received from the Government ..83
CHAPTER IV Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies 
of Government have not been accepted by the Committee 
which require reiteration and commented upon ………………….…...... 84-90  
CHAPTER V Recommendations/Observations in respect of which 
Government have furnished interim replies………………………........    91
APPENDICES
I     Minutes of the seventh sitting of the Standing Committee on
               Defence (2015-16) held on 08.01.2016 .………………..................92-95
II    Analysis of Action Taken by the Government on the 
      Observations/Recommendations   contained   in the Second
Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee 
on Defence (2015-16)..................................................................... 96

4
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE (2015-16)
Maj Gen B C Khanduri, AVSM (Retd) - Chairperson
Members
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Suresh C. Angadi
3. Shri Shrirang Appa Barne
4. Shri Dharambir 
5. Shri Thupstan Chhewang
6. Col Sonaram Choudhary(Retd)
7. Shri H.D. Devegowda
8. Shri Sher Singh Ghubaya
9. Shri G. Hari 
10. Shri Ramesh Jigajinagi
11. Dr. Murli Manohar Joshi
12. Km. Shobha Karandlaje
13. Shri Vinod Khanna
14. Dr. Mriganka Mahato
15. Shri Tapas Paul
16. Shri Ch. Malla Reddy
17. Shri Rajeev Satav
18. Smt. Mala Rajya Lakshmi Shah
19. Capt  Amarinder Singh(Retd)
20. Shri A.P. Jithender Reddy
21. Smt. Pratyusha Rajeshwari Singh
Rajya Sabha
1. Shri K. R. Arjunan
2. Shri Anand Sharma
3. Shri Rajeev Chandrasekhar
4. Shri A.U. Singh Deo
5. Shri Harivansh
6. Shri Vinay Katiyar
7. Shri Hishey Lachungpa
8. Shri Madhusudan Mistry
9. Smt. Ambika Soni
10. Shri Tarun Vijay

5
SECRETARIAT
1. Smt. Kalpana Sharma - Joint Secretary
2.       T.G. Chandrasekhar - Director
3. Smt. Jyochanmayi Sinha - Additional Director
4. Shri Rahul Singh - Under Secretary

6
INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairperson of the Standing Committee on Defence (2015-16), having been 
authorised by the Committee to submit the report on their behalf, present this Fourteenth 
report on Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations 
contained in the Second Report of the Standing Committee on Defence(16th Lok Sabha)  
on 'Demands for Grants (2014-15) of the Ministry on Defence on General Defence Budget 
(Demands No. 20, 21 and 27).
2.       The  Second  Report was presented  to Lok  Sabha / laid on the Table of Rajya  
Sabha on 22 December, 2014.  The  Action Taken Notes on the 
Observations/Recommendations were received from the Ministry of Defence in August 
2015.
3. The Committee considered and adopted this Report at their Sitting held on 08 
January, 2016.
4. An analysis of  action taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Second Report of the Committee is given 
in Appendix II.
5. For facility of reference and convenience, Observations/Recommendations of the 
Committee have been printed in bold letters in the Report.
New Delhi;                                                          Maj Gen  B C Khanduri, AVSM (Retd),  
8 January, 2016     Chairperson,                   
18 Pausa, 1937 (Saka)                                        Standing Committee on Defence

7
REPORT
CHAPTER – I
This report of the Standing Committee on Defence deals with Action Taken by the 
Government on observations/recommendations contained in the Second Report of 
Standing Committee on Defence (16th Lok Sabha) on 'Demands for Grants of Ministry of 
Defence for the year 2014 -15 on General Defence Budget (Demand No. 20, 21 & 27)'  
which was presented to Lok Sabha and laid in Rajya Sabha on 22 December, 2014. 
2. The Committee's Second Report (16th Lok Sabha) contained 74 observations/ 
recommendations on the following aspects:-
Para No./Nos. Subject
1 Growth of Defence Budget
2,3 Growth of Defence budget-other parameters
4,5,6 Reduced Budgetary allocation- compromises made by the Services
7,8,9 &10 Defence Preparedness
11, 12, 13, 14, 15 &16 Procurement Procedure 
17, 18, 19 & 20 Private Sector Partnership
21 & 22 Offset Clause
23,24 & 25 Self -reliance in Defence production 
26 Welfare of Servicemen 
27,28,29,30,31,32,33,34 & 
35
Construction of Border roads  and roads in difficult areas
36 & 37 Requirement of funds in maintenance and dual control of BRO
38 National War Memorial
39,40,41,42,43 & 44 Welfare of Ex-servicemen - Resettlement of Retired Officers and 
Person Below Officers Rank
45, 46 & 47 Lateral induction of Ex-servicemen in Central Para Military Forces 
and State Police Forces
48, 49 & 50 Uniform Financial assistance to World War Veterans and awardees of 
war medals
51 Veteran Commission
52 Raising of Eco-Task Force
53,54 & 55 One Rank One Pension
56, 57 & 58 Marriage Grant to daughters of ESM and their widow
59, 60 & 61 Military Engineer Services
62 & 63 Married Accommodation Project
64 & 65 Canteen Stores Department
66,67 & 68 Coast Guard Organisation
69 Defence Public Sector Undertakings (DPSUs) -
Product quality and delay 
70 Research and Development
71 Export
72, 73 & 74 Capital Budget

8
3. Action Taken Replies have been received from the Government in respect of all the 
observations/ recommendations contained in the Report.  The replies have been examined 
and the same have been categorised as follows:-
(a) Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the Government:
Para Nos. 7, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20, 24, 27, 29, 30, 32, 37, 38, 44, 
45, 46, 47, 48, 49, 50, 51, 52, 53, 54, 55, 56, 57, 58, 59, 60, 61, 62, 63, 64, 
65, 66, 67, 69, 70, 71, 72, 73 & 74
(48  Recommendations)
These may be included in Chapter II of the Draft Report.
(b) Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the Government 
and commented upon:
Para Nos.1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 9, 21, 22, 23, 25, 26, 28, 33, 36, 39, 40, 41, 42 & 43 
(20 Recommendations)
These may be included in Chapter II of the Draft Report.
(ii)  Observations/Recommendations which the  Committee do not desire to pursue in 
view of the replies received from the Government:
Para No. Nil
(00 Recommendation)
These may be included in Chapter III of the Draft Report.
(iii) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of    Government have 
not been accepted by the Committee which require reiteration and commented 
upon:
Para Nos. 8, 15, 31, 34, 35 & 68
(06 Recommendations)
         This may be included in Chapter IV of the Draft Report.
                 
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which Government have 
furnished interim replies:
Para No. Nil
( 00 Recommendation)
This may be mentioned in Chapter V of the Draft Report.

9
4. The Committee desire that the Ministry’s response to the comments made in 
Chapter 1 of this Report be furnished at the earliest, and in any case not later than 
six months of the presentation of this Report. 
A. Growth of Defence Budget
Recommendations/Observations of the Committee (Para  Nos. 1 to 6)
5. The Committee had recommended as under:-
'The Committee note that Budget Estimates (Net) for the year 2014-15 are for Rs. 
2,29,000 crore, comprises Revenue Outlay of Rs. 1,34,412.05 crore and Capital 
Outlay of Rs. 94,587.95 crore. Although Defence expenditure has been increasing 
over the years, the percentage increase in Defence expenditure since 2000-2001 
has not been consistent. The Defence expenditure in percentage terms increased by 
a healthy 26.29% in the year 2004-2005 in comparison to the preceding year.  Such 
an increase was only witnessed in the years 2008-09 and 2009-10, when the 
percentage growth was 24.59% and 24.13%, respectively. However, during the year 
2010-11, the percentage growth declined to 8.70%. In the subsequent years, 
although slight increase was seen but it never touched the level of growth achieved 
in the years 2004-05, 2008-09 and 2009-10.  During the years 2011-12 and 2012-
13, the percentage increase was 10.90% and 6.36%, respectively.  The Committee 
are satisfied to some extent to find that in the year 2013-14, the growth was 12.05% 
and this year the growth in the budget is 12.44%.  However, as stated by the 
Ministry during oral evidence, this growth in the budget is not sufficient   for the 
projects and modernization of the Services. The Committee have also noted a 
revealing fact that revenue expenditure of Army is on rise since 2009-10 when it was 
76% and touched 82% in 2013-14 leaving a little for capital expenditure.  Therefore, 
the Committee desire that at least the growth in the budget should be such that 
would ensure sufficient funds with the Services in both the heads i.e. Revenue and 
Capital.' 
6. The Ministry in its Action Taken Reply has stated as under:-
'Higher rate of growth in Defence expenditure during 2008-09 and 2009-10 is mainly 
attributable to payment of arrears pursuant to implementation of recommendations 
of the VIth Pay Commission.  The exceptionally low growth during 2010-11 is 
because no arrear payments were made in that year, and as such the year-to-year 
comparison incorrectly suggests a dip during the year.
The years of high growth cited are unusual years and cannot form a basis for 
generalisation.  Growth rates since 2011 have been generally healthier than in the 

10
pre-2007 period and every effort is made to ensure that sufficient funds are available 
to meet the most critical requirements of the Services.
Further, the higher growth in the revenue expenditure of the Army is mainly 
attributable to the fact that it is manpower intensive with a large portion of its 
expenditure being devoted to Salaries.  This skews the revenue-capital ratio in 
favour of revenue expenditure, especially when compared to the other Services.
While capital allocations usually witness a high growth from year to year, the stress 
on the non-Salary revenue budget is being highlighted to the Ministry of Finance and 
other agencies in Government.'
7. The Committee had recommended as under:-
'From the data supplied on the growth of Defence budget, the Committee note that 
although the Defence budget is increasing every year in numerical terms but in 
comparison to central budget, it has consistently been declining.  In 2009-10, with 
the Defence expenditure of Rs. 1,41,781 crore, it was just 13.84% of total Central 
Government Expenditure (CGE), while in 2010-11; the budget rose to Rs.12,336 
crore but in percentage terms it came down to 12.87%. In 2011-12, Defence
expenditure rose to Rs. 1,70,913crore but in percentage terms it was merely 13.10%
to total CGE.  Since then it is sliding continuously in percentage terms to the CGE.  
In 2012-13, Defence expenditure was pegged at Rs. 1,81,776 which was 12.89% to 
CGE but the Committee was surprised to find that at the time of revised estimates it 
came down to 12.81%.  In the current year also, it is just 12.76% of total Central 
Government Expenditure. The Committee are unhappy with the continuous fall of 
Defence expenditure in comparison to CGE. The Committee desire that this 
declining ratio should be arrested in the next financial year itself, so that the Services 
are provided adequate funds and hence they are not deprived of essential 
equipment and ammunition. Therefore, the Committee want that the Government 
should consider fixing a minimum benchmark for this percentage, which should be 
adhered to, in every case.'
8. The Ministry in its Action Taken Reply has stated as under:-
'This Ministry has been bringing these concerns to the attention of the Ministry of 
Finance.  In this regard last reference (D.O. No. 3(4)/Bud-I/2013/06/DefSecy/2015) 
was sent to Ministry of Finance on 14.01.15.  Ministry of Finance was informed 
about the Committee’s emphasis on the need for increase in Defence expenditure in 
proportion to total central government spending and fixing a minimum benchmark 
percentage in this regard.  Response from Ministry of Finance is awaited.'
9. The Committee had recommended as under:-
'The Committee are given to understand that Defence expenditure as a percentage 
share of Gross Domestic Product (GDP) in some of the developed and neighbouring 
countries is in the range of 2% to 4% and it is growing every year. On the other 
hand, our Defence expenditure as a percentage to GDP is in reverse mode and 

11
declining every year.  In 1999-2000; the Defence expenditure was 2.41% of the GDP 
and it had a continuous slide and since then this financial year, it came down to 
1.78% of the GDP. The Committee perceive it to be a grim and unacceptable 
situation which is affecting all the Services of Defence forces considerably. The 
Committee desire that the Ministry should raise the bar and gradually increase 
Defence expenditure at the level of 3% of GDP so that modernization of Armed 
Forces can become a reality and not remain a mirage.'  
10. The Ministry in its Action Taken Reply has stated as under:-
'This observation of the Committee was conveyed to the Ministry of Finance vide 
D.O. No. 3(4)/Bud-I/2013/06/Def Secy/2015 dated 14.01.15.  Response from 
Ministry of Finance is awaited.'
11. The Committee had recommended as under:-
'The Committee note that due to reduced budgetary allocation against the 
projections made by the Services and other organizations/ departments, many 
compromises have been made or are likely to be made. The Committee understand 
that  under the Revenue Segment, provision is first made for salary and other 
obligatory expenses and only after that balance available  allocation is distributed to 
meet the requirement of stores (including ordnance), transportation (of personnel 
and stores), revenue works and maintenance, etc. Under the Capital Segment, 
funds are first set aside to meet the projected Committed Liabilities likely to 
materialize during the year and only then the remaining allocation is distributed to 
meet the projected requirement for other items.  Consequently, only little amount 
remains available for making acquisitions and compromises are made.  Therefore, 
the Committee want the Ministry to review the modernization schemes/plans and 
reprioritized so that operationally essential plans are not shelved of due to 
starvation of funds.'   
12. The Ministry in its Action Taken Reply has stated as under:-
'There is a continuous monitoring of the progress of acquisition of projects and 
prioritisation of the most urgent requirements.  This helps to ensure that limited 
resources are devoted to the most critical projects.  The Committee may be 
assured that no operational requirement will be shelved for want of funds.
This observation of the Committee was conveyed to the Ministry of Finance vide 
D.O. No. 3(4)/Bud-I/2013/06/Def Secy/2015 dated 14.01.15.'

12
13. The Committee had recommended as under:-
'The Committee also note that budget for high value acquisitions like Medium Multi 
Role Combat Aircraft (MMRCA) is not available under the current allocation and for 
these additional funds will be sought. The Committee also note the Revenue to 
Capital ratio all these years is increasing in favour of Capital, which is a good sign 
because this needed for modernization of the Services. However, the Committee 
want to caution the Ministry that acquiring the large capital assets also entail high 
value maintenance, therefore, they recommend that non-salary revenue 
expenditure must be increased to ensure the maintenance of the capital assets so 
acquired.' 
14. The Ministry in its Action Taken Reply has stated as under:-
'The Ministry fully concurs with the views of the Committee on the need to enhance 
availability of funds for maintenance of capital assets and has been regularly 
sensitising the Ministry of Finance and other agencies to this imperative.
This observation of the Committee was conveyed to the Ministry of Finance vide 
D.O. No. 3(4)/Bud-I/2013/06/Def Secy/2015 dated 14.01.15.'
15. The Committee had recommended as under:-
'The Committee have consistently been noting that the phenomenon of providing 
lower allocation to the Services is becoming a trend. The Committee are unable to 
understand the reason, therefore, the Ministry should make all out efforts to 
persuade the Ministry of Finance for not making any cut in their projections because 
that will result in compromising the Defence preparedness of the country. The 
Committee want that allocation to any Defence programme should not be cut on 
account of overall economic situation of the country.'
16. The Ministry in its Action Taken Reply has stated as under:-
'The Ministry fully concurs with the views of the Committee.  It may, however, be 
noted that the Ministry of Defence is bound by the overall budgetary ceiling provided 
by the Ministry of Finance, which in turn must balance multiple requirements and 
priorities of the government against available resources.  Also Ministry of Finance is 
being regularly sensitized about the requirements of the Ministry. In this regard last 
reference (D.O. No. 3(4)/Bud-I/2013/06/Def Secy/2015) was sent to Ministry of 
Finance on 14.01.15'

13
17. In the reports on the Demands for Grants of the previous years and Action 
Taken Reports thereon, the Committee have repeatedly expressed the need for 
providing adequate allocations to the Ministry of Defence, and more particularly, for
the Modernization programme of the Services.  The Committee note in this regard, 
that in response to Recommendation No. 4 (on possible compromises made on 
account of reduced Budget allocation), the Ministry has, inter alia stated that there 
was ‘continuous monitoring of the progress of acquisition of projects and 
prioritization of the most urgent requirements’. This is for helping in ensuring that 
the resources, which are limited, are ‘devoted to the most critical projects’.  The 
Ministry has also assured the Committee that ‘no operational requirement will be 
shelved for want of funds’.
Contrary to these submissions, the Committee had, while examining the 
Demands for Grants (2014-15) inter alia observed that the Budget for high value 
acquisitions such as Medium Multi Role Combat Aircraft (MMRCA) was not available 
under the allocations. Further, in   reply to Recommendation No. 6 (on the growing 
trend of making lesser allocations) the Ministry has stated that it was bound by   the 
overall budgetary ceilings imposed by the Ministry of Finance, which also has to 
balance multiple requirements and priorities of the Government against available 
resources.
From the facts as narrated above , it can be averred that the Budget cuts leave 
the possibility of having adverse implications on the country’s security. The 
Committee, therefore, reiterate their earlier recommendation and desire that the 
Ministry of Defence take up the issue of providing adequate budgetary resources at 
the highest level, so that the modernization programme as well as other priorities 
are not hampered. 
Further, the Committee also feel dismayed to note that although the Ministry 
of Defence has reportedly conveyed the concern expressed by them to the Ministry 
of Finance on 14 January 2015, the response of the Ministry of Finance is still 
awaited. The Committee, in this regard desire to be apprised of the details of the 
communications made with the Ministry of Finance, secure the response of the 
Ministry, and apprise the Committee of the same. 

14
B. Defence Preparedness
Recommendations/Observations of the Committee (Para  No. 8)
18. The Committee had recommended as under:-
'During oral evidence, the Defence Secretary also apprised the Committee about the 
problems experienced by the Ministry e.g. spending the budget on the highest priority 
item, non-adherence to timelines in procurement of the Defence items, streamlining of 
issuing of Request for Proposals.  The Committee also note that Ministry of Defence is 
not always buying highest priority item for the Services.'
19. The Ministry in its action taken reply has stated as under:-
'Government is taking steps to address the issues mentioned above. However, it would 
not be appropriate to say that Ministry of Defence is not always buying highest priority 
item for the services.  It may be possible that certain higher priority items may reach the 
contract signing stage late because of the procedural delays in the procurement 
process, whereas a lower priority item which has cleared the process may have been  
contracted earlier.'
20. The Committee are not convinced with the action taken reply of the Ministry of 
Defence which is  contradictory to the statement made by the Defence Secretary while 
tendering evidence. As per the submission made, the Ministry was not always buying 
the highest priority items for the Services. The Committee understand that a few items 
which are locally produced may be procured in a shorter time span as compared to the 
items that are procured from foreign sources. Nevertheless, the Committee desire 
that all necessary equipment be secured in a fixed time frame, so that the Forces can be 
assured of  having the requisite equipment and plan their long as well as short term 
goals accordingly. The Committee desire that procedural delays in buying highest 
priority items be minimised. Action taken in this regard may be intimated to the 
Committee.

15
C. Defence Preparedness
Recommendations/Observations of the Committee (Para  No. 9)
21. The Committee had recommended as under:-
'The Committee appreciate that some of the grey areas have been identified by the 
Ministry but what action it has taken to improve the situation, has not been known to 
them.  The Committee are of the view that if the present perspective planning process 
is flawless then the Ministry can always know the number and kind of equipment 
needed after a certain period of time and it can always buy top priority equipment. This 
is not true in the instant case.  The Committee are of the view that if the 15-years long 
plan are not yielding results, then it should make planning for at least 20 or 25 years.  
Therefore, the Committee desire that a thorough review must be taken first for all the 
available Defence plans, so that long-term perception of the Ministry and Services can 
be corrected.'
22. The Ministry in its action taken reply has stated as under:-
'Improvement is an ongoing process.  Being a large organisation, the Army has a wide 
range of equipment and therefore has more number of ongoing procurement cases as 
well as proposals for future acquisitions.  
The prioritisation of equipment to be procured from LTIPP to SCAP to AAP is carried 
out based on operational requirements/ technological developments / needs of 
accretional  forces making up of existing deficiencies / replacement of obsolete 
equipments etc.  Present system of LTIPP / SCAP / AAP gives adequate opportunities 
to carry out mid-course reviews based on emerging operational scenarios, evolving 
technologies and / or financial availability.
Notwithstanding the above, delays in procurement projects do take place and these 
happen mainly due to procedural issues that are being addressed at various levels. 
Steps have been instituted in the Army to hasten the acquisition process.
A holistic review and prioritisation of all the schemes has been carried out with a view to 
remove shortages and for fast track capability building.  Twenty important schemes 
have been identified as Chief of Army Staff (COAS) priority schemes considering the 
operational capability requirements and are being progressed on priority. 
Furthermore, a Higher Forum has been constituted under the aegis of the Vice Chief of 
Army Staff which meets on monthly basis to monitor the progress of the operational 
preparedness. 
Also, an internal study to speed up the equipment trial / validation process is currently 
underway, which will further streamline the procedures and cut down avoidable delays.

16
An institutionalised mechanism in the form of a Working Group to review critical items of 
ammunitions and issues of spares, barrels, overhaul programme of infantry and 
mechanised forces has been set up.  A system of long term five year Roll-on-indents on 
OFB is a curative measure to buy top priority items/equipment through indigenous 
sources.  Ammunition Road Map has also been approved which envisages 
procurement to build up adequate targeted stocks with three years training 
requirement.'
23. The Committee note that the Ministry has taken several steps to review and 
prioritize certain schemes with a view to overcoming shortages and for fast tracking
capacity building. Twenty important schemes are said to have been identified as Chief 
of Army Staff (CoAS) priority schemes on the basis of the operational capability 
requirements which are being progressed on priority. Also, a Higher Forum is said to 
have been constituted under the aegis of the Vice Chief of Army Staff which meets on 
monthly basis to monitor the progress of the operational preparedness.
The Committee also note that an institutionalized mechanism in the form of a 
Working Group to review critical items of ammunitions and issues of spares, barrels, 
overhaul program of infantry and mechanized forces has been set up. An ''Ammunition 
Road Map'' has also been approved which envisages procurement to build up adequate 
targeted stocks with three years training requirement.
The Committee desire to be apprised of the progress in regard to each of the 
twenty prioritized  schemes. The Committee desire to be informed of the details 
pertaining to the members of the Working Group along with the parameters set by the
group and achievements made in the form of identifying the shortages in procurement.
The Committee wish to be provided with details in regard to whether the Ordnance 
Factory Board has enough orders from the Forces for sustaining operations. The 
Committee also desire that delays that may have occurred owing to procedural issues 
be identified  and be informed of the steps taken for hastening the acquisition process 
at the earliest.

17
D. Procurement Procedure
Recommendations/Observations of the Committee (Para  No. 15)
24. The Committee had recommended as under:-
'The Committee also desires that pre-audit of procurements should be done by 
Comptroller and Auditor General, Central Bureau of Investigation and Central Vigilance 
Commission simultaneously in a fixed timeframe so that there would be no anxiety 
while placing the orders to vendors for procurement of equipments so that delays can 
be minimised.'
25. The Ministry in its action taken reply has stated as under:-
'The Capital procurement process can be broadly divided into three phases, i.e., 
approval stages up to AoN, technical evaluation/trials and commercial/contract 
negotiation.  The approval stages involve policy as well as technical and operational 
issues and is not appropriate for pre-audit.  The technical evaluation/trials and 
commercial negotiations are carried out as per DPP with specific responsibilities 
assigned to different authorities and any assessment by any other authority before 
conclusion and final decision may dilute and delay the process.  Thus, these stages are 
also not appropriate for pre-audit.  In this background, pre-audit of all procurements 
would not be appropriate.'
26. The Committee are not happy with the reply of the Ministry that pre-audit of 
procurement would delay the procurement process. The intention of the Committee 
while recommending  for pre-audit were not only to avoid possible anxiety while 
placing the orders on vendors so as to avoid delays but also to enable in making
the Ministry doubly sure that there would be no criticism of any kind from any quarter 
following the procurement. Therefore,  the Committee re-iterate their recommendation 
and desire that pre-audit of procurement be done so as to avoid the possibility of any 
anxiety in the Ministry of Defence while placing the orders and also minimize delays.  

18
E. Offset Policy and Self Reliance in Defence Production
Recommendations/Observations of the Committee (Para  Nos. 21, 22, 23 & 25)
27. The Committee had recommended as under:-
'The Committee note that the offset policy mandates foreign Original Equipment 
Manufacturers (OEMs) to discharge offset obligations through combination of 
permissible avenues w.r.t. eligible product and services in all procurements cases 
where cost of the capital acquisition is Rs. 300 crore or more. As on date, a total of 24 
Defence Offset contracts have been signed in the Ministry of Defence out of which 16 
cases pertain to Indian Air Force and 05 and 03 cases relate to Indian Navy, Indian 
Army respectively. The total offset obligations are estimated at approximately Rs. 28, 
770 crore over a period from 2008 to 2022. The Committee also note that the problems 
being faced by the Ministry of Defence in implementation of the offset policy. They, 
therefore, suggests improvement by way of revision of the offset provisions.'
28. The Ministry in its action taken reply has stated as under:-
'The revision of Offset guidelines is under progress to ensure smooth implementation 
of Offset obligations.  As regard to offset guidelines it is clarified that the same is part 
of DPP and available in the public domain.  It is further, informed that a ‘Facilitation 
Cell’ has been established for regular interactions with all stake holders including 
private sector.'
29. The Committee had recommended as under:-
'During the oral evidence, the Committee came to know that the potential of the 
Defence offset policy has not been fully realized.  Therefore, at many places, work 
relating to offset obligations could not start and benefits of offset policy reaped.  The 
Committee desire that guidelines regarding offset policies should be given to private 
sector also so that they may be well versed of the provisions contained in the offset 
policy.  The Committee desire that regular interactions should be held with the 
private sector to encourage investment in the Defence sector.  The Committee are 
also of the opinion that while selecting the Industry, the Ministry should look for new 
technology areas so that the country can have the benefit of the same.
The Committee note that in the year 2010-11, the value of Capital acquisition made 
from indigenous sources was Rs 35589.77 crore; in 201-12, it went down to Rs 
28152.72 crore; in 2012-13, it rose to Rs 32045.36 crore; and in 2013-14, it slipped 
again to Rs 31503.58 crore.  Capital procurement from outside sources (import) 

19
during the corresponding period was 9917.47 crore, Rs 22218.77 crore,                         
Rs 26181.42 crore and Rs 35006.35 crore respectively.
While the value of imports was enormous, the value of exports have been 
meagre at Rs 290.35 crore, Rs 512.04 crore, Rs 444.45 crore and Rs 686.21 crore 
respectively during the same period.
The Committee appreciate the initiatives taken by the Ministry but in addition to 
these initiatives, they desires that the Ministry should take steps to curtail the direct 
imports which are on incremental path. On the other hand, acquisition from 
indigenous sources show an uneven pattern, which is not good or making the self-
reliant. The committee desire that early finalization of ‘Make’ procedure should be 
given priority and implemented early, so that the country can have the benefit of 
developing new and critical technologies with the collaboration of public sector, 
private sector and research & academic institutions to make the country self-reliant 
in Defence production and should not depend on imports only.'
30. The Ministry in its action taken reply has stated as under:-
'The Make procedure is being simplified and is in the final stages of approval.  The 
revised procedure caters for development in collaboration between Public Sector, 
private sector and research & academic institutions.
In addition, in order to curtail direct imports and to move towards self-reliance the 
Ministry has taken a series of measures towards creating level playing field for the 
Indian Private sector, so as to enable them to make investment in the Defence sector.
(a) Technology Perspective and Capability Roadmap (TPCR),which gives out the 
details of the equipment and technologies required by our Armed Forces, has 
been put in public domain to  provide the industry an overview of the direction in 
which the Armed Forces intend to head in terms of capability in future.
(b) Preference to ‘Buy (Indian)’, Buy & Make (Indian)’ & ‘Make” categories of 
Acquisition over ‘Buy (Global)’ or ‘Buy & Make’ categories thereby giving 
preference to Indian industry in procurement.
(c) The procedure for ‘Buy and Make (Indian)’ category, has been simplified in order 
to make the category more attractive for Indian Defence industry.
(d) A clear definition of indigenous content has been provided which would not only 
bring more clarity on the indigenous content required for different categorization, 
but also enhance the indigenization of Defence products in India. 
(e) Raksha Mantri Production Committee (RMPC) has been re-constituted for 
monitoring and review of indigenisation and interaction with various stakeholders 
like DDP, DRDO, Armed forces and DPSUs / OFB.
(f) The Make procedure is being simplified and is in the final stages of approval.  
The revised procedure caters for development in collaboration between Public 
Sector, private sector and research & academic institutions.

20
(g) FDI Policy has been reviewed in Defence sector and as per the new policy, 
composite foreign investment up to 49% has been allowed through FIPB route 
and beyond 49 % with the approval of Cabinet committee on security (CCS).
(h) Defence products list for the purpose of industrial licensing has been revised and 
in the revised list most of the components/parts/raw materials have been taken 
out from the purview of industrial licensing.'
31. The Committee note that the process of revising the Offset guidelines is 
underway with a view to enabling  smooth implementation of the " Offset obligations"
and a ‘Facilitation Cell’ has been established for regular interactions with all stake 
holders including the private sector. The Committee desire that the policy regarding 
Offsets be finalised at the earliest. It also needs to be ensured that the Facilitation Cell 
is composed of experienced persons who are well versed with the various obligations 
of Offset Policy so as to properly guide the stakeholders of the  various provisions of 
the Policy.  The Committee may be apprised of the steps so taken in this direction at the 
earliest.
The Committee also note that the simplified ''Make procedure' is likely to be 
finalised soon. The revised procedure is aimed towards development and collaboration 
between public sector, private sector and research and academic institutions. In 
addition, in order to curtail direct imports and to move towards self-reliance, the 
Ministry has taken a series of measures towards creating level playing field for the 
Indian private sector so as to enable them to make investment in the Defence sector i.e. 
placing Technology Perspective and Capability Roadmap (TPCR) which gives out the 
details of the equipment and Technology required by our Armed Forces in public 
domain; preference to 'Buy (Indian)',  'Buy & Make (Indian)' and 'Make' categories of 
Acquisition over 'Buy (Global) or 'Buy & Make' categories thereby giving preference to 
Indian industry in procurement etc.,.
The Committee further note that the Raksha Mantri Production Committee 
(RMPC) have been reconstituted for monitoring and reviewing the indigenisation 
programme and interacting with various stakeholders like DDP, DRDO, Armed 
Forces and DPSUs/OFB. The Foreign Direct Investment  (FDI) policy pertaining to the
Defence sector has been reviewed to provide for allowing composite foreign 
investment up to 49%  through Foreign Investment Promotion Board (FIPB) route and 

21
FDI in excess of 49% with the approval of Cabinet Committee on Security (CCS).This is 
besides the other measures taken by the Ministry. 
The Committee desire to be apprised of details of the recently approved 'Make' 
Procedure as well as the impact of other initiatives taken by the Ministry . The 
Committee also desire to be kept apprised of the initiatives taken and progress  made 
by the Raksha Mantri Production Committee as well as the impact of raising the FDI 
limit in the Defence sector. 
F. Welfare of Servicemen
Recommendations/Observations of the Committee (Para  No. 26)
32. The Committee had recommended as under:-
'The Committee understand that personnel of Armed Forces have very limited leave 
and most of the time they are away from their homes guarding the Nation. But they 
have to face many problems at their homes during their absence. Generally, trivial 
matters pertaining to district administration also take unnecessary long time and some 
time they have to waste all their leave on just meeting officials in district administration. 
Therefore, the Committee recommend that strict instructions should be passed on to 
the District Magistrate/ Collectors to give utmost priority to the works of personnel/ their 
family members belonging to the Services (Army, Navy and Air Force), a dedicated 
district nodal officer should always be in place to cater to their difficulties. The nodal 
officer should be given all requisite administrative or legal powers to implement his 
decisions. The Chief Secretary should invariably submit quarterly report on the issues 
pertaining to their matters.'
33. The Ministry in its action taken reply has stated as under:-
'Armed Forces personnel serve in far flung areas and inhospitable terrain in Defence of 
the borders of the Country and in counter-insurgency operations where they are 
subjected to considerable physical and mental stress. Therefore, it has been endeavour 
of the Government to make all efforts to boost the morale of Defence personnel and 
redress the genuine problems of Armed Forces personnel for their hassle free duty.
2. The Government has already taken steps for setting up an institutional 
mechanism for redressal of grievances of service personnel and their families through 
District Collectors, Superintendents of Police and other officials at District and State 
level. In response to letters issued earlier to Chief Ministers of State Government/UTs, 
State Government of Maharashtra, Uttarakhand, Karnataka, Gujarat, Tripura, 
Meghalaya, Nagaland, UP, Punjab, Haryana, J&K, Assam, Chhattisgarh, Sikkim, 

22
Rajasthan, Kerala, Bihar, Madhya Pradesh, West Bengal and UTs of Andaman & 
Nicobar Islands, Delhi and Chandigarh have already constituted such mechanism at the 
State and District levels or already initiated action for setting up of a formal grievance 
redressal mechanism.
3. Raksha Mantri has written letters to the Chief Ministers of all States and Chief 
Administrators of all Union Territories of the Country on 12.2.2015 for according top 
priority in strengthening the mechanism for addressing grievances of Armed Forces 
personnel in a time bound manner so that they feel secure about the problems being 
faced at their homes.'
34. The Committee are happy to note that the Government has already taken steps 
for setting up an institutional mechanism for redressing the grievances of Service 
personnel and their families through District Collectors, Superintendents of Police and 
other officials at District and State level. In response to letters issued in this regard, the 
State Governments of Maharashtra, Uttarakhand, Karnataka, Gujarat, Meghalaya, 
Nagaland, Uttar Pradesh, Punjab, Haryana, Jammu & Kashmir, Assam, Chhattisgarh, 
Sikkim, Rajasthan, Kerala, Bihar, Madhya Pradesh, West Bengal and Delhi and the 
Union Territory Administrations of Andaman and Nicobar Islands and Chandigarh are 
said to have either instituted such a mechanism at the State and district level or have 
initiated action for setting up of formal grievance redressal mechanism.
The Committee desire that regular online/offline feedbacks from Service 
personnel should also be taken to know whether the initiatives taken by the Ministry of 
Defence have had the desired effect in resolving their grievances; and also to assess 
the working of the institutional mechanism as has been proposed.  
G. Construction of Border and other roads  in difficult areas- Roads under BRDB         
and LTROWP
Recommendations/Observations of the Committee (Para  No. 28)
35. The Committee had recommended as under:-
The Committee desire that in order to make BRO more focused, the roads which are of 
strategic importance from rail head to forward areas in existence or planned to be 
maintained and constructed by the BRO in Uttarakhand, J&K and North East should be 
prioritized and MoRTH should make alternative arrangements for remaining roads.  The 
Committee are of the view that besides focusing on Northern border, BRO should also 
concentrate on Eastern border

23
36. The Ministry in its action taken reply has stated as under:-
'BRO is concentrating on both the Northern and North-Eastern borders simultaneously 
and special effort is being given for completion of Indo-China Border Roads (ICBRs). In 
order to streamline the procedure the following steps have been taken:
(a) BORDER ROADS DEVELOPMENT BOARD (BRDB) PROGRAMME: In 
addition to constructing /developing/improving roads, BRO maintains a road 
network of 20642 km in border areas to ensure smooth movement of troops. 
Further roads constructed/ completed by BRO are required to be maintained 
continuously so that these are in traffic worthy condition. In order to stream line 
the need for maintenance of these roads, it has been decided that once a road is 
included in BRDB programme, no separate sanction would be required for 
carrying out maintenance. A list of 760 roads has been prepared as BRDB 
Programme to enable BRO to focus on identified roads and develop/maintain 
them in a planned manner.
(b) LONG TERM ROLL ON WORKS PLAN (LTROWP): BRO has been assigned 
the task of construction /maintenance of roads of strategic importance. Over a 
period of time the work load of BRO has increased considerably compared to its 
capability. Army has also finalized two list of roads under its Long term 
perspective Plan–I and II for expeditious development. Besides BRO has been 
entrusted works of Indo Tibet Border police (ITBP) roads by Ministry of Home 
Affairs (MHA), Special Accelerated Road Development Programme (SARDP) 
and Arunachal Pradesh package works by Ministry of Road Transport and 
Highways. Thus there was a need to draw a Long Term Plan for BRO in order to 
utilize the capacity of BRO in a judicious and time–bound manner to complete 
priority roads for Army so that the estimates for such works may be prepared by 
BRO without waiting for specific approval from Govt. For holistic development of 
roads in border areas, a LTROWP has been drawn up for 461 roads including 
the ICBRs for Rs 21333 cr.
Agency No of 
Roads
Works Planned(Rs Cr) Total
2014-15 2015-16 2016-17 2017-18
GS/Strategic 434 4249.68 4599.7 4564.3 4066.03 17479.70
NH 27 1228 1004 761 861 3854.0
Total 461 
roads
5477.68 5603.70 5325.30 4927.03 21333.70

24
In addition to above, a new company National Highways and Infrastructure 
Development Corporation Limited (NHIDCL) has been created under MoRT&H for 
exclusively dealing with the task of constructing/widening of National Highways in parts 
of the country sharing international boundaries with neighbouring countries.'
37. The Committee note that under the Border Roads Development Board 
Programme, a list of 760 roads has been prepared so as to enable BRO to focus on 
identified roads and develop/maintain them in a planned manner. Also, under the Long 
Term Roll on Works Plan (LTROWP), BRO has been assigned the task of construction 
/maintenance of roads of strategic importance. The Committee also note that for 
enabling holistic development of roads in border areas a sum of Rs 21333 crore under 
LTROWP has been drawn up for 461 roads including the Indo-China Border Roads. The 
Committee desire that continuous monitoring of  the work relating to roads under BRDB 
and LTROWP be done and they be kept appraised at regular intervals of the progress of 
construction of the roads and hindrances faced, if any, in ensuring timely completion
of the works.
H. Construction of Border and other roads  in difficult areas- setting up stone 
crushers and  Hot Mix Plants in the requisite areas
Recommendations/Observations of the Committee (Para  No. 31)
38. The Committee had recommended as under:-
'The Committee desire that keeping in view the importance of construction of 
roads in strategic areas, Ministry of Environment & Forest should look into the 
request of BRO earnestly and grant it permission to set up stone crushers and 
Hot Mix Plants in the requisite areas.'
39. The Ministry in its action taken reply has stated as under:-
'The following measures have been taken to expedite the forest clearances and other 
issues with the State Governments:
(a) Empowered committees have been constituted and some States are holding 
regular meetings under the Chairmanship of Chief Secretaries to resolve critical 
issues.

25
(b) Regular review meeting with forest authorities has expedited Forest Clearance 
cases. 
(c) A large number of steps have been initiated by Government for timely disposal of 
forest clearance cases:
(i) Setting up of single window system at State level for speedy clearance.
(ii) Exemption of Compliance of Scheduled Tribe and other Forest Dwellers 
(Recognition of Forest Rights) Act 2006 to avoid delay in clearance of 
road projects within states of Arunachal Pradesh, Himachal Pradesh, 
Jammu & Kashmir, Uttarakhand and Sikkim has been accorded vide 
MoEF order dated 27 Apr 2011.
(iii) Exemption for transfer and mutation of alternate Revenue Land for 
raising compensatory Afforestation for border roads within the State of 
Uttarakhand State accorded vide Ministry of Environment & Forest 
(MoEF) order dated 09 Dec 2013.
(iv) Requirement of certificate regarding non availability of alternate alignment 
has been dispensed with for BRO projects by MoEF vide their order dated 
09 Dec 2013.
(v) Permission for processing division wise cases of BRO projects have been 
accorded by MoEF vide their order dated 09 Dec 2013.
(vi) A working group was constituted under the chairmanship of Secretary MoEF 
for expediting the forest clearance cases and its recommendations are 
under consideration.
(d) Ministry of Environment and Forests (MoEF)  vide their letter No 11-246/2014-FC 
dated 4 th July 2014 has accorded general approval under Section (2) of the 
Forest (Conservation) Act 1980 for diversion of forest land in the state of 
Arunachal Pradesh, Himachal Pradesh,  Uttarakhand & Sikkim for following :-
(i) Construction and widening of two lane roads by the BRO and other road 
construction agencies entrusted with the job by the Ministry of Defence, in 
the area falling within 100km kilometers aerial distance from the LAC and
(ii) widening of road by the BRO and other road construction agencies) which 
are identified by the Ministry of Defence as link roads between Border 
Roads in the area within 100 kilometer aerial distance from the LAC and 
National Highways/State Highways/other State Roads, subject to 
fulfillment of the conditions. 
(e) MoEF vide their letter dated 8 th Aug 2014 has accorded approval for working 
permission for tree cutting and commencement of work, if the required 
compensatory levies as per conditions stipulated in the principle approval are 
realized from the user agency and where necessary, for compensatory 
afforestation, transfer and mutation of non-forest/revenue forest land in favour of 
state Forest Department is affected.

26
(f)  Chief Secretaries of State Governments of Arunachal Pradesh, Assam ,J&K, 
Himachal Pradesh, Manipur, Nagaland, Sikkim, Tripura and Uttarakhand have 
been requested to constitute an Empowered Committee under their 
Chairmanship with Principal Secretaries of Revenue, Forest, Mining, PWD and 
Power Departments along with the PCCF and Chief Engineers of BRO as 
members to resolve issues. States of Sikkim, Arunachal Pradesh, J&K, Himachal 
Pradesh and Uttarakhand have constituted the Empowered Committee.
(g) A Standard Operating Procedure (SOP) with simplified procedure to ensure 
expeditious payment of Forest Clearance/Net present value/compensatory 
afforestation/cost of trees and other related payment to Forest authorities after 
getting Stage-I clearance for obtaining forest clearance has been issued on 18 th
Dec 2014.'
40. The Committee note that Chief Secretaries of State Governments of Arunachal 
Pradesh, Assam, Jammu and Kashmir, Himachal Pradesh, Manipur, Nagaland, Sikkim, 
Tripura and Uttarakhand have been requested to constitute  Empowered Committees 
under their Chairmanship with Principal Secretaries of Revenue, Forest, Mining, PWD 
and Power Departments along with the Principal Chief Conservator of Forests and 
Chief Engineer of BRO as members to resolve issues. The Committee also note that 
States of Sikkim, Arunachal Pradesh, Jammu and Kashmir, Himachal Pradesh and 
Uttarakhand have already constituted such Committees. The Committee may be 
apprised of details of meetings held by the Chief Secretaries of the States where 
Empowered Committees are functioning and the outcome or results thereof. The
Committee also desire to be appraised of the bottlenecks in constituting the
Empowered Committees in other States so that the information could be analysed for 
working out a   trajectory for enabling constitution of the Empowered Committees at
the earliest. The Committee would like to extend all desired help to the Ministry in 
achieving these objectives.
The reply is silent on the   recommendation on  setting up of stone crushers and 
Hot Mix Plants in the requisite areas. The Committee desire that the recommendation of 
the Committee be brought to the know of the Ministry of Environment and Forests also 
so as to enable in considering the request of BRO and granting permission to setup 
stone crushers and hot mix plants in the requisite areas. The Committee may be 
apprised of the action taken by both the Ministries in this regard at the earliest.

27
I. Construction of Border and other roads  in difficult areas-need to introduce new      
technology
Recommendations/Observations of the Committee (Para  No. 33)
41. The Committee had recommended as under:-
'The Committee further note the problems being faced by BRO on the roads in which 
works are in progress in difficult and border areas e.g delay in forest and wild life 
clearances, high altitude areas, limited working period due to snow bound conditions, 
hard rock stretches, adverse ground conditions, non availability of quarries and difficulty 
in getting construction materials, permission for installation of stone crushers, etc.  The 
Committee contemplated over the difficulties being faced by BRO.  They are of the view 
that some of the complications like difficulty in getting constructions material and 
permission for installing stone crushers can easily be resolved with proper coordination 
with concerned State Governments.  However, to cope with the natural phenomena like 
limited working period due to snow bound conditions and hard rock stretches, 
assistance from the construction agencies of international repute may be taken.'
42. The Ministry in its action taken reply has stated as under:-
'In order to introduce the latest art of technology being used by the various developed 
Countries, officers of BRO are being sent on training to various foreign countries. One 
group of two Officers visited Russia in the last week of February 2015. 
As far as road construction in high altitude areas is concerned, a decision has been 
taken to adopt internationally proven best practices and try new technology, material 
and equipment and towards this 10% of GS funds are being earmarked. 
Furthermore, a collaborative measure has been initiated to establish a multi-discipline-
expert group with experts from Ministry of Science and Technology (CRRI, CSIR, GSI 
etc) to assist BRO in technical matters.
In addition a National Workshop on Border Roads, by BRO and Confederation of Indian 
Industry (CII) on ‘Private sector’s participation in construction of Roads, bridges, and 
tunnel in border area ’ was held on     17 Feb 2015. Based on the deliberations in the 
National workshop three working group has been constituted to recommend measures 
for enhancing the private sector’s participation in construction of roads , bridges, and 
tunnels in border areas. 
Three roads have been identified by Army for construction through international 
consortium in the Border areas so that the latest technology may be used.'

28
43. The Committee note that a group composed of two Officers visited Russia in the 
last week of February 2015 for being acquainted with the latest  technologies being 
used in construction of Border roads. The Committee desire to be apprised of the 
measures taken towards adoption of new technologies, material and equipment, 
internationally proven best practices   as well as utilization of 10% of GS funds 
earmarked for construction of Border roads.
The Committee also desire that improvements made by the multi-discipline-
expert group which consists of experts from Ministry of Science and Technology (CRRI, 
CSIR, GSI etc) to assist BRO in technical matters; as well as experience gained through 
international consortia in the Border areas may also be communicated to them at the 
earliest, and in any case not later than three months following the presentation of this 
report to Parliament.
J. Construction of Border and other roads  in difficult areas- problems in getting 
land for construction of roads
Recommendations/Observations of the Committee (Para  No. 34)
44. The Committee had recommended as under:-
'The Committee also note the difficulties being faced in getting the land for construction 
of roads in the States which have tribal laws in place, as the land is owned by the local 
population.  The Committee desire that amendment in the existing laws may be made 
so that difficulties in getting the land for construction of roads are removed.'
45. The Ministry in its action taken reply has stated as under:-
'Issues related to land acquisition, environmental clearance, lack of quarries etc. are 
impediments to the smooth progress of work. Chief Secretaries of various State 
Governments have been requested to constitute Empowered Committees under their 
chairmanship with secretaries of concerned departments as members to resolve issues 
that affect progress of works by BRO.
Exemption from Scheduled Tribe and other Forest Dwellers (Recognition of Forest 
Rights) Act 2006 to avoid delay in clearance of road projects within states of Arunachal 
Pradesh, Himachal Pradesh, Jammu & Kashmir, Uttarakhand and Sikkim has been 
accorded vide Ministry of Environment & Forest (MoEF) order dated 27 April 2011.

29
The following measures have been adopted for quick and time bound disposal of 
forest clearance cases by MoEF:
(i) Single window system established at District, State & Ministry of Environment & 
Forest (MoEF) levels to fast track processing of forest clearance cases on 28 th
Jan 2010.
(ii) Simplified and unified Proforma adopted for processing both forest and wild life 
clearance simultaneously. 
(iii) Regular review meeting is being held at Ministry of Defence to review progress 
of pending cases with representatives of State Govternment, MoEF and BRO.
(iv) A Working Group has been constituted on 03.06.2013 by Ministry of 
Environment & Forest (MoEF) under the Chairmanship of Secretary MoEF to 
review the forest clearance cases.'
46. The Committee note from the action taken replies that the Ministry of 
Environment and Forests (MoEF) vide their order dated 27 April, 2011, has exempted 
the application of Scheduled Tribes and other Forest Dwellers (Recognition of Forest 
Rights) Act,2006 with a view   to avoiding delays in  clearance of road projects within 
the States of Arunachal Pradesh, Himachal Pradesh, J&K, Uttaranchal and Sikkim.  
Besides, the MoEF has adopted certain measures for enabling in quick and time bound 
disposal of cases of  forest clearances. The Committee are distressed to note that 
despite adopting the measures, the Ministry of Defence is facing problems of securing 
the requisite land.  The Ministry has not detailed  the outcomes of the existing 
measures. Further, the Ministry has also not submitted any information on the 
progress made by the Working Group for reviewing cases of   forest clearances. The 
Committee desire that the Ministry of Defence  apprise them of the outcome of the 
measures initiated, as have been mentioned in the action taken replies and the 
difficulties that continue to persist.

30
J. Construction of Border and other roads  in difficult areas- concept of GREF
Recommendations/Observations of the Committee (Para  No. 35)
47. The Committee had recommended as under:-
'The committee rely on the candid admission of the Defence Secretary that the 
performance of BRO is not satisfactory and needs substantive improvement for which 
large number of steps are being taken. The Committee desire that this organization 
should be revamped and revitalized by infusing new equipment, machinery and 
workforce so that all time dependable roads may be made to reach our borders.  The 
Committee also desire that concept of GREF (General Reserve Engineer Force), which 
was formed post 1962 debacle should be brought back and BRO should be manned by 
a “Force” not like any normal department.'
48. The Ministry in its action taken reply has stated as under:-
'In order to induct latest Construction Equipments in Border Roads Organisation a five 
year Long Term Equipment Procurement Plan (LTEP) 2014-15 to 2018-19 has been 
approved amounting to Rs 3913 crs. 
Following specific measures have been taken to expedite progress of works:-
(i) Government of India (Allocation of Business rules 1961) has been amended vide 
notification dated 9 th January 2015 to include ‘all matters relating to Border 
Roads Development Board and Border Roads Organisation (BRO)’ in the list of 
business allocated to Ministry of Defence. This will improve the operational 
efficiency of BRO and achieve clarity and unity of command. 
Budget Estimate (BE) 2015-16 funds will be made available under Ministry of 
Defence instead on Ministry of Road Transport and Highways. The allocations of 
Budget for BRO for (BE) 2015-16 is Non Plan (NP) Rs 3030.57 crores and for 
Plan is Rs 450.00 crores.
(ii) With a view to improve the quality of maintenance, DGBR has been delegated 
powers to fix rates for maintenance, snow clearance grants and outsourcing of 
Maintenance .
(iii) Enhancement of delegated powers of DGBR in respect of 26  items have been 
approved. The enhanced powers include power to sanction Estimates for works 
uptoRs 10 Cr by Project Chief Engineers, enhanced powers of hiring of 
vehicle/equipment/plant, enhanced powers for outsourcing of consultancy 
services for preparation of DPRs, powers for DGBR to include works on 
emergent basis, enhanced powers for procurement of construction stores. 

31
Further, special delegation of powers has been approved for works related to 
roads of Char DhamYatra in Uttarakhand. Also special dispensation in select 
items involving higher delegation to expedite ICBRs and operationally critical 
roads has also been approved.
(iv) More units (5 projects – Vijayak, Hirak, Shivalik, Arunannk, Brahmank& 8 Task 
Forces) were additionally deployed to expedite completion of ICBRs.
(v) MoEF vide their letter No 11-246/2014-FC dated 4th July 2014 has accorded 
general approval under Section (2) of the Forest (Conservation) Act 1980 for 
diversion of forest land in the state of Arunachal Pradesh, Himachal Pradesh, 
Uttarakhand & Sikkim as per details given below :-
(a) Construction and widening of two lane roads by the BRO and other road 
construction agencies entrusted with the job by the Ministry of Defence, in 
the area falling within 100 km kilometer aerial distance from the LAC and
(b) Widening of road (by the BRO and other road construction agencies) 
which are identified by the Ministry of Defence as link roads between 
Border Roads in the area within 100 kilometer aerial distance from the 
LAC and National Highways/State Highways/other State Roads, subject to 
fulfillment of the conditions. 
(vi) In addition to above, MOEF vide their letter No.11-246/2014-FC dated 4th July 
2014 has accorded Relaxation for diversion of forest land for non forest purpose-
special provision for creation of compensatory afforestation in lieu of forest land 
diverted for creation of strategic Defence projects being taken up within 100 km 
aerial distance from the Line of Actual Control by any user agency identified by 
the Ministry of Defence.
(vii) MoEF has been requested that BRO may be exempted from clause 19 & 21 of 
the Air (Prevention and Control of Pollution) Act 1981 for installation of stone 
crusher and setting up of Hot Mix Plant on the above areas.
(viii) Chief Secretaries of State Govts of Arunachal Pradesh, Assam ,J&K, Himachal 
Pradesh, Manipur, Nagaland, Sikkim, Tripura and Uttarakhand have been 
requested to constitute an Empowered Committee under their Chairmanship with 
Principal Secretaries of Revenue, Forest, Miming, PWD and Power Departments 
along with the PCCF and Chief Engineers of BRO as members to resolve 
issues.'
49. The Committee appreciate the fact that with a view to inducting the latest 
Construction Equipments in Border Roads Organisation, a five year Long Term 
Equipment Procurement Plan (LTEPP) 2014 -15 to 2018 -19 with an allocation of 
Rs. 3913 crore has been approved.  With a view to improving the operational efficiency 

32
of BRO and achieving clarity and unity of command, the Government of India  
(Allocation and Business Rules 1961) have been amended vide Notification dated the 
9th January 2015 to transfer all matters relating to Border Roads Development Board 
and Border Roads Organisation  under the purview of Ministry of Defence.  Further, 
with a view to improving the quality of maintenance, DGBR has been delegated powers 
to fix rates for maintenance, snow clearance grants and outsourcing of maintenance of 
more units which were destroyed and expediting completion of ICBRS. 
Ministry of Environment and Forests(MoEF) vide their letter No 11-246/2014-FC 
dated 4th July 2014 has accorded general approval under Section (2) of the Forest 
(Conservation) Act 1980 for diversion of forest land in the States of Arunachal Pradesh, 
Himachal Pradesh, Uttarakhand & Sikkim.
In addition to the above, MoEF vide their letter No.11-246/2014-FC dated 4th July 
2014 has accorded relaxation for diversion of forest land for non forest purposes-
special provision for creation of compensatory aforestation in lieu of forest land 
diverted for creation of strategic Defence projects being taken up within 100 km aerial 
distance from the Line of Actual Control by any user agency identified by the Ministry 
of Defence. MoEF has also been requested that BRO may be exempted from clause 19 
& 21 of the Air (Prevention and Control of Pollution) Act 1981 for installing stone 
crushers and setting up of Hot Mix Plants in the above areas. The Committee desire to 
be apprised of the response of the MOEF in this regard.
Besides, the Chief Secretaries of State Governments of Arunachal Pradesh, 
Assam, J&K, Himachal Pradesh, Manipur, Nagaland, Sikkim, Tripura and Uttarakhand 
have been requested to constitute Empowered Committees. The committee may be 
informed of the progress made in this direction.
The Committee also note that the Ministry’s  reply is silent with regard to the
recommendation that the concept of GREF (General Reserve Engineer Force ) which 
was formed post - 1962 war be revived and BRO manned by a `Force’ and not like any 
normal department. Therefore, the Committee desire that  the required steps be taken 
for implementing  the recommendation.
The Committee may be apprised of the action taken within three months of the 
presentation of this report.

33
K. Construction of Border and other roads  in difficult areas-performance of BRO
Recommendations/Observations of the Committee (Para  No. 36)
50. The Committee had recommended as under:-
'The Committee note that the maintenance of existing roads is carried out with the 
maintenance grants allocated based on approved rates.  With a view to improving the 
quality of maintenance, the Director General Border Roads (DGBR) has been 
delegated powers to fix rates of maintenance and snow clearance grant and carry out 
revision whenever required. The Committee also note that formation kilometers which 
were 1960 kms in 2011-12 came down to 1669 in 2012-13.  It declined further to 1588 
kms in 2013-14.  So is the case with surfacing, which came down from 2389 km in 
2011-12 to 2173 km in 2013-14.  The construction of bridges has also come down from 
3149 metres in 2011-12 to 2246 metres in 2013-14. '
51. The Ministry in its action taken reply has stated as under:-
'With a view to improve the quality of maintenance, DGBR has been delegated powers 
to fix rates for maintenance and snow clearance grants. The revision of maintenance 
grant, snow clearance grant are under process and same will be revised shortly by 
DGBR. Other efforts like enhancement of financial powers to executing staff, 
outsourcing, mechanization, reorganization etc has been made to enhance BRO output.
In order to expedite the execution of works approval in principle was accorded for 
outsourcing certain works in BRO to Central Public Sector Undertakings, strictly in 
conformity with GFRs, CVC guidelines and any other rules and procedures prescribed 
in this regard in the BRDB meeting held on 4 th Feb 2013. Accordingly outsourcing of 4 
roads to 4 CPSUs has been approved as mentioned under:
Sl. 
No.
Name of Firm Name of Road Length in Km
(a) M/S IRCON International Ltd, New 
Delhi
Leh – Loma 103.00
(b) M/S Bridge and Roof Co (India) Ltd, 
Kolkata
Along-Kaying 35.00
(c) M/S Engineering Projects (I) Ltd, New 
Delhi (EPIL)
Sansari- Killar-
Thirot-Tandi
59.00
(d) M/S National Building Construction 
Corporation Ltd,   New Delhi (NBCC)
Miao-Vijaynagar 185.00

34
52. The Committee note that with a view to improving the quality of maintenance, 
DGBR has been delegated powers to fix rates for maintenance and snow clearance 
grants; and in order to enable the execution of the works, expeditiously, in principle 
approval has been accorded for outsourcing certain works in BRO to the Central Public 
Sector Undertakings.  The Committee appreciate the fact that the Ministry is taking
concrete steps for expediting the work undertaken by BRO. However, the Committee 
are keen to know of the details of the effectiveness of these measures.  Therefore, they 
may be apprised of the progress of work made by Central Public Sector Undertakings.
L. Resettlement of Retired Officers and Person Below Officers Rank
Recommendations/Observations of the Committee (Para Nos. 39, 40 & 41)
53. The Committee had recommended as under:-
'The Committee note that various avenues  are available for resettlement of retired 
officers and Person Below Officers Rank (PBORs) e.g. reservations in various Central 
and State Government jobs including  banks, Public Sector Undertakings, 
employment/self-employment schemes, etc. 
The Committee also note that out of 21615 Ex- Servicemen (ESM) registered with 
Directorate General Resettlement (DGR)/Rajya Sainik Board (RSB)/Zila Sainik Board 
(ZSB), only 12018 were employed in 2011 which is 55.6% of the total. In the year 2012, 
out of 26518 ESM registered, only 14447 which is 54.58% of total registered got 
employment. In 2013, 34364 ESW were registered, however, only 14320 got 
employment which is 41.67% of the total. From the data supplied by the Ministry it may 
be inferred that every year out of the registered ESM, less that 50% are getting 
employment/resettlement and the employment figure is decreasing every year. The 
Committee desire that DGR should be cautious in its planning and try to provide re-
settlement to all the ESM registered with it and it should commensurate with the 
qualification and aptitude of the retired soldiers so he should not feel out of place. 
The committee also note that some new avenues are being explored by the Ministry for 
resettlement of Ex-Servicemen and utilizing their competence for nation building and 
Directorate General Resettlement has made inroads in coordination with Confederation 
of Indian Industry (CII) for creating jobs for ESM. To achieve better results, the 
Directorate General Resettlement is in the process of creating National ESM data base 
compilation and creation of job portal for ESM. A twitter account has also been opened 
for making information available to ESM. The Committee appreciate that Directorate 
General Resettlement is now approaching CII for providing employment opportunities 
but they find that till date DGR has not made concerted efforts for resettlement of ESM 
in private Sector. The Committee desire that besides CII, the Directorate General 
Resettlement should have interactions with the other private sector associations like the 

35
Associated Chambers of Commerce and Industry of India (ASSOCHAM), Federation of 
Indian Chambers of Commerce and Industry (FICCI) etc to encourage them to hire and 
let disciplined ex-soldiers prove their mantle in the progress of private sector. It is the 
responsibility of DGR to look after its veterans so that they can have decent livelihood   
after spending their prime time in the service of the nation.'
54. The Ministry in its action taken reply has stated as under:-
'The concerns highlighted by the Standing Committee are appreciated and DGR has 
taken a number of initiatives to ensure that maximum ESM are given resettlement. 
Some of the key initiatives are as under:-
(i) Organisation of Job Fair every two months at various places in the country to 
ensure maximum jobs for ESM.
(ii) DGR has organised a conclave with CII to engage the corporate sector to 
provide jobs for ESM.
(iii) One of the major reasons for the falling numbers is the lack of opportunities in 
Government jobs reserved for ESM. The following has come to light:-
(a) There are approximately 55 lakhs Central Government Employees 
including in Banks, PSUs & Para Military Forces.
(b) Out of abov e, based on reservation policy for ESM, at least                                    
12-15 lakh jobs should have been reserved for ESM.
(c) However, based on approximately 14% reports received for 2013, only 
about 2 lakhs ESM are employed in Government jobs reserved for them.
(d) In 2013 alone, based on above 14% reports, while 15908 ESM should 
have been employed on reserved jobs, however only 3231 were actually 
employed.
(e) If the Central Government and States reservation policies are 
implemented, ESM will not have to look for jobs outside.
(iv) To rectify the above major anomaly, DGR has taken the following initiatives:-
(aa)  Establishment of Reservation Monitoring Cell(RMC) to monitor such 
vacancies.
(ab) Request has been made to Government agencies to implement 
reservations policy in true spirit. 
(ac)  The issue of change in the reservation policy for ESM to include 10% 
vacancies in Group “B” and 20% vacancies in Group “C” against the 

36
existing reservation of 10% vacancies in Group “C” and 20% vacancies in 
Group “D” had been taken up with DOP&T. As intimated by DOP&T 
certain Ministries including MHA are reluctant to the said enhancement. 
The matter was taken up with MHA by D/o ESW however MHA has not 
agreed to the same, as even the 10% Vacancies in Group C, reserved for 
ESM are not being filled up for want of willing/ eligible ESM and large 
number of vacancies are still unfilled as informed by MHA.
(ad)    The matter has been taken up by D/o ESW with MHA about the pay and 
seniority protection for ESM getting employed in Government jobs 
specially in CAPFs.  However, the same has not been agreed to by MHA 
as on date.
(ae)    Preparation of Ready Reckoner for all soldiers to provide them first-hand 
information on how to prepare for selection for jobs reserved for ESM, 
which is likely to be published in the first week of April 2015. 
(v) The Concept Paper incorporates a large number of new avenues for    
employment for the ESM. One of the issues viz.  Skill Development is under the 
active consideration.  A series of high level meetings have already been held at 
the level of the RM, Defence Secretary with Ministry of skill Development and all 
stakeholders.  NSDC in consultation with DGR is preparing a draft MoU to 
translate into action.'  
55. The Committee note that  DGR has initiated a number of measures for enabling 
resettlement of  Ex-Servicemen (ESM) to the maximum extent; and a Concept Paper 
incorporating a large number of new avenues for  enabling   employment for the ESM  
viz. by means of Skill Development is said to be under active consideration.  The 
Committee appreciate the fact that  for the purpose, a series of high level meetings 
have already been held at the level of the Raksha Mantri, Defence Secretary with 
Ministry of Skill Development and other stakeholders.  NSDC, in consultation with DGR 
is preparing a draft MoU to translate the initiates into action.  The Committee desire to 
be apprised of the details of the measures and the outcomes thereof.
L. Fixed Tenure of Ex-Servicemen Secretary
Recommendations/Observations of the Committee (Para No. 42)
56. The Committee had recommended as under:-
'The Committee note that the Department of Ex. Servicemen Welfare was 
created some time in 2003, but the first full-time Secretary was posted in 

37
December, 2007. The Committee are dismayed to learn that approximately six 
years, eight Secretaries have moved in  and out of the Department, which 
obviously not only affected the long-term planning and strategy but conveyed the 
lack of seriousness of Government with which it takes the welfare of Ex. 
servicemen. The Committee are of the view that the Ministry is not sensitive 
towards the welfare of Ex- servicemen. Therefore, the Committee recommend 
that tenure of Secretary of Department of ESM should become a fixed one to 
have accountability and better implementation of policies for redressal of 
grievances of Ex-servicemen.'
57. The Ministry in its action taken reply has stated as under:-
'There is no fixed tenure for Secretaries of Government of India, except for a 
few Secretaries viz Cabinet Secretary, Defence Secretary and Home Secretary. 
However, the recommendations of the Committee have been conveyed to 
Department of Personnel & Training.'
58. The Committee had noted that the Department of Ex-Servicemen Welfare was 
created  in 2003, but  a full-time Secretary was made in-charge of the Department only 
in December, 2007. The Committee were also dismayed to learn that in approximately 
six years, eight Secretaries have moved in and out of the Department which, apart from
affecting  the Long Term Planning and strategy was indicative of lack of seriousness 
on matters pertaining to the welfare of Ex-Servicemen. Therefore, the Committee had 
recommended that the tenure of Secretary of Department of ESM should become a fixed 
one which would ensure accountability and better implementation of policies to address 
the grievances of Ex-servicemen. The Committee note that the recommendation has
been conveyed to DOPT. The Committee are of the view that to mitigate the problems
of ESM, a fixed tenure should be given to the Secretary, ESM and this matter  should 
be sincerely pursued with the Department of Personnel  & Training (DOPT).

38
M. Need to have clear database of trained Ex-servicemen.
Recommendations/Observations of the Committee (Para  No. 43)
59. The Committee had recommended as under:-
'During the oral evidence, the Committee note that there is a need for automation of 
functions of Department of Ex-Servicemen Welfare. The Committee also note from the 
evidence tendered before them that the Department does not have clear database of 
trained Ex-servicemen. Therefore, the Committee desire that DGR should generate 
national data base of skilled and unskilled Ex-Servicemen and a real time software may 
be created which can be accessed by ESM for uploading information relating to them. 
The employment opportunities available in the private sector may also be made 
available on the website so that Ex. servicemen can make use of it.'
60. The Ministry in its action taken reply has stated as under:-
'Action is already in hand for developing all India software to ensure a central database 
for ESM. Simultaneously automation of the DGR itself is in progress. A job portal to link 
ESM with the corporate industries and to provide suitable jobs based on their skills is 
also planned.'
61. From the action taken reply, the Committee note that the Ministry is in the 
process of developing a software for preparing a central database of ESM among 
other things. The Committee desire that details of the time lines drawn for creating the 
database and tentative schedule of automation of the Directorate General, Resettlement
be shared with the Committee.
N. Lesser allocations to Coast Guard
Recommendations/Observations of the Committee (Para No. 68)
62. The Committee had recommended as under:-
'The Committee also note from the submission of Coast Guard that their strength has 
gone up by 33 per cent in the last five years, however, their revenue budget has moved 
only at six per cent.  The Committee desire that to maintain acquired equipment, there 
is a need for increase in revenue budget.  The Ministry should, while making capital 
budget purchases, perceive and have provision for revenue budget also to run and 
maintain these assets.'

39
63. The Ministry in its action taken reply has stated as under:-
'1. The severe financial crunch faced by the Indian Coast Guard is largely due to 
budget allocation not keeping pace with rapid growth of the Services in the past 
five years. The Indian Coast Guard, which had 61 Ships/Boats, 45 Aircrafts, 20 
Stations, 05 Air Establishments, 11 District HQs and  03 Regional HQs in 2008, 
today stands at 108 Ships/Boats, 64 Aircrafts, 42 Stations, 09 Air 
Establishments, 14 District HQs and 05 Regional HQs achieving almost 40% 
growth since 2009. The growth is a result of CCS directives in 2009 on Maritime 
Security including Coastal Security.
2. Against this background and in order to meet matching financial requirement 
including carry over liabilities of last fiscal, a consolidated case was taken up with 
MoD (Fin/MO) on 17 June, 2014 seeking additional revenue amount of                     
Rs. 264.342 crore against four revenue object heads. The said case was 
returned by MoD with an assurance that it will be considered at 
Supplementary/RE stage and advised to submit the additional requirement at 
those stages only.
3. At First batch of Supplementary Grant stage, ICG had proposed re-appropriation 
of Rs. 140 crore from Capital head allocation to Revenue head as Technical 
Supplementary in consultation with MoD (Fin/MO) and Ministry of Finance. The 
proposal was submitted to MoD (Fin/MO) on 13 October, 2014. The said 
proposal was worked out as additional funds were urgently needed against 
revenue heads during current fiscal. 
4. Indian Coast Guard had submitted RE 2014-15 proposal to MoD (Fin/MO) on 21 
October, 2014, wherein additional Rs. 300 crore had been sought against 
Revenue Head non-salary components. Since shortage of budget allocation 
under Revenue heads has a direct bearing on operations and maintenance of 
Indian Coast Guard fleet, a letter was forwarded by DGICG to the Defence
Secretary on 08 December, 2014 bringing out the critical budget requirements of 
Indian Coast Guard at RE 2014-15 stage and for BE 2015-16.
5. Expenditure ceiling in respect of Coast Guard Organization (CGO) is being fixed 
by Ministry of Finance.  The expenditure ceiling in respect of CGO for RE 2014-
15 was fixed by Ministry of Finance at Rs.1265.00 crore in Revenue section and 
Rs.1140.00 crore in Capital Section.  Further, the proposal of CGO for               
re-appropriation of Rs.140.00 crore from Capital section to Revenue section in 
technical supplementary was recommended/forwarded to Ministry of Finance for 
inclusion of the same in the statement of first batch of supplementary for the 
approval of Parliament vide this Ministry OM No. 1(9)/Fin(MO)/2014/740 dated 
17-10-2014.  However, Ministry of Finance did not include the aforesaid 
proposed in respect of CGO into the statement of first batch supplementary 
Demands for FY 2014-15 for the approval of Parliament.  No reasons were 
stated by Ministry of Finance in this regard.
6. Further, it is stated that Indian Coast Guard (ICG) proposal for RE 2014-15 for 
Rs.1465.21 crore in Revenue Section and Rs.1491.73 crore in Capital section 
were forwarded to Ministry of Finance in Statement of Budgets Estimates for their 
consideration.  The Budget matters in respect of CGO were also discussed in 

40
details in the pre-budget meeting held in Ministry of Finance under the 
Chairmanship of Secretary (E) before allocating the RE 2014-15 & BE 2015-16 
by them.
7. Subsequently, the matter of critical budget requirement of ICG was also taken up with 
the Ministry of Finance vide this Division ID dated 18 -12-2014 for their consideration 
to provide the appropriate funds in Revenue and Capital section while finalizing the 
RE 2014 -15 & BE 2015 -16 to sustain its day to day operation for surveillance in 
maritime domain, mandatory repairs/refits and procurement of spares for sea going 
assets/aircraft.  However, Ministry of Finance provided the expenditure ceiling of RE 
2014-15 of Rs.1265.00 crore in Revenue section and Rs. 1140.00 crore in Capital 
section against our projections of Rs.1456.21 crore in Revenue Section and 
Rs.1491.73 crore in Capital section for RE 2014-15.'
64. The Committee note from the action taken reply that severe financial crunch 
faced by the Indian Coast Guard is largely due to budget allocation not keeping pace 
with rapid growth of the Services in the past five years. The Indian Coast Guard, which 
had 61 Ships/Boats, 45 Aircrafts, 20 Stations, 05 Air Establishments, 11 District HQs and  
03 Regional HQs in 2008, today has 108 Ships/Boats, 64 Aircrafts, 42 Stations, 09 Air 
Establishments, 14 District HQs and 05 Regional HQs achieving almost 40% growth 
since 2009. This growth is a result of CCS directives in 2009 on Maritime Security 
including Coastal Security. Further, the Committee are concerned to note that 
expenditure ceiling in respect of CGO for RE 2014 -15 was fixed by Ministry of Finance 
at Rs.1265 crore in Revenue Section and Rs.1140 crore in Capital Section against the 
proposal for Rs. 1465.21 crore  and  Rs. 1491.73 crore in Revenue and Capital  Sections      
respectively.   Further, the Ministry of Finance did not heed to the proposal of ICG for 
granting an additional amount of Rs.300 crore   against Revenue Head for non-salary 
components. All these had negatively affected the operations and maintenance of ICG
fleet. Therefore, keeping in view the importance of Maritime Security, the Ministry of 
Finance needs to be impressed upon for  providing adequate allocation to the Coast 
Guard in the future budgets.

41
  CHAPTER II
A. RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS, WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY 
THE GOVERNMENT
Recommendation (Para  No. 7)
The Committee are given to understand that the primary function of the Armed Forces 
is to defend the country in the event of conventional armed conflict and for this purpose, the 
goals for the Armed Forces are clearly laid out by the Government.  The committee further 
note that the Headquarters of the Integrated Defence Staff (IDS) has prepared the Long Term 
Integrated Perspective Plan (LTIPP) for 15 years (2012-27) as well as Service Capital 
Acquisition Plan (SCAP)  (2012-17) (12 th Five Year Plan) which has been approved by the 
Defence Acquisition Council (DAC) and there has been considerable improvement in 
operation preparedness of Armed Forces as  a result a sustained efforts in Defence 
Acquisition and Defence Production. 
Reply of the Government
No comments. These are observations  of the Standing Committee.
Recommendation (Para  No. 10)
The Committee also do not find any reason behind non approval of the Twelfth Defence 
Plan and desire that approval of Defence Plan should be given importance so as to avoid ad-
hoc planning so that our forces are able to anticipate the number of equipment and 
infrastructure after a certain period of time and prepare themselves accordingly. The 
Committee recommend that all efforts should be done to ensure that Armed Forces are 
capable to take on any kind of threats.
Reply of the Government
Budget Estimates 2015-16 are already being finalized and allocations for four years of 
12th Defence Plan Period will be thus be completed after these figures are approved.  At this 
stage it serves little practical purpose to seek approval of the Plan.   Therefore a decision has 
been taken not to further pursue the matter with Ministry of Finance for approval of 12 th
Defence Plan.  
It may, however, be added that there is no adverse impact on planning due to want of approval 
of Ministry of Finance for 12 th Defence Plan.  The annual projections are being made as per 
the 12th Plan and capital acquisitions progressed in tune with requirements set out in the Plan.  

42
Recommendation (Para  No. 11)
The Committee notes that the Capital Procurement is undertaken in accordance with 
the Defence Procurement Procedure.  The proposal for acquisition of capital assets flows from 
the Defence Procurement Planning Process and this planning process covers long-term, 
medium-term and short-term perspectives including 15-year long-term perspective plan.  The 
five year service capital acquisition plan, which includes the list of equipment to be acquired 
keeping in view the operational exigencies and the overall requirement of funds.  The sub sect 
of this is a two year roll-on plan, which is also approved by the Defence Procurement Board
every year.
Recommendation (Para  No. 12)
The Committee also notes that preferred order of categorisation for capital acquisition 
is, ‘Buy Indian’, ‘Buy and Make (Indian)’, ‘Make Indian’, Buy and Make’ and lastly ‘Buy Global’.  
The emphasis is to give a boost to the Indian defence industry by according highest 
preference to ‘Buy Indian’.
Recommendation (Para  No. 13)
The Committee further note that capital acquisition for schemes, as per defence 
procurement procedure involves formulation of Services’ qualitative requirement, acceptance 
of necessity by the defence acquisition council and the preparation of issue of Request for 
Proposal.  Solicitation of offers is followed and after the offers are received, there is evaluation 
of technical offers by the Technical Evaluation Committee.
Reply of the Government on Para No. 11, 12 & 13
Submissions of the Government have been noted by the Committee.  No further action 
on part of the Government.
Recommendation (Para  No. 14)
The Committee appreciates that the prevailing procurement procedure seems to be a 
flawless on one hand, but at the same time, they feel that something is missing therein 
because this procedure is not yielding the desired results and procurements have not fully 
materialised.  The Committee also notes that one of the reasons for not making procurements 
is non-adherence of timelines because GSQR are being changed frequently.  Therefore, the 
Committee is of the view that early finalisation of GSQR for procurement of specific equipment 
should be the order of the day and GSQR should be frozen before giving an order.  For the 
next order of the same equipment, revised GSQR may be used.  The Committee desires that 
instead of making the best product, Mark I, II, III and IV of the equipment may be made so that 
at least the Services get something and improvements can be made at the later stages with 

43
the experience gained and with the advancement in technology.  This will not only save time 
and wasteful expenditure but also avoid depriving the Armed Forces of any equipment which 
lowers not fighting efficiency but also its morale.  The Committee desires that to curtail the 
delays in procurement from vendor’s side, it is essential to choose only capable and reputed 
vendors.
Reply of the Government
The current processes are in line with the recommendation.
As per Defence Procurement Procedure-2013 (DPP-2013), the GSQR has to be 
finalised prior to seeking of Acceptance of Necessity (AoN) for the scheme.  GSQR is being 
formulated with due deliberation and with complete coordination between the agencies 
concerned.  It is also being ensured that GSQR do not aim for the best available product in the 
market but represent only the actual operational requirements of the user.
Request for Proposal (RFP) is issued to vendors as per provisions contained in the 
DPP-2013.  Only those vendors that clear the trials and Staff Evaluation continue to the 
commercial stage, where the lowest bidder is determined and contract signed after negotiation 
by the Contract Negotiation Committee (CNC) and the approval of CFA.  For delays in supply, 
penal provisions, as available in the DPP, are imposed on the vendor.  
Recommendation (Para  No. 16)
The Committee also desires that while procuring an equipment, where there is long 
gestation period in the supply, say 10 years, large orders of a particular make should not be 
given.  Instead order should be given in parts so that technological improvements can be 
inculcated in the next order.  The Committee also recommends that penal provisions should 
be included in the procurement policy so that if equipment is not supplied according to the 
prototype or there is delay in supply, those provisions could be invoked.
Reply of the Government
Quantity to be procured in one order is based on the operational requirements of the 
Services as also the economy of scales.  However, delivery schedule is based on the Services 
schedule of raising new units / phasing out of existing equipment/ capacity of the vendor to 
deliver, etc.  Technological improvements are incorporated in subsequent inductions, where 
applicable.
Penal provisions are already existing in the Defence Procurement Procedure for 
delayed supplies and are being invoked where applicable.
Recommendation (Para  No. 17)
The Committee note that the Ministry of Defence along with the Department of 
Industrial Policy and Promotion, Ministry of Commerce and Industry has taken various steps to 
encourage private sector participation and has issued so far 222 letters of 

44
intents(LOIs)/Industrial Licences(ILs) to 131 companies till August 2014 for manufacturing of a 
wide range of licensable defence items. 
Reply of the Government
As per the latest figure, Department of Industrial Policy and Promotion, Ministry of 
Commerce and Industry have issued so far 251 letters of intents (LOIs)/Industrial Licences 
(ILs) to 150 companies till January, 2015 for manufacturing of a wide range of licensable 
defence items.
Recommendation (Para  No. 18)
The Committee note that so far FDI inflow has been very low in the defence sector and 
as stated by a representative of Ministry of Defence that raising the cap from 26% to 49%, 
there will be promotion of joint ventures and manufacturing in domestic sector. 
Reply of the Government
The Government has notified revised Foreign Direct Investment (FDI) policy in defence sector 
vide Press Note No. 7(2014 Series)[available on Department of Industrial Policy & Promotion 
(DIPP) website] according to which FDI upto 49% is allowed through FIPB route and above 
49% with the approval of Cabinet Committee on Security (CCS) on case to case basis, 
wherever it is likely to result in access to modern and ‘state-of-art’ technology in the country. 
The FDI limit is also subject to obtaining Industrial License for licensable defence items under 
the Industries (Development & Regulation) Act, 1951. The FDI in defence sector is allowed to 
encourage Indian Private Sector Participation in defence production to achieve the objective of 
self-reliance.
Recommendation (Para  No. 19)
For the betterment of the system, the Committee suggest that feasibility and desirability 
increasing the FDI limit should be examined critically. 
Reply of the Government
The FDI policy in defence sector has been revised in August, 2014 only. The 
assessment/feasibility of increase in FDI may be assessed only after the policy gets matured. 
Recommendation (Para  No. 20)
The Committee note that the Ministry of Defence, at present, does not give any grant to 
private sector for encouraging manufacturing or Research & Development. The Committee are 
of the opinion that generally private sector does not invest in the defence R&D till it is sure of 
getting orders. In the opinion of the Committee this is one of the reasons for non-participation 

45
of private players in the defence sector, thus making the country dependent on imports. 
Therefore, the Committee desire that private sector should also be given grant for R&D in 
defence sector so that ‘Make in India’ concept comes true.    
Reply of the Government
The Government provides assistance to private industry in Research and Development 
of defence equipment. Under the ‘Make’ Category of Defence Procurement Procedure, there 
is a provision for collaboration between Government and private Indian Industry where 80% of 
the expenditure on Research and Development of prototype is shared by Government and 
20% by the private Indian Industry. Such developments are backed by assured orders also. 
‘Make’ procedure is under review for simplification and removal of ambiguities as mandated by 
the Defence Production Policy of the Government promulgated in 2011. Additionally, a 
Technology Development Fund (TDF) was announced in Union Budget 2014-15 to provide 
necessary resources to public and private sector companies, including SMEs as well as 
academic and scientific institutions to support Research and Development of defence systems 
that enhance cutting edge technology capability in the country. The process of formulation of 
the scheme for implementation of TDF is under progress.
Recommendation (Para  No. 24)
The Committee also notes that the Ministry of Defence has taken series of measures in 
the form of some major policy initiatives like amendments to Defence Procurement Procedure 
(DPP), Technology Perspective and Capability Roadmap (TPCR), Preference to ‘Buy (Indian)’, 
‘Buy and Make (Indian)’, ‘Make (Indian)’, ‘Buy and Make’ categories over ‘Buy (Global)’ 
category of Capital Acquisition.  The Committee also notes that Make procedure is under final 
stages of streamlining after being cleared by the Defence Procurement Board.  The revised 
procedure would cater to the development in collaborations between Public Sector, Private 
Sector and Research and Academic Institutions.
Reply of the Government
Submissions of the Government have been noted by the Committee.  No further action 
on part of the Government.
Recommendation (Para  No. 27)
From the reply furnished by the representative of BRO, the Committee note that now 
onwards the Border Roads Organisation would focus on core strategic functions on the 
Northern Border.  The Ministry of Defence & the Ministry of Road Transport and Highways 
(MoRT&H) will work out modalities of separating Border Roads Organizations strategic road 
building functions from infrastructural development in Left Wing Extremism affected areas and 
internal roads.  The Committee also note that in order to reduce BRO’s work load, MoRTH and 
BRO will jointly examine and priorities the roads which are necessarily to be constructed by 
the BRO in Uttarakhand, J&K and North East.  MoRTH will make alternative arrangements for 

46
remaining roads.  Accordingly, 28 roads of 2904 Kms lengths have been identified for transfer 
to various agencies. 
Reply of the Government
In the meeting of National Security Council (NSC) held on 1.11.2013, it was decided 
that Border Roads Organisation(BRO) would focus on core strategic functions on the Northern 
Border and Ministry of Defence (MoD) &Ministry of Road Transport and Highways( MoRT&H) 
will work out modalities of separating BRO’s strategic road building functions from 
infrastructure development in Left Wing Extremism affected areas and internal roads. Further, 
it was decided in a meeting held with National Security Advisor (NSA) on 23.8.2013 that in 
order to reduce BRO’s work load, MoRTH and BRO will jointly examine and prioritise the 
roads which are necessarily to be constructed by the BRO in Uttarakhand, J&K and North 
East. MoRT&H will make alternate arrangements for remaining roads. Accordingly, 28 roads of 
2904 Kms length were identified for transfer to various agencies. Roads are being handed 
over to other agencies by BRO in a phased manner to utilize its resources optimally for 
construction of roads which are of strategic importance.  Till 12 February 2015, BRO has 
handed over a total of 772.89 km of 9 roads to other agencies.
Recommendation (Para  No. 29)
The Committee note that various other measures e.g inclusion of 747 roads in the 
Border Roads Development Boards (BRDB) programme, Long Term Roll On Works Plan 
(LTROWP) for Rs.21,133 Cr for the period 2014-2018, delegation of powers to BRO for 
deciding Standard Schedule of Rates (SSR), restoration of powers to DGBR to sanction 
Revised/work done estimates, Delinking of Bhutan Compensatory Allowance from works in 
Bhutan, approval of procurement of 39 state-of-the-art medium Crawler Rock drills, 
outsourcing of critical category employee i.e Junior Engineers (JEs) till the candidates are 
made available by the Staff Selection Commission (SSC), faster clearances of pending forest 
clearance (FC) cases, land acquisition (LA) cases, etc. have been taken to expedite the 
construction of roads.  
Reply of the Government
MEASURES TAKEN TO FACILITATE PROGRESS: Following specific measures have 
been taken overcome the impediments and to facilitate smooth progress:
(i) Role of BRO: In the meeting of National Security Council (NSC) held on 
1.11.2013, it was decided that BRO would focus on core strategic functions on 
the Northern Border and Ministry of Defence (MoD) & Ministry of Road 
Transport and Highways (MoRT&H) will work out modalities of separating 
BRO’s strategic road building functions from infrastructure development in Left 
Wing Extremism affected areas and internal roads. Further, it was decided in a 
meeting held with NSA on 23.8.2013 that in order to reduce BRO’s work load, 
MoRT&H and BRO will jointly examine and prioritize the roads which are 

47
necessarily to be constructed by the BRO in Uttarakhand, J&K and North East. 
MoRT&H will make alternate arrangements for remaining roads. Accordingly, 
28 roads of 2904 Kmslength were identified for transfer to various agencies. 
Roads are being handed over by BRO to other agencies.
(ii) Outsourcing of 4 roads to CPSUs: Four roads have been approved for 
outsourcing to 4 Central public Sector Units (CPSUs) on nomination basis in 
order to expedite progress of road construction in border areas.
(iii) BRO has been empowered with delegated powers/policy simplifications in 
following area so that works can be expedited and can progress smoothly:
(a) Enhanced delegation of power: Enhancement of delegated powers of DGBR in 
respect of 26 items have been approved. The enhanced powers include power to sanction 
Estimates for works uptoRs 10 Cr by Project Chief Engineers, enhanced powers of hiring of 
vehicle/equipment/plant, enhanced powers for outsourcing of consultancy services for 
preparation of DPRs, powers for DGBR to include works on emergent basis, enhanced powers 
for procurement of construction stores. Further, special delegation of powers has been 
approved for works related to roads of Char DhamYatra in Uttarakhand. Also special 
dispensation in select items involving higher delegation to expedite ICBRs and operationally 
critical roads has also been approved.
(b) BRDB Programme: 760 roads have been included in the BRDB programme. This will 
facilitate DGBR to approve maintenance grant for roads which are part of BRDB Programme 
without any further approval.
(c) Long term Roll On Works Plan (LTROWP):  Long term Roll On Works Plan (LTROWP) 
for Rs.21,133 Cr has been finalized to help BRO to get clearances and complete the 
preparatory works /estimates in advance and so that works can be taken up in time without 
having to wait for approval of Annual Works Plan (AWP). 
(d) Standard Schedule of  Rates (SSR):  DGBR has been delegated powers to issue 
new/revised Standard Schedule of Rates (SSR). This will ensure timely assessment of correct 
cost of projects and avoid frequent review of estimates.

48
(e) Change in Maintenance Grant and Snow Clearance Grant: With a view to improve 
quality of maintenance DGBR has been delegated powers to fix rates of maintenance  and 
snow clearance grant and carry out revision whenever required.
(f) Work done/Revised AEs : Powers of DGBR to sanction Revised/work done estimates 
have been restored to expedite completion of works held up for revision of estimates. 
(g) Delinking of BCA from works in Bhutan: Bhutan  Compensatory Allowance( BCA) has 
been delinked from the estimates to reduce burden on works. 
(h) Increased out-lay for vehicle/equipment/plant procurement: The size of annual 
procurement plan for procurement of vehicle/equipment/plant has been increased to Rs 459 
Crores in 2014-15. Besides to complete preparatory action for timely procurement of a road 
map has been drawn in the form of a long term equipment plan (LTEP)   from 2014-15 to 
2018-19 for Rs. 3913.47Cr. 
(i) Outsourcing of DPR preparation:  Delegated powers of DGBR for outsourcing 
consultancy services  for preparation of DPRs has been  enhanced to Rs 200 lacs from 
present Rs 10 lacs to enable DGBR to take up preparation of DPR for whole length of road in 
one go through outsourcing.
(j)   Amendment of Border Roads Regulations: A proposal to allow BRO to outsource 
maintenance activities as well as works has been considered (Para 611 and 614) and 
approved. The proposal to empower Chief Engineer to sanction preparation of Detailed Project 
report (DPR) once a road is included in BRDB Programme without linking it to Annual work 
Plan (AWP) has been considered (Para 545 of BR Regulations) and approved.
(k) MoEF  vide their letter No 11-246/2014-FC dated 4 th July 2014 has accorded general 
approval under Section (2) of the Forest (Conservation) Act 1980 for diversion of forest land in 
the state of Arunachal Pradesh, Himachal Pradesh,  Uttarakhand & Sikkim for following :-
(i) Construction and widening of two lane roads by the BRO and other road construction 
agencies entrusted with the job by the Ministry of Defence, in the area falling within 100km 
kilometers aerial distance from the LAC and
(ii) widening of road (by the BRO and other road construction agencies) which are 
identified by the Ministry of Defence as link roads between Border Roads in the area within 
100 kilometer aerial distance from the LAC and National Highways/State Highways/other State 
Roads, subject to fulfillment of the conditions. 
(l) MoEF vide their letter dated 8 th Aug 2014 has accorded approval for working 
permission for tree cutting and commencement of work, if the required compensatory levies as
per conditions stipulated in the in-principle approval are realized from the user agency and 

49
where necessary, for compensatory afforestation, transfer and mutation of non-forest/revenue 
forest land in favour of state Forest Department is affected.
(m)  Chief Secretaries of State Govts of Arunachal Pradesh, Assam ,J&K, Himachal Pradesh, 
Manipur, Nagaland, Sikkim, Tripura and Uttarakhand have been requested to constitute an 
Empowered Committee under their Chairmanship with Principal Secretaries of Revenue, 
Forest, Mining, PWD and Power Departments along with the PCCF and Chief Engineers of 
BRO as members to resolve issues. States of Sikkim, Arunachal Pradesh, J&K, Himachal 
Pradesh and Uttarakhand have constituted the Empowered Committee.
(n) A Standard Operating Procedure (SOP) with simplified procedure to ensure expeditious 
payment of Forest Clearance/Net present value/compensatory afforestation/cost of trees and 
other related payment to Forest authorities after getting Stage-I clearance for obtaining forest 
clearance has been issued on 18th Dec 2014.
Recommendation (Para  No. 30)
The Committee further note that the Chief Secretaries of State Governments of 
Arunachal Pradesh, Assam, J&K, Himachal Pradesh, Manipur, Nagaland, Sikkim, Tripura and 
Uttarakhand have been requested to constitute an Empowered Committee under their 
Chairmanship with Principal Secretaries of  Revenue, Forest, Mining, Public Works 
Department (PWD) and Power Departments along with the Principal Chief Conservators of 
Forests (PCCF) and Chief Engineers of BRO as members to resolve issues.  The Ministry of 
Environment & Forests has been requested that BRO may be exempted from clause 19 & 21 
of the Air (Prevention and Control of Pollution) Act 1981 for installation of stone crusher and 
setting up of Hot Mix Plant on the above areas.
Reply of the Government
The following measures have been taken to expedite the forest clearances and other 
issues with the State Governments:
(a) Empowered committees have been constituted and some States are holding regular 
meetings under the Chairmanship of Chief Secretaries to resolve critical issues.
(b) Regular review meeting with forest authorities has expedited Forest Clearance cases. 
(c) A large number of steps have been initiated by Government for timely disposal of forest 
clearance cases:
(i) Setting up of single window system at State level for speedy clearance.

50
(ii) Exemption of Compliance of Scheduled Tribe and other Forest Dwellers 
(Recognition of Forest Rights) Act 2006 to avoid delay in clearance of road 
projects within states of Arunachal Pradesh, Himachal Pradesh, Jammu & 
Kashmir, Uttarakhand and Sikkim accorded vide MoEF order dated 27 Apr 
2011.
(iii) Exemption for transfer and mutation of alternate Revenue Land for raising 
compensatory Afforestation for border roads within the State of Uttarakhand State accorded 
vide MoEF order dated 09 Dec 2013.
(iv) Requirement of certificate regarding non availability of alternate alignment has been 
dispensed with for BRO projects by MoEF vide their order dated 09 Dec 2013.
(v) Permission for processing division wise cases of BRO projects have been accorded by 
MoEF vide their order dated 09 Dec 2013.
(vi) A working group was constituted under the chairmanship of Secretary MoEF for 
expediting the forest clearance cases and its recommendations are under consideration.
(d) MoEF  vide their letter No 11-246/2014-FC dated 4 th July 2014 has accorded general 
approval under Section (2) of the Forest (Conservation) Act 1980 for diversion of forest land in 
the state of Arunachal Pradesh, Himachal Pradesh,  Uttarakhand & Sikkim for following :-
(i) Construction and widening of two lane roads by the BRO and other road construction 
agencies entrusted with the job by the Ministry of Defence, in the area falling within 100km 
kilometers aerial distance from the LAC and
(ii) widening of road (by the BRO and other road construction agencies) which are 
identified by the Ministry of Defence as link roads between Border Roads in the area within 
100 kilometer aerial distance from the LAC and National Highways/State Highways/other State 
Roads, subject to fulfillment of the conditions. 
(e) MoEF vide their letter dated 8 th Aug 2014 has accorded approval for working 
permission for tree cutting and commencement of work, if the required compensatory levies as 
per conditions stipulated in the in-principle approval are realized from the user agency and 
where necessary, for compensatory afforestation, transfer and mutation of non-forest/revenue 
forest land in favour of state Forest Department is affected.
(f)  Chief Secretaries of State Governments of Arunachal Pradesh, Assam ,J&K, Himachal 
Pradesh, Manipur, Nagaland, Sikkim, Tripura and Uttarakhand have been requested to 
constitute an Empowered Committee under their Chairmanship with Principal Secretaries of 
Revenue, Forest, Mining, Public Work Department(PWD) and Power Departments along with 
the  Principal Chief Conservator of Forest (PCCF) and Chief Engineers of BRO as members to 

51
resolve issues. States of Sikkim, Arunachal Pradesh, J&K, Himachal Pradesh and 
Uttarakhand have constituted the Empowered Committee.
(g) A Standard Operating Procedure (SOP) with simplified procedure to ensure expeditious 
payment of Forest Clearance/Net present value/compensatory afforestation/cost of trees and 
other related payment to Forest authorities after getting Stage-I clearance for obtaining forest 
clearance has been issued on 18th Dec 2014.
Recommendation (Para  No. 32)
The committee are of the view that measures taken by BRO and the Border Road 
Development Board (BRDB) may ease the construction of road work in border areas but it all 
depends upon the efficiency of the personnel working in various capacities. The Committee 
desire that Crawler Rock Drills for which the approval has been given for procurement, should 
be acquired at the earliest as it will ease lots of hardships which BRO is facing. The 
Committee desire that timelines of every project should be drawn and adhered to meticulously 
so that the delays in achieving the results are avoided.
Reply of the Government
A Long term Equipment Plan 2014-15 to 2018-19 for induction in BRO has been 
approved for Rs 3913 crores. 39 Nos Crawler Rock Drills has been received and deployed by 
BRO on various roads works. In addition to this an additional 15 Nos are sanctioned for 
procurement during 2014-15.  
Long term Roll on works Plan (LTROWP) has been prepared where in the probable 
date of completion of all projects has been fixed. In case of the any change the approval is 
required from the Ministry in consultation with Army.
Recommendation (Para  No. 37)
The Committee note that BRO has projected a demand of Rs.698.14 crore against 
maintenance during Revised Expenditure 2013-14, however, the funds allotted was only 
Rs.566.49 crore.  Similarly, against a Budget Expenditure a demand of Rs.749.64 crore for 
2014-15 has been made but the fund allotted is Rs.637.00 crore only. It seems that the 
Ministry of Road Transport and Highways, which provides the budget to BRO is not aware of 
the ground realities and importance of maintaining the roads in all weather conditions.  The 
Committee feel that the difficulty regarding non-availability of funds being faced by BRO is due 
to the dual control of BRO. Therefore, the Committee desire that the Border Roads 
Organisation should be devoid of dual control and its budget should rests with the Ministry of 
Defence only.
Reply of the Government
In order to improve the operational efficiency of BRO and achieve clarity and unity of 
command, Government of India (Allocation of Business rules 1961) has been amended vide 

52
notification dated 9 th January 2015 to include ‘all matters relating to Border Roads 
Development Board and Border Roads Organisation (BRO)’ in the list of business allocated to 
Ministry of Defence. The budget allocation from BE 2015-16 onwards for BRO has been done 
Ministry of Defence (Demand No 21). The allocations of Budget for BRO for (BE) 2015-16 
under Non Plan (NP) is Rs 3030.57 crores and under Plan is Rs 450.00 crores.
Recommendation (Para  No. 38)
National War Memorial
The Committee note that there has been a demand for construction of National War 
Memorial by various ex-servicemen organizations. The Committee are happy to note that Rs. 
200 crores have been allocated in the Defence Services Estimates for the Year 2014-15 for
this purpose. The Committee desire that all out efforts may be made so that National War 
Memorial may become a reality soon.
Reply of the Government
The proposal for the construction of National War Memorial and National War Museum 
is under consideration of the Government. The proposal is being processed for obtaining 
Government approval for the project.
Recommendation (Para  No. 44)
The Committee also feel that coordination between ex-servicemen and the Department 
has been lacking and this fact that has also been admitted by the Secretary, Ex-Servicemen 
Welfare. The Committee are of the view that a forum should be created within the Department 
which can deal directly with the recognised ESM associations, so that the two ways 
communication between them may be formed to understand each other better and to have 
more ideas to take effective steps to mitigate the grievances of ESM. 
Reply of the Government
A committee has been constituted under the Chairmanship Hon’ble Raksha Mantri for 
interaction with the recognized ESM Associations at regular intervals.
Recommendation (Para  No. 45)
The Committee have been recommending in their various reports for lateral induction of 
Ex. Servicemen in Central Para Military Forces and State Police Force. The    Committee note 
that so far no scheme for lateral induction of ESM into Central Para Military Forces (CPMF) 
and State Police Force has been introduced.  As per the existing guidelines, the retired Armed 
Forces personnel are recruited against the quota earmarked for ESM and they do not get any 
seniority or pay protection, therefore, very few ESM have opted for these jobs. 

53
Recommendation (Para  No. 46)
As the lateral induction of ESM into Central Armed Police Forces (CAPFs) and State 
Police Forces has still not been implemented, the Committee, therefore, recommend that 
Ministry of Defence should have high level regular meeting with Ministry of Home Affairs so 
that guidelines regarding recruitment could suitably be amended to give seniority to ESM while 
providing employment in CAPFs. The Committee desire that the quota in respect of ESM 
should be increased in Central Armed Police Forces and they should be given seniority and 
pay protection so that Ministry of Home Affairs can have disciplined and trained manpower. 
However, lateral induction of ESM into CAPFs must be given serious thought.
Recommendation (Para  No. 47)
The Committee also desire that State Governments should also be requested to make 
amendment in the recruitment rules for lateral transfer of ESM into the State Police Forces.
Reply of the Government on Para No. 45, 46 & 47
(a) ESM are recruited in the Central Armed Police Forces (CAPF) as per the 
reservation policy in force. Ministry of Home Affairs (Police II Division) vide letter 
dated 10th April 2012 communicated broad guidelines regarding recruitment of ESM 
against vacancies in CAPFs. As per the existing provisions ESM recruited in the 
CAPFs do not get any protection of seniority or last pay drawn. The pay fixation for 
ESM who are re-employed is governed by the DoP&T order 3/19/2009/Est (Pay II) 
dated 05 Apr 2010.
(b) The issue of Lateral Induction in CAPFs was taken up with MHA. In response MHA 
has intimated that the CAPFs have not agreed to induction of Defence personnel 
(other Ranks) to the CAPFs/creation of a separate cadre in CAPFs for Army men. 
However, Assam Rifles (AR) has concurred with the proposal of induction of 1000 
Army personnel as a separate cadre and has requested MHA to issue suitable 
guidelines for preparation of Recruitment Rules for said cadre. The main reasons 
put forth by CAPFs for not agreeing to the said proposal are as under:-
(i) The Army personnel are maintaining one rank above CAPFs personnel with respect 
to pay thus; pay fixation will create disparity within similar ranks. Pay fixation under 
Scheme is also different in Army (8, 16& 24 years) and CAPFs (10, 20& 30 years).
(ii) Difficulty in maintaining younger age profile of CAPFs due to older age profile of 
lateral inductees.
(iii) Difficulty in fixing seniority of lateral inductees vis-à-vis CAPFs personnel.

54
(iv)The role of Defence Forces (safeguarding the Country against external aggression) 
is different from that of the CAPFs (internal security, Anti Naxal Operations, Law & 
Order duties etc).
(v) It will affect the promotional prospects of CAPFs personnel who are already facing 
stagnation, as the Army personnel will always be senior to CAPFs personnel by 
virtue of younger age at entry level and better promotional prospects in the Army. 
Thus, it will lead to large scale disgruntlement and demoralization amongst CAPFs 
personnel.
(vi)Creation of new cadre/sub cadre may bring discontent in CAPF troops and will also 
create complication viz. Charter of duties, deployment, identification of post 
including promotional post, inter-se-seniority and difficulty in maintaining command 
& control.
In view of the above, it appears that MHA is not in favour of lateral induction of Armed 
Forces Personnel in the CAPFs moreover, they are not also in favour of increasing the 
reservation quota for Ex-Servicemen beyond 10% of the vacancies.
In respect of Recommendation No.47, it is submitted that all the State 
Governments/UTs have already been requested to intimate the reservation quota, if any, and 
the number of ESM recruited in the State/UTs Police Force during the last three years. 
Information has been received from a few States/UTs. On receipt of complete information from 
the States/UTs all the State Government/UTs will be requested to make amendment in the 
recruitment rules for lateral transfer of ESM into the State Police Forces.
Recommendation (Para  No. 48)
The Committee note that the primary responsibility for providing assistance to World 
War Veterans and their widows is that of the respective State Governments. As the   financial 
assistance provided was inadequate, therefore, the Department of Ex.Servicemen Welfare 
took up the matter with the State Governments/Union Territory Administrations in 2009 for 
enhancing the assistant to a minimum of Rs. 3000/- p.m. The states of A&N Islands, Andhra 
Pradesh, Bihar, Chandigarh, Chhattisgarh, Delhi, Goa, Gujarat, Jharkhand, Karnataka, 
Madhya Pradesh, Maharashtra, Meghalaya, Nagaland, Puducherry, Rajasthan, Sikkim, Tamil 
Nadu, Telangana, Tripura, Uttar Pradesh and Uttrakhand which are paying in the range of Rs. 
3000/- to Rs. 6000/- per month. The States like Assam, Haryana, Himanchal Pradesh, J&K, 
Kerala, Mizoram, Orissa, Punjab and West Bengal are paying a meagre amount of Rs. 500 to 
1500 per month. The Committee are surprised to find that the States of Arunachal Pradesh 
and Manipur are not paying anything at all.
Reply of the Government
Arunchal Pradesh has reported nil World War II Veterans/Widows population.  Manipur 
has started paying Rs. 1200/-pm w.e.f. from 5 Jan 2015.

55
Recommendation (Para  No. 49)
The World War I was fought between 1914   to 1918 and The World War II from 1939 to 
1945, therefore, the  veterans of  World War I might not be alive except very few and veterans 
of  World War II might be in the ripe old age. The Committee understand that there are very 
few world war veterans in the country and for a small number of veterans; the State scan bear 
financial assistance of Rs. 6000/- to Rs. 10,000/- per month. The Committee want    that the 
country should not forget the sacrifices made by these veterans and provide assistance in their 
old age. Therefore, the Committee desire that a decent amount between  Rs. 6000 to Rs. 
10,000 may be provided to each veteran. 
Reply of the Government
Chief Secretaries and Directors/Secretaries of RSBs of all States/UTs have been 
requested to enhance the rate of monthly financial assistance for World War veterans and 
their widows, to Rs. 6000/- to Rs. 10,000/- per month per veteran. 
Recommendation (Para  No. 50)
During the oral evidence the Committee came to know that gallantry award winners are 
also not getting uniform financial benefits as different States have different policy in awarding 
these benefits to the winners.  The Committee are of the opinion that the soldiers who have 
fought for the Nation without caring for their lives, a uniform financial benefits should be given 
to all gallantry award winners across the country and if need be, the Government should back 
it up with legislative bindings.
Reply of the Government
It is stated that the financial / cash rewards for Gallantry awardees varies from State to State 
as it is prerogative of the State Governments.  Central Government has fixed uniform 
monetary allowances to the recipients of Gallantry Awards as per the following details:
Name of Awards Monetary allowance
(Rupees per month)
ParamVir Chakra (PVC) 10,000
Ashok Chakra (AC) 6,000
MahaVir Chakra (MVC) 5,000
Kirti Chakra (KC) 4,500
Vir Chakra (Vr C) 3,500
Shaurya Chakra (SC) 3,000
Sena Medal / NavoSena Medal / 
Vayu Medal  (SM/NM/VM) -
Gallantry
1,000

56
Recommendation (Para  No. 51)
The Committee note that the appointment of a Veteran Commission to address their 
grievances, was announced long back but the appointment is still pending.  The Committee 
desire that the Veteran Commission should be appointed at the earliest with wide judicial 
powers.
Reply of the Government
In pursuance of Hon’ble President’s statement made in the joint session of parliament 
on 9 th June, 2014, regarding Government’s decision to appoint a Veteran Commission, the 
National Commission for Ex-Servicemen Bill’2015 has been drafted in order to set up the 
National Commission for Ex-Servicemen. The comments of Department of Legislative affairs 
have been obtained on the Bill and follow-up action is being taken in accordance with the 
guidelines/procedure laid down for legislative proposals to set up such Bodies
Recommendation (Para  No. 52)
The Committee appreciate the good work done by the Eco Task Force of Territorial 
Army at various places in maintaining the ecological balance, aforestation, grassland 
development, restoration of habitat for indigenous wildlife and other faunal species, 
improvement of ground water regime, improvement of soil quality and fertility in the area and 
improvement in bio-diversity.  The work of task force was much praised in Uttarakhand, which 
is totally funded by the State Government.  Therefore, the Committee desire that more Eco 
Task Battalions should be raised by central funding, where on the one hand ESM get re-
employment and on the other the country will have dedicated work force to turn the area green 
even in difficult terrains.
Reply of the Government
Eco Task Force (ETF) have been created to execute specific ecology related projects with 
military like work culture and commitment.  ETF use technical expertise of the respective State 
Forest Department to prevent ecological degradation and promote environment. As on date 
there are eight such ETF Battalions having 21 operational companies under their ambit.  Of 
these six ETF Battalion Headquarter and 14 companies are funded by Ministry of Environment, 
Forests and Climate Change (MoEF& CC) and two Battalion Headquarters and seven 
companies are funded by State Governments. 
2. ETF Battalions are funded by MoEF& CC / State Governments who bear the cost of 
raising, maintenance, pay and allowances of the units.  The State Forest Department provides 
technical supervision and guidance including land, provision of saplings, budget for 
accommodation at the project site, telephones, electrification, fencing materials and related 
ancillaries and equipment for afforestation. 
3. The comments of Ministry of Environment, Forests and Climate Change (MoEF& CC) on 
the recommendations of the Standing Committee of Defence have also been obtained. MOEF 

57
&CC have indicated that Eco Task Force (ETF) Scheme was initiated in 1982 with the twin-
objective of Ex-servicemen’s welfare/rehabilitation and eco-restoration of degraded 
ecosystems through afforestation, soil conservation & water resource management techniques.  
At present six Battalions of Ex-servicemen/Territorial Army located in Uttarakhand, Rajasthan, 
J&K and Assam are funded by Ministry of Environment & Forest & Climate Change. 
Establishment cost of ETF is reimbursed by Ministry of Environment & Forest & Climate 
Change to Ministry of Defence. 
4. Considering the commendable works done by the ETF battalions some states have 
requested Ministry of Environment & Forest & Climate Change to financially support them in 
raising the Eco Battalions. In this context, Ministry of Environment & Forest & Climate Change 
has intimated that at present budget allocation is not enough to meet the expenditure on 
existing six battalions and around Rs. 81 crores of pending bills are yet to be reimbursed to 
MoD by Ministry of Environment & Forest & Climate Change.  Therefore, it may not be possible 
for the Ministry of Environment & Forest & Climate Change to support additional battalions. 
However, the State Governments may consider raising Eco Task Force battalions from their 
own resources as is being done by States like Delhi and Himachal Pradesh.  Technical support 
and advice can be provided by the State Forest Departments & Ministry of Environment & 
Forest & Climate Change. 
Recommendation (Para  No. 53)
The Committee note that One Rank One Pension(OROP) implies that uniform pension 
be paid to the Armed Forces Personnel retiring in the same rank with the same length of 
service irrespective of their  date of retirement and any future enhancement in the rates of 
pension to be automatically passed on to the past pensioners. This will bridge the gap 
between the rate of pension of the current pensioners, the past pensioners, and also future 
enhancement.
Recommendation (Para  No. 54)
The Committee also note that a Working Group under the Chairpersonship of Controller 
General of Defence Accounts (CGDA) has been constituted for examining the proposal 
submitted by the Services and preparing Government orders for implementation of OROP 
w.e.f. 01.04.2014, however, the Working Group could not arrive at any consensus and the 
modalities for implementation of OROP are still under consideration. An allocation of Rs. 500 
crore was announced in the interim budget and in the current years, an allocation of Rs. 1000 
crore has been made for implementation of OROP. 
Recommendation (Para  No. 55)
Since the Hon’ble Prime Minister has already made a commitment and the Finance 
Minister has provided Rs. 1000 crore in the current budget, the OROP must be implemented 
at the earliest. 

58
Reply of the Government on Para No. 53, 54 & 55
The modalities for implementation of One Rank One Pension are still under consideration of 
the Government.
Recommendation (Para  No. 56)
The Committee note that financial assistance of Rs. 16000/- for marriage of daughter 
(maximum two) is provided to ESM and their widows, up to the rank of Hav/equivalent, from 
the Armed Forces Flag Day (AFFDF). A financial assistance is also provided to 
ESM/dependents out of AFFDF for their identified personal needs such as Penury Grant and 
Child Education Grant, etc. The amount available is not sufficient to meet the annual 
requirement. Additional funds to the tune of Rs. 79 crore are required to clear the backlog of 
50,000 applications during the current financial year 2014-15. The Committee also note that in 
order to implement the enhanced rate of Rs. 50,000 as Marriage Grant, another additional 
amount of Rs. 10.30 crore (approx.) per annum will be required.
Recommendation (Para  No. 57)
The Committee further note that the Ministry are making efforts to strengthen the 
AFFDF corpus through some options such as enhancing the Services’ Contribution to AFFDF, 
exploring the other sources of income such as contribution from CSR budget of PSUs and 
sharing of CSD canteen profit, etc. Presently, the upward revision of marriage grant may not 
be possible in view of the limited funds available for financial assistance. The proposal will be 
considered once the available funds are sufficient to meet the requirement.
Recommendation (Para  No. 58)
The Committee desire that an additional allocation of Rs. 79 crore to clear the backlog 
of 50000 applications and Rs. 10.30 crore for enhanced rate of Rs. 50,000 per application 
should be given to Department of Ex.servicemen at the Revised Estimates stage to clear all 
the pending applications at enhanced rate.
Reply of the Government on Para No. 56, 57 & 58
The matter has been taken up with Financial Planning Division of Ministry of Defence 
for allocation of additional Rs.79 Crore to clear the backlog of 50000 application, and Rs.10.30 
Crore for enhanced rate of marriage Grant @ Rs.50,000/- per application.

59
Recommendation (Para  No. 59)
The Committee note that the Military Engineer Services (MES) are having Rs. One lakh 
crore worth of works coming up in the next decade and also it is trying to enhance its capacity.  
As informed by Engineer-in-Chief, MES is also plagued with deficiencies in manpower to carry 
out the requisite work.
Recommendation (Para  No. 60)
The Committee also note that a number of proposals have been sent by MES to the 
Ministry of Defence.  During the oral evidence, the Committee were not assured whether the 
proposals would be cleared by the Ministry or not.  The Defence Secretary gave a reply on the 
set patterns stating that there is hard budgetary constraint implying the proposals may not be 
cleared till more budget is infused. 
Recommendation (Para  No. 61)
The Committee therefore, recommend that the Ministry of Defence should have high 
level meeting with the Ministry of Finance to get projected and envisaged requirements of 
MES so that there would be no delay in the projects.  The committee also desire that problems 
of human resource in MES also be resolved by the Ministry because quality manpower is 
essential to carry out the proposed mammoth tasks of the MES.  The Committee are of the 
view that MES should involved private sector in non-Military works such as making office and 
residential buildings, etc. and focus itself on core areas of work in strategic places.
Reply of the Government on Para No. 59, 60 & 61
1. Approximately Rs. 1.59 lakh crore worth of works are under various stages of planning/ 
sanction. Assurance has been given by the Ministry of Defence that budgetary support for all 
the proposals would be given as and when the work is sanctioned.  The details are as given 
below :-
(a) Works sanctioned - Rs. 12474 crore.
(b) Works under process for sanction - Rs. 55102 crore.
(c) Proposals under preparation - Rs. 91490 crore.
at Service Headquarters

60
2. To plan and execute works in a time bound manner and to avoid over burdening the 
existing MES formations, following cases have been taken up with the Ministry :-
(a) MES Accretions.
Ser No Project Officers Subordinates
(i) 11th Plan and 12th Plan 142 877
(ii) Dedicated establishments for Coast 
Guard
135 4329
(iii) Chief Engineer for Southern Air 
Command and Special Projects
61 305
Total 338 5511
(b) Making up existing deficiencies of MES Manpower by restoration of deemed abolitions 
through recruitment of 24,196 personnel and balance of 31,712 by outsourcing.
(c) Raising of Chief Engineer Zone for Leh- Ladakh region.  
3. In order to improve the efficiency and make the existing procedures contemporary,   a 
number of initiatives as under have also been taken up with the Ministry; for which a 
presentation was made to the Defence Secretary on 03 Dec 14 and Hon’ble Raksha Mantri on 
22 Dec 14 :-
(a) Delegation of  listing of wks services and go ahead based on rough cost.
(b) Revision of Scales of Accommodation 2009.
(c) Maintenance norms at par with CPWD.
(d) Integrating all MES establishments for automation and enterprise resource planning 
solution through MES NET.
(e) Revision of Regulations of MES.
(f) Revision of Contract Conditions.
(g) Revision of Defence Works Procedure 2007.
(h) Amendment to SRO 92 of 1957 on Field Service Liability in respect of MES civilian 
officers and subordinates.
(j) Resolution of equivalence between Military and Civilian officers.

61
4. All the above cases are under active consideration of the Ministry.  Recently the 
Ministry has revised the maintenance norms and financial powers of MES executives, which 
will enhance the productivity of the organisation and improve user satisfaction.    
5. MES works are planned and designed in house and executed by civil contractors. 
However, where required, consultancy through private parties is resorted to exploit their 
domain expertise. Public Private Participation model is not in consonance with present policy 
on execution of works in Military Engineer Services, which is bound by General Financial Rule 
(GFR) 2005 and Defence Work Procedure (DWP) 2007. Since there is no scope for revenue 
generation, Public Private Participation model is not suitable for construction of defence 
infrastructure. Notwithstanding, the Ministry is actively considering pilot Public Private 
Participation in the field of power generation with renewable energy, which is a very 
specialised field.
Recommendation (Para  No. 62)
The Committee note that the Married Accommodation Project has been created to 
provide married accommodation for the three Services, with the aim of eradicating the 
deficiency of married accommodation for service personnel.
Recommendation (Para  No. 63)
The Committee note that MAP phase I is almost over but in Phase II only 13% work is 
completed and as admitted by Engineer-in-Chief, the MAP project is running 2 to 3 years 
behind schedule. The Committee are perturbed over the fact that although MAP has been 
created solely to provide married accommodation to service personnel but the results have not 
been encouraging since projects are running behind schedule. The Committee desire that 
engineers working on MAP should acquire technology of quick construction of houses from the 
private sector in India and from developed nations, so that our service personnel who are 
generally away from their families can have peaceful life with their families in the married 
accommodation.
Reply of the Government on Para No. 62 & 63
The progress of  MAP Phase II project has been slow due to  overall liquidity crunch 
faced by construction companies, slow performance by contractors, environmental issues 
(treecutting, costal zone clearance), demolition of old buildings, disputed land title etc, 
shortage / increase in cost of material like cement, steel, aggregate, sand etc. 
Slow moving projects were identified by DG(MAP). DG (MAP) has thereafter cancelled   
a number of contracts and retendered them at the risk and cost of the original contractors as 
one of  the  measures to speed up the progress of the projects. As a result the progress of the 
projects has improved. A  Board of Officers (BOO) was constituted to study the lessons learnt 
from Phase-I and Phase -II projects and suggest remedial actions. The recommendations of 
the BOO are being considered for implementation in Phase-III. The BOO has also studied 

62
latest technologies and methodologies prevalent in construction industry for faster construction 
for incorporating in future MAP projects.  A pilot project at Mumbai using the latest technology 
namely “Shear Wall Technology“ for faster construction has already been sanctioned. The 
tender action for this project is in progress. A number of projects of Phase III have been 
identified for incorporation of such latest technologies for faster and better quality construction.
Recommendation (Para  No. 64)
The Committee are unhappy to note the instances of supply of inferior quality of CSD 
products as well as their pilferage and reaching these in open market.  Therefore, the 
Committee are of the opinion that there should be a marking on the product of CSD after they 
are purchased from the manufacturers to avoid any pilferage.  The Committee also desire that 
CSD must keep on improving its procedure relating to sampling and quality check so that only 
best quality items are delivered to the consumers. 
Reply of the Government
CSD purchases items directly from the manufacturers, brand owners or sole 
distributors/importers of the product in the country. All the items approved for introduction in 
CSD inventory are cleared by various Committees such as Preliminary Screening Committee 
(PSC), Price Negotiation Committee (PNC) etc and finally approved by the Board of 
Administration (BOA) comprising of independent senior officers of the Department and 
Chaired by the General Manger (GM), CSD. All edible items prior to placement of initial order 
undergo testing by Army Medical Corps and Composite Food Laboratory (CFL) to ensure 
quality.  In addition to this quality control tests are also done at regular intervals as per 
departmental policy to insure quality of products. 
Introduction of Canteen Smart Card and use of Canteen Inventory Management 
Systems (CIMS) ver 5.06 has helped genuine consumers and curbed pilferage/sale of goods 
to unauthorized consumers. This has curbed the sale of goods in the civil market and such 
complaints are no longer being reported from the environment. 
Regarding marking on products after purchase from manufacturer to avoid pilferage, it 
is stated that the firms are not supplying items to CSD with ‘CSD only’ marking. The 
manufacturers are supplying goods directly to all depots and small suppliers are supplying 
goods through Base Depot.  These items/goods are supplied in sealed case packs to CSD 
Depots. Many suppliers deliver stores to CSD Area Depots though local clearing and 
forwarding (C & F) agents from the local warehouse.  It will not be possible for them to arrange 
fresh stock from local C & F in case CSD insists for special marking on the product. Besides 
unsold goods, non moving items can be returned to the firms who can then sell them in the 
civil market but with ‘CSD Only’ marking unsold goods returned to the firms are of no use as 
these would not be sold in the civil market and become a dead loss.  
Supply of identical goods to CSD and civil market without any difference in 
marking/logo by Firm/Suppliers has helped in changing the perception of the consumers who 
in the past felt that goods market “For CSD only” were inferior to the similar products available 
in the civil market. Further, it will also help CSD in carrying out quality checks & cost 
comparison in a more efficient way.  

63
Recommendation (Para  No. 65)
The Committee also note the difficulties being faced by the Ex-servicemen, who are 
residing in far-flung areas in getting CSD items.  The Committee are of the view that along with 
mobile canteens, concept of online purchases should also be encouraged because extension 
counters or mobile canteens may not have all the items in required quantity.  These online 
purchases may be made through smart phone applications or using internet and Ex-
servicemen and their family members can order exact number and type of items required.  
These items could be delivered at their door step without bothering them to come to city just to 
buy them.  For the purpose, CSD can have private sector participation in sending the items to 
the ESM.
Reply of the Government
CSD cannot be compared with the private models of online sale of stores. The CSD 
stores are procured by CSD/CSD depots from dealers and then supplied to URCs. CSD pays 
its dealers from the budget allotted by the Government. URC makes payment from their non-
public funds to CSD Depot in advance for supply of stores.
Online purchases require interlinking of all URCs on the cloud server/Internet with 
access to bank gateways.  However, URCs are private ventures of units/formations and many 
of them are located in far-flung, remote field areas where internet access in not available. The 
online purchase and delivery of stores will require carriage/transportation cost which would be 
borne by customers which may lead to increase in price for consumer and would defeat the 
main objective of CSD of providing good to the troops and their dependent at a price cheaper 
than the market price.  Linking of URCs to internet may be a security risk as this may give out 
the location and strength of serving and veterans in a particular location. 
Notwithstanding a pilot project for Online Sale of URC stores is being taken up by 
Golden Star URC of HQ Southern Command (Sigs) for veterans.  Based on the response and 
success of pilot project same will be replicated in other cities for ESM/Veterans.  
Recommendation (Para  No. 66)
The Committee note that like other Services, Coast Guard Organisation is also deficient 
in manpower.  Out of 13839 manpower sanctioned for Coast Guard, only 10646 number of 
employees are in position.  One of the reasons cited by the Coast Guard is that, intake has 
been restricted due to limited allocation of vacancies for training by the Indian Navy due to 
availability of limited infrastructure at INA Ezhimala, INS Chilka and various other Naval 
training establishments.  The Committee are unhappy over the prevailing situation that even 
after many years of formation of this Force, exclusive training academy for the Coast Guard 
has not been established resulting in lower intake of manpower. 

64
Reply of the Government
1. The Approval-in-Principle was accorded for establishing of ICG Academy at Azhikkal by 
Cabinet Committee on Security (CCS) on 03 October, 2012. A 'Go-Ahead sanction' amounting 
to Rs.30.50 crore was accorded by Ministry of Defenceon 16thOctober, 2012. 
2. M/s MEACON Ltd. a PSU under Ministry of Steel has been engaged as Consultant for 
the project from Concept to Commissioning.
3. On 12 thDecember,2013,Ministry of Defence had accorded approval for an amount of 
Rs. 53.22 crore for  the following deposit works which are in progress:-
Sl. No. Item of Work Cost
(Rs. in crore)
(a) 33 KV power supply to site by KSEB 08.96
(b) Water supply line to site by KWA 06.28
(c) Construction of 
retaining wall by 
Kerala State Irrigation 
Department
(i)  River front area 27.77
(ii)  Stream/thodu 
sides
10.21
Total 53.22
4. Administrative approval to the revised estimated cost of Rs.990.19 crore for 
infrastructure development of the ICG Academy has been accorded by the Hon’ble Raksha 
Mantri with a direction to seek the approval of CCS for the increased cost of the proposal, as 
the original approval has been granted by CCS.  Accordingly, the case is being processed for 
approval of CCS.  The revised infrastructure cost of the ICG Academy project is as under:-
Sl. No. Item Amount
(Rs. in crore)
(a) The cost of land for leasing of 164.22 acres of 
land for 90 years including service tax and 
other charges 
23.26
(b) Amount sanctioned for Deposit Works 53.22
(c) AEs concurred-in by MoD(Fin/CG) 913.71
Total 990.19
5. Zonal Layout Plan and Master Plan of ICG Academy have been finalised.  Concept 
Drawings (CDs) of all buildings have been completed and Preliminary Drawings and Detailed 

65
Project Report (DPR) are under preparation by M/s MEACON Ltd.  Soil survey and soil 
investigation is also in progress.
Recommendation (Para  No. 67)
The Committee are of the opinion that for efficient working and keeping vigil on sea, 
trained and required manpower is must for Coast Guard.  Therefore, the Committee desire that 
the Ministry should take necessary steps for filling of the vacant posts at the earliest and 
establishment of a Coast Guard Academy.
Reply of the Government
The steps taken for filling up of the vacant posts in Indian Coast Guard are as follows:
1. Officers
(a) Recruitment of officers has been increased from 35 to130 officers (approx) per annum 
from 2009.  
(b) Manpower of Coast Guard Selection Board has been augmented for screening of more 
number of candidates.
(c) Short Service appointment of CPL holders and Women officers have been introduced.
(d) Increased promotion of outstanding subordinate officers to Assistant Commandant as 
departmental promotee.
(e) Wider electronic / print media publicity to enhance awareness about Indian Coast 
Guard and to encourage youth to join Coast Guard.
(f) Application for officer candidates are being received 'Online'. 
(g) Special Recruitment Drive are being carried out to fill up the backlog SC/ST vacancies.
2. Enrolled Personnel (EP)
(a) Recruitment of enrolled personnel have been increased from 350 to 700EP (approx) 
per annum from 2009. 
(b) The number of recruitment zones have been increased to cover the entire length & 
breadth of the country.
(c) Wider electronic / print media publicity to enhance awareness about Indian Coast 
Guard.
(d) Applications for Naviks are being received 'Online'. 
3. Civilian Personnel
(a) Coast Guard is having constant liaison with the Staff Selection Commission for 
sponsoring of the candidates.

66
(b) Case has been initiated for filling up of vacancies on deputation basis as per 
Recruitment Rules.
(c) DPCs are being conducted regularly for filling up of promotional posts.
(d) The unfilled vacancies earmarked for deputation/promotion have already been notified 
in Employment News for filling up the vacancies through deputation.
Recommendation (Para  No. 69)
The Committee note from the data supplied that to improve and maintain the product 
quality, the DPSUs are taking various measures.  However, there are problems of delay in 
supplying products and quality of products.  The Committee desire that a proper time frame 
should be maintained by the DPSUs and there should not be any delay in supplying critical 
items required by the forces as in the case of submarine and LCA projects.
Recommendation (Para  No. 70)
The Committee find from the data furnished by the Ministry that some of the DPSUs are 
investing huge sums of money on research and development in their respective organisations.  
The Bharat Electronics Limited (BEL) is investing 50% of its profit after tax and the Hindustan 
Aeronautics Limited (HAL) is investing 40.2% but some organisations are investing less than 
1% of profit after tax on research and development.  Therefore, the Committee desire that for 
improvement in products and for innovation, the DPSUs should fix definite percentage of their 
profits on R&D, so that the country could have the benefit of new and quality products.
Recommendation (Para  No. 71)
The Committee note from the data supplied the value of exports of DPSUs is not 
encouraging and some of them like Goa Shipyard Limited, MDL and MIDHANI have not 
acquired any export orders during the last year.  The Committee desire that while supplying to 
the forces, DPSUs should strive for exporting of quality equipment to generate profit and use it 
in further development of their respective organisations.
Reply of the Government on Para No. 69, 70 & 71
The recommendations of the Committee on Product Quality and timely Supplies to 
the Forces, fixing definite percentage of the product on R&D and promotion of exports are 
very pertinent.  In the MOU to be signed with DPSUs for the year 2015-16, all these points 
have been factored in by giving adequate weightage in the following manner:-
(i) Important projects have been identified and delivery dates have been 
fixed;
(ii) Quality parameters with verifiable indicators have been laid down;
(iii) Emphasis has been given on increasing expenditure on R&D;
(iv) Enhanced targets have been fixed for exports.

67
The performance of the DPSUs on these parameters is being monitored periodically 
by DDP during various review meetings.
Recommendation (Para  No. 72)
The Committee note that this year a sum of Rs. 94,587.95 crore has been allocated in 
the form of capital grant.  The Committee also note that during 2013-14, there was 
underspending of Rs. 720.41 crore. The Committee desire that the Ministry should take 
necessary steps like adhering to time lines etc. so that underspending could be avoided. 
Reply of the Government
The figure of under spending of Rs. 720.41 cr. cited above is basedupon information 
given in response to Question No. 32(ii) of Examination of Demands for Grants of the Ministry 
of Defence for the year 2014-15 in respect of Demand No. 27.  This only gives details of heads 
where there was under spending.  There has also been over spending under other heads and 
the net position is of Rs. 252.82 cr. as over expenditure.  The overall position is tabulated 
below:
(Rs. in crores)
Service/ 
Department
Final Grant (Net) Expenditure Under-spending (+) 
/ Over Spending (-)
Army 15,038.63 14,433.29 605.34 (+)
Navy 19,385.62 20,358.85 973.23 (-)
Air Force 38,708.42 38,614.93 93.49 (+)
DGOF 465.96 465.34 0.62(+)
DRDO 5,261.60 5,241.52 20.08(+)
DGQA 12.00 11.12 0.88(+)
Total 78,872.23 79,125.05 252.82(-)
Recommendation (Para  No. 73)
The Committee note that for capital acquisition this year Army projected Rs. 9,455.53 
crore but only Rs. 2,084.15 crore has been allocated; in the case of Navy the projection was 
Rs. 3,012.15 crore  but only Rs. 663.92 crore allocated; joint staff projected Rs. 41.61 crore 
and only Rs. 9.17 crore has been allocated. The worst case is with Air Force where it projected 
for Rs. 12000 crore but given only Rs. 2644.99 crore.  It is surprising to note that out of Rs. 
24509.29 croreprojection, the Ministry of Finance could only give Rs. 5402.23 crore.  It is 
beyond imagination of the Committee that in the absence of budget for new schemes, how the 
forces would get equipment in future, therefore, the Committee desire that as the upcoming 

68
contracts are based on the budget allocation of the new schemes only, full allocation should be 
made under this head.  
Reply of the Government
The allocation of Rs. 5,402.23 cr., against a projected requirement of Rs. 24,509.29 
cr., pertains to New Schemes only and not to Capital Acquisition, as a whole.  The 
allocation for Capital Acquisition includes amount ofRs. 69,745.80 cr.for Committed 
Liabilities, as per requirements projected by the Services.  This expenditure also 
contributes to the acquisition of defence equipment.
The projection for New Schemes is based upon expectations of approvals of new projects.  
However, it has been seen that only a small number of cases projected are finally approved 
given the various approvals required.  As such, allocation of the full amount projected for 
New Schemes may not be necessary.
However, the observation of the Committee was conveyed to the Ministry of Finance vide 
D.O. No. 3(4)/Bud-I/2013/06/DefSecy/2015 dated 14.01.15.
Recommendation (Para  No. 74)
The Committee also note that as compared to the committed liabilities, every year 
capital budget for new schemes is going down.  They are unhappy to learn that total capital 
expenditure which was Rs. 15,852.95 crore in the year 2010-11 has been decreasing every 
year and in the year 2013-14 it has come down to Rs. 14433.29 crore.  The Committee are of 
the opinion that the Ministry of Finance is not able to understand the requirement of capital 
modernization budget or Ministry of Defence has not projected its case well, otherwise such a 
situation has not arisen.  Considering the situation of low allocation to the capital budget every 
year, the Committee recommend that capital budget of the Ministry of Defence should be 
enhanced so that modernization of forces could take place and new equipment, platforms, 
vessels, aircraft, etc. could be inducted and infrastructure created.
Reply of the Government
The slight decrease in capital expenditure of the Army is not solely due to lower 
allocation as would be evident from the data tabulated below:
(Rs. in crores)
Year Budget Estimates Revised 
Estimates
Expenditure
2010-11 17250.84 15641.16 15852.95
2011-12 19210.69 16005.69 14947.82
2012-13 19237.80 15749.30 14760.69
2013-14 17883.83 14967.25 14433.29
However, the observation of the Committee was conveyed to the Ministry of Finance vide 
D.O. No. 3(4)/Bud-I/2013/06/DefSecy/2015 dated 14.01.15.

69
B. RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS, WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY 
THE GOVERNMENT AND COMMENTED UPON
Recommendation (Para  No.1)
The Committee note that Budget Estimates (Net) for the year 2014-15 are for Rs. 
2,29,000 crore, which comprises Revenue Outlay of Rs. 1,34,412.05 crore and Capital Outlay 
of Rs. 94,587.95 crore. Although Defence expenditure has been increasing over the years, the 
percentage increase in Defence expenditure since 2000-2001 has not been consistent. The 
Defence expenditure in percentage terms increased by a healthy 26.29% in the year 2004-
2005 in comparison to the preceding year.  Such an increase was only witnessed in the years 
2008-09 and 2009-10, when the percentage growth was 24.59% and 24.13%, respectively. 
However, during the year 2010-11, the percentage growth declined to 8.70%. In the 
subsequent years, although slight increase was seen but it never touched the level of growth 
achieved in the years 2004-05, 2008-09 and 2009-10.  During the years 2011-12 and 2012-13, 
the percentage increase was 10.90% and 6.36%, respectively.  The Committee are satisfied to 
some extent to find that in the year 2013-14, the growth was 12.05% and this year the growth 
in the budget is 12.44%.  However, as stated by the Ministry during oral evidence, this growth 
in the budget is not sufficient   for the projects and modernization of the Services. The 
Committee have also noted a revealing fact that revenue expenditure of Army is on rise since 
2009-10 when it was 76% and touched 82% in 2013-14 leaving a little for capital expenditure.  
Therefore, the Committee desire that at least the growth in the budget should be such that 
would ensure sufficient funds with the Services in both the heads i.e. Revenue and Capital. 
Reply of the Government
Higher rate of growth in defence expenditure during 2008-09 and 2009-10 is mainly 
attributable to payment of arrears pursuant to implementation of recommendations of the VIth 
Pay Commission.  The exceptionally low growth during 2010-11 is because no arrear 
payments were made in that year, and as such the year-to-year comparison incorrectly 
suggests a dip during the year.
The years of high growth cited are unusual years and cannot form a basis for generalisation.  
Growth rates since 2011 have been generally healthier than in the pre-2007 period and every 
effort is made to ensure that sufficient funds are available to meet the most critical 
requirements of the Services.
Further, the higher growth in the revenue expenditure of the Army is mainly attributable to the 
fact that it is manpower intensive with a large portion of its expenditure being devoted to 
Salaries.  This skews the revenue-capital ratio in favour of revenue expenditure, especially 
when compared to the other Services.
While capital allocations usually witness a high growth from year to year, the stress on the 
non-Salary revenue budget is being highlighted to the Ministry of Finance and other agencies 
in Government.

70
Recommendation (Para  No.2)
From the data supplied on the growth of defence budget, the Committee note that 
although the defence budget is increasing every year in numerical terms but in comparison to 
central budget, it has consistently been declining.  In 2009-10, with the defence expenditure of 
Rs. 1,41,781 crore, it was just 13.84% of total Central Government Expenditure (CGE), while 
in 2010-11; the budget rose to Rs.12,336 crore but in percentage terms it came down to
12.87%. In 2011-12, defence expenditure rose to Rs. 1,70,913crore but in percentage terms it 
was merely 13.10% to total CGE.  Since then it is sliding continuously in percentage terms to 
the CGE.  In 2012-13, defence expenditure was pegged at Rs. 1,81,776 which was 12.89% to 
CGE but the Committee was surprised to find that at the time of revised estimates it came 
down to 12.81%.  In the current year also, it is just 12.76% of total Central Government 
Expenditure. The Committee are unhappy with the continuous fall of defence expenditure in 
comparison to CGE. The Committee desire that this declining ratio should be arrested in the 
next financial year itself, so that the Services are provided adequate funds and hence they are 
not deprived of essential equipment and ammunition. Therefore, the Committee want that the 
Government should consider fixing a minimum benchmark for this percentage, which should 
be adhered to, in every case.
Reply of the Government
This Ministry has been bringing these concerns to the attention of the Ministry of 
Finance.  In this regard last reference (D.O. No. 3(4)/Bud-I/2013/06/DefSecy/2015) was sent 
to Ministry of Finance on 14.01.15.  Ministry of Finance was informed about the Committee’s 
emphasis on the need for increase in defence expenditure in proportion to total central 
government spending and fixing a minimum benchmark percentage in this regard.  Response 
from Ministry of Finance is awaited.
Recommendation (Para  No. 3)
The Committee are given to understand that defence expenditure as a percentage 
share of Gross Domestic Product (GDP) in some of the developed and neighbouring countries 
is in the range of 2% to 4% and it is growing every year. On the other hand, our defence 
expenditure as a percentage to GDP is in reverse mode and declining every year.  In 1999-
2000; the defence expenditure was 2.41% of the GDP and it had a continuous slide and since 
then this financial year, it came down to 1.78% of the GDP. The Committee perceive it to be a 
grim and unacceptable situation which is affecting all the Services of defence forces 
considerably. The Committee desire that the Ministry should raise the bar and gradually 
increase defence expenditure at the level of 3% of GDP so that modernization of Armed 
Forces can become a reality and not remain a mirage.  

71
Reply of the Government
This observation of the Committee was conveyed to the Ministry of Finance vide D.O. 
No. 3(4)/Bud-I/2013/06/DefSecy/2015 dated 14.01.15.   Response from Ministry of Finance is 
awaited.
Recommendation (Para  No. 4)
The Committee note that due to reduced budgetary allocation against the projections 
made by the Services and other organizations/ departments, many compromises have been 
made or are likely to be made. The Committee understand that  under the Revenue Segment, 
provision is first made for salary and other obligatory expenses and only after that balance 
available  allocation is distributed to meet the requirement of stores (including ordnance), 
transportation (of personnel and stores), revenue works and maintenance, etc. Under the 
Capital Segment, funds are first set aside to meet the projected Committed Liabilities likely to 
materialize during the year and only then the remaining allocation is distributed to meet the 
projected requirement for other items.  Consequently, only little amount remains available for 
making acquisitions and compromises are made.  Therefore, the Committee want the Ministry 
to review the modernization schemes/plans and reprioritized so that operationally essential 
plans are not shelved of due to starvation of funds.   
Reply of the Government
There is a continuous monitoring of the progress of acquisition projects and 
prioritisation of the most urgent requirements.  This helps to ensure that limited resources are 
devoted to the most critical projects.  The Committee may be assured that no operational 
requirement will be shelved for want of funds.
This observation of the Committee was conveyed to the Ministry of Finance vide D.O. No. 
3(4)/Bud-I/2013/06/DefSecy/2015 dated 14.01.15.
Recommendation (Para  No. 5)
The Committee also note that budget for high value acquisitions like Medium Multi Role 
Combat Aircraft (MMRCA) is not available under the current allocation and for these additional 
funds will be sought. The Committee also note the Revenue to Capital ratio all these years is 
increasing in favour of Capital, which is a good sign because this needed for modernization of 
the Services. However, the Committee want to caution the Ministry that acquiring the large 
capital assets also entail high value maintenance, therefore, they recommend that non-salary 
revenue expenditure must be increased to ensure the maintenance of the capital assets so 
acquired. 
Reply of the Government
The Ministry fully concurs with the views of the Committee on the need to enhance 
availability of funds for maintenance of capital assets and has been regularly sensitising the 
Ministry of Finance and other agencies to this imperative.
This observation of the Committee was conveyed to the Ministry of Finance vide D.O. No. 
3(4)/Bud-I/2013/06/DefSecy/2015 dated 14.01.15.

72
Recommendation (Para  No. 6)
The Committee have consistently been noting that the phenomenon of providing lower 
allocation to the Services is becoming a trend. The Committee are unable to understand the 
reason, therefore, the Ministry should make all out efforts to persuade the Ministry of Finance 
for not making any cut in their projections because that will result in compromising the defence 
preparedness of the country. The Committee want that allocation to any defence programme 
should not be cut on account of overall economic situation of the country.
Reply of the Government
The Ministry fully concurs with the views of the Committee.  It may, however, be noted 
that the Ministry of Defence is bound by the overall budgetary ceiling provided by the Ministry 
of Finance, which in turn must balance multiple requirements and priorities of the government 
against available resources.  Also Ministry of Finance is being regularly sensitized about the 
requirements of the Ministry. In this regard last reference (D.O. No. 3(4)/Bud-
I/2013/06/DefSecy/2015) was sent to Ministry of Finance on 14.01.15
For comments of the Committee on replies to recommendations nos. 1 to 6  please see 
Para No. 17 of Chapter- I.
Recommendation (Para  No. 9)
The Committee appreciate that some of the grey areas have been identified by the 
Ministry but what action it has taken to improve the situation, has not been known to them.  
The committee are of the view that if the present perspective planning process is flawless then 
the Ministry can always know the number and kind of equipment needed after a certain period 
of time and it can always buy top priority equipment. This is not true in the instant case.  The 
Committee are of the view that if the 15-years long plan are not yielding results, then it should 
make planning for at least 20 or 25 years.  Therefore, the Committee desire that a thorough 
review must be taken first for all the available defence plans, so that long-term perception of 
the Ministry and Services can be corrected.
Reply of the Government
Improvement is an ongoing process.  Being a large organisation, the Army has a wide 
range of equipment and therefore has more number of ongoing procurement cases as well as 
proposals for future acquisitions. The prioritisation of equipment to be procured from LTIPP to 
SCAP to AAP is carried out based on operational requirements/ technological developments / 
needs of accretional  forces  / making up of existing deficiencies / replacement of obsolete 
equipments etc.  Present system of LTIPP / SCAP / AAP gives adequate opportunities to carry 
out mid-course reviews based on emerging operational scenarios, evolving technologies and / 
or financial availability.

73
Notwithstanding the above, delays in procurement projects do take place and these happen 
mainly due to procedural issues that are being addressed at various levels. Steps have been 
instituted in the Army to hasten the acquisition process.
A holistic review and prioritisation of all the schemes has been carried out with a view to 
remove shortages and for fast track capability building.  Twenty important schemes have been 
identified as Chief of Army Staff (COAS) priority schemes considering the operational 
capability requirements and are being progressed on priority. 
Furthermore, a Higher Forum has been constituted under the aegis of the Vice Chief of Army 
Staff which meets on monthly basis to monitor the progress of the operational preparedness. 
Also , an internal study to speed up the equipment trial / validation process is currently 
underway, which will further streamline the procedures and cut down avoidable delays.
An institutionalised mechanism in the form of a Working Group to review critical items of 
ammunitions and issues of spares, barrels, overhaul programme of infantry and mechanised 
forces has been set up.  A system of long term five year Roll-on-indents on OFB is a curative 
measure to buy top priority items/equipment through indigenous sources.  Ammunition Road 
Map has also been approved which envisages procurement to build up adequate targeted 
stocks with three years training requirement.
For comments of the Committee please see Para No. 23 of Chapter- I.
Recommendation (Para  No. 21)
The Committee note that the offset policy mandates foreign Original Equipment 
Manufacturers (OEMs) to discharge offset obligations through combination of permissible 
avenues w.r.t. eligible product and services in all procurements cases where cost of the capital 
acquisition is Rs. 300 crore or more. As on date, a total of 24 Defence Offset contracts have 
been signed in the Ministry of Defence out of which 16 cases pertain to Indian Air Force and 
05 and 03 cases relate to Indian Navy, Indian Army respectively. The total offset obligations 
are estimated at approximately Rs. 28, 770 crore over a period from 2008 to 2022. The 
Committee also note that the problems being faced by the Ministry of Defence in 
implementation of the offset policy. They, therefore, suggests improvement by way of revision 
of the offset provisions.
Reply of the Government
The revision of Offset guidelines is under progress to ensure smooth implementation of 
Offset obligations.  As regard to offset guidelines it is clarified that the same is part of DPP and 
available in the public domain.  It is further, informed that a ‘Facilitation Cell’ has been 
established for regular interactions with all stake holders including private sector.
Recommendation (Para  No. 22)

74
During the oral evidence, the Committee came to know that the potential of the Defence 
offset policy has not been fully realized.  Therefore, at many places, work relating to offset 
obligations could not start and benefits of offset policy reaped.  The Committee desire that 
guidelines regarding offset policies should be given to private sector also so that they may be 
well versed of the provisions contained in the offset policy.  The Committee desire that regular 
interactions should be held with the private sector to encourage investment in the defence 
sector.  The Committee are also of the opinion that while selecting the Industry, the Ministry 
should look for new technology areas so that the country can have the benefit of the same.
Recommendation (Para  No. 23)
The Committee note that in the year 2010-11, the value of Capital acquisition made 
from indigenous sources was Rs 35589.77 crore; in 201-12, it went down to Rs 28152.72 
crore; in 2012-13, it rose to Rs 32045.36 crore; and in 2013-14, it slipped again to Rs 
31503.58 crore.  Capital procurement from outside sources (import) during the corresponding 
period was 9917.47 crore, Rs 22218.77 crore, Rs 26181.42 crore and Rs 35006.35 crore 
respectively.
While the value of imports was enormous, the value of exports have been meagre at 
Rs 290.35 crore, Rs 512.04 crore, Rs 444.45 crore and Rs 686.21 crore respectively during 
the same period.
Recommendation (Para  No. 25)
The Committee appreciate the initiatives taken by the Ministry but in addition to these 
initiatives, they desires that the Ministry should take steps to curtail the direct imports which 
are on incremental path. On the other hand, acquisition from indigenous sources show an 
uneven pattern, which is not good or making the self-reliant. The committee desire that early 
finalization of ‘Make’ procedure should be given priority and implemented early, so that the 
country can have the benefit of developing new and critical technologies with the collaboration 
of public sector, private sector and research & academic institutions to make the country self-
reliant in defence production and should not depend on imports only.
Reply of the Government on Para No. 22, 23 & 25
The Make procedure is being simplified and is in the final stages of approval.  The 
revised procedure caters for development in collaboration between Public Sector, private 
sector and research & academic institutions.
In addition, in order to curtail direct imports and to move towards self-reliance the 
Ministry has taken a series of measures towards creating level playing field for the Indian 
Private sector, so as to enable them to make investment in the defence sector.
(a) Technology Perspective and Capability Roadmap (TPCR),which gives out the details of 
the equipment and technologies required by our Armed Forces, has been put in public domain 
to  provide the industry an overview of the direction in which the Armed Forces intend to head 
in terms of capability in future.

75
(b) Preference to ‘Buy (Indian)’, Buy & Make (Indian)’ & ‘Make” categories of Acquisition 
over ‘Buy (Global)’ or ‘Buy & Make’ categories thereby giving preference to Indian industry in 
procurement.
(c) The procedure for ‘Buy and Make (Indian)’ category, has been simplified in order to 
make the category more attractive for Indian Defence industry.
(d) A clear definition of indigenous content has been provided which would not only bring 
more clarity on the indigenous content required for different categorization, but also enhance 
the indigenization of defence products in India. 
(e) Raksha Mantri Production Committee (RMPC) has been re-constituted for monitoring 
and review of indigenisation and interaction with various stakeholders like DDP, DRDO, Armed 
forces and DPSUs / OFB.
(f) The Make procedure is being simplified and is in the final stages of approval.  The 
revised procedure caters for development in collaboration between Public Sector, private 
sector and research & academic institutions.
(g) FDI Policy has been reviewed in defence sector and as per the new policy, composite 
foreign investment up to 49% has been allowed through FIPB route and beyond 49 % with the 
approval of Cabinet committee on security (CCS).
(h) Defence products list for the purpose of industrial licensing has been revised and in the 
revised list most of the components/parts/raw materials have been taken out from the purview 
of industrial licensing. 
For comments of the Committee replies to recommendations nos. Para No. 21, 22, 23, & 
25 please see Para No. 31 of Chapter- I.
Recommendation (Para  No. 26)
The Committee understand that personnel of Armed Forces have very limited leave and 
most of the time they are away from their homes guarding the Nation. But they have to face 
many problems at their homes during their absence. Generally, trivial matters pertaining to 
district administration also take unnecessary long time and some time they have to waste all 
their leave on just meeting officials in district administration. Therefore, the Committee –
recommend that strict instructions should be passed on to the District Magistrate/ Collectors to 
give utmost priority to the works of personnel/ their family members belonging to the Services 
(Army, Navy and Air Force), a dedicated district nodal officer should always be in place to 
cater to their difficulties. The nodal officer should be given all requisite administrative or legal 
powers to implement his decisions. The Chief Secretary should invariably submit quarterly 
report on the issues pertaining to their matters.
Reply of the Government

76
Armed Forces personnel serve in far flung areas and inhospitable terrain in defence of 
the borders of the Country and in counter-insurgency operations where they are subjected to 
considerable physical and mental stress. Therefore, it has been endeavour of the Government 
to make all efforts to boost the morale of defence personnel and redress the genuine problems 
of Armed Forces personnel for their hassle free duty.
2. The Government has already taken steps for setting up an institutional mechanism for 
redressal of grievances of service personnel and their families through District Collectors, 
Superintendents of Police and other officials at District and State level. In response to letters 
issued earlier to Chief Ministers of State Government/UTs, State Government of Maharashtra, 
Uttarakhand, Karnataka, Gujarat, Tripura, Meghalaya, Nagaland, UP, Punjab, Haryana, J&K, 
Assam, Chhattisgarh, Sikkim, Rajasthan, Kerala, Bihar, Madhya Pradesh, West Bengal and 
UTs of Andaman & Nicobar Islands, Delhi and Chandigarh have already constituted such 
mechanism at the State and District levels or already initiated action for setting up of a formal 
grievance redressal mechanism.
3. Raksha Mantri has written letters to the Chief Ministers of all States and Chief 
Administrators of all Union Territories of the Country on 12.2.2015 for according top priority in 
strengthening the mechanism for addressing grievances of Armed Forces personnel in a time 
bound manner so that they feel secure about the problems being faced at their homes.
For comments of the Committee please see Para No. 34 of Chapter- I.
Recommendation (Para  No. 28)
The Committee desire that in order to make BRO more focused, the roads which are of 
strategic importance from rail head to forward areas in existence or planned to be maintained 
and constructed by the BRO in Uttarakhand, J&K and North East should be prioritized and 
MoRTH should make alternative arrangements for remaining roads.  The Committee are of the 
view that besides focusing on Northern border, BRO should also concentrate on Eastern 
border.
Reply of the Government
BRO is concentrating on both the Northern and North-Eastern borders simultaneously 
and special effort is being given for completion of Indo-China Border Roads (ICBRs). In order 
to streamline the procedure the following steps have been taken:
(a) BORDER ROADS DEVELOPMENT BOARD (BRDB)  PROGRAMME: In addition to 
constructing /developing/improving roads, BRO maintains a road network of 20642 km in 
border areas to ensure smooth movement of troops. Further roads constructed/ completed by 
BRO are required to be maintained continuously so that these are in traffic worthy condition. In 
order to stream line the need for maintenance of these roads, it has been decided that once a 
road is included in BRDB programme, no separate sanction would be required for carrying out 
maintenance. A list of 760 roads has been prepared as BRDB Programme to enable BRO to 
focus on identified roads and develop/maintain them in a planned manner.

77
(b) LONG TERM ROLL ON WORKS PLAN (LTROWP): BRO has been assigned the task 
of construction /maintenance of roads of strategic importance. Over a period of time the work 
load of BRO has increased considerably compared to its capability. Army has also finalized 
two list of roads under its Long term perspective Plan–I and II for expeditious development. 
Besides BRO has been entrusted works of Indo Tibet Border police (ITBP) roads by Ministry of 
Home Affairs (MHA), Special Accelerated Road Development Programme (SARDP) and 
Arunachal Pradesh package works by Ministry of Road Transport and Highways. Thus there 
was a need to draw a Long Term Plan for BRO in order to utilize the capacity of BRO in a 
judicious and time–bound manner to complete priority roads for Army so that the estimates for 
such works may be prepared by BRO without waiting for specific approval from Govt. For 
holistic development of roads in border areas, a LTROWP has been drawn up for 461 roads 
including the ICBRs for Rs 21333 cr.
Agency No of 
Roads
Works Planned(Rs Cr) Total
2014-15 2015-16 2016-17 2017-18
GS/Strategic 434 4249.68 4599.7 4564.3 4066.03 17479.70
NH 27 1228 1004 761 861 3854.0
Total 461 
roads
5477.68 5603.70 5325.30 4927.03 21333.70
In addition to above, a new company National Highways and Infrastructure 
Development Corporation Limited (NHIDCL) has been created under MoRT&H for exclusively 
dealing with the task of constructing/widening of National Highways in parts of the country 
sharing international boundaries with neighbouring countries.
Recommendation (Para  No. 33)
The Committee further note the problems being faced by BRO on the roads in which 
works are in progress in difficult and border areas e.g delay in forest and wild life clearances, 
high altitude areas, limited working period due to snow bound conditions, hard rock stretches, 
adverse ground conditions, non availability of quarries and difficulty in getting construction 
materials, permission for installation of stone crushers, etc.  The Committee contemplated 
over the difficulties being faced by BRO.  They are of the view that some of the complications 
like difficulty in getting constructions material and permission for installing stone crushers can 
easily be resolved with proper coordination with concerned State Governments.  However, to 
cope with the natural phenomena like limited working period due to snow bound conditions 
and hard rock stretches, assistance from the construction agencies of international repute may 
be taken. 

78
Reply of the Government
In order to introduce the latest art of technology being used by the various developed 
Countries, officers of BRO are being sent on training to various foreign countries. One group of 
two Officers visited Russia in the last week of February 2015. 
As far as road construction in high altitude areas is concerned, a decision has been 
taken to adopt internationally proven best practices and try new technology, material and 
equipment and towards this 10% of GS funds are being earmarked. 
Furthermore, a collaborative measure has been initiated to establish a multi-discipline-
expert group with experts from Ministry of Science and Technology (CRRI, CSIR, GSI etc) to 
assist BRO in technical matters.
In addition a National Workshop on Border Roads, by BRO and Confederation of Indian 
Industry (CII) on ‘Private sector’s participation in construction of Roads, bridges, and tunnel in 
border area ’ was held on     17 Feb 2015. Based on the deliberations in the National 
workshop three working group has been constituted to recommend measures for enhancing 
the private sector’s participation in construction of roads , bridges, and tunnels in border areas. 
Three roads have been identified by Army for construction through international 
consortium in the Border areas so that the latest technology may be used.
For comments of the Committee please see Para No. 43 of Chapter- I.
Recommendation (Para  No. 36)
The Committee note that the maintenance of existing roads is carried out with the 
maintenance grants allocated based on approved rates.  With a view to improving the quality 
of maintenance, the Director General Border Roads (DGBR) has been delegated powers to fix 
rates of maintenance and snow clearance grant and carry out revision whenever required. The 
Committee also note that formation kilometers which were 1960 kms in 2011-12 came down to 
1669 in 2012-13.  It declined further to 1588 kms in 2013-14.  So is the case with surfacing, 
which came down from 2389 km in 2011-12 to 2173 km in 2013-14.  The construction of 
bridges has also come down from 3149 metres in 2011-12 to 2246 metres in 2013-14. 
Reply of the Government
With a view to improve the quality of maintenance, DGBR has been delegated 
powers to fix rates for maintenance and snow clearance grants. The revision of 
maintenance grant, snow clearance grant are under process and same will be revised 
shortly by DGBR. Other efforts like enhancement of financial powers to executing staff, 
outsourcing, mechanization, reorganization etc has been made to enhance BRO output.

79
In order to expedite the execution of works approval in principle was accorded for 
outsourcing certain works in BRO to Central Public Sector Undertakings, strictly in 
conformity with GFRs, CVC guidelines and any other rules and procedures prescribed in 
this regard in the BRDB meeting held on 4 th Feb 2013. Accordingly outsourcing of 4 roads 
to 4 CPSUs has been approved as mentioned under:
Sl. 
No.
Name of Firm Name of Road Length in Km
(a) M/S IRCON International Ltd, New 
Delhi
Leh – Loma 103.00
(b) M/S Bridge and Roof Co ( India ) Ltd, 
Kolkata
Along-Kaying 35.00
(c) M/S Engineering Projects (I) Ltd, New 
Delhi (EPIL)
Sansari- Killar-
Thirot-Tandi
59.00
(d) M/S National Building Construction 
Corporation Ltd,   New Delhi (NBCC)
Miao-Vijaynagar 185.00
For comments of the Committee please see Para No. 52 of Chapter- I.
Recommendation (Para  No. 39)
The Committee note that various avenues  are available for resettlement of retired 
officers and Person Below Officers Rank (PBORs) e.g. reservations in various Central and 
State Government jobs including  banks,  Public Sector Undertakings, employment/self-
employment schemes, etc. 
Recommendation (Para  No. 40)
The Committee also note that out of 21615 Ex- Servicemen (ESM) registered with 
Directorate General Resettlement (DGR)/Rajya Sainik Board (RSB)/Zila Sainik Board (ZSB), 
only 12018 were employed in 2011 which is 55.6% of the total. In the year 2012, out of 26518 
ESM registered, only 14447 which is 54.58% of total registered got employment. In 2013, 
34364 ESW were registered, however, only 14320 got employment which is 41.67% of the 
total. From the data supplied by the Ministry it may be inferred that every year out of the 
registered ESM, less that 50% are getting employment/resettlement and the employment 
figure is decreasing every year. The Committee desire that DGR should be cautious in its 
planning and try to provide re-settlement to all the ESM registered with it and it should 
commensurate with the qualification and aptitude of the retired soldiers so he should not feel 
out of place. 
Recommendation (Para  No. 41)

80
The committee also note that some new avenues are being explored by the Ministry for 
resettlement of Ex-Servicemen and utilizing their competence for nation building and 
Directorate General Resettlement has made inroads in coordination with Confederation of 
Indian Industry (CII) for creating jobs for ESM. To achieve better results, the Directorate 
General Resettlement is in the process of creating National ESM data base compilation and 
creation of job portal for ESM. A twitter account has also been opened for making information 
available to ESM. The Committee appreciate that Directorate General Resettlement is now 
approaching CII for providing employment opportunities but they find that till date DGR has not 
made concerted efforts for resettlement of ESM in private Sector. The Committee desire that 
besides CII, the Directorate General Resettlement should have interactions with the other 
private sector associations like the Associated Chambers of Commerce and Industry of India 
(ASSOCHAM), Federation of Indian Chambers of Commerce and Industry (FICCI) etc to 
encourage them to hire and let disciplined ex-soldiers prove their mantle in the progress of 
private sector. It is the responsibility of DGR to look after its veterans so that they can have 
decent livelihood   after spending their prime time in the service of the nation. 
Reply of the Government on Para No. 39, 40 & 41
The concerns highlighted by the Standing Committee are appreciated and DGR has 
taken a number of initiatives to ensure that maximum ESM are given resettlement. Some of 
the key initiatives are as under:-
(vi) Organisation of Job Fair every two months at various places in the country to 
ensure maximum jobs for ESM.
(vii) DGR has organised a conclave with CII to engage the corporate sector to 
provide jobs for ESM.
(viii) One of the major reasons for the falling numbers is the lack of opportunities in 
Government jobs reserved for ESM. The following has come to light:-
(f) There are approximately 55 lakhs Central Government Employees including 
in Banks, PSUs & Para Military Forces.
(g) Out of above , based on reservation policy for ESM, at least                                    
12-15 lakh jobs should have been reserved for ESM.
(h) However, based on approximately 14% reports received for 2013, only about 
2 lakhs ESM are employed in Government jobs reserved for them.
(i) In 2013 alone, based on above 14% reports, while 15908 ESM should have 
been employed on reserved jobs, however only 3231 were actually 
employed.
(j) If the Central Government and States reservation policies are implemented, 
ESM will not have to look for jobs outside.
(ix) To rectify the above major anomaly, DGR has taken the following initiatives:-
(aa)  Establishment of Reservation Monitoring Cell(RMC) to monitor such vacancies.

81
(ab) Request has been made to Government agencies to implement reservations policy in 
true spirit. 
(ac)  The issue of change in the reservation policy for ESM to include 10% vacancies in 
Group “B” and 20% vacancies in Group “C” against the existing reservation of 10% vacancies 
in Group “C” and 20% vacancies in Group “D” had been taken up with DOP&T. As intimated 
by DOP&T certain Ministries including MHA are reluctant to the said enhancement. The matter 
was taken up with MHA by D/o ESW however MHA has not agreed to the same, as even the 
10% Vacancies in Group C, reserved for ESM are not being filled up for want of willing/ eligible 
ESM and large number of vacancies are still unfilled as informed by MHA.
(ad)    The matter has been taken up by D/o ESW with MHA about the pay and seniority 
protection for ESM getting employed in Government jobs specially in CAPFs.  However, the 
same has not been agreed to by MHA as on date.
(ae)    Preparation of Ready Reckoner for all soldiers to provide them first-hand information on 
how to prepare for selection for jobs reserved for ESM, which is likely to be published in the 
first week of April 2015. 
(x) The Concept Paper incorporates a large number of new avenues for    
employment for the ESM. One of the issues viz.  Skill Development is under 
the active consideration.  A series of high level meetings have already been 
held at the level of the RM, Defence Secretary with Ministry of skill 
Development and all stakeholders.  NSDC in consultation with DGR is 
preparing a draft MoU to translate into action.  
For comments of the Committee replies to recommendations nos. Para No. 39, 40 & 41 
please see Para No.55 of Chapter- I.
Recommendation (Para  No. 42)
The Committee note that the Department of Ex. Servicemen Welfare was created some 
time in 2003, but the first full-time Secretary was posted in December, 2007. The Committee 
are dismayed to learn that approximately six years, eight Secretaries have moved in  and out 
of the Department, which obviously not only affected the long-term planning and strategy but 
conveyed the lack of seriousness of Government with which it takes the welfare of Ex. 
servicemen. The Committee are of the view that the Ministry is not sensitive towards the
welfare of Ex- servicemen. Therefore, the Committee recommend that tenure of Secretary of 
Department of ESM should become a fixed one to have accountability and better 
implementation of policies for redressal of grievances of Ex-servicemen.

82
Reply of the Government
There is no fixed tenure for Secretaries of Government of India, except for a few 
Secretaries viz Cabinet Secretary, Defence Secretary and Home Secretary. However, the 
recommendations of the Committee have been conveyed to Department of Personnel & 
Training.
For comments of the Committee please see Para No.58 of Chapter- I.
Recommendation (Para  No. 43)
During the oral evidence, the Committee note that there is a need for automation of 
functions of Department of Ex-Servicemen Welfare. The Committee also note from the 
evidence tendered before them that the Department does not have clear database of trained 
Ex-servicemen. Therefore, the Committee desire that DGR should generate national data 
base of skilled and unskilled Ex-Servicemen and a real time software may be created which 
can be accessed by ESM for uploading information relating to them. The employment 
opportunities available in the private sector may also be made available on the website so Ex. 
servicemen can make use of it.
Reply of the Government
Action is already in hand for developing all India software to ensure a central 
database for ESM. Simultaneously automation of the DGR itself is in progress. A job portal 
to link ESM with the corporate industries and to provide suitable jobs based on their skills is 
also planned.
For comments of the Committee please see Para No.61 of Chapter- I.

83
CHAPTER III
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS, WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT DESIRE 
TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT
- NIL -

84
CHAPTER IV
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS, IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE 
GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE AND WHICH 
REQUIRE REITERATION
Recommendation (Para  No. 8)
During oral evidence, the Defence Secretary also apprised the Committee about the 
problems experienced by the Ministry e.g. spending the budget on the highest priority item, 
non-adherence to timelines in procurement of the defence items, streamlining of issuing of 
Request for Proposals.  The committee also note that Ministry of Defence is not always buying 
highest priority item for the Services.
Reply of the Government
Government is taking steps to address the issues mentioned above. However, it would 
not be appropriate to say that Ministry of Defence is not always buying highest priority item for 
the services.  It may be possible thatcertain higher priority items may reach the contract 
signing stage late because of the procedural delays in the procurement process, whereas a 
lower priority item which has cleared the process may have been  contracted earlier. 
For comments of the Committee please see Para No.20 of Chapter- I.
Recommendation (Para  No. 15)
The Committee also desires that pre-audit of procurements should be done by 
Comptroller and Auditor General, Central Bureau of Investigation and Central Vigilance 
Commission simultaneously in a fixed timeframe so that there would be no anxiety while 
placing the orders to vendors for procurement of equipments so that delays can be minimised
Reply of the Government
The Capital procurement process can be broadly divided into three phases, i.e., 
approval stages up to AoN, technical evaluation/trials and commercial/contract negotiation.  
The approval stages involve policy as well as technical and operational issues and is not 
appropriate for pre-audit.  The technical evaluation/trials and commercial negotiations are 
carried out as per DPP with specific responsibilities assigned to different authorities and any 
assessment by any other authority before conclusion and final decision may dilute and delay 
the process.  Thus, these stages are also not appropriate for pre-audit.  In this background, 
pre-audit of all procurements would not be appropriate.
(For comments of the Committee please see Para No.26 of Chapter- I)

85
Recommendation (Para  No. 31)
The Committee desire that keeping in view the importance of construction of roads 
in strategic areas, Ministry of Environment & Forest should look into the request of BRO 
earnestly and grant it permission to set up stone crushers and Hot Mix Plants in the 
requisite areas.
Reply of the Government
The following measures have been taken to expedite the forest clearances and other 
issues with the State Governments:
(a) Empowered committees have been constituted and some States are 
holding regular meetings under the Chairmanship of Chief Secretaries to resolve 
critical issues.
(b) Regular review meeting with forest authorities has expedited Forest
Clearance cases. 
(c) A large number of steps have been initiated by Government for timely 
disposal of forest clearance cases:
(i) Setting up of single window system at State level for speedy clearance.
(ii) Exemption of Compliance of Scheduled Tribe and other Forest 
Dwellers (Recognition of Forest Rights) Act 2006 to avoid delay 
in clearance of road projects within states of Arunachal 
Pradesh, Himachal Pradesh, Jammu & Kashmir, Uttarakhand 
and Sikkim has been accorded vide MoEF order dated 27 Apr 
2011.
(iii) Exemption for transfer and mutation of alternate Revenue Land 
for raising compensatory Afforestation for border roads within 
the State of Uttarakhand State accorded vide Ministry of 
Environment & Forest (MoEF) order dated 09 Dec 2013.
(iv) Requirement of certificate regarding non availability of alternate 
alignment has been dispensed with for BRO projects by MoEF 
vide their order dated 09 Dec 2013.
(v) Permission for processing division wise cases of BRO projects 
have been accorded by MoEF vide their order dated 09 Dec 
2013.

86
(vi) A working group was constituted under the chairmanship of 
Secretary MoEF for expediting the forest clearance cases and 
its recommendations are under consideration.
(d) MoEF  vide their letter No 11-246/2014-FC dated 4 th July 2014 has 
accorded general approval under Section (2) of the Forest 
(Conservation) Act 1980 for diversion of forest land in the state of 
Arunachal Pradesh, Himachal Pradesh,  Uttarakhand & Sikkim for 
following :-
(i) Construction and widening of two lane roads by the BRO and other 
road construction agencies entrusted with the job by the Ministry of 
Defence, in the area falling within 100km kilometers aerial distance from 
the LAC and
(ii) widening of road by the BRO and other road construction agencies) 
which are identified by the Ministry of Defence as link roads between 
Border Roads in the area within 100 kilometer aerial distance from the LAC 
and National Highways/State Highways/other State Roads, subject to 
fulfillment of the conditions. 
(e) MoEF vide their letter dated 8 th Aug 2014 has accorded approval for 
working permission for tree cutting and commencement of work, if the required 
compensatory levies as per conditions stipulated in the principle approval are 
realized from the user agency and where necessary, for compensatory 
afforestation, transfer and mutation of non-forest/revenue forest land in favour of 
state Forest Department is affected.
(f)  Chief Secretaries of State Governments of Arunachal Pradesh, Assam 
,J&K, Himachal Pradesh, Manipur, Nagaland, Sikkim, Tripura and Uttarakhand 
have been requested to constitute an Empowered Committee under their 
Chairmanship with Principal Secretaries of Revenue, Forest, Mining, PWD and 
Power Departments along with the PCCF and Chief Engineers of BRO as 
members to resolve issues. States of Sikkim, Arunachal Pradesh, J&K, Himachal 
Pradesh and Uttarakhand have constituted the Empowered Committee.
(g) A Standard Operating Procedure (SOP) with simplified procedure to 
ensure expeditious payment of Forest Clearance/Net present 
value/compensatory afforestation/cost of trees and other related payment to 
Forest authorities after getting Stage-I clearance for obtaining forest clearance 
has been issued on 18th Dec 2014.
(For comments of the Committee please see Para No. 40 of Chapter- I)

87
Recommendation (Para  No. 34)
The Committee also note the difficulties being faced in getting the land for construction 
of roads in the States which have tribal laws in place, as the land is owned by the local 
population.  The Committee desire that amendment in the existing laws may be made so that 
difficulties in getting the land for construction of roads are removed.
Reply of the Government
Issues related to land acquisition, environmental clearance, lack of quarries etc. are 
impediments to the smooth progress of work. Chief Secretaries of various State Governments 
have been requested to constitute Empowered Committees under their chairmanship with 
secretaries of concerned departments as members to resolve issues that affect progress of 
works by BRO.
Exemption from Scheduled Tribe and other Forest Dwellers (Recognition of Forest Rights) 
Act 2006 to avoid delay in clearance of road projects within states of Arunachal Pradesh, 
Himachal Pradesh, Jammu & Kashmir, Uttarakhand and Sikkim has been accorded vide 
Ministry of Environment & Forest (MoEF) order dated 27 Apr 2011.
The following measures have been adopted for quick and time bound disposal of forest 
clearance cases by MoEF :
(i) Single window system established at District, State & Ministry of Environment & Forest 
(MoEF) levels to fast track processing of forest clearance cases on 28th Jan 2010.
(ii) Simplified and unified Proforma adopted for processing both forest and wild life 
clearance simultaneously. 
(iii) Regular review meeting is being held at Ministry of Defence to review progress 
of pending cases with representatives of State Govternment, MoEF and BRO.
(iv) A Working Group has been constituted on 03.06.2013 by Ministry of 
Environment & Forest (MoEF) under the Chairmanship of Secretary MoEF to review the 
forest clearance cases. 
For comments of the Committee please see Para No.46 of Chapter- I.
Recommendation (Para  No. 35)
The committee rely on the candid admission of the Defence Secretary that the 
performance of BRO is not satisfactory and needs substantive improvement for which large 
number of steps are being taken. The Committee desire that this organization should be 
revamped and revitalized by infusing new equipment, machinery and workforce so that all time 
dependable roads may be made to reach our borders.  The Committee also desire that 

88
concept of GREF (General Reserve Engineer Force), which was formed post 1962 debacle 
should be brought back and BRO should be manned by a “Force” not like any normal 
department. 
Reply of the Government
In order to induct latest Construction Equipments in Border Roads Organisation a five 
year Long Term Equipment Procurement Plan (LTEP) 2014-15 to 2018-19 has been approved 
amounting to Rs 3913 crs. 
Following specific measures have been taken to expedite progress of works:-
(i) Government of India (Allocation of Business rules 1961) has been amended vide 
notification dated 9 th January 2015 to include ‘all matters relating to Border Roads 
Development Board and Border Roads Organisation (BRO)’ in the list of business 
allocated to Ministry of Defence. This will improve the operational efficiency of BRO and 
achieve clarity and unity of command. 
Budget Estimate (BE) 2015-16 funds will be made available under Ministry of Defence 
instead on Ministry of Road Transport and Highways. The allocations of Budget for 
BRO for (BE) 2015-16 is Non Plan (NP) Rs 3030.57 crores and for Plan is Rs 450.00 
crores.
(ii) With a view to improve the quality of maintenance, DGBR has been delegated 
powers to fix rates for maintenance, snow clearance grants and outsourcing of 
Maintenance .
(iii) Enhancement of delegated powers of DGBR in respect of 26  items have been 
approved. The enhanced powers include power to sanction Estimates for works uptoRs 
10 Cr by Project Chief Engineers, enhanced powers of hiring of 
vehicle/equipment/plant, enhanced powers for outsourcing of consultancy services for 
preparation of DPRs, powers for DGBR to include works on emergent basis, enhanced 
powers for procurement of construction stores. Further, special delegation of powers 
has been approved for works related to roads of Char DhamYatra in Uttarakhand. Also 
special dispensation in select items involving higher delegation to expedite ICBRs and 
operationally critical roads has also been approved.
(iv) More units (5 projects – Vijayak, Hirak, Shivalik, Arunannk, Brahmank& 8 Task 
Forces) were additionally deployed to expedite completion of ICBRs.
(v) MoEF vide their letter No 11-246/2014-FC dated 4th July 2014 has accorded 
general approval under Section (2) of the Forest (Conservation) Act 1980 for diversion 
of forest land in the state of Arunachal Pradesh, Himachal Pradesh, Uttarakhand & 
Sikkim as per details given below :-

89
(a) Construction and widening of two lane roads by the BRO and other road 
construction agencies entrusted with the job by the Ministry of Defence, in 
the area falling within 100 km kilometer aerial distance from the LAC and
(b) Widening of road (by the BRO and other road construction agencies) 
which are identified by the Ministry of Defence as link roads between 
Border Roads in the area within 100 kilometer aerial distance from the 
LAC and National Highways/State Highways/other State Roads, subject to 
fulfillment of the conditions. 
(vi) In addition to above, MOEF vide their letter No.11-246/2014-FC dated 4th July 
2014 has accorded Relaxation for diversion of forest land for non forest purpose-
special provision for creation of compensatory afforestation in lieu of forest land 
diverted for creation of strategic defence projects being taken up within 100 km 
aerial distance from the Line of Actual Control by any user agency identified by 
the Ministry of Defence.
(vii) MoEF has been requested that BRO may be exempted from clause 19 & 21 of 
the Air (Prevention and Control of Pollution) Act 1981 for installation of stone 
crusher and setting up of Hot Mix Plant on the above areas.
(viii) Chief Secretaries of State Govts of Arunachal Pradesh, Assam ,J&K, Himachal 
Pradesh, Manipur, Nagaland, Sikkim, Tripura and Uttarakhand have been 
requested to constitute an Empowered Committee under their Chairmanship with 
Principal Secretaries of Revenue, Forest, Miming, PWD and Power Departments 
along with the PCCF and Chief Engineers of BRO as members to resolve issues.
(For comments of the Committee please see Para No.49 of Chapter- I)
Recommendation (Para  No. 68)
The Committee also note from the submission of Coast Guard that their strength has 
gone up by 33 per cent in the last five years, however, their revenue budget has moved only at 
six per cent.  The Committee desire that to maintain acquired equipment, there is a need for 
increase in revenue budget.  The Ministry should, while making capital budget purchases, 
perceive and have provision for revenue budget also to run and maintain these assets.
Reply of the Government
1. The severe financial crunch faced by the Indian Coast Guard is largely due to budget 
allocation not keeping pace with rapid growth of the Services in the past five years. The Indian 
Coast Guard, which had 61 Ships/Boats, 45 Aircrafts, 20 Stations, 05 Air Establishments, 11 
District HQs and  03 Regional HQs in 2008, today stands at 108 Ships/Boats, 64 Aircrafts, 42 
Stations, 09 Air Establishments, 14 District HQs and 05 Regional HQs achieving almost 40% 

90
growth since 2009. The growth is a result of CCS directives in 2009 on Maritime Security 
including Coastal Security.
2. Against this background and in order to meet matching financial requirement including 
carry over liabilities of last fiscal, a consolidated case was taken up with MoD (Fin/MO) on 17 
June,2014 seeking additional revenue amount of Rs. 264.342 crore against four revenue 
object heads. The said case was returned by MoD with an assurance that it will be considered 
at Supplementary/RE stage and advised to submit the additional requirement at those stages 
only.
3. At First batch of Supplementary Grant stage, ICG had proposed re-appropriation of Rs. 
140 crore from Capital head allocation to Revenue head as Technical Supplementary in 
consultation with MoD(Fin/MO) and Ministry of Finance. The proposal was submitted to MoD 
(Fin/MO) on 13 October,2014. The said proposal was worked out as additional funds were 
urgently needed against revenue heads during current fiscal. 
4. Indian  Coast  Guard had  submitted  RE 2014-15 proposal toMoD(Fin/MO) on 21 
October,2014, wherein additional Rs. 300 crore had been sought against Revenue Head non-
salary components. Since shortage of budget allocation under Revenue heads has a direct 
bearing on operations and maintenance of Indian Coast Guard fleet, a letter was forwarded by 
DGICG to the Defence Secretary on 08 December,2014 bringing out the critical budget 
requirements of Indian Coast Guard at RE 2014-15 stage and for BE 2015-16.
5. Expenditure ceiling in respect of Coast Guard Organization (CGO) is being fixed by Ministry of 
Finance.  The expenditure ceiling in respect of CGO for RE 2014-15 was fixed by Ministry of Finance at 
Rs.1265.00 crore in Revenue section and Rs.1140.00 crore in Capital Section.  Further, the proposal of 
CGO for re-appropriation of Rs.140.00 crore from Capital section to Revenue section in technical 
supplementary was recommended/forwarded to Ministry of Finance for inclusion of the same in the 
statement of first batch of supplementary for the approval of Parliament vide this Ministry OM No. 
1(9)/Fin(MO)/2014/740 dated 17-10-2014.  However, Ministry of Finance did not include the aforesaid 
proposed in respect of CGO into the statement of first batch supplementary Demands for FY 2014-15 
for the approval of Parliament.  No reasons were stated by Ministry of Finance in this regard.
6. Further, it is stated that Indian Coast Guard (ICG) proposal for RE 2014-15 for 
Rs.1465.21 crore in Revenue Section and Rs.1491.73 crore in Capital section were forwarded 
to Ministry of Finance in Statement of Budgets Estimates for their consideration.  The Budget 
matters in respect of CGO were also discussed in details in the pre-budget meeting held in 
Ministry of Finance under the Chairmanship of Secretary (E) before allocating the RE 2014-15 
& BE 2015-16 by them.
7. Subsequently, the matter of critical budget requirement of ICG was also taken up with the 
Ministry of Finance vide this Division ID dated 18-12-2014 for their consideration to provide the 
appropriate funds in Revenue and Capital section while finalizing the RE2014-15 & BE 2015-16 to 
sustain its day to day operation for surveillance in maritime domain, mandatory repairs/refits and 
procurement of spares for sea going assets/aircraft.  However, Ministry of Finance provided the 
expenditure ceiling of RE 2014-15 of Rs.1265.00 crore in Revenue section and Rs. 1140.00 crore in 
Capital section against our projections of Rs.1456.21 crore in Revenue Section and Rs.1491.73 
crore in Capital section for RE 2014-15.
(For comments of the Committee please see Para No. 64 of Chapter- I)

91
CHAPTER V
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS, IN RESPECT OF WHICH GOVERNMENT
HAVE FURNISHED INTERIM REPLIES
- NIL -
NEW DELHI;      MAJ GEN B C KHANDURI, AVSM (RETD),
8 January, 2016 Chairperson,
18 Pausa, 1937 (Saka)                                             Standing Committee on Defence
     

92
APPENDIX - I
STANDING COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE (2015-16)
MINUTES OF THE SEVENTH SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE  
ON DEFENCE (2015-16)
The Committee sat on Friday, the 08th January, 2016  from 1430 hrs. to 1700 hrs. in 
Main Committee Room, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Maj Gen B C Khanduri, AVSM (Retd) - Chairperson
LOK SABHA
2. Shri Dharambir 
3. Shri Thupstan Chhewang 
4. Col Sonaram Choudhary(Retd)
5. Shri Sher Singh Ghubaya
6. Shri G  Hari 
7. Shri Ramesh Jigajinagi
8. Shri Tapas Paul
9. Shri A P  Jithender Reddy
10. Smt  Pratyusha Rajeshwari Singh
RAJYA SABHA
11. Shri Anand Sharma
12. Shri Harivansh
13. Shri Vinay Katiyar
14. Shri Madhusudan Mistry
15. Smt  Ambika Soni
16. Shri Tarun Vijay
      SECRETARIAT
1. Smt  Kalpana Sharma - Joint Secretary
2. Smt  J M Sinha - Additional Director
3. Shri Rahul Singh - Under Secretary

93
WITNESSES
REPRESENTATIVES OF THE MINISTRY OF DEFENCE
S No Name Designation
1. Shri Ashok Kumar Gupta Secretary(DP)
2. Smt Surina Rajan AS(DP)
3. Lt Gen MMS Rai VCOAS
4. Air Marshal B S Dhanoa VCAS
5. Lt Gen Ravi Thodge MGO
6. Lt Gen A K Ahuja DCIDS (PP&FD)
7. Dr S Christopher Secretary (R&D)
8. Smt Bharat Khera JS(NS)
9. Smt Kusum Singh JS(P&C)
10. Shri K K Pant JS(Aero)
11. Shri Sanjay Prasad JS(LS)
12. Shri V Udaya Bhaskar CMD, BDL
13. Dr T Suvarna Raju CMD, HAL
14. Shri S K Sharma CMD, BEL
15. RAdm LV Sarat Babu(Retd) CMD, HSL
16. Shri P Dwarakanath CMD, BEML
17. RAdm Shekhar Mital(Retd) CMD, GSL
18. RAdm A K Verma(Retd) CMD; GRSE
19. Dr. D K Likhi CMD, MIDHANI
20. RAdm R K Shrawat (Retd) CMD, MDL
21. AVM BR Krishna ACAS (Proj)
22. RAdm Dinesh K Tripathi ACNS (P&P)
23. Dr Sudershan Kumar Chief Controller (PC and SI)
24. Shri G S Mallik Chief Controller (R&M and Imp)
25. Dr G Athithan Chief Controller (SAM)
26. Dr C P Ramanarayanan Director General (ACE)
27. Dr J P Singh Director, Parliamentary Affairs
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members of the Committee and 
informed them about the agenda for the sitting.  
3. The Committee then took up for consideration the  following  draft reports:-
(i) Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations 
contained in the Second Report of the Standing Committee on Defence(16th 
Lok Sabha)  on 'Demands for Grants (2014-15) of the Ministry on Defence on 
General Defence Budget (Demand Nos. 20, 21 and 27)'; 
(ii) Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations 
contained in the Sixth Report of the Standing Committee on Defence(16th Lok 
Sabha)  on 'Demands for Grants (2015-16) of the Ministry of Defence on 'Civil 
Expenditure of the Ministry of Defence and Capital Outlay on Defence 
Services ( Demand Nos. 21, 22 and 28)';

94
(iii) Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations 
contained in the Eighth Report of the Standing Committee on Defence(16th 
Lok Sabha)  on 'Demands for Grants (2015-16) of the Ministry of Defence on 
Navy and Air Force (Demand Nos. 24 and 25)'; and
(iv) Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations 
contained in the Ninth Report of the Standing Committee on Defence(16th Lok 
Sabha) on 'Demands for Grants (2015-16) of the Ministry of Defence on 
'Defence on Ordnance Factories and Defence Research and Development 
Organisation (Demand Nos. 26 And 27)'.
4. After deliberations, the Committee adopted the above Reports without any 
modifications. The Committee, then, authorised the Chairperson to present the reports to 
Hon'ble Speaker under  Direction 71(A) of directions by the Speaker and subsequently 
present the same to Parliament during the coming Budget  Session.
5. The Committee then invited representatives of the Ministry of Defence,   Defence 
Public Sector Undertakings and Defence Research and Development Organisation. After 
welcoming the representatives to the Sitting of the Committee, the Chairperson drew their 
attention to Directions 55(1)  and 58 of the Directions by the Speaker, Lok Sabha 
regarding confidentiality of proceedings.  
6. After the witness introduced themselves,  the representatives of the Ministry of 
Defence made Power Point Presentation and briefed the Committee on the main issues 
viz. value of production of all the DPSUs from 2012-13 to 2014-15 and profit thereof, total 
expenditure on R&D, saving in foreign exchange because of inputs substitution, saving 
because of outsourcing, R&D set up and salient features, major R&D products, future 
plans and initiatives taken to promote import substitution by all the DPSUs.   

95
The Chairperson and Members of the Committee raised several issues/points as 
briefly mentioned below:
i. Steps taken to encourage DPSUs to come out with their R&D Policy;
ii. Need to develop and construct/produce helicopters, Aircraft, Submarines and 
Ships to maintain supremacy of the Forces;
iii. Quantum and category  of items indigenized  by DPSUs for the Forces;
iv. Need to enhance production of defence equipments leading to import 
substitution by DPSUs;
v. Progress of the 'Make in India' initiative and impact on the Defence Industry;
vi. Time taken from conceptualization stage to actual production;
vii. Fulfilling the requirement of the Forces by the Indian  Defence Industry 
including DPSUs;
viii. Non-availability of Bullet Proof Jackets (BPJs);
ix. Cut in licensing list to the tune of 70 percent;
x. Reasons for withdrawal of special dispensation given to the DPSUs like 
Nomination facility, excise duty, import duty, custom duty etc.; 
xi. Reasons for inexplicable delay in construction of Scorpene submarines;
xii. Reasons for non-satisfaction by the Army of the product 'Arjun Tank' and 
'Dhruv' Helicopters etc.
7.  The representatives of the Ministry of the Defence then responded to the queries 
raised by the Members.  The Chairperson directed the representatives of the Ministry to 
furnish written replies/information on the points raised by the Members at an early date, 
which was assured by the representatives.
The witnesses then withdrew
8. A copy of verbatim record of the proceedings has been kept.
The Committee then adjourned.

96
APPENDIX II
ANALYSIS OF THE ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS CONTAINED IN THE SECOND REPORT (FIFTEENTH 
LOK SABHA) ON `DEMANDS FOR GRANTS OF THE MINISTRY OF DEFENCE FOR THE YEAR 
2014-15 ON DEMANDS FOR GRANTS(2014-15) OF THE MINISTRY ON DEFENCE ON 
GENERAL DEFENCE BUDGET(DEMAND NO. 20, 21 &27)’
1. Total number of recommendations                         74
2. Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted by the Government (please see 
Chapter II):
Para Nos. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20, 21, 22, 
23, 24, 25, 26, 27, 28, 29, 30, 32, 33, 36, 37, 38, 39, 40, 41, 42, 43, 44, 45, 
46, 47, 48, 49, 50, 51, 52, 53, 54, 55, 56, 57, 58, 59, 60, 61, 62, 63, 64, 65, 
66, 67, 69, 70, 71, 72, 73 & 74
(68  Recommendations)
Percentage:   92%   
3. Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do not desire to pursue in view of 
the replies received from the Government (please see Chapter III):
Nil
Total :        00
Percentage:     Nil
4. Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of Government have not 
been accepted by the Committee which require reiteration and commented upon (please 
see Chapter IV):
Para Nos. 8, 15, 31, 34, 35 & 68
Total :       06
Percentage:    8%
5. Recommendations/Observations in respect of which Government have furnished interim 
replies (please see Chapter V):
-Nil-
Total :    Nil 
Percentage:   0%