1 
 
 
 
13 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE 
(2015-2016) 
 
(SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
MINISTRY OF DEFENCE 
 
 
[Action taken by the Government on the observations / recommendations contained 
in the Fifth Report of the Committee (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) on Demands for 
Grants(2014-15) of the Ministry of Defence on Ordnance Factories and Defence 
Research and Development Organisation (Demand Nos. 25 & 26)] 
 
 
THIRTEENTH REPORT 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
December, 2015/ Agrahayana, 1937 (Saka) 
 
THIRTEENTH REPORT 


2 
 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE 
(2015-2016) 
  
(SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
MINISTRY OF DEFENCE 
 
 
[Action taken by the Government on the observations / recommendations contained 
in the Fifth Report of the Committee (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) on Demands for 
Grants(2014-15) of the Ministry of Defence on Ordnance Factories and Defence 
Research and Development Organisation (Demand Nos. 25 & 26)] 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on   16.12.2015 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on    16.12.2015 
 
 
 
  
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
December, 2015/ Agrahayana, 1937 (Saka) 


3 
 
 
 
 
 
CONTENTS 
            
PAGE. 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE(2015-16).……………………….....….......... 4    
INTRODUCTION..…………………………………………………….….…..................   6  
 
CHAPTER I Report………………………………………………………………….......7 
       
 
CHAPTER II a) Recommendations/Observations which have been  
  accepted by the Government ……………………………………..21 
 
 b) Recommendations/Observations which have been  
 accepted by the Government and commented 
upon.........................................................................................30 
 
CHAPTER III Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do not 
 desire to pursue in view of the replies received from the 
  Government ....................................................................... ............38 
 
CHAPTER IV Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies  
 of Government have not been accepted by the Committee  
 which require reiteration and commented upon ………………….…..39 
 
CHAPTER V Recommendations/Observations in respect of which  
 Government have furnished interim replies………………………......40    
 
APPENDICES 
 
  I      Minutes of the Sixth sitting of the Standing Committee on 
                  Defence (2015-16) held on 10. 12.2015.………………..............41 
 
  II     Analysis of Action Taken by the Government on the  
         Observations/Recommendations   contained   in the Fifth 
   Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee  
   on Defence (2015-16).............................................................. 43 
 
 

4 
 
 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE (2015-16) 
 
Maj Gen B C Khanduri, AVSM (Retd)  -  Chairperson 
 
 
Members 
 
Lok Sabha 
 
 
2. Shri Suresh C. Angadi 
3. Shri Shrirang Appa Barne 
4. Shri Dharambir  
5. Shri Thupstan Chhewang 
6. Col Sonaram Choudhary(Retd) 
7. Shri H.D. Devegowda 
8. Shri Sher Singh Ghubaya 
9. Shri G. Hari  
10. Shri Ramesh Jigajinagi 
11. Dr. Murli Manohar Joshi 
12. Km. Shobha Karandlaje 
13. Shri Vinod Khanna 
14. Dr. Mriganka Mahato 
15. Shri Tapas Paul 
16. Shri Ch. Malla Reddy  
17. Shri Rajeev Satav 
18. Smt. Mala Rajya Lakshmi Shah 
19. Capt  Amarinder Singh(Retd) 
20. Shri A.P. Jithender Reddy 
21. Smt. Pratyusha Rajeshwari Singh 
 
Rajya Sabha 
 
1. Shri K. R. Arjunan 
2. Shri Anand Sharma 
3. Shri Rajeev Chandrasekhar 
4. Shri A.U. Singh Deo 
5. Shri Harivansh 
6. Shri Vinay Katiyar 
7. Shri Hishey Lachungpa 
8. Shri Madhusudan Mistry 
9. Smt. Ambika Soni 
10. Shri Tarun Vijay 
 
 

5 
 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Smt. Kalpana Sharma  - Joint Secretary 
2.        T.G. Chandrasekhar  - Director 
3.  Smt. Jyochanamayi Sinha  - Additional Director 
4. Shri Rahul Singh   - Under Secretary 
5. Shri Rajesh Kumar   - Executive Assistant 
 
  
  

6 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
I, the Chairperson of the Standing Committee on Defence (2015-16), ha ving 
been authorised by the Committee to submit the report on their behalf , present this 
Thirteenth report on `Action Taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Fifth Report of the Standing 
Committee on Defence(16th Lok Sabha)  on Demands for Grants of the Ministry of 
Defence for the year 2014-15 on Ordnance Factories and Defence Research an d 
Development Organisation (Demand Nos. 25 & 26)'. 
 
2.  The Fifth Report was presented to Lok Sabha and laid in Rajya Sabh a on 
22.12.2014. It contained 15 observations/recommendations. The Ministry of Defe nce 
furnished Action Taken Replies on all the Observations/Recommendations in July  
2015. 
 
3.  The draft Action Taken Report was considered and adopted by the Committee 
at their Sitting held on 10.12.2015. 
 
4.  For facility of reference and convenience, Observations/Recommendations of 
the Committee have been printed in bold letters in the Report. 
 
5.  An analysis of  action taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Fifth Report of Standing 
Committee on Defence (16th Lok Sabha) is given in Appendix II. 
 
 
New Delhi;                                                    Maj Gen  B C Khanduri, AVSM (Retd),   
11 December, 2015            Chairperson,  
20 Agrahayana, 1937 (Saka)                                Standing Committee on Defence 
  

7 
 
 
CHAPTER – I 
 
REPORT 
 
 This report of the Standing Committee on Defence deals with action taken by 
the Government on the recommendations/observations contained in the Fifth  Report 
(16th Lok Sabha) on `Demands for Grants of the Ministry of Defence for the y ear 
2014-15 on Ordnance Factories and Defence Research and Development 
Organisation (Demand No. 25 & 26)’ which was presented to Lok Sabha and  laid in 
Rajya Sabha on 22 December 2014. 
 
2. The Committee's Fifth  Report (16th Lok Sabha) contained Fifteen 
recommendations/observations on the following aspects :- 
Para No.  Subject 
1 Under expenditure 
2 Budgetary Provisions 
3 Delays in projects’ executions 
4 Research and Development 
5 Manpower 
6 Quality Assurance 
7 Budgetary provisions for defence Research and Development 
8 & 9 Manpower 
10 Performance audit of the work of scientists of DRDO 
11  Indigenisation Research and Development Activities 
12 Delay in Projects 
13 Closed projects 
14 Nuclear, Biological and Chemical (NBC) 
15 Collaboration with universities/academic institutions 
 
3. Action Taken Replies have been received from the Government in 
respect of all the recommendations/observations contained in the Report.  The 
replies have been examined and the same have been categorised as follows :- 
 
(a) Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the 
Government: 
 
  Para Nos. 4,5,8,9,10,11,12,14,15  
(09 Recommendations) 
  

8 
 
 
 These may be included in Chapter II of the Draft Report. 
 
(b) Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the      
Government and to be  commented upon: 
 Para Nos. 1,3,6,7,13  
(05 Recommendations) 
 
   These may be included in Chapter II of the Draft Report.  
 
 
(ii)   Observations/Recommendations  which the  Committee do not desire to 
pursue in view of the replies received from the Government: 
  
 Para Nos. Nil 
(00 Recommendation) 
   
 These may be included in Chapter III of the Draft Report.  
 
 (iii) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of    
Government have not been accepted by the Committee which require 
reiteration and commented upon: 
 
     Para Nos. 2  
 (01 Recommendations) 
               
 This may be included in Chapter IV of the Draft Report.  
                    
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which Government have  
furnished interim replies: 
 Para No.  Nil 
(00 Recommendation) 

9 
 
 
 
4. The Committee desire that the Ministry’s response to their comments made in 
Chapter 1 of this Report to be furnished to them at the earliest and in any case not 
later than six months of the presentation of this Report.  
 
Recommendation (Para No. 1) 
A. Under expenditure  
 
5. The Committee had recommended as under: 
 
"Indian Ordnance Factories were provided a fund of Rs. 3,666 crore during 
11th Five Year Plan from 2007-12 for modernization against which an 
expenditure of Rs, 2,927 crore was incurred.  Hence, Rs. 739 crore was left 
unutilized.  The Committee observe that Ordnance Factory Board manages 
41 manufacturing Units and 32 other establishments, nevertheless around 
20% amount allocated for modernization remained unutilized during th e 11 th 
plan period.  The under utilization of fund also indicate that Ordnance Fact ory 
Board has not been so forthcoming in modernizing Ordnance Factories.  The  
issue of augmenting capacity for manufacturing has not been properly 
addressed which has resulted in delays of many projects like T-90 tanks, 
Pinaka Rocket system, etc.  The Committee express their anguish over the 
under utilization of Nations funds.  This shows sheer callousness on the pa rt 
of the Ordnance Factory Board.  The Committee are of the opinion that had 
there been less allocations, this amount could have utilized in some other 
head.  The Committee opine that alongwith adequate budgeting, optimum 
utilisation should also be given due importance.  The Committee also de sire 
that funding and expenditure pattern should be promptly dealt w ith under 
intimation to this Committee". 
 
6. The Ministry in its action taken reply, has stated as under: 
 
"Ordnance Factory Board was provided with Rs. 3666 Crore during the 11 th 
plan period, out of which an expenditure of Rs. 2927 Crore was incurred.  The 
under expenditure of Rs. 739 Crore occurred for the reasons as under: 
 
a) BE projection is made one year before the year of expenditure, base d 
on the committed liability and potential liability.  However, many case s 
results in re-tendering due to certain reasons (as enumerated below) 
and in turn the actual expenditure could not be met to the extent of B E 
projection: 
 
(i) Most of the machines procured by Ordnance Factory 
Board(OFB)  are special purpose machines, tooled up and 
normally not available off the shelf. 

10 
 
(ii) Vendor base for the above kind of machines is limited. 
(iii) There are limited sources for ammunition and explosive 
manufacturing plants. 
(iv) Because of financial crisis, major suppliers in Europe failed to 
respond to tender enquiries resulting in re-tendering of cases 
and also failed to execute the supply timely. 
 
b) The estimated cost at the time of demand preparation is based on the 
Budgetary Quotation obtained from the prospective suppliers.  
However, many a time the actual expenditure in procurement of plant & 
machinery through competitive bidding is less than the budgetary 
quote. 
 
Modernization drive has been speeded up and in the first two ye ars of XIIth 
Plan (2012-13 & 2013-14), the funds have been utilized to the extent of 100% 
i.e. Rs. 1939.39 Crore have been spent against BE of Rs. 1933.69 Crores 
even though there was a severe fund crisis in the year 2012-13  due to which 
Ordnance Factory Board(OFB)   had to prioritise its investment plan.  
Ordnance Factory Board(OFB)   has envisaged an investment plan of Rs. 
1660 Crore in the current financial year 2014-15". 
 
7. The reasons given for the gap between the budgetary provisions and the 
actual expenditure by Ordnance Factory Board(OFB) seem to be genuine and 
are well taken by the Committee.  However, at the same time, the Committee 
opine that a better assessment of the total budgetary requirements can be 
made by the Ordnance Factory Board(OFB) at the budgetary stage itself so 
that the gap between the budgetary provisions and the actual expenditure 
which in the present year is about Rs.739 crore can be reduced to the 
minimum possible level. The Committee feel that this could be done by 
meticulous planning and correct assessment of defence equipment 
requirements. Necessary initiatives taken in this regard should be intimated to 
the Committee. 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 2) 
B. Budgetary Provisions 
 
8. The Committee had recommended as under: 
 
"During the deliberations, it was revealed that due to non-availability of  funds 
in 2013-14, expenditure was prioritized and restricted to Rs. 186 crore for 
augmentation of capacity for manufacturing of T-90 Tanks from 1 00 to 140 
number per annum.   The Committee are surprised at this meagre allocation 
for such an ambitious project.  While seeking clarifications for such lesser 

11 
 
allocation the Committee desire that enough allocation should be provided  to 
augment the capacity of T90 tanks so that adequate supplies are made to 
Army within the stipulated time frame.  Accordingly, this Committee be 
intimated about the initiatives taken in this regard". 
 
9. The Ministry in its action taken reply, has stated as under: 
 
"The project for manufacturing capacity augmentation of T-90 Tanks from 1 00 
to 140 nos. per annum was sanctioned in September, 2011 and the re were 
delays in initial period of project execution, primarily in tendering of machi nes.  
Subsequently in the year 2013-14, due to budget constraint the expen diture 
was prioritised and the investment plan against the project was restricted to 
Rs. 186.00 Crore. In the meanwhile the project is under review in light of fir m 
indent being available for only 236 T-90 tanks from the Army HQ. It is 
equivalent to a workload of only two and a half year approx. at HV F Avadi 
(existing capacity being 100 T-90 tanks per annum). Even this order was 
placed after a gap of eight years". 
  
10. The Committee note that the Ministry has not replied to the part of the 
recommendation regarding providing enough allocation to augment the 
capacity of T90 tanks so that adequate supplies are made to Army within the 
stipulated time frame. Therefore, the  Committee reiterate their 
recommendation on this aspect.  A new fact has been brought before the 
Committee in the Action Taken Replies about lesser number of orders of T-90 
tanks from the Army HQ, which was placed after a gap of 8 years. In this 
connection, the Committee would like to know the specific reasons for such a 
wide gap. They are of the view that the delays in placing orders should be 
avoided in future. It is also suggested that regular orders should be given by 
the Services to keep Ordnance Factories operational and plan their production 
schedule in advance. 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 3) 
 
C. Delays in projects’ executions 
 
11. The Committee had recommended as under: 
 
"While examining the subject, the Committee noted that there have be en very 
long gestation periods in case of different projects.  For example, the project 
for creation of capacity for manufacturing of MBT Arjun @ 30 numb ers per 
annum was sanctioned in May 2002 and the project could be complete d only 
in August, 2011.  This resulted in a time overrun of ten years. Also, Ordnance  

12 
 
Factory project, Nalanda was initiated during the 10 th Plan and has been 
carried forward to the 12 th Plan.  Besides this, the project for creation of 
capacity for manufacturing of T-90 tanks @ 100 numbers per annu m was 
sanctioned in December, 2003. Ordnance Factory Board started 
manufacturing 100 tanks per annum,  inclusive of tanks manufactured f rom 
SKD (Semi-knocked down kits) from 2009-10.  Besides these, many projects 
which started in 2010 such as creation of capacity for manufacturing of T- 72 
variants @ 50 numbers per annum, augmentation of capacity for 
manufacturing of armoured vehicles engines from 350 to 750 per a nnum, 
augmentation of capacity for manufacturing of spares required in overhau ling 
of T-72 &  T-90 tanks have not even attained 50% completion  even after a 
lapse of 4-5 years.  The Committee take serious note of the position with 
regard to long gestation of periods and delays in project executions of 
Ordnance Factories projects and desire that all-out efforts be made to 
streamline the project execution. Any kind of indecisiveness or callousness is 
not acceptable to the Committee.  The Committee want this that matter should 
be looked into by a high powered fact finding Committee so that accountability 
of the all concerned be fixed.  In this context the Committee are g iven to 
understand that certain Ordnance Factories are facing capacity constraints 
due to explosive safety limit restrictions on building used for ammunition 
production.  They have been further informed that steps are being taken to 
augment capacity of certain Ordnance Factories.  Besides this in the past also 
Ordnance Factory Board had problems in meeting the target of manufacturin g 
the T-90 tanks, BMP-II and Pinaka Rocket due to various constraints such as 
delayed product support from the Original Equipment Manufacturer (OEM), 
discontinuity in production line due to non-availability of indents from Army  
and also certain issues involving modification of design.  The Committee ar e 
not happy with such a sorry state of affairs prevalent in respect of project 
executions.  They are of the opinion that these problems could have be en 
envisaged at the planning stage itself.  Hence the Committee want that 
adequate steps should be taken to adhere to the targets both in terms of 
quality and time under intimation to them". 
 
12. The Ministry in its action taken reply, has stated as under: 
 
"The creation of infrastructure facilities for manufacture of MBT Arjun was 
completed by Feb, 2006 i.e. within the schedule time of 78 weeks.  Howev er, 
a minor civil work comprising only 2% of the project cost of construction of 2 
nos of type V residential quarters, which formed a part of MBT Project, was 
delayed and accordingly only the financial closure was delayed. 
 
The delay in T-90 project for creating a manufacturing capacity of 100 Nos per 
annum was due to non-availability of product support from Rosoboronexp ort, 
Russia and non-availability of ToT documents from OEM. 
  

13 
 
 
 The likely completion status of the projects started in 2010 is as 
follows: 
  Name of the Project Status of the 
Project 
Delay 
T-72 Variants @ 50 Nos. p.a. Anticipated completion of 
the project – Mar, 2015  
18 months 
Augmenting the capacity of 
Armoured Vehicles Engines 
from 350 Nos. to 750 Nos. p.a. 
Anticipated completion of 
the project – Dec, 2016.  
38 months 
Spares required in overhauling 
of T-72/T-90 Tanks  
Anticipated completion of 
the project – Dec., 2015 
26 months 
 
The progress of all the above projects is regularly monitored in the concerned 
Ordnance Factory as well as at the Ordnance Factory Board(OFB) level. 
 
 Ordnance Factory Board has been directed to take immediate measures to  
complete the projects at the earliest.  Simultaneously Ordnance Factory 
Board has also been asked to take the feedback in the form of ‘lesson s 
learned’ from the officials involved in project execution so that the reasons for 
delay are captured and reflected upon so as not to repeat them in future". 
 
13. The Committee are happy to note that the Ordnance Factory Board(OFB) 
has taken the concerns raised by the Committee in terms of the long gestation 
periods in the completion of the projects and has taken steps to complete all 
the projects within a scheduled time period including taking feedback from the 
officials involved in project execution to assess the reasons for the delay in 
the projects. This will be fruitful in avoiding delays in future projects.  
However, the Committee feel that consistent efforts must be made by the 
Ordnance Factory Board(OFB) to further reduce the period of delay in the 
execution of their projects which besides optimizing the use of manpower, will 
also thereafter contribute towards the reduction of expenditure in the projects. 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 6) 
  
D. Quality Assurance 
 
14. The Committee had recommended as under: 
 
"The Committee opine that besides timely production, it is also equally 
pertinent to have quality production.  During the deliberations, it was reve aled 
that earlier there were certain quality problems with the ordnance factory 
products.  However, the representatives of Ministry of Defence assured that 

14 
 
now they are taking a lot of initiatives in ensuring that everything is 
manufactured as per the process schedule.  As regard the defects due to 
improper handling of ammunition and storage in ammunition depots, improper  
maintenance of weapon system, improper handling of ammunition and 
weapon during firing or design deficiency, the Committee opine that qua lity of 
products has to be ensured at all levels.  Excellent quality is absolutely 
necessary in achieving indigenization and self-reliance in respect of differen t 
high-end technology systems and sub-systems.  The Ordnance Factory 
Board(OFB)  should take responsibility of training its end users (the Service 
personnel) in proper handling of ammunition and weapon. Inspite of these 
remedial measures, if the lacuna continue to exist, then accountability shou ld 
be fixed and Committee be informed about the steps taken". 
 
15. The Ministry in its action taken reply, has stated as under: 
 
"Factories have taken lot of initiatives to conform the manufacturing of 
products as per ToT/AHSP documents. 
 
Regarding the defects due to improper handling and storage in ammunition 
depots, improper maintenance of weapon system, improper handling of 
Ammunition & Weapons during firing or design deficiency, the follow ing 
comments are furnished: 
 
(i) For ammunition items, Ammunition Maintenance Instruction 
(AMI) and Ammunition Maintenance Kit (AMK) are being issued 
by AHSP documents. 
(ii) For training of users, it is proposed that user may depute group 
of persons to the relevant Ordnance factories for training & 
guidance on handling and storage in ammunition depots, 
maintenance of weapon system, handling of Ammunition & 
Weapons during firing. 
(iii) DDP has issued instruction for audit of QC/QA practices in OFs 
by a team involving representatives from Users, Quality 
Assurance agencies, DRDO and production Agencies.  It is 
proposed that for audit of storage, handling and maintenance at 
user end to be included in the scope of audit. 
 
Process of defect investigation by a composite team of DGQA & Ordnance 
factory already exists.  Remedial actions are taken based on the report. 
Accountability is fixed based on findings of the inquiry report. In a specific 
case of failure of PTA Lakshya Parachute, manufactured at Ordnance 
Parachute Factory Kanpur, concerned workmen, Staff and Officers even upto 
SAG level in the factory were issued advisory notes pending inquiry into the 
failure.  The inquiry by a composite team of representatives from all 
stakeholders including the User is a still continuing and further necessary 
action shall be taken based on the inquiry report".     
  

15 
 
 
16. The Committee note that some initiatives have been planned to be taken 
by the Ordnance Factory Board(OFB) so as to ensure excellent quality of their 
products and minimize complaints from the end-users.  However, the 
Committee earnestly desire that concrete action  has to be taken in a fixed 
time in consonance with long term planning. In this regard, the Committee 
would like to be intimated about the implementation of these measures such 
as training of users, audit of Quality Control( QC)/Quality Assurance( QA) 
practices etc. and a detailed statement of the progress made in this  regard 
may be furnished to the Committee within three months of the presentation of 
this report. 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 7) 
 
E. Budgetary Provisions for Defence Research and Development 
 
17. The Committee had recommended as under: 
 
"The Committee note that the Defence Research and Development 
Organization (DRDO) projected an amount of Rs. 18495.46 crore, however, it  
has been allocated an amount of   Rs.15282.92 crore only thereby a shortfall 
of Rs. 3212.54 crore. The Committee also note that out of the total defence 
budget the share of DRDO was 6.98% in 2009-10, which reduced to 5.37 % in 
2013-14.  However, this share has slightly improved to 6.67% in 2014-15.  
The share of defence research and development budget to GDP is also 
declining over the years.  It has reduced to 0.09 per cent in 2013-14 from 0.13 
per cent in 2009-10.  The Committee also note that DRDO gives its budgetary 
projection, based on the ongoing projects/programmes and future 
requirements, but it has been allocated a meager amount and out o f which 
nearly 80% is utilized for Mission Mode Projects with deliverables for Armed 
Forces.  The Committee feel that shortfalls in budget affects the pace of 
technological and infrastructural development since ongoing development 
activities have to be re-prioritized.  Now-a-days there is a need to lay 
emphasis on indigenization of defence products but it can only be achieved 
with adequate budgetary support.  The Committee desire that all possible 
measures should be taken to meet the budgetary requirement of DRDO.  The 
Committee may be informed about the measures so taken".  
 
18. The Ministry in its action taken reply, has stated as under: 
 
"Prior to 2014–15, Defence Research and Development Organisation (DRDO) 
was facing problem of funds crunch.  Many on-going projects were 
reprioritised due to inadequacy of funds. During 2014 – 15, Government has 

16 
 
increased Defence R&D Budget substantially, particularly in “Capital Head”.  
DRDO has requested for increase in budget in “Revenue Head” also.  At 
present, Defence R&D Budget is approximately 6.67% of the Defence Budget 
which is insufficient for proper technological development.  Justice towards 
indigenization can be done only if the budget of Defence R&D is raised to at 
least 8 to 10% of the Defence Budget.  DRDO has prepared a Long Term 
Technology Perspective Plan (LTTPP) that aligns with the Services Long  
Term Integrated Perspective Plan (LTIPP) to ensure strengthening and 
competitive growth in indigenous Defence technologies which is under 
implementation.  Government is considering request of DRDO for giving 
preference to indigenous products in defence acquisition and create a 
category ‘Make in India/Developed by DRDO".    
 
19. The Committee note with concern that the work of the DRDO has been 
suffering and many on-going projects had to be re-prioritised due to 
inadequacy of funds.  The Committee are in agreement with DRDO that for 
indigenisation of defence products, budget of DRDO should be increased to 
the tune of 8% to 10% of Defence Budget. The Committee therefore, reiterate 
their recommendation that measures should be taken to meet the budgetary 
requirements of DRDO.  However, the Committee may be informed of the 
current status of LTTPP and LTIPP of DRDO.  The Committee also wish that 
the budget expenditure of DRDO should be more result oriented and realistic. 
The Committee may be informed about the measures so far taken. 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 13) 
 
F. Closed Projects 
 
20. The Committee had recommended as under: 
 
"The Committee note that many projects including development of cargo 
ammunition, development of GPS Based System as an Alternative to Fire 
Direction Radar, development of  30 mm Fair Weather Towed AD Gun 
System, development of 30 mm Light Towed AD Gun System have b een 
closed thus wasting a considerable amount of public money.  The Committee 
desire that they be informed about the basis on which these were includ ed 
and specific reasons which forced the Government to close these projects. In 
this connection, the Committee feel that before commencing a project and 
channelizing money towards it though calculation should be made for the 
project so that it may not be dropped before its completion and not ev en a 
single penny of the public is wasted in the name of country’s defence". 
  

17 
 
 
21. The Ministry in its action taken reply, has stated as under: 
 
 "Development of Cargo Ammunition 
 
The project was undertaken in 1998 based on requirements from user. T he 
objective was to develop cargo bomblets for 105 mm, 130 mm, 155 m m guns 
and 120 mm Mortar and  122 mm Remotely Delivered Munition System 
(RDMS).  The project was to demonstrate assembly and trials in all calibers.  
Bomblets being the same for all the calibers and carrier systems was only 
different, it was decided to first prove the bomblets in 130 mm caliber and 
then evaluate it in all the carrier systems. 
 
To prove the design aspects, expenditure was incurred by all the participatin g 
labs for procurement of shells, bomblets, fuzes, stabilizing systems, packing 
systems, propellant, initiation systems, conduct of various performance 
evaluation, qualification level tests, static and dynamic trials. 
 
Under the project, achievement made are establishment of shell, packaging 
system, stabilizing mechanism, bomblet dispersion mechanism, ejection 
system, bomblet testing system, lethality for anti tank role and antipersonnel 
role.  The integrated trails also resulted in 70-80% success in direct impact 
mode and additional 10-15% in Self Destruction Mode.  Maximum of 90% 
success rate was achieved, whereas it was required to achieve 99% success 
rate to avoid any blind bomblets remaining in the field. 
 
The complex system has been attempted with a good amount of success rate, 
the project closed with achievements listed above.  The experience gained in  
progress of project has resulted in its utilization in Pinaka project to achieve 
major milestones at faster rare. 
 
Development of 30 mm Fair Weather Towed AD Gun System 
 
Indian Army has long standing requirement to replace vintage AD guns i.e.  40 
mm L70 and 23 mm ZU gun in the service.  After continuous interaction  and 
long deliberations with the Users, the GSQR for AD gun system was finalized 
and GSQR 767 was received in Jan 2000.  The main objective of the project 
was to develop 30 mm Air Defence Gun which would meet qualitative 
requirements as specified in GSQR 767 and replace in-service AD Gun 
systems. 
 
In Jan 2001, during review of DRDO projects by VCOAS, it was opined that 
existing fleet of AD guns i.e.40mm L70 and 23mm ZU gun in the service are 
in good condition with residual life of 10-15 years.  Further during 9 th& 10 th 
Plan, these guns are proposed to be upgraded and after upgradation the 
characteristics of these guns will be superior to that specified in GSQR 767.  
Further, ADG AD (Arty) Directorate in February 2001, indicated that the 

18 
 
existing AD Guns in our service will be deinducted with effect from 2015 o nly 
as against 2006 planned earlier.  It was also proposed to convene a me eting 
to finalize the GSQR as well as calibre of the future AD Gun. 
 
In view of the above developments, it was not possible to effectively p rogress 
the Staff Project on 30mm Fair Weather Towed AD Gun.  A change in QR at 
that stage was going result in major changes in the scope of work and hence  
the action for holding of PDR, manufacture of hardware, etc had not b een 
progressed.  Considering major policy shift by Users, Project Monitoring 
Committee on Armament and High Energy Materials proposed to close the 
project. 
 
Development of 30mm Light Towed AD Gun System 
 
Draft GSQR based on the General Staff Policy Statement (GSPS) No. 144 on 
Army Air Defence Equipment for development of Fair Weather Towed Air 
Defence (AD) Gun was received in Feb 1997.  According to the GSPS No. 
144, de-induction of 40mm L/70 and ZU-23 mm gun was planned w ith effect 
from 2005 and 2006, respectively.  Therefore, it was stated that these guns 
are to be replaced with new Fair Weather Towed Gun System.  Hence  in  
anticipation  of  finalized  GSQR,   the  project  for  Development  of  30   mm  
Light Towed AD Gun System was undertaken in August 1997.   
   
Main reasons for short closure of the project ‘Development of 30 mm Light 
Towed    AD Gun system’ were: 
 
(i) Change in GSQR parameters (number of barrels, rate of fire, 
overall mass, power laying, etc.) 
(ii) Allotted funds were not adequate for development of AD gun 
with servo drive and control system as per new QR. 
(iii) PDC extension required due to delayed receipt of finalized 
GSQR. 
  
 As it was not possible to accommodate new Qualitative 
Requirements(QRs) within the allotted project funds and time frame, decision 
was taken in the Corporate Review Meeting to close the project and submit 
statement of case of new project. 
 
 
Development of GPS Based System as an Alternative to Fire Direction 
Radar 
 
An R&D project was taken up for technology demonstration to develop a GPS 
based telemetry system for Pinaka rocket.  This system is utilized for tracking 
a pilot shot to generate certain trajectory parameters.  The trajectory data is 
then extrapolated to get the co-ordinates of the predicted point of impact .  
This information is then can be used to give correction to the fire units.  This 
enables in achieving first salvo effectiveness by speedy and accurate 

19 
 
engagement of targets.  Use of such system can improve the accuracy, which 
would result in: 
 
(i) Less ammunition required per engagements. 
(ii) Reduced mission time and fast response to call for fire. 
(iii) More missions per battlefield day. 
(iv) Lower demand for and cost on logistic chain. 
 
 The following achievements were made: 
 
(i) Development of GPS Sensor Module 
(ii) Development of telemetry transmitter with its Antenna 
(iii) Integration of GPS-Telemetry Modules as an Onboard Unit 
(iv) Integration of Onboard Unit with Pinaka warhead 
(v) Ten Units of GPS Receiver and Ten Units of Telemetry 
Transmitter were developed 
(vi) Successful static trials of hardware were carried out 
 
 Project Monitoring Committee Meeting held on 24 Oct 2002, took the 
decision to close the project.  Subsequently, Director ARDE constituted a 
Committee to review the project progress and technical work done and 
suggest future plan of work.  The committee noted that the primary ob ject of 
this project was to achieve higher accuracy.  Three routes were undertaken 
for accuracy improvement 
 
(i) Fire Direction Radar (FDR)-For rocket registration 
(ii) GPS- For rocket registration  
(iii) AGAPS- Automatic Gun Alignment and Positioning System. 
 
 Of these, the first and third was tried out during the User Trial.  It was 
found that the third route viz the AGAPS system gave the required accuracy  
(less than 1.2% of range).   In case of the FDR, it was found that the 
improvement obtained was marginal and there were cases where no 
improvement was obtained.  It was also seen that three pilot rockets may be 
required to obtain improvement in accuracy.  Three pilot rockets however 
constitute a waste of rockets and reduced neutralization capability.  The GPS 
system which is a registration system like the FDR will suffer from the same 
inaccuracies and limitations and as such is not suitable for improving the 
accuracy of Pinaka.  In addition, major changes in rocket configuration has to 
be done before the GPS system becomes feasible.  It is therefore felt that this 
project is no longer necessary or feasible as a method for increasing Pinaka 
accuracy. The Committee therefore proposed that Project may be short 
closed". 
 
22. The Committee note that though a number of reasons have been given 
by the DRDO for the closure of some of their projects.  Yet before 

20 
 
commencement of a project proper planning should have been done and all 
out efforts be made to ensure that no such issues arise which necessitate the 
closure of these projects.  The Committee further note that one of the reasons 
given for closure of projects were mentioned as change in Qualitative 
Requirement(QR) at later stage. The Committee are of the view that there 
should have been foresight at the planning stage and also urge that the QRs 
should be finalised by involving all the stakeholders at the highest level so 
that there will be less necessity for changing the QRs by the users. While 
acknowledging the fact that technology is constantly upgrading and research 
has to be in line with upgradations, the Committee advise DRDO that its 
research activities has to be more pro-active, practical and comprehensive. 
Ad-hocism in commencement and closure of projects reflects pretense, which 
Committee condemn in all respect. The Committee desire that once these QRs 
are frozen, products should be developed accordingly and improvements if 
needed could be done after a prototype is made. 
 
  

21 
 
CHAPTER II 
 
 
a) Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the      
Government  
 
Recommendation (Para  No. 4) 
 
 
 The Committee were concerned about the R&D work being taken in 
Ordnance Factories.  In this regard, the Committee were informed that Ordnance 
Factory Board (OFB) is primarily a manufacturing organization engaged in 
manufacturing of defence products based on Transfer of Technolog y (ToT) from the 
Original Equipment Manufacturer(OEM) or DRDO.  Expenditure on R&D is very  
minimal i.e. less than even 17 of Value of Issues (VOl) during the last five yea rs.  
With regard to strategies/initiatives for R&D enhancement, the Committee were 
informed that in 2003, Ordnance Factory Board adopted a policy of in-ho use R&D 
resulting in the formation of 11 Ordnance Development Centres (ODCs) in diverse 
technical fields.  OFB has decided to increasingly play the role of lead integrator of 
defence equipments.  Accordingly, OFB has initiated actions to jointly work with 
major DPSUs such as BEL, MIDHANI, BDL etc.  Reputed institutes like IITs at 
Kanpur, Mumbai and Chennai have also been roped in for R&D indigenization .  
Adequate fund is made available to Ordnance Factories to carry out de velopment of 
arms and ammunitions with indigenous technology.  Besides this, the Ministry has 
approved a number of capacity augmentation projects involving an investm ent of 
more than Rs. 4000 crore during the last 04 years in the Ordnance Factory  Board.  
However, it is regretted that no substantial R&D work are being taken at Ordnance 
Factories.  Unless strategies towards restructuring and in house R&D work are 
undertaken in Ordnance Factories it will not be possible for Ordnance Factories to  
position itself in the league of internationally reckoned companies to man ufacture 
arms and ammunition.  Therefore, the Committee wish that strategic efforts be made 
to kickstart and set rolling the R&D activities in Ordnance Factories.  The initiatives 
taken in this regard be intimated to the Committee. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 
The following initiatives have been taken towards restructuring of R&D in 
Ordnance Factories Organization: 
(i) Factories have been given target to increase the expenditure in R&D activ ities 
to the extent of 3% of their turnover by the year 2018-19 in a phased manner. 
(ii) To avoid the delay in processing of R&D projects at OFB HQ, financial powers 
have been delegated at all levels. 
(iii) Factories are being encouraged to associate themselves with reputed 
academic Institutes for research assistance. OFB is developing Electronic Fuze 
for artillery ammunition jointly with IIT Mumbai.  OFB also plans to develop “smart 
ammunition” jointly with IIT Kanpur. 
(iv) Core technologies have been identified for 12 Ordnance factories to pu t in 
focused effort to cope up with Technology denial regime; it also includes joint 
working on some of the large projects with DRDO from the inception stage and to 
render manufacturing assistance wherever required by DRDO. 

22 
 
Futuristic R&D projects being undertaken by OFB are as under: 
 Futuristic Infantry Combat Vehicle(FICV) 
 Commander TI sights for T-72 and T- 90 
 155mm/52 Cal Future Artillery Gun 
 105mmLFG up-gradation with Laser Pointing and Positioning system 
 105mm HEER (BB) (High Explosive Extended Range) 
 Electronic Fuze for Artillery 105/130/155mm 
 5.56x30mm joint venture Protective carbine(JVPC) 
 Development of propellant and ammunition for 76/62 SRGM 
 Indigenization of 6 types of critical items for supercharger of V46-6 Engine 
 Development of Extreme Cold Weather Clothing System(ECWCS) 
 
Recommendation (Para  No. 5) 
 
 
 The Committee found that against a sanctioned strength of 1,25,126 
personnel in technical category, there is an existing strength of 76,273 personnel in  
various Ordnance Factories.  As far as non-technical staff is concerned, the 
sanctioned & existing strength are 23,095 and 17,645 respectively.  The a bove 
figures show a huge gap in sanctioned and existing strength for both technic al and 
non-technical personnel in Ordnance Factories.  The existing strength of Group A 
officers is 1,671 as against the sanctioned strength of 2000.  The Committee are 
deeply concerned about the fact that the shortage of personnel is ordnance  factories 
is escalating over the years.  In this regard, the Committee desire that essentia l 
measures should be taken to fill the sanctioned posts so that ordnance facto ries are 
able to deliver as per the requirements and inordinate delays in delivery is checked 
and progressive enhancement of infrastructural base takes place.  The Committee  
should be intimated about the steps taken in this regard. 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 
 With regard to the shortfall in existing strength as against sanctioned strength 
of 93,918 personnel, it is intimated that the sanctioned strength of Ordna nce 
Factories is intended towards catering to peak load requirements of Indian A rmed 
Forces while existing strength is maintained for meeting the current load of the 
Armed Forces on annual basis.  The flexibility is required to help Indian Ordnance  
Factories to augment the manpower at a very short notice in times of exigency. 
 
 Further to the above, the Industrial Cadre of the Ordnance Factories is a 
Four-Grade structure which is maintained in each trade of the Industrial 
Establishment.  The promotions to the Industrial Employees are given bas ed on the 
ratios based on sanctioned strength of each trade.  As such the sanctioned streng th 
is required for maintaining a healthy career progression of the work force while t he 
existing strength is maintained to meet the workloads requirements. 
 

23 
 
 Manpower is being sanctioned every year in respect of all categories of 
employees based on vacancies available in the recruitment grade and w ork load 
requirement and also keeping the plant modernization and outsourcing in view. 
 
 
 
Recommendation (Para  No.8) 
 
 
 The Committee note that at present 7809 number of scientists (including 
Service Officers and Work Officers) are working in Defence Research and 
Development Organisation (DRDO) against the sanctioned strength of 7932 
(including 7255 Scientists, 623 Service Officers and 54 Work Officers) (as per Govt. 
Orders in 2001).   The Committee also note that while the number of projects have 
grown multi-fold in terms of size and technological complexity keeping in view India’s 
strategic and tactical defence requirements but there has been no increase of 
scientific manpower in DRDO since 2001.  The Committee feel that scientific 
manpower in DRDO should commensurate with the R&D requirements and projects 
undertaken.  As intimated by the Ministry that a cabinet note for augmentation of 
additional posts of scientists had already been forwarded for consideration of the  
Government.  The Committee desire that the matter may be pursued vigorously  at 
the highest level and they are apprised of the same within three months of 
presentation of this report. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 
 As desired by Department of Expenditure, Ministry of Finance, a revised 
Cabinet Note for augmentation of Manpower of DRDO by 1316 posts (1260 
Scientists and 56 Works Cadre Officers) has been forwarded for consideration of the 
Government.  These 1316 posts are proposed to be filled in a phased m anner in 
three recruitment years as under:- 
Sl. No. Year Scientists Works Cadre 
Officers 
Total 
(i) First 420 16 436 
(ii) Second 420 20 440 
(iii) Third 420 20 440 
Total 1260 56 1316 
 
  The matter is being pursued vigorously at the highest level. 
  

24 
 
 
 
Recommendation (Para  No.9) 
 
 The Committee also observe that on an average of more than 65 scientists 
have been resigning from DRDO since 2009.  Till 1 st October 2014, 23 scientists 
have left the organization.  The reasons given for their exodus are indicated as their 
personal/domestic grounds.  However, the Committee opine that conducive work 
environment, invigorated growth opportunities and suitable incentives can control 
such resignations.  The Committee would like to be informed about the steps taken  
in this regard by the Ministry. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 
 The details of various financial and growth related incentives given to attract 
and encourage the scientists in DRDO are as under: 
 
(a) Financial Incentives 
 
(i) Additional Increments Two additional increments are given to 
Scientists ‘C’, ‘D’, ‘E’ and ‘F’ in the Grade Pay of Rs. 6000, Rs. 
7600,       Rs. 8700 and Rs. 8900, respectively. 
  
(ii) Professional Update Allowance Rs. 12500 p.a. to 
Scientists‘B’,‘C’ and ‘D’; Rs. 25000 p.a. to Scientists ‘E’ and ‘F’; 
and Rs. 37500 p.a. to Scientist ‘G’ and above are granted as 
Professional Update Allowance.  
 
(ii) Variable Increments        Up to a maximum of six 
increments are granted to deserving Scientists at the time of 
promotion, based on the recommendations of the Assessment 
Committee. 
 
(b) Growth Related Incentives For better promotional avenues of 
Scientists in DRDO, a merit based Flexible Complementing Scheme 
(FCS) is provided in the DRDS Rules, wherein promotions are based 
purely on merit without any linkage to availability of vacancies.  Under 
the FCS, Scientists recruited at the level of     Scientist ‘B’ in Pay Band 
– 3 with Grade Pay of Rs. 5400 can move upto th e level of Scientist ‘H’ 
in HAG Scale (Rs. 67000 – 79000) and thereafter upto the level of 
Distinguished Scientist in HAG + Scale of Rs. 75500 – 80000 on 
personal upgradation basis. 
 
 
 Young Scientist are provided mentoring and guidance through constant 
interactive process for maintaining highest standard of research.  Also 
best of infrastructure, state- of-the-art laboratories, equipment, test 
facilities, etc. are provided for better working environment and research 
standards.       
 

25 
 
 
(c) Proposed Incentives Efforts are on to implement Performance 
Related Incentive Scheme (PRIS) in the Organisation as per 
recommendation of 6 th Central Pay Commission (CPC) which has not 
been agreed to by Ministry of Finance, despite the same being in 
operation in Department of Space and Department of Atomic Energy.  
Grant of PRIS to the Organisation will further rejuvenate the morale of 
DRDO Scientist/staff and encourage them to perform better.   
 
 
Recommendation (Para  No 10) 
 
 
 The Committee have also observed that there are many projects, undertaken 
in different DRDO labs, which are not attaining completion due to shortage of 
manpower.  The Committee desire that all out efforts should be made by  DRDO to 
ensure that projects undertaken by it are not delayed on account of shortag e of 
manpower. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 
Defence Research and Development Organisation (DRDO) follows a dynamic 
system of manpower development policy wherein no laboratory/establishment is 
provided a permanent authorisation of posts.  The deployment of Scientists and 
other manpower is decided on the basis of functional requirements, work load and 
other relevant considerations in each laboratory/establishment at a given point of 
time.  Once a post falls vacant, it is taken back into the corporate pool and i s 
released to laboratory again based on functional justifications.  In this manne r, 
availability of manpower is ensured in crucial projects. 
 
 However, it is mentioned that DRDO is indeed facing shortage of Scientists, 
for which it has taken up a Cabinet proposal for 1316 additional posts (126 0 
Scientists and 56 Works Cadre Officers), which is presently under consideration of 
the Government.        
  
 
Recommendation (Para  No 11) 
 
 
 The Committee are happy to note that the country’s defence requireme nts in 
terms of indigenous systems are being taken care of by the Defence Research and 
Development Organisation (DRDO).  The Committee see that although DRDO has 
given the country a vast range of products and systems, ranging from the strategic 
Agni class of missiles, a family of radars and sonars for virtually every 
platform/application, Electronic  Warfare (EW) systems, Main Battle Tank (MBT), 
combat aircraft, etc.yet the country is still dependent on imports.  Even after five 
decades of the establishment of DRDO, in 1958, having a vast network of  52 
laboratories across the country, the Nation is still importing large chunk of its 
technological requirements in Defence Sector fully knowing that technologically 
advanced countries do not part their critical technologies with developing countries 

26 
 
and offer only ‘Buy’ category of systems to countries like India.  Therefore, our labs 
have to develop each systems, sub-systems, component ab-initio including 
information infrastructural and testing facilities.  For this, adequate budgetary support 
is required.  The Committee desire that necessary reforms in this regard should b e 
undertaken and a detailed concept paper be prepared to ensure that there is no 
dearth of funds.  The Committee also desire that they may be apprised a bout the 
same.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 
Every year budget requirement is projected by DRDO based on the ongo ing 
and futuristic projects. Approximately 42% of the allotted funds are utilized  for 
strategic projects and 58% towards development of tactical and other systems which 
include R&D Activities, Salaries, Works & Maintenance, Miscellaneous, etc. About 
80% of the total budget is utilised for completion of Mission Mode Proje cts with 
deliverables for Armed Forces. Short falls in allocation of budget for Department  of 
Defence R&D was affecting Technology Development (TD), Science & Technology 
(S&T), Creation and maintenance of Infrastructure and Facilities (IF) and Product  
Support (PS) activities.  Over the past many years, matter related to short falls in  
Defence R&D Budget were raised in the meetings of the Parliamentary Standing 
Committee on Defence.  As a result, Standing Committee recommended increase in 
Defence R&D Budget which was increased substantially during 2014-15 particularly 
in “Capital Head”. This increase will be utilised for completion of major flagship 
strategic programmes. This year Defence R&D Budget has been increased from 
5.37% to 6.67% of the total Defence Budget. 
 
   
 DRDO has also evolved a Long Term Technology Perspective Plan (LTTPP) 
which highlights the emerging technologies in defence areas.  The Plan caters for  
requirements of Services for next 15 years (XII to XIV Plans) and possible lo ng term 
requirements beyond 15 years.  The basis of Plan is threat perception and 
requirements of Armed Forces as articulated in Long Term Integrated Perspective  
Plan (LTIPP) of Services which clearly indicates the deliverables in XII, XIII and XIV  
Five Year Plans.  
 
 On the directives of Hon’ble Prime Minister, DRDO has recently established 
following seven Young Scientist Centres  at various locations in the country on 21 
Jan 2015: 
 
(i) Centre for Guidance Systems of Rockets, Pune; 
(ii) Centre for Soldier Assist System for Difficult Areas, Bengaluru; 
(iii) Centre for Advanced Semiconductor Technology, Delhi; 
(iv) Centre for Briefcase Sonar Technology, Kochi; 
(v) Centre for Unmanned Small Airship Technology System, Agra; 
(vi) Centre for Advanced Avionics Technology, Hyderabad; 
(vii) Centre for Adaptive Sensing Technology, Bengaluru. 
 
 These Centers are headed by scientists under 35 years of age and these w ill 
function for accelerated R&D in respective areas. 
 

27 
 
 Keeping all above in view adequate budgetary support is required  for which 
DRDO will submit its requirements to the Govt. in the next financial year proposal. 
 
 
Recommendation (Para  No 12) 
 
 
 The Committee note that there are about 530 ongoing projects in different 
DRDO labs and out of it 136 in mission mode.  Some of these include Agn i IV, Agni 
V, Nirbhay cruise missile, K-15, Nag, Astra, AWACS, Arjun main battle tank, Teja s 
LCA etc.  The Committee also note that out of 44 major ongoing projects (more than  
100 crore), there have been cost revisions and time revision in case of 8  and 12 
projects respectively.  Besides, 10 projects are more than 5 years old i.e sanctioned 
before 2009.  Eighteen major projects (more than 50 crore) sanctioned d uring 10 th 
Five Year Plan (April 2002 to March 2007) but none has yet been comp leted. 
Moreover, two of them have been closed, five awaiting closure and one u nder 
evaluation.  Out of 43 major projects (more than 50 crore) initiated during 11 th Five 
Year Plan (2007-12) none has reached completion.  The Committee are perturbed to 
observe that the projects being undertaken are not executed according to their 
schedule and inordinate delays in execution of almost all the projects is a common 
phenomena.  While deploring this attitude, the Committee desire that some  concrete 
steps should be taken to put in place a mechanism to oversee the project e xecution 
so that they are implemented in stipulated time-frame.  Although, the Comm ittee 
note that some measures have been taken to decimate delays such as cr eation of 
seven technology clusters and the concerned Director Generals of technology 
clusters have been delegated adequate financial and administrative powe rs to carry 
out research and development as per mandate of DRDO,  monitoring of all Cabinet 
Committee on Security (CCS) projects by the Cabinet Secretariat through monthly 
report submitted before 10 th of every month on status and progress of each project.  
The Committee note that despite such an elaborate mechanism in place, the projects 
are being delayed.  The Committee are not happy with the situation.  They opine that 
this mechanism is not being followed scrupulously.  The Committee desire that more 
effective efforts are required to be made for timely completion of each project.  The 
Committee also desire that efforts so made may be apprised to them.   
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 
 Recommendations of the Parliamentary Standing Committee on Defenc e 
have been noted.  The following corrective measures have been ta ken by DRDO to 
restrict future time over-runs in projects:- 
 
(i) While undertaking new projects, pre-project activity including 
preliminary design will be given greater focus. 
(ii) More stringent review mechanisms have been put in place and various 
high level Committees including Steering Committees, Advisory 
Committees and Monitoring Boards have been established. 
(iii) Services and production partners during development process and 
reviews have been involved to know their views in advance including 
finalization of GSQRs. 
 

28 
 
 After implementation of recommendations of Dr. Rama Rao Committee, 
authority have been delegated to Technology Clusters with responsibility and 
accountability.   
 
 Director Generals of all seven technology clusters have been instructed to 
complete all ongoing projects on-time.  In case any problem comes du ring execution 
of project, it has to be sorted out at appropriate level.  All DRDO laboratories h ave 
been advised to formulate projects with realistic date of completion and review 
projects strictly at every set milestones.  Extension of project completion period wil l 
be given with proper justifications and those are beyond control of DRDO. 
 
 Individual/team/agency responsible for delay in completion of project will be 
called for explanation with DRDO Management Council (DMC), a apex body  of 
DRDO and appropriate action would be initiated. 
 
 DRDO HQr has issued Procedure for Project Formulation and Management     
(PPFM) – 2014 as a guidelines Manual for reference to all DRDO laboratories. All 
laboratories have been instructed to follow the set guidelines to avoid an y time over-
runs in project.  
 
Recommendation (Para  No 14) 
 
  
 The Committee are happy to note that to counter the threat of conv entional 
warfare and to equip the troops with equipment/systems which can detect, 
decontaminate and offer protection against NBC threats, DRDO is developing NBC 
defence technologies that are in regular use in the Services.  Life Sciences 
laboratories have been involved in the development of NBC equipment.  Over the 
last two decades, thirty-eight NBC systems/products have been developed by DRDO 
laboratories.  These products essentially cover the areas like detection, individual 
and collective protection, decontamination and medical and first aid systems, which 
have already been delivered to the Services.  Some of these deve lopments include 
chemical agent detectors, NBC reconnaissance vehicle, water poison detection kit, 
residual vapour detection kit, three colour detector paper, NBC Filter, personal 
decontamination kit, decontamination solution (DS-2), portable decontamination 
apparatus, integrated field shelter, mobile decontamination system, NBC individual 
protective equipment (IPE), first aid kits, NBC protective items, NBC canister, 
neelkantha and auto injector, etc. While appreciating the efforts of DRDO, the 
Committee recommend that the Ministry of Defence and DRDO should be pro-active  
in foreseeing the future challenges of NBC threat and work towards decimatin g its 
menace. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 
 Defence Research and Development Organisation (DRDO) has undertaken 
new initiatives to further augment the Nuclear, Biological and Chemical (NBC) 
Defence capabilities of the Armed Forces.  A major programme on NBC Defence 
Technologies has been undertaken with a budget of Rs. 284.96 Cr.  The programme 
includes 12 Mission Mode projects and 24 Science and Technology projects.  Th e 
deliverables include chemical agent detectors, individual protective equipment, 

29 
 
shelters, decontaminants and medical management devices.  Deliverables have 
undergone User Assisted Technical Trials (UATT) and are ready for User Trials. 
 
 
 
Recommendation (Para  No 15) 
 
 
 The Committee are happy to note that DRDO has instituted Grants- in-Aid 
schemes to nurture available research talents in universities, academia and other 
research centres, including industries in the country.  The Committee commend this  
initiative as this will foster knowledge-based growth of defence-related discipli ne in 
the country, strengthen national resources of knowledge, know-how, experience, 
facilities and infrastructure and catalyze the much needed cross-fertilization o f ideas 
and experiences between DRDO and outside experts in scientific and technical fields 
that contribute to defence technology.  In this regard, DRDO has established se ven 
centres of excellence at various institutions/universities in Bangalore, Chennai, 
Hyderabad, Coimbatore, Mumbai and Kolkata.  The Committee recommend tha t 
such centres should be opened at more places across the country.  The Ministry o f 
Defence should take initiatives in this regard under intimation to this Committee. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 
 Recommendations of the Parliamentary Standing Committee on Defence has 
been accepted.  In addition to establishment of seven Centers of Excelle nce in 
various disciplines, DRDO has taken initiative to establish four more centers of 
advanced research in areas of interest to defence.  These are: 
 
(i) Bi-nodal Center of Propulsion Technologies (CoPT) at IIT, Bombay. 
(ii) Jagadish Chandra Bose Center for Advanced Technology (JCBCAT) at 
Jadavpur University, Kolkata. 
(iii) Joint Advanced Technology Center (JATC) at IIT, Delhi. 
(iv) Center for Advanced Materials & Electromagnetics (CAMEL) at IIT, 
Jodhpur.   
 
 
 
 
  

30 
 
b) Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the 
Government and commented upon  
  
Recommendation (Para  No.1) 
 
 
 Indian Ordnance Factories were provided a fund of Rs. 3,666 crore during 
11th Five Year Plan from 2007-12 for modernization against which an expen diture of 
Rs, 2,927 crore was incurred.  Hence, Rs. 739 crore was left unutilized.  The 
Committee observe that Ordnance Factory Board manages 41 manufacturing Units 
and 32 other establishments, nevertheless around 20% amount allocated  for 
modernization remained unutilized during the 11 th plan period.  The under utilization 
of fund also indicate that Ordnance Factory Board has not been so forthco ming in 
modernizing Ordnance Factories.  The issue of augmenting capacity for 
manufacturing has not been properly a ddressed which has resulted in del ays of 
many projects like T-90 tanks, Pinaka Rocket system, etc.  The Committee express  
their anguish over the under utilization of Nations funds.  This shows sheer 
callousness on the part of the Ordnance Factory Board.  The Committee a re of the 
opinion that had there been less allocations, this amount could hav e utilized in some 
other head.  The Committee opine that alongwith adequate budgetin g, optimum 
utilisation should also be given due importance.  The Committee also desire that 
funding and expenditure pattern should be promptly dealt with under int imation to 
this Committee. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 
 
 
 Ordnance Factory Board was provided with Rs. 3666 Crore during the 11 th 
plan period, out of which an expenditure of Rs. 2927 Crore was incurred.  The under 
expenditure of Rs. 739 Crore occurred for the reasons as under: 
 
a) BE projection is made one year before the year of expenditure, base d 
on the committed liability and potential liability.  However, many case s 
results in re-tendering due to certain reasons (as enumerated below) 
and in turn the actual expenditure could not be met to the extent of B E 
projection: 
 
 (i) Most of the machines procured by OFB are special purpos e 
machines, tooled up and normally not available off the shelf. 
 (ii) Vendor base for the above kind of machines is limited. 
 (iii) There are limited sources for ammunition and explosive 
manufacturing plants. 
 (iv) Because of financial crisis, major suppliers in Europe failed to 
respond to tender enquiries resulting in re-tendering of cases 
and also failed to execute the supply timely. 
 
b) The estimated cost at the time of demand preparation is based on the 
Budgetary Quotation obtained from the prospective suppliers.  
However, many a time the actual expenditure in procurement of plant & 

31 
 
machinery through competitive bidding is less than the budgetary 
quote. 
 
 Modernization drive has been speeded up and in the first two y ears of XIIth 
Plan (2012-13 & 2013- 14), the funds have been utilized to the extent of 100% i.e. 
Rs. 1939.39 Crore have been spent against BE of Rs. 1933.69 Crores even  though 
there was a severe fund crisis in the year 2012-13 due to which OFB had to prioritise 
its investment plan.  OFB has envisaged an investment plan of Rs. 1660 Crore in the 
current financial year 2014-15. 
 
 
 
Recommendation (Para  No. 3) 
 
 While examining the subject, the Committee noted that there have been very 
long gestation periods in case of different projects.  For example, the project for 
creation of capacity for manufacturing of MBT Arjun @ 30 numbers per annum was 
sanctioned in May 2002 and the project could be completed only in Aug ust, 2011.  
This resulted in a time overrun of ten years. Also, Ordnance Factory project, Nalanda 
was initiated during the 10 th Plan and has been carried forward to the 12 th Plan.  
Besides this, the project for creation of capacity for manufacturing of T-90 tanks @ 
100 numbers per annum was sanctioned in December, 2003. Ordnance Factory 
Board started manufacturing 100 tanks per annum,  inclusive of tanks manuf actured 
from SKD (Semi-knocked down kits) from 2009-10.  Besides these, many projects 
which started in 2010 such as creation of capacity for manufacturing of T-72  variants 
@ 50 numbers per annum, augmentation of capacity for manufacturing of armoured 
vehicles engines from 350 to 750 per annum, augmentation of capa city for 
manufacturing of spares required in overhauling of T-72 &  T-90 t anks have not even 
attained 50% completion even after a lapse of 4-5 years.  The Committe e take 
serious note of the position with regard to long gestation of periods and de lays in 
project executions of Ordnance Factories projects and desire that all-out efforts b e 
made to streamline the project execution. Any kind of indecisiveness or callo usness 
is not acceptable to the Committee.  The Committee want this that matter should b e 
looked into by a high powered fact finding Committee so that accountabil ity of the all 
concerned be fixed.  In this context the Committee are given to understand  that 
certain Ordnance Factories are facing capacity constraints due to explosive safety 
limit restrictions on building used for ammunition production.  They have been further 
informed that steps are being taken to augment capacity of certain Ordna nce 
Factories.  Besides this in the past also Ordnance Factory Board had problems in 
meeting the target of manufacturing the T-90 tanks, BMP-II and Pina ka Rocket due 
to various constraints such as delayed product support from the Original Equipment  
Manufacturer (OEM), discontinuity in production line due to non-availability of indents 
from Army and also certain issues involving modification of design.  The Committe e 
are not happy with such a sorry state of affairs prevalent in respect of project 
executions.  They are of the opinion that these problems could have b een envisaged 
at the planning stage itself.  Hence the Committee want that adequate step s should 
be taken to adhere to the targets both in terms of quality and time un der intimation to 
them. 
 
 
 

32 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 
 The creation of infrastructure facilities for manufacture of MBT Arjun was 
completed by Feb, 2006 i.e. within the schedule time of 78 weeks.  However, a minor 
civil work comprising only 2% of the project cost of construction of 2 nos of typ e V 
residential quarters, which formed a part of MBT Project, was delayed and 
accordingly only the financial closure was delayed. 
 
 The delay in T-90 project for creating a manufacturing capacity of 100 Nos p er 
annum was due to non-availability of product support from Rosoboronexp ort, Russia 
and non-availability of ToT documents from OEM. 
 
 The likely completion status of the projects started in 2010 is as follows: 
 
Name of the Project Status of the Project Delay 
T-72 Variants @ 50 Nos. p.a. Anticipated completion of 
the project – Mar, 2015  
18 months 
Augmenting the capacity of 
Armoured Vehicles Engines from 
350 Nos. to 750 Nos. p.a. 
Anticipated completion of 
the project – Dec, 2016.  
38 months 
Spares required in overhauling 
of T-72/T-90 Tanks  
Anticipated completion of 
the project – Dec., 2015 
26 months 
 
 The progress of all the above projects is regularly monitored in the concerned 
Ordnance Factory as well as at the OF Board level. 
 
 Ordnance Factory Board has been directed to take immediate measures to 
complete the projects at the earliest.  Simultaneously Ordnance Factory Board h as 
also been asked to take the feedback in the form of ‘lessons lea rned’ from the 
officials involved in project execution so that the reasons for delay are captured  and 
reflected upon so as not to repeat them in future. 
 
Recommendation (Para  No. 6) 
 
 The Committee opine that besides timely production, it is also equally 
pertinent to have quality production.  During the deliberations, it was revealed th at 
earlier there were certain quality problems with the ordnance factory products.  
However, the representatives of Ministry of Defence assured that now they are 
taking a lot of initiatives in ensuring that everything is manufactured as per the  
process schedule.  As regard the defects due to improper handling of amm unition 
and storage in ammunition depots, improper maintenance of weapon syste m, 
improper handling of ammunition and weapon during firing or design deficiency, the 
Committee opine that quality of products has to be ensured at all levels.  Ex cellent 
quality is absolutely necessary in achieving indigenization and self-reliance i n 
respect of different high-end technology systems and sub-systems.  The O FB should 
take responsibility of training its end users (the Service personnel) in proper handling 
of ammunition and weapon. Inspite of these remedial measures, if the la cuna 
continue to exist, then accountability should be fixed and Committee be info rmed 
about the steps taken. 
 

33 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 
 Factories have taken lot of initiatives to conform the manufacturing of 
products as per ToT/AHSP documents. 
 
 Regarding the defects due to improper handling and storage in ammunition  
depots, improper maintenance of weapon system, improper handling o f Ammunition 
& Weapons during firing or design deficiency, the following comments are furnished: 
 
(i) For ammunition items, Ammunition Maintenance Instruction (AMI) and 
Ammunition Maintenance Kit (AMK) are being issued by AHSP 
documents. 
 
(ii) For training of users, it is proposed that user may depute group of 
persons to the relevant Ordnance factories for training & guidance on 
handling and storage in ammunition depots, maintenance of weapon 
system, handling of Ammunition & Weapons during firing. 
 
(iii) DDP has issued instruction for audit of QC/QA practices in OFs by a 
team involving representatives from Users, Quality Assurance 
agencies, DRDO and production Agencies.  It is proposed that for audit 
of storage, handling and maintenance at user end to be included in the 
scope of audit. 
 
 Process of defect investigation by a composite team of DGQA & Ordnance 
factory already exists.  Remedial actions are taken based on the report. 
Accountability is fixed based on findings of the inquiry report. In a speci fic case of 
failure of PTA Lakshya Parachute, manufactured at Ordnance Parachute Facto ry 
Kanpur, concerned workmen, Staff and Officers even upto SAG level in th e factory 
were issued advisory notes pending inquiry into the failure.  The inquiry by a 
composite team of representatives from all stakeholders including the User is a still 
continuing and further necessary action shall be taken based on the inquiry report.     
 
Recommendation (Para  No. 7) 
 
 The Committee note that the Defence Research and Development 
Organization (DRDO) projected an amount of Rs. 18495.46 crore, however, it has 
been allocated an amount of   Rs.15282.92 crore only thereby a sho rtfall of Rs. 
3212.54 crore. The Committee also note that out of the total defence budget the 
share of DRDO was 6.98% in 2009-10, which reduced to 5.37% in 2013-14.  
However, this share has slightly improved to 6.67% in 2014-15.  The share of 
defence research and development budget to GDP is also declining over the years.  
It has reduced to 0.09 per cent in 2013-14 from 0.13 per cent in 20 09-10.  The 
Committee also note that DRDO gives its budgetary projection, based on the 
ongoing projects/programmes and future requirements, but it has been allocated a 
meager amount and out of which nearly 80% is utilized for Mission Mo de Projects 
with deliverables for Armed Forces.  The Committee feel that shortfalls in budget 
affects the pace of technological and infrastructural development since ongoing 
development activities have to be re-prioritized.  Now-a-days there is a nee d to lay 
emphasis on indigenization of defence products but it can only be achi eved with 

34 
 
adequate budgetary support.  The Committee desire that all possible m easures 
should be taken to meet the budgetary requirement of DRDO.  The Co mmittee may 
be informed about the measures so taken.  
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 
 Prior to 2014 – 15, Defence Research and Development Organisation 
(DRDO) was facing problem of funds crunch.  Many on-going projects were 
reprioritised due to inadequacy of funds. During 2014 – 15, Government has 
increased Defence R&D Budget substantially, particularly in “Capital Head”.  DR DO 
has requested for increase in budget in “Revenue Head” also.  At present, Defe nce 
R&D Budget is approximately 6.67% of the Defence Budget which is insufficient for  
proper technological development.  Justice towards indigenization can be done only 
if the budget of Defence R&D is raised to at least 8 to 10% of the Defence Budget.  
DRDO has prepared a Long Term Technology Perspective Plan (LTTPP) that aligns 
with the Services Long Term Integrated Perspective Plan (LTIPP) to ensure 
strengthening and competitive growth in indigenous Defence technologies which is 
under implementation.  Government is considering request of DRDO for giving 
preference to indigenous products in defence acquisition and create a catego ry 
‘Make in India/Developed by DRDO.    
 
Recommendation (Para  No 13) 
 
 
 The Committee note that many projects including development of cargo 
ammunition, development of GPS Based System as an Alternative to Fire Di rection 
Radar, development of  30 mm Fair Weather Towed AD Gun System, developm ent 
of 30 mm Light Towed AD Gun System have been closed thus wasting a  
considerable amount of public money.  The Committee desire that they be informed 
about the basis on which these were included and specific reasons which fo rced the 
Government to close these projects. In this connection, the Committee feel that 
before commencing a project and channelizing money towards it though calculati on 
should be made for the project so that it may not be dropped before its completion 
and not even a single penny of the public is wasted in the name of country’s 
defence. 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 
Development of Cargo Ammunition 
 
 The project was undertaken in 1998 based on requirements from user. The 
objective was to develop cargo bomblets for 105 mm, 130 mm, 155 mm guns and 
120 mm Mortar and  122 mm Remotely Delivered Munition System (RDMS).  The 
project was to demonstrate assembly and trials in all calibers.  Bomblets being t he 
same for all the calibers and carrier systems was only different, it was decided to first 
prove the bomblets in 130 mm caliber and then evaluate it in all the carrier systems. 

35 
 
 
 To prove the design aspects, expenditure was incurred by all the participa ting 
labs for procurement of shells, bomblets, fuzes, stabilizing systems, packing 
systems, propellant, initiation systems, conduct of various performance eva luation, 
qualification level tests, static and dynamic trials. 
 
 Under the project, achievement made are establishment of shell, packaging 
system, stabilizing mechanism, bomblet dispersion mechanism, ejection system,  
bomblet testing system, lethality for anti tank role and antipersonnel role.  The  
integrated trails also resulted in 70-80% success in direct impact mode and 
additional 10-15% in Self Destruction Mode.  Maximum of 90% success rat e was 
achieved, whereas it was required to achieve 99% success rate to avoid any blind 
bomblets remaining in the field. 
 
 The complex system has been attempted with a good amount of success rate, 
the project closed with achievements listed above.  The experience gained in 
progress of project has resulted in its utilization in Pinaka project to achieve major 
milestones at faster rare. 
 
Development of 30 mm Fair Weather Towed AD Gun System 
 
 Indian Army has long standing requirement to replace vintage AD guns i.e . 40 
mm L70 and 23 mm ZU gun in the service.  After continuous interaction a nd long 
deliberations with the Users, the GSQR for AD gun system was finalized and GSQR 
767 was received in Jan 2000.  The main objective of the project was to  develop 30 
mm Air Defence Gun which would meet qualitative requirements as specifi ed in 
GSQR 767 and replace in-service AD Gun systems. 
 
 In Jan 2001, during review of DRDO projects by VCOAS, it was opined that 
existing fleet of AD guns i.e.40mm L70 and 23mm ZU gun in the service a re in good 
condition with residual life of 10-15 years.  Further during 9 th& 10th Plan, these guns 
are proposed to be upgraded and after upgradation the characteristics of t hese guns 
will be superior to that specified in GSQR 767.  Further, ADG AD (Arty) Directorate in 
February 2001, indicated that the existing AD Guns in our service will be deinducted  
with effect from 2015 only as against 2006 planned earlier.  It was also proposed to 
convene a meeting to finalize the GSQR as well as calibre of the future AD Gun. 
 
 In view of the above developments, it was not possible to effectively p rogress 
the Staff Project on 30mm Fair Weather Towed AD Gun.  A change in QR at that 
stage was going result in major changes in the scope of work and hence the  action 
for holding of PDR, manufacture of hardware, etc had not been progressed.  
Considering major policy shift by Users, Project Monitoring Committee on Armamen t 
and High Energy Materials proposed to close the project. 
 
Development of 30mm Light Towed AD Gun System 
 
 Draft GSQR based on the General Staff Policy Statement (GSPS) No. 144 on  
Army Air Defence Equipment for development of Fair Weather Towed Air Defenc e 
(AD) Gun was received in Feb 1997.  According to the GSPS No. 144, de-indu ction 
of 40mm L/70 and ZU-23 mm gun was planned with effect from 2 005 and 2006, 
respectively.  Therefore, it was stated that these guns are to be replaced with ne w 
Fair Weather Towed Gun System.  Hence  in  anticipation  of  finalized  GSQR,   the  

36 
 
project  for  Development  of  30  mm  Light Towed AD Gun System wa s undertaken 
in August 1997.   
   
Main reasons for short closure of the project ‘Development of 30 mm Light 
Towed  AD Gun system’ were: 
 
(i) Change in GSQR parameters (number of barrels, rate of fire, overall 
mass, power laying, etc.) 
(ii) Allotted funds were not adequate for development of AD gun with servo 
drive and control system as per new QR. 
(iii) PDC extension required due to delayed receipt of finalized GSQR. 
  
 As it was not possible to accommodate new QRs within the allotted project 
funds and time frame, decision was taken in the Corporate Review Meetin g to close 
the project and submit statement of case of new project. 
 
Development of GPS Based System as an Alternative to Fire Direction Radar 
 
 An R&D project was taken up for technology demonstration to develop a GPS  
based telemetry system for Pinaka rocket.  This system is utilized for tracking a pil ot 
shot to generate certain trajectory parameters.  The trajectory data is then 
extrapolated to get the co-ordinates of the predicted point of impact.  This 
information is then can be used to give correction to the fire units.  This enables in 
achieving first salvo effectiveness by speedy and accurate engagement of ta rgets.  
Use of such system can improve the accuracy, which would result in: 
 
(i) Less ammunition required per engagements. 
(ii) Reduced mission time and fast response to call for fire. 
(iii) More missions per battlefield day. 
(iv) Lower demand for and cost on logistic chain. 
 
The following achievements were made: 
 
(i) Development of GPS Sensor Module 
(ii) Development of telemetry transmitter with its Antenna 
(iii) Integration of GPS-Telemetry Modules as an Onboard Unit 
(iv) Integration of Onboard Unit with Pinaka warhead 
(v) Ten Units of GPS Receiver and Ten Units of Telemetry Transmitter 
were developed 
(vi) Successful static trials of hardware were carried out 
 
  
 Project Monitoring Committee Meeting held on 24 Oct 2002, took the de cision 
to close the project.  Subsequently, Director ARDE constituted a Committee tor 
review the project progress and technical work done and suggest future plan of work.  
The committee noted that the primary object of this project was to achieve higher 
accuracy.  Three routes were undertaken for accuracy improvement 
 
(i) Fire Direction Radar (FDR)-For rocket registration 
(ii) GPS- For rocket registration  
(iii) AGAPS- Automatic Gun Alignment and Positioning System. 
 

37 
 
 Of these, the first and third was tried out during the User Trial.  It was found 
that the third route viz the AGAPS system gave the required accuracy (le ss than 
1.2% of range).  In case of the FDR, it was found that the improvement obtained was 
marginal and there were cases where no improvement was obtained.  It was also 
seen that three pilot rockets may be required to obtain improvement in a ccuracy.  
Three pilot rockets however constitute a waste of rockets and reduced neutralizatio n 
capability.  The GPS system which is a registration system like the FDR will suffer  
from the same inaccuracies and limitations and as such is not suitable for improving  
the accuracy of Pinaka.  In addition, major changes in rocket configuration has to  be 
done before the GPS system becomes feasible.  It is therefore felt that this p roject is 
no longer necessary or feasible as a method for increasing Pinaka accuracy. The 
Committee therefore proposed that Project may be short closed. 
 
  

38 
 
CHAPTER III 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT 
DESIRED TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE REPLIES RECEIVED FROM THE 
GOVERNMENT  
 
-Nil- 
 
 
  

39 
 
CHAPTER IV 
 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF 
GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE WHICH 
REQUIRE REITERATION AND COMMENTED UPON 
 
 
Recommendation (Para  No 2) 
 
 
 During the deliberations, it was revealed that due to non-availability of fun ds in 
2013-14, expenditure was prioritized and restricted to Rs. 186 crore fo r 
augmentation of capacity for manufacturing of T-90 Tanks from 100  to 140 number 
per annum.  The Committee are surprised at this meagre allocation for s uch an 
ambitious project.  While seeking clarifications for such lesser allocation the 
Committee desire that enough allocation should be provided to augment the capacity 
of T90 tanks so that adequate supplies are made to Army within th e stipulated time 
frame.  Accordingly, this Committee be intimated about the initiatives taken in this 
regard. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 The project for manufacturing capacity augmentation of T-90 Tanks from 10 0 
to 140 nos. per annum was sanctioned in September, 2011 and the re were delays in 
initial period of project execution, primarily in tendering of machines.  Su bsequently 
in the year 2013-14, due to budget constraint the expenditure was prioritised and the 
investment plan against the project was restricted to Rs. 186.00 Crore. In the 
meanwhile the project is under review in light of firm indent being availa ble for only 
236 T-90 tanks from the Army HQ. It is equivalent to a workload of o nly two and a 
half year approx. at HVF Avadi (existing capacity being 100 T-90 tanks per annum). 
Even this order was placed after a gap of eight years". 
 
  

40 
 
CHAPTER V 
                    
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH 
GOVERNMENT HAVE  FURNISHED INTERIM REPLIES 
 
 
 
-Nil- 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI;     MAJ GEN B C KHANDURI, AVSM (RETD), 
10 December, 2015                      Chairperson ,  
19 Agrahayana, 1937 (Saka)                Standing  Committee on Defence 
  

41 
 
APPENDIX I 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE  
 
MINUTES OF THE SIXTH SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE   
ON DEFENCE (2015-16) 
 
 The Committee sat on Thursday, the 10th December, 2015  from 1000 h rs. to 
1100 hrs. in Committee Room, `62', Parliament House, New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
Maj Gen B C Khanduri, AVSM (Retd)  -  Chairperson 
 
 
LOK SABHA 
 
2 Shri Shrirang Appa Barne 
3 Shri Thupstan Chhewang 
4 Col Sonaram Choudhary(Retd) 
5 Shri Sher Singh Ghubaya 
6 Shri Ramesh Jigajinagi 
7 Km Shobha Karandlaje  
8 Dr  Mriganka Mahato 
9 Shri CH Malla Reddy 
10 Smt  Mala Rajya Lakshmi Shah 
11 Shri A P Jithender Reddy 
                                        
                                              RAJYA SABHA 
 
12 Shri K R Arjunan 
13 Shri Harivansh 
14 Shri Hishey Lachungpa 
15 Shri Tarun Vijay 
 
      SECRETARIAT 
1. Smt. Kalpana Sharma   - Joint Secretary  
2. Shri T G Chandrasekhar    - Director 
3. Smt. J M Sinha    - Additional Director 
4. Shri Rahul Singh    -  Under Secretary 
 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the members to the sitting of th e 
Committee and briefed about the reports.  
3. The Committee then took up for consideration of the  following  draft reports:- 

42 
 
(i) Action Taken by the Government on observations/recommendations 
contained in the Fourth Report of Standing Committee on Defence (16th 
Lok Sabha) on 'Demands for Grants of Ministry of Defence for the year 
2014-15 on  Navy and Air Force (Demand Nos. 23 and 24)'; and 
(ii)  Action Taken by the Government on observations/recommendations 
contained in the Fifth Report of Standing Committee on Defence (16th 
Lok Sabha) on 'Demands for Grants of Ministry of Defence for the year 
2014-15 on  Ordnance Factories and Defence Research and 
Development Organisation (Demand Nos. 25 and 26)'  
4. After deliberations, the Committee adopted the above Reports with some 
modifications. 
5. The Committee, then, authorised the Chairperson to finalise the above draft 
Reports and present the same to the House on a date convenient to him duri ng the 
ongoing Winter Session, 2015. 
The Committee then adjourned 
 
  

43 
 
 
APPENDIX II 
 
ANALYSIS OF THE ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS CONTAINED IN THE FIFTH REPORT 
(FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA) ON `DEMANDS FOR GRANTS OF THE MINISTRY OF 
DEFENCE FOR THE YEAR 2014-15 ON ORDNANCE FACTORIES AND 
DEFENCE RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT ORGANISATION(DEMAND NO. 25 
& 26)’ 
 
 
1. Total number of recommendations      15 
 
2. Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted by the 
Government (please see Chapter II): 
 
 Para Nos. 4,5,8,9,10,11,12,14,15 
Total :      09 
Percentage:   60%    
 
3. Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted by the 
Government and commented upon (please see Chapter II): 
  
 Para Nos. 1,3,6,7,13 
Total :      05  
Percentage:     33% 
 
4. Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do not desire to 
pursue in view of the replies received from the Government (please see 
Chapter III): 
 
-Nil- 
 
Total :        Nil 
Percentage:     0% 
 
5. Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of Government 
have not been accepted by the Committee which require reiteration and 
commented upon (please see Chapter IV): 
 
 
  Para Nos. 2 
Total :       01 
Percentage:    7% 
 
6. Recommendations/Observations in respect of which Government have 
furnished interim replies (please see Chapter V): 
 
-Nil- 
 
Total :    Nil  
Percentage:   0% 