1
15
STANDING COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE
(2015-2016)
(SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA)
MINISTRY OF DEFENCE
[Action taken by the Government on the observations / recommendations contained in 
the Sixth Report of the Committee (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) on Demands for 
Grants(2015-16) of the Ministry on Defence on Civil Expenditure of the Ministry of 
Defence and Capital Outlay on Defence Services & Demand No. 21, 22 and 28)]
FIFTEENTH REPORT
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
February, 2016/ Phalguna, 1937 (Saka)


2
STANDING COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE
(2015-2016)
(SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA)
MINISTRY OF DEFENCE
[Action taken by the Government on the observations / recommendations contained in 
the Sixth Report of the Committee (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) on Demands for 
Grants(2015-16) of the Ministry on Defence on Civil Expenditure of the Ministry of 
Defence and Capital Outlay on Defence Services & Demand No. 21, 22 and 28)]
Presented to Hon'ble Speaker, Lok Sabha on 27.01.2016
Presented to Lok Sabha on 26.02.2016
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 26.02.2016
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
February, 2016/ Phalguna, 1937 (Saka)


3
CONTENTS
PAGE.
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE(2015-16).……………………….....….........4-5
INTRODUCTION..…………………………………………………….….….................. 6
CHAPTER I Report………………………………………………………………….....7- 39
CHAPTER II a) Recommendations/Observations which have been 
accepted by the Government………………………………….40-58
b) Recommendations/Observations which have been
accepted by the Government and commented 
upon.........................................................................................59-67
CHAPTER III Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do not
desire to pursue in view of the replies received from the Government .....68-73
CHAPTER IV Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies 
of Government have not been accepted by the Committee 
which require reiteration and commented upon ……………….…....74-83
CHAPTER V Recommendations/Observations in respect of which 
Government have furnished interim replies………………………........84
APPENDICES
I     Minutes of the seventh sitting of the Standing Committee on
Defence (2015-16) held on 08.01.2016.………………............85-88
II    Analysis of Action Taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained  in the Sixth
Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee 
on Defence (2015-16)...............................................................89

4
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE (2015-16)
Maj Gen B C Khanduri, AVSM (Retd) - Chairperson
Members
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Suresh C. Angadi
3. Shri Shrirang Appa Barne
4. Shri Dharambir 
5. Shri Thupstan Chhewang
6. Col Sonaram Choudhary(Retd)
7. Shri H.D. Devegowda
8. Shri Sher Singh Ghubaya
9. Shri G. Hari 
10. Shri Ramesh Jigajinagi
11. Dr. Murli Manohar Joshi
12. Km. Shobha Karandlaje
13. Shri Vinod Khanna
14. Dr. Mriganka Mahato
15. Shri Tapas Paul
16. Shri Ch. Malla Reddy
17. Shri Rajeev Satav
18. Smt. Mala Rajya Lakshmi Shah
19. Capt  Amarinder Singh(Retd)
20. Shri A.P. Jithender Reddy
21. Smt. Pratyusha Rajeshwari Singh
Rajya Sabha
1. Shri K. R. Arjunan
2. Shri Anand Sharma
3. Shri Rajeev Chandrasekhar
4. Shri A.U. Singh Deo
5. Shri Harivansh
6. Shri Vinay Katiyar
7. Shri Hishey Lachungpa
8. Shri Madhusudan Mistry
9. Smt. Ambika Soni
10. Shri Tarun Vijay

5
SECRETARIAT
1. Smt. Kalpana Sharma - Joint Secretary
2. T.G. Chandrasekhar - Director

6
INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairperson of the Standing Committee on Defence (2015-16), having 
been authorised by the Committee to submit the report on their behalf, present this 
Fifteenth report on Action Taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Sixth Report of the Standing 
Committee on Defence(16th Lok Sabha)  on 'Demands For Grants (2015-16) of the 
Ministry of Defence on Civil Expenditure of the Ministry of Defence and Capital Outlay 
on Defence Services vis. Demand No. 21, 22 and 28).
2.       The  Sixth  Report was  presented  to Lok  Sabha / laid on the Table of Rajya  
Sabha on 27 April, 2015.  The  Action Taken Notes on the 
Observations/Recommendations were received from the Ministry of Defence in     
October 2015.
3. The Committee considered and adopted this Report at their Sitting held on               
08 January, 2016.
4. An analysis of  action taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Sixth Report of the Committee is 
given in Appendix II.
5. For facility of reference and convenience, Observations/Recommendations of 
the Committee have been printed in bold letters in the Report.
New Delhi;                          Maj Gen  B C Khanduri, AVSM (Retd),  
08 January, 2016 Chairperson,            
18 Pausa, 1937 (Saka)             Standing Committee on Defence

7
CHAPTER – I
REPORT
This report of the Standing Committee on Defence deals with Action Taken by 
the Government on recommendations/observations contained in the Sixth Report of 
Standing Committee on Defence (16th Lok Sabha) on 'Demands for Grants of Ministry 
of Defence for the year 2015-16 on Civil Expenditure of the Ministry of Defence and 
Capital Outlay on Defence Services (Demand No. 21, 22 & 28)'  which was presented 
to Lok Sabha and laid in Rajya Sabha on 27 April, 2015. 
2. The Committee's Sixth Report (16th Lok Sabha) contained 50
recommendations/observations on the following aspects :-
Para 
No./Nos.
Subject
1 - 2 Capital Expenditure
3 Indigenisation and R&D
4 - 5 Defence Procurement Procedure
6 - 22 Border Roads Organisation (BRO)
23 - 24 Indian Coast Guard (ICG)
25 - 29 Defence Estates Organisation
30 - 33 Military Engineering Services (MES)
34 - 38 Married Accommodation Projects (MAP)
39 - 40 Defence Public Sector Undertakings (DPSU)
41 - 47 Welfare of Ex-Servicemen
48 - 50 One Rank One Pension
3. Action Taken Replies have been received from the Government in respect of all 
the recommendations/observations contained in the Report.  The replies have been  
examined and categorised as follows :-
(a) Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the 
Government:
Para Nos. 3, 6, 8, 9, 10, 15, 20, 21, 22, 23, 30, 31, 32, 33, 36, 37, 38, 
39, 40, 41, 42
(21 Recommendations)

8
These may be included in Chapter II of the Draft Report.
(b) Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the     
Government and are commented upon:
Para Nos. 14, 16, 18, 19, 27, 28, 34, 35, 44, 45, 46, 47
(12 Recommendations)
These may be included in Chapter II of the Draft Report.
(ii) Observations/Recommendations which the  Committee do not desire to 
pursue in view of the replies received from the Government:
Para No. 12, 13, 17, 25, 26, 29, 43
(07 Recommendations)
These may be mentioned in Chapter III of the Draft Report.
(iii) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of    
Government have not been accepted by the Committee which require 
reiteration and commented upon:
Para No. 1, 2, 4, 5, 7, 8, 11, 24, 48, 49, 50     
(11 Recommendations)
These may be included in Chapter IV of the Draft Report.
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which Government have 
furnished interim replies:
Para No. NIL
(0 Recommendations)
These may be mentioned   in Chapter V of the Draft Report.
4. The Committee desire that the Ministry’s response to their comments 
made in Chapter 1 of this Report to be furnished to them at the earliest and in 
any case not later than six months of the presentation of this Report. 

9
A. Capital Expenditure
Recommendation (Para No. 1 )
5. The Committee had recommended as under :-
The Committee observe that the Capital Expenditure has never remained under 
control. The Committee feel that the Capital Head invariably ends up with unutilized 
funds. During the year 2010-11 against the RE allocations of Rs.24266.79 crore, 
Army spent Rs. 23,625.42 crore. Similarly in the year 2011-12and 2012-13, Army 
could utilize Rs. 14,947.82 crore and Rs. 14760 crore against RE of Rs. 16005.69 
crore and 15749 crore. In case of Navy Rs. 17759.88 crore and Rs. 20338.85 crore 
could be utilized during the year2012-13 and 2013-14 against RE of Rs. 18266.42 
crore and Rs. 20418.98 crore respectively. Air Force too could utilize Rs. 23,625.42 
crore out of RE allocation of Rs. 24266.79 crore in the year 2010-2011. During the 
preceding financial year2014-15 the position of expenditure upto the end of February 
2015, in respect of Army, Navy and Air force is Rs. 14843.37 crore, Rs. 18439.02 
crore and Rs. 29682.14 crore respectively against their RE of Rs. 21933.54 crore,Rs. 
18507.07 crore and Rs. 33710.68 crore respectively. Such underspending leads to a 
situation where the preparation of Defence Forces are nowhere near the target which 
are fixed and it becomes a fait accompli. The Committee are of the opinion that 
capital investment requires a certain period of time to materialize. A capital 
investment cannot be completed in a financial year. A lot of studies are to be carried 
out which require the clearance from a number of agencies. The Committee, 
therefore, strongly recommend that Capital Allocation and Expenditure should be 
"Non-lapsable and Roll-on" allocation. It should be a part of plan expenditure and the 
progress should be monitored by a specialist, expert Committee to ensure that the 
time schedule is set and followed on various stages till the delivery of capital goods.
6. The Ministry in its Action Taken Reply has stated as under:-
'The utilisation of the Defence capital budget must be viewed in its entirety.  
Focussing only on a particular Service, or year, of under spending gives a 
distorted picture.  It is more appropriate to focus on under-spending, if any, 
under the capital budget as a whole rather than any one Service.  Under-
spending by one Service is usually counter balanced by excess spending by 
another Service.  Thus, from the position of utilisation of the capital budget 
tabulated below, it may be seen that funds available have been fully utilised:

10
(in Rs.crores)
Year BE RE Actuals %age 
utilisation
2010-11 60,000.00 60,833.26 62,056.00 102.01
2011-12 69,198.81 66,143.81 67,902.38 102.65
2012-13 79,578.63 69,578.63 70,499.12 101.32
2013-14 86,740.71 78,872.23 79,125.05 100.32
2014-15 94,587.95 81,965.24 81,887.42 99.91
In view of the above, it is felt that no purpose is served by delineating the capital budget as 
“non-lapsable and roll-on” as on no occasion during the last five years were any surplus 
funds available for rolling over.
It is also felt that designation of Defence capital expenditure as plan expenditure would yield 
no benefit, especially since the distribution between `Plan’ and `Non-Plan’ expenditure even 
in the civil side has been called into question with the winding-up of the Planning 
Commission.
It may also be noted that the progress of capital acquisition expenditure is monitored by the 
Acquisition Wing which is tasked with the responsibility of defence capital procurement, as 
well as by the Defence Acquisition Council headed by the Raksha Mantri.'
Recommendation (Para No. 2 )
7. The Committee had recommended as under :-
'The Committee have been apprised that Capital Outlay is in the ratio of 30:40:30 all 
over the world which means that out of the total Capital Outlay, the 30% has to be 
the category of state-of-the-art technology, 40% current and 30% for obsolescence. 
The Ministry of Defence is endeavouring to follow this standard pattern. The 
Committee feel that in order to achieve this standard ratio, we would have to not only 
enhance our capital outlay but also make it "Non-lapsable and Roll-on" as an urgent 
change in our Financial Policy. The major reason cited by the Defence Secretary for 
not adhering to this standard ratio was insufficient Capital Budget. The Defence 
Ministry officials have to make sincere efforts and ensure that the funds allocated are 
fully & efficiently utilized under respective heads.
The Committee are dismayed to note that there was underspending of Rs. 
720.41 crore during the years 2013-14 which lapsed! In respect of Army the 
underspending was Rs. 605.34 crore, in case of Air Force it was Rs. 93.49 crore 
while in case of Director General Ordnance Factories (DGOF), Defence Research 

11
and Development Organization (DRDO) and Directorate General of Quality 
Assurance (DGQA), it was Rs. 0.62 crore, Rs. 20.08 crore and Rs. 0.88 crore 
respectively. The Committee observed that barring Navy there was underspending in 
respect of each services/departments. The Committee therefore express their 
displeasure over this fact wants it to be examined and details reasons given to the 
Committee. The Committee also recommend that all out efforts should be made to 
curb underspending.'
8. The Ministry in its Action Taken Reply has stated as under :-
'As stated in reply to Recommendation at serial no. 1, the position of utilisation of the 
budget must be viewed for the Demand as a whole.  In 2013-14, while minor under-
spending did occur in respect of Final Estimates of Army, Air Force, DGOF, DRDO 
and DGQA, this was balanced by overspending by other agencies and there was no 
surrender of funds.  This is clearly brought out below:
(inRs.crores)
BE RE Actuals % age utilisation
86,740.71 78,872.23 79,125.05 100.32%
The Committee may rest assured that all efforts will continue to be made to ensure 
that available funds are fully utilised.'
9. The Action Taken Note is misleading on the reasons attributable for the 
underutilization of the Capital Outlay, which, as highlighted by the Committee is 
substantial viz., Rs. 720.41 crore for the year 2013-14.  The amount of shortfall in 
utilizing the Budgeted funds has been to the tune of Rs. 605.34 crore in case of Army 
and Rs. 93.49 crore in case of Air Force.  
10. What the Committee find to be particularly dismaying in this regard is the fact 
that a detailed reasoning for the shortfall in utilizing the outlays has not been given.  
Instead, the Ministry has chosen the evasive route by stating that ‘under-spending’ 
in the case of certain agencies has been balanced by way of ‘over-spending’ by 
other agencies. The intention behind the Committee’s recommendation was for 
keeping the budgetary allocations for ‘Capital Acquisition’ exclusively for the 
purpose and not divert the allocations to any other head of account. This

12
has not been adhered to by the Ministry of Defence. It is also evident that the 
budgetary allocation that is under-spent has been diverted to non-priority or non-
essential heads of account and shown as ‘not-lapsed’.  The Committee entirely 
disapprove this approach of the Ministry in treating the Capital Outlay.  It is 
imperative that the reasons attributable for the shortfall in utilizing the funds are 
analysed in detail and necessary remedial measures taken so as to ensure that such 
instances do not recur.  The Committee expects to be apprised of the action taken in 
this regard.  
11. The Committee also do not find to be tenable, the submission of the Ministry 
that no purpose would be served by delineating the capital budget as “non-lapsable 
and roll-on”. The data on budgetary spending reveals that substantial outlays remain 
unutilized. Also, the Ministry has been unable to adhere to the standard ratio of 
Capital Outlay followed the world over.  The Committee, therefore, strongly reiterate 
their Recommendation for treating the Capital Outlays ‘as roll-on and non-lapsable’ 
be considered with due seriousness and intention based, even if the measure calls 
for, or involves substantial changes in the process of Budget formulation.
B Defence Procurement Procedure
Recommendation (Para No. 4)
12. The Committee had recommended as under :-
'The Committee observed that the Capital allocation for Air Force has been reduced 
during the current financial year.  It is also observed that the deal of 126 aircraft with 
the French based Rafale Company could not be finalised.  The Committee feel that 
all these attribute to long gestation period of Defence Procurement Procedure.'

13
13. The Ministry in its Action Taken Reply has stated as under :-
'The Capital budget allocation for Indian Air Force has increased to Rs.33685.75 
Crore in 2015-16 from Rs.31627.39 Crore in 2014-15.  The case for procurement of 
126 Medium Multi Role Combat Aircraft (MMRCA) for which Acceptance of Necessity 
(AoN) was accorded on 29 th June, 2007 has remained inconclusive.  Capital 
Acquisitions have long gestation periods.  However, all Capital Procurements for the 
armed forces are carried out in accordance with the guidelines laid down in the 
Defence Procurement Procedure (DPP).  Government constantly monitors the 
progress of schemes ensure to that Defence preparedness is maintained at all time 
and constantly reviews the security environment so that IAF is fully equipped to meet 
the security challenges.'
Recommendation (Para No. 5)
14. The Committee had recommended as under :-
'The Committee have been apprised that Defence Procurement Procedure is 
changed every two years.  The last change was made at the end of May 2013 and by 
the end of May 2015 a change shall be due in the procedure.  As the Defence 
Secretary submitted before the Committee that four major issues are going to be 
changed in the revised procedure.  The Committee hope that the new Defence 
Procurement Procedure shall plug the loopholes in the existing policy and make it 
more productive without time and cost overrun. The new procedure envisages the 
tackling of the complaints without any hindrance in the procurement.  The new policy 
should be drafted in such a fashion that procurement is not hampered. While 
appreciating the reforms proposed to be brought out in the Defence Procurement 
Procedure, the Committee note that the Offset Policy should envisage 30% 
indigenous production by the importer in India and Transfer of Technology (ToT).  
The Committee also recommend the immense potential and capability already 
available in the field of “Reverse Engineering” in our Country.  These could be 
utilized where very high degree of expertise or technology is not required.  The 
Committee feel that instead of investing in those areas which are of not much 
significance, the offset policy should lay stress on Transfer of Technology, 
indigenization and Intellectual Property Right (IPR).  The Committee are of the 
opinion that if the IPR is obtained by the money invested by the Government then 
part sharing of profit shall be there and in case the foreign company decides to 
discontinue then IPR shall be reverted to the Government.  The Committee, 
therefore, recommend that revised Defence Procurement Procedure shall include all 
these things and Committee shall be apprised about the more efficient procurement 
in coming months.'
15. The Ministry in its Action Taken Reply has stated as under :-
As noted by the Hon’ble Committee, a number of initiatives have been taken to 
address issues relating to Defence Procurements.
MoD has recently constituted a Committee of Experts to evolve a policy framework to 
facilitate “Make in India”, align it with the DPP and suggest requisite amendments to 
DPP-2013.  The Offset policy is also under review.

14
16. The Committee note that the Ministry has merely chosen to state that the deal 
for procuring 126 Air Craft from the France based Rafale Company - for which the 
Acceptance of Necessity (AoN) was accorded way back in 2007 - has remained 
inconclusive. The concern expressed by Committee has been on the deal not having 
been finalized thus far.  Not furnishing the reasons for the deal not having been 
finalized or details of the current status of the proposal is indicative of lack of 
seriousness on the part of the Ministry in furnishing the Action Taken Notes.  The 
Committee, therefore, expects to be apprised in detail of the status pertaining to the 
deal, which has been in the pipeline for long.  
17. Also, the Committee had laid stress on the specific aspects of the Defence 
Procurement Procedures that need to be reviewed.  These include, inter alia, 
providing for tackling of complaints in procurement without any hindrance;
envisaging 30 per cent indigenous production by the Indian importer and Transfer of 
Technology (ToT) under the Offset Policy; tapping the potential of “Reverse 
Engineering”.  The Committee also desired that the ‘Offset Policy’ should lay stress 
on Transfer of Technology, indigenization and Intellectual Property Rights (IPR) etc.  
Instead of addressing these issues, the Ministry has merely chosen to indicate that a 
number of initiatives have been taken to address the issues related to Defence 
Procurement and the Offset Policy was ‘under review’. The Action Taken Note not 
being satisfactory, the Committee expects to be furnished with a detailed account of 
the measures initiated/ taken for revising the Defence Procurement Procedures and 
the status thereof.  

15
18. The Committee also desire to be apprised of the composition of the Committee 
of Experts that is said to have been constituted for the
purpose  of evolving a framework for facilitating “Make in India”,  the 
recommendations made by the Expert Committee and the action taken or 
contemplated thereon.
C Border Roads Organisation
Recommendation (Para Nos. 7 & 11)
(i) Para No.7
19. The Committee had recommended as under :-
'The public at large specially those living in border States, have great expectation 
from Border Roads Organisation. The expeditious movement of troops depend upon 
good quality roads capable of withstanding the climatic condition of the region. This 
can only be achieved if BRO is provided adequate funds to carry out its functions 
smoothly. The Committee are disappointed that such an important area had been 
neglected by the Government over a period of time. BRO which was founded as a 
“Force”, viz General Reserve Engineer Force (GREF), by the first Prime Minister of 
the Country and headed by him, which enabled it to take major decisions promptly 
and resulting in creation of very effective and efficient GREF (now BRO).  It lost its 
sheen since then, as Border Roads Development Board (BRDB) is now headed by a 
Minister of State.  It is observed from the statistics that paucity of funds has always 
been there in the BRO.  However, the Committee are happy and have some solace 
that BRO has been transferred from Ministry of Road and Surface Transport to 
Ministry of Defence.  However, this can not be panacea for all the maladies to which 
BRO has been struggling since long. The Committee, therefore, recommend 
Government to provide ample amount of money to BRO and there should not be 
budget cut since north-East Projects in particular suffer when funds are withdrawn 
every year during working season (last quarter). The Committee also recommend 
that BRDB should be headed by Defence Minister instead of Minister of State for 
Defence.'
20. The Ministry in its Action Taken Reply has stated as under :-
'In order to improve the operational efficiency of BRO and achieve clarity and unity of 
command, Government of India (Allocation of Business rules 1961) has been 
amended vide notification dated 9 th January 2015 to include ‘all matters relating to 
Border Roads Development Board and Border Roads Organisation (BRO)’ in the list 
of business allocated to Ministry of Defence. Further, the budget allocation from 
Budget Estimate (BE) 2015-16 onwards for BRO has been done under Ministry of 
Defence (Demand No 21). For BRO the allocation of funds for IS 2015-16 under Non 
Plan (NP) is Rs 3030.57 crores and under Plan is Rs 450.00 crores.  The details of 
demand versus allocation of funds for BE 2015-16 is given below:

16
SrlNo Major Head Demand  (Rs in 
Crores)
Allotment  (Rs in Crores)
Non Plan
i 2052 456.13 372.57
ii 3054 895.18 736.00
iii 5054 2104.69 1922.00
Total 4056.00 3030.57
Plan
i 3601 50.00 45.00
ii 5054 400.00 360.00
iii 2552 - 5.00
iv 4552 - 40.00
Total 450.00 450.00
G/Total (Non Plan 
and Plan)
4506.00 3480.57
2. Further, a proposal for additional funds under Non plan for BE 2015-16 
amounting to Rs 1096 Crs for BRO has been submitted to MoD (Fin) on 24 June 
2015 for inclusion under the first batch of supplementary Demands for Grants to 
be considered during the current monsoon session of the Parliament.'
(ii) Para No. 11
21. The Committee had recommended as under :
'The Committee note with concern that funds for BRO are released at a late stage. 
When there is conductive working season to carry out the work, the funds are not 
released. On the contrary, in Ladakh Region, North-Eastern Region, Uttarakhand 
and Himachal Pradesh, funds are released at the time of onset of winter. During that 
period it is very difficult to carry out the work and as a result, the funds remain 
unutilized. As admitted by the Defence Secretary at the time of oral evidence, snow 
clearance grant had been a problem, It is imperative in this regard that grants are 
released well before the onset of winter. The Committee also recommend that the 
funds which remain un-utilized due to hostile climatic condition may be carried 
forward for the next working session.'
22. The Ministry in its Action Taken Reply has stated as under :-
'At the Revised Estimate (RE) stage, Ministry of Finance revises the allocation of 
budget based on the actual expenditure incurred in the current financial year and as 
per the guidelines issued from time to time for austerity measures. 
During this FY 2015-16, an amount of Rs 3030 crores under Non plan has been 
allotted against the BE demand of Rs 4056 of BRO. At the time of budget allocation 
to BRO for RE 2014-15 and BE 2015-16 during January 2015, a case was taken up 
by Hon’ble RM with Hon’ble Finance Minister for allocation of Rs 4056 crores under 

17
GS Non Plan for BE 2015-16 to BRO. Further, again a proposal to enhance the 
allotment of funds under Non Plan for BE 2015-16 amounting to Rs 1096 Crs for 
BRO has been submitted to MoF through MoD (Fin) on 24 June 2015 for inclusion 
under the first batch of supplementary Demands for Grants to be considered during 
the monsoon session of the Parliament.
With a view to improve the quality of maintenance, DGBR has been delegated 
powers to fix rates for maintenance, snow clearance grants and outsourcing of 
Maintenance. Details of funds allotted by DGBR for road maintenance/ snow 
clearance during this financial year 2015-16 is given as under:-
Allotment
(a) General Staff (GS) Roads : 610.00 Cr
(b) MoRT&H Roads : 140.00 Cr
Total : 750.00 Cr
23. It is dismaying to note that despite the Boarder Roads Organisation (BRO) 
having been transferred from the Ministry of Road and Surface Transport to the 
Ministry of Defence, the organization continues to face the problem of 
inadequate funds/ allocation.  It is seen that the total allocation for the BRO has 
been short of the demand made for the year 2015-16 by more than Rs.1000 
crore (the allocated amount being Rs.3480.57 crore as compared to the demand 
for Rs. 4506 crore).  The Committee, while reiterating the need for ensuring that 
the activities of the BRO are not stymied due to inadequacy of funds, also 
expects to be apprised of the status in regard to making available, the fresh 
demand of over Rs.1000 crore made for the year 2015-16.  
24. The concern of the Committee also extends to the delayed and untimely 
release of funds for maintenance work, about which the Action Taken Note is 
either evasive or is silent. As per the Defence Secretary’s own submission 
before the Committee, the delay in releasing funds earmarked for maintenance 
work is a bane for the Border Roads Organisation (BRO).  The Committee 
trusts that remedial measures have been/are being taken to address the 

18
problem.   The Committee would await a detailed note from the Ministry in this 
regard.
Recommendation (Para  No. 8)
25. The Committee had recommended as under :-
'The Committee observed that BRO faces a lot of difficulty in acquisition of land and 
forest clearance.  After the takeover of BRO by the Ministry of Defence, it is felt that 
these problems would be mitigated to a large extent.  In this regard, the Committee 
recommend that an empowered committee consisting of Defence Secretary and be 
Chief Secretary of the concerned State should constituted to settle the issues 
pertaining to land acquisition and forest clearance expeditiously as the country’s 
security cannot be compromised.  The committee therefore recommends that both 
Defence Secretary and Chief Secretary of the State concerned sit together and 
resolve the issues without any delay.'
26. The Ministry in its Action Taken Reply has stated as under :-
(a) 'Border Roads Organization (BRO) is entrusted with the 
construction/development of Strategic Roads in the border areas. For the 
construction/development of these Strategic Roads, Environment clearances, Wildlife 
and Forest Clearance within Reserve Forests, Wild Life Sanctuaries and Protected 
Areas is required to be obtained. In addition, there are also delays caused due to 
protracted procedures involved in Land Acquisition cases.'
(b) Environmental, Forest and Wildlife Clearance: As per Ministry of 
Environment and Forest (MoEF) notification dated 12 Aug 2013 “expansion of 
National Highway projects upto 100 kms involving additional right of way of land 
acquisition up to 40 mtrs on existing alignments and 60 mtrs on realignments or by 
passes are exempted from environmental clearances”. At present no Environmental 
clearance cases are pending in respect of road projects under taken by Border 
Roads Organisation (BRO). 
(c) The following measures have been taken by the Government to expedite the 
various clearances:
(i)State Governments of Arunachal Pradesh, Assam, J&K, Himachal Pradesh, 
Manipur, Nagaland, Sikkim, Tripura and Uttarakhand have been requested to 
constitute an Empowered Committee under their Chairmanship with Principal 
Secretaries of Revenue, Forest, Mining, PWD and Power Departments along with the 
PCCF and Chief Engineers of BRO as members to resolve issues. States of Sikkim, 
Arunachal Pradesh, J&K, Himachal Pradesh and Tripura have constituted the 
Empowered Committee.

19
(ii) A working group has been constituted on 03 June 2013 by Ministry of 
Environment & Forest under the chairmanship of Secretary MoEF to review the forest 
clearance cases.
(iii) Regular monitoring of forest clearance cases, establishment of Single window 
system at District, State, and Ministry of Environment & Forest (MoEF) levels and 
simplification of forms.
(iv)  MoEF vide letter dated 27 Apr 2011 in the States Arunachal Pradesh, Himachal 
Pradesh, Jammu & Kashmir, Uttarakhand and Sikkim has accorded Exemption of 
Compliance of Scheduled Tribe and other Forest Dwellers (Recognition of Forest 
Rights) Act 2006 to avoid delay in clearance of road projects. 
(v) MoEF letter dated 09 Dec 2013 in the State of Uttarakhand State has 
accorded exemption for transfer and mutation of alternate Revenue Land for raising 
compensatory Afforestation for border roads.
(iv) Requirement of certificate regarding non availability of alternate alignment has 
been dispensed with for BRO projects by MoEF vide their order dated 09 Dec 2013.
(vi) Permission for processing division wise cases of BRO projects have been 
accorded by MoEF vide their order dated 09 Dec 2013.
(vii) MoEF  vide their letter No 11-246/2014-FC dated 4 th July 2014 has accorded 
general approval under Section (2) of the Forest (Conservation) Act 1980 for 
diversion of forest land in the state of Arunachal Pradesh, Himachal Pradesh,  
Uttarakhand & Sikkim for following :-
(i) Construction and widening of two lane roads by the BRO and other 
road construction agencies entrusted with the job by the Ministry of Defence, 
in the area falling within 100km kilometers aerial distance from the LAC and
(ii) widening of road (by the BRO and other road construction agencies) 
which are identified by the Ministry of Defence as link roads between Border 
Roads in the area within 100 kilometer aerial distance from the LAC and 
National Highways/State Highways/other State Roads, subject to fulfillment of 
the conditions. 
(viii) MoEF vide their letter No.11-246/2014-FC dated 4th July 2014 for the States 
of Arunachal Pradesh, Himachal Pradesh, Uttarakhand and Sikkim has decided to 
extend the said relaxation to strategic defence projects (including infra-structure and 
road projects) being taken up in the area falling within 100 km aerial distance from 
the Line of Actual Control by any user agency identified by the Ministry of Defence 
which provides that compensatory afforestation in lieu of the forest land diverted for 
compensatory afforestation may be raised on degraded forest land twice in extent of 
forest area being diverted, without insisting of certificate of Chief Secretary regarding 
non –availability of non- forest for compensatory afforestation, inter –alia it was 
informed that the compensatory afforesation will be raised and maintained at the cost 

20
of the user agency over degraded forest land equal in extent to the area of forest 
land diverted. 
(ix) MoEF vide their letter dated 8 th Aug 2014 has intimated that      in-principle 
approval under the Forest (Conservation) Act 1980 may be deemed as the working 
permission for tree cutting and commencement of work, if the required funds for 
compensatory afforestation, NPV, wildlife conservation plan, plantation of dwarf 
species of medicinal plants, and all such other compensatory levies specified in the 
in–principle approval are realized from the user agency. 
d. In addition to above the following measures have been taken by BRO to 
expedite the forest clearances:
(i) Appointment of Nodal Officer: Project wise Nodal Officers have been 
appointed and details are uploaded on BRO website       ( www.bro.gov.in) for the 
coordination with the State Principal Chief Conservator of Forest (PCCF) and 
Regional Offices of MoEF.
(ii) Filing of Interlocutory Application (IA): IAs have been filed with Hon’ble 
Supreme Court for the following roads:-
(i) Kupur-TrJn
(ii) Bagphool-Kalijhora
(iii) Flag Hill-Dokhal
(iii) Filing of early hearing petition has been submitted to Ministry of Law and 
application filed with Hon’ble Supreme Court on 06 Apr 2015. 
(iv) General application in Hon’ble Supreme Court: A general application has 
been filed in Hon’ble Supreme Court  for exempting BRO from filing case to case 
basis Interlocutory Application in respect of road projects falling within protected 
areas and to grant clearance by MoEF after getting approval from Standing 
Committee on National Board for wild life clearance. Hon’ble Supreme Court has 
referred the matter to Chief Empowered Committee (CEC) for their comments.'
27. A number of measures have reportedly been initiated for speeding up the 
process of land acquisition and obtaining forest clearances, which is in line 
with the recommendation of the Committee and is appreciable.  These include, 
inter alia:  constitution of Empowered Committees by the State Governments 
concerned; Working Group by the Ministry of Environment and Forests, 

21
granting relaxation to strategic Defence Projects (including road projects) in 
States such as Arunachal Pradesh, Himachal Pradesh, Uttarakhand and 
Sikkim, etc.  The Committee, however, notes in this regard that certain States, 
including Assam, Manipur, Nagaland and Uttarakhand are yet to constitute 
Empowered Committees for assessing and resolving issues relating to 
clearances, despite the request made in this regard by the Ministry of Defence.  
As is the case with the other States concerned, the Committee desire that 
these States may be impressed upon on the need for constituting Empowered 
Committees so as to enable in speedy clearance of land acquisition related 
issues, etc.  
28. The Committee also desire to be apprised of the outcome in regard to the 
application reportedly filed before the Supreme Court for exempting the BRO 
from filing interlocutory applications in respect of road projects on case to 
case basis; and to provide for obtaining clearances from the Ministry of 
Environment and Forests following the approval from the Standing Committee 
on National Board for Wild Life.
Recommendation (Para No. 14 )
29. The Committee had recommended as under :-
'The connectivity between Himachal Pradesh and Ladakh Region is very crucial for 
the expeditious movement of troops and equipment to this strategic area. The 
Committee, therefore, recommend to construct Nyemo-Padum-Darcha road to 
connect Himachal Pradesh and Ladakh Region.  The Committee may be apprised of 
the steps taken in this regard.'
30. The Ministry in its Action Taken Reply has stated as under :-
'In order to establish all weather connectivity between Himachal Pradesh and 
Ladakh region the following proposals have been formulated:-

22
(i) Road Darcha-Padam-Nimmu-Leh:
(a) Road Nimu- Padam – Darcha : The road Nimu-Padam-Darcha, of length 
297.375 Km is presently under construction. Out of which 170.02 Km to single 
lane specifications and 10 Km to double lane specifications have been 
completed. Formation works for Km 17.50 in single lane and 50.00 Km double 
lane are in progress.
(b) Road Darcha-Shinkunla: The road Darcha –Shinkunla of length 39.375 
Km is presently under construction. Out of which 21.89 Km formation work 
and 14.19 Km surfacing work has been completed.
Further, the following works are planned to expedite the completion of the road:
(a) Approval for feasibility study for Shinkunla Tunnel has been accorded.
(b) Development of road Nimu-Padam-Darcha to NHDL specifications has 
been proposed for taking up through large private player and approval for 
preparation of detailed project report has been accorded.
(ii) Road Manali-Sarchu-Upshi-Leh.
(a) Construction of 8.800 Km long Rohtang Tunnel is under progress.
(b) Approval for feasibility study for Barlach La and Tanglang La 
Tunnels has been accorded.
(c) Development of balance road stretch on Manali-Sarchu-Leh to NHDL 
specifications has been proposed for taking up through International 
Consortium and approval for preparation of detailed project report has been 
accorded.
(iii) In addition to above, the following alignments for all weather connectivity from 
Himachal Pradesh to Ladakh region are also under consideration:
(a) Road Wangtu-Pooh-Sumdo-Chumar-Nyoma-Upshi-Leh
(b) Road Wangtu-Bhaba Pass-Aturgu-Kiato-NurbuSumdo-TsoMorari-
Karzok-Mahe-Upshi-Leh.'
29. The Committee note that the work on constructing the Nimu – Padam – Darcha 
Road with a total length of 297.375 Km that would provide the much needed 
connectivity between Himachal Pradesh and Ladakh Region, is underway and 
is likely to be taken up by a private concern for being developed to NHDL 
specifications.  Providing for connectivity between Himachal Pradesh and 

23
Ladakh region is crucial and its importance cannot be underemphasized.  The 
Committee presume that a clear road map for completing the construction of 
the Nimu – Padam – Darcha Road; as well as the Manali-Sarchu-Upshi-Leh 
Road, which includes a 8.8 km long Rohtang Tunnel within a specified 
timeframe has been drawn up.  If not, the Committee expects that such a road 
map for execution of the project is drawn up and adhered with.  The 
Committee also desires to be kept apprised of the progress made in this 
regard.  
30. It is also desired that the other proposals in the pipeline for establishing all 
weather connectivity between Himachal Pradesh and Ladakh Region, which 
include the Shinkunla Tunnel and the Wangtu-Pooh-Sumdo-Chumar-Nyoma-
Upshi-Leh Road are taken up in right earnest.  The Committee desires to be 
apprised of the progress made in this direction on periodic basis, say in three-
monthly intervals.
Recommendation (Para No. 16 )
31. The Committee had recommended as under :-
'The Committee fail to understand that in spite of the instructions of Government of 
India to invite public representatives of the area where some project or scheme is 
carried out either by the Union Government or State Government, BRO do not invite 
local MPs nor inform them.  This sends a wrong message and public at large do not 
understand what is actually going on. The Committee, therefore, recommend that 
BRO should keep this in mind and local MPs and other public representatives should 
be kept abreast with the developmental activities of BRO and invite them at the 
inauguration of such projects.'
32. The Ministry in its Action Taken Reply has stated as under :-
'Guidelines for the role and responsibility of State Government Agencies as 
executing agencies on behalf of Ministry of Road Transport and Highways (MoRT&H) 
regarding ceremonial functions like inauguration/BhoomiPujan/Foundation laying etc. 
has been issued by MoRT&H vide letter dated 12 September 2011. Accordingly, 
BRO has again issued necessary instruction to all Chief Engineer (Project) in this 
regard.'

24
33. The Committee appreciates the fact that instructions have been issued by the 
Border Roads Organisation to the Heads of the projects on the need for 
ensuring adherence with the Govt. of India instructions on ceremonial 
functions such as inauguration/Bhoomi Pujan/Foundation laying etc.  The 
Committee trusts that cases of deviation from the instructions are dealt with 
appropriately and with due seriousness and the public representatives from the 
areas concerned inevitably invited for the ceremonies/ functions.
Recommendation (Para No. 18 )
34. The Committee had recommended as under :-
'The Committee are dismayed to note that in Tawang area the situation is very critical 
in so far as connectivity is concerned.  In case of war, the Army can not reach there 
in a day.  While our neighbouring countries can reach borders within two or three 
hours, our Army takes more than a day to reach there.  This is a matter of great 
concern with regard to our Defence Preparedness. The Committee, therefore, 
recommend to construct good quality roads in this area on priority basis.
The Committee also recommend that our engineers and other BRO personnel are 
sent abroad to upgrade their technical knowhow.  The Committee have been 
apprised that a permanent scientific committee under the Ministry of Science and 
Technology had been constituted to aid and advise BRO on technologies which can 
be adopted.  As stated by the Secretary that 10% of BRO budget has been 
earmarked for experimenting new  technologies to construct blacktop road at high 
altitude the Committee feel that this would give impetus to a new paradigm.'
35. The Ministry in its Action Taken Reply has stated as under :-
'At present, three axis are planned for construction to establish all weather 
connectivity up to Tawang. The present status of these three axis is as mentioned 
below:-
(i) Road Balipara-Charduar-Tenga-Tawang (Main Axis): 
Construction/development works to National Highway Double lane (NHDL) 
specification on this road of length 317.28 km is under progress and the progress 
as on May 2015 is as under:

25
(a) Formation – 192.73 km 
(b) Surfacing  - 145.74 km
The road stretch between Km 50 to 88 passes through Eagle Nest wild life sanctuary 
in Arunachal Pradesh and Namari tiger reserve in Assam due to which the work has 
not commenced. At present the clearance are pending with MoEF. An Interlocutory 
Application (IA) has been filed in Hon’ble Supreme Court on 09 Jan 2015 to permit 
the applicant to construct and develop strategic border roads after obtaining the 
clearances from standing committee of State Wildlife Board/National Wildlife Board 
and after obtaining prior approval from Ministry of Environment & Forest under 
theForest Conservation Act.
(ii)    Road Orang-Kalaktang-Rupa-Shergaon-Morshing-Phudung-Mandala-
Debrabu-Naga GG-BJ Gompa-Lagamche GG-Mukto-Teli-Bomdir-Tawang 
(Alternate Axis): The present status of this axis is as under:
Srl No Stretch of Road Present Status
a Orang-Shergaon Under development to NHDL 
specifications.
b Shergaon-Naga 
GG
Completed to Class-9 specification and 
is under maintenance.
c Naga GG-BJ 
Gompa
Under construction to Class-9 
specifications.
d BJ Gompa -
Lagamche GG
Completed to Class-9 specification and 
is under maintenance.
e Lagamche GG-Teli Under construction to Class-9 
specifications. Further extension of the 
road uptoTawang is part of existing 
Bomdir-Lumla and Balipara-Charduar-
Tawang road.
f Shergaon-Teli Development of this road to NHDL 
specifications has been proposed for 
taking up through International 
Consortium and approval for preparation 
of detailed project report has been 
accorded.
(iii) Pinjoli-Buragaon-Dibbin-Mathow-Tungri-Chhangla-Pangila-Pota-Tsela-
Mago (Third Axis). This axis has already been Operationally endorsed by Army and 
works will be taken up once the construction of main axis is completed.
2. In order to introduce the latest technology in BRO the following steps are 
taken:
a. Guidelines for technology initiative in BRO have been approved. In order to 
identify and select most appropriate technology initiatives in a fair transparent 
manner for introduction in BRO, DGBR shall constitute a Multi Disciplinary Expert 

26
Group (MDEG) consisting of technical/domain experts, representatives of the 
scientific institutions, users, financing and administrative authorities etc. for 
continuous evaluation of proposals and making detailed recommendations in a time 
bound manner.  
b. In addition a National Workshop on Border Roads, by BRO and 
Confederation of Indian Industry (CII) on ‘Private sector’s participation in 
construction of Roads, bridges, and tunnel in border areas’ was held on 17 Feb 
2015. Based on the deliberations in the National workshop three working group has 
been constituted to recommend measures for enhancing the private sector’s 
participation in construction of roads, bridges, and tunnels in border areas. 
c.   In order to get acquaintance with the latest art of technology being used by the 
various developed Countries, officers of BRO are being sent on training to various 
foreign countries. Four groups have already been sent on training to various foreign 
countries.'
36. It is observed from the Action Taken Note that three axis roads are planned 
and are under different stages of implementation/ construction in the Tawang 
area, which, as observed by the Committee in their earlier report too, is a 
critical issue.  The ongoing as well as pending work on the project pertains 
inter alia to: obtaining environmental clearance for undertaking construction 
of a part of a stretch of the ‘Main Axis Road’ in the Eagle Nest wild life 
sanctuary in Arunachal Pradesh and Namari tiger reserve in Assam; 
entrusting the construction of the Shergaon – Teli Stretch of the road to an 
international consortium; and taking up the Third Axis after completing the 
work on the Main Axis Road.  The Committee expects to be apprised of the 
current status in regard to addressing the pending issues pertaining to 
projects.  
Also, considering the fact that the a Tawang area is of critical 
importance to the security of the Nation, the Committee desire that no effort is 
spared in ensuring completion of the construction of the roads in a 
phased/timely approach.  The Committee desire to be kept appraised on the 
progress made in this regard on regular basis.

27
Recommendation (Para No. 19 )
37. The Committee had recommended as under :-
'The Committee observes that during Uttarakhand tragedy and flood situation in 
Kashmir, BRO had to divert its work force to these areas as it was the need of the 
hour.  BRO did commendable job in spite of many obstacles. This might have 
affected the regular work of BRO in other areas. The Committee, therefore, 
recommend that there should be two wings of BRO- one for routine job and another 
for emergency duties.'
38. The Ministry in its Action Taken Reply has stated as under :-
'In case of natural calamity, BRO resources are diverted to such locations to restore 
the line of communication. This does affect the progress of ongoing works. However, 
for disaster management additional equipment required during Disaster under 
'Disaster Management Brick' for deployment during such contingencies is under 
consideration. A separate wing in BRO for emergency duties is likely to remain idle 
for very long as the location and timing of disaster is not known.'
39. The proposal for adding additional equipment required for attending to 
disasters under the ‘Disaster Management Brick’, which would be deployed 
during contingencies is in consonance with the 
concern expressed and recommendation made by the Committee in their 
earlier report.  The Committee desire to be apprised of the progress made in 
this direction.  
D. Indian Coast Guard (ICG)
Recommendation (Para No. 24 )
40. The Committee had recommended as under :-
'It has been observed that the Ministry of finance has allocated less money to ICG 
than demanded by the Ministry of Defence.  In the year 2014-15, against BE of Rs. 
1550 crore, RE was Rs. 1140 crore. For Capital expenditure only Rs. 1200 crore 
were given against the demand of Rs. 2150 crore. As stated by the Defence 
Secretary that the money allocated for the year 2015-16 would be exhaust in just six 
months, a revisit is required to enhance the budget to ward off any incident like 
26/11.'

28
41. The Ministry in its Action Taken Reply has stated as under :-
'This Ministry projected funds to the tune of Rs. 2050.00 crore in Capital section for 
Budget Estimates- 2015-16 to Ministry of Finance for consideration. Whereas, 
Ministry of Finance allocated only Rs. 1200.00 crore in Capital section for BE-2015-
16.  Moreover, ICG has intimated that the carryover liability of FY 2014-15 is Rs. 
675.00 crore due to cut imposed by Ministry of Finance in allocation of RE 2014-15 
stage. 
Further, ICG has intimated that in view of progress of various new schemes on 
reassessment it is found that the fund requirement against Capital head is Rs. 
4225.00 crore. Hence, resultant shortfall in allocation for FY 2015-16 is nearly Rs. 
3000.00 crore. Accordingly, ICG has requested to place an immediate requirement 
of Rs. 1700.00 crore under Capital head in the First Batch of Supplementary for the 
Year 2015-16 in order to enable meeting the requirement till the stage of RE-2015-
16. Requirement of further additional funds, if any, will be reviewed at RE 15-16 
stage. 
As per the requirement of ICG, a demand of Rs. 1700.00 crore under Capital 
Section in r/o Coast Guard Organisation has been forwarded by this Ministry to 
Ministry of Finance for inclusion of the same into the statement of First Batch of 
Supplementary demands for the FY 2015-16 for the approval of Parliament.'
42. It is indeed worrying and dismaying to note from the Action Taken Note that 
the funds allocated under the capital section for 2015-16 for the Indian Coast 
Guard (ICG) is short of the projected requirement by near about 50 per cent 
viz., the allocated amount being Rs.1200.00 crore as compared to the 
projected requirement of Rs. 2050.00 crore.  More worryingly, due to the 
budgetary cut imposed by the Ministry of Finance, the ICG is carrying over a 
liability of Rs.675 crore from the previous year 2014-15. Concurrently, the 
projected requirement under the capital head for various new schemes of the 
ICG is said to be Rs. 4225.00 crore.  Aspects relating to the security of the 
Nation and more particularly, coastal security on account of the current threat 
perception cannot be underemphasized or ignored in any way.  Also, to ward-
off the possibility of any incident such as that of 26/11, about which the 
representatives of the Ministry themselves had, while deposing before the 
Committee, expressed concern, the Committee desires that every possible 
step be taken for ensuring that the functioning/ programmes of the ICG do not 

29
suffer due to want of funds.  This is all the more important, also on account of 
the huge mismatch between the projected requirement and funds being made 
available.  
E. Defence Estates Organisation
Recommendation (Para No. 27 )
43. The Committee had recommended as under:-
'It has been observed that roads and cantonment area are sometimes closed by 
senior officers of the Army in cantonment area. This leads to trouble to the public 
commuting through Cantonment area. The Committee understand the security of the 
country cannot be compromised and threat perception cannot be overlooked, but 
causing inconvenience to public at large without any such input is very disturbing. 
The committee feel that concept should be from security point of view, but when that 
degenerates into personal vanity, it becomes abhorable'
44. The Ministry in its Action Taken Reply has stated as under :-
'The Ministry of Defence vide order dated 7 th January, 2015 have issued directions 
to Service Headquarters and DGDE to ensure that no public road-(outside unit lines) 
in a Cantonment shall be closed by any authority other than the Cantonment Board, 
for any reason other than security, and without following procedure laid down u/s 
258 of the Cantonments Act, 2006. It has inter-alia been decided that roads already 
closed without following the procedure as delineated in Section 258 of the 
Cantonments Act, 2006 shall be opened forthwith and closed again, if such closure 
is required after following the laid down procedure and obtaining the statutory 
approval.'
Recommendation (Para No. 28 )
45. The Committee had recommended as under :-
'Defence Estate Organisation has a large area of land which is lying unutilized for a 
very long time. The Committee, therefore, recommend that this should be examined 
in detail and appropriate use of this be considered; some funds could be used for the 
welfare of residents of cantonment area. This would add to the revenue of the 
Ministry of Defence, which would held in launching big ticket projects of the Armed 
Forces.'

30
46. The Ministry in its Action Taken Reply has stated as under :-
'Out of the 17.57 Lakhs acres of defence land, nearly 66,000 acres is under the 
management of Defence Estates out of which 53,148 acres is inside Cantonments 
and 13.574 acres is outside Cantonments.  Out of  the 53,148 acres inside
Cantonments, defence land is placed under following four classifications:
A-2 land     6,509 acres 
B-3 land   12,977 acres 
B-4 land   27,616  acres
C land         6,046 acres   
Class A-2: land which is not actually used or occupied by the Military authorities, 
but to the use or occupation of which for any other purpose, except temporarily, 
there exist specific military objections.
Class B-3: Land which is held by any private person under the provisions of these 
rules, or which is held or may be  presumed to be held under the provisions of the 
Cantonment Code of 1899 or 1912  or under  any executive orders previously in 
force, subject to conditions under which  the Central Government reserve, or have 
reserved, to themselves the proprietary rights in the soil; and 
Class B-4: Land which is not included in any other class.
Class C: Land which is vested in the Board under Section 122 of the Cantonments 
Act, 2006 is called class ‘C’ land. 
As such, while class A-2 land needs to be left vacant for immediate Military use 
Class B-3  &C land are already occupied.  Further, Class B-4 land is earmarked for 
future defence purposes and already demand has been received from Services & 
Defence Establishments for re-classifying it into ClassA-1.
(ii)   Land outside Cantonments placed under the management of DE Organisation 
is basically in the form of Camping Grounds and Abandoned Airfields.  DGDE vide 
its ID No. 711/RD/DSP/DLC/88 dated 26 th February 2014 has circulated list of these 
Camping Grounds and Abandoned Airfields to MoD for circulation among the 
various Organizations of MoD/Central Government Organizations/State 
Governments for allotment based on priorities laid down therein.'
47. The Committee appreciates the fact that in line with the recommendation made 
in their earlier report, directions have been issued for ensuring that roads 
which may have been closed for the public in the cantonment areas without 

31
following the procedures stipulated have been ordered to be opened.  The 
Committee trusts that no measure that would have the negative effect of 
putting the public to inconvenience by way of closing the roads on account of 
reasons other than that of security is resorted to.  The Committee also desire 
to be apprised of the details of the number of roads that may have been 
opened to the public following the issue of the directions to this effect.
48. The Committee also wishes to be apprised of the progress made towards 
distribution/ re-allocation of vacant/unused Defence land – which is basically 
in the form of camping grounds and abandoned air fields – details pertaining 
to which have been circulated to the organizations concerned of the Central/ 
State Governments.
F. Married Accommodation Projects (MAP)
Recommendation (Para No. 34 )
49. The Committee had recommended as under :-
'The Committee have been informed that “satisfaction rate” i.e. availability of Married 
Accommodation of the Army would be about 70 percent by the time phase IV gets 
completed, which is expected to be completed by 2020.  In the case of Navy and Air 
force it would be 85 and 90 percent respectively. Presently the Married 
Accommodation is to the extent of only 10-15 percent of total accommodation of the
Armed Forces.  In such a case, the satisfaction rate of 75 percent is inadequate.  
The Committee therefore, recommend that it should be 100 percent and every jawan 
should get it.  Army personnel serve in field area.  They come and stay for maximum 
2 to 3 years in peace stations.  Half of the time they stay outside in hired 
accommodation, which create immense administrative and “Morale” problems.  
Hence the aim of MAP should be 100 percent “satisfaction level”.'

32
50. The Ministry in its Action Taken Reply has stated as under :-
'The Ministry agrees that it should be the aim of the Government to provide 100 
percent “satisfaction level” keeping in view the approved scales of authorisation in 
this regard. However, this would necessarily have to be planned for implementation 
in a phased manner keeping in view the present progress of the Married 
Accommodation Project (MAP), availability of funds and the capacity of MoD’s own 
construction agencies. In the meantime the Government will continue to meet the 
gap through hiring of accommodation and payment of compensation in lieu of 
quarters (CILQ).'
51. The Committee trusts that as per the assurance given in the Action Taken 
Note, the Married Accommodation Project (MAP) is implemented in right 
earnest so as to achieve a “satisfaction level” of 100 per cent.  The Committee 
also trusts that appropriate measures are taken to ensure that the project, 
which is being implemented in separate phases does not suffer due to paucity 
of funds and the inadequacies in the Ministry of Defence’s construction 
agencies/ construction plans augmented, as may be needed.  The Committee, 
nevertheless find the reasons attributed by the Ministry for the slippages in 
implementing the projects to be untenable.  This issue is being commented 
upon/ dealt with in reference to the Action Taken Note furnished by the 
Ministry on the relevant recommendation made in their earlier report.
Recommendation (Para No. 35 )
52. The Committee had recommended as under :-
'The committee observed that the phase I of the Project, which was scheduled to be 
completed in 2002 , actually started in 2004 and completed in 2008. Thus Phase I 
has been delayed by 6 years. Similarly Phase II which was due to be completed in 
2014 will now be completed by 2017. The Committee therefore, express their 
displeasures and anguish that phase I and Phase II of MAP were delayed for one 
reason or another and timeline was not maintained.  This might have resulted into 
cost overrun apart from effecting “Morale” of the Troops. They, therefore, 
recommend that MAP should meticulously ensure that phase III is completed on 
schedule.'

33
53. The Ministry in its Action Taken Reply has stated as under :-
'The delay in Phase I of the project was on account of the fact that considerable time 
was consumed in framing procedures and for planning of the project. The strategy of 
involving other construction agencies and CPSUs in the project also did not yield 
desired results. Based on lesson in that phase , during phase II large work packages 
were made so as attract participation of reputed construction companies. However, 
due to the recession in the building industry, funds crunch and constraints in 
sourcing building materials, the performance of the contractors was slow. As a result 
several contracts have been cancelled and retendered under the risk and cost 
clause of the contracts. Performance is being closely monitored and reviewed at 
various levels. As regards Phase III locations where dwelling units are to be 
constructed has been finalised and planning work has commenced. Increase in 
delegation of powers of various committees and changes in contract conditions to 
ensure faster execution of work in this phase is under consideration.'
54. Attributing the delay of about 6 years in implementing the first phase of the 
project to the time taken in ‘framing procedures and for planning’, is, in the 
opinion of the Committee unacceptable.  The only reason that appears to be 
justifiable to an extent for having contributed to the delay in implementing the 
project is the recession in the building industry, which could have resulted in 
cancellation of contracts etc.  The facts relating to the delays in implementing 
the project are indicative of serious shortcomings in the entire planning and 
execution process.  The Committee, therefore, desire that remedial measures, 
which may include aspects such as additional delegation of powers, making 
appropriate changes in the contract conditions etc., are taken in right earnest 
so that the project does not continue to suffer delays.           
G. Welfare of Ex-Servicemen
Recommendation (Para No. 44 )
55. The Committee had recommended as under :-
The Committee have been apprised that majority of the States, except five States, 
have already legislated for reservations from 2 per cent to 20 per cent in various 
categories. Even those five States have given reservations for group ‘A’ and ‘B’ jobs, 
but not for group ‘C’ and ‘D’ posts. The Committee therefore, recommend to take up 

34
the matter with those five States at the highest level by the Ministry of Defence and 
impress upon them to make legislation expeditiously.
56. The Ministry in its Action Taken Reply has stated as under :-
'There is no reservation in jobs even in C & D, in five States/ UT namely Bihar, 
Jharkhand, Kerala, Meghalaya and Andaman & Nicobar. These five States/ UT have 
been requested to provide meaningful resettlement opportunities to Ex-Servicemen 
by providing reservation to them in State Government / UTs jobs.'
57. The Committee desire that as is the case with all other States, the five 
States/Union Territories, namely Bihar, Jharkhand, Kerala, Meghalaya and 
Andaman & Nocobar Islands are once again impressed upon the need for 
providing reservation in Group C and D posts for Ex-Servicemen.  Such a 
measure would contribute immensely in enabling the resettlement of 
Ex-Servicemen.  
Recommendation (Para No. 45 )
58. The Committee had recommended as under :-
'The Committee have been apprised by DG Resettlement that at state level there is 
no such agency like DGR to monitor the reservation. The Committee therefore, 
recommend Ministry of Defence to take up this issue with State Governments. In this 
regard the assistance of Rajya Sainik Board and can be availed.'
59. The Ministry in its Action Taken Reply has stated as under :-
'State/UT Governments have been requested to designate Rajya Sainik Boards to 
collect and compile the data regarding employment provided to the ESM in State 
Government / State PSUs jobs and also furnish such data to DGR on half yearly 
basis.'

35
60. The Committee note that in line with the recommendation made in their earlier 
report, the State/Union Territory Governments have been requested to 
designate the Rajya Sainik Boards for the purpose of collecting, compiling and 
furnishing the relevant data to the DG Resettlement.  The Committee desire to 
be kept apprised of the information/data received/compiled in this regard.  
Recommendation (Para No. 46)
61. The Committee had recommended as under :-
'The Committee note with concern that the amount of money given to Param Veer 
Chakra and other gallantry medal winners, vary from State to State.  In some states 
like Punjab, Haryana and Uttarakhand, they are handsomely rewarded while in 
some States they are paid very meager sum.  This is really pitiable and require 
uniformity so that our brave soldiers do not feel let down.  As such the Committee 
observe that the soldiers are national heroes and States should have conformity in 
this regard.'
62. The Ministry in its Action Taken Reply has stated as under :-
'It is stated that the financial / cash rewards for Gallantry awardees varies from State 
to State as it is prerogative of the State Governments.  Central Government has 
fixed uniform monetary allowances to the recipients of Gallantry Awards as per 
details given below:

36
Name of Awards Monetary allowance
(Rupees per month)
ParamVir Chakra (PVC) 10,000
Ashok Chakra (AC) 6,000
MahaVir Chakra (MVC) 5,000
Kirti Chakra (KC) 4,500
Vir Chakra (Vr C) 3,500
Shaurya Chakra (SC) 3,000
Sena Medal / NavoSena 
medal / Vayu Medal 
(SM/NM/VM) – Gallantry
1,000
63. Though it is the prerogative of the State Governments to decide on the 
financial/cash awards for Gallantry awardees, as pointed out by the Committee 
earlier too, it would be in the fitness of things for the Ministry to impress upon 
the State Governments/Union Territory Administrations to follow a uniform 
method of providing monetary allowances.  As this would contribute 
immensely in making the awardees feel not let down, the Committee desire 
that the Ministry of Defence take up the matter with the State Governments by 
writing to them. 
Recommendation (Para No. 47)
64. The Committee had recommended as under :-
'The Committee are of the opinion that Ex-Servicemen can gainfully be employed in 
several eco projects. But the irony is this that State Governments do not have them 
due to dearth of money. Worse the fact that Ministry of Environment or River 
Rejuvenation also do not pay heed to such an important task carried out by 
Ex-Servicemen. Whether it is cleaning of Ganga or Indira Gandhi Canal in 
Rajasthan’s Desert area or Eco Battalion, do not get money for their sustenance. 
The Committee therefore, strongly recommend to Ministry of Defence and 
Directorate of Resettlement to do something concrete in this regard.'

37
65. The Ministry in its Action Taken Reply has stated as under :-
'A proposal is under active consideration for raising of four Territorial Army 
Battalions of ESM for Mission clean Ganga. Once approved/ implemented, this will 
benefit both Nation and ESM community.'
66. The Committee appreciates the fact that as recommended by them, a proposal 
for raising four territorial army battalions of Ex-service men for the mission, 
Clean Ganga is under consideration.   The Committee expects that necessary 
approvals have been/would be obtained in this regard.  The Committee wishes 
to be apprised of the progress made in this direction. 
H. One Rank One Pension 
Recommendations (Para  Nos. 48, 49 & 50)
(i) Para No. 48
67. The Committee had recommended as under: 
‘The Committee note that One Rank One Pension (OROP) implies that uniform 
pension be paid to the Armed Forces Personnel retiring in the same rank with the 
same length of Service, irrespective of their date of retirement and any future 
enhancement in the rates of pension to be automatically passed on to the past 
pensioners. This will bridge the gap between the rate of pension of the current 
pensioners, the past pensioners, and also future enhancements. The Committee 
note that a Working Group under the Chairpersonship of Controller General of 
Defence accounts (CGDA) was constituted for examining the proposal submitted by 
the Services and preparing Government orders for implementation of OROP w.e.f. 
01.04.2014. While examining the subject, the Committee found that subsequent to 
the announcement of the Government’s acceptance in principle of One Rank One 
Pension for the Defence forces, in BE 2014-15, Rs. 51,000 crore was allocated for 
Defence pensions including an allocation of Rs. 1000 Crore for implementation of
OROP. However, in RE 2014-15 the allocation for Defence persons was reduced to 
Rs.50, 000 crore. The implementation of OROP was referred to a Committee of 
Secretaries by the Government. Raksha Rajya Mantri (RRM) also convened a 
meeting on 09.01.2015 to discuss the matter with the representatives of the three 
Services, CGDA, Defence (Finance) and Directorate of Ex-Servicemen Welfare 
(DESW). The matter was further discussed by Raksha Mantri with officials of DESW, 
Defence (Finance), CGDA and representatives of the three Services in meeting held 

38
on 16.02.2015. However, the modalities for implementation of OROP are yet to be 
finalized. The Working Group could not arrive at any consensus and the modalities 
for implementation of OROP are still under consideration.’
(ii) Para  No. 49
‘The Committee regret that even after Hon’ble Prime Minister had made a 
commitment and the Finance Minister had provided Rs. 1000 crore in BE 2014-15 
budget, the OROP has not been implemented. In this regard, it is further observed
that this issue has been protracted for considerably long passage of time and it is 
beyond the understanding of the Committee as to what reasons are preventing the 
Government from making necessary decisions and arriving at a solution. In view of 
the Committee, it is of utmost importance that requisite modalities are sorted out and 
an amicable solution is brought out with regard to OROP within stringent timeframe 
at the earliest. It is needless to say that the Committee be intimated about the 
progress made in this regard.’
(iii) Para  No. 50
‘Alongwith the implementation of OROP, it is equally pertinent that all the targeted 
beneficiaries receive their dues in accordance with the newly formulated guidelines. 
In this regard, there should be a redressal mechanism in place so as to ensure that 
any kind of anomalies are sorted out without delay, as the Ex-Service personnel 
have already been waiting for long time to receive their dues. One of the methods 
could be uploading the calculating formulae website intending to ensure that they 
transparently reach the receivers’ end with all clarity. The steps taken in this regard 
should be intimated to the Committee.’
68. The Ministry in its Action Taken Reply has stated as under:
‘The modalities for implementation of One Rank One Pension are still under active 
consideration of the Government.’
69. The Committee finds it extremely dismaying to note that the Action Taken 
Note is totally silent on the recommendations made by them on ensuring that 
the One Rank One Pension (OROP) Scheme is implemented in right earnest.  
The recommendations made by the Committee in this regard include, inter alia 
working out the modalities for implementing the OROP and being apprised of 

39
the progress thereof; and ensuring that the beneficiaries get their dues 
without any loss of time.  The process of implementing the scheme appears to 
be taking an unusually long time, which, to say the least is deplorable.  The 
Committee, therefore, reiterates the need for ensuring that the scheme is 
implemented without further loss of time and the Ex-Service personnel not put 
to continued hardship on this count.

40
CHAPTER II
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS, WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY 
THE GOVERNMENT
Recommendations (Para  No. 3)
Indigenisation and R&D
The Committee note that India is the major importer of the Defence equipments and 
weaponry.  The contract from a foreign country takes a lot of time to materialize.  In 
certain instances orders given almost a decade back have not yet been concluded 
or cancelled.  This leads to the deterioration of Global Service Provider Rating 
(GSPR).  The Committee, therefore, recommend to adopt a phase wise system 
under the Defence Procurement Policy which may ensure that the Imported item is 
delivered within the stipulated period of that phase.  The Committee would like to 
stress that R&D should also keep on improving and be accountable.  This policy 
would help us in the acquisition of latest weaponry and equipment instead of getting 
the obsolete items.  The Committee strongly recommend for the indigenization 
supported by state-of-art R&D.  For this purpose, it is imperative that interaction with 
the CSIR labs, technical institutions and universities should be made so that talented 
people are attracted towards defence services.  The Committee are dismayed to 
note that DRDO has not made any concrete efforts in this regard.  As stated by the 
Defence Secretary during oral evidence, certain efforts were made by them but 
these were sporadic and scattered.  The Committee, therefore, recommend that a 
formal policy should be formulated at the earliest.  The Committee are given to 
understand that IIT Kanpur had been assigned a project on rotary UAV.  The 
Committee appreciate the achievement made by IIT Kanpur with the hope that such
innovations are encouraged by DRDO by involving premier technical institutions and 
universities.      
Reply of the Government
Capital equipment can be acquired phase wise.  Urgent requirement can be met 
through global sources, in case they are not available indigenously.  However, a 
parallel development plan for ‘Make in India’ for systems being acquired from global 
sources should be seeded.  Inputs to this effect have been given for revision of 
Defence Procurement Policy (DPP).
In collaboration with academia and research centers, DRDO has been consciously 
making efforts towards indigenous development of state-of-the-art technologies 
through Extramural Research, four Research Boards and Advanced Technology 
Centers.  DRDO has engaged most of the Indian premier academic institutions, 
including IISc, IITs, NITs, CSIR labs CGCRI, CEERI, NIOT, NPL etc. and many 
other Indian Universities.  DRDO also encourage the talented researchers to join the 
Organisation as Research Fellows and also as regular scientific cadres.  To perform 
contemporary directed research in focused areas and attract talented young 
scientists towards defence research, DRDO has embarked upon creating Advanced 

41
Technology Centers at academic institutions within the country with state-of-the-art 
research facilities.  Existing advanced technology centers are given below:-
(i) Research and Innovation Center (RCI) at Research Park, IIT-Madras;
(ii) Advanced Center for Research in High Energy Materials (ACRHEM) at 
Hyderabad University; and 
(iii) DRDO-Bharatyar Center for Life Sciences at Bharatiyer University, 
Coimbatore.  DRDO is proposing to create following new center:-
∑ Bi-nodal Center of Propulsion Technology at IIT-Bombay and IIT-Madras;
∑ J.C.Bose Center for Advanced Technologies, High Energy Laser and Photonics and 
Cyber Security Technologies;
∑ Joint Advanced Technology Center at IIT-Delhi to pursue research in Advanced 
Ballistics, Ballistic Protection, Modeling , Terra hertz technology, Brain-Machine 
Intelligence and Quantum Photonics. 
Through these centers with excellent research opportunity, DRDO intends to engage 
the talented researchers and faculty towards defence research.
Nomenclature A/U FY   
2016
17
FY     
2017
18
FY
2018
19
Hyd Excavator 20 Ton Nos 74 60 63
Hyd Excavator 30 Ton Nos 20 15 40
Motor Grader Nos 15 10 11
Tracked /Wheeled 
Stone Crusher 60 
TPH/100 TPH
Nos 03 08 05
Self Propelled Light 
Weight Rock Drill 
(Tracked)
Nos 10 20 12
Self Propelled Medium 
Weight Rock Drill 
(Tracked)
Nos 10 15 15
Jumbo Rock Drill with 
3 Boomers and above
Nos 08 05 08
Hot Mix Plant 20/30 
TPH with matching 
Gen set
Nos 15 10 8
Mobile HMP 15/20 
TPH with matching 
Gen Set
Nos 20 10 14
WMM Plant 60 TPH Nos 04 05 06
Paver Finisher (Dual 
purpose)
Nos 30 25 31
Transit Mixer 5/6 
Cum/Hr
Nos 01 02 -
Transit Mixer 9 
Cum/Hr
Nos 02 02 -

42
Recommendation (Para  No. 6)
Border Roads Organisations
The committee are very happy to note that the BRO has now come under the 
Ministry of Defence. The Committee traveled by road from Nathula Pass to Gangtok 
on a road maintained by the BRO.  The committee appreciated their efforts inspite of 
adverse weather conditions and difficult territory they are doing good job.
Reply of the Government
No comments
Recommendation (Para  No. 9)
This is the matter of great concern that obsolete equipment, viz Type II and IV are 
being used by BRO.  These equipments should be immediately replaced with 
modern equipments befitting the climatic conditions of the region. The Committee 
think that in order to compete with our neighbouring countries, especially China, we 
must have latest, State-of-the Art equipment with the BRO.
Reply of the Government
A Long term Equipment Plan (LTEP) 2014-15 to 2018-19 for the induction of modern 
Vehicle/Equipment/Plants in BRO has been approved for Rs 3913 crores. The 
following modern equipments are planned to be inducted into during the next four 
years:-
2. Based on the approved LTEP, a two year annual procurement plan (APP) for 
Vehicles/Equipment/Plants for FY 2015-16 and FY 2016-17 amounting to Rs 814.10 
Crores and Rs 497.67 Crores respectively has been approved. 
Centrifugal Water 
Pump with Discharge 
600 LPM , Head 18 
Mtrs, Suction / delivery 
80 mm
Nos 40 40 27
Pot Hole Repair 
Vehicle
Nos 06 06 07
Bituminous Asphalt 
Recycling Plant
Nos 03 03 -
RCC Hume Pipe 
making Machine
Nos 03 03 -
Concrete Paver 
Machine
Nos 03 04 03
Interlocking Block 
making Machine
Nos 01 01 -
Snow Cutter/Blower Nos 06 14 15
Snow Sweeper with 
Plough
Nos 06 14 10

43
Recommendation (Para  No. 10)
It is evident from the data given by the Ministry that there is acute shortage of 
manpower, both combatant and civilians put together, in the BRO.  The Committee, 
therefore, recommend that urgent steps need be taken to make-up the strength in 
BRO.  In this regard, the services of ex-servicemen can be requisitioned. In addition 
to this, uniform functional facilities for the BRO personnel are also necessary.  
Instead of putting them in tents which jeopardize their health. They should be 
provided proper accommodation at high altitude. As submitted by the Secretary, the 
casualty rate in BRO is alarming as mortality rate is that of one man per day.  It is 
imperative for the Government to ponder over this issue and provide them proper 
high altitude accommodation to ward off such incidents. The committee feel that 
hard service conditions of BRO compounded with lack of necessary facilities do not 
attract youngsters and talented engineers to join BRO.  If these issues are properly 
addressed the strength would increase and work of BRO shall not suffer due to 
insufficient manpower.
Reply of the Government
Action for filling up of vacancies in different categories of posts in BRO through 
UPSC, SSC and the GREF Centre as the case may be are being regularly taken. 
Efforts are also being made to hire/ outsource the services of critical personnel such 
as Junior Engineers.
Several measures have been undertaken for provision of better working conditions 
for BRO personnel including Casual paid labourers especially in high altitude and 
hard areas e. g higher scale rations , enhanced leave, , provision of kerosene oil for 
warming purpose , winter/ extreme cold climate clothing, improved medical facilities 
are being provided. Provision of creating adequate accommodation/other 
administrative facilities is incorporated in the Administrative Approval of the job 
under Road side Accommodation (RSA) head. However, efforts to further improve 
the living and working conditions are being made.
Recommendation (Para  No. 15)
The maintenance and upkeep of all the border roads is quite essential. It is learnt 
that BRO has a particular pattern that all border roads irrespective of weather 
conditions of the particular area are resurfaced. In Ladakh Region, it has generally 
been observed that roads are resurfaced in spite of their good condition and when 
only it is resurfaced in most of the cases the resurfaced road become no better than 
the previous road.  In Ladakh Region the climate is dry and scanty rain fed, so roads 
in this area do not require resurfacing again and again as these are not much 
damaged.  On the contrary, in Uttarakhand which is highly rain fed area the roads 
require maintenance frequently.  The Committee, therefore, recommend that 
maintenance of roads should be carried out after a thorough inspection of the roads 
and resurfacing should be carried out where only it is required.  This would help in 
concentrating in those areas where roads have been damaged due to the vagaries 
of weather.

44
Reply of the Government
At present, maintenance is being done as per existing maintenance scale. 
Resurfacing of roads is being carried out at an interval of 5 to 6 years depending on 
the area classification of roads. Premature failure cases/damage due to natural 
calamities i.e flood, earth quake etc is taken up on a case to case basis.
BRO has been empowered with delegated powers/policy simplifications in following 
area so that maintenance of roads can progress smoothly:
(a) BRDB Programme: 762 roads have been included in the BRDB programme. 
This will facilitate DGBR to approve maintenance grant for roads which are part of 
BRDB Programme without any further approval.
(b) Standard Schedule of Rates (SSR): DGBR has been delegated powers to 
issue new/revised Standard Schedule of Rates (SSR). This will ensure timely 
assessment of correct cost of projects and avoid frequent review of estimates.
(c) Change in Maintenance Grant and Snow Clearance Grant: With a view to 
improve quality of maintenance DGBR has been delegated powers to fix rates of 
maintenance  and snow clearance grant and carry out revision whenever required.
Recommendations (Para  No. 20)
The Committee note that BRO is not like civil engineering agencies e.g PWD and 
CPWD. It has got specific jobs and work under hostile conditions.  As such strategic 
roads should be identified right from the rail head upto where the strategic road ends 
on borders.
Reply of the Government
In the meeting of National Security Council (NSC) held on 1.11.2013, it was decided 
that BRO would focus on core strategic functions on the Northern Border and 
Ministry of Defence (MoD) & Ministry of Road Transport and Highways (MoRT&H) 
will work out modalities of separating BRO’s strategic road building functions from 
infrastructure development in Left Wing Extremism affected areas and internal 
roads. Further, it was decided in a meeting held with NSA on 23.8.2013 that in order 
to reduce BRO’s work load, MoRT&H and BRO will jointly examine and prioritize the 
roads which are necessarily to be constructed by the BRO in Uttarakhand, J&K and 
North East. MoRT&H will make alternate arrangements for remaining roads. 
Accordingly, 28 roads of 2904 Km length was identified for transfer to various 
agencies. Roads are being handed over by BRO to other agencies.
2. BRO is concentrating on both the Northern and North-Eastern borders 
simultaneously and special effort is being given for completion of Indo-China Border 
Roads (ICBRs). In order to streamline the procedure the following steps have been 
taken:
(a) BORDER ROADS DEVELOPMENT BOARD (BRDB) PROGRAMME: In 
addition to constructing /developing/improving roads, BRO maintains a road network 
of 20642 km in border areas to ensure smooth movement of troops. Further roads 
constructed/ completed by BRO are required to be maintained continuously so that 
these are in traffic worthy condition. In order to stream line the need for maintenance 
of these roads, it has been decided that once a road is included in BRDB 

45
programme, no separate sanction would be required for carrying out maintenance. A 
list of 760 roads has been prepared as BRDB Programme to enable BRO to focus 
on identified roads and develop/maintain them in a planned manner.
(b) LONG TERM ROLL ON WORKS PLAN (LTROWP): BRO has been 
assigned the task of construction /maintenance of roads of strategic importance. 
Over a period of time the work load of BRO has increased considerably compared to 
its capability. Army has also finalized two list of roads under its Long term 
perspective Plan–I and II for expeditious development. Besides BRO has been 
entrusted works of Indo Tibet Border police (ITBP) roads by Ministry of Home Affairs 
(MHA), Special accelerated road development programme (SARDP) and Arunachal 
Pradesh package works by Ministry of Road Transport and Highways. Thus there 
was a need to draw a Long Term Plan for BRO in order to utilize the capacity of 
BRO in a judicious and time–bound manner to complete priority roads for Army so 
that the estimates for such works may be prepared by BRO without waiting for 
specific approval from Govt. For holistic development of roads in border areas, a 
LTROWP has been drawn up for 461 roads including the ICBRs for Rs 21333 cr.
Agency No of 
Road
s
Works Planned(Rs Cr) Total
(Rs Cr)2014
15
2015
16
2016
17
2017
18
GS/Strategi
c
434 4249.
68
4599.
7
4564.3 4066.
03
17479.
70
NH 27 1228.
00
1004.
00
761.00 861.0
0
3854.0
0
Total 461 5477.
68
5603.
70
5325.3
0
4927.
03
21333.
70
Recommendations (Para  No. 21)
BRO Budget is within the civil estimates of the Ministry.  As such, limits have been 
set for the Defence Ministry. The Committee therefore recommend that this issue 
should be taken up with the ministry of Finance so that the Ministry of Defence can 
have its say over the budget.  The Committee also feel that it is necessary to de-link 
pay and allowances from the budget estimates of BRO. As submitted by the 
Secretary that during the rainy reason or during the snow when the labour is sitting 
idle, the project costs goes up as a result of pay and allowances given to the labour. 
This results into escalation of revised estimates. Hence, it is imperative that the 
system needs restructuring so that work is performed as per actual requirements.
Reply of the Government
Border Roads Organisation (BRO) is an executing agency and is a work charged 
Organisation. Presently, only Road Construction Company (RCC) and functional 
platoons are actually being deployed for execution of works on ground by getting the 
logistic and administrative support from HQ and Common Service Units (CSUs). The 
proposal for Provision of Ground Establishment for Salary of Work Charged Task 
Forces (TFs), CSUsand other Functional Units in BRO was submitted to Ministry of 
Finance (MoF) through Ministry of Defence (Fin/BR) in Sept 2014, MoF has 
intimated that issue may be considered in lines of MES and CPWD. The 
proposalhas been resubmitted to MoD (Fin/BR) as it will have the following 
advantages:-

46
(a) The delinking of obligatory payments such as Pay and Allowances of permanent 
employees of the Govt of India from the works estimates would lead to simplification 
of works estimates.
(b) Better control over actual expenditure incurred on physical execution of works 
and fewer Revised Approximate Estimates (RAEs).
(c) The factors included in the SSR on account of Pay & Allowances (P&A) are 
also more in the nature of thumb rule percentage and may not accurately represent 
the actual outgo on account of P&A of permanent employees.
Recommendations (Para  No. 22)
The Committee find that BRO faces a lot of difficulties in respect of quarries. This 
requires urgent action and remedial measures. It is therefore, necessary that 
dedicated quarries be allocated to BRO so that the raw material for the construction 
is easily available without any hindrance. The Committee therefore recommend that 
an empowered Committee be set up under the Chairmanship of the Chief Secretary 
of the concerned State.  The Committee are given to understand that some States 
are adhering while others are not.  The Committee therefore recommend that if any 
State has not given the approval for a particular quarry the BRO should be given 
authority to bring the raw material from another quarry, irrespective of the distance.
Reply of the Government
Chief Secretaries of State Governments of Arunachal Pradesh, Assam, J&K, 
Himachal Pradesh, Manipur, Nagaland, Sikkim, Tripura and Uttarakhand have been 
requested to constitute an Empowered Committee under their Chairmanship with 
Principal Secretaries of Revenue, Forest, Mining, PWD and Power Departments 
along with the PCCF and Chief Engineers of BRO as members to resolve issues. 
States of Sikkim, Arunachal Pradesh, J&K, Himachal Pradesh and Tripura have 
constituted the Empowered Committee.
2. Recently a meeting was held with the various Resident Commissioners of 
State under the chairmanship of Additional Secretary to PMO on 03 Feb 2015 
regarding allotment of quarries to BRO. During the meeting the following was 
intimated by the various State representatives regarding the allotment of quarries to 
ensure availability of required construction material to BRO:
(a) In Uttarkhand has BRO has been exempted from the tender process for 
allotment of quarries. Moreover, in order to facilitate the extraction of river bed 
material (RBM) for road construction, the State Government has taken up the issue 
of de notifying the rivers as forests and amendment of the Mines and Minerals 
(Regulation and Development)(MMRD) Act 1956 so that the removal of RBM, 
required to maintain river flow, is not construed as mining. 
(b) In Sikkim after the adoption of the policy for the allotment of quarries to BRO 
by the State Government, the allotment of quarries would be streamlined.
(c) In Arunachal Pradesh as the ownership of land is vested with local
communities which create hurdles in allotment of quarries. However, efforts are 
being made by State Government to resolve the issue.
(d) In J&K the procedure for allotment of quarries needs to be streamlined and 
BRO was asked to sent applications for allotment of quarries to Director (Mining), 
Government of J&K for faster processing.

47
Recommendations (Para  No. 23)
Indian Coast Guard
The Committee note that after the 26/11 incident, ICG got a steep increase in its 
budget and manpower.  The Committee can understand that it was absolutely 
necessary to strengthen manpower and machinery of ICG post-26/11, but it also 
indicates that we never anticipated the incidents like 26/11 and we were also not 
prepared for such eventuality.  The Committee feel that enhancement in the budget 
and manpower should been proactive instead of post-occurrence of any untoward 
incidents.  The Government cannot eschew its responsibility just by taking the plea 
that before the year 2008 the threat was largely continental.  This indicates that we 
were not prepared for any threat from sea side.  The Committee are therefore, of the 
opinion that we strengthen our security from sea side also and coastal security be 
given an impetus.  The ghastly massacre at Mumbai could have possibly been 
avoided had this been given a serious thought.
Reply of the Government
The observations of the Committee regarding the need to strengthen coastal 
security have been noted.  Towards strengthening our security from sea side and 
also to give impetus to coastal security, the Government has been taking various 
steps.  Some of these are listed below:
∑ Coast Guard fleet strength has increased from 60 ships in 2009 to 119 
ships till date.  The mandate for ships which was primarily anti 
poaching and anti smuggling has been further augmented with coastal 
security duties.  Unlike previous deployments, when ships were mainly 
patrolling Exclusive Economic Zone (EEZ), now major component of 
Coast Guard deployment is water jet ships of FPV / IB class which
patrol close to coast, where fishing activity is more.
∑ The operation deployment of ships has increased from 10-11 ships per 
day in 2009 to 25-30 ships per day in 2014.  During fair weather, this 
deployment often touches 35-40 ships per day.  The air assets have 
also increased substantially with the current fleet of 62 aircraft 
compared to 46 aircraft in 2009.  On an average 8-10 aircraft are 
deployed daily for maritime aerial surveillance.
∑ The ICG has established 22 stations at different locations along the 
coast and on islands territories post 2009.  At present ICG has 42 such 
stations.

48
∑ The Boarding Operations (BO) in Coast Guard have increased 
substantially from 2274 in 2009 to 21193 in 2014 and 13277 till April, 
2015.
∑ 118 exercises and 166 Coastal Security operations have been 
conducted since January 2009 to test Coastal Security system and 
validate the Coastal Security SOPs.  Two exercises are conducted 
every year in each Coastal State and UT.  Intelligence input regarding 
seaward threats are also frequent, resulting in launch of Operations 
jointly with Navy, Marine Police and other agencies.  Ships are put on 
high alert during such operations and numbers of boarding operations, 
therefore, has increased substantially during such operations. So far 
167 such operations have been conducted since 2009.
∑ Coastal Surveillance Network (CSN) consisting of chain of static 
sensors has been set up to ensure automatic monitoring of all vessels 
transiting/operating along the coast.  As on date, 44 out of 46 radar
sites are functioning optimally.  38 additional Radar sites have been 
envisaged under CSN phase-II in order to achieve gap free 
surveillance of the entire coast.
Recommendations (Para  No. 30)
Military Engineering Services (MES)
It has come to the notice of the Committee that bricks used by the MES are not of 
desired standard.  The bricks got damaged quickly and do not adhere to the quality 
control.  As admitted by Engineer in Chief that substandard quality of the bricks 
specially in Punjab, Northern Rajasthan and parts of Haryana is due to the salinity of 
water used for making the bricks, it becomes absolute necessary to treat these 
bricks before their actual application.  The Committee have been apprised that a 
technology team, which is design and consultancy team of MES, is examining the 
issue.  White appreciating the measures taken by MES, the Committee recommend 
that a thorough study followed by scientific treatment of all the existing structure 
should also be made wherever such bricks have been used.
Reply of the Government
As brought out by the Committee and agreed by the Engineer-in-Chief, the quality of 
bricks used by MES in Punjab, North Rajasthan and parts of Haryana are not of the 
desired standards. This is due to presence of harmful salt/ chemicals above the 
prescribed limits in the bricks and the water being used in the area for manufacturing 
the bricks. As a result of this, white powdery residue appears on the brick surface 
when the water evaporates. This effect is called efflorescence. This can be arrested 
by using chemical treatment. A study of the problem of efflorescence was carried out 
by Additional Director General (Design and Consultancy), Pune in certain affected 
stations.  A similar independent study was also carried out by IIT Roorkee.  Based 
on their recommendations, solutions for effective treatment of this problem for new 
works, existing works and vintage buildings has been circulated to Chief Engineers 
Command and Zone.

49
Recommendations (Para  No. 31)
The Committee are of the opinion that wherever possible the locally available raw 
material should be utilized instead of using pre fabricated material. The Committee 
understand that at an high altitude like Ladakh it becomes difficult to carry out raw 
material from the quarry; and in some specific cases prefabricated material is 
convenient to use, specially for the temporary structure of the Army, as these can 
easily be relocated depending on operational requirement.  Even then, emphasis 
should be given to use of local material wherever it is feasible.  In this regard some 
innovative products like hollow bricks should be used which cost less and are 
suitable for local weather condition.  The use of fly-ash is also a welcome step as it 
would mitigate pollution emitting from thermal power plant and use its ash. 
Reply of the Government
Prefabricated material are only used in temporary structures being constructed 
under operational works using troop labour for temporary habitat of troops. These 
temporary structures are prefabricated in nature so that they can be relocated once 
permanent structures are constructed through Annual Major Works Program. The 
permanent structures are constructed by MES through Chief Engineers Zone. In 
order to ensure best local engineering practices, local material and economy in 
construction Zonal specifications are drawn out by Chief Engineers Zone for use in 
MES. Hence, the recommendations of the Committee on use of locally available 
material is already in place. Innovative products such as Hollow bricks, as brought 
out by the Committee, are being used for construction of accommodation in high 
altitude areas like Leh etc. These hollow bricks are also generally fabricated in situ 
using local materials. The use of fly ash bricks is being enforced in all works within 
100 km of Thermal Power Plants (TPP), in conformity to Government of India 
Notification No 979(E) dated 27 Aug 2003.This HQ had issued instructions to all 
Chief Engineers Command and Chief Engineers Zone to this effect in 2004.
Recommendations (Para  No. 32)
The Committee note that MES is setting up a solar plant which would generate 30 
MW electricity by the year 2019.  The Committee feel that steps be taken to explore 
whether it can be made sequential i.e. initially it may generate 10 MW, then 20 MW 
and finally by the end of 2019 it should generate 30 MW.  Instead of waiting till 2019 
it would be in the fitness of case that generation of electricity takes place in phased 
manner.
Reply of the Government
On behalf of the Defence Forces the MES is setting up several solar plants in 
different places in a phased manner/ sequentially to achieve an overall capacity of 
300 MW by the year 2019 with details as under:-

50
(a) The draft road map for implementation of 300 MW Solar Photo Voltaic Power 
projects by Defence Establishments under Jawaharlal Nehru National Solar Mission 
(JNNSM) during 2014-19 has been prepared. 
(b) The implementation is phase wise and as per the road map, the Renewable 
Energy (RE) works proposed to be listed in forthcoming Annual Major Works 
Programme (AMWP) is as under:-
Phase Financial Year Capacity in Mega Watt 
(MW)
I 2015-16 81
II 2016-17 108
III 2017-18 92
(c) Typically it takes 12-18 months for Solar Power stations to be erected, tested 
and commissioned. Thus, successive years would see such power stations being 
commissioned with the last one to be completed by 2019.
Recommendations (Para  No. 33)
The Committee have been informed that MES would develop six smart stations 
which shall be in harmony with the other hundred stations which are being identified.  
The Committee laud the efforts of MES that these stations would be for the logistic 
support of Armed Forces and consequently a model for State of Art living and 
lodging of Armed Forces.
Reply of the Government
Keeping in view the Hon’ble Prime Minister’s vision to create smart cities, the 
Defence Forces is also planning to develop similar Smart Armed Forces Stations.  
Chief of Staff Committee HQ Integrated Defence Staff has been nominated as the 
nodal agency for development of Smart Armed Forces Stations. An approach paper 
on Smart Armed Forces Stations have been prepared and circulated to the three 
Service HQs. The broad focus areas are:-
(a) Infrastructure development to include underground services, shared 
resources, cycling and walking tracks and spatial orientation.
(b) Centralised services including MES helplines, solid waste management, 
piped gas, welfare and community centres, centralised Canteen Stores Department 
with automated home delivery etc.
(c) Welfare facilities such as central welfare institutes with free Wi-Fi zones, 
CNG/ battery operated vehicle services etc.
(d) Emphasis on environment and ecology with establishment of eco park and 
implementation of Green norms to include solar/ wind projects, renewable energy 
sources, organic waste management, LED bases lighting etc.
(e) Biometric based security systems aided by video surveillance and state of art 
identity cards.
(f) Use of automated water management systems both for fresh water and waste 
water management.

51
Recommendations (Para  No. 36)
In the desert areas, like Jaisalmer, there is an acute shortage of accommodation 
even in the market.  It is strategic location as large number of Army officials or 
jawans have to look for rented accommodations.  The Committee therefore, 
recommend that in phase-III, priority should be given in constructing MAP in 
Jaisalmer.
Reply of the Government
In Phase III, due priority will be given for construction of MAP at Jaisalmer.
Recommendations (Para  No. 37)
The Committee got a suggestion from MES that they should also be given the same 
power as vested with Director General MAP.  As MES is the executing agency of 
MAP, it is strongly recommended that power as vested to DG MAP should also be 
given to MES for the expeditious completion of MAP.
Reply of the Government
The Apex Steering Committee of MAP has already decided to give similar powers to 
MES as is available to DG MAP for execution of work entrusted to it during Phase III.
Recommendations (Para  No. 38)
MAP was constituted as a separate entity in order to focus on accommodation 
problem of married Armed Forces personnel.  The Committee are dismayed to note 
that in spite of giving autonomy to MAP; the works carried out by MAP are not 
meeting the target.  Works are going at a snail’s pace, which need to be 
introspected.  The Committee, therefore, recommend that MAP, should gird up their 
loins and carry out the work vigoursly otherwise there is no use of making it a 
separate organisation.  
Reply of the Government
The Government takes note of the observations and recommendations of the 
Committee and assures that all efforts would be made towards accomplishing all 
tasks relating to MAP and for removing all structural impediments that were evident 
in the implementation of the first 2 phases of MAP.

52
Recommendations (Para  No. 39)
Defence Public Sector Undertakings (DPSU)
The Committee note that inspite of large manufacturing by Defence PSUs, Armed 
Forces and BRO are suffering in so far as their requirement is concerned. 
Nonetheless, except two PSUs, all DPSUs, all Defence PSUs are running in profit. 
The Committee failed to understand as to why BEML, who has BRO as direct user, 
is running in losses. The Committee are of the opinion that DPSUs should primarily 
fulfill the need of Armed Forces and BRO. Their aim should not be solely profit 
making but capacity enhancement also. The Committee understand that unless 
DPSUs are healthy, they will not be able to cater to the requirements of Armed 
Forces.  At the same time if they fulfill the requirement of Armed Forces and BRO 
even at the cost of their losses, it would be a great Service to the Nation. The 
Committee feel that the Defence PSUs are different from other PSUs.  While 
appreciating their efforts to fulfill the need of Armed Forces and BRO to a substantial 
extent, the Committee recommend that they should strive for total satisfaction of the 
Armed Forces and BRO. In this regard, equilibrium in maintaining the PSU a 
profitable one vis-à-vis fulfilling National obligation, for which DPSUs have been 
established, must be ensured.
Reply of the Government
HAL: HAL, since inception, has dedicated itself to fulfil the requirements of Indian 
Defence Services by supplying aircraft & helicopters and its associated accessories. 
The testimony to  this fact is that more than 95% of the aircraft / helicopters 
manufactured by HAL are supplied to the Indian Defence Services. 
Currently HAL is executing supply of Su-30 MKI fighter aircraft, Light Combat 
Aircraft, Advanced trainer aircraft Hawk, Dornier-228, Advanced Light Helicopters 
(ALH). All these aircrafts and helicopters are produced for Indian Defence Services. 
HAL also provides repair and overhaul services of aircraft, engines and its 
accessories which includes aircraft and engines that are not manufactured at HAL 
like, Mirage, AN-32 and also those for which Original Equipment Manufacturers have 
discontinued their support, Eg Dart, Orpheus engine etc. Support is also extended to 
Indian Defence Services through aircraft upgrade and life extension services. 
BEL: BEL has been one of the premier Electronics Companies in the country, 
meeting the current and emerging requirements of armed forces in the area of 
Strategic Electronics. Besides maintaining upward trend in the profit over the years, 
85% of BEL’s turnover is to Indian defence forces. Some of the prominent products 
introduced in the recent past include Akash Missile System, Central Acquisition 
Radar, Low Level Light Weight Radar, 3D Tactical Control Radar, Night Vision 
Devices, Missile Warning System, Ship Borne EW systems, Tank / Gun upgrades, 
etc. Taking into account, the future strategies and business plans, BEL will strive to 
play  a significant role in meeting the requirements of armed forces.  

53
BEML:- BEML since its  inception in 1964, has been continuously making profits, 
and only in the year 2012-13 BEML made a loss of Rs.122.33 crore, mainly due to 
the extraordinary situation BEML encountered in Defence vertical. However, BEML 
turned around in the year 2013-14 with a PBT of Rs.9.08 crore. 
BEML has supplied various equipments viz., Dozers, Excavators, Loaders & Motor 
Graders to DGBR and Engineer-in-Chief. Further, BEML has opened a service 
centre at Leh, recently, to support the equipments supplied to Armed Forces and 
BRO. 
BDL:- BDL has been striving to fulfill the requirement of Armed Forces and infact, 
BDL has taken lead to order the items in advance anticipating orders from Armed 
Forces. BDL has been constantly upgrading its capabilities to meet the requirement 
of Armed Forces. 
BDL has acquired land at IbrahmpathamTelengana State and Amaravati, 
Maharashtra state in anticipation of orders for MRSAM and VSHORAD respectively. 
Proactively BDL has taken-up infrastructure development at these areas to meet the 
demand of the Armed Forces. 
GSL:-GSL suffered a loss of Rs.61.09 crore during the financial year 2013-14. The 
loss was mainly due to guarantee liabilities / expenditure on projects concluded / 
delivered prior to FY 2013-14, besides inadequate capacity utilization coupled with 
yard’s lean order book position.  
During financial year 2014-15, the provisional Profit before Tax is expected to be 
about Rs.50 crore. Further, on account of repeat order of five CG OPVs and the 
recent approval for construction of 12 MCMVs, yard’s financials are expected to 
further improve. 
Notwithstanding above, GSL has been consistently building and delivering variety of 
ships / platforms indigenously to both Indian Navy and Indian Coast Guard to meet 
their operational requirements. Ships built and delivered so far include Navy 
Offshore Patrol vessels, Advance patrol vessels of different variant to ICG, Missile 
boats survey vessels, Landing Craft Utility vessels, etc., to name a few. 
GRSE:- Over the years, GRSE has developed capabilities to design and build most 
modern warships in the country. 
In 2006, GRSE acquired Raja Bagan Dockyard from Central Inland Water Transport 
Corporation (CIWTC). The facility which was in a dilapidated condition has been 
revived by GRSE and converted into a dedicated shipyard for construction of small 
ships for Indian Navy and Coast Guard. 
Major modernisation of GRSE was undertaken at a cost of Rs.605.85 crore. and 
completed in Jun 2013. This has doubled the installed capacity for construction of 
large warships like Frigates / Corvettes etc. for Indian Navy. 
HSL:-The yard has necessary capability for building Naval vessels including 
warships and submarines. HSL has been accumulating losses due to large idle 
capacity and high fixed costs due to legacy factors. HSL has endeavoured to fulfil its 
obligations towards strengthening the Indian Navy and Coast Guard, whenever an 
opportunity is provided for this yard. 

54
MIDHANI:  MIDHANI’s mission is to achieve self-reliance in the research & 
development, manufacture and supply of critical alloys and products of national 
security and strategic importance. MIDHANI in coordination with DRDO and with in-
house R & D has developed a number of critical alloys which are not available to 
defence from overseas suppliers. MIDHANI is regularly catering to the requirement 
of these critical materials of Armed Forces, DPSUs, Naval Programs & Ordnance 
Factories. Continued focus is given for development of new alloys to meet the 
strategic requirement. 
Recommendations (Para  No. 40)
The Committee while appreciating the milestones set by the DPSUs in respect of 
indigenization of various aircraft and equipment, especially Sukhoi and LCA, hope 
that indigenization would be given a boost by DPSUs. For this purpose it is essential 
to translate into reality the lab to land projects. The technology which we get from 
DRDO and other premier institutions should be given a boost. This would make 
‘Make in India’ programme a big success. The Committee are happy to note that 
BEML is compared with multinationals like Hitachi and apart from Defence they also 
get orders from Coal India Limited and other companies. The Committee have been 
intimated by the CMD, HAL, at that time of oral evidence, they are moving towards 
indigenization in a phased manner. First, they bring major modules from abroad and 
assemble them to make aircraft, like Sukhoi, then in Phase-II they buy components 
from abroad and make the module and in third Phase raw material is only imported 
and all other activities are done in our country. The Committee acknowledge such 
steps, but recommend that instead of depending all the times on the technology of 
advanced countries we should also be a torch bearer and accordingly a synergic 
efforts should be made by DPSUs and Ministry of Defence. 
Reply of the Government
HAL: HAL as a major Aerospace defence public sector under Ministry of Defence, 
has initiated several steps to adopt “Make in India”  concept and accordingly several 
strategies are being adopted at HAL for Indigenous development of Aircrafts, 
Helicopters, Aero engine, UAVs, aircraft systems such as avionics, mechanical 
systems etc. 
(I) Indigenous development of platforms and systems.
The following Indigenous development programmes are already under way at 
HAL which is a step towards Make in India:
Programs already under production stage:-
(a) Light Combat Aircraft (LCA) – Tejas
(b) Intermediate Jet Trainer (IJT)
(c) Advanced Light Helicopter (ALH)
(d) Pilotless Target Aircraft (PTA)
Programs under development stage and subsequently to be produced at HAL:-

55
(a) Hindustan Turbo Trainer (HTT-40)
(b) Light Combat Helicopter (LCH)
(c) Light Utility Helicopter (LUH)
(d) Fixed and Rotary wing Unmanned Aerial Vehicle (UAV) 
(e) Advanced 25 kN Aero Engine 
(II) Indigenisation
Indigenisation activities include development & import substitution efforts. In order to 
attain higher level of self-reliance, HAL has put-in concerted effort on indigenisation 
of components, accessories and systems required for manufacture as well as repair 
& overhaul of aircraft, engine and associated systems. Every year more than 2000 
items are indigenized with considerable foreign exchange Savings. 
(III) Synergy between HAL and DRDO Labs for R&D Projects 
HAL and DRDO labs have been collaborating on a number of design & development 
programs in Aeronautical sector. HAL is engaged with 21 DRDO labs & 
organizations in the various Research and Development field for Light Combat 
Aircraft (LCA), Intermediate Jet Trainer (IJT), Fifth Generation Fighter Aircraft FGFA, 
Su-30 MKI, Jaguar, MiG-27, DO-228, Advanced Light Helicopter (ALH), Light 
Combat Helicopter (LCH) etc. 
BEL:-R&D has been one of the key areas of the company to meet the indigenization 
objective and move towards the path of self-reliance. BEL has been playing key role 
in supporting the Government ‘Make in India’ policy. Some of the initiatives in this 
regard are:-
∑ 3 years R&D plan for Indigenous development released
∑ In order to bridge the technology gaps, Collaborative R&D approach 
involving Indian private industries and Indian design houses has been 
initiated
∑ Increased R&D Investment – from 7.56% of turnover in 2013-14 to 8.2% 
in 2014-15
∑ Setting up of Product Development & Innovation Centre initiated for 
development of common sub system
∑ Thrust on patents - 9 Patents filed during 2014-15 (total 45 patents filed). 
∑ Joint development projects with leading academic institutes in the 
country initiated
∑ Thrust on In-house developments around 80% of turnover is generated 
from Indigenous Technology.
∑ Policy on Long term Outsourcing & Indigenization (Draft prepared).
∑ “Make in India” Cell is proposed to be set up to implement BEL’s 
Outsourcing policy. 
∑ New Joint Venture with Thales has been started for manufacture of Civil 
and select Defence Radars like Air Traffic Management Radar.
∑ Investment in Expansion & Modernization to meet the current and future 
manufacturing requirements.  
BEML:- In respect of Mining equipment, BEML is competing with multinationals in 
India like Komatsu, Caterpillar, Libherr and equipments supplied from China, South 

56
Korea and Domestic Player like L&T, Tata Hitachi, JCB etc. Indigenisation is above 
85% to 90% in each of these products. 
Defence equipment viz PMS Pontoon bridge system, Aircraft Towing Tractor, 
Aircraft Weapon Loader, 50T Trailer, Wagons, BoyevayaMashinaPekhoty (BMP) 
Transmission and Ejector Air Cleaner Assembly (EJ&AC) are fully indigenised. The 
indigenisation level in respect of BEML Heavy Duty High Mobility Vehicles is over 
90%. 
Similarly in the case of Metro, BEML is competing with world leaders like M/s. 
Alstom, Bombardier against open tender and winning contracts. It is also to be noted 
that 88% of BEML’s sales in 2014-15 is from orders obtained through competitive 
mode. 
BEML is committed to the success of “Make in India” programme. BEML has 
successfully developed Country’s First High End High Capacity Electric Drive Dump 
Truck (15T & 190T) and 180T Electric Excavator through our in-house R&D efforts. 
Also there is a continuous endeavour to up-grade the existing products to ‘World 
Class’ Standards to meet customer requirement.
BEML is jointly working with M/s. CVRDE, for Design and Development of Armoured 
Repair & recovery Vehicle (ARRV). BEML is also working with M/s. BDL and have 
developed Stage IV and V aggregates of Akash Missile. 
BDL:-BDL has been a pioneer in the areas of converting the development projects 
into series production models both in case of foreign ToT projects and DRDO 
projects. 
In ToT projects, BDL adopts phased manufacturing which allows smooth absorption 
of technology and allows Indigenisation to take place in a phased manner. BDL has 
also developed items when ToT has not been provided by the original equipment 
manufacturer OEM which is as per the contract in the case of Konkurs-M ATGM and 
Invar ATGM.
BDL has achieved high levels of indigenization in all its projects. The details 
of Indigenization Project-wise are as listed below:-
Product Target % Indigenization 
achieved 
Invar 63 76.4
Konkurs-M 63 90
Milan – 2T 71 71
C-303 71 71
In case of DRDO projects BDL has been working in tandem with DRDO labs to 
convert the items from development phase to series production phase. Prithvi 
project has been successfully completed.   Akash Weapon System has been  
productionised in the above manner.
GSL:-GSL has been in the forefront of design of Navy Vessels and  indigenisation.  
GSL has designed, produced and delivered several series of Patrol Vessels for 
Indian Navy & Coast Guard and even actively participated in export of the vessels. 

57
GSL, having independent ship design capability within the country, has now been 
nominated for construction of 12 MCMV vessels for which GSL will be tying up for 
appropriate ToT as per specifications formulated by Indian Navy. GSL has initiated 
dialogues with several specialised MCMV equipment OEMs from abroad for making 
the items in India in collaboration with local private industrial groups with requisite 
capabilities, so that the higher indigenisation level can be achieved. 
GRSE:-Over the years, GRSE has established proven capabilities for in-house ship 
design & shipbuilding and has made significant contribution to the success of 
indigenous warship construction programme. 
All warships ordered by Indian Navy & Indian Coast Guard to GRSE are 
indigenously designed & developed by the shipyard.  Currently 15 warships of Indian 
Navy are under construction in GRSE.
With the delivery of Anti-Submarine warfare Stealth Corvette, INS Kamorta, GRSE 
achieved the milestone of delivering a frontline warship to Indian Navy with almost 
90% indigenous content. 
HSL:-HSL has been contributing to the cause of indigenisation by undertaking 
constructions of warships of different types for the Navy and the Coast Guard. Most 
significantly it has undertaken the MR of the Foxtrot class submarines as well as 
MR-cum-modernisation of EKM class submarines, which otherwise had to be done 
in Russia. The yard has also nurtured a strong Design Office which can take up 
indigenous design of commercial ships as well as warships (except the capital 
ships). HSL has also entered into a MoU with other PSUs - BHEL and MIDHANI –
with the view to synergise their efforts, resources and capabilities towards 
construction of advanced technology vessels. 
MIDHANI:-Midhani has been participating in the tender enquiries floated by HAL and 
has successfully bagged some orders competing with the international suppliers. 
Midhani has supplied various raw materials vis. Titanium alloys, Maraging Steel as 
import substitutes to Bharat Dynamic Limited for Akash Missile Project and have 
supplied its materials viz. Superalloys, Titanium and its alloys and Special Steels as 
import substitutes to various indigenisation programmes of Space, Nuclear and 
Defence sectors. 
Recommendations (Para  No. 41)
Welfare of Ex-Servicemen
The committee notes that in a number of cases the dependents of soldiers who 
sacrificed their lives for the sake of the country do not get the land which is given to 
them as a token of appreciation.  The Committee understand that the matter pertains 
to State Government even though then they wish the Ministry of Defence take up all 
such cases which come to their notice, expeditiously into the State Governments 
and impress upon them to do the needful.
Reply of the Government

58
The cases relating to allotment of land to war widows/dependents under 
consideration of respective State Govts are monitored through Kendriya Sainik 
Board (KSB) Sectt.  in coordination with respective RSBs on a monthly basis.  If any 
case is reported to be inordinately delayed, the matter will be taken up with the State 
Government concerned by Ministry of Defence for expeditious disposal.
Recommendations (Para  No. 42)
The Committee are of the view that there should be an official in all such areas 
where war widows or dependant parents are residing to facilitate them in order to get 
pension and other benefits. The Committee, therefore, recommend that such areas 
should be identified.
Reply of the Government
Kendriya Sainik Board Secretariat at the Central level, Rajya Sainik Boards at the 
State level and Zila Sainik Boards at the District level are entrusted with welfare of  
Ex-servicemen and their families including the families of defence personnel killed in 
military operations residing in their districts, and provide all help to facilitate pension 
and other benefits to them.
In addition, the Indian Air Force, have formed Samvedna Cells at all Air Force 
Stations since the year 2005 to render timely assistance to the NOK/Families of 
deceased air warriors which include from paying condolences to assisting them in 
getting Non Effective benefits, escorting to new location, counseling of families, 
assistance to school going children etc. 
Naval Regimental System has been established region wise to reach out to widows 
or dependent parents of late sailors.  Nodal officers have been designated to 
facilitate pension and other benefits and deal with their issues in a speedy and 
professional manner.
Regiments and local formations/establishments/units have systems in place to 
periodically interact formally/informally with the families of defence personnel killed 
during operations.

59
(B) OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED 
BY THE GOVERNMENT AND ARE COMMENTED UPON:
Recommendation (Para No. 14 )
The connectivity between Himachal Pradesh and Ladakh Region is very crucial for 
the expeditious movement of troops and equipment to this strategic area. The 
Committee, therefore, recommend to construct Nyemo-Padum-Darcha road to 
connect Himachal Pradesh and Ladakh Region.  The Committee may be apprised of 
the steps taken in this regard.
Reply of the Government
In order to establish all weather connectivity between Himachal Pradesh and 
Ladakh region the following proposals have been formulated:-
(i) Road Darcha-Padam-Nimmu-Leh:
(a) Road Nimu- Padam – Darcha : The road Nimu-Padam-Darcha, of length 
297.375 Km is presently under construction. Out of which 170.02 Km to single 
lane specifications and 10 Km to double lane specifications have been 
completed. Formation works for Km 17.50 in single lane and 50.00 Km double 
lane are in progress.
(b) Road Darcha-Shinkunla: The road Darcha –Shinkunla of length 39.375 
Km is presently under construction. Out of which 21.89 Km formation work 
and 14.19 Km surfacing work has been completed.
Further, the following works are planned to expedite the completion of the 
road:
(a) Approval for feasibility study for Shinkunla Tunnel has been accorded.
(b) Development of road Nimu-Padam-Darcha to NHDL specifications has 
been proposed for taking up through large private player and approval for 
preparation of detailed project report has been accorded.
(ii) Road Manali-Sarchu-Upshi-Leh.
(a) Construction of 8.800 Km long Rohtang Tunnel is under progress.
(b) Approval for feasibility study for Barlach La and Tanglang La 
Tunnels has been accorded.
(c) Development of balance road stretch on Manali-Sarchu-Leh to NHDL 
specifications has been proposed for taking up through International 
Consortium and approval for preparation of detailed project report has been 
accorded.

60
(iii) In addition to above, the following alignments for all weather 
connectivity from Himachal Pradesh to Ladakh region are also under 
consideration:
(a) Road Wangtu-Pooh-Sumdo-Chumar-Nyoma-Upshi-Leh
(b)  Road Wangtu-Bhaba Pass-Aturgu-Kiato-NurbuSumdo-TsoMorari Karzok-
Mahe-Upshi-Leh.' 
For comments of the Committee please see Para No. 29 & 30 of Chapter- I.
Recommendation (Para No. 16 )
The Committee fail to understand that in spite of the instructions of Government of 
India to invite public representatives of the area where some project or scheme is 
carried out either by the Union Government or State Government, BRO do not invite 
local MPs nor inform them.  This sends a wrong message and public at large do not 
understand what is actually going on. The Committee, therefore, recommend that 
BRO should keep this in mind and local MPs and other public representatives should 
be kept abreast with the developmental activities of BRO and invite them at the 
inauguration of such projects.'
Reply of the Government
Guidelines for the role and responsibility of State Government Agencies as executing 
agencies on behalf of Ministry of Road Transport and Highways (MoRT&H) regarding 
ceremonial functions like inauguration/BhoomiPujan/Foundation laying etc. has been 
issued by MoRT&H vide letter dated 12 September 2011. Accordingly, BRO has 
again issued necessary instruction to all Chief Engineer (Project) in this regard.
For comments of the Committee please see Para No.33 of Chapter- I.
Recommendation (Para No. 18 )
The Committee are dismayed to note that in Tawang area the situation is very critical 
in so far as connectivity is concerned.  In case of war, the Army can not reach there 
in a day.  While our neighbouring countries can reach borders within two or three 
hours, our Army takes more than a day to reach there.  This is a matter of great 
concern with regard to our Defence Preparedness. The Committee, therefore, 
recommend to construct good quality roads in this area on priority basis.
The Committee also recommend that our engineers and other BRO personnel are 
sent abroad to upgrade their technical knowhow.  The Committee have been 
apprised that a permanent scientific committee under the Ministry of Science and 
Technology had been constituted to aid and advise BRO on technologies which can 
be adopted.  As stated by the Secretary that 10% of BRO budget has been 
earmarked for experimenting new  technologies to construct blacktop road at high 
altitude the Committee feel that this would give impetus to a new paradigm.

61
Reply of the Government
At present, three axis are planned for construction to establish all weather 
connectivity up to Tawang. The present status of these three axis is as mentioned 
below:-
(i) Road Balipara-Charduar-Tenga-Tawang (Main Axis): 
Construction/development works to National Highway Double lane (NHDL) 
specification on this road of length 317.28 km is under progress and the progress 
as on May 2015 is as under:
(a) Formation – 192.73 km 
(b) Surfacing  - 145.74 km
The road stretch between Km 50 to 88 passes through Eagle Nest wild life sanctuary 
in Arunachal Pradesh and Namari tiger reserve in Assam due to which the work has 
not commenced. At present the clearance are pending with MoEF. An Interlocutory 
Application (IA) has been filed in Hon’ble Supreme Court on 09 Jan 2015 to permit 
the applicant to construct and develop strategic border roads after obtaining the 
clearances from standing committee of State Wildlife Board/National Wildlife Board 
and after obtaining prior approval from Ministry of Environment & Forest under 
theForest Conservation Act.
(ii)    Road Orang-Kalaktang-Rupa-Shergaon-Morshing-Phudung-Mandala-
Debrabu-Naga GG-BJ Gompa-Lagamche GG-Mukto-Teli-Bomdir-Tawang 
(Alternate Axis): The present status of this axis is as under:
Srl No Stretch of Road Present Status
a Orang-Shergaon Under development to NHDL 
specifications.
b Shergaon-Naga 
GG
Completed to Class-9 specification and 
is under maintenance.
c Naga GG-BJ 
Gompa
Under construction to Class-9 
specifications.
d BJ Gompa -
Lagamche GG
Completed to Class-9 specification and 
is under maintenance.
e Lagamche GG-Teli Under construction to Class-9 
specifications. Further extension of the 
road uptoTawang is part of existing 
Bomdir-Lumla and Balipara-Charduar-
Tawang road.
f Shergaon-Teli Development of this road to NHDL 
specifications has been proposed for 
taking up through International 
Consortium and approval for preparation 
of detailed project report has been 
accorded.

62
(iii) Pinjoli-Buragaon-Dibbin-Mathow-Tungri-Chhangla-Pangila-Pota-Tsela-
Mago (Third Axis). This axis has already been Operationally endorsed by Army and 
works will be taken up once the construction of main axis is completed.
2. In order to introduce the latest technology in BRO the following steps are 
taken:
c. Guidelines for technology initiative in BRO have been approved. In order to identify 
and select most appropriate technology initiatives in a fair transparent manner for 
introduction in BRO, DGBR shall constitute a Multi Disciplinary Expert Group 
(MDEG) consisting of technical/domain experts, representatives of the scientific 
institutions, users, financing and administrative authorities etc. for continuous 
evaluation of proposals and making detailed recommendations in a time bound 
manner.  
d. In addition a National Workshop on Border Roads, by BRO and Confederation of 
Indian Industry (CII) on ‘Private sector’s participation in construction of Roads, 
bridges, and tunnel in border areas’ was held on 17 Feb 2015. Based on the 
deliberations in the National workshop three working group has been constituted to 
recommend measures for enhancing the private sector’s participation in construction 
of roads, bridges, and tunnels in border areas. 
c.   In order to get acquaintance with the latest art of technology being used by the 
various developed Countries, officers of BRO are being sent on training to various 
foreign countries. Four groups have already been sent on training to various foreign 
countries.
For comments of the Committee please see Para No.36 of Chapter- I.
Recommendation (Para No. 19 )
The Committee observes that during Uttarakhand tragedy and flood situation in 
Kashmir, BRO had to divert its work force to these areas as it was the need of the 
hour.  BRO did commendable job in spite of many obstacles. This might have 
affected the regular work of BRO in other areas. The Committee, therefore, 
recommend that there should be two wings of BRO- one for routine job and another 
for emergency duties.
Reply of the Government
'In case of natural calamity, BRO resources are diverted to such locations to restore 
the line of communication. This does affect the progress of ongoing works. However, 
for disaster management additional equipment required during Disaster under 
'Disaster Management Brick' for deployment during such contingencies is under 
consideration. A separate wing in BRO for emergency duties is likely to remain idle 
for very long as the location and timing of disaster is not known.'
For comments of the Committee please see Para No.39 of Chapter- I.

63
Recommendation (Para No. 27 )
Defence Estates Organisation
It has been observed that roads and cantonment area are sometimes closed by 
senior officers of the Army in cantonment area. This leads to trouble to the public 
commuting through Cantonment area. The Committee understand the security of the 
country cannot be compromised and threat perception cannot be overlooked, but 
causing inconvenience to public at large without any such input is very disturbing. 
The committee feel that concept should be from security point of view, but when that 
degenerates into personal vanity, it becomes abhorable
Reply of the Government
The Ministry of Defence vide order dated 7th January, 2015 have issued directions to 
Service Headquarters and DGDE to ensure that no public road-(outside unit lines) in 
a Cantonment shall be closed by any authority other than the Cantonment Board, for 
any reason other than security, and without following procedure laid down u/s 258 of 
the Cantonments Act, 2006. It has inter-alia been decided that roads already closed 
without following the procedure as delineated in Section 258 of the Cantonments 
Act, 2006 shall be opened forthwith and closed again, if such closure is required 
after following the laid down procedure and obtaining the statutory approval.'
Recommendation (Para No. 28 )
Defence Estate Organisation has a large area of land which is lying unutilized for a 
very long time. The Committee, therefore, recommend that this should be examined 
in detail and appropriate use of this be considered; some funds could be used for the 
welfare of residents of cantonment area. This would add to the revenue of the 
Ministry of Defence, which would held in launching big ticket projects of the Armed 
Forces.
Reply of the Government
'Out of the 17.57 Lakhs acres of defence land, nearly 66,000 acres is under the 
management of Defence Estates out of which 53,148 acres is inside Cantonments 
and 13.574 acres is outside Cantonments.  Out of  the 53,148 acres inside 
Cantonments, defence land is placed under following four classifications:
A-2 land     6,509 acres 
B-3 land   12,977 acres 
B-4 land   27,616  acres
C land         6,046 acres   
Class A-2: land which is not actually used or occupied by the Military authorities, 
but to the use or occupation of which for any other purpose, except temporarily, 
there exist specific military objections.

64
Class B-3: Land which is held by any private person under the provisions of these 
rules, or which is held or may be  presumed to be held under the provisions of the 
Cantonment Code of 1899 or 1912  or under  any executive orders previously in 
force, subject to conditions under which  the Central Government reserve, or have 
reserved, to themselves the proprietary rights in the soil; and 
Class B-4: Land which is not included in any other class.
Class C: Land which is vested in the Board under Section 122 of the Cantonments 
Act, 2006 is called class ‘C’ land. 
As such, while class A-2 land needs to be left vacant for immediate Military use 
Class B-3  &C land are already occupied.  Further, Class B-4 land is earmarked for 
future defence purposes and already demand has been received from Services & 
Defence Establishments for re-classifying it into ClassA-1.
(ii)   Land outside Cantonments placed under the management of DE Organisation is 
basically in the form of Camping Grounds and Abandoned Airfields.  DGDE vide its ID 
No. 711/RD/DSP/DLC/88 dated 26th February 2014 has circulated list of these 
Camping Grounds and Abandoned Airfields to MoD for circulation among the various 
Organizations of MoD/Central Government Organizations/State Governments for 
allotment based on priorities laid down therein.'
For comments of the Committee on replies of the Government  on 
recommendations nos. 27 & 28 please see Para No.47 & 48 of Chapter- I.
Recommendation (Para No. 34 )
Married Accommodation Projects (MAP)
The Committee have been informed that “satisfaction rate” i.e. availability of Married 
Accommodation of the Army would be about 70 percent by the time phase IV gets 
completed, which is expected to be completed by 2020.  In the case of Navy and Air 
force it would be 85 and 90 percent respectively. Presently the Married
Accommodation is to the extent of only 10-15 percent of total accommodation of the 
Armed Forces.  In such a case, the satisfaction rate of 75 percent is inadequate.  
The Committee therefore, recommend that it should be 100 percent and every jawan 
should get it.  Army personnel serve in field area.  They come and stay for maximum 
2 to 3 years in peace stations.  Half of the time they stay outside in hired 
accommodation, which create immense administrative and “Morale” problems.  
Hence the aim of MAP should be 100 percent “satisfaction level”.
Reply of the Government
The Ministry agrees that it should be the aim of the Government to provide 100 
percent “satisfaction level” keeping in view the approved scales of authorisation in 
this regard. However, this would necessarily have to be planned for implementation 
in a phased manner keeping in view the present progress of the Married 
Accommodation Project (MAP), availability of funds and the capacity of MoD’s own 
construction agencies. In the meantime the Government will continue to meet the 

65
gap through hiring of accommodation and payment of compensation in lieu of 
quarters (CILQ).
For comments of the Committee please see Para No.51 of Chapter- I.
Recommendation (Para No. 35 )
The committee observed that the phase I of the Project, which was scheduled to be 
completed in 2002 , actually started in 2004 and completed in 2008. Thus Phase I 
has been delayed by 6 years. Similarly Phase II which was due to be completed in 
2014 will now be completed by 2017.  The Committee therefore, express their 
displeasures and anguish that phase I and Phase II of MAP were delayed for one 
reason or another and timeline was not maintained.  This might have resulted into 
cost overrun apart from effecting “Morale” of the Troops. They, therefore, 
recommend that MAP should meticulously ensure that phase III is completed on 
schedule.
Reply of the Government
The delay in Phase I of the project was on account of the fact that considerable time 
was consumed in framing procedures and for planning of the project. The strategy of 
involving other construction agencies and CPSUs in the project also did not yield 
desired results. Based on lesson in that phase , during phase II large work packages 
were made so as attract participation of reputed construction companies. However, 
due to the recession in the building industry, funds crunch and constraints in 
sourcing building materials, the performance of the contractors was slow. As a result 
several contracts have been cancelled and retendered under the risk and cost 
clause of the contracts. Performance is being closely monitored and reviewed at 
various levels. As regards Phase III locations where dwelling units are to be 
constructed has been finalised and planning work has commenced. Increase in 
delegation of powers of various committees and changes in contract conditions to 
ensure faster execution of work in this phase is under consideration.
For comments of the Committee please see Para No.54 of Chapter- I.
Recommendation (Para No. 44 )
The Committee have been apprised that majority of the States, except five States, 
have already legislated for reservations from 2 per cent to 20 per cent in various 
categories. Even those five States have given reservations for group ‘A’ and ‘B’ jobs, 
but not for group ‘C’ and ‘D’ posts. The Committee therefore, recommend to take up 
the matter with those five States at the highest level by the Ministry of Defence and 
impress upon them to make legislation expeditiously.

66
Reply of the Government
There is no reservation in jobs even in C & D, in five States/ UT namely Bihar, 
Jharkhand, Kerala, Meghalaya and Andaman & Nicobar. These five States/ UT have 
been requested to provide meaningful resettlement opportunities to Ex-Servicemen 
by providing reservation to them in State Government / UTs jobs.
For comments of the Committee please see Para No.57 of Chapter- I.
Recommendation (Para No. 45 )
'The Committee have been apprised by DG Resettlement that at state level there is 
no such agency like DGR to monitor the reservation. The Committee therefore, 
recommend Ministry of Defence to take up this issue with State Governments. In this 
regard the assistance of Rajya Sainik Board and can be availed.'
Reply of the Government
'State/UT Governments have been requested to designate Rajya Sainik Boards to 
collect and compile the data regarding employment provided to the ESM in State 
Government / State PSUs jobs and also furnish such data to DGR on half yearly 
basis.'
For comments of the Committee please see Para No.60 of Chapter- I.
Recommendation (Para No. 46)
The Committee note with concern that the amount of money given to Param Veer 
Chakra and other gallantry medal winners, vary from State to State.  In some states 
like Punjab, Haryana and Uttarakhand, they are handsomely rewarded while in 
some States they are paid very meager sum.  This is really pitiable and require 
uniformity so that our brave soldiers do not feel let down.  As such the Committee 
observe that the soldiers are national heroes and States should have conformity in 
this regard.
Reply of the Government
It is stated that the financial / cash rewards for Gallantry awardees varies from State 
to State as it is prerogative of the State Governments.  Central Government has 
fixed uniform monetary allowances to the recipients of Gallantry Awards as per
details given below:

67
For comments of the Committee please see Para No.63 of Chapter- I.
Recommendation (Para No. 47)
The Committee are of the opinion that Ex-Servicemen can gainfully be employed in 
several eco projects. But the irony is this that State Governments do not have them 
due to dearth of money. Worse the fact that Ministry of Environment or River 
Rejuvenation also do not pay heed to such an important task carried out by Ex-
Servicemen. Whether it is cleaning of Ganga or Indira Gandhi Canal in Rajasthan’s 
Desert area or Eco Battalion, do not get money for their sustenance. The Committee 
therefore, strongly recommend to Ministry of Defence and Directorate of 
Resettlement to do something concrete in this regard.
Reply of the Government
A proposal is under active consideration for raising of four Territorial Army 
Battalions of ESM for Mission clean Ganga. Once approved/ implemented, this 
will benefit both Nation and ESM community.
For comments of the Committee please see Para No.66 of Chapter- I.
Name of Awards Monetary allowance
(Rupees per month)
ParamVir Chakra (PVC) 10,000
Ashok Chakra (AC) 6,000
MahaVir Chakra (MVC) 5,000
Kirti Chakra (KC) 4,500
Vir Chakra (Vr C) 3,500
Shaurya Chakra (SC) 3,000
Sena Medal / NavoSena 
medal / Vayu Medal 
(SM/NM/VM) – Gallantry
1,000

68
CHAPTER III
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS, WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT 
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT
Recommendations (Para  No. 12)
Border Roads Organisation (BRO)
It is observed that BRO consist of mixed cadre.  It has civilian as well as Army 
Personnel.  This creates a lot of difficulty in the field. The Committee, therefore, 
recommend that there should be a institutional mechanism to avoid conflicting 
situation.  As the BRO has now come under the Ministry of Defence, the Committee 
hope that the situation would improve and there shall be no conflicting situation.
Reply of the Government
BRO has been raised on the pattern of Army e.g companies/ platoons etc. with 
similar command and control structure. The manning in BRO is of a mixed character 
i.e the posts are manned both by Civilian Officers and Army Officers as per the 
provisions of the recruitment Rules and further as per the manning Policy as decided 
by the Government. A well defined functional hierarchy exists and Commanders at all 
levels have been empowered to take appropriate decisions to resolve grievances if 
any. 
Recommendations (Para  No. 13)
The Committee express their displeasure over the fact that the required vehicles and 
equipments are not available with the BRO.  This problem has been persisting for the 
last five years as per the records submitted by the Ministry of Defence. This may 
have been persisting for a very long time.  The Committee are anguished over this 
fact and feel that under staffed BRO with ill equipped and inadequate vehicles and 
equipments cannot compete with our neighbouring countries and this may be a 
stumbling block in the optimum utilization of the combatant capacity of our Armed 
Forces and Para Military Forces
Reply of the Government
In order to expedite the induction of Vehicle/Equipment/Plant the Annual 
Procurement Plan (APP) for FY 2015-16 and 2016-17 has been approved on 27 April 
2015 as per the details given under:-
S/No Description FY 2015-
16(in Rs 
Cr)
FY 2016-
17(in Rs 
Cr)
a Construction Veh/Eqpt/Plant–
Operational Requirement
506.07 361.46

69
b Snow Clearance Eqpt 104.41 35.61
c V/E/Ps for Disaster management/ slide 
clearance
138.35 73.07
d Quality Control Eqpt 15.59 8.14
e Medical eqpt 4.79 0
f Misc Operational Vehicle Requirement 19.84 12.37
g First line Tpt 0.44 0.38
h Eqpt bridges under DGBR’s reserve 15.16 0
i Prefabricated containerized 
accommodation 
9.45 6.61
Total 814.10 497.67
2. Some of the major Vehicle/Equipment/Plant provisioned in APP FY 2015-16 
and FY 2016-17 is given as under:-
Srl.No Item FY 2015-
16
(in Nos)
FY 2016-
17
(in Nos)
a Dozer BD 50/80 165 113
b Hydraulic  Excavator   20 /7 Ton 113 108
c Excavator cum loader/wheel 
Loader 167 82
d Tipper 4x2/4x4 815 577
e Dumper 182 110
f Hot Mix Plant 20-30TPH 33 7
g Paver finisher - 5
h Road roller    (all types) 73 47
i Stone crusher (20TPH)/(6/10) 186 40
j Snow cutter 30 12
k Medium Weight Crawler rock drill 6 9
l Light Weight Crawler Rock Drill 6 12

70
3. The detail of the V/E/P procured by BRO during the last six years is 
mentioned below:
Details of Major Vehicle/Equipment/Plant Procured during last Six Years
Srl.No Item
2009-
10
2010-
11
2011-
12
2012-
13
2013-
14
2014-
15
a Dozer BD 50/80 89 104 62 - 18 -
b Hydraulic  Excavator   
20 Ton/7 Ton 57 156 135 50 120 12
c Excavator cum 
loader/wheel Loader 77 61 108 38 50 70
d Tipper (4x2/4x4) 230 238 490 - 443 250
e Dumper 5 25 - - - 89
f Hot Mix Plant 20-30 
TPH - 3 - - - 13
g Paver finisher - 8 36 17 - 8
h Road roller  (all 
types) 82 24 120 40 32
i Stone crusher 
(20TPH) - - 20 - - 40
j Snow cutter 4 5 - - - -
k Crawler rock drill (all 
type) - - - - 39 33
4.   The details of funds utilized by BRO for the procurement of V/E/P during the last 
six years are mentioned below:
S/No Year Approved APP
(Rs. in Crores)
Expenditure               
(Rs in Crores)
a 2009-10 250.76 210
b 2010-11 380.80 194

71
c 2011-12 429.80 242
d 2012-13 469.77 242
e 2013-14 403.13 97
f 2014-15 459.66 159
Recommendations (Para  No. 17)
It is not only the hilly and terrain areas but area bordering Punjab, Jammu, 
Rajasthan and Gujarat which BRO can not neglect.  At the time of war heavy 
armoured vehicles pass through these areas which require strong and good quality 
roads. Civil agencies cannot construct such roads. There are water channels, 
canals, dams etc.  on the way and Army vehicles pass over these areas and, as 
such it is expedient not to neglect this area.
Reply of the Government
At present BRO has completed the construction of 2782 km of roads in the State of 
Punjab, Rajasthan and Gujarat, which are presently being maintained. In addition to 
above, the improvement works on the following two roads bordering International 
Border with Pakistan in Rajasthan, Punjab is planned: 
(a) Road Ajnala-Lopoke–Sohal : The construction/improvement of this road to 
Intermediate width  specifications (IW-5.5 meter carriage-way) has been completed. 
However, during this financial year sanction has been accorded for Rs 1673.71 lacs 
for rehabilitation works to improve the quality of riding surface for the stretch from 
Km 0 to Km 51. 
(c) Road Bakasar-Mavasari: The length of this road is 32.490 Km. Out of which 
the initial 9.510 Km is with Rajasthan Public work Department and balance 
22.980 km with BRO. Initial 26.740 Km of road length is in Rajasthan and 
balance 5.750 Km in Gujarat. The construction/improvement works of this 
road was stopped in August 2006 as the entire region experienced 
unprecedented heavy rains which caused submergence of the road for more 
than 20 days due to back flow from the sea (Rann of Kutch) which caused 
extensive damages. Since then the works on this road was suspended. Now 
Dte. MO-4 has endorsed this road for development to National Highway 
double lane specification (NHDL). 
Recommendations (Para  No. 25)
Defence Estates Organisation
The Committee are given to understand that in many a case property tax has not 
been paid by the Cantonment Board. At the time of oral evidence of the 
representatives of the Defence Estates, it has come to the notice of the committee 
that Telangana Government has given a notice to Cantonment Board of 
Secunderabad Area. The Committee are of the opinion that in the absence of funds 
which come through property tax it become difficult to develop Cantonment Board.  

72
Reply of the Government
Cantonment Boards do not have to pay property tax to any authority. Rather, they 
are empowered under the provisions of Cantonments Act, 2006, to levy and collect 
property tax from properties situated within the Cantonment. 
No notice has been received by Chief Executive Officer and Defence Estate Officer 
of SecunderabadCantonment  regarding payment of Property tax from Telangana 
Government.
Recommendations (Para  No. 26)
The Committee have been apprised that a large number of demolition work has 
been initiated by Cantonment Boards. The Committee understand that there should 
not be any encroachment in the Cantonment Area, but at the same time care is 
required to ensure that a genuine structure and other buildings/dwelling units which 
are situated on the so called defence land, which earlier belonged to some princely 
States like Nizam, should not be disturbed.
Reply of the Government
Cantonment Boards initiate action for demolition of unauthorised construction under 
the provisions of Cantonments Act, 2006 as per the laid down procedure. However, 
the aggrieved parties obtain stay order by way of filing suits/writs against the Board. 
The action to demolish unauthorized construction is to be taken only after finality of 
litigation. 
It has been intimated by CEO, Secunderabad that massive unauthorized 
constructions have been carried out in Old Grant Bungalows. The action regarding 
demolition of unauthorized constructions has been taken by DEO & CEO 
Secunderabad as per the existing provisions of law. During November 2013, 
demolitions were carried out in Old Grant Bungalows by Cantonment Board 
Secunderabad. During the year 2014, after the dismissal of C.A. No. 1839/2006 
titled as S.M. HussainRasheed Vs. Union of India and Ors., on 28.08.2014, 
unauthorized construction in Old Grant Bungalow No. 219, comprising GLR Sy. No. 
465 was removed. 
Due care is being taken while removing the unauthorized constructions.
Recommendations (Para  No. 29)
The Committee are of the view that sum of Rs. 348.26 crore as demanded in BE 
2015-16 may be provided to DGDE as Grant-in-aid for the development of 
Cantonments Boards.  The Committee also desire that adequate provisions may be 
made in the Budgets of Army and Air Force to clear the arrears in the coming years. 
Reply of the Government
The funds to the tune of Rs. 348.26 crore under Object head “Grants-in-aid- general 
was projected by Defence Estate Organisation for BE 2015-16. However, as per the 

73
funds provided by Ministry of Finance this Division was able to provide funds to the 
tune of Rs. 258.76 crore under the said head.  In this context, it is pertinent to 
mention here that any additionality over approved Grant requires the approval of 
Parliament.  Hence, the matter was taken up with the DGDE to project their 
requirement, if any, for additional funds in the first Batch of Supplementary demand 
for FY 2015-16.  In response, DGDE intimated that the additional funds under this 
head is required, however, the same will be projected at the stage of RE 2015-16. 
Recommendations (Para  No. 43)
Welfare of Ex-Servicemen
The Committee feel that Armed forces personnel getting retirement at very early age 
are national assets. It is and irony that they are not getting befitted status. The 
Committee have been apprised that almost fifty percent of Ex-Servicemen are 
rehabilitated in PSUs and private sector but still another fifty per cent need to be 
rehabilitated. The Committee in that regard, recommend that feasibility of absorbing 
them in para military forces, like BSF, should be explored at the highest level. The 
Committee feel that Ex-Serviceman are already trained personnel and they can be 
very useful if they are inducted into Para Military Forces. This will also reduce the 
“Pension Budget” of the Army.
Reply of the Government
There is a reservation of 20% in Group D and 10 % in Group C for ESM in all 
Central Government jobs, including in CAPFs. In CAPFs this reservation of 10 % 
has been made available to ESM upto the level of Asst. Commandant also. Thus the 
ESM have the option to join even in group A and group B posts in CAPFs as a direct 
recruit. However, as intimated by Ministry of Home Affairs, the existing ESM quota is 
not being filled up for want of willing/ eligible ESM.

74
CHAPTER IV
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF 
THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE AND 
WHICH REQUIRE REITERATION
Recommendation (Para No. 1 )
Capital Expenditure
The Committee observe that the Capital Expenditure has never remained under 
control. The Committee feel that the Capital Head invariably ends up with unutilized 
funds. During the year 2010-11 against the RE allocations of Rs.24266.79 crore, 
Army spent Rs. 23,625.42 crore. Similarly in the year 2011-12and 2012-13, Army 
could utilize Rs. 14,947.82 crore and Rs. 14760 crore against RE of Rs. 16005.69 
crore and 15749 crore. In case of Navy Rs. 17759.88 crore and Rs. 20338.85 crore 
could be utilized during the year2012-13 and 2013-14 against RE of Rs. 18266.42 
crore and Rs. 20418.98 crore respectively. Air Force too could utilize Rs. 23,625.42 
crore out of RE allocation of Rs. 24266.79 crore in the year 2010-2011. During the 
preceding financial year2014-15 the position of expenditure upto the end of February 
2015, in respectof Army, Navy and Air force is Rs. 14843.37 crore, Rs. 18439.02 
crore andRs. 29682.14 crore respectively against their RE of Rs. 21933.54 crore,Rs. 
18507.07 crore and Rs. 33710.68 crore respectively. Such underspending leads to a 
situation where the preparation of Defence Forces are nowhere near the target which 
are fixed and it becomes a fait accompli. The Committee areof the opinion that 
capital investment requires a certain period of time to materialize. A capital
investment cannot be completed in a financial year. A lot of studies are to be carried 
out which require the clearance from a number of agencies. The Committee, 
therefore, strongly recommend that Capital Allocation and Expenditure should be 
"Non-lapsable and Roll-on" allocation. It should be a part of plan expenditure and the 
progress should be monitored by a specialist, expert Committee to ensure that the 
time schedule is set and followed on various stages till the delivery of capital goods.
Reply of the Government
The utilisation of the Defence capital budget must be viewed in its entirety.  
Focussing only on a particular Service, or year, of under spending gives a distorted 
picture.  It is more appropriate to focus on under-spending, if any, under the capital 
budget as a whole rather than any one Service.  Under-spending by one Service is 
usually counter balanced by excess spending by another Service.  Thus, from the 
position of utilisation of the capital budget tabulated below, it may be seen that funds 
available have been fully utilised:
(in Rs.crores)
Year BE RE Actuals %age 
utilisation
2010-11 60,000.00 60,833.26 62,056.00 102.01
2011-12 69,198.81 66,143.81 67,902.38 102.65
2012-13 79,578.63 69,578.63 70,499.12 101.32
2013-14 86,740.71 78,872.23 79,125.05 100.32
2014-15 94,587.95 81,965.24 81,887.42 99.91

75
In view of the above, it is felt that no purpose is served by delineating the capital 
budget as “non-lapsable and roll-on” as on no occasion during the last five years 
were any surplus funds available for rolling over.
It is also felt that designation of Defence capital expenditure as plan expenditure 
would yield no benefit, especially since the distribution between `Plan’ and `Non-
Plan’ expenditure even in the civil side has been called into question with the 
winding-up of the Planning Commission.
It may also be noted that the progress of capital acquisition expenditure is monitored 
by the Acquisition Wing which is tasked with the responsibility of defence capital 
procurement, as well as by the Defence Acquisition Council headed by the Raksha 
Mantri.'
Recommendation (Para No. 2 )
The Committee have been apprised that Capital Outlay is in the ratio of 30:40:30 all 
over the world which means that out of the total Capital Outlay, the 30% has to be 
the category of state-of-the-art technology, 40% current and 30% for obsolescence. 
The Ministry of Defence is endeavouring to follow this standard pattern. The 
Committee feel that in order to achieve this standard ratio, we would have to not only 
enhance our capital outlay but also make it "Non-lapsable and Roll-on" as an urgent 
change in our Financial Policy. The major reason cited by the Defence Secretary for 
not adhering to this standard ratio was insufficient Capital Budget. The Defence 
Ministry officials have to make sincere efforts and ensure that the funds allocated are 
fully & efficiently utilized under respective heads.
The Committee are dismayed to note that there was underspending of Rs. 720.41 
crore during the years 2013-14 which lapsed! In respect of Army the underspending 
was Rs. 605.34 crore, in case of Air Force it was Rs. 93.49 crore while in case of 
Director General Ordnance Factories (DGOF), Defence Research and Development 
Organization (DRDO) and Directorate General of Quality Assurance (DGQA), it was 
Rs. 0.62 crore, Rs. 20.08 crore and Rs. 0.88 crore respectively. The Committee 
observed that barring Navy there was underspending in respect of each 
services/departments. The Committee therefore express their displeasure over this 
fact wants it to be examined and details reasons given to the Committee. The 
Committee also recommend that all out efforts should be made to curb 
underspending.
Reply of the Government
As stated in reply to Recommendation at serial no. 1, the position of utilisation of the 
budget must be viewed for the Demand as a whole.  In 2013-14, while minor under-
spending did occur in respect of Final Estimates of Army, Air Force, DGOF, DRDO 
and DGQA, this was balanced by overspending by other agencies and there was no 
surrender of funds.  This is clearly brought out below:
(inRs.crores)
BE RE Actuals % age utilisation
86,740.71 78,872.23 79,125.05 100.32%
The Committee may rest assured that all efforts will continue to be made to 
ensurethat available funds are fully utilised.

76
Recommendations (Para  No. 4)
Defence Procurement Procedure
The Committee observed that the Capital allocation for Air Force has been reduced 
during the current financial year.  It is also observed that the deal of 126 aircraft with 
the French based Rafale Company could not be finalised.  The Committee feel that 
all these attribute to long gestation period of Defence Procurement Procedure.
Reply of the Government
The Capital budget allocation for Indian Air Force has increased to Rs.33685.75 
Crore in 2015-16 from Rs.31627.39 Crore in 2014-15.  The case for procurement of 
126 Medium Multi Role Combat Aircraft (MMRCA) for which Acceptance of Necessity 
(AoN) was accorded on 29 th June, 2007 has remained inconclusive.  Capital 
Acquisitions have long gestation periods.  However, all Capital Procurements for the 
armed forces are carried out in accordance with the guidelines laid down in the 
Defence Procurement Procedure (DPP).  Government constantly monitors the 
progress of schemes ensure to that Defence preparedness is maintained at all time 
and constantly reviews the security environment so that IAF is fully equipped to meet 
the security challenges.'
Recommendation (Para No. 5)
The Committee have been apprised that Defence Procurement Procedure is 
changed every two years.  The last change was made at the end of May 2013 and by 
the end of May 2015 a change shall be due in the procedure.  As the Defence 
Secretary submitted before the Committee that four major issues are going to be 
changed in the revised procedure.  The Committee hope that the new Defence 
Procurement Procedure shall plug the loopholes in the existing policy and make it 
more productive without time and cost overrun. The new procedure envisages the 
tackling of the complaints without any hindrance in the procurement.  The new policy 
should be drafted in such a fashion that procurement is not hampered. While 
appreciating the reforms proposed to be brought out in the Defence Procurement 
Procedure, the Committee note that the Offset Policy should envisage 30% 
indigenous production by the importer in India and Transfer of Technology (ToT).  
The Committee also recommend the immense potential and capability already 
available in the field of “Reverse Engineering” in our Country.  These could be 
utilized where very high degree of expertise or technology is not required.  The 
Committee feel that instead of investing in those areas which are of not much 
significance, the offset policy should lay stress on Transfer of Technology, 
indigenization and Intellectual Property Right (IPR).  The Committee are of the 
opinion that if the IPR is obtained by the money invested by the Government then 
part sharing of profit shall be there and in case the foreign company decides to 
discontinue then IPR shall be reverted to the Government.  The Committee, 
therefore, recommend that revised Defence Procurement Procedure shall include all 
these things and Committee shall be apprised about the more efficient procurement 
in coming months.  

77
Reply of the Government
As noted by the Hon’ble Committee, a number of initiatives have been taken to 
address issues relating to Defence Procurements.
MoD has recently constituted a Committee of Experts to evolve a policy framework to 
facilitate “Make in India”, align it with the DPP and suggest requisite amendments to 
DPP-2013.  The Offset policy is also under review.
For comments of the Committee on the replies of the Government on Para 
Nos. 4 & 5 please see Para No.15 & 16 of Chapter- I.
Recommendation (Para No. 7)
Border Roads Organisation (BRO)
The public at large specially those living in border States, have great expectation 
from Border Roads Organisation. The expeditious movement of troops depend upon 
good quality roads capable of withstanding the climatic condition of the region. This 
can only be achieved if BRO is provided adequate funds to carry out its functions 
smoothly. The Committee are disappointed that such an important area had been 
neglected by the Government over a period of time. BRO which was founded as a 
“Force”, viz General Reserve Engineer Force (GREF), by the first Prime Minister of 
the Country and headed by him, which enabled it to take major decisions promptly 
and resulting in creation of very effective and efficient GREF (now BRO).  It lost its 
sheen since then, as Border Roads Development Board (BRDB) is now headed by a 
Minister of State.  It is observed from the statistics that paucity of funds has always 
been there in the BRO.  However, the Committee are happy and have some solace 
that BRO has been transferred from Ministry of Road and Surface Transport to 
Ministry of Defence.  However, this can not be panacea for all the maladies to which 
BRO has been struggling since long. The Committee, therefore, recommend 
Government to provide ample amount of money to BRO and there should not be 
budget cut since north-East Projects in particular suffer when funds are withdrawn 
every year during working season (last quarter). The Committee also recommend 
that BRDB should be headed by Defence Minister instead of Minister of State for 
Defence.
Reply of the Government
In order to improve the operational efficiency of BRO and achieve clarity and unity of 
command, Government of India (Allocation of Business rules 1961) has been 
amended vide notification dated 9 th January 2015 to include ‘all matters relating to 
Border Roads Development Board and Border Roads Organisation (BRO)’ in the list 
of business allocated to Ministry of Defence. Further, the budget allocation from 
Budget Estimate (BE) 2015-16 onwards for BRO has been done under Ministry of 
Defence (Demand No 21). For BRO the allocation of funds for IS 2015-16 under Non 
Plan (NP) is Rs 3030.57 crores and under Plan is Rs 450.00 crores.  The details of 
demand versus allocation of funds for BE 2015-16 is given below:

78
SrlNo Major Head Demand  (Rs in 
Crores)
Allotment  (Rs in Crores)
Non Plan
i 2052 456.13 372.57
ii 3054 895.18 736.00
iii 5054 2104.69 1922.00
Total 4056.00 3030.57
Plan
i 3601 50.00 45.00
ii 5054 400.00 360.00
iii 2552 - 5.00
iv 4552 - 40.00
Total 450.00 450.00
G/Total (Non Plan 
and Plan)
4506.00 3480.57
2. Further, a proposal for additional funds under Non plan for BE 2015-16 
amounting to Rs 1096 Crs for BRO has been submitted to MoD (Fin) on 24 June 
2015 for inclusion under the first batch of supplementary Demands for Grants to 
be considered during the current monsoon session of the Parliament.
Recommendation (Para  No. 8)
The Committee observed that BRO faces a lot of difficulty in acquisition of land and 
forest clearance.  After the takeover of BRO by the Ministry of Defence, it is felt that 
these problems would be mitigated to a large extent.  In this regard, the Committee 
recommend that an empowered committee consisting of Defence Secretary and 
Chief Secretary of the concerned State should constituted to settle the issues 
pertaining to land acquisition and forest clearance expeditiously as the country’s 
security cannot be compromised.  The committee therefore recommends that both 
Defence Secretary and Chief Secretary of the State concerned sit together and 
resolve the issues without any delay.
Reply of the Government
Border Roads Organization (BRO) is entrusted with the construction/development of 
Strategic Roads in the border areas. For the construction/development of these 
Strategic Roads, Environment clearances, Wildlife and Forest Clearance within 
Reserve Forests, Wild Life Sanctuaries and Protected Areas is required to be 

79
obtained. In addition, there are also delays caused due to protracted procedures 
involved in Land Acquisition cases.
2. Environmental, Forest and Wildlife Clearance: As per Ministry of Environment 
and Forest (MoEF) notification dated 12 Aug 2013 “expansion of National Highway 
projects upto 100 kms involving additional right of way of land acquisition up to 40 
mtrs on existing alignments and 60 mtrs on realignments or by passes are exempted 
from environmental clearances”. At present no Environmental clearance cases are 
pending in respect of road projects under taken by Border Roads Organisation 
(BRO). 
3. The following measures have been taken by the Government to expedite the 
various clearances:
(a) State Governments of Arunachal Pradesh, Assam, J&K, Himachal Pradesh, 
Manipur, Nagaland, Sikkim, Tripura and Uttarakhand have been requested to 
constitute an Empowered Committee under their Chairmanship with Principal 
Secretaries of Revenue, Forest, Mining, PWD and Power Departments along with the 
PCCF and Chief Engineers of BRO as members to resolve issues. States of Sikkim, 
Arunachal Pradesh, J&K, Himachal Pradesh and Tripura have constituted the 
Empowered Committee.
(b) A working group has been constituted on 03 June 2013 by Ministry of 
Environment & Forest under the chairmanship of Secretary MoEF to review the forest 
clearance cases.
(c) Regular monitoring of forest clearance cases, establishment of Single window 
system at District, State, and Ministry of Environment & Forest (MoEF) levels and 
simplification of forms.
(d)  MoEF vide letter dated 27 Apr 2011 in the States Arunachal Pradesh, 
Himachal Pradesh, Jammu & Kashmir, Uttarakhand and Sikkim has accorded 
Exemption of Compliance of Scheduled Tribe and other Forest Dwellers (Recognition 
of Forest Rights) Act 2006 to avoid delay in clearance of road projects. 
(e) MoEF letter dated 09 Dec 2013 in the State of Uttarakhand State has 
accorded exemption for transfer and mutation of alternate Revenue Land for raising 
compensatory Afforestation for border roads.
(f) Requirement of certificate regarding non availability of alternate alignment has 
been dispensed with for BRO projects by MoEF vide their order dated 09 Dec 2013.
(g) Permission for processing division wise cases of BRO projects have been 
accorded by MoEF vide their order dated 09 Dec 2013.
(h) MoEF  vide their letter No 11-246/2014-FC dated 4 th July 2014 has accorded 
general approval under Section (2) of the Forest (Conservation) Act 1980 for 
diversion of forest land in the state of Arunachal Pradesh, Himachal Pradesh,  
Uttarakhand & Sikkim for following :-
(i) Construction and widening of two lane roads by the BRO and other 
road construction agencies entrusted with the job by the Ministry of Defence, 
in the area falling within 100km kilometers aerial distance from the LAC and
(ii) widening of road (by the BRO and other road construction agencies) 
which are identified by the Ministry of Defence as link roads between Border 

80
Roads in the area within 100 kilometer aerial distance from the LAC and 
National Highways/State Highways/other State Roads, subject to fulfillment of 
the conditions. 
(j) MoEF vide their letter No.11-246/2014-FC dated 4th July 2014 for the States 
of Arunachal Pradesh, Himachal Pradesh, Uttarakhand and Sikkim has decided to 
extent the said relaxation to strategic defence projects (including infra-structure and 
road projects) being taken up in the area falling within 100 km aerial distance from 
the Line of Actual Control by any user agency identified by the Ministry of Defence 
which provides that compensatory afforestation in lieu of the forest land diverted for 
compensatory afforestation may be raised on degraded forest land twice in extent of 
forest area being diverted, without insisting of certificate of Chief Secretary regarding 
non –availability of non- forest for compensatory afforestation, inter –alia it was 
informed that the compensatory afforesation will be raised and maintained at the cost 
of the user agency over degraded forest land equal in extent to the area of forest 
land diverted. 
(k) MoEF vide their letter dated 8 th Aug 2014 has intimated that      in-principle 
approval under the Forest (Conservation) Act 1980 may be deemed as the working 
permission for tree cutting and commencement of work, if the required funds for 
compensatory afforestation, NPV, wildlife conservation plan, plantation of dwarf 
species of medicinal plants, and all such other compensatory levies specified in the 
in–principle approval are realized from the user agency. 
4. In addition to above the following measures have been taken by BRO to expedite 
the forest clearances:
(a) Appointment of Nodal Officer: Project wise Nodal Officers have been 
appointed and details are uploaded on BRO website       ( www.bro.gov.in) for the 
coordination with the State Principal Chief Conservator of Forest (PCCF) and 
Regional Offices of MoEF.
(b) Filing of Interlocutory Application (IA): IAs have been filed with Hon’ble 
Supreme Court for the following roads:-
(i) Kupur-TrJn
(ii) Bagphool-Kalijhora
(iii) Flag Hill-Dokhal
(c) Filing of early hearing petition has been submitted to Ministry of Law and 
application filed with Hon’ble Supreme Court on 06 Apr 2015. 
(d) General application in Hon’ble Supreme Court: A general application has 
been filed in Hon’ble Supreme Court  for exempting BRO from filing case to case 
basis Interlocutory Application in respect of road projects falling within protected 
areas and to grant clearance by MoEF after getting approval from Standing 
Committee on National Board for wild life clearance. Hon’ble Supreme Court has 
referred the matter to Chief Empowered Committee (CEC) for their comments.
For comments of the Committee please see Para Nos. 25 & 26 of Chapter- I.

81
Recommendation (Para No. 11 )
The Committee note with concern that funds for BRO are released at a late stage. 
When there is conductive working season to carry out the work, the funds are not 
released. On the contrary, in Ladakh Region, North-Eastern Region, Uttarakhand 
and Himachal Pradesh, funds are released at the time of onset of winter. During that 
period it is very difficult to carry out the work and as a result, the funds remain 
unutilized. As admitted by the Defence Secretary at the time of oral evidence, snow 
clearance grant had been a problem, It is imperative in this regard that grants are 
released well before the onset of winter. The Committee also recommend that the 
funds which remain un-utilized due to hostile climatic condition may be carried 
forward for the next working session.
Reply of the Government
At the Revised Estimate (RE) stage, Ministry of Finance revises the allocation of 
budget based on the actual expenditure incurred in the current financial year and as 
per the guidelines issued from time to time for austerity measures. 
During this FY 2015-16, an amount of Rs 3030 crores under Non plan has been 
allotted against the BE demand of Rs 4056 of BRO. At the time of budget allocation 
to BRO for RE 2014-15 and BE 2015-16 during January 2015, a case was taken up 
by Hon’ble RM with Hon’ble Finance Minister for allocation of Rs 4056 crores under 
GS Non Plan for BE 2015-16 to BRO. Further, again a proposal to enhance the 
allotment of funds under Non Plan for BE 2015-16 amounting to Rs 1096 Crs for 
BRO has been submitted to MoF through MoD (Fin) on 24 June 2015 for inclusion 
under the first batch of supplementary Demands for Grants to be considered during 
the monsoon session of the Parliament.
With a view to improve the quality of maintenance, DGBR has been delegated 
powers to fix rates for maintenance, snow clearance grants and outsourcing of 
Maintenance. Details of funds allotted by DGBR for road maintenance/ snow 
clearance during this financial year 2015-16 is given as under:-
Allotment
(a) General Staff (GS) Roads : 610.00 Cr
(b) MoRT&H Roads : 140.00 Cr
Total : 750.00 Cr
For comments of the Committee on the replies of the Government on Para 
Nos. 7 & 11 please see Para Nos. 22 & 22 of Chapter- I.

82
Recommendation (Para No. 24 )
Indian Coast Guard (ICG)
It has been observed that the Ministry of finance has allocated less money to ICG 
than demanded by the Ministry of Defence.  In the year 2014-15, against BE of Rs. 
1550 crore, RE was Rs. 1140 crore. For Capital expenditure only Rs. 1200 crore 
were given against the demand of Rs. 2150 crore. As stated by the Defence 
Secretary that the money allocated for the year 2015-16 would be exhaust in just six 
months, a revisit is required to enhance the budget to ward off any incident like 
26/11.
Reply of the Government
This Ministry projected funds to the tune of Rs. 2050.00 crore in Capital section for 
Budget Estimates- 2015-16 to Ministry of Finance for consideration. Whereas, 
Ministry of Finance allocated only Rs. 1200.00 crore in Capital section for BE-2015-
16.  Moreover, ICG has intimated that the carryover liability of FY 2014-15 is Rs. 
675.00 crore due to cut imposed by Ministry of Finance in allocation of RE 2014-15 
stage. 
Further, ICG has intimated that in view of progress of various new schemes on 
reassessment it is found that the fund requirement against Capital head is Rs. 
4225.00 crore. Hence, resultant shortfall in allocation for FY 2015-16 is nearly Rs. 
3000.00 crore. Accordingly, ICG has requested to place an immediate requirement 
of Rs. 1700.00 crore under Capital head in the First Batch of Supplementary for the 
Year 2015-16 in order to enable meeting the requirement till the stage of RE-2015-
16. Requirement of further additional funds, if any, will be reviewed at RE 15-16 
stage. 
As per the requirement of ICG, a demand of Rs. 1700.00 crore under Capital 
Section in r/o Coast Guard Organisation has been forwarded by this Ministry to 
Ministry of Finance for inclusion of the same into the statement of First Batch of 
Supplementary demands for the FY 2015-16 for the approval of Parliament.
For comments of the Committee please see Para No. 42 of Chapter- I.
Recommendations (Para  No. 48)
One Rank One Pension 
The Committee note that One Rank One Pension (OROP) implies that uniform 
pension be paid to the Armed Forces Personnel retiring in the same rank with the 
same length of Service, irrespective of their date of retirement and any future 
enhancement in the rates of pension to be automatically passed on to the past 
pensioners. This will bridge the gap between the rate of pension of the current 
pensioners, the past pensioners, and also future enhancements. The Committee 
note that a Working Group under the Chairpersonship of Controller General of 
Defence accounts (CGDA) was constituted for examining the proposal submitted by 
the Services and preparing Government orders for implementation of OROP w.e.f. 
01.04.2014. While examining the subject, the Committee found that subsequent to 

83
the announcement of the Government’s acceptance in principle of One Rank One 
Pension for the Defence forces, in BE 2014-15, Rs. 51,000 crore was allocated for 
Defence pensions including an allocation of Rs. 1000 Crore for implementation of
OROP. However, in RE 2014-15 the allocation for Defence persons was reduced to 
Rs.50, 000 crore. The implementation of OROP was referred to a Committee of 
Secretaries by the Government. Raksha Rajya Mantri (RRM) also convened a 
meeting on 09.01.2015 to discuss the matter with the representatives of the three 
Services, CGDA, Defence (Finance) and Directorate of Ex-Servicemen Welfare 
(DESW). The matter was further discussed by Raksha Mantri with officials of DESW, 
Defence (Finance), CGDA and representatives of the three Services in meeting held 
on 16.02.2015. However, the modalities for implementation of OROP are yet to be 
finalized. The Working Group could not arrive at any consensus and the modalities 
for implementation of OROP are still under consideration.
Recommendations (Para  No. 49)
The Committee regret that even after Hon’ble Prime Minister had made a 
commitment and the Finance Minister had provided Rs. 1000 crore in BE 2014-15 
budget, the OROP has not been implemented. In this regard, it is further observed 
that this issue has been protracted for considerably long passage of time and it is 
beyond the understanding of the Committee as to what reasons are preventing the 
Government from making necessary decisions and arriving at a solution. In view of
the Committee, it is of utmost importance that requisite modalities are sorted out and 
an amicable solution is brought out with regard to OROP within stringent timeframe 
at the earliest. It is needless to say that the Committee be intimated about the 
progress made in this regard.
Recommendations (Para  No. 50)
Alongwith the implementation of OROP, it is equally pertinent that all the targeted 
beneficiaries receive their dues in accordance with the newly formulated guidelines. 
In this regard, there should be a redressal mechanism in place so as to ensure that 
any kind of anomalies are sorted out without delay, as the Ex-Service personnel 
have already been waiting for long time to receive their dues. One of the methods 
could be uploading the calculating formulae website intending to ensure that they 
transparently reach the receivers’ end with all clarity. The steps taken in this regard 
should be intimated to the Committee.
Reply of the Government on Para No. 48, 49 & 50
The modalities for implementation of One Rank One Pension are still under active 
consideration of the Government.

84
CHAPTER V
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL 
REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED
- NIL -
New Delhi;                          Maj Gen  B C Khanduri, AVSM (Retd),  
08 January, 2016 Chairperson,            
18 Pausa, 1937 (Saka)             Standing Committee on Defence

85
APPENDIX - I
STANDING COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE (2015-16)
MINUTES OF THE SEVENTH SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE  
ON DEFENCE (2015-16)
The Committee sat on Friday, the 08th January, 2016  from 1430 hrs. to 1700 
hrs. in Main Committee Room, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Maj Gen B C Khanduri, AVSM (Retd) - Chairperson
LOK SABHA
2. Shri Dharambir 
3. Shri Thupstan Chhewang 
4. Col Sonaram Choudhary(Retd)
5. Shri Sher Singh Ghubaya
6. Shri G  Hari 
7. Shri Ramesh Jigajinagi
8. Shri Tapas Paul
9. Shri A P  Jithender Reddy
10. Smt  Pratyusha Rajeshwari Singh
RAJYA SABHA
11. Shri Anand Sharma
12. Shri Harivansh
13. Shri Vinay Katiyar
14. Shri Madhusudan Mistry
15. Smt  Ambika Soni
16. Shri Tarun Vijay
SECRETARIAT
1. Smt  Kalpana Sharma - Joint Secretary
2. Smt  J M Sinha - Additional Director
3. Shri Rahul Singh - Under Secretary

86
WITNESSES
REPRESENTATIVES OF THE MINISTRY OF DEFENCE
S No Name Designation
1. Shri Ashok Kumar Gupta Secretary(DP)
2. Smt Surina Rajan AS(DP)
3. Lt Gen MMS Rai VCOAS
4. Air Marshal B S Dhanoa VCAS
5. Lt Gen Ravi Thodge MGO
6. Lt Gen A K Ahuja DCIDS (PP&FD)
7. Dr S Christopher Secretary (R&D)
8. Smt Bharat Khera JS(NS)
9. Smt Kusum Singh JS(P&C)
10. Shri K K Pant JS(Aero)
11. Shri Sanjay Prasad JS(LS)
12. Shri V Udaya Bhaskar CMD, BDL
13. Dr T Suvarna Raju CMD, HAL
14. Shri S K Sharma CMD, BEL
15. RAdm LV Sarat Babu(Retd) CMD, HSL
16. Shri P Dwarakanath CMD, BEML
17. RAdm Shekhar Mital(Retd) CMD, GSL
18. RAdm A K Verma(Retd) CMD; GRSE
19. Dr. D K Likhi CMD, MIDHANI
20. RAdm R K Shrawat (Retd) CMD, MDL
21. AVM BR Krishna ACAS (Proj)
22. RAdm Dinesh K Tripathi ACNS (P&P)
23. Dr Sudershan Kumar Chief Controller (PC and SI)
24. Shri G S Mallik Chief Controller (R&M and Imp)
25. Dr G Athithan Chief Controller (SAM)
26. Dr C P Ramanarayanan Director General (ACE)
27. Dr J P Singh Director, Parliamentary Affairs
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members of the Committee and 
informed them about the agenda for the sitting.  
3. The Committee then took up for consideration the  following  draft reports:-
(i) Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations 
contained in the Second Report of the Standing Committee on 
Defence(16th Lok Sabha)  on 'Demands for Grants (2014-15) of the 
Ministry on Defence on General Defence Budget (Demand Nos. 20, 21 
and 27)'; 
(ii) Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations 
contained in the Sixth Report of the Standing Committee on Defence(16th 
Lok Sabha)  on 'Demands for Grants (2015-16) of the Ministry of Defence 
on 'Civil Expenditure of the Ministry of Defence and Capital Outlay on 
Defence Services ( Demand Nos. 21, 22 and 28)';

87
(iii) Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations 
contained in the Eighth Report of the Standing Committee on 
Defence(16th Lok Sabha)  on 'Demands for Grants (2015-16) of the 
Ministry of Defence on Navy and Air Force (Demand Nos. 24 and 25)'; and
(iv) Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations 
contained in the Ninth Report of the Standing Committee on Defence(16th 
Lok Sabha) on 'Demands for Grants (2015-16) of the Ministry of Defence
on 'Defence on Ordnance Factories and Defence Research and 
Development Organisation (Demand Nos. 26 And 27)'.
4. After deliberations, the Committee adopted the above Reports without any 
modifications. The Committee, then, authorised the Chairperson to present the reports 
to Hon'ble Speaker under  Direction 71(A) of directions by the Speaker and 
subsequently present the same to Parliament during the coming Budget  Session.
5. The Committee then invited representatives of the Ministry of Defence,   
Defence Public Sector Undertakings and Defence Research and Development 
Organisation. After welcoming the representatives to the Sitting of the Committee, the 
Chairperson drew their attention to Directions 55(1)  and 58 of the Directions by the 
Speaker, Lok Sabha regarding confidentiality of proceedings.  
6. After the witness introduced themselves,  the representatives of the Ministry of 
Defence made Power Point Presentation and briefed the Committee on the main 
issues viz. value of production of all the DPSUs from 2012-13 to 2014-15 and profit 
thereof, total expenditure on R&D, saving in foreign exchange because of inputs 
substitution, saving because of outsourcing, R&D set up and salient features, major 
R&D products, future plans and initiatives taken to promote import substitution by all 
the DPSUs.   

88
The Chairperson and Members of the Committee raised several issues/points 
as briefly mentioned below:
i. Steps taken to encourage DPSUs to come out with their R&D Policy;
ii. Need to develop and construct/produce helicopters, Aircraft, Submarines 
and Ships to maintain supremacy of the Forces;
iii. Quantum and category  of items indigenized  by DPSUs for the Forces;
iv. Need to enhance production of defence equipments leading to import 
substitution by DPSUs;
v. Progress of the 'Make in India' initiative and impact on the Defence 
Industry;
vi. Time taken from conceptualization stage to actual production;
vii. Fulfilling the requirement of the Forces by the Indian  Defence Industry 
including DPSUs;
viii. Non-availability of Bullet Proof Jackets (BPJs);
ix. Cut in licensing list to the tune of 70 percent;
x. Reasons for withdrawal of special dispensation given to the DPSUs like 
Nomination facility, excise duty, import duty, custom duty etc.; 
xi. Reasons for inexplicable delay in construction of Scorpene submarines;
xii. Reasons for non-satisfaction by the Army of the product 'Arjun Tank' and 
'Dhruv' Helicopters etc.
7.  The representatives of the Ministry of the Defence then responded to the 
queries raised by the Members.  The Chairperson directed the representatives of the 
Ministry to furnish written replies/information on the points raised by the Members at an 
early date, which was assured by the representatives.
The witnesses then withdrew
8. A copy of verbatim record of the proceedings has been kept.
The Committee then adjourned.

89
APPENDIX II
ANALYSIS OF THE ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS CONTAINED IN THE SIXTH REPORT OF 
THE COMMITTEE (SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA) ON DEMANDS FOR GRANTS
(2015-16) OF THE MINISTRY ON DEFENCE ON CIVIL EXPENDITURE OF THE 
MINISTRY OF DEFENCE AND CAPITAL OUTLAY ON DEFENCE SERVICES & 
DEMAND NO. 21, 22 AND 28)
1. Total number of recommendations 50
2. Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted by the Government 
(please see Chapter II):
Para Nos. 3, 6, 9, 10, 14, 15, 16, 18, 19, 20, 21, 22, 23, 27, 28, 30, 31, 32, 33, 
34, 35, 36, 37, 38, 39, 40, 41, 42, 44, 45, 46, 47
Total :      32
Percentage:   64 %   
3. Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do not desire to pursue in view 
of the replies received from the Government (please see Chapter III):
Para No. 12, 13, 17, 25, 26, 29, 43
Total :        07
Percentage: 14 %
4. Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of Government have not 
been accepted by the Committee which require reiteration and commented upon 
(please see Chapter IV):
Para No. 1, 2, 4, 5, 7, 8, 11, 24, 48, 49, 50     
Total :       11
Percentage:    22 %
5. Recommendations/Observations in respect of which Government have furnished 
interim replies (please see Chapter V):
-Nil- Total :    Nil 
Percentage:   0%