1 
 
 
 
12 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE 
(2015-2016) 
 
(SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
MINISTRY OF DEFENCE 
 
 
[Action taken by the Government on the observations / recommendations contained in the 
Fourth Report of the Committee (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants(2014-15) of 
the Ministry of Defence on Navy and Air Force(Demand Nos. 23 & 24)] 
 
 
TWELFTH REPORT 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
December, 2015/ Agrahayana, 1937 (Saka) 
 


2 
 
TWELFTH REPORT 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE 
(2015-2016) 
  
(SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
MINISTRY OF DEFENCE 
 
 
[Action taken by the Government on the observations / recommendations contained in the 
Fourth Report of the Committee (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants(2014-15) of 
the Ministry of Defence on Navy and Air Force(Demand Nos. 23 & 24)] 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on   16.12.2015 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on   16.12.2015 
 
 
 
  
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
December, 2015/ Agrahayana, 1937 (Saka) 
  


3 
 
CONTENTS 
            
PAGE. 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE(2015-16).……………………….....…...........           4  
INTRODUCTION..…………………………………………………….….…..................             6 
 
CHAPTER I Report………………………………………………………………….......          7 
       
 
CHAPTER II a) Observations/Recommendations which have been  
  accepted by the Government ……………………………………..          23 
 
 b) Observations/Recommendations which have been  
  accepted by the Government and commented upon....................        31 
 
CHAPTER III Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not 
 desire to pursue in view of the replies received from the Government ..      41     
 
CHAPTER IV Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies  
 of Government have not been accepted by the Committee  
 which require reiteration and commented upon ………………….…......       42 
 
CHAPTER V Observations/Recommendations in respect of which  
 Government have furnished interim replies………………………........          43 
 
 
APPENDICES 
 
  I      Minutes of the sixth sitting of the Standing Committee on 
                  Defence (2015-16) held on 1012.2015.………………...................        44 
 
  II     Analysis of Action Taken by the Government on the  
         Observations/Recommendations   contained   in the Fourth 
   Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee  
   on Defence (2015-16)......................................................................      46 
   
 
 
 
 
 

4 
 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE (2015-16) 
 
Maj Gen B C Khanduri, AVSM (Retd)  -  Chairperson 
 
 
Members 
 
Lok Sabha 
 
 
2. Shri Suresh C. Angadi 
3. Shri Shrirang Appa Barne 
4. Shri Dharambir  
5. Shri Thupstan Chhewang 
6. Col Sonaram Choudhary(Retd) 
7. Shri H.D. Devegowda 
8. Shri Sher Singh Ghubaya 
9. Shri G. Hari  
10. Shri Ramesh Jigajinagi 
11. Dr. Murli Manohar Joshi 
12. Km. Shobha Karandlaje 
13. Shri Vinod Khanna 
14. Dr. Mriganka Mahato 
15. Shri Tapas Paul 
16. Shri Ch. Malla Reddy  
17. Shri Rajeev Satav 
18. Smt. Mala Rajya Lakshmi Shah 
19. Capt  Amarinder Singh(Retd) 
20. Shri A.P. Jithender Reddy 
21. Smt. Pratyusha Rajeshwari Singh 
 
Rajya Sabha 
 
1. Shri K. R. Arjunan 
2. Shri Anand Sharma 
3. Shri Rajeev Chandrasekhar 
4. Shri A.U. Singh Deo 
5. Shri Harivansh 
6. Shri Vinay Katiyar 
7. Shri Hishey Lachungpa 
8. Shri Madhusudan Mistry 
9. Smt. Ambika Soni 
10. Shri Tarun Vijay 

5 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Smt. Kalpana Sharma  - Joint Secretary 
2.        T.G. Chandrasekhar  - Director 
3.  Smt. Jyochanamayi Sinha  - Additional Director 
4. Shri Rahul Singh   - Under Secretary 
5. Smt. Rekha Sinha   - Executive Assistant 
 
  

6 
 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
I, the Chairperson of the Standing Committee on Defence (2015 -16), having been 
authorised by the Committee to submit the report on their behalf, present this Twelfth report 
on `Acti on Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations contained in 
the Fourth Report of the Standing Committee on Defence(16th Lok Sabha)  on Demands for 
Grants of the Ministry of Defence for the year 2014 -15 on Navy and Air Force (Demand Nos. 
23 & 24)'. 
 
2.       The  Fourth  Report was  presented  to Lok  Sabha and  laid  in  Rajya  Sabha   on 
22.12.2014.  It contained  19 Observations/Recommendations.  The  Ministry  of Defence 
furnished Action  Taken Replies on  all  the Observations/Recommendations in August 2015. 
 
3.  The Report was considered and adopted by the Committee at their Sitting held on 
10.12.2015. 
 
4.  For facility of reference and convenience, Observations/Recommendations of the 
Committee have been printed in bold letters in the Report. 
 
5. An analysis of  action taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Fourth Report of Standing Committee on 
Defence (16th Lok Sabha) is given in Appendix II. 
 
 
 
New Delhi;                                                                  Maj Gen  B C Khanduri, AVSM (Retd),   
11 December, 2015                         Chairperson,  
20 Agrahayana, 1937 (Saka)                                              Standing Committee on Defence 
 
 
 
 

7 
 
CHAPTER – I 
 REPORT 
 This report of the Standing Committee on Defence deals with Action Taken by the 
Government on observations/recommendations contained in the Fourth Report of Standing 
Committee on Defence (16th Lok Sabha) on ' Demands for Grants of Ministry of Defence for 
the year 2014 -15 on  Navy and Air Force (Demand Nos. 23 & 24)'  which was presented to 
Lok Sabha and laid in Rajya Sabha on  22 December, 2014.   
2. The Committee's Fourth Report (16th Lok Sabha) contained 19 
observations/recommendations on the following aspects :- 
Para No./Nos. Subject 
 
Navy 
 
1, 2 & 3 Budgetary Provisions for Navy 
4 & 5 Force Level 
6 Accidents 
7 & 8 Manpower and Training 
Air force 
 
9  Capital Budget 
10 & 11 Revenue Budget 
12 & 13 Squadron Strengh 
14 Speedy Procurement 
15 & 16 Training 
17 Serviceability 
18 Manpower 
19 Modernisation of Air Bases 
 
3. Action Taken Replies have been received from the Government in respect of all the 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS contained in the Report.  The replies have been  
examined and categorised as follows :- 

8 
 
(a)  Observations/recommendations which have been accepted by the Government: 
 
  Para Nos. 2, 3, 4, 7,8, 11, 14, 17, 18 
(09 Recommendations) 
 
 These may be included in Chapter II of the Draft Report. 
(b) Observations/recommendations which have been accepted by the      
Government and are commented upon: 
 Para Nos. 1, 5 , 6, 10, 12, 13, 15, 16,  19 
( 09 Recommendations) 
  
 These may be included in Chapter II of the Draft Report. 
 
(ii)   Observations/recommendations  which the  Committee do not desire to pursue 
in view of the replies received from the Government: 
 Para No. Nil 
(00 Recommendations) 
 This may be mentioned in Chapter III of the Draft Report. 
 
(iii)  Observations/recommendations in respect of which replies of    Government 
have not been accepted by the Committee which require reiteration and 
commented upon: 
 Para No. 9 
 
(01 Recommendation) 
           This may be included in Chapter IV of the Draft Report. 
                    
(iv) Observations/recommendations in respect of which Government have furnished 
interim replies: 
  
 Para No.  Nil 
(00 Recommendation) 
 This may be mentioned   in Chapter V of the Draft Report. 
 

9 
 
4. The Committee desire that the Ministry’s response to their comments made in 
Chapter 1 of this Report to be furnished to them at the earliest and in any case not 
later than six months of the presentation of this Report.  
A Budgetary provisions for Navy 
 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 1) 
 
 
5. The Committee had recommended as under :- 
 
' The Committee note that although Navy had projected an amount of Rs.19,570.57 
crore as budgetary allocation for 2014 -15, it has been allocated an  amount of Rs. 
13,975.79 crore, which amounts to a shortfall of Rs. 5,594.78 crore i.e. nearly 1/3rd of 
the projected amount. The Committee also note that the Revenue Budget shortfall 
mainly  affects `Other than Salary’ heads where the projection  of Navy was to the tune 
of Rs. 11,662 crore while allocation is made of Rs. 6,921.30 crore, hence only 59%  of 
the money   solicited. This is the 6th successive year of lesse r allocation under `Other 
than Salary’  segment.  During evidence,  the officials of Indian Navy submitted that 
there is a  need for additional fund s under Revenue H ead to meet day -to-day 
requirements of Operational Deployments  (including Anti -Piracy Patrols) and Coastal 
Security. In addition, requirement of S tores (Fuel, Weapons, Armament, Spares), 
Victualling and Ra tions,  Repairs and Refits also needed. Hence,  there is an  
immediate requirement of Rs. 1884 crore. Therefore, the Committee   recommend that 
the requirement of N avy for additional funds under Revenue H ead should be looked 
into and the Committee be informed about the same. ' 
 
6. The Ministry in its Action Taken Reply has stated as under :- 
 
 'The requirement of additional funds for non-Salary Revenue Expenditure for the Navy 
during 2014 -15 has been submitted to the Ministry of Finance in the RE 2014 -15 
projections.' 
  
7. The Committee observes that the amount that has been sought from Ministry of 
Finance for non -salary revenue expenditure of Navy during the year 2014 -15 has not 
been communicated . The Committee  would also like to know  the additional funds 
alloted to Navy and whether the amount so received by the Navy at RE stage has been 
utilised fully or not.  This may be informed by the Ministry in their Action Taken Notes. 
 
 

10 
 
B. Force Level 
Recommendation (Para No. 5) 
 
8. The Committee had recommended as under :- 
'According to DAC 2012, the sanctioned strength of vessels  for Navy includes 
submarines,  ships, aircraft carriers, etc. Some projects such as  P 15 A, P28, Indian 
Aircraft Carrier (IAC), P75 and P75(I) are  streamlined  and under progress at various 
shipyards in the country. However, the  Committee are worried about regular delays 
and cost  overruns occurring in different projects. In case of IAC, the original 
sanctioned cost was Rs. 3 ,261 crore which  has been revised to Rs. 19,341 crore i.e. 
six times c ost escalation. In case of P15A,  the cost  has been revised to Rs. 11662   
crore from Rs. 3,580 crore and dates have been  revised  from  2009 -10  to  2015 -16.  
The Committee  feel that there have been long  delays and cost overruns in almost all 
the acquisition activities. Similarly, in case of aircraft carrier  `Vikramaditya’, there had 
been huge cost escalation due to repeated  time extensions. These time and cost 
overruns in almost all the  projects is a major cause of concern. For long, country’s 
defence needs have been lying unattended and huge gaps have emerged in Force 
Level. It’s  high time that adequate budgetary support is made along with necessary 
operational reforms at shipyards and other construction  sites. The Committee desire 
that  appropri ate action be  taken by the authorities concerned so that high valued 
projects should not be affected by time and  cost overruns. The  measures  so  
initiated be apprised to the Committee.' 
 
9. The Ministry in its Action Taken Reply has stated as under :- 
 
 'Modernisation of Indian Navy is an ongoing process based upon assessment of  
prevailing external strategic environment, threat perception, operational necessity,  
emerging technologies, capabilities to be achieved and availability of  
funds.Shipbuilding projects are time -intensive and spread over years. The entire  
process from design to commissioning entails various stakeholders, with lengthy  
deliberations. Whilst the specific issues pertaining to time overrun and cost  
escalations are covered in succeeding paragraphs, major reasons for delay include: - 
 
 (a) Infrastructural constraints of the Shipyards (DPSU). 
 (b) Delay in receipt of material/ equipment. 
 (c) Design finalization/ change of equipment (vendor specific). 
(d) Increase in mater ial/ equipment cost, besides labour cost and 
overheads. 
 (e) Financial constraints and design expertise limitations of the Private 
Shipyards. 
 
(ii) P 15A (M/s MDL): The initial delivery of the yards 127 01, 12702 and 12703 
were March 08, March 09 and March 10 respectively. The revised delivery dates of the 
ships were May 10, May 11 and May 12 respectively. However, the actual and 
targeted deliveries are 10 July 14 (INS Kolkata commissioned in August 14), June 15  

11 
 
and Decembe r 15. Time overrun is attributable to infrastructural constraints at the  
shipyard, and delay in supply of steel from Russia. T he original cost of Rs 3580 Crore   
was revised to Rs 11662 Crore . Cost overrun has been mainly due to the increase in  
equipment cost and Yard material and increase in cost of Labour and Labour  
overheads and identification of realistic assessment of cost of weapons and sensors. 
 
(iii) P 28 (M/s GRSE): The initial delivery of yard 3017, 3018, 3019 and 3020 were 
2008, 2009, 2011 and 2012. The revised deliveries are July 14 (INS Kamorta was 
commissioned on 23 August 14), March 15, March 16 and March 17. The time  
overrun was attributed to  delay in development of steel, delay in development of  
indigenised weap ons and sensors and delay in completion of trials for critical  
equipment like Diesel Generators, Air Conditioning Plant, etc. The original cost of Rs  
3051.2 Crore was revised to Rs 7852.39 Crore . Cost overrun is attributable to the 
increase  in prices due to delay in commencement of construction, increase in costs of 
developmental Projects, and introduction of new/ state of the art equipment/systems.  
 
(iv) IAC (M/s CSL): The delivery schedule of IAC has been revised from December 
10 to December 18.  Th e main reasons for time overrun were due to non - availability 
of Russian steel, delay in receipt of critical pre -launch equipment such as  Gear Box 
and 3MW Diesel Generators. There had been delays also in getting  specialized 
Russian Aircraft Carrier equip ment, due to administrative and procedural  delays of 
Russian Side in obtaining internal clearances from their Government. The original cost 
of Rs 3261 Crore  was rev ised to Rs 19341 Crore . Over the time, and with the  
experience of ‘Vikramaditya’, the ‘form & fit’ of the vessel has been finalised and  many 
emerging technological advances/ new  generation equipment has been  incorporated 
in the IAC. Increased equipment costs, including weapons and sensors,  and AFC due 
to finalisation from generic to specific equipment has further added to the cost overrun.  
 
(v) Project 75:  The project cost was estimated at Rs. 18797 Crore  in  2005 at the 
time of contract signing. The cost was revi sed to approx Rs  23558 Crore  (2010) 
primarily due to increase in cost of M azagaon Dock Limited procured items as 
compared to  earlier indicated cost. The reasons for time overrun include frequent 
revision in cost  estimates by Deputy Chief of Naval Staff, large variations with respect 
to initial cost estimates and difficulties in  absorption of technology by the Shipyard. 
 
(vi). P 75 (I) :   Defence Acquisition Council has approved construction of six 
submarines in India, by a  single shipyard, with ToT from a foreign collaborator, 
chosen on competitive basis. A  Core Committee has been constituted by the Ministry 
in December 14, under the Chairmanship of Controller of Warship Production and 
Acquisition (CWP&A), for  identification of suitable Indian shipyards. The Committee is 
likely to submit its  report by March 15. 
 
  

12 
 
 (vii). Steps Taken to Reduce Time and Cost Overruns 
Various steps have been taken to reduce time overrun and cost escalation in 
 Shipbuilding projects. These include: - 
  
(a) All projects are now “fixed cost” projects. Variable cost option is available 
only where cost of equipment is uncertain.   
 (b) Construction of follow on Ships based on same design to reduce build 
time. 
 (c) Provision for nomination of equipment for follow-on Ships to reduce 
procurement time. 
 (d) Regular Project Reviews during Apex Committee Meetings and Steering 
Committee Meetings, besides regular meetings at different levels in 
NHQ. 
 (e) Integrated Modular Construction for new Projects and s hift fr om 
Telescopic Design to Frozen Design. 
 (f) Capacity building through Modernisation.  
 (g) Enterprise Resource Planning through Information Technology 
management tools.' 
  
10. The Committee  note from the Action Taken R eply that one of the reasons 
common in most of the cases for delay in construction of various projects is delay in 
receipt of steel from Russia.  The Committee may be informed about the alternative 
steps taken over the years by the Ministry to obtain steel from other 
sources/countries. The Committee desire that the Ministry of Defence should take cue 
from the 'Made in India' initiative of the Government and make all efforts  to produce 
the desired quality and quantity of steel in the country in collaboration with Indian  
public/private sector comp anies like SAIL, MIDHANI, etc. It is further desired that t he 
regularity of Project Review meetings  should also be maintained and the progress 
made may be intimated to the Committee. 
 However, t he Committee note t hat some efforts have been made  towards 
containing  time & cost overruns in various shipbuilding projects. In its reply, the  
Ministry has stated that all projects are now 'fixed cost' project. The  Committee would 
like to be informed in detail regarding this clause. The  Committee would  also like to 
know in det ail about the initiatives such as construction of follow -on ships and 
provision for nomination of equipment.  Besides this, the Committee would also like to 
know in detail about the differences between Telescopic Design and Frozen Design.  
 
 

13 
 
 
 
 
C. Accidents 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 6) 
 
11. The Committee had recommended as under :- 
 
 'There have been spurt in  accidents of naval vessels in the recent past which include 
INS Sindhurakshak, INS Vipul, INS Talwar, etc. The Committee  are highly concerned 
about  the increasing number of accidents in defence vessels. These accidents result 
not only in material loss but also in irrepairable loss of  human  lives besides, puttting a 
question mark on the level of maintenance and security. The Committee found that in 
most of these  cases, the reasons for mishap is either material failure or human error. 
The Committee desire that the   Ministry of Defence must ensure that these cases be 
investigated and reach culmination. The Committee would like to be apprised about  
inquiries, investigations held and judgements executed in case of each and every  
accident. The Committee also desire that the recommendations, if any,   given by any 
agency and the action taken thereon by the Ministry of Defence  as well as naval 
authorities be apprised to them.' 
 
12 The Ministry in its Action Taken Reply has stated as under :- 
  
'As per the laid down procedures, all cases of accidents are investigated by a Board of 
Inquiry (BoI).  The details are as follows:- 
 
Sl. 
No. 
Date Incident Cause of 
Accident 
Outcome of 
Investigation 
(a) 08 January 
2014 
Crack in Sonar 
Dome of INS 
Betwa. 
Error of 
Judgment 
by Crew. 
Three officers were found 
culpable.  Disciplinary action 
against two officers has been 
taken and against one officer 
is being processed at 
HQWNC. 
(b) 17 January 
2014 
Suspended 
movement of 
INS 
Sindhughosh at 
securing 
alongside berth. 
Crew Error One officer was found culpable 
and disciplinary action is being 
processed at HQWNC. 
(c) 23 January 
2014 
Sea water 
ingress through 
a crack/hole in 
the ship side of 
INS Vipul 
Poor refit 
work and 
quality 
control on 
work-
Board of Inquiry (BoI) has 
been approved at IHQ MoD 
(N) on 16 September 2014.  05 
officers were found culpable 
and disciplinary action against 

14 
 
manship them is being processed at 
HQWNC.   
(d) 30 January 
2014 
Damage to 
Propeller of INS 
Airavat, whilst 
entering 
harbour. 
Crew Error Two officers were found 
culpable and disciplinary 
action is being processed at 
HQENC. 
(e) 26 February 
2014 
Fire onboard 
INS 
Sindhuratna 
Electrical 
short circuit 
in cables 
Seven officers were found 
culpable and disciplinary 
action is being processed at 
HQWNC. 
(f) 07 March 
2014 
Accident during 
trials of engine 
room fire 
fighting system 
onboard Yard 
12701 (Kolkata) 
under 
construction at 
MDL. 
Material 
Failure. 
No individual or organization 
was held responsible for the 
cause of incident, and the 
incident was treated as an 
accident.  The death of the 
officer is considered as 
‘attributable to Service’. 
(g) 06 April 2014 Incident of 
smoldering and 
thick smoke 
during hot work 
on INS 
Matanga. 
Electrical 
short circuit 
in cables 
Board Proceedings are under 
examination at IHQ MoD (N). 
(h) 28 June 
2014 
Damage to port 
propeller of INS 
Kuthar while 
coming 
alongside at 
Port Blair. 
- Board Proceedings are under 
examination at IHQ MoD (N). 
(i) 02 July 2014 Touching 
bottom of INS 
Cheetah while 
entering Kochi 
Harbour. 
- Board Proceedings are under 
examination at IHQ MoD (N). 
(j) 31 October 
2014 
Collision of INS 
Kora with MV 
Madeleine 
Rickmers at 
Sea. 
- Board Proceedings are under 
examination at IHQ MoD (N). 
(k) 06 
November 
2014 
Sinking of TRV -
72. 
- BoI is in progress at HQENC. 
 
 
Lessons learnt from the report of BoI are implemented appropriately.  Corrective steps 
have been taken by Naval HQs with extensive checks on weapon related safety 
systems and audit of Standard Operating Procedures on all operational Naval Units.  

15 
 
Safety procedures and professional checks  are re-emphasized.  Incidents S tudy and 
Analysis Cells have been intimated at professional schools wherein lessons learnt are 
incorporated into professional training.  Safety Audits of various units are being 
regularly conducted.' 
 
13. The Committee note that in case of accidents occurring post April 2014, the 
Ministry of Defence , in its  reply, has stated that Board proceedings are under 
examination. The ATR has been received on 14 August, 2015 and the Committee opine 
that time period of one year is sufficient time in our technology driven dispensation to 
assess the reasons for accidents. 
 
 However, in the case of  accident occurring on 07 March, 2014, the reason 
attributed is material failure. The Committee would like to know the reason  behind 
acceptance of sub -standard material and how is it possible that  neither the  supplier 
organisation/individual nor any quality check personnel have  been held responsible. 
 
 In all those cases where the crew is held responsible, the Committee would  like 
to know whether the crew members/officers found guilty were onboard  and whether 
they have survived. E rror by the crew is a reflection on the  training provided at the 
training institutions and refresher courses  conducted by them . Therefore, the 
Committee desire that the Ministry should revisit its training curriculum and to obviate 
lapses in the future . In this matter, all the desired details may be furnished to the 
Committee in  Action Taken Notes.   
 
 
AIR FORCE 
 
D. Capital Budget 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 9) 
 
14. The Committee had recommended as under :- 
 
 While examining the subject, the Committee found that Air Force had projected a 
requirement of Rs. 62,408.33 crore for Capital Budget  while the amount actually 
allocated is Rs. 33,710.68 crore, which is  nearly half of the projections. Further,  it 
was revealed during deliberations that out of total Capital Budget, there was a demand  
of Rs. 12,395 crore exclusively for `New Schemes’. However, the actual allocation   for 

16 
 
this Head is merely Rs. 2645 crore. Thus, amounting to a shortfall of  Rs. 9750 crore in 
this segment i.e. 80% of the projections. The Committee are  baffled   at such  a 
meagre allocation as   Air Force  has a long list of projects planned for induction  
during the year  2014 -15, which  include  Medium Multi -Role Combat Aircraft 
(MMRCA), Jaguar Re -engineering, Addle Cheetal Helicopters, M LH Upgrade, 
Additional Aerostats, Additional Dornier, Addl FRA, Additional Airborne Warning and 
Control System(AWACS), Additional IACCS Nodes, Attack Helicopters Heavy Lift 
Helicopters, Modernization of Air Field Infrastructure (MAFI) phase II and VSHORADS. 
The Committee here feel that this is  a state of ad -hocism in planning  and  budgeting 
and an apparent case of callousness and  non -seriousness. The Committee while 
deploring this attitude of non -commitment and insincerity, desire that accountability 
and commitment has to be incorporated in the entire process of planning, budgeting 
and  execution.  Only then, one could expect the desired results. In any case,  as per 
Ministry’s own submission  the impact of shortfall in Capital  Budget will lead to 
slowdown of modernization, delay in induction of new  capabilities and resultant 
asymmetry in capability with respect to  threat perception.   The  fact that on the one 
hand Air Force has audacious  acquisitions and upgradation plans for the coming year  
and on the other hand the Ministry has made  feeble  allocation of Rs. 2645 crore. This 
appears to demonstrate  a lackadaisical  approach of the Ministry. The Committee 
strongly recommend that adequate funds should be allocated for `New Schemes’, so 
that already worsened situation in respect of depleted air fleet, infrastructure  and 
modernisation of Air Force is not further aggravated. 
 
15. The Ministry in its Action Taken Reply has stated as under :- 
  
 'The allocation for New Schemes is constantly reviewed based upon progress of 
approval of  New Schemes and additional funds provided as and when required.' 
 
16. The reply of the Ministry of Defence is vague and intends to conceal the 
information desired by the Committee . The Committee feel that i f a system of getting 
additional funds provided, as and when required, is in vogue in the Ministry, then there 
is no need to have separate H eads in the budgetary all ocations for the services. If it is 
not so, then  the Committee wish to be intimated  in detail about the amount sought 
from Ministry of Finance under this H ead. The Committee feel that proper attention is 
not given to the fact that adequate funds need to b e allocated for 'New Schemes' and 
the amount, if allocated, may be informed to the Committee for its analysis. 
 
 
 

17 
 
 
E. Revenue Budget  
Recommendation (Para No. 10) 
17. The Committee had recommended as under :- 
 The Committee found that in case  of Revenue Budgeting also, the scenario  of deficit 
budgeting is quite evident. The amount projected by Air Force was Rs. 27,073.40 
crore while the actually allocated amount is Rs. 20,506.84  crore.  Out of the total 
Revenue Demands, Rs. 16642 crore  was asked for no n-salary expenses. However, 
the amount actually allocated under this Head is Rs. 10877 crore, thus resulting into a 
shortfall of Rs. 5765 crore. Representatives of Air Force  candidly  submitted  that 
Revenue Budget constraint will impact  procurement of sp ares and fuel and resultant 
shortfall in training as older systems require more maintenance. It was also informed 
that expenditure for disaster relief in Uttrakhand and Jammu and Kashmir as well as in 
General Elections 2014 has further added pressure on al ready stretched resources of 
Air Force.  The Committee, observe that there  is already a huge shortage of air fleet 
from the sanctioned strength and any  further constraint on  spares will lead to shortfall 
in serviceability and hence impact availability  adversely. The Committee are perturbed 
to find  that the entire scenario is dismal  and recommend that adequate budget should  
be  allocated against Revenue Head so as to ensure  that spares  and serviceability do 
not suffer any further.  
18. The Ministry in its Action Taken Reply has stated as under :- 
  
 'The requirement for additional funds under the revenue budget has been projected to 
the Ministry of  Finance.' 
 
19. The Committee wish to be informed in detail about the solicitation of additional 
funds under various revenue heads. Besides this,  adequate funding for fuel and 
spares should also be provided , as scarcity for fuel and spares will adversely affect 
training facilties . The Committee may be provided the desired information at the 
earliest as they feel concerned that any compromise  in training will be detrimental to  
the safety of our pilots.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

18 
 
F. Squadrons Strength  
    
Recommendation (Para Nos. 12 & 13) 
 
20. The Committee had recommended as under :- 
 
 'The Committee were informed by the representatives of Indian Air Force  that IAF 
today requires at least 45 fighter squadrons  to counter a two front collusive threat but 
the Government has authorized a strength of 42 squadrons for this purpose. This 
revelation is astonishing as on the one hand Indian Air Force (IAF) had made a   
submission that they would require at least 45  squadrons  while on the  other hand 
Ministry is sanctioning 42 squadrons. The Committee feel that this paradox needs to 
be rectified at the earliest. 
  
 With regard to  existing squadron strength, it is learnt that we are down to 25 
squadrons today even though authorization is for  42 combat squadrons.  Thus our  
capability has already come down. In a candid submission, it was admitted by the  
representatives of Air Force that our capability vis-à-vis our neighbours is fast  eroding.  
Further, it was also found that Air Force today has only 25 active  fighter  squadrons. 
Moreover, 14 of these squadrons are equipped with MiG -21 and  MiG - 27 which will 
retire between 2015 - 2024. Thus the strength will be reduced to  just 11 squadrons by 
2024.   The Committee came to know  that this widening gap  occur because  the  rate 
at which fighter aircraft are retiring after completion of their  total technical life exceeds 
the rate at which their replacements are being inducted  into the IAF. In this regard, the 
Committee further enquired  about the initiatives  being taken in order to  mitigate 
these gaps in the  squadron strength and found that  Air Force has contracted for 272 
Su-30 MKI fighter aircraft to form 13 Squadrons  and the delivery of these aircraft is 
likely to be completed by 2020.  This means that  Air Force will be able to add 13 
squadrons in its kitty only by 2020. However, the  strength will be raised to the extent 
of 24 squadrons. Further, the series production of Light Combat Aircraft (LCA) by 
Hindustan Aeronautics Limited (HAL) is also awaited, to form the first LCA squadron in 
IAF. The Medium Multi -Role Combat  Aircraft (MMRCA) project is at Contract 
Negotiation Committee  (CNC) stage. It is needless to say that an early induction of 
additional aircraft is crucial for arresting  the downward trend in the strength of fighter 
squadrons. The  Committee find the  situation  to be very  grim and it is quintessential 
for the Ministry  to ensure smooth  and adequate flow of funds and providing easier 
induction  procedure for attaining  the requisite squadron strengh.  More distressing i s 
the fact  that only Rs. 2645 crore has been allocated for  `New Schems’ in this Budget. 
The Committee are constrained to observe that country’s security requirements are 
being compromised  by  ignoring consistenly widening gap between san ctioned and 
existing strengths. The Committee desire that conc rete and prompt steps be initiated 
expeditiously to  induct sufficient number of functional platforms and a status report in 
this regard be  submitted to the Committee.  
 
 
 
 
 

19 
 
21. The Ministry in its Action Taken Reply to para nos. 12 & 13 has stated as under :- 
 
 The Indian Air Force (IAF) has projected the requirement of 45 fighter squadrons to 
counter a two front collusive threat.   However, the IAF today has 35 active fighter 
squadrons as against a Government authorised strength of 42 squadrons.   
IAF has contracted 272 Su-30 MKI fighter aircraft to form 13 Squadrons.  The delivery 
of Su -30 MKI will continue till 2030, resulting in equipping 3 more squadrons in the 
next 4 to 5 years.   In addition, as per the India -France Joint Statement issued by the 
two countries during the Prime Minister’s visit to France, Government of India 
conveyed to the Government of France that in view of the critical operational necessity 
for Multirole Combat Aircraft, Indian Air Force will acquire 36 Rafale jets in fly -away 
condition as quickly as possible.  The two leaders agreed to conclude an Inter -
Government agreement for supply of the aircraft on terms that would be better than 
conveyed by Dasault Aviation as part of a separate process underway; the delivery 
would be in time-frame that would be compatible with the operation requirement of IAF 
and that the aircraft and associated systems and weapons would be delivered on the 
same configuration as had been tested and approved by IAF; and with a longer 
maintenance responsibil ity by France.  Further, IAF has accepted the first Series 
Production LCA on 17.01.2015.  In addition, design / development of Fifth Generation 
Fighter Aircraft is under progress.  If all procurements fructify as planned, the IAF is 
likely to achieve the G overnment authorised strength of 42 Sqns by the end of 15 th 
Plan period.  
 
  
22. The Committee have been expressing their concern  about the fast depleting  
squadron strength of  IAF during the last few years. The Committee take note of the 
efforts  being made and desire that tangible outcome are attained.  They would like to 
be informed about the induction of squadrons during the last seven years, i.e. 2008 
onwards. The Committee would also like to be informed in detail about the contracted 
272 Su -30 MKI fi ghter aircraft such as contract d ates, delivery schedules, cost  and 
company. Moreover, the Committee desire to know the present status of acquisition of 
Rafale, the maintenance terms  and the problems surrounding the Light-Combat 
Aircraft. The Committee would also like to know the time -framework decided for 
design/development of Fifth Generation Fighter Aircraft.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
G. Training  

20 
 
 
Recommendation (Para Nos. 15 & 16) 
 
 
23. The Committee had recommended as under :- 
 
  
On the issue of trainer aircraft, the Committee has found that IAF is currently holding 
trainer aircrafts under its inventory which include Basic Trainer Aircraft (BTA), 
Intermediate Jet Trainer (IJT) consisting of Kiran Mk -I/IA and Kiran Mk -II, and 
Advanced Jet Trainer ( AJT).  The existing strength of trainer aircraft is 253 as against 
the sanctioned strength of 430.  Simulators have also been provided for each type of 
aircraft.  It is noticeable that there is a shortage of nearly 40% of trainer aircraft.  In this 
regard, the IAF’s proposal for the procurement of 106 BTA (PC -7 MK-II) under ‘Buy 
and Make (Indian)’ categorization is under process.  It has been informed that the Air 
Force follows a pattern of three -stage training on a BTA.  In this category the demand 
has bee n satisfied to some measure and more purchases to be made there.  The 
second level of training which Air Force follows is on an IJT which is a problem area 
because this task has been assigned to HAL and this aircraft is yet to come into being.  
The third i s AJT which is being produced in India and the country is generally able to 
satisfy that requirement.  The Committee here find that IJT, the Kiran aircraft, have 
already started retiring and were planned to be replaced by the HAL built IJT; 
however, the IJ T has been under development since 1999 and still certain difficulties 
are being faced in its induction.  In view of the above, IAF is looking for other available 
options for Intermediate Flying Training.  A Request for Information (RFI) for the same 
was p osted on the Ministry of Defence website on 25 February 2014 and the 
responses received are being examined at Air HQ.  The IAF has contracted a total of 
106 Hawk Mk-132 AJT aircraft and their deliveries are likely to be completed by 2016.  
The Committee de sire that urgent measures should be taken to ensure timely 
deliveries of the same under intimation to this Committee. 
 
The Committee were concerned to know about the strategy being pursued to fill the 
huge gaps in sanctioned and existing trainer aircraft.  The Committee feel that one of 
the important factors in grooming Air Force is provision of adequate training facilities to 
the personnel.  It is indeed unfortunate to disclose that there are huge deficiencies in 
trainer aircraft.  The Committee in their e arlier report have consistently taken up the 
issue of basic trainer.  The status of IJT is quite disturbing.  The Committee are 
unhappy that HAL has not been able to deliver IJT to Air Force even after 15 years of 
commencement of the project and such non -performance derails the modernization 
and indigenization drive of defence forces.  The M inistry has resorted to looking for 
alternatives only in early 2014 that too only on consistent pursuance of the Committee.  
In this connection, the Committee desire to be informed about the response received 
in regard to RFI and are concerned that IJTs are acquired in time so that training 
modules are not hampered for lack of aircraft.  The Committee also recommend that 
HAL is appropriately dealt with for not being able to timely deliver IJTs to Air Force.  
The Committee should be intimated about the concrete action taken in this regard. 
24. The Ministry in its Action Taken Reply has stated as under :- 

21 
 
 
 
'Trainer Aircraft held by IAF currently include Baisc Trainer Aircra ft (BTA) intermediate 
Jet Trainer (IJT) and Advanced Jet Trainer (AJT).  The existing trainer aircraft strength 
is 274 as against the sanctioned strength of 430.  Simulators have also been provided 
for each type of aircraft.  In view of the delays in the d evelopment of HTT -40 BTA by 
Hindustan Aeronautics Limited (HAL), Defence Acquisition Council (DAC) on 
28.02.2015, approved the procurement of additional 38 PC -7 MK -II aircraft under 
‘option Clause’ of the procurement contract, subject to certain conditions.  
  Further, HAL in conjunction with  RCMA (A/C) has carried out life extension 
studies on Kiran aircraft.  Consequently, the life of Kiran aircraft has been extended by 
2 years and the phase out will now commence from 2017 -18 onwards.  However, the 
IJT has been under development since 1999.   In view of the above, the IAF is looking 
at options for Intermediate Flying Training.  This could include use of the BTA to also 
undertake the Intermediate stage training syllabus (Stage-II Flying). 
The IAF has contracte d a total of 106 hawk Mk -132 AJT aircraft.  The deliveries are 
likely to be completed by 2016.    
The timeline for IJT project was estimated based on knowledge/experience gained in 
successful development projects.  However, each new development, having its  own 
complexities and unique features/requirements, is inherent with certain amount of risk 
& uncertainty.  The design and development of IJT has encountered various 
unforeseen incidents/ design modifications such as change of engine, incident on 
prototype aircraft, redesign of control circuit etc.  The project is monitored by a 
Steering Committee comprising MoD, IAF, HAL, CEMILAC and DGAQA. HAL has 
overcome majority of these issues by implementing the recommendations of Steering 
Committee.   The only major  activity remaining towards Operational Clearance is 
completion of spin trials for which, aircraft has been modified in consultation with BAE 
System to achieve the desired spin characteristics.  Operational clearance is planned 
to be achieved by December, 2015.'  
 
 
25. This is not the first time when the Commit tee have  expressed concern over 
deficiency in tra iner aircraft. The Committee have been consistently pointing  out 
inadequacies in training facilities which need corrective measures to be taken without 
any further delay. So  far as Intermediate Jet Trainers are concerned, the operational 
clearance dates have been extended time and again due to report ed problems. The 
Committee take serious note of the repeated failures that ha ve taken place at HAL and 
wish that this time the spin tria ls are successfully cleared latest by December 2015.  In 
line with the same perspective, the  Committee would like to be apprised about the 
steps being taken towards  this end.  
 

22 
 
H. Modernization of Air Bases 
Recommendation (Para No. 19) 
 
26. The Committee had recommended as under :- 
 
'The Committee are given to understand that infrastructure for airfields in forward 
areas viz. Leh, Ladakh and the North -East, is a cause of concern.  Although 
infrastructure development projects have been undertaken, but these will take their 
own time to fruition.  The Committee find that this has to be coupled with automatically 
hardened shelters which need to exist for every single aircraft so that we are not 
caught by surprise as has h appened in different parts of the world.  The Committee 
understand that the pace of progress is determined always by the availability of 
budget.  The Committee observe that unless the infrastructure projects are completed 
in time, effectiveness of all othe r assets, be it fleet or manpower, will be obviated.  
Hence, they recommend that in addition to availability of funds, these are optimally 
and transparently utilized.  The Ministry of Defence must ensure this and intimate the 
Committee about the initiatives taken in this regard.' 
 
27. The Ministry in its Action Taken Reply has stated as under :- 
 
a) New Generation Hardened Aircraft Shelter: The proposal of construction of 
108 New Generation Hardened Aircraft Shelters (NGHAS) for Su -30 class of 
aircraft is u nder examination of the Ministry in consultation with other 
department(s) concerned.  
b) Nyoma Air Force Base: Nyoma, in eastern Ladakh, is planned to be 
developed into a full -fledged airbase.  The infrastructure planned includes an 
extended runway hardened aircraft shelters, aprons and all other requirements 
of an operational base. Draft CCS Note in this regard is under process.    
c) Kargil Air Force Base: A proposal for development of infrastructure at 
Kargil Air Force Base is also under examination with concerned agencies.    
d) Development of ALGs along with allied Security Infrastructure in North -
East: A comprehensive plan for improvement of infrastructure of the Indian 
Army and Indian Air Force (IAF) along the Eastern Sector has been approved.  
This includes up -gradation of infrastructure at ten airbases in Eastern Air 
Command Area of Responsibility (EA C AOR) and development of eight 
Advance Landing Grounds (ALGs) in Arunachal Pradesh.  The proposals are at 
various stages of execution.    
28. The Committee appreciate various efforts being made  by the Ministry. However,  
they desire  that the measures tak en should be time bound and priority may be 
assigned to them. Further, the Committee may  be apprised of the outcome in detail at 
the time of furnishing Action Taken Notes. 
  

23 
 
 
CHAPTER II 
(A) OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS, WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY 
THE GOVERNMENT 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 2) 
 In case of Capital Budget, maximum strain is laid on committed liabilities.  Wherein the 
projection was to the tune of Rs. 22,727.09 crore, the allocation amount is only Rs. 17,313.00 
crore amounting to a shortfall of Rs. 5,414.09 crore. The Committee do not understand as to 
how the expenditure for committed liabilities   will be adjusted by Navy.  The Committee feel that 
a cut of Rs. 5400 crore, is quite a substantial amount and will further add up to the plight of the 
Indian Navy. Therefore, the Committee opine that Navy should be provided adequate fundin g 
towards committed liabilities. 
Reply of the Government 
 The Navy has been allocated Rs. 21,248.07 cr. for Committed Liabilities in 2014 -15 as 
per requirement projected.  These projections included payment for P -17A which was estimated 
to be approved before 31.3.2014.  However, as the project was not approved during 2013-14 the 
amount could not be considered a Committed Liability in 2014 -15 and the Navy made int ernal 
adjustments in their allocations to reduce the amount earmarked for Committed Liabilities. 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 3) 
 During the course of deliberations, it came to the notice of the Committee that share of 
naval budget to the total defence budget  has fallen down to 15.72% in 2014 -15 from 16.79% in 
2013-14 and 18.12% in 2012 -13. The Committee are perturbed to find that in recent times there 
have been spurt in accidents which has been separately dealt with in succeeding paras. 
However, it is importa nt to mention that in most of the cases of accidents, the cause is either 
material failure or human error. This implies that either the equipment or machinery acquired are 
substandard or there are inadequacies in training. The Committee feel that the inade quate 
funding will further aggravate the condition of Indian Navy and lead to compromises in 
operational preparedness. Therefore, it is the absolute necessity to allocate ample funds to Navy 
under intimation to this Committee. 
 
 
 
 

24 
 
Reply of the Government 
 The Ministry of Defence is bound by the overall budgetary ceiling provided by the Ministry 
of Finance.  However, every effort is made to ensure that sufficient funds are available to meet 
the most critical requirements of the Services.  
 
Recommendation (Para No. 4) 
 In 2012, Defence Acquisition Council approved a total of 198 ships and submarines in 
order to equip Navy for safeguarding national interests.  However, presently Navy has 127 ships 
and 15 submarines i.e. total of 142 vessels.  The Committee were  informed that 41 ships and 
submarines are under construction in the country.  These include indigenous aircraft carrier at 
Cochin Shipyard, 06 destroyers and 06 submarines at Mazagaon Dock, etc. At the same time it 
has also come to the notice of the Commi ttee that 7 of our MCMVs are over 25 years old and 
require replacement.  With regard to submarines, it was revealed that there are presently 14 
conventional submarines (including Sindhurakshak) in the Indian Navy.  Most conventional 
submarine are over 20 years old and are reaching the end of their service life.  As far as strength 
of submarines is concerned, 18 are planned though existing force level is much less and most of 
them are vintage and old.  The committee are concerned to note that during the last  15 years 
only one submarine has been inducted (Sindhushastra in July 2000) and five submarines have 
been de-inducted.  The Committee are further dismayed at the snail pace of commissioning of 
vessels in Navy.  The Committee are further dismayed to learn t he fact that commissioning and 
decommissioning of ships are not analogous.  It’s high time that adequate budgetary provisions 
are made to Navy so that deficiencies are mitigated and the country is capable to take on two 
front challenges.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
1. Mine Counter Measure Vessels (MCMVs):  Presently, the Indian Navy (IN) has seven 
minesweepers.  These minesweepers are scheduled to be de-inducted by 2018. 
Acceptance of Necessity (AoN) for construction of 12 MCMVs has been approved by Defence 
Acquisition Council (DAC) on 28 th February, 2015.  DAC has nominated M/s Goa Shipyard Ltd., 
(GSL), a Defence PSU, for construction of these MCMVs with Transfer of Technology (ToT) 
from foreign Shipyard. 
 
2. SUBMARINES 
 
 Presently, there are 14 conventional  submarines in the Indian Navy (IN) (including 
Sindhurakshak).  In addition, the IN has acquired one submarine (Chakra) from Russia on 10 
year lease.  Most conventional submarines are over 20 years old.   
Induction/ De-induction of Submarines in Last 15 years.  Two submarines have  been 
inducted in the last 15 years (Sindhushastra) in July 2000 and Chakra in  January, 2012).  
Further, five submarines have been de-inducted in the last 15 years. 
 

25 
 
Induction Plan.   CCS in June, 1999 had approved 30 years Long T erm Submarine Building 
Plan for Indigenous construction of 24 conventional submarines by 2030.   The programme 
comprises of two phases-  
 
Phase - I 
(i) Project 75. Six submarines of scropene class (P 75) are being constructed at Mazagon 
Dock Limited, Mumbai.  The first submarine is expected to be delivered in September 
2016, followed by induction of one submarine every nine months thereafter.  The last 
submarine is likely to be delivered in June 2020.  
(ii) Project 75 (I)  DAC has approved construction of six submarines in India, by a single 
shipyard, with ToT from a foreign collaborator, chosen on competitive basis.  A Core 
Committee was constituted by the Ministry in De cember, 2014, under the Chairmanship 
of Controller of Warship Production and Acquisition (CWP&A), for identification of suitable 
Indian shipyard (Public/Private) for indigenous construction of P 75(I) submarines.  The 
committee has submitted its report in May, 2015.  
Phase – II 
 Twelve submarines of Indigenous design are envisaged to be constructed in India with 
 the experience gained and technology absorbed from construction  of submarines during 
Phase –I.   
Medium Refit With Life Certification (MRLC).   Due to delay in induction of new 
 submarines under P -75, and the requirement to maintain requisite force levels, the 
 DAC has accorded approval for ‘MRLC Plan’ for submarines on 29 th August, 2014.  
 This would enable extending the ‘Service Life’ of submarines so as to bridge the 
 capability gap, pending induction of new submarines. 
3. Further, it is informed that 48 ships and submarines are under various stages 
 ofconstruction.  In the last two years,  INS Vikramaditya (Aircraft Carrier) and ships 
 like 04 NOPVs and one ship each under P -15A and P -28 were delivered.  Delivery 
 of more ships from P -15A, P -28, LCU and Water jet FACs is planned in current year.  
 Modernisation of Navy is an ongoing process  based upon threat perception, prevailing 
 security environment, emerging technologies, operational necessity, capabilities to be 
 achieved and availability of funds.  Adequate funds are being made available 
 commensurate with the Modernisation Plan of Navy. 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 7) 
 During the examinations of Demands for Grants 2014 -15, the Committee noted 
that the percentage of shortage of officers and sailors in Navy has increased over the 
years.  It was 16.75% for officers in 2007 which increased to  19.70% in 2012.  The 
shortfall for sailors has increased from 6.39% in 2007 to 22.60% in 2012.  The 
Committee take serious note of the shortage of manpower and desire that effective 
initiatives to be taken to mitigate the gaps in the existing and sanction ed strength of 
manpower including officers, sailors and civilians in Navy.  The Committee were informed 
by the representatives of Navy that ban by the Ministry of Finance on creation of posts 
due to austerity measures is severely impacting recruitment, tra ining and deployment, 

26 
 
hence there is a need to review the ban imposed by the Ministry of Finance for Indian 
Navy.  The Committee desire that the Ministry of  Defence may look into the matter and 
take appropriate action in this regard under intimation to them. 
Reply of the Government 
 The shortage of officers and sailors has been reduced through initiation of various 
measures, aimed to mitigate the gap between the sanctioned strength and the borne 
strength.  The initiatives taken during the XI th (2007-12) and ongoing XII th (2013-17) Plan 
Period have resulted in reduction in shortages.  The manpower shortages, as on 31 st 
December 2014 has reduced to 14.5% and 16.97%, from 21.46% and 22.65% in 2011 
for officers and sailors respectively, despite an  increase in the sanctioned strength of 
officers from 10405 in 2011 to 10848 in 2014 (as on 31 st December) and sailors 63130 in 
2011 to 65440 in 2014 (as on 31st December). 
Ban on Creation of Posts :  In 2011, Ministry of Finance imposed a ban on creation o f 
posts, as part of larger austerity measures and has reiterated the ban periodically in 
2012, 2013, and the latest on 29 th October 2014.  In contrast, the number of platforms 
and the operational tempo of the Service has increased significantly during the period.  
The mandate of maintaining    a minimum force level by the Indian Navy necessitates 
accretion of the manpower complement.  Added to this is the need to suitably augment 
the supporting organizations for maintaining operational platforms. 
 Sanctions Post Imposition of Ban :  It would be pertinent to mention here that in spite of 
Ministry of Finance’s ban on creation of new posts / sanction of manpower, a number of 
manpower sanctions, on accretion basis, have been accorded considering Indian Navy’s 
operational requirements, as shown in following table: 
 
S. No. Year Category of Posts sanctioned 
on Accretion 
Officers Sailors 
(a) 2012 138 898 
(b) 2013 46 159 
(c) 2014 102 875 
(d) 2015 72 570 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 8) 
 
 Alongwith induction of new manpower, commensurate training should also be imparted to 
the recruited workforce and periodical review of training should also be undertaken.  The 
Committee found that the last review of officers training was undertaken in 2012 .  The 
Committee opine that in today’s world, continuously changing technological upgradation  should 

27 
 
be regularly incorporated in study manuals and training modules.  Therefore, annual review of 
training for both officers and sailors should be undertaken without fail. 
Reply of the Government 
Training in the Indian Navy is a dynamic process and a major peace -time activity.  
Therefore, the review of training is a continuous process and is constantly undertaken at the 
Command level and vigorously pursued at IHQ MoD(N), on a regular basis.  Whilst, the last 
review of curricula of  officer’s specialization courses was undertaken in 2012, it is pertinent to 
mention that the training content and procedures are being reviewed periodically, 
commensurate with the ch anges in technology and technical upgradation  by Headquarters 
Southern Naval Command (HQSNC), which is the Indian Navy’s Training Command. 
 All training related activities are closely monitored by IHQ MoD(N).  Towards this, a Half 
Yearly Training Meeting (HYTM), chaired by FOC -in-C (South), is conducted every six months 
to review training policies, methodologies and content, with participation from representatives of  
IHQ MoD(N).  Issues requiring policy changes are discussed during the Annual Training 
Conference (ATC), held annually, chaired by the FOC -in-C (South) and attended by Chief of 
Personnel (COP) / IHQ MoD(N) along with all other stakeholders.  All the emergent changes in 
training are discussed during these two forums to keep the training relevant  and contemporary.  
The last HYTM was held on 21st November 2014, and the last ATC was held on 16th May 2014. 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 11) 
 Besides this, adequate funding for fuel should also be provided since scarcity for fuel will 
adversely impact training facilities and the Committee are apprehensive that any compromise in 
training will be detrimental for the safety of our pilots.  The Committee want to be intimated about 
the same. 
Reply of the Government 
 In the financial year 2014 -15, the sanctio ned Budget was Rs. 6830 Cr. under Revenue 
Head.  The Committed Liabilities for the year was Rs. 8048 Crs.   The portion of Committed 
Liabilities also included the requirement of ATF (Aviation Turbine Fuel).  The Sanctioned Budget 
for the year 2014 -15 was less than the Committed Liabilities by Rs. 1218 Crs.  The shortage in 
the Committed Liabilities for current year has now been made by receipt of additional allotment 
in the RE stage thereby increasing the budget to Rs. 7558 Crs.  Further, the drop in ATF pr ices 
due to fall in crude oil process in the international market has also eased the budgetary 
requirements.  
 
 
  

28 
 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 14) 
 In the opinion of the Committee, one of the reasons for the plight of our combatant 
strength in the skies is considerable delays in procurement of various platforms.  During the 
examination of the subject, it was found that capital procurement of IAF is undertaken in 
accordance with the Defence Procurement Procedure (DPP), which lays down timelines for 
various stages of the procurement process.  All efforts are made to adhere to these laid down 
timelines, albeit the complexity in certain procurement cases leads to delays.  The DPP provides 
for seeking firm and fixed commercial offers from vendors and in case of de lay, vendors are 
asked to extend the validity of commercial offer before the contract is finalised.  The DPP is also 
reviewed and refined on the  basis of experience gained.  As per the information submitted by 
the Ministry, it was found that there are 37 cases of procurement pending at 13 different pre -
Contract Negotiation Committee (CNC) stages.  According to this information, the time taken at 
each stage is sufficiently more than what is accorded by DPP.  Further, it was also found that 27 
cases are lyin g at post CNC stages.  This makes a total of 64 cases of pending Capital 
Procurements.  The Committee are not happy with such an indolent state of affairs because of 
the DPP.  They are of the opinion that if this trend is allowed to continue, all the impor tant 
acquisitions will keep languishing resulting in compromising the National Security in a big way.  
What the committee want is that the Ministry should come  out of its indolence and start looking 
towards IAF problems with an open mind where acceptance of shortfalls, envisaged 
acquisitions, proposed timelines and achieved targets get synchronised so that National interest 
is given utmost importance.  The Ministry should take initiatives towards this end under 
intimation to this Committee. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 Periodic reviews are carried out at all levels in Air HQ as well as at MoD to ensure that 
the procurement schemes progress as per the laid down timelines and the final product is 
operationally capable while being technologically relevant.  The focus is always to ensure that 
there are no unwarranted delays in the Capital Procurement Process. Currently the Procurement 
Procedure are under review. A vigorous effort will be made to speed up the pending cases at 
various stages of procurement. 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 17) 
 The Committee, while noting the dismal scenario in case of strength of Combat 
squadrons and trainer aircraft, desired to know about the status of serviceability of the existing 
platforms.  In this regard, the Committee were informed by the representatives of Ministry of 
Defence that the serviceability of the fleet need to improve further.  It was also submitted that 
this is the challenge which needs to be dealt with comprehensively.  The Committee are given to 

29 
 
understand that with the serviceability of fleet, IAF could easily enhance its fighter fleet, provided 
necessary additional allocations, in terms of revenue allocation is made to enable the Air Force 
to get needed spares and upgradation.  The Committee are of the opinion that lac k of resources 
is one of the major factors which is affecting the serviceability.  The Committee further observe 
that our own ability to produce and service different platforms needs to be properly addressed.  It 
also falls in line with the present scheme of ‘Make in India’ which needs to be emphasized and 
the Ministry and its organizations need to go a long way into this area both in terms of research 
and development as well production.  The Committee note that some beginnings have been 
made in terms of li ght combat aircraft, ALH helicopters, etc.  These measures have to be 
enhanced as this would give a long -term benefit to Air Force because by creating a domestic 
industry, it would ensure availability of the spares and upgradation.  The Committee earnestly  
desire that if the country has to achieve the goal, the Ministry must chalk out a comprehensive 
plan without loss of time and intimate the Committee about the same. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 During the period from 01 January to 31 December, 2014, the average aircraft availability 
was approx 55%.  Between 15 - 20% of the aircraft fleet were on Aircraft On Ground (AOG) due 
to shortage of spares.  Adequate revenue budgetary support along with timely conclusion of 
contracts, will help mitigate the outstand ing AOGs and increase aircraft availability.  A large 
number of aircraft spares are being sourced through Hindustan Aeronautical Ltd (HAL).  Better 
product support by HAL will improve the availability of aircraft supported by HAL.  An increase in 
TAT (Turn around Time) of overhaul spares and ready availability spares at HAL will contribute 
to assure better aircraft availability.  To enhance self -reliance, IAF has taken steps for 
indigenization of spares of the fleets supported by the IAF Base Repair depots and critical item 
of the HAL/Original Equipment Manufacturer (OEM) supported fleets. 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 18) 
 The Committee understand that availability of sufficient and skilled manpower is 
indispensable for efficient services.  Therefore, if the Ai r Force has to improve the availability 
and effectiveness of the fighter aircraft, it can be increased by having skilled and trained 
manpower.  In this regard, it is equally important to have sufficient recruitment and proper 
training facilities.  The Ministry of Defence should take measures to this end and the Committee 
be kept informed about the measures taken in this regard. 
 
 
 

30 
 
Reply of the Government 
 As on 31 March, 2012, there was shortfall of 396 officers and 6561 airmen in the IAF 
establishment.  The gap between required and existing manpower (excluding medical and 
dental officers) as on 01.05.2015 is as follows:  
 
 Officers Airmen 
Establishment 11959 136274 
Strength 11779 130253 
Shortfall 180 6021 
 
 It is mentioned that concerted efforts are made and various initiatives have been taken 
from time to time to reduce the shortages which include proactive steps like publicity 
measures and simplification of selection process.  Two additional Air Force Selection Boards 
(AFSBs) have also been sanctioned by Government of India in September, 2011. 
 As regards airmen, a total of 6160 recruits are undergoing training thereby fulfilling the 
current requirement of airmen.    
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

31 
 
 
 
(B) OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE 
 GOVERNMENT AND ARE COMMENTED UPON: 
Recommendation (Para No. 1) 
 The Committee note that although  Navy had projected an amount of Rs. 19,570.57 crore 
as budgetary allocation for 2014 -15,  it  has been allocated an  amount of Rs. 13,975.79 crore, 
which amounts to a shortfall of Rs. 5,594.78 crore i.e. nearly 1/3rd of th e projected amount.  The 
Committee also note that the Revenue Budget  shortfall mainly  affects `Other than Salary’ 
heads where the projection  of Navy was to the tune of Rs. 11,662 crore while allocation is made 
of Rs. 6,921.30 crore, hence only 59%  of t he money   solicited. This is the 6th successive year 
of lesser allocation under `other than salary’ segment.  During evidence, the officials of Indian 
Navy submitted that there is a need for additional funds under revenue head to meet day -to-day 
requirements of Operational Deployments (including Anti -Piracy Patrols) and Coastal Security. 
In addition, requirement of stores (Fuel, Weapons, Armament, Spares), Victualling and Rations, 
Repairs and Refits ofalso needed. Hence, there is an immediate requirement o f Rs. 1884 crore.  
Therefore, the Committee recommend that the requirement of Navy for additional funds under 
revenue head should be looked into and the Committee be informed about the same.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 The requirement of additional funds for non -Salary revenue expenditure for the Navy 
during 2014-15 has been submitted to the Ministry of Finance in the RE 2014-15 projections. 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 5) 
 
 According to DAC 2012, the sanctioned strength of vessels for Navy includes 
submarines, ships, aircraft carriers, etc. Some projects such as P 15A, P28, Indian Aircraft 
Carrier (IAC), P75 and P75 (I) are streamlined and under progress at various shipyards in the 
country. However, the Committee are worried about regular delays and cost over runs occurring 
in different projects. In case of IAC, the original sanctioned cost was Rs. 3261 Crore which has 
been revised to Rs. 19,341 Crore i.e. six times cost escalation. In case of P 15A, the cost has 
been revised to Rs. 11662 Crore from Rs. 3580 Cr ore and dates have been revised from 2009 -
10 to 2015-16. The Committee feel that there have been long delays and cost overruns in almost 
all the acquisition activities. Similarly, in case of aircraft carrier ‘Vikramaditya’, there had been 
huge cost escalat ion due to repeated time extensions. These time and cost overruns in almost 
all the projects is a major cause of concern. For long, country’s defence needs have been lying 
unattended and huge gaps have emerged in Force Level. It’s high time that adequate b udgetary 

32 
 
support is made along with necessary operational reforms at shipyards and other construction 
sites. The committee desire that appropriate action be taken by authorities concerned so that 
high valued projects should not be affected by time and cost overruns. The measures so initiated 
be apprised to the Committee.    
Reply of the Government 
 
Modernisation of Indian Navy is an ongoing process based upon assessment of 
prevailing external strategic environment, threat perception, operational necessity, 
emerging technologies, capabilities to be achieved and availability of funds. Shipbuilding 
projects are time -intensive and spread over years. The entire process from design to 
commissioning entails various stakeholders, with lengthy deliberations. Whilst the 
specific issues pertaining to time overrun and cost escalations are covered in succeeding 
paragraphs, major reasons for delay include: - 
(a) Infrastructural constraints of the Shipyards (DPSU). 
 
(b) Delay in receipt of material/ equipment. 
 
(c) Design finalization/ change of equipment (vendor specific). 
 
(d) Increase in material/ equipment cost, besides labour cost and overheads. 
(e) Financial constraints and design expertise limitations of the Private 
Shipyards. 
 
2. P 15A (M/s MDL). The initial delivery of the yards 12701, 12702 and 12703 were 
March 08, March 09 and March 10 respectively. The revised delivery dates of the ships 
were May 10, May 11 and May 12 respectively. However, the actual and targeted 
deliveries are 10 July 14 (INS  Kolkata commissioned in August 14), June 15 and 
December 15. Time overrun is attributable to infrastructural constraints at the shipyard, 
and delay in supply of steel from Russia. The original cost of Rs 3580 Crs was revised to 
Rs 11662 Crs. Cost overrun has been mainly due to the increase in equipment cost and 
Yard material and increase in cost of Labour and Labour overheads and identification of 
realistic assessment of cost of weapons and sensors. 
 
3. P 28 (M/s GRSE). The initial delivery of yard 3017, 3018, 3019 and 3020 were 
2008, 2009, 2011 and 2012. The revised deliveries are July 14 (INS Kamorta was 
commissioned on 23 August 14), March 15, March 16 and March 17. The time overrun 
was attributed todelay in development of  steel, delay in development of indigenised 
weapons and sensors and delay in completion of trials for critical equipment like Diesel 
Generators, Air Conditioning Plant, etc. The original cost of Rs 3051.2 Crs was revised to 
Rs 7852.39 Crs. Cost overrun is attributable to the increase in prices due to delay in 
commencement of construction, increase in costs of developmental Projects, and 
introduction of new/ state of the art equipment/ systems.  

33 
 
 
4. IAC (M/s CSL).   The delivery schedule of IAC has been revised from December 
10 to December 18.  The main reasons for time overrun were due to non -availability of 
Russian steel, delay in receipt of critical pre -launch equipment such as Gear Box and 
3MW Diesel Generators. There had been delays also in getting speci alized Russian 
Aircraft Carrier equipment, due to administrative and procedural delays of Russian Side 
in obtaining internal clearances from their Government. The original cost of Rs 3261 Crs 
was revised to Rs 19341 Crs. Over the time, and with the experie nce of ‘Vikramaditya’, 
the ‘form & fit’ of the vessel has been finalised and many emerging technological 
advances/ new generation equipment has been incorporated in the IAC. Increased 
equipment costs, including weapons and sensors, and AFC due to finalisat ion from 
generic to specific equipment has further added to the cost overrun.  
 
5. Project 75.  The project cost was estimated at Rs. 18797 Crores in 2005 at 
the time of contract signing. The cost was revised to approx Rs  23558 Crores (2010) 
primarily due to increase in cost of MDL procured items as compared to earlier indicated 
cost. The reasons fo r time overrun include frequent revision in cost estimates by DCNS, 
large variations wrt initial cost estimates and difficulties in absorption of technology by the 
Shipyard. 
6. P 75 (I) .   DAC has approved construction of six submarines in India, by a sing le 
shipyard, with ToT from a foreign collaborator, chosen on competitive basis. A Core 
Committee has been constituted by the Ministry in December 14, under the chairmanship 
of Controller of Warship Production and Acquisition (CWP&A), for identification of 
suitable Indian shipyards. The Committee is likely to submit its report by March 15. 
 
7. Steps Taken to Reduce Time and Cost Overruns 
Various steps have been taken to reduce time overrun and cost escalation in 
Shipbuilding projects. These include: - 
  
(a) All projects are now “fixed cost” projects. Variable cost option is available 
only where cost of equipment is uncertain.   
 
(b) Construction of follow on Ships based on same design to reduce build time. 
 
(c) Provision for nomination of equipment for follow -on Ships to reduce 
procurement time. 
  
(d) Regular Project Reviews during Apex Committee Meetings and Steering 
Committee Meetings, besides regular meetings at different levels in NHQ. 
 
(e) Integrated Modular Construction for new Projects and s hift from Te lescopic 
Design to Frozen Design. 
  

34 
 
(f) Capacity building through Modernisation.  
 
(g) Enterprise Resource Planning through Information Technology management 
tools. 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 6) 
 
 There have been spurt in accidents of naval vessels in the recent past which include INS 
Sindhurakshak, INS Vipul, INS Talwar, etc.  The Committee are highly concerned about the 
increasing number of  accidents in defence vessels.  These accidents result not only in material 
loss but also in irreparable loss of hum an lives besides, putting a  question mark on the level of 
maintenance and security.  The Committee found that in most of these cases, the reasons for 
mishap are either material failure of human error.  The Committee desire that the Ministry of 
Defence must ensure that these cases be investigated and reach culmination.  The Committee 
would like to be apprised about inquires, investigations held and judgments executed in case of 
each and every accident.  The Committee also desire that the recommendations, if  any, given 
by any agency and the action taken thereon by the Ministry of Defence as well as naval 
authorities be apprised to them. 
Reply of the Government 
As per the laid down procedures, all cases of accidents are investigated by a Board of 
Inquiry (BoI).  The details are as follows:- 
Ser Date Incident Cause of 
Accident 
Outcome of 
Investigation 
(a) 08 January 
2014 
Crack in 
Sonar Dome 
of INS 
Betwa. 
Error of 
Judgment 
by crew. 
Three officers were 
found culpable.  
Disciplinary action 
against two officers 
has been taken and 
against one officer is 
being processed at 
HQWNC. 
(b) 17th January 
2014 
Suspended 
movement of 
INS 
Sindhughosh 
while 
securing at 
alongside 
berth. 
Crew Error One officer was 
found culpable and 
disciplinary action is 
being processed at 
HQWNC. 
(c) 23 January 
2014 
Sea water 
ingress 
through a 
Poor refit 
work and 
quality 
Board of Inquiry 
(BoI) has been 
approved at IHQ 

35 
 
crack/hole in 
the ship side 
of INS Vipul 
control on 
work-
manship 
MoD (N) on 16 
September 2014.  
05 officers were 
found culpable and 
disciplinary action 
against them is 
being processed at 
HQWNC.   
(d) 30 January 
2014 
Damage to 
Propeller of 
INS Airavat, 
whilst 
entering 
harbour. 
Crew Error Two officers were 
found culpable  and 
disciplinary action is 
being processed at 
HQENC. 
(e) 26 
February 
2014 
Fire onboard 
INS 
Sindhuratna 
Electrical 
short circuit 
in cables 
Seven officers were 
found culpable and 
disciplinary action is 
being processed at 
HQWNC. 
(f) 07 March 
2014 
Accident 
during trials 
of engine 
room fire 
fighting 
system 
onboard 
Yard 12701 
(Kolkata) 
under 
construction 
at MDL. 
Material 
Failure. 
No individual or 
organization was 
held responsible for 
the cause of 
incident, and the 
incident was treated 
as an accident.  The 
death of the officer 
is considered as 
‘attributable to 
Service’. 
(g) 06 April 
2014 
Incident of 
smoldering 
and thick 
smoke 
during hot 
work on INS 
Matanga. 
Electrical 
short circuit 
in cables 
Board Proceedings 
are under 
examination at IHQ 
MoD (N). 
(h) 28 June 
2014 
Damage to 
port propeller 
of INS 
Kuthar while 
coming 
alongside at 
- Board Proceedings 
are under 
examination at IHQ 
MoD (N). 

36 
 
Port Blair. 
(i) 02 July 
2014 
Touching 
bottom of 
INS Cheetah 
while 
entering 
Kochi 
Harbour. 
- Board Proceedings 
are under 
examination at IHQ 
MoD (N). 
(j) 31 October 
2014 
Collision of 
INS Kora 
with MV 
Madeleine 
Rickmers at 
Sea. 
- Board Proceedings 
are under 
examination at IHQ 
MoD (N). 
(k) 06 
November 
2014 
Sinking of 
TRV-72. 
- BoI is in progress at 
HQENC. 
 
 Lessons learnt from the report of BoI are implemented appropriately.  Corrective 
steps have been taken by Naval HQs with extensive checks on weapon related safety 
systems and audit of Standard Operating Procedures on all operational Naval Units.  
Safety procedures and pr ofessional checks  are re -emphasized.  Incidents study and 
Analysis Cells have been intimated at professional schools wherein lessons learnt are 
incorporated into professional training.  Safety Audits of various units are being regularly 
conducted. 
Recommendation (Para No. 10) 
 The Committee found that in case of Revenue budgeting also, the scenario of deficit 
budgeting is quite evident. The amount projected by Air Force was Rs. 27,073.40 crore while the 
actually allocated amount is Rs. 20,506.84 crore.  Out of the total Revenue Demands, Rs. 16642 
crore was asked for non -salary expenses. However, the amount actually allocated under this 
Head is Rs. 10877 crore, thus resulting into a shortfall of Rs. 5765 crore. Representatives of Air 
Force candidly submitted that Revenue Budget constraint will impact procurement of spares and 
fuel and resultant shortfall in training as older systems require more maintenance. It was also 
informed that expenditure for disaster relief in Uttrakhand and Jammu and Kashmir as well as in 
General Elections 2014 has further added pressure on already stretched resources of Air Force.  
The Committee, observe that there is already a huge shortage of air fleet from the sanctioned 
strength and any further constraint on spares will lead to s hortfall in serviceability and hence 
impact availability adversely. The Committee are perturbed to find that the entire scenario is 
dismal and recommend that adequate budget should be allocated against revenue head so as to 
ensure that spares and serviceability do not suffer any further.   

37 
 
Reply of the Government 
 The requirement for additional funds under the revenue budget has been projected to the 
Ministry of Finance. 
Recommendation (Para No. 12) 
 
 The Committee were informed by the representatives of Indian Air Force that IAF today 
requires at least 45 fighter squadrons to counter a two front collusive threat but the Government 
has authorized a strength of 42 squadrons for this purpose.  This revelation is astonishing as on 
the one hand Indian Air Forc e (IAF) had made a submission that they would require at least 45 
squadrons while on the other hand Ministry is sanctioning 42 squadrons.  The Committee feel 
that this paradox needs to be rectified at the earliest. 
Recommendation (Para No. 13) 
 With regard to existing squadron strength, it is learnt that we are down to 25 squadrons 
today even though authorization is for 42 combat squadrons.  Thus our capability has already 
come down.  In a candid submission, it was admitted by the representatives  of Air Force that our 
capability vis-à-vis our neighbours is fast eroding.  Further, it was found that Air Force today has 
only 25 active fighter squadrons.  Moreover, 14 of these squadrons are equipped with MiG -21 
and MiG -27 which will retire between 20 15-2024.  Thus the strength will be reduced to just 11 
squadrons by 2024.  The Committee came to know that this widening gap occur because the 
rate at which fighter aircraft are retiring after completion of their total technical life exceeds the 
rate at which their replacements are being inducted into the IAF.  In this regard, the Committee 
further enquired about the initiatives being taken in order to mitigate these gaps in the squadron 
strength and found that Air Force has contracted for 272 Su -30 MKI fig hter aircraft to form 13 
Squadrons and the delivery of these aircraft is likely to be completed by 2020.  However, the 
strength will be raised to the extent of 24 squadrons.  Further, the series projection of Light 
Combat Aircraft (LCA) by Hindustan Aerona utics Limited (HAL) is also awaited, to form the first 
LCA squadron in IAF.  The Medium Multi -Role Combat Aircraft (MMRCA) project is at Contract 
Negotiation Committee (CNC) stage.  It is needless to say that an early induction of additional 
aircraft is cr ucial for arresting the downward trend in the strength of fighter squadrons.  The 
Committee find the situation to be very grim and it is quintessential for the Ministry to ensure 
smooth and adequate flow of funds and providing easier induction procedure fo r attaining the 
requisite squadron strength.  More distressing is the fact that only Rs. 2645 crore has been 
allocated for ‘New Schemes’ in the Budget.  The Committee are constrained to observe that 
country’s security requirements are being compromised by ignoring consistently widening gap 
between sanctioned and existing strengths.  The Committee desire that concrete and prompt 
steps be initiated expeditiously to induct sufficient number of functional platforms and a status 
report in this regard be submitted to the Committee. 
 

38 
 
Reply of the Government (Paras No. 12 & 13) 
  
 The Indian Air Force (IAF) has projected the requirement of 45 fighter squadrons to 
counter a two front collusive threat.   However, the IAF today has 35 active fighter squadrons as 
against a Government authorised strength of 42 squadrons.      
 IAF has contracted 272 Su-30 MKI fighter aircraft to form 13 Squadrons.  The delivery of 
Su-30 MKI will continue till 2030, resulting in equipping 3 more squadrons in the next 4 to 5 
years.   In addition, as per the India -France Joint Statement issued by the two cou ntries during 
the Prime Minister’s visit to France, Government of India conveyed to the Government of France 
that in view of the critical operational necessity for Multirole Combat Aircraft, Indian Air Force will 
acquire 36 Rafale jets in fly -away condition as quickly as possible.  The two leaders agreed to 
conclude an Inter-Government agreement for supply of the aircraft on terms that would be better 
than conveyed by Dasault Aviation as part of a separate process underway; the delivery would 
be in time -frame that would be compatible with the operation requirement of IAF and that the 
aircraft and associated systems and weapons would be delivered on the same configuration as 
had been tested and approved by IAF; and with a longer maintenance responsibility by France.  
Further, IAF has accepted the first Series Production LCA on 17.01.2015.  In addition, design / 
development of Fifth Generation Fighter Aircraft is under progress.  If all procurements fructify as 
planned, the IAF is likely to achieve the Governme nt authorised strength of 42 Sqns by the end 
of 15th Plan period. 
Recommendation (Para No. 15) 
 On the issue of trainer aircraft, the Committee has found that IAF is currently holding 
trainer aircrafts under its inventory which include Basic Trainer Aircraft (BTA), Intermediate Jet 
Trainer (IJT) consisting of Kiran Mk -I/IA and Kiran Mk -II, and Advanced Jet Trainer (AJT).  The 
existing strength of trainer aircraft is 253 as against the sanctioned strength of 430.  Simulators 
have also been provided for each type of aircraft.  It is noticeable that there is a shortage of 
nearly 40% of trainer aircraft.  In this regard, the IAF’s proposal for the procurement of 106 BTA 
(PC-7 MK -II) under ‘Buy and Make (Indian)’ categorization is under process.  It has been 
informed that the Air Force follows a pattern of three -stage training on a BTA.  In this category 
the demand has been satisfied to some measure and more purchases to be made there.  The 
second level of training which Air Force follows is on an IJT which is a problem area because 
this task has been assigned to HAL and this aircraft is yet to come into bei ng.  The third is AJT 
which is being produced in India and the country is generally able to satisfy that requirement.  
The Committee here find that IJT, the Kiran aircraft, have already started retiring and were 
planned to be replaced by the HAL built IJT;  however, the IJT has been under development 
since 1999 and still certain difficulties are being faced in its induction.  In view of the above, IAF 
is looking for other available options for Intermediate Flying Training.  A Request for Information 
(RFI) for the same was posted on the Ministry of Defence website on 25 February 2014 and the 
responses received are being examined at Air HQ.  The IAF has contracted a total of 106 Hawk 

39 
 
Mk-132 AJT aircraft and their deliveries are likely to be completed by 2016.  The Committee 
desire that urgent measures should be taken to ensure timely deliveries of the same under 
intimation to this Committee. 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 16) 
 
 The Committee were concerned to know about the strategy being pursued to fill the huge 
gaps in sanctioned and existing trainer aircraft.  The Committee feel that one of the important 
factors in grooming Air Force is provision of adequate training facilities to the personnel.  It is 
indeed unfortunate to disclose that there are huge deficiencies in trainer aircraft.  The Committee 
in their earlier report have consistently taken up the issue of basic trainer.  The status of IJT is 
quite disturbing.  The Committee are unhappy that HAL has not been able to deliver IJT to Air 
Force even after 15 year s of commencement of the project and such non -performance derails 
the modernization and indigenization drive of defence forces.  The ministry has resorted to 
looking for alternatives only in early 2014 that too only on consistent pursuance of the 
Committee.  In this connection, the Committee desire to be informed about the response 
received in regard to RFI and are concerned that IJTs are acquired in time so that training 
modules are not hampered for lack of aircraft.  The Committee also recommend that HAL is 
appropriately dealt with for not being able to timely deliver IJTs to Air Force.  The Committee 
should be intimated about the concrete action taken in this regard. 
 
Reply of the Government on Para No. 15 & 16 
 
Trainer Aircraft held by IAF currently incl ude Baisc Trainer Aircraft (BTA) intermediate Jet 
Trainer (IJT) and Advanced Jet Trainer (AJT).  The existing trainer aircraft strength is 274 as 
against the sanctioned strength of 430.  Simulators have also been provided for each type of 
aircraft.  In vie w of the delays in the development of HTT -40 BTA by Hindustan Aeronautics 
Limited (HAL), Defence Acquisition Council (DAC) on 28.02.2015, approved the procurement of 
additional 38 PC -7 MK-II aircraft under ‘option Clause’ of the procurement contract, subje ct to 
certain conditions.  
  Further, HAL in conjunction with  RCMA (A/C) has carried out life extension studies on 
Kiran aircraft.  Consequently, the life of Kiran aircraft has been extended by 2 years and the 
phase out will now commence from 2017 -18 onwards.  However, the IJT has b een under 
development since 1999.   In view of the above, the IAF is looking at options for Intermediate 
Flying Training.  This could include use of the BTA to also undertake the Intermediate stage 
training syllabus (Stage-II Flying). 
 The IAF has contracted a total of 106 hawk Mk -132 AJT aircraft.  The deliveries are likely 
to be completed by 2016.    
 The timeline for IJT project was estimated based on knowledge/experience gained in 
successful development projects.  However, each new development, having its own complexities 

40 
 
and unique features/requirements, is inherent with certain amount of risk & uncertainty.  The 
design and development of IJT has encountered various unforeseen incidents/ design 
modifications such as change of engine, incident on prototy pe aircraft, redesign of control circuit 
etc.  The project is monitored by a Steering Committee comprising MoD, IAF, HAL, CEMILAC 
and DGAQA. HAL has overcome majority of these issues by implementing the 
recommendations of Steering Committee.   The only maj or activity remaining towards 
Operational Clearance is completion of spin trials for which, aircraft has been modified in 
consultation with BAE System to achieve the desired spin characteristics.  Operational clearance 
is planned to be achieved by December, 2015.  
 
Recommendation (Para No. 19) 
 The Committee are given to understand that infrastructure for airfields in forward areas 
viz Leh, Ladakh and the North-east, is a cause of concern.  Although infrastructure development 
projects have been undertaken, but these will tak    e their own time to fruition.  The Committee 
find that this has to be coupled with automatically hardened shelters which need to exist for 
every single aircraft so that we are not caught by surprise as has happened in different parts of 
the world.  The Committee understand that the pace of progress is determined always by the 
availability of budget.  The Committee observe that unless the infrastructure projects are 
completed in time, effectiveness of all other assets, be it fleet or ma npower, will be obviated.  
Hence, they recommend that in addition to availability of funds, these are optimally and 
transparently utilized.  The Ministry of Defence must ensure this and intimate the Committee 
about the initiatives taken in this regard. 
Reply of the Government 
1. New Generation Hardened Aircraft Shelter. The proposal of construction of 108 
New Generation Hardened Aircraft Shelters (NGHAS) for Su -30 class of aircraft is under 
examination of the Ministry in consultation with other department(s) concerned.  
2. Nyoma Air Force Base. Nyoma, in eastern Ladakh, is planned to be developed into 
a full -fledged airbase.  The infrastructure planned includes an extended runway hardened 
aircraft shelters, aprons and all other requirements of an operational  base. Draft CCS Note in 
this regard is under process.    
3. Kargil Air Force Base. A proposal for development of infrastructure at Kargil Air 
Force Base is also under examination with concerned agencies.    
4. Development of ALGs along with allied Security Infrastructure in North-East.  
(a)  A comprehensive plan for improvement of infrastructure of the Indian Army and Indian Air 
Force (IAF) along the Eastern Sector has been approved.  This includes up -gradation of 
infrastructure at ten airbases in Eastern Air Command Area of Responsibility (E AC AOR) and 
development of eight Advance Landing Grounds (ALGs) in Arunachal Pradesh.  The proposals 
are at various stages of execution. 

41 
 
 
CHAPTER III 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS, WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT DESIRE TO 
PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NIL 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

42 
 
CHAPTER IV 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS, IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE 
GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE AND WHICH REQUIRE 
REITERATION 
Recommendation (Para No. 9) 
 While examining the subject, the Committee found that Air Force had projected a 
requirement of Rs. 62,408.33 crore for Capital Budget while the amount actually allocated is Rs. 
33,710.68 crore, which is nearly half of the projections. Further, it was revea led during 
deliberations that out of total Capital Budget, there was a demand of Rs. 12,395 crore 
exclusively for `New Schemes’. However, the actual allocation   for this head is merely Rs. 2645 
crore. Thus, amounting to a shortfall of Rs. 9750 crore in th is segment i.e. 80% of the 
projections. The Committee are baffled   at such  a meagre allocation as   Air Force  has a long 
list of projects planned for induction  during the year  2014 -15, which include  Medium Multi-Role 
Combat Aircraft (MMRCA), Jaguar R e-engineering, Addle Cheetal Helicopters, MLH Upgrade, 
Additional Aerostats, Additional Dornier, Addl FRA, Additional Airborne Warning and Control 
System(AWACS), Additional IACCS Nodes, Attack Helicopters Heavy Lift Helicopters, 
Modernization of Air Field Infrastructure (MAFI) phase II and VSHORADS. The Committee here 
feel that this is a state of ad -hocism in planning and budgeting and an apparent case of 
callousness and non -seriousness. The Committee while deploring this attitude of non -
commitment and insincerity, desire that accountability and commitment has to be incorporated in 
the entire process of planning, budgeting and execution.  Only then, one could expect the 
desired results. In any case, as per Ministry’s own submission the impact of shortfall in  Capital 
Budget will lead to slowdown of modernization, delay in induction of new capabilities and 
resultant asymmetry in capability with respect to threat perception.   The  fact that on the one 
hand Air Force has audacious  acquisitions and upgradation p lans for the coming year  and on 
the other hand the Ministry has made  feeble  allocation of Rs. 2645 crore. This appears to 
demonstrate a lackadaisical approach of the Ministry. The Committee strongly recommend that 
adequate funds should be allocated for `New Schemes’, so that already worsened situation in 
respect of depleted air fleet, infrastructure  and modernisation of Air Force is not further 
aggravated.  
Reply of the Government 
 
 The allocation for New Schemes is constantly reviewed based upon progress of approval 
of New Schemes and additional funds provided as and when required. 
 
 
 

43 
 
CHAPTER V 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS, IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL REPLIES OF THE 
GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NIL 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI;         MAJ GEN B C KHANDURI, AVSM (RETD), 
10 December, 2015                  Chairperson 
19 Agrahayana, 1937 (Saka)                      Standing Committee on Defence 
  

44 
 
APPENDIX I 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE  
 
MINUTES OF THE SIXTH SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE   
ON DEFENCE (2015-16) 
 
 The Committee sat on Thursday, the 10th December, 2015  from 1000 hrs. to 1100 hrs. 
in Committee Room, `62', Parliament House, New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
Maj Gen B C Khanduri, AVSM (Retd)  -  Chairperson 
 
 
LOK SABHA 
 
2 Shri Shrirang Appa Barne 
3 Shri Thupstan Chhewang 
4 Col Sonaram Choudhary(Retd) 
5 Shri Sher Singh Ghubaya 
6 Shri Ramesh Jigajinagi 
7 Km Shobha Karandlaje  
8 Dr  Mriganka Mahato 
9 Shri CH Malla Reddy 
10 Smt  Mala Rajya Lakshmi Shah 
11 Shri A P Jithender Reddy 
                                        
                                              RAJYA SABHA 
 
12 Shri K R Arjunan 
13 Shri Harivansh 
14 Shri Hishey Lachungpa 
15 Shri Tarun Vijay 
 
      SECRETARIAT 
1. Smt. Kalpana Sharma   - Joint Secretary 
2. Shri T G Chandrasekhar    - Director 
3. Smt. J M Sinha    - Additional Director 
4. Shri Rahul Singh    -  Under Secretary 
 
 

45 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the members to the sitting of the Committee 
and briefed about the reports.  
3. The Committee then took up for consideration of the  following  draft reports:- 
(i) Action Taken by the Government on observations/recommendations contained 
in the Fourth Report of Standing Committee on Defence (16th Lok Sabha) on 
'Demands for Grants of Ministry of Defence for the year 2014 -15 on  Navy and 
Air Force (Demand Nos. 23 and 24)'; and 
(ii)  Action Taken by the Government on observations/recommendations contained 
in the Fifth Report of Standing Committee on Defence (16th Lok Sabha) on 
'Demands for Grants of Ministry of Defence for the year 2014 -15 on  Ordnance 
Factories and Defence Research and Development Organisation (Demand Nos. 
25 and 26)'  
4. After deliberations, the Committee adopted the above Reports with some modifications. 
5. The Committee, then, authorised the Chairperson to finalise the above draft Reports 
and present t he same to the House on a date convenient to him during the ongoing Winter 
Session, 2015. 
The Committee then adjourned 
  

46 
 
APPENDIX II 
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON OBSERVATIONS / 
RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE FOURTH REPORT OF STANDING 
COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE (16TH LOK SABHA) ON ' DEMANDS FOR GRANTS OF 
MINISTRY OF DEFENCE FOR THE YEAR 2014 -15 ON  NAVY AND AIR FORCE 
(DEMAND NOS. 23 & 24)'. 
 
(i)  Total number of recommendations :                    19 
(ii)   Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the Government 
 (please see Chapter II) : 
Para Nos. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8,10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16,17, 18 and  19 
Total : 18 
Percentage : 94.84% 
 
(iii) Observations/Recommendations which the  Committee do not desire to pursue in view 
 of the replies received from the Government (please see Chapter III): 
Para No.  Nil 
Total :Nil 
Percentage : 0  
 
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of Government have not 
 been accepted by the Committee which require reiteration and commented upon 
 (please see Chapter IV): 
Para No.   9 
Total : 1 
Percentage : 5.26% 
 
(v) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which Government have furnished 
 interim replies (please see Chapter V): 
Para No.  Nil 
Total : Nil 
Percentage : 0 
 