 
49 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE 
(2018-19) 
 
(SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
MINISTRY OF DEFENCE 
 
 
[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations contained in the 
Forty-third Report (16th Lok Sabha) on ‘Demands for Grants of the Ministry of Defence for 
the year 2018-19 pertaining to Revenue Budget of Ordnance Factories, Defence Research 
and Development Organisation, DGQA and NCC (Demand No. 20).'] 
 
 
FORTY-NINTH REPORT 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
January, 2019/Pausa, 1940(Saka) 
 
 
  


FORTY-NINTH REPORT 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE 
(2018-19) 
 
(SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
MINISTRY OF DEFENCE 
 
 
[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations contained in the 
Forty-third Report (16th Lok Sabha) on ‘Demands for Grants of the Ministry of Defence for 
the year 2018-19 pertaining to Revenue Budget of Ordnance Factories, Defence Research 
and Development Organisation, DGQA and NCC (Demand No. 20).'] 
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 7.1.2019 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 7.1.2019 
 
 
 
  
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
January, 2019/Pausa, 1940(Saka) 
 
 
  


CONTENTS 
 
REPORT 
PART I 
CHAPTER I REPORT 
 
 
CHAPTER II (A) OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN 
ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT 
 
(B) OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN 
ACCEPTED BY  THE GOVERNMENT AND TO BE COMMENTED 
UPON 
 
 
 
 
CHAPTER III OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE 
DO NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE REPLIES 
RECEIVED FROM THE GOVERNMENT 
 
 
CHAPTER IV OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH 
REPLIES OF GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE 
COMMITTEE AND WHICH REQUIRE REITERATION AND 
COMMENTED UPON 
 
 
CHAPTER V OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH 
GOVERNMENT HAVE FURNISHED INTERIM REPLIES 
 
 
 
 
APPENDICES 
 
I      MINUTES OF THE THIRD SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
           DEFENCE (2018-19) HELD ON 04.01.2019  
 
II     ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS   CONTAINED   IN THE FORTY THIRD 
REPORT (SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA) OF THE STANDING  COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE 
(2017-18) 
 
 
 
  

 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE (2018 -19)  
SHRI KALRAJ MISHRA  -  CHAIRPERSON 
 
Lok Sabha 
 
 
 * Shri Thupstan Chhewang resigned w.e.f. 13.12.2018  
2. Shri Deepak Adhikari (Dev) 
3. Shri Suresh Chanabasappa Angadi 
4. Shri Shrirang Appa Barne 
5. Col Sona Ram Chaudhary VSM (Retd) 
6. Shri H D Devegowda 
7. Shri Jayadev Galla 
8. Shri Sher Singh Ghubaya 
9. Shri Gaurav Gogoi 
10. Dr Murli Manohar Joshi 
11. Km Shobha Karandlaje 
12. Dr Mriganka Mahato 
13. Shri Rodmal Nagar 
14. Shri Partha Pratim Ray 
15. Shri A P Jithender Reddy 
16. Shri B Senguttuvan 
17. Smt Mala Rajya Laxmi Shah 
18. Shri Dharambir Singh 
19. Smt Pratyusha Rajeshwari Singh 
20. Shri Rakesh Singh 
 
  Rajya Sabha 
 
21. Shri K R Arjunan 
22. Dr Ashok Bajpai 
23. Shri Joginipally Santosh Kumar 
24. Shri Madhusudan Mistry 
25. Shri Soumya R Patnaik 
26. Shri G V L Narasimha Rao 
27. Shri Sanjay Raut 
28. Smt Ambika Soni 
29. Shri Ram Nath Thakur 
30. Lt. Gen. Dr D P Vats 
 

SECRETARIAT 
 
1.  Smt. Kalpana Sharma  - Joint Secretary 
2. Shri Srinivasulu Gunda   - Director 
3. Smt. Jyochnamayi Sinha  - Additional Director 
4.   Shri Rajesh Kumar   - Sr. Executive Assitant 
 
 
 
  

INTRODUCTION 
 
 I, the Chairperson of the Standing Committee on Defence (2018 -19), having been 
authorised by the Committee, present this Forty -ninth Report on `Action Taken by the 
Government on the recommendations/observations contained in the Forty -third Report of 
Standing Committee on Defence (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants 2018 -19 of the 
Ministry of Defence pertaining to Revenue Budget of Ordnance Factories, Defence Research and 
Development Organisation, Directorate General Of Quality Assurance And National Cadet Corps 
(Demand No. 20)'. 
 
2.       The Forty-third Report was  presented  to Lok  Sabha and laid  in  Rajya  Sabha on 
13.03.2018.  It contained 34 Observations/Recommendations. The Ministry  of Defence furnished 
Action  Taken Replies on  all  the Observations/Recommendations in July  2018. 
 
3.  The Report was considered and adopted by the Committee at their Sitting held on 
04.01.2019. 
 
4.  For facility of reference and convenience, Observations/Recommendations of the 
Committee have been printed in bold letters in the Report. 
 
5. An analysis of  Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations 
contained in the Forty-third Report of Standing Committee on Defence (16th Lok Sabha) is given 
in Appendix II. 
 
 
New Delhi;                                                               Kalraj Mishra,   
  4 January, 2019                     Chairperson,  
 14  Pausa, 1940 (Saka)                                            Standing Committee on Defence 
  

REPORT 
CHAPTER I 
This report of the Standing Committee on Defence deals with Action Taken by the 
Government on the Observations/Recommendations contained in the Forty-third  Report 
of Standing Committee on Defence (16 thLok Sabha) on ‘Demands for Grants of the 
Ministry of Defence for the year 2018 -19 on Ordnance Factory, Defence Research and 
Development Organisation, Directorate General of Quality Assurance (DGQA) and 
National Cadet Corps (NCC) (Demand No. 20)' which was presented to Lok  Sabha and 
laid in Rajya Sabha on 13  March, 2018. 
 
2. The Committee's Forty -third Report (16 thLok Sabha) contained 34 
Observations/Recommendations on the following aspects:- 
Para No. Subject 
ORDNANCE FACTORY BOARD 
1 and 2 Budgetary provisions 
3 and 4 Budget for Modernization 
5 Expenditure on Research & Development 
6 and 7  Delay in projects 
8 and 9 Quality of Products of Ordnance Factories 
10 Cost Cutting of Ordnance Factory Products 
11 Exporting of Ordnance Factory Products 
DEFENCE RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT ORGANISATION 
12-17,  Budgetary provisions 
18 - 20 Projects abandoned closed by DRDO 
21-22 Delay in Projects 
23  
24 
Indigenisation 
Quality Control 
25 Nuclear, Biological and Chemical(NBC) Research 
26 and 27 Collaboration with Universities/Academic Institutions 
DIRECTORATE GENERAL QUALITY ASSURANCE 
28 Budget 2018-19 
29 Quality Check 
30 Training  upgradaton 
NATIONAL CADET CORPS 
31, 32, 33 and 34 Budget 

 
3. Action Taken Replies have been received from the Government in respect of all the 
observations/recommendations contained in the Report. The replies have been examined 
and categorized as follows:- 
 
(i) (a)  Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by 
the Government: 
   
  Para Nos. 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 17, 18, 19, 20, 23, 24, 25, 26, 27, 30, 31, 32, 33 and 34 
 (19 Recommendations) 
  These are included in Chapter II (A) of the Draft Report. 
(b) Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by 
 The Government and commented upon: 
Para Nos.  28 
(01 Recommendations) 
 These are included in Chapter II (B) of the Draft Report. 
 
(ii)   Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to 
pursue in view of the replies received from the Government: 
  
Para No.     29 
      (01 Recommendations) 
These are mentioned in Chapter III of the Draft Report.  
(iii) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of Government 
have not been accepted by the Committee which require reiteration  and 
commented upon: 
 
  Para Nos. 3, 4, 5, 11, 12,  21 &  22 
(07 Recommendations) 
           These are included in Chapter IV of the Draft Report. 
 
(iv)   Observations/recommendations in respect of which Government have 
furnished interim replies: 
  
Para No. 1,2, 13, 14, 15 & 16           (06 Recommendations)  
           These are included in Chapter V of the Draft Report. 
 

4.  The Committee desire that the Ministry’s response to their comments made in 
Chapter I and final replies to the Observations/Recommendations for which only 
interim replies have been given by the  Government should be furnished to them at 
the earliest and in any case not later than six months of the presentation of this 
Report. 
A. Budget for Modernization 
Recommendation (Para No. 3 and 4) 
 
 5. The Committee had recommended as under: 
 
“Modernisation of Ordnance Factories is a continuous process. To keep pace with 
the contemporary manufacturing technologies, OFB prepares a long term planning 
spread over a period of 5 years which started from 2007 -08. Ordnance Factories 
have been adopting three pronged approach for modernisation viz. (a) Renewal 
and Replacement (RR) of P&M which are beyond economical repair, with 
machineries of state of the art technologies. (b) Acquisition of P&M under New 
Capital (NC) for additional capacity, (C) higher productivity, enhanced quality, focus 
on use of renewable energy and to address environmental issues etc. (d) 
Corresponding Civil Works (CW) infrastructure development etc. 
 
The key technology inte nsive areas identified  for modernisation of Ordnance 
Factories were: 
 
(i) Chemical Process Plants 
(ii) Small arms ammunition Production 
(iii) Ammunition filling and assembly 
(iv) Foundry and extrusion 
(v) Metal forming, machining and fabrication 
(vi) Quality control and assurance 
 
Under the Capital segment, the allocation was Rs. 5345.22crore against projection 
of Rs 6027.63 crore. The allocations for Research and Development work for 
Ordnance Factories at the BE stage of Rs 2017 -18 was Rs. 105.00 crore. It was 
reduced to Rs 100.00 crore at RE stage. The allocation at BE 2018 -19 was Rs 
105.00 crore. The Committee were disappointed to note that there was no increase 
in the allocations for R&D of Ordnance Factories. Also, the inflation rate was not 
factored into. With this allocation, the Committee were apprehensive whether the 
key technological intensive areas as mentioned above were going to be 
materialised or not. Ordnance Factories play a significant role in ‘Make in India’ 
drive of the Government of India at least in Defence Sector . Howe ever, it was of 
utmost importance that the products being manufactured in Ordnance Factories 
were of global standards so that they coul d compete with private players also who 
are now joining the Defence Sector. To reach this objective it was imperat ive that 
the production related infrastructure and capacity in OFs are enhanced up to 

required standards. Therefore, the Committee desired that essential steps should 
be taken towards modernization of OFs in a planned manner and essential budget 
for the sa me should also be provided by Ministry of Defence and appropriately 
spent by OFB”. 
 
 6. The Ministry in its action taken reply has stated as under:- 
 
“OFB’s modernization programme is primarily focused on introduction of State -of-
the-Art machines to manufacture quality product with cost effectiveness, taking into 
account the current and long term future requirements of its customers. A structured 
mechanism exists to ensure that OFB’s infrastructure is modernized with the latest 
manufacturing technolog ies and machineries in the identified areas. Status of 
budget provided to OFB during the year 2017-18 and expenditure is given below: 
(Rs in Crore) 
 Renewal & 
Replacement 
(RR) 
New 
Capital 
(NC) 
Civil Works 
(CW) 
Total 
Approved Modified 
Appropriation 
(MA) 
460.00 801.00 204.85 1465.85 
Expenditure (Tentative 
up to March,2018) 
400.96 825.25 204.75 1430.96 
 
 
7. As the allocation for Research & Development( R&D) of Ordnance Factories at 
RE stage of 2017 -18 and at BE of 2018 -19 was almost  the same i.e. Rs. 100  crore 
and Rs. 105 crore respectively, t he Committee had expressed their disappointment 
over the meager allocation to R&D which may  have  affected adversely the 
modernization of Ordnance factories in key technology areas .  While allocating 
funds at BE 2018 -19, the C ommittee noticed that even the inflation  rate seems to 
have not been factored into. Further, this meager allocation, the Committee had felt,  
has not been in tune with the significant role envisaged for Ordnance factories in 
‘Make in India’ I nitiative of the Government in D efense Sector.  The Committee, 
therefore, had desired  to take essential steps for modernization and to allocate 
necessary amounts commensurate with the modernization programme.   
 The Ministry in the action taken reply has submitted inter alia that Ordnance 
Factory Board’s modernization programme is focused on introduction of State-of-
the-Art machines to manufacture quality product with cost effectiveness, taking into 
account the current and long term future requirements of its customers.  However, 
the reply is conspicuously silent as to the allocation of adequate funds for R& D as 

desired by the Committee.  Further as apprehended by the Committee, the Ministry 
while responding to the recommendations at S l. nos. 6 & 7 admitted inter alia that 
due to budgetary constraints Ordnance Factory Board (OFB) was forced to prioritize 
civil works for various projects.   Thus, the Committee believe that funds crunch 
appears to impact  adversely various projects inc luding R&D. The Committee, 
therefore, reiterating their recommendation,   suggest that inadequacy of resources 
may not be allowed to hinder R&D efforts of OFB.  
B. Expenditure on Research & Development 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 5) 
 
 8. The Committee had recommended as under: 
 
 “The Committee viewed that R&D had to be an integral component of all the 
production units. The same holds true for OFs also. In this connection, the 
Committee were informed that OFB has taken up in house R&D projects for design 
& Development & product upgrade of Armament, Ammunition and equipment. OFB 
had developed 122 Armament s &ammunition so far, out of which 61 items have 
been designed and developed by Ordnance factories through in -house R&D. In all, 
25% of the output value of OFB was from in -house R&D, and R&D under foreign 
Transfer of Technology (ToT) & R&D with Defence Res earch & Development 
Organisation.   The Committee noted that design centers have been established in 
each of the OFs to carry out R&D and collaborative R&D projects were also taken 
up. However, while glancing at the percentage of expenditure in R&D to over all 
allocation during last five years, the Committee had found that it was 0.40% in 
2012-13, 0.38% in 2013 -14, 0.50% in 2014 -15, 0.67% in 2015 -16 & 0.40% in the 
year 2016 -17. The Committee were of the view that the data is indicative of a 
somewhat apatheti c attitude towards the R&D drive of OFB. On this account, the 
Committee would like to observe that considerable attention & emphasis should be 
given to R&D activities by OFB and the Committee be intimated of the measures 
taken in this regard”. 
 
 9. The Ministry in its action taken reply has stated as under:- 
 
“OFB noted the same for compliance”. 
 
10. The Committee in their 43rd report had desired that considerable attention 
and emphasis should be given to R&D activities by OFB and the Committee be 
intimated of the measures taken in this regard. In their reply, the Ministry of Defence 
had merely stated that OFB noted the Committee's view for compliance. There is no 
mention to the various measures  taken or ought to be taken thereto. The 

Committee, therefore, wish  to reiterate that they shall be intimated about the 
concrete steps taken to increase R&D activities. 
 
C. Exporting of Ordnance Factory Products 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 11) 
 
 11. The Committee had recommended as under: 
“From the data supplied to the Committee, it was noted that in the year 2013 -14, 
Ordnance Factories exported Rs 20.24 crore worth  of arms and ammunition. This 
figure remained static till 2016 -17, with the exception of the year 2015 -16, where it 
went down to Rs 6.51 crore. The Committee viewed that improvement in technical 
& financial qualifications would not only be helpful in provi ding quality products to 
our Defence Forces but also boost export of products being manufactured at OFs. 
This would also help OFB to shift gear from being merely dependent of our Armed 
Forces for order book. During the course of evidence, the Committee als o found 
that OFs needed orders to keep their machines running. OFB had to strive to make 
use of their infrastructure optimally and financial propriety had to be observed in 
manufacturing process”. 
 
          12. The Ministry in its action taken reply state d that “ OFB noted the same for 
compliance”. 
13. During the examination of Demands for Grants 2018 -19, the  Committee had  
observed that O rdnance factories need  orders to keep their machines running. 
Further the  data pertaining to export  showed that from 2013 -14 t o 2016-17, their  
exports have either remained static or declined . At the same time their main 
customer, the Arm ed forces seems to have not been giving sufficient orders to 
ensure utilization of the production capacity. The Committee, therefore, had 
recommended that OFB should strive  to make use of their infrastructure optimally 
while observing financial propriety.   
 The Committee take a serious note of the routine nature of the reply of the 
Ministry wherein it has stated th at “Ordnance Factories Board had noted the 
recommendations of the Committee for compliance”. The Ministry has not furnished 
the ways and means for optimum utilization of their infrastructure by exports or by 
domestic sales. The Committee, therefore, desire the Ministry to furnish the same in 
their further action taken replies.   

D. Budgetary Provisions 
Recommendation (Para No. 12) 
 
 14. The Committee had recommended as under: 
 
“The Committee found that there has been shortfall in budget provided to DRDO. 
The budgetary allocation projected, and actually allocated in each of the years 
since 2013-14 is shown in the table below 
The Committee noted from the afore -mentioned table that there had been a 
considerable shortfall in budgetary allocation over the years.” 
 
15. The Ministry in its action taken reply has stated as under:- 
 
 “The requisite information in respect of Dept. of Defence R&D is as follows 
Year Defence* 
Expenditure 
(Rs in crore) 
Projection 
(Rs in crore) 
Budget 
allocated to 
R&D 
(actuals)(Rs in 
crore) 
% of Defence 
Expenditure 
2014-15 218694.18 18495.46 13257.98 6.06 
2015-16  225922.98 19641.56 13317.12 5.89 
2016-17  225899.59 18782.86 13382.05 5.92 
2017-18 
(BE) 274114.00 19935.60 14818.74 5.41 
2018-19 
(BE) 295511.41 22203.74 17861.19 6.04 
 
S. No. Year Projection  (Rs in crore) Allocation  (Rs in crore) 
1.  2013-14 16,483.28 10,934.17 
2.  2014-15 18,495.46 13,716.14 
3.  2015-16 19,641.56 13,540.11 
4.  2016-17 18,782.86 13,593.78 
5.  2017-18 22,203.74 14,818.74 

Yes, it is a fact that budgetary  allocations are much less then the projections made 
by the Deptt of Defence R&D. However, the Deptt is managing within the 
allocations by re-prioritising the project activities.” 
 
16. The Committee view that R&D expenditure needs emphasis and the 
percentage of Defence expenditure on R&D requires upward revision. The growth 
and capability enhancement of Defence sector depends immensely on the sustained 
R&D activities, the success of whic h alone can make India self -sufficient thus 
reducing our dependency on costly imports and leading to considerable savings in 
the overall defence expenditure in the long run.  Therefore, the Committee opine 
that appropriate emphasis may be given to this are a and funds should not act as a 
hindrance in any manner. Appropriate action taken/proposed to be taken in this 
regard may be furnished to the Committee.  
 
 E. Delay in Projects 
Recommendation (Para No. 21 ) 
 17. The Committee had recommended as under: 
 “…. delays in completion of projects were  a part and parcel of DRDOs functioning. 
For  instance, Light Combat Aircraft (LCA) was supposed to have been  completed 
in 2008 but the revised date of completion is June, 2019. In the case of Aero 
engine, Kaveri, the  original date of completion was 1996 but was revised to 
December, 2009. Further revision of the completion schedule continues to be under 
process. Similar was the case with LCA -Navy, Airborne Early Warning and Control 
(AEW&C) System, Air to Air Missile sy stem-Astra, Long Range surface to Air 
Missile etc. to name a few. The extent of delay in the execution of above mentioned 
projects varies from project to project. Although various reasons have been 
attributed for project delays by the representatives of DR DO, the Committee took 
very serious note of this unwarranted and unsavoury phenomenon. These delays 
not only place a burden of unnecessary cost implications but also deprive the 
Services of critical capabilities. The Committee wished to be kept apprised on  the 
progress made in regard to each of the above mentioned projects”. 
  
 … accountability has to be bestowed at some level for the continued delays.  Such 
a dismal scenario cannot be allowed to go on perpetually and wastage of resources 
cannot be taken for granted as a routine phenomenon.  The Committee have also 
been informed t hat various measures are being taken to curb delays that are a 
regular feature.  However, the Committee would like to emphasise that the efforts 
should bear the desired results.  Therefore, an inherent system needs to be 

developed where specific roles and responsibilities are demarcated and specified 
within the organizational structure of DRDO.  The progress made in the direction 
may be brought to the knowledge of the Committee.  
 18. The Ministry in its action taken reply has stated as under:- 
 
“DRDO acknowledges that there have been delays in some of the projects. DRDO 
has issued fresh guidelines to tighten and streamline the process for completion of 
the project within PDC. 
 
a) All reviews i.e. Apex Boards (AB), Executive Boards (EB) and Project 
Monitoring & Review Committees (PMRC) be scheduled at specified 
intervals with advance notice sent to all members. Postponement of reviews 
be avoided to the extent possible. Reviews shoul d focus on issues affecting 
project timelines.  
 
b) Frequency of reviews i.e. EBs/PMRCs may be tightened for unusual delayed 
projects. 
 
c) New cases of project sanction may please project realistic timeframes 
keeping in mind current procedures. Necessary levels of pre-project activity 
including design/configuration reviews & procurement plan to be finalized 
before moving the case for sanction. 
 
                                           Recommendation (Para No. 22) 
 
  19.  The Committee had recommended as under: 
 "… accountability has to be bestowed at some level for the continued delays. Such 
a dismal scenario cannot be allowed to go on perpetually and wastage of resources 
cannot be taken for granted as a routine phenomenon. The Committee have also 
been informed that various measures are being taken to curb delays that are a 
regular feature. However, the Committee would like to emphasise that the efforts 
should bear the desired results. Therefore, an inherent system needs to be 
developed where specific roles and r esponsibilities are demarcated and specified 
within the organizational structure of DRDO. The progress made in the direction 
may be brought to the knowledge of the Committee”. 
 20. The Ministry in its action taken reply has stated as under:- 
 
 “Project Directors are responsible for project execution. The projects are reviewed 
by DGs/Secretary. Only those delayed projects are granted PDC extension in which 
the delay is due to certain unforeseen factors beyond control of DRDO like 
technological b ottlenecks, procurements/integration/manufacturing delay by 
industry, delay in international contracts/MoU, denial of license by certain countries, 
dependence on trial platforms to be provided by services, QR changes etc.  

However it may be noted that rese arch and development is an area of uncertainty 
where certain unknowns are explored. In addition to taking of design projects where 
the sub -systems are already matured, DRDO also has to undertake technology 
projects and science and technology projects where  the technology readiness level 
worldwide may be at intermediate and low level respectively increasing the risk of 
delays. Certain high risk and high pay off projects and blue-sky research has also to 
be undertaken where there are extremely high chance not  only of delays but also   
failures. 
 
It is submitted that, it is difficult to fix accountability solely on DRDO as our projects 
are dependent on number of external agencies including Users, Production/QA 
agencies, Certification agencies etc.” 
 
21. While agreeing with the view that research is an open end activity, the 
Committee still desire that DRDO streamlines the envisaged targets, deadlines of 
the processes and other milestones defined in the project. In the reply, the Ministry 
has submitted that guidelines have been issued to ensure that new cases of project 
sanction may be project  realistic timeframes. The Committee feel that the  earlier 
approach has  led to inordinate delays, in some ca ses as mentioned above more 
than a decade. This Committee believe might have resulted in manifold increase in 
cost of the project / product.   The Committee feel that accountability at the level of 
project directors be invariably fixed for inordinate delays which leads to cost  
escalation of the product / project. In addition, such delays also deprive the services 
of the critical equipment which  probably might have been met through costly 
imports. The Committee, therefore while reiterating their earlier recommendations 
suggest that all out efforts be made to complet e the ongoing projects critical to the 
services performance be completed without further delay.  
 
Directorate General of  Quality Assurance 
 
F. Budget  2018-19 
Recommendation (Para No. 28) 
 
22. The Committee had recommended as under: 
 “During the year 2018-19, against the projection of Rs.1322.81 crore the allocation 
for DGQA is Rs.1146.98 crore. This accounts to a shortfall of Rs.175.83 crore. The 
Committee viewed that DGQA plays a significant part in ensuring the quality of 
products be ing supplied to the Defence Forces. DGQA carries out inspection of 
Defence stores supplied by Ordnance Factories, Defence Public Sector 

Undertakings and Industry. These inspections were done at various stages. The 
Committee came to know that on an average DGQA carries out approx. 18,000 
inspections per month. Considering the significance that DGQA holds in ensuring 
qualitative value of equipments including arms and ammunition, the Committee 
desired that adequate funds are provided to them for mandatory sust enance and 
operational requirements”. 
 
 23. The Ministry in its action taken reply has stated as under:- 
 
 “The projections made by the Services, including DGQA, are forwarded to Ministry 
of Finance for favourable consideration. If Ministry of Finance conveys reduced 
allocation, the same is required to be passed on to the Services. It is agreed that 
due to reduced allocations, certain adjustments may be made but not to the extent 
that it affects operational preparedness. 
 
The Committee may be assured that all efforts will be made to obtain additional 
requirements projected by DGQA at Supplementary/RE stage.  It  may be further 
added that all efforts will be made to ensure that sustenance and operational 
requirements of DGQA do not suffer due to want of funds”. 
 
 
24. The Committee have expressed their concern about the shortfall in the 
allocation to DGQA in their report. While acknowledging the critical role played by 
DGQA in ensuring the quality of equipments supplied by the Defence production 
agencies, the Committee had desired that DGQA might be provided with adequate 
funds.  The Committee note that the Ministry  would make all out efforts to obtain 
additional requirement as projected by DGQA at supplementary RE stage.   The 
Committee wish to be apprised about the additional funds provided to DGQA at 
supplementary/RE stage as well as  the  projects  affected due t o   reduced 
allocations during the Financial Year 2018-19. 
 
  
 

      CHAPTER II 
  
(A)  OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE 
GOVERNMENT: 
     
DELAY IN PROJECTS 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 6) 
 
 From the reply submitted by the Ministry,  the Committee note that various projects of OFB 
have been delayed. The OFB has given many reasons for delays including those relating to 
procurement of plants and machinery and delay in completion of civil works by MES. The 
Committee note in this regard t hat both OFB and MES function under the control of Ministry of 
Defence. Therefore, Ministry of Defen ce should direct both the orga nisations to co -ordinate and 
plan all the procedures with complete sync amongst the organizations. 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 7) 
 
 At the same time, the Committee would like to emphasize that OFB has to introduce 
stringent discipline in project execution which seems to be lacking. Efforts at shifting the blame to 
the other organizations or citing procedural aspects as a cause for delays do not augur well. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Civil works for on -going projects at OFB have already been completed or on the verge of 
completion, barring a few projects, viz  Pinaka @2500,Akash Booster and Sustainer (PDC for 
Civil works- Jul’18) and BMCS plant at OFN, which is a turnkey project. However, the following 
factors causing delay were beyond control of OFB: 
i) Due to budgetary constraints, OFB was forced to prioritise Civil Works of various projects. 
ii) Due to late receipt of clearance for deforestation from MoEF, Civil Works pertaining to 
Augmentation of Pinaka rockets and Akash Booster and Sustainer projects were delayed. 
iii) Due to non-finalization of weapon by Army, progress of Small Arms Factory at Korwa has 
been held up. 
iv) Due to financial crisis in Europe, some foreign firms failed to execute the supply of critical 
machines in time as committed, thereby delaying the completion of some projects viz. T - 
72 Variants and Augmentation of Spares for overhaul of T -72 and T-90 Tanks. Opening of 
many of the tenders were postponed due to non/poor participation by potential vendors 
causing delay in finalization of orders. 
v) Explosive plants have very limited global sources, so acquiring technology indigenously or 
globally is very difficult. 
  

 
 Following measures have been taken to closely monitor the projects and ensure timely 
progress of projects:- 
i) As a measure for improvement, OFB has roped in DRDO, who has been entrusted with 
the responsibility of Civil works in Pinaka @2500 project, refraining sole de pendence on 
MES, thus creating an alternate source. 
ii) In projects such as Akash Booster and Sustainer, where MES has been entrusted with the 
responsibility of CW, a mechanism has been established at factory level for monitoring 
and Co -ordinating with MES, so  that further delay in completion of Civil Works can be 
avoided. At OFB level interaction in the form of Progress Review meeting is regularly 
being done and monitored so that issues causing delay may be addressed. 
 
iii) Progress of the projects is now being regularly reviewed at MoD at the level Secretary DP. 
Necessary directives have been subsequently issued by MoD.  
 
 
QUALITY OF PRODUCTS 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 8) 
 
 One more aspect that has come to the notice of the Committee while examining the 
Demands for Grants of the Ministry of Defence for the year 2018 -19 pertains to quality of 
products being manufactured by OFB. As regards  Assault Rifles being manufactured for Indian 
Army, the Committee have found that despite providing prescribed GQSR, OFB could not deliver 
Assault Rifles to Army. The Committee are distressed to note that the assault Rifle developed 
has failed at the trial stage. 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 9) 
 
 The Committee are of the view that OFB should find out the reasons for failure and take all 
measures to improve the quality of weapons for the satisfaction of the User. The Committee feel 
that OFB should strive towards manufacturing of products which qualitatively qualify for induction 
in the Defence Forces. At the same time, OFB should ensure fi nancial priority in manufacturing 
procedures. The steps taken in this direction may be brought to the knowledge of the Committee.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The last Indent for 5.56 mm INSAS Rifle was received from the Indian Army in the year 
2010. The Indian Army wanted to replace the INSAS weapon with an Assault Rifle. Therefore, 
Army tried to procure Assault Rifle globally and issued RFP in the year 2011 for Multi Caliber 
Assault Rifle having capability to exploit 5.56x45mm and 7.62x39mm ammunitions thro ugh 
change of magazines and barrels. The RFP did not fructify & was finally retracted in Feb’2016. 

Thereafter, Indian Army in close interaction with OFB along with DRDO and DGQA was 
looking to develop an indigenous Assault Rifle which could meet revised re quirement of Army. 
OFB in association with DG/Infantry led Task Force has successfully developed 5.56 x 45mm 
Assault Rifle for the Army. The Rifle could meet the required parameters including reliability in 
2400 rounds  which is comparable to international standards . However the Army has now 
changed their philosophy and is looking for 7.62x51mm Calibre. 
In a meeting held in Sept’2016, Hon’ble  Raksha Mantri directed OFB to develop 7.62 x 
51mm Assault Rifle & a Project Mon itoring Team(PMT) was constituted under the Chairmanship 
of DG-INF with members from OFB, DRDO & DGQA. Accordingly, an in -house R&D project has 
been undertaken at Rifle Factory Ishapore, OFB in association with ARDE. OFB is developing the 
Rifle under the g uidance of PMT.  Under the aegis of above PMT, initial prototypes of 7.62 x 
51mm Assault Rifle was realised in May’2017. Based on the decision of 6 th PMT OFB has made 
a batch of prototypes as per the Army’s GSQR. By and large GSQR is being met by the weapon  
prototype developed by OFB. 30 nos Assault Rifles will be offered to 7th PMT for next evaluation. 
Apart from above, to improve the quality of OFB products , following steps have been taken by 
OFB:  
a) Exclusive QC set up:  T o look after the quality area, Offi cer  of the rank of SAG/JAG has 
been nominated as Quality Control Officer in each Ordnance Factory. 
 
b) Creation of Test Facilities for input material inspection and NABL accreditation of labs: All 
the OFs are having ISO 9001 certified QMS. 35 Ordnance Factories have NABL 
accredited labs as per factory requirement. 
 
c) Quality Audit Group (QAG): In order to monitor and ensure adherence of the production 
process to the laid down QA plans, 10 QAG centers, each headed by an SAG level Officer 
has been set up.  
 
d) Audit of manufacturing processes:  To check any deviation from the standards, process 
audits are carried out by QAG of Ordnance Factories and surveillance audit is being 
carried out by DGQA.  
 
e) Introduction of NQDBMS (Networked Quality Data base Management System):For better 
communication & transparency, NQDBMS has been implemented in all OFs and are 
reviewed periodically with DGQA Representative. 
 
f) Introduction of accountability documents for operators/supervisors: To make the 
operators/supervisors accountab le, accountability documents has been introduced, to 
ensure improved quality products. 
 
g) Failure Review Board:  To review and analyse the causes of defects observed during 
manufacturing, final acceptance inspection and to suggest remedial measures, Failure 
Review Board (FRB) has been constituted in each factory with DGQA representative.  
 

h) Liaison Meeting with DGQA Rep:    To discuss/resolve any specific observation of DGQA 
during inspection, Liaison meeting with DGQA representative is organized every month a t 
factory level.  
 
i) System of Customer feedback:  Representatives from Factories visit the field units to get 
first hand feedback about the products supplied by OFB and users of all ranks from field 
units are also invited to visit the Factories.  
 
Other act ivities like regular training & awareness programmes on Quality aspects for 
workmen, staff & officers and quality awareness programmes for vendors are being carried out as 
a measure to further strengthen the Quality set up in Ordnance Factories. 
 
COST CUTTING 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 10) 
 
 Along with quality, OFB shall also work towards cost cutting measures so that the products 
of OFB are capable of countering financial competition as well. The Committee have found that 
the cost of products being manufactured at OFs are not competitive with the same GSQR 
products manufactured in private sector or international market. Therefore, the Committee feel 
that in order to sustain the competitive environment OFB must leave no stone unturned to 
achieve an edge over the rival competitors or private players operating in the market. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
During price fixation exercise of OFB products for 2018 -19, overall price for Army, Navy 
and Air Force has been decreased over last year price i.e. of 2017-18. Price fixation is a detailed 
and extensive exercise wherein elements of Cost of Production of each factory is examined and 
scrutinized. Every effort is being made to reduce the cost of items. Unavoidable Rejection (UAR) 
and Standard Man -Hour (SMH)  of items to be produced  have been reduced due to the 
installation of state -of-the-art machines(like CNC Machines). As a result, Labour  estimates have 
been revised by the Ordnance Factories. This has resulted in lower cost of production and the 
benefit of the same in the form of reduced price is being passed on to the Services.  
Recommendation (Para No. 17) 
 
 At the same time, it is equally important that disciplined expenditure pattern and stringent 
financial propriety be observed by DRDO in project execut ion and research activities. DRDO 
needs to endeavour towards curtailing the extraneous expenditure to the extent possible. The 
Committee may be kept apprised of the steps taken in this direction. 
  

Reply of the Government 
 Following steps have been taken by DRDO to curtail the extraneous expenditure for the 
projects. 
a) As a part of pre -project activity, a stringent requirement is finalisation of cost by Project 
Cost Estimation Committee which is chaired by Senior Scientist and estimates are based 
on the last  purchase price, existing rate contract, budgetary cost etc. This committee 
comprises of technical expert from other labs and finance representative.  
 
b) All projects are being reviewed by various levels of committees wherein overall review of 
expenditure is carried out along with plan for next six months. 
 
 Stringent financial propriety is being observed in DRDO project execution and research 
activities. DRDO has its own procurement manual PM -2016 which is being strictly adhered. 
Besides above, various instructions are being issued from time to time by DRDO HQrs. 
 
PROJECTS ABANDONED/ CLOSED BY DRDO 
Recommendation (Para No. 18) 
 
 While going through the details submitted by the Ministry, the Committee noted that there 
are many projects which get closed fo llowing a few years of operation. This results in immense 
financial burden with no eventual fruitful results. Such wastage of exchequer’s money needs to 
be checked. Defence Research and Development Organisation, therefore, needs to undertake 
research orien ted programmes with great concern and care. The Committee desire that at the 
initial stage itself, before the project is sanctioned, all the possible constraints and bottlenecks 
that are likely to arise needs to be assessed with care. 
Reply of the Government 
 Following steps are taken by DRDO before project is sanctioned. 
a) Detailed Feasibility Report is being prepared to realistically assess the probability of 
success of the project with respect to internal and external factors, identifying critical 
elements contributing to low success probability, techno -managerial constraints and cost 
benefit analysis. 
 
b) All Project proposals are first considered in the Cluster Council, before initiation to avoid 
duplication of work in the cluster. 
 
c) Cluster Council a ccords ‘in principle’ clearance to project proposals based on need and 
lab competence. 
 
d) Thereafter the project is subjected to peer review by national level technical experts for 
robustness of design and development methodology. 

 
e) The proposal is then prese nted in DRDO Management Council (DMC) for Acceptance of 
Necessity (AoN)  with respect to user requirements and DRDO partners. 
 
f) Project proposals (cleared ‘in principle’ by Cluster Council and/or DMC) are then initiated 
by the concerned lab after cost vetti ng by Cost Estimation Committee having a finance  
rep for approval of CFA on file.  
 Hence it can be seen that due diligence is adopted before sanction of project. 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 19) 
 
 The Committee express their deep concern on the wasteful expenditure incurred by DRDO 
on account of closure of major projects. The Committee understand that research activity is an 
open end programme and closing a project midway is a possibility. Nevertheless, it needs to be 
ensured that closure of projects befo re culmination should not be allowed to become a regular 
practice. 
Reply of the Government 
 A sanctioned DRDO project may be closed before its Probable Date of Completion(PDC) 
with or without achieving its objective under the following conditions: 
 
Cancelled Project: The project has been approved and project no. allotted but the work on the 
project has not commenced and no expenditure has been incurred. 
 
Short Closed Project: Where the work on a project has already commenced and certain amount 
of expenditure has been incurred but for certain reasons (to be specified) it is decided to short 
close the project. 
 
Stage Closed Project: Pre-mature closure of project is where considerable effort and funds have 
been spent yet no concrete results have been achieved. Stage closing of a project is only 
resorted into extra-ordinary circumstances 
 For short/stage closure of the project, the highest review/monitoring board has to 
recommend for short closure of the projects during its last held meeting after due justificati on is 
provided by the project team. 
 Further, all the projects which are short closed (before PDC or attainment of   its 
objectives) have to be duly approved by Secretary DD R&D for short closure even if the 
approving authority for the project is Director or Cluster DG. 
 In the last 03 years, 192 projects were sanctioned, 144 projects were completed and only 
12 projects have been short closed/stage closed/cancelled. A project is closed based on the 
recommendations of the highest project monitoring committee . However, as per parliamentary 

committee’s directives, every care will be taken by DRDO to minimise the stage closure and 
cancellation of projects. 
Recommendation (Para No. 20) 
 
 The Committee recommend that it would be preferable to have a scientific, technical and 
concurrent audit of every ongoing project carried out preferably by an independent agency so 
that such midway closure of projects is avoided in future. The Committee also strongly feel that 
the Ministry should re-evaluate the reasons and also  seek expert advice before taking a decision 
towards closing down any project of DRDO in future so as to avoid wastage of public funds and 
to help in sustaining the project(s), which can possibly prove to be beneficial to the country. 
Reply of the Government 
 Technical audit of every project is carried out as per following:- 
a) Peer Review :- To provide recommendations for i) Scope/Goals of the project, ii) 
Identifying design alternatives and selection of suitable design, iii) Realisation 
methodology, iv) Risk factors /grey areas and mitigation strategy, v) PDC and category of 
project, vi) Linking of milestones with financial outlay and timelines, vii) QA/Testing Plan, 
viii) Cost Estimation 
 
b) Preliminary Design Review : To review requirement as well as concept des ign of the 
project. 
 
c) Detailed Design Review: To review finalised design methodology and detailed design. 
 
d) Critical Design Review: To critically analyse detail design w.r.t performance and 
engineering requirement. 
 
 Peer Review, Preliminary Design Review (P DR) and Critical Design Review (CDR) are 
carried out for projects at various stages of project cycle which are chaired by technical experts 
preferably from outside DRDO and also comprise members from academia, Dept. of Space 
(DoS), Dept. of Atomic Energy ( DAE) as members. These reviews also provide clearance to 
proceed to the next stage. 
 
 In addition to above, DRDO projects are also being reviewed by Apex Boards, Executive 
Boards, Project Monitoring & Review Committees at scheduled intervals by all stakeho lders 
including Services. As per the committee directives every effort will be taken to ensure that 
systematic process of reviewing projects will be followed meticulously for every project. 

INDIGENISATION OF RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT ACTIVITIES  
 
Recommendation (Para No. 23) 
 
 The Committee observe that even today the country is heavily dependent on imports to 
meet its Defence requirements. Given the fact that technologically advanced countries are 
reluctant to part with their critical technologies  with developing countries like India, it becomes all 
the more essential for our labs to develop each system, sub -systems, components etc. ‘ab-initio’ 
including information, infrastructural and testing facilities. The Committee are also of the view that 
as undertaking original research is a lengthy and time consuming process, DRDO may also think 
of developing products through the process of reverse engineering. The Committee recommend 
that the Ministry of Finance provide adequate budgetary support in this r egard so that 
indigenization of R&D activities can be taken up by DRDO on a war footing. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 Details of Expenditure of DRDO, Total Defence Expenditure, and Expenditure of DRDO 
as %age of Total Defence Expenditure from 2011-12 onwards are as under:- 
(Rs. in crore) 
Year Expenditure of 
DRDO 
Total Defence 
Expenditure  
Expenditure of DRDO as %age 
of Total Defence Expenditure 
2011-12 9,893.84 1,70,913.28 5.79 
2012-13 9,794.80 1,81,775.78 5.39 
2013-14 10,868.89 2,03,499.35 5.34 
2014-15 13,257.98 2,18,694.18 6.06 
2015-16 13,289.28 2,25,894.85 5.88 
2016-17 13,382.05 2,51,780.73 5.31 
2017-18 (RE) 15,463.25 2,63,003.85 5.88 
2018-19 (BE) 17, 861.19 2,79,305.32 6.39 
 
 It may be seen from the above table that the Budget Expenditure of DRDO has been 
consistently increasing in real terms since 2011 -12 in comparison to previous year (except in FY 
2012-13). It may be seen that in RE allocation for the FY 2017 -18 and BE 2018 -19 the share of 
DRDO has gone up to 5.88% and 6.39% respectively of Defence Expenditure. Every effort is 
made to ensure that adequate funds are available to meet the critical requirements of the DRDO.  
 
Recommendation (Para No. 24) 
 
 The Committee feel tha t one of the important factors for quality management is the extent 
of knowledge of a user of the product to be produced and made available for a specific project. 
So is the case of the extent of the end users involvement in the conceptualization stage of the 
project so that defects, if any, may be rectified during production stage itself and delivery of the 
product to the user may not get delayed for a long time. In this way, there is a better scope for 
fixation of accountability, if the user does not sugg est corrective measures/improvements and the 

product is not developed as per the GSQR stipulations. The Committee desires that instead of 
aiming for perfection in developing a project from the very beginning, DRDO should, at first, 
develop a product and la ter on, keep improving on the same by categorizing them as Mark I, II, 
III, IV or so on. This would enable the Services in having some products at hand to carry on with 
their assigned tasks without waiting endlessly for perfection in the products. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 The user (Army, Navy & Air force) projects Preliminary Staff Qualitative Requirements 
(PSQRs) in a draft form as an initial concept based on the available knowledge on the 
Product/System to be Designed and Developed by DRDO. On receipt of PSQR, Feasibility  Study 
is undertaken by DRDO to establish, whether it is practicable to meet the User requirement.  
 Thereafter, Scientific/technical requests are identified and time required to complete the 
project assessed accordingly. 
 The suggestion/recommendation of the standing Committee in providing the Services 
(Army, Navy & Air force) the DRDO Products on time without resorting to perfection would enable 
the Services having some DRDO product available for deployment and meeting their assigned 
tasks . Based on User ’s requirement DRDO may undertake Concurrent approach towards 
improving the product as Mark I, II and so on as suggested by Standing Committee.  
NUCLEAR, BIOLOGICAL AND CHEMICAL (NBC) RESEARCH 
Recommendation (Para No. 25) 
 
 The Committee are aware of the t hreats of nuclear, biological and chemical warfare in the 
current times. In this connection, the Committee have discovered that DRDO, through its R&D 
effort, over the last two decades, has developed several products for NBC detection, protection, 
decontamination and medical management to continue the sustainment of the indigenous NBC 
defence capabilities. The Committee appreciate the initiatives taken in this connection and desire 
that pro-active exercises on the issue shall be continued 
 
Reply of the Government 
 DRDO had undertaken a Cabinet committee on Security (CCS) approved Programme on 
“NBC Defence Technologies” in 2010 to develop products and technologies to continue the 
sustainment of the indigenous NBC defence capabilities and close the technol ogy gap vis -à-vis 
the developed countries.  
 This CCS approved project is completed on time in 2015 with 35% lesser budget and 
twenty products were developed for NBC detection, protection and decontamination. Out of 
these, NBC suit MK V is under production for Army (50,000 no.) and other have been cleared/are 
being taken up for User trials. Due to these developments, no NBC item has been imported by 
the services from last 7 years. To further strengthen the NBC development capabilities and bring 

it at par with developed countries, new NBC projects are being taken up by DRDO laboratories to 
bring out next generation NBC products for detection, protection, decontamination and medical 
management in the field of NBC defence to maintain continuity of technology de velopment and 
retain our nation’s technological capability edge.   
COLLABORATION WITH UNIVERSITIES/ ACADEMIC INSTITUTIONS 
Recommendation (Para No. 26) 
 
 The Committee have learnt that DRDO conducts many research programmes in 
collaboration with different u niversities/institutions. In this connection, they have further been 
informed that during the 12 th plan, 683 projects costing Rs. 496 crore were sponsored to various 
universities and academic institutions. This has accrued benefits to DRDO’s research 
programmes. The Committee also note in this regard that universities and academic institutions 
are full of budding talent. Therefore, more such collaborations need to be encouraged with a view 
to advancing research in the country. 
Reply of the Government 
 The o bservations/recommendations of the Committee have been noted and the same 
would be pursued in future. 
Recommendation (Para No. 27) 
 
 In this regard, the Committee also found that DRDO has established 6 centers of 
excellence viz, Center of Propulsion Techno logy at IIT Bombay (CoPT), Joint Advance 
Technology Center at IIT Delhi (JATC), Jagdish Chandra Bose Center for Advanced Technology 
(JCBCAT) at Jadavpur University, Kolkata, Research Innovation Center (RIC) IIT Madras, 
Advanced Center for Research in High Energy Materials (ACRHEM), University of Hyderabad 
and DRDO- BU Center of Life Sciences at Bharatiyar University. The Committee wish that more 
such centers to be established in the future and fruitful research efforts may be used for the 
benefit of Defence Services and the country. 
Reply of the Government 
 As recommended by the Committee, DRDO will take all necessary steps to establish more 
centres of advanced technology & research in the country. 
TRAINING UPGRADATION  
 
Recommendation (Para No. 30) 
 
 The Committee found that with the evolutionary processes in manufacturing sector, the 
plants machinery also ‘move forward’. Also, production rate is increasing. To carry out testing 
and quality check, the officials of DGQA need tobe trained accordingly. In  this regard, the 
Committee have been informed by the representatives of DGQA that there are training 
schools and institutes where training on quality aspects is given. The Committee feel that with 

change in new requirements of production commensurate modi fications in training of officials 
in DGQA has to be incorporated. The changes incorporated in training curriculum shall be 
brought to the knowledge of the Committee.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
         Change in technology and manufacturing techniques are  ever evolving. So also is the 
requirement of incorporating such changes in the training curriculum. Keeping this in view 
under direction and guidance of MoD changes have been undertaken in the course calendar 
of 2017-18 of Defence Institute of Quality Ass urance for training of officials in DGQA. Hence 
following additional courses have been incorporated in the training curriculum:-   
 
Sl No. 
 
Course Name 
 
(a) Refresher Course for Officers from Senior Quality Assurance Establishments  
& Authority Holding Sealed Particulars 
(b) Orientation Course for Assistant Engineers & Junior Engineers 
(c) Basic Metallurgy course 
(d) Basic Explosive Course 
(e) National Aerospace and Defence Contractor Accreditation Programme 
(f) Information Security Management System 
(g) Basic Quality Management Course has been re-deigned and bifurcated into 
Tech and Adm phase for insure focus on technical aspects to address the 
aspects of quality during manufacturing and Administrative phase being run 
separately. 
 
NATIONAL CADET CORPS 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 31) 
 
 National Cadet Corps (NCC) was established under the NCC Act, 1948. NCC aims at 
developing character, comradeship, discipline, a secular outlook, the spirit of adventure and 
ideals of selfless service amongst young citizens. Further, it aims at creating a pool of organized, 
trained and motivated youth with leadership qualities in all walks of life, so that they become 
useful citizens and serve the Nation with all their might regardless of the career they choose. 
Needless to say, the NCC also provides an env ironment conducive to motivating young Indians 
to join the armed forces.  
 
Recommendation (Para No. 32) 
 
 In BE 2018 -19, NCC projected an amount of Rs. 1910.42 crore but was allocated 
Rs.1584.21 crore, including the Revenue and Capital funds. The Committee  has been given to 
understand that NCC is enhancing its footprints in 710 districts, which is seven more than the 
previous year. There is a waitlisting of 8948 schools & colleges for NCC. The Committee also 
found that Government has sanctioned additional 2  lakh cadets for NCC. The expansion 

programme of NCC would require infusion of adequate funds. The Committee express the hope 
that the expansion programme does not come at the cost of compromising quality of training and 
infrastructure. Therefore, it is ne cessary that the Government make requisite allocations to NCC 
during the upcoming financial year. 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 33) 
 
 While examining the subject, the Committee found that in July 2017 the Government has 
approved clothing for NCC Cadets. The Co mmittee feel that this is a positive step and would be 
beneficial in attracting cadets .However, provision of uniforms and expansion of NCC’s footprints 
would indeed require infusion of adequate funds. During the course of oral evidence, the 
representatives of NCC confided to the Committee that shortage of uniforms has been a problem. 
The Committee desire that the issue of shortage of uniforms be taken up at the level of Ministry of 
Defence with due concern and priority. The Committee desire that provision of sufficient funds to 
NCC be ensured by the Ministry of Defence and the Committee kept apprised. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 The projections made by the Services, including NCC, are forwarded to Ministry of 
Finance for consideration as it is the nodal Mini stry for providing funds. If Ministry of Finance 
conveys reduced allocation, the same is passed on to the Services. It is agreed that due to 
reduced allocations, certain adjustments may be made but not to the extent that it affects 
operational preparedness. 
 
 The Committee may be assured that all efforts will be made to obtain additional 
requirements projected by NCC at Supplementary/RE stage. 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 34) 
 
 The Committee wish that a system of receiving feedback from cadets of NCC is developed 
so that first hand and realistic opinions on improvement in institutions and operations of NCC can 
be received by the higher authorities. The methodology developed in th is regard shall be brought 
to the information of the Committee.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 The recommendation of the Committee at Para 34 pertaining to HQ DG NCC has been 
noted for compliance. In this regard an internal Committee has been constituted with the approval 
of DG NCC to develop a methodology for receiving the feedback from the cadets as 
recommended by the Committee.    

(B) OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE 
GOVERNMENT AND COMMENTED UPON: 
 
DIRECTORATE GENERAL OF QUALITY ASSURANCE 
 
Budget 2018-19 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 28) 
 
 During the year 2018 -19, against the projection of Rs.1322.81 crore the allocation for 
DGQA is Rs.1146.98 crore. This accounts to a shortfall of Rs.175.83 crore. The Committee view 
that DGQA plays a significant part in ensuring the quality of products being supplied to the 
Defence Forces. DGQA carries out inspection of Defence stores supplied by Ordnance Factories, 
Defence Public Sector Undertakings and Industry. These inspections are done at variou s stages. 
The Committee came to know that on an average DGQA carries out approx. 18,000 inspections 
per month. Considering the significance that DGQA holds in ensuring qualitative value of 
equipments including arms and ammunition, the Committee desire that  adequate funds are 
provided to them for mandatory sustenance and operational requirements. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 The projections made by the Services, including DGQA, are forwarded to Ministry of 
Finance for favourable consideration. If Ministry of Finance conveys reduced allocation, the same 
is required to be passed on to the Services. It is agreed that due to reduced allocations, certain 
adjustments may be made but not to the extent that it affects operational preparedness. 
 
 The Committee may be a ssured that all efforts will be made to obtain additional 
requirements projected by DGQA at Supplementary/RE stage.  It may be further added that all 
efforts will be made to ensure that sustenance and operational requirements of DGQA do not 
suffer due to want of funds. 
 
(For comments of the Committee, please refer to Para No. 24 of Chapter – I of the Report)

CHAPTER III 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT DESIRE TO 
PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE REPLIES RECEIVED FROM THE GOVERNMENT: 
  
 
Recommendation (Para No. 29) 
 
 The Committee are concerned about the fact that despite checking at DGQA, some 
ammunition or other equipment reaching out to Defence Services turns out to be faulty. In this 
connection, the Committee found that sample testing  is carried out by DGQA and the whole 
lot of material may not be unflawed. Further, on this aspect the committee found that DGQA 
mainly conducts process audit and product audit is very little. In this context, the Committee 
would like to recommend that DGQ A carry out some random sample testing also so that the 
quality of products can be ensured to the maximum possible extent.  
 
Reply of the Government 
DGQA carries out quality Assurance activities by conducting in process inspection & 
final acceptance inspection in ammunition & other equipment. Based on observation while 
coming on the above activities and feedback received from users, surveillance, proce ss audit 
& quality audit are also carried out to ensure quality of the equipment/Ammunition. The quality 
of the equipment is also affected by the input material, the responsibility of which has been 
transferred to OFB since Apr 2005. It is brought out that  system is already in place for 
conducting random sampling. However in case of failure statistical quality control technique 
are offered and the suspect lot is put through enhanced random sampling checks.    
 

      CHAPTER IV 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF 
GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE WHICH REQUIRE 
REITERATION AND COMMENTED UPON: 
 
   
 
Recommendation (Para No. 3) 
 
 Modernisation of Ordnance Factories is a continuous process. To keep pace with the 
contemporary manufacturing technologies, OFB prepares a long term planning spread over a 
period of 5 years which started from 2007 -08. Ordnance Factories have been adopting three 
pronged approach for modernisation viz. (a) Renewal and Replacement (RR) of P &M which are 
beyond economical repair, with machineries of state of the art technologies. (b) Acquisition of 
P&M under New Capital (NC) for additional capacity, (C) higher productivity, enhanced quality, 
focus on use of renewable energy and to address envi ronmental issues etc. (d) Corresponding 
Civil Works (CW) infrastructure development etc. 
 
 The key technology intensive areas which have been identified for modernisation of 
Ordnance Factories are: 
(i) Chemical Process Plants 
(ii) Small arms ammunition Production 
(iii) Ammunition filling and assembly 
(iv) Foundry and extrusion 
(v) Metal forming, machining and fabrication 
(vi) Quality control and assurance 
 
(For comments of the Committee, please refer to Para No. 7 of Chapter – I of the Report) 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 4) 
 
 Under the Capital segment, the allocation is Rs. 5345.22crore against projection of Rs 
6027.63 crore. The allocations for Research and Development work for Ordnance Factories at 
the BE stage of Rs 2017 -18 was Rs. 105.00 crore. It was reduced to Rs 100.00 crore at RE  
stage. The allocation at BE 2018 -19 is Rs 105.00 crore. The Committee is disappointed to note 
that there is no increase in the allocations for R&D of Ordnance Factories. Also, the inflation rate 
has not been factored into. With this allocation, the Commit tee are apprehensive whether the key 
technological intensive areas as mentioned above are going to be materialised or not. Ordnance 
Factories play a significant role in ‘Make in India’ drive of the Government of India at least in 
Defence Sector. Howe ever,  it is of utmost importance that the products being manufactured in 
Ordnance Factories are of global standards so that they can compete with private players also 
who are now joining the Defence Sector. To reach this objective it is imperative that the 
production related infrastructure and capacity in OFs are enhanced up to required standards. 

Therefore, the Committee desires that essential steps should be taken towards modernization of 
OFs in a planned manner and essential budget for the same shall also be provided by Ministry of 
Defence and appropriately spent by OFB. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
OFB’s modernization programme is primarily focused on introduction of State -of-the-Art 
machines to manufacture quality product with cost effectiveness, taking into ac count the current 
and long term future requirements of its customers. A structured mechanism exists to ensure that 
OFB’s infrastructure is modernized with the latest manufacturing technologies and machineries in 
the identified areas. Status of budget provi ded to OFB during the year 2017 -18 and expenditure 
is given below: 
(Rs in Crore) 
 Renewal & 
Replacement 
(RR) 
New 
Capital 
(NC) 
Civil Works 
(CW) 
Total 
Approved Modified Appropriation(MA) 460.00 801.00 204.85 1465.85 
Expenditure (Tentative up to 
March,2018) 
400.96 825.25 204.75 1430.96 
 
 
(For comments of the Committee, please refer to Para No. 7 of Chapter – I of the Report) 
 
 
RESEARCH & DEVELOPMENT 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 5) 
 
 The Committee view that R&D has to be an integral component of all the production units. 
The same holds true for OFs also. In this connection, the Committee were informed that OFB has 
taken up in house R&D projects for design & Development & product upgrade of Armament, 
Ammunition and equipment. OFB has developed 122 Armament s &ammunition so far, out of 
which 61 items have been designed and developed by Ordnance factories through in -house 
R&D. In all, 25% of the output value of OFB is from in -house R&D, and R&D under foreign 
Transfer of Technology (ToT) & R&D with Defence Rese arch & Development Organisation.   The 
Committee note that design centers have been established in each of the OFs to carry out R&D 
and collaborative R&D projects are also taken up. However, while glancing at the percentage of 
expenditure in R&D to overall  allocation during last five years, the Committee have found that it 
was 0.40% in 2012 -13, 0.38% in 2013 -14, 0.50% in 2014 -15, 0.67% in 2015 -16 & 0.40% in the 
year 2016-17. The Committee are of the view that the data is indicative of a somewhat apathetic 
attitude towards the R&D drive of OFB. On this account, the Committee would like to observe that 
considerable attention & emphasis should be given to R&D activities by OFB and the Committee 
be intimated of the measures taken in this regard. 
 

Reply of the Government 
 
OFB noted the same for compliance. 
 
 (For comments of the Committee, please refer to Para No. 10  of Chapter – I of the Report) 
 
EXPORT 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 11) 
 
 From the data supplied to the Committee, it is noted that in the year 2013 -14, Ordnance 
Factories exported Rs 20.24 crore worth of arms and ammunition. This figure remained static till 
2016-17, with the exception of the year 2015 -16, where it went down to Rs 6.51 crore. The 
Committee view that improvement in technical & financial qu alifications will not only be helpful in 
providing quality products to our Defence Forces but also boost export of products being 
manufactured at OFs. This will also help OFB to shift gear from being merely dependent of our 
Armed Forces for order book. Dur ing the course of evidence, the Committee also found that OFs 
need orders to keep their machines running. OFB has to strive to make use of their infrastructure 
optimally and financial property has to be observed in manufacturing process. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
OFB noted the same for compliance. 
 
 
(For comments of the Committee, please refer to Para No. 13 of Chapter – I of the Report) 
 

BUDGETARY PROVISIONS 
 Recommendation (Para No. 12) 
 
The Committee found that there has been shortfall in budget provided to DRDO. The 
budgetary allocation projected, and actually allocated in each of the years since 2013 -14 is 
shown in the table below: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The Committee note from the afore -mentioned table that there has been a considerable shortfall 
in budgetary allocation over the years. 
Reply of the Government 
 The requisite information in respect of Dept. of Defence R&D is as follows 
Year Defence* Expenditure 
(Rs in crore) 
Projection(Rs 
in crore) 
Budget allocated 
to R&D (actuals) 
(Rs in crore) 
% of 
Defence 
Expenditure 
2014-15 218694.18 18495.46 13257.98 6.06 
2015-16  225922.98 19641.56 13317.12 5.89 
2016-17  225899.59 18782.86 13382.05 5.92 
2017-18 (BE) 274114.00 19935.60 14818.74 5.41 
2018-19 (BE) 295511.41 22203.74 17861.19 6.04 
 
S. No. Year Projection  (Rs in crore) Allocation  (Rs in crore) 
1.  2013-14 16,483.28 10,934.17 
2.  2014-15 18,495.46 13,716.14 
3.  2015-16 19,641.56 13,540.11 
4.  2016-17 18,782.86 13,593.78 
5.  2017-18 22,203.74 14,818.74 

 Yes, it is a fact that budgetary allocations are much less then the projections made by the 
Deptt of Defence R&D. However, the Deptt is managing within the allocations by re -prioritising 
the project activities 
(For comments of the Committee, please refer to Para No. 16  of Chapter – I of the Report) 
DELAY IN PROJECTS 
Recommendation (Para No. 21) 
 
 The Committee, while examining the Demands for Grants, discovered that delays in 
completion of projects is a part and parcel of DRDOs functioning. For  instance, Light Combat 
Aircraft (LCA) was supposed to be completed in  2008 but the revised date of completion is June, 
2019. In the case of Aero engine, Kaveri, the original date of completion was 1996 but was 
revised to December, 2009. Further revision of the completion schedule continues to be under 
process. Similar is th e case with LCA -Navy, Airborne Early Warning and Control (AEW&C) 
System, Air to Air Missile system -Astra, Long Range surface to Air Missile etc. to name a few. 
The extent of delay in the execution of above mentioned projects varies from project to project.  
Although various reasons have been attributed for project delays by the representatives of 
DRDO, the Committee take very serious note of this unwarranted and unsavoury phenomenon. 
These delays not only place a burden of unnecessary cost implications but a lso deprive the 
Services of critical capabilities. The Committee wish to be kept apprised on the progress made in 
regard to each of the above mentioned projects. 
Reply of the Government 
 DRDO acknowledges that there have been delays in some of the projects . DRDO has 
issued fresh guidelines to tighten and streamline the process for completion of the project within 
PDC. 
 
a) All reviews i.e. Apex Boards (AB), Executive Boards (EB) and Project Monitoring & Review 
Committees (PMRC) be scheduled at specified interva ls with advance notice sent to all 
members. Postponement of reviews be avoided to the extent possible. Reviews should 
focus on issues affecting project timelines.  
 
b) Frequency of reviews i.e. EBs/PMRCs may be tightened for unusual delayed projects. 
 
c) New cas es of project sanction may please project realistic timeframes keeping in mind 
current procedures. Necessary levels of pre -project activity including design/configuration 
reviews & procurement plan to be finalized before moving the case for sanction. 
 
(For comments of the Committee, please refer to Para No. 21 of Chapter – I of the Report) 
 
  

 
Recommendation (Para No. 22) 
 
 In view of the above, the Committee opine that accountability has to be bestowed at some 
level for the continued delays. Such a dismal scenario cannot be allowed to go on perpetually 
and wastage of resources cannot be taken for granted as a routine phenomenon. The Committee 
have also been informed that various measures are being taken to curb delays that are a regular 
feature. However, the Committee would like to emphasise that the efforts should bear the desired 
results. Therefore, an inherent system needs to be developed where specific roles and 
responsibilities are demarcated and specified within the organizational structure of DRDO. Th e 
progress made in the direction may be brought to the knowledge of the Committee. 
Reply of the Government 
 Project Directors are responsible for project execution. The projects are reviewed by 
DGs/Secretary. Only those delayed projects are granted PDC extension in which the delay is due 
to certain unforeseen factors beyond control of DRDO like technological bot tlenecks, 
procurements/integration/manufacturing delay by industry, delay in international contracts/MoU, 
denial of license by certain countries, dependence on trial platforms to be provided by services, 
QR changes etc.  
 However it may be noted that resea rch and development is an area of uncertainty where 
certain unknowns are explored. In addition to taking of design projects where the sub -systems 
are already matured, DRDO also has to undertake technology projects and science and 
technology projects where the technology readiness level worldwide may be at intermediate and 
low level respectively increasing the risk of delays. Certain high risk and high pay off projects and 
blue-sky research has also to be undertaken where there are extremely high chance not only of 
delays but also   failures. 
 
 It is submitted that, it is difficult to fix accountability solely on DRDO as our projects are 
dependent on number of external agencies including Users, Production/QA agencies, 
Certification agencies etc. 
 
 
 
(For comments of the Committee, please refer to Para No. 21 of Chapter – I of the Report) 
  

CHAPTER V 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH GOVERNMENT HAVE 
FURNISHED INTERIM REPLIES: 
          
Recommendation (Para No. 1) 
 
 The committee note from the data supplied by the Ministry that in BE 2018 -19, against the 
projected allocation of Rs8844.79 crore, Rs 6397.20 crore has been allocated under the Revenue 
Head for Ordnance Factory Board. Under the Capital segment, the allocation is Rs.5345.22 crore 
against the projection of Rs 6027.63 crore. The total allocation is Rs 11,742.42 crore against a 
projection of Rs 14,872.42 crore (excluding GST). 
Recommendation (Para No. 2) 
 
 The Committee note that the Ordnance Factory Board plays a very crucial role in 
indigenous production of arms, ammunition, vehicles etc for the Services through its 41 
manufacturing units. To match the growing requirement of Armed Forces of arm, ammunition and 
vehicles of International Standards, this would require regular up -gradation of Infrastructure and 
induction of state -of-the-art technologies. Therefore, the committee desire that essential funds 
shall be provided to OFB for maintenance, overhaul, capacity enhancement and upgrading of 
Ordnance Factories. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Matter has been taken up with the concerned authorities through a D.O. letter from 
Secretary (DP). 
 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 13) 
 
 Further, on this issue, the Committee, during the deliberations on Demands for Grants 
discovered that out of the total DRDO bu dget, keeping aside obligatory expenses like pay & 
allowances and other non -salary revenue expenditure, the amount left for R&D  activities is less 
than Rs. 9,000 crore. Out of the remaining amount, Rs. 5000 crore is dedicated for strategic 
schemes and ano ther Rs. 1,000 crore for top priority CCS programmes there by leaving merely 
Rs. 1,400 crore for Science & Technology, Technological Demonstration and other Mission Mode 
projects(TD&ST). The Technological Demonstration and other Mission Mode projects(TD&ST ) 
constitutes ‘blue sky research’ and involves futuristic technology which ideally is the bed rock for 
any R&D Organisation. In view of the facts mentioned above, DRDO would need additional funds 
to taken up futuristic projects. 
  

Reply of the Government 
 DRDO thanks the Committee for the recommendations. DRDO has sought additional Rs 
1800 cr. and is hoped that this will be soon available for current development initiative.  
Recommendation (Para No. 14) 
 
 The Committee also found that for the current year, 2018-19, DRDO has received a 20 per 
cent jump in their budget as compared to the previous year. This is a welcome step. However, it 
has also been observed that owing to the LCA programme that is underway, which is funded by 
the way of grant-in-aid, the DRDO would require additional funding to the tune of Rs. 800 crore. 
Reply of the Government 
 Comparison of Budgetary provisions under Revenue and Capital head for 2017 -18 and 
2018-19 is as under :            
            (Rs in crore) 
 2017-18 (BE) 2017-18 
(RE) 
2018-19 (BE) % Variation w.r.t 
BE RE 
Revenue 
Head 
7266.42 7910.93 8126.74 11.84% 2.74% 
Capital  Head 7552.32 7552.32 9734.45 27.54% 28.89% 
TOTAL (Net) 14818.74 15463.25 17861.19 20.53% 15.51% 
 
 Additional amount of Rs. 800 crore was projected  by DRDO for LCA program and the 
same was recommended by Standing Committee of Defence (SCOD). 
 MoD (Fin) may consider allocation of the same at the earliest. 
Recommendation (Para No. 15) 
 
 Like-wise, for some other strategic programmes, there is a requirement of another Rs. 500 
crore as a part of civil capital account. In addition to this, the Committee have also been intimated 
that Rs. 500 crore is an additional requirement for the revenue requirement of the stores. 
Reply of the Government 
 Additional amount of Rs. 500 crore was sought for Civil works and Rs. 500 crore for 
Projects store by DRDO. MoD (Fin) may consider allocation of additional funds over and above 
the BE provision for Financial Year 2018-19 as per recommendation of the Standing Committee. 
 
  

Recommendation (Para No. 16) 
 
 The Committee recognize the significance that Research and development holds for the 
welfare and progress of the Defence Forces. Therefore, the Committee wish that requisite funds 
be given to DRDO for their research activities. 
Reply of the Government 
 DRDO thanks the Committee for the recommendations. DRDO has sought additional Rs 
1800 crore and is hoped that this will be soon available for current development initiative.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi;                                                                                                             Kalraj Mishra,  
4 January, 2019                                                            Chairperson,          
14 Pausa, 1940 (Saka)                                                          Standing Committee on Defence 
  

APPENDIX I 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE 
 
MINUTES OF THE THIRD SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE (2018-19) 
 
 The Committee sat on Friday, the 4 th January, 2019 from 1500 hrs. to 1645 hrs. in  
Committee Room No. 'C', Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
Shri Kalraj Mishra       - Chairperson 
 
   MEMBERS 
 
     LOK SABHA 
2 Km Shobha Karandlaje 
3 Smt Mala Rajya Laxmi Shah 
4 Shri Dharambir Singh 
5 Smt Pratyusha Rajeshwari Singh 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
6 Dr Ashok Bajpai 
7 Shri Madhusudan Mistry 
8 Shri Soumya R Patnaik 
9 Shri G V L Narasimha Rao 
10 Shri Ram Nath Thakur 
11 Lt. Gen. Dr D P Vats 
SECRETARIAT 
1. Smt. Kalpana Sharma   - Joint Secretary  
2. Shri Srinivasulu Gunda   - Director  
3. Shri Rahul Singh   - Deputy Secretary 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members of the Committee and informed 
them about the agenda for the Sitting. The Committee then took up the following draft Reports for 
consideration and adoption: 
(i) Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations contained in the 
Fortieth Report (16th Lok Sabha) on ‘Demands for Grants of the Ministry of Defence for 
the year 2018 -19 on General Defence Budget, Borde r Roads Organisation, Indian Coast 
Guard, Military Engineer Services, Directorate General Defence Estates, Defence Public 

Sector Undertakings, Welfare of Ex -Servicemen, Defence Pensions, Ex -Servicemen 
Contributory Health Scheme (Demand Nos. 19 and 22);  
(ii) Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations contained in the 
Forty-first Report (16th Lok Sabha) on ‘Demands for Grants of the Ministry of Defence for 
the year 2018-19 on Army, Navy and Air Force (Demand No. 20)’; 
(iii) Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/ Recommendations contained in the 
Forty-second Report (16th Lok Sabha) on 'Demands for Grants of the Ministry of Defence 
for the year 2018 -19 on Capital Outlay on Defence Services, Procurement Policy and 
Defence Planning (Demand No. 21)'; and 
(iv) Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/ Recommendations contained in the 
Forty-third Report (16th Lok Sabha) on ‘Demands for Grants of the Ministry of Defence for 
the year 2018-19 pertaining to Revenue Budget of Ordnance Factories, Defence Research 
and Development Organisation, DGQA and NCC (Demand No. 20)’. 
3. After deliberation, the Committee adopted the above Reports and authorized the 
Chairperson to finalize and present the Reports to Parliament on a convenie nt date alongwith the 
Reports on Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/ Recommendations contained 
in the Thirty-second Report (16th Lok Sabha) on 'Creation of Non-Lapsable Capital Fund Account, 
instead of the present system' and Action Taken b y the Government on the Observations/ 
Recommendations contained in the Thirty -third Report (16 th Lok Sabha) on 'Resettlement of Ex -
Servicemen', which were already adopted by the Committee on 14.11.2018.  
4. ******* 
The Committee then adjourned. 
 
A copy of verbatim record of the proceedings has been kept. 
 
****Does not pertain to the Reports. 
 
  

APPENDIX II 
 
ANALYSIS OF THE ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE OBSERVATIONS/ 
RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE FORTY-THIRD  REPORT OF STANDING COMMITTEE 
ON DEFENCE (16 THLOK SABHA) ON ‘DEMANDS FOR GRANTS OF THE MINISTRY OF DEFENCE 
FOR THE YEAR 2018 -19 ON ORDNANCE FACTORY, DEFENCE RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT 
ORGANISATION, DIRECTORATE GENERAL OF QUALITY ASSURANCE (DGQA) AND NATIONAL 
CADET CORPS (NCC) (DEMAND NO. 20)' 
1. Total number of recommendations                          34 
2. Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by 
the Government(please see Chapter II A): 
 
 Recommendation Nos.6,7,8, 9, 10, 17, 18, 19, 20, 23, 24, 25, 26, 27, 30, 31, 32, 33 and 34 
 
 
Total :      19 
Percentage:  55.8%    
 
3 Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by 
the Government and are commented upon (please see Chapter II B): 
  
 Recommendation Nos.  28 
Total :      01 
 
Percentage:   2.9% 
 
4. Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to pursue in view of 
the replies received from the Government(please see Chapter III): 
 Recommendation No. 29 
Total :        01 
Percentage:  2.9 % 
 
5. Observations/Recommendations in respect of  which replies of Government have not been 
accepted by the Committee which require reiteration and to be commented upon (please see 
Chapter IV): 
 
 
Recommendation Nos.  3, 4, 5, 11,12,  21& 22 
Total :       07 
Percentage:    20.5% 
 
6. Observations / recommendations in respect of which Government have furnished interim 
replies(please see Chapter V): 
 
 Recommendation Nos.  1,2, 13, 14, 15 & 16 
Total :    06 
   Percentage:   17.6% 
 