 
 
 
25 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE 
(2016-17) 
 
(SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
MINISTRY OF DEFENCE 
 
 
[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations contained in the 
Twentieth Report (16th Lok Sabha) on 'Demands for Grants of the Ministry of Defence for the 
year 2016-17 on Army, Navy and Air Force  (Demand No. 22)] 
 
 
TWENTY FIFTH REPORT 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
March, 2017/Phalguna, 1938 (Saka) 
 


 
 
TWENTY FIFTH REPORT 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE 
(2016-17) 
 
(SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
MINISTRY OF DEFENCE 
 
 
[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations contained in the 
Twentieth Report (16th Lok Sabha) on 'Demands for Grants of the Ministry of Defence for the 
year 2016-17 on Army, Navy and Air Force  (Demand No. 22)] 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 09.03.2017 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on ……………… 
 
 
 
  
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
March, 2017/Phalguna, 1938 (Saka) 


 
 
 
 
CONTENTS 
        
PAGE 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (2016-17) ……………………………………. 
INTRODUCTION …………………………………………………………………………... 
 
CHAPTER I Report………………………………………………………..……….....      
 
CHAPTER II (A) Observations/Recommendations which have been  
                    accepted by the Government………………………………............ 
 
(A) Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the 
Government and to be commented upon………............................. 
 
 
CHAPTER III Observations/Recommendations which the Committee 
 do not desire to pursue in view of the replies of the  
 Government ………………………………….........................................    
 
CHAPTER IV Observations/Recommendations in respect of which  
 Replies of the Government have not been accepted by 
 the Committee which require reiteration and commented upon………...  
 
CHAPTER V Observations/Recommendations in respect of which  
 Government have furnished interim replies……..…………..........    
 
APPENDICES 
 
  I      Minutes of the sixth sitting of the Standing Committee on 
                  Defence (2016-17) held on 16.01.2017…………............... 
 
  II     Analysis of Action Taken by the Government on the  
         Observations/Recommendations   contained  in the Twentieth 
   Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee  
 on Defence (2016-17).................................................... 
  

 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE (2016-17) 
 
Maj Gen B C Khanduri, AVSM (Retd)  -  Chairperson 
 
Lok Sabha 
2. Shri Dipak Adhikari (Dev) 
3. Shri Suresh C Angadi 
4. Shri Shrirang Appa Barne 
5. Shri Thupstan Chhewang 
6. Col Sonaram Choudhary(Retd) 
7. Shri H D Devegowda 
8. Shri Sher Singh Ghubaya 
9.* Shri B. Senguttuvan  
10. Dr Murli Manohar Joshi 
11. Km Shobha Karandlaje 
12. Shri Vinod Khanna 
13. Dr Mriganka Mahato 
14. Shri Rodmal Nagar 
15. Shri A P Jithender Reddy 
16. Shri Ch Malla Reddy  
17. Shri Rajeev Shankarrao Satav 
18. Smt Mala Rajya Lakshmi Shah 
19.# Shri Partha Pratim Ray 
20. Shri Dharambir Singh 
21. Smt Pratyusha Rajeshwari Singh 
22.** Shri G Hari 
23.$ Capt Amarinder Singh 
  
Rajya Sabha 
1. Shri K R Arjunan 
2. Shri A U Singh Deo 
3. Shri Harivansh 
4.^ Shri Rajeev Chandrasekhar 
5. Shri Madhusudan Mistry 
6. Shri Praful Patel 
7. Shri Sanjay Raut 
8. Dr Abhishek Manu Singhvi 
9. Smt Ambika Soni 
10. Dr Subramanian Swamy 
11.@ Shri Om Prakash Mathur 
 
 
* Nominated w.e.f on 13.02.2017 
** Ceased to be Member of the Committee w.e.f. 13.02.2017 
$  Ceased to be Member of the Committee w.e.f. 23.11.2016 
# Nominated w.e.f. 02.01.2017 
@  Ceased to be Member of the Committee w.e.f. 10.10.2016 
^ Nominated w.e.f. 10.10.2016 

 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1.  Smt. Kalpana Sharma  - Joint Secretary 
2. Shri T.G. Chandrasekhar  - Director 
3. Smt. Jyochnamayi Sinha  - Additional Director 
4.  Smt Rekha Sinha   - Sr. Executive Assistant 
 
 
  

 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
I, the Chairperson of the Standing Committee on Defence ( 2016-17), having been 
authorised by the Committee, present this Twenty Fifth report on Action Taken by the 
Government on the Observations/Recommendations contained in the Twentieth Report (16th 
Lok Sabha) on 'Demands for Grants of the Ministry of Defence for the year 2016 -17 on Army, 
Navy and Air Force  (Demand No. 22)'. 
 
2.       The  Twentieth Report was  presented  to Lok  Sabha / laid on the Table  of  Rajya 
Sabha on 03  May, 2016. The Report contained 7 1 Observations/Recommendations. The 
Action Taken Notes on the Observations/Recommendations were received from the Ministry of 
Defence in  December, 2016. 
 
3.  The Committee considered and adopted this Report at their Sitti ng held on 16 January, 
2017. 
 
4. An analysis of  action taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations 
contained in the Twentieth Report of the Committee is given in Appendix II. 
 
5.  For facility of reference and convenience, Observations/Rec ommendations of the 
Committee have been printed in bold letters in the Report. 
  
 
 
 
New Delhi;                                                                     Maj Gen  B C Khanduri, AVSM (Retd),   
 1 February, 2017                           Chairperson,                    
12 Magha, 1938 (Saka)                                                         Standing Committee on Defence 
  

 
 
CHAPTER – I 
REPORT 
 This report of the Standing Committee on Defence deals with Action Taken by the 
Government on observations/recommendations contained in the twentieth Report of Standing 
Committee on Defence (16th Lok Sabha) on ' Demands for Grants of Ministry of Defence for  
the year 2016-17 on Army, Navy and Air Force (Demand No 22) ' which was presented to Lok 
Sabha and laid in Rajya Sabha on 3 May, 2016.   
2. The Committee's twentieth Report (16th Lok Sabha) contained 71 observations 
/recommendations on the following aspects :- 
Para No./Nos. Subject 
 
ARMY 
 
1& 2  Revenue Budget 
3, 3A & 4 Capital Budget 
5, 6, 7& 8 Bullet Proof Jackets (BPJs) 
9 & 10 Shortage of Ammunition 
11 Procurement of Rifles 
12,13,14 & 15 Modernization of Army 
16 Acquisition from indigenous sources 
17 Main Battle Tank 
18 Mountain Strike Corps 
19 & 20 Shortage of officers 
21 & 22 Sainik Schools 
23 Terror Attack 
 
NAVY 
 
24 Budget Review 
25 Revenue Budget of Indian Navy 
26 & 27 Capital Budget for Indian Navy 
28 Naval Base at Karwar 
29,30,31& 32 Critical requirement of Force Level 
33 Manpower 
34 Delay in Refitting 

 
 
35 Accidents 
AIR FORCE 
36 Budgetary Provisions for 2016-17 
37& 37A Budget Review for the year 2015-16 Revenue Budget 
38 Revenue Budget - Humanitarian Assistance and Disaster Relief 
39 & 39A Capital Budget 
40 Reduction in Capital Budget for 2016-17 
41,42&43 Modernization Budget for Air Force 
44 Over spending 
45,46&47 Slow pace of Acquisitions / Procurements 
48 Indigenization 
49&50 Planning 
51 Force Level 
52 Rafale Aircraft (MMRCA) 
53 Light Combat Aircraft (LCA) 
54&55 Fifth Generation Fighter Aircraft (FGFA) 
56 Trainer Aircraft 
57 Intermediate Jet Trainer (IJT) Aircraft 
58 Hawk Mk-132 
59 Replacement of Aging Helicopters 
60 Modernisation of existing Air Force bases 
61&62 Night Landing Facilities 
63 Airfields in the North-Eastern part of India 
64&65 Abandoned Airfields 
66 Accident Data of Indian Air Force 
67 & 67A Manpower 
 
  

 
 
3. Action Taken Replies have been received from the Government in respect of all the 
observations/ recommendations contained in the Report.  The replies have been  examined 
and categorised as follows :- 
(a)  Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the Government: 
 
  Para Nos. 3, 3A, 4,  12, 13, 14, 15, 16,19, 20, 25, 26, 27, 27A, 28, 32, 33, 35, 
36, 37, 37A, 38, 39, 40, 41, 42, 43, 44,  49, 50, 53, 54,  55, 58, 59, 60, 63, 64, 65, 
67, 67A,  
(41  Recommendations) 
 These are included in Chapter II of the Draft Report. 
(b) Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the      
Government and are commented upon: 
 Para Nos. 1, 2, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9,10,11, 24, 29  46, 48, 51 and 61 
( 15 Recommendations) 
  These are  included in Chapter II of the Draft Report. 
 
(ii)   Observations/Recommendations  which the  Committee do not desire to pursue 
in view of the replies received from the Government: 
 Para No. 21, 22, 34, 39A,  47, 52, 62 and 66 
(08 Recommendations) 
 These are  mentioned in Chapter III of the Draft Report. 
 
(iii)  Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of    Government 
have not been accepted by the Committee which require reiteration and 
commented upon: 
 Para Nos. 17, 18, 23, 30, 31, 45, 46 56 and  57 
(09 Recommendation) 
           These are  included in Chapter IV of the Draft Report. 
                    
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which Government have furnished 
interim replies: 
  
 Para No.  Nil 
(00 Recommendation) 
 These is  mentioned   in Chapter V of the Draft Report. 
 

 
 
4. The Committee desire that the Ministry’s response to their comments made in 
Chapter 1 of this Report to be furnished to them at the earliest and in any case not later 
than six months of the presentation of this Report.  
A Revenue Budget 
 
 
Recommendation (Para Nos. 1 & 2) 
 
 
5. The Committee had recommended as under :- 
 
`The Committee note that during the year 2016 -17, Army has been allocated Rs. 
1,12,764.62crore, against the projection of Rs. 1,15,561.78 crore under the Revenue 
Head. The BE for 2015 -16 was Rs. 1,03,315.91crore. The percentage variation of BE 
2015-16 vis-à-vis BE 2016-17 is 9.1 percent.  Under the revenue segment, provision is 
first made for pay and allowances and other obligatory expenses and the balance 
allocation is distributed to meet th e requirement of stores (including ordnance), 
transportation (of personnel and stores), revenue works and maintenance, etc. These 
areas are likely to be impacted when allocation is lower than projection. As the revenue 
segment of the expenditure caters to welfare of the human resource and carrying out 
critical works related to stores and transportation etc., the Committee desire that 
adequate allocation of funds should be made after considering the total requirements of 
Army at the Revised Estimate or Suppl ementary Demands stage. While supporting the 
Army's need for more funds, the Committee would also like the Ministry to observe 
utmost financial discipline and keep a continuous watch on wasteful expenditure. 
 
 The Committee are baffled to note that the all ocation under Non salary revenue 
for   BE 2016 -17 is Rs. 32,186 crore, which amounts to only 1.1 percent increase over 
last year’s BE of Rs. 31,835 crore. As per  the Ministry’s own admission, areas of new 
raisings and accretions, maintenance of existing w eapons and equipment and  
replenishment of War Wastage Reserve Ammunition, maintenance and repair of 
infrastructure, contingency allocation for humanitarian assistance and disaster relief etc. 
are going to be affected due to such meagre increase in allocat ions during the year. 
Therefore, the Committee strongly recommend that the Ministry of Defence should 
enhance the allocation sufficiently at the time of Revised Estimate stage under Non -
salary revenue Head so as to enable the Army in meeting the requiremen ts of 
operational preparedness.' 
 
 

 
 
 
6. The Ministry in its Action Taken Reply has stated as under :- 
 
`The recommendations of the Committee are noted for compliance. The 
projections/requirements of the Army will be forwarded to Ministry of Finance for 
consideration at Supplementary/RE stage. Necessary instructions are being issued from 
time to time for adherence to financial propriety and avoidance of underutilization of 
funds/wasteful expenditure. 
 The recommendations of the Committee are noted for com pliance. The 
projections/requirements of the Army will be forwarded to Ministry of Finance for 
consideration at Supplementary/RE stage.' 
  
7. The Committee take note of the intent of the Ministry of Defence with regard to  
providing adequate funds to Army and adherence to financial propriety. In this regard, 
the Committee would like to be informed in detail  about and  the  details of the amount 
projected to Ministry of Finance at supplementary/RE stage  and the actual budget 
allocations made to Army at supplementary/RE stage.  
 
 In addition to the above, the Committee would like to  be informed about the 
details of the additional amount allocated to Army under Non-salary revenue Head at RE 
stage. The Committee are  concerned about the adjustments made, if any, by Army due 
to lesser all ocation made under this segment and would like to be intimated of the 
details in this connection. The information may be furnished to the Committee in entirity 
in the further Action Taken Statements. 
 
B. Bullet Proof Jackets (BPJs) 
Recommendation (Para Nos. 5, 6, 7 & 8) 
 
8. The Committee had recommended as under :- 
‘The Committee are aghast to note that 1,86,138 Bullet Proof Jackets(BPJs), for which 
the approval of Defence Acquisition Council was obtained on 19 October, 2009 and a 
Request For Proposal (RFP) through Capital route was issued on 7 December, 2012, 
are still not available with the Army. And this, in spite of the Committee highlighting this 
again and again during the last eighteen months. The reason submitted by the Ministry 
was that the said RFP was retracted on 5 October, 2015 as all the three vendors who  

 
 
had participated in the ‘Trial Evaluation’ of BPJs from March -June 2015 had failed. The 
Committee fervently deplore that the procurement of  these protective gears meant for 
our soldiers has been inordinately delayed due to  the loopholes and deficiencies 
existing in the procurement system. While taking a  serious view of such amazing laxity 
on the part of the Ministry of Defence, the  Committee had in their earlier report 
recommended that the Ministry should fix  responsibility at the appropriate level for thi s 
glaring lapse. 
 
 The Committee have also learnt that the Bullet Proof Jackets (BPJs) currently 
held by Indian Army are based on General Staff Qualitative Requirements (GSQR) No. 
878. This GSQR has since been revised and further procurement of BPJs in the  Army is 
being undertaken as per revised GSQR, i.e. GSQR No. 1438. As per the Ministry, the 
new GSQR No. 1438 is at par with the world standards being followed and allows 
addition/removal of external attachments to / from the BPJs as per operational 
requirement. The Committee sincerely hope that the Ministry's admission regarding the 
quality of BPJs is correct and our Army is equipped with State -of-the-Art armour. The 
Committee would like the Ministry to strictly monitor the quality of the BPJs being 
procured and leave no room for compromise in this aspect. The Committee wish to have 
a separate report on the subject, from the Ministry of Defence, within a month of the 
presentation of this Report.' 
 
9. The Ministry in its Action Taken Reply has stated as under :- 
 
`Ballistic Evaluation of samples provided by the vendors under RFP for quantity 
1,86,138 BPJs issued on 07 December 2012 was conducted at Terminal Ballistics 
Research Laboratory (TBRL), Chandigarh from 12 th March 2015 to 16 th June 2015. The 
RFP was later retracted on 05 th October 2015 due to rejection of all samples in the trials 
conducted by the Indian Army. Analysis revealed lack of technology and manufacturing 
expertise as the reasons behind sample failure on evaluation. RF P for procurement of 
quantity 1,86,138 BPJs as per revised GSQR No. 1438 has been re -issued on 04 April 
2016. TEC commenced w.e.f 1 st August 2016 and was completed on 19 th September 
2016. The trials will commence post approval of TEC report. Further progre ss of the 
case will be guided as per Defence Procurement Procedure (DPP). Meanwhile, an 
immediate requirement of quantity 50,000 BPJs is being met through Revenue route 
and the complete quantity is likely to be received by April 2017 based upon earlier 
GSQR (GSQR 878). The procurement through Revenue Route on GSQR 878 has been 
undertaken to ensure the availability of BPJs till the procurement of BPJs as per new 
GSQR (GSQR 1438) fructifies and is available for issue.  
 
 
 

 
 
The delay in procurement of BPJs as p er GSQR 1438 is on account of the 
following reasons: 
(a) Change in GSQR The GSQR was amended twice between 2010 and 2012 due 
to increased safety concerns and latest trends available world over. The issue of 
frequent changes in GSQR by the Army are being add ressed to avoid recurrence of 
such changes in future. 
(b) Procedural delays in TEC The RFP for procurement of Quantity 1,86,138 Bullet 
Proof Jackets was issued in December 2012 and tender bids were opened on 29 th 
March 2013. TEC was approved in November 201 3. The trial directive was issued in 
January 2014 and subsequently, vendors sought certain clarifications, which were then 
issued in October 2014 after consultations with TBRL Chandigarh. Further, some time 
was given to the vendors for submission of sample s for trials. The trials were held from 
March 2015 to June 2015 and all the samples failed the tests. The RFP was thereafter 
retracted in October 2015.' 
  
10. While taking note of the efforts being taken by the Ministry of Defence, t he 
Committee express their concern in regard to the procurement of sufficient number of 
BPJs without further delay . Also, the quality of BPJs is a matter of concern for the 
Committee as time and again faults have been found in the same. Therefore, the 
Committee, while reiterating their position in this regard, desire that a ll measures 
should be taken to ensure that the latest procurement is made without lapses as BPJs 
are extremely crucial for the safety of our soldiers.   
 
C. Shortage of Ammunition  
 
Recommendation (Para No. 9 &10) 
 
11. The Committee had recommended as under :- 
 
‘The Committee have been informed about the shortages with Army in several areas 
ranging from modern assault rifles, bullet -proof jackets and night -fighting capabilities to 
howitzers, missiles and helicopters. The Ministry, in its written reply, submitted that the 
Government constantly reviews the security scenario and accordingly decides to induct 
appropriate Defence equipment to keep the Armed Forces in a state of readiness and 
remaining equipped with modern weapon systems. Mismatches between requirements  
and availability can sometimes occur which are continually addressed by the on -going 
procurement process. However, during oral deposition, the representatives of the 
Ministry admitted to the shortage and attributed it to the incapability of Ordnance 

 
 
Factory Board (OFB) and delay in procurement process especially import. The 
Committee are deeply pained to hear the oft -repeated plea of the Ministry regarding 
such critical issue of shortage of arms and ammunition. Therefore, the Committee 
recommend that the M inistry should now adopt the policy of zero tolerance for any 
factor causing this critical failure in operational preparedness of the armed forces. 
 The oral deposition of the representatives of the Ministry of defence highlighted 
the need for diversification of sources and selective private sector participation to 
address the shortage of arms and ammunition. The Committee, however, would 
recommend the Ministry to tread with caution in this regard and not expect any 
miraculous turn of events jus t by involving private sector selectively in production of 
ammunition. Considering the fact that the OFB, supposedly a broad and versatile 
production base with multi -technology capabilities evolved over the years, is not able to 
deliver the required volume  of defence equipments, the Committee cannot hel p being 
skeptical on how the newly emerged Private Sector would be a panacea for the problem 
of shortage of arms and ammunition. The Committee, while consenting with the need for 
diversification of sources, recommend that the Defence Public Sector Undertakings and 
the OFB take this onus on themselves for providing State -of-the-Art equipments to our 
Defence personnel within a fixed time framework and take concerted and urgent steps 
in this direction.  
 
 
12. The Ministry in its Action Taken Reply has stated as under :- 
  
`The present state of availability of Arms and Ammunition has certain shortages. The 
shortages are mainly due to limited production capability of the Ordnance Factories and 
some slippages in achieving production targets. The supply of ammunition is also 
dependent upon imports from foreign vendors to meet the requirements of the Indian 
Army. Apart from the above factors, the aspect of management of Shelf -life of 
ammunition also has an impact on the level of ammunition holdings. In the levels of 
WWR holdings for ammunition, out of an inventory of 160 ammunition items, 89 are 
considered operationally important by the Army. Of these items with stocks below 20(I) 
(i.e. below 50% holdings) are classified as critical ammunition. 79 out of 89 ammunition 
items were c ritical in 2012. Consequent to procurement actions in last two years, the 
deficiencies are likely to be reduced substantially by 2019. These projections are based 
on the assumption of no production shortfalls by OFB, expeditious processing and 
timely budget allocations.  
 
Deficiencies have accumulated over prolonged period and cannot be made up in a 
 compressed timeframe. The Action Plan to mitigate the deficiency is as under:  
 

 
 
a) A Five Year Roll on Indent has been placed on OFB since to facilitate capacity 
planning and achieve zero production slippages. The currently on -going Second Roll on 
Indent has a value of Rs. 26,378 Crore.  
 
b) To ensure that the OFB produces as per plan, t he Army HQ converts the annual 
financial goals to numerical targets by types of ammunition. The monthly production 
report received from OFB is compared to laid down numerical targets. In addition, 
quarterly reviews by MoD to resolve difficulties and course  corrections for areas flagged 
by the Army are also being held. 
 
c) A concerted drive to acquire components and repair ammunition requiring 
maintenance has further added to ammunition holdings of the Indian Army. 
 
d)  ‘Ammunition Road Map’ approved in 2013  to ameliorate the deficiency of select 
important indigenous and ex-import ammunition items. 
 
 The observation of the Committee has been noted for compliance.' 
 
13. The Committee take note of the numerous measures being taken by the Ministry 
of Defence wit h regard to deficiency of Ammunition held with Army whic h include 
drawing up an 'Ammunition Road Map' for procurement.  Nevertheless, they are deeply 
concerned about the quality and quantity of ammunition available with our Forces. The 
Committee strongly feel that all these steps should be supplemented by adequate 
budgetary allocations to Ordnance Factories Board & DPSUs. The Committee would like 
to be informed in detail about the timeline stipulated for procurement of ammunition by 
Army from O rdnance factories,  DPSUs, private sector  and foreign venders and actual 
adherence to the timelines.  
 
D. Procurement of Rifles 
Recommendation (Para No. 11) 
 
 
14. The Committee had recommended as under :- 
 
`The Committee note that two categories of weapon i.e. 5.56mm INSAS Rifle & 5.56mm 
INSAS LMG are available in Indian Small Arms System (INSAS) family of weapons. 
The weapons were designed by DRDO and have evolved over a period of time with 
upgraded versions coming in to take care of shortcoming. As per the written reply of the 
Ministry, the INSAS Rifle developed against the Army’s GSQR (GSQR 429) has fully 
met the QR and thus inducted into the Service. The committee note that the Ministry 

 
 
seems satisfied with the currently induced INSAS rifle and hope that rifles would add to 
the capability enhancement and war preparedness of the Army. 
 
 The committee have learnt that a case for capital procurement of Assault Rifles is 
under process and a request for informat ion is being formulated by Army HQs (AHQ) for 
the same. Simultaneously, DRDO and OFB are undertaking development of a 5.56 mm 
Assault Rifle wherein AHQ, as user, is also involved. The committee desire that all 
requisite trials and processes for induction o f assault rifles in Army are completed in a 
targeted time frame and cost implications. The committee would require to be updated 
regarding procurement of assault rifles and budgetary provision for the same. 
 
15. The Ministry in its Action Taken Reply has stated as under :- 
 
 
`The capital procurement of Assault Rifles, is being progressed as per DPP -2016 which 
stipulates timelines for completion of procurement process. Various options of 5.56 mm 
and 7.62 mm Assault Rifles are under consideration. Necessary budget provisions would 
be made once the procurement is approved based on delivery and payment schedule of 
the equipment.' 
 
16. The Committee have been taking up the issue of  procurement of  assault rifles 
since long.  However, no satisfactory results could be seen as yet.  While taking note of 
the efforts being made  by the Ministry of Defence in this connection, the Committee 
desire to be informed in detail about the  time line stipulated for procurement of assault 
rifles for Army and actual progress made in this regard.  
 
E. Main Battle Tank 
Recommendation (Para No. 17) 
 
17. The Committee had recommended as under:- 
 
`The Committee note that the Defence Acquisition Council approval was accorded for 
118 Nos. of Arjun Main Battle Tank Mk -II.  However, the validity has expired on 28 
August, 2015 and needs extension. With increase in weight, apprehensions have arisen 
in regard to its seamless application in semi -developed and developed sectors of the 
Western Front. The various aspects like trafficability, transportability, agility, mobility and 
other operational/functional problems caused by 6 tonne of additional weight have  been 
deliberated by the QR Committee and the report is under finalisation at Directorate 
General of Mechanised Forces (DGMF) office. The Committee are disappointed to note 

 
 
that even the improved version of Arjun MBT Tank Mk-I has raised apprehensions about 
its serviceability in the field. They desire that issues such as trafficability, transportability, 
agility, mobility and other operational/functional problems encountered in usage of Arjun 
MBT Mk-II should be resolved at the earliest and the Army be equi pped with a world 
class product.' 
 
18. The Ministry in its Action Taken Reply has stated as under:- 
 
Development of Arjun MBT Mk-II 
Arjun MBT Mk -II has been developed with 73 mutually agreed tank -fittable 
improvements out of which 15 are major tank-fittable improvements. Configuration of 
Arjun MBT Mk-II incorporating the mutually agreed improvements with weight has been 
deliberated in many Arjun Core Committee meetings constituted by Secretary (DP), 
which comprises all stakeholders. All the abov e improvements resulted in the additional 
weight of 6 t over and above Arjun MBT Mk-l. 
Agility, Mobility, Functional and Performance of Arjun MBT Mk -II in Desert and 
Semi-Desert Terrains - During User Trials 
 Before commencement of the trials, the Arjun MBT  Mk-II has been weighed and 
taken for trials by Users. The performance of Arjun MBT Mk -II with increased 
weight to 68.6 t is well proven during the various phases of User trials in terms of 
agility, mobility and other operational / functional aspects in th e desert and semi -
desert terrains. User conducted these numerous and extensive trials in Mahajan 
Field Firing Ranges, Pokhran Field Firing Ranges, rocky terrains around Jaisalmer 
and forward areas closure to Jaisalmer sector. 
 
 Based on the above User trials of Arjun MBT Mk -II, User declared 67 
improvements as successful and ordered for DGQA and MET evaluation. It is 
planned to conduct User trials for the balance 3 improvements viz., missile firing 
demonstration and two related improvements by end 2018. 
 
 Arjun MBT Mk -II has exhibited the required performance in all aspects of agility, 
mobility and other operational/ functional parameters in the desert and semi -desert 
terrains during various phases of User trials as indicated above.  
 
 
 

 
 
Agility, Mobility,  Functional and Performance of Arjun MBT Mk -II in Developed 
and Semi-Developed Terrains – Operational Employability 
 DRDO is confident that that Arjun MBT Mk-II will have requisite agility, mobility and 
other operational/functional parameters in various dev eloped and semi developed 
terrains also. As directed by Hon’ble RM, DRDO requested Army for mobility 
comparative trials with the 'Arjun MBT Mk -II even with 68.6 t’ along with Tank T -90 
to prove its tactical and operational mobility aspects in all envisaged  terrains 
(including developed and semi developed terrains) for its future employability. 
However, Army intimated that Arjun MBT Mk -II and T90 are of different class& 
weight classification and their deployment is as per assigned operational roles. 
Arjun MBT has operational employment restrictions to specific sectors (desert/semi 
desert) being heavy tank. Therefore, Army intimated that the conduct of 
comparative mobility trials is not required. 
 
Trafficability and Transportability of Arjun MBT Mk-II 
 Arjun MBT Mk-II is transportable by rail using the B-FAT wagons which are already 
in service. Road Transport of Arjun MBT Mk -II is possible through the 70 t trailer 
being developed by Indian Army. 70 t Bridge Layer Tanks (such as BLT T -72 and 
Sarvatra) are availab le with which Arjun MBT Mk -II can cross an obstacle. 70 t 
Modular Bridge is also under development by DRDO. 
 
 However, there may be a requirement to strengthen/upgrade culverts, civil bridges, 
etc. in strategic thrust areas at the developed and semi develop ed terrains by the 
GOI in consultation with Army to facilitate deployment of Arjun MBT Mk -II beyond 
the presently envisaged desert and semi-desert terrains. 
 
Status of QR Committee 
 On the directions of Hon'ble RM, QR Committee comprising members from Army 
and DRDO with then ADGMF as Chairman and Director, CVRDE as Co-Chairman, 
was formed to look into aspects of weight reduction keeping seamless application 
of ArjunMBT Mk ll in semi-developed and developed sectors of Western front. This 
QR Committee studied the possible areas of weight reduction including issues 
such as trafficability, transportability, agility, mobility and other 
operational/functional problems encountered in the usage of Arjun MBT Mk -II. The 
committee deliberated all these aspects and a fin alised "QR Committee Report on 
Arjun MBT Mk -II" was signed and submitted to DGMF on 28 Feb 2016 and 
subsequently expected to have been submitted to Hon'ble RM. 
 

 
 
 Army-DRDO exercise (during QR Committee) to carryout weight budgeting that 
could only yield a w eight reduction of 1.045 t. An alternate solution could lie in 
achieving compactness through redesign of hull/turret and use of advanced 
armour materials. 
 
 DRDO intimated that the alternate solution in achieving compactness through 
redesign of hull/turret including use of advanced armour material is not 
recommended considering the long development and validation cycle. 
 
Approach Plan for Weight Reduction 
 It was insisted by Army that an innovative solution in the form of redesign of 
hull/turret structures an d use of newer materials to replace the conventional 
structure is to be worked out to achieve a reasonable reduction in weight, without 
removing any of the major improvements. As discussed during the status review 
meeting held under the Chairmanship of Secy DD R&D wherein DCOAS(P&S) and 
DGMF participated on 27 Sept 2016, it was decided to initiate redesign of hull & 
turret structure modules along with other potential systems where there is a scope 
for weight reduction and to be demonstrated as modules to Us ers by taking up a 
project with a timeline of 18 months from the date of sanction. The anticipated 
weight reduction is about 3 t. Accordingly, actions have been initiated. 
 
 However, User accepted the weight reduction from 68.6 t to about 65 t during the 
above DCOAS meeting. Army also indicated that there are no major advantages 
from tactical and operational point of view with 65 t weight reduction also. 
However, CVRDE has initiated a project proposal towards the above to meet the 
User requirements for 65 t Arjun MBT Mk-II. It is felt that even weight reduction to 
62 t equal to that of Arjun MBT Mk -I may not provide any significant tactical/ 
operational advantages. The cycle time for    65 t weight reductions of Arjun MBT 
Mk-II and validation will take about four to six years for successful acceptance by 
User after trials/procedures. 
 
Conclusion 
 It is stated that Arjun MBT Mk -II is superior state -of-art weapon system and a 
world-class product. In order to gainfully utilize this superior weapon system, Army 
is required to interact and ensure development of infrastructure in terms of 
culverts, civil bridges, etc. to ensure the transportability in strategic thrust areas 
leading to induction of Arjun MBT Mk -II in semi-developed and developed terrains 
also over a period of time.' 
 

 
 
19. The Committee are dissatisfied to find that the infrastructure available for 
transportation etc. is not ideally suited for the MBT Arjun.  In such a scenario, there is 
all possibility of facing acute challenges at the time of war or other eventualities. 
Therefore, the Committee desire that a ll efforts must be made for overcoming the 
inadequacies pertaining to culverts, civil bridges, etc . so as  to ensure  the 
transportability in strategic thrust areas that could enable induction of Arjun MBT Mk-II. 
Also, at the same time , necessary innovations need to be made in Arjun MBT Mk -II by 
DRDO so that it suits the infrastructure available in the country.  
 
 
F. Mountain Strike Corps  
 
Recommendation (Para No. 18) 
 
20. The Committee had recommended as under :- 
 
`The Committee note that in regard to the proposal for raising the Mountain Strike 
Corps, sanction by the Govt. in 2013, the Army is grappling with the problem of non -
release of funds for infrastructure development. During the oral  evidence, the 
representatives of the Ministry submitted that the process was being hampered because 
the army is using its own Reserves to raise the formations. However, it was stated that 
the process of raising of the Corps was on track. The Committee fee l that raising the 
Mountain Strike Corps is in the interest of security of the nation and recommend that 
necessary funds for infrastructure development be released for the Corps. Milking 
existing resources, which in some case are not fully upto the authori sation, is suicidal. 
The Committee suggest that this issue be critically examined. Action taken in this regard 
may be intimated to the Committee within two months of the presentation of this report. 
 
 
21. The Ministry in its Action Taken Reply has stated as under :- 
 
`Equipping and arming of these forces has been done from existing stocks. Indents 
have been initiated to make up the depleted stocks. This cycle of initial equipping from 
existing stocks and making up depleted stocks will continue till completion of raising. 
Concrete steps have been initiated to ensure that there is no further increase in 
hollowness.' 
 

 
 
22. The Committee would like to be informed in detail about the concrete steps which 
have been initiated to ensure that there is not furt her depletion in availability of stocks . 
Also, the Committee desire that there should be some stipulated timeframe with regard 
to raising the Mountain Strike Corps.  Vague decisions do not serve the desired 
purposes and therefore, tangible targets must be made in this direction. 
 
G. Terror Attack   
 
Recommendation (Para No. 23) 
 
23. The Committee had recommended as under :- 
 
`The Committee note that security arrangements in military establishments are dynamic 
in nature and are periodically reviewed. The observations and recommends of these 
reviews are progressively implemented to maintain a robust and strong response 
mechanism to emerging threats. In view of the recent Pathankot terror attack, the 
Government has constituted a Committee under the chairmans hip of a former Vice 
Chief of Army/Staff to inter alia suggest measures to strengthen security of various 
military establishments across the country and the Committee is expected to submit its 
report shortly. As directed by Government, the three Services h ave carried out security 
audit of all their military establishments. The Committee desire that heightened security 
measure post Pathankot terror attack need to be sustained to face any eventuality. The 
recommendations of the Committee constituted by the Go vernment in view of the attack 
need to be studied carefully and suitably implemented.' 
 
24. The Ministry in its Action Taken Reply has stated as under :- 
 
 
`The Committee constituted by Government under the chairmanship of Lt Gen (Retd.) 
Philip Campose, former Vice Chief of Army Staff, has submitted its report to Ministry of 
Defence on 20 th May, 2016. The report is under examination in consultation with all the 
stakeholders.' 
 
25. The Committee observe that the Report under the Chairmanship of Lt Gen (Retd.) 
Philip Campose was submitted in May, 2016.  The Ministry of Defence has  furnished 
Action Taken Report in the Month of December. Yet, there is no information in regard to 
the inputs  considered in the report. The security scenario is vulnerable as has been 
exposed during Pathankot & Uri attacks. Yet, no concrete measures appear to have 
been taken even after a lapse of 6 -7 months of the submission  of the report. The 

 
 
Committee are distressed to note the apparent lack of sincerity on the pa rt of  the 
Ministry of Defence in this regar d and desire that situation should improve. Necessary 
measures must be taken so as to ensure that any unpleasant incidence does not recur. 
 
H. Budget Review  
 
Recommendation (Para Nos. 24 & 25) 
 
26. The Committee had recommended as under :- 
 
`Against the projected amount of Rs. 48,725.87 crore as required by Indian Navy, the 
allocation at BE 2016 -17 is Rs. 39,424.88 crore. This amounts to a shortfall or gap of 
Rs. 9,300.99 crore. The Committee no te that there is a remarkable difference in the 
amount projected by the Service and the allocation made during the last five years. 
During the previous year 2015 -16, the BE was Rs. 40,528.88 crore, against which an 
allocation of Rs. 34,375.24 crore was mad e at RE. In this regard, the Committee feel 
that deficit budgeting at the stage of RE 2015 -16 is already present, and a further 
shortfall of   Rs. 9,300.99 crore at BE 2016-17 as compared to the projected amount will 
put more pressure on the already stretc hed Naval Budget. The Committee are also 
concerned to note that the percentage share of Naval Budget out of the total Defence 
Budget has declined from 18.12 percent in the year 2012 -13 to 14.55 percent in the 
year 2016 -17. Also, Navy has the lowest share of Defence Budget. During the 
deliberations on the Demands for Grants (2016 -17), the Defence Secretary admitted 
that the `Money’ that is allocated for Capital acquisition is not in accordance with the 
requirements. As submitted by the Defence Secretary, al though the projections are 
made, the Ministry only gets whatever is allocated by the Ministry of Finance. This 
`procedure' needs to be critically examined. 
 
 In this backdrop of reduced allocations, it is pertinent to mention that   at the sea 
frontiers, India has an edge over her adversaries in comparison to all other domains. 
The adversaries have their vulnerabilities in the form of sea lines of communication s 
which are passing close to our coast. In Military parlance, Indian Navy operates in their 
internal line and the adversaries operate at the external lines. Therefore, there is a need 
to exploit this advantage and there is a need for strong and capable Nav y. The 
Committee, in this regard are of the view that there is a huge requirement of capital 
induction in the Navy as it is short of vessels, aircraft and helicopters. Additionally, 
shortage of manpower and presently prevalent inadequacies in training can also not to 
be ignored. Therefore, reduction in the share of Naval Budget is not desirable, 
especially in view of the fact that India’s larger chunk of trade takes place through sea 
routes. Besides this, the new challenges for the Navy are enormous, as ins tances of 
hostility in the seas by the neighbouring countries have been on the increase over the 

 
 
years. Hence, equipping our Navy with high level of tactical proficiency would indeed 
require ample budgetary support. Considering the requirements of training  and 
modernization drive of the Navy as envisaged in accordance with the Maritime 
Capability Perspective Plan (MCPP) 2012 -27, the plummeting budgetary trend appears 
to be misplaced. Therefore, in order to achieve the targeted outcome, the Ministry of 
Defence must ensure essential budget to the Navy and additional grants need to be 
provided at the RE stage. Or else, the "targets" envisaged need to be revised and re - 
formulated. 
 The Committee note that during the FY year 2015 -16 the gross Budget at BE 
stage was Rs. 13,385.22 crore with the reduction vis -à-vis the projection being to the 
extent of Rs. 940.46 crore.  During the year 2016 -17, against the projected amount of 
Rs. 16,391.30 crore the allocation at BE is Rs. 15,597.69 crore.  Thus, the gap vis -à-vis 
the projection is Rs.793.61 crore.  This reduction will definitely have a negative impact, 
particularly on certain Heads of Account viz., transportation, repairs and refits, stores 
and works, which directly impact the operational preparedness. The Committ ee deplore 
following this pattern of ‘deficit’ funding, ad -hocism in approach and distributing the 
already constrained resources, which have the effect of compromising the   priorities.  
Therefore, additional allocations need to be provided to the Indian N avy so that no 
compromise is made on operational preparedness.' 
27. The Ministry in its Action Taken Reply has stated as under :- 
 
`The recommendations of the Committee are noted for compliance.The 
projections/requirements of the Navy will be forwarded to Ministry of Finance for 
consideration at RE stage.  In case the funds are not provided as per projections by the 
Ministry of Finance, the available resources will be optimally utilized based on prioritized 
requirements of Navy. 
 The Committee may be assured that Navy’s operational preparedness will not be 
compromised due to want of funds.  Additional funds will be sought based on 
requirements projected by Navy at Supplementary/RE stage.' 
 
28. The Committee take note of the submission made by the Ministry of Defence. 
However, the Committee would like to be informed in detail about the budget allocations 
made to Navy at the supplementary/RE stage. The Ministry of Defence may a lso furnish 
details of the amount projected to Ministry of Finance at supplementary/RE stage  along 
with the details of the amount projected by Navy at supplementary/RE stage.   
 

 
 
 In addition to the above , the Committee would like to be informed about the 
details of the additional amount allocated to Navy separately under revenue and capital 
Heads at RE stage. The Committee would also like to be intimated about any 
compromises made by Navy during financial year 2016-17 due to lesser allocations. 
 
I. Critical requirement of Force Level  
 
Recommendation (Para Nos. 29) 
 
29. The Committee had recommended as under :- 
 
`The Committee were informed that the emergency Cabinet Committee report of 1964 
had approved a Force Level of 138 ships and submarines for Indian Navy.  Since then 
the Maritime Security Environment of the country has undergone a sea -change. The 
present day  Maritime Challenges include, Coastal Security in the light of terrorism 
emanating through sea route, increased threats of Piracy and amplified hostilities in 
Indian Ocean Region by our neighbouring nations. Maritime infrastructure is a vital 
component of economic development. The Committee have been informed that keeping 
in view the new challenges, a requirement of 212 vessels and 458 aircraft have been 
contemplated for Indian Navy in MCPP 2012 -27. In 2012, DAC had approved 198 ships 
and submarines by 2027 . However, the present force level is only 123 ships, 15 
submarines and 235 aircraft. The Committee were also apprised that due to slippages in 
contractual milestones, slow progress of work and delay in milestone, slow progress of 
work and delay in milestone payments (P71, P 15A, P15B, NOPV, CTS, P17A etc.). The 
Committee are baffled to note that Indian Navy is struggling with low force level and still 
there are huge slippages being noticed in various acquisitions/ procurements. It should 
be dealt with stri ngently by the Ministry of Defence and the Committee be informed 
accordingly.'  
 
30. The Ministry in its Action Taken Reply has stated as under :- 
 
`The Indian Navy has a force level of 137 ships and submarines. In addition, 45 ships 
and submarines are presently under construction at various public sector and private 
shipyards. Shipbuilding projects are time -intensive and are spread over several years. 
The major reasons for delay in Shipbuilding projects include: - 
 
(a) Infrastructural constraints of the DPSU Shipyards. 
(b) Delay in receipt of material/ equipment. 
(c) Delay in design finalisation/ finalisation of vendor-specific equipment. 

 
 
(d) Increase in material/ equipment cost, along with labour cost and overheads. 
(e) Financial constraints and design expertise limitations of the private shipyards. 
 
Specific issues pertaining to time overrun and cost escalations in specific projects are 
covered in the succeeding paragraphs.   
 
1. P 71 (M/s CSL, Kochi) .  The details pertaining to time and cost overruns of the 
Indigenous Aircraft Carrier (IAC-1) under construction at Cochin Shipyard Limited (CSL) 
are as follows:- 
 
(a) Time Overrun.   The main reasons for revision in timelines are listed below:- 
  
(i)  Ordering of Long Lead Equipment and Design Studies. 
(ii)  Non-Availability of Steel. 
(iii)  Learning Curve for CSL. 
(iv) Delayed ordering of Propulsion System Integration (PSI). 
(v)  Delay in Russian approvals for design and supply of equipment for 
Aviation Facilities Complex (AFC).  
(vi)  Delay in receipt of critical/unique pre-launch indigenous equipment. 
 
(b) Cost Overrun.  The revised estimated cost of the IAC of Rs. 19341 Crore at 
2018 prices is on a ‘not exceeding basis’. The main reasons contributing to revision 
in cost of the project are listed below:- 
 
(i) Increase in equipment costs, including weapon & sensor and AFC 
equipment.  
(ii) Increase in cost of yard materials, including steel.  
(iii) Increase in labour wages, labour overheads (yard efforts) and  material 
overheads. 
(iv) Increase in other yard efforts pertaining to CSL’s detailed engineering 
design. 
(v) Increase in shipyard design support cost and external design input costs.   
(vi) Inclusion of costs towards tests, trials and guarantee repairs. 
(vii) Inclusion of preservation & extended warranty cost of already order ed 
equipment. 
(viii) Inclusion of addition & alteration (i.e. modification cost) as per Defence 
Procurement Procedure (DPP). 
(ix) Increase in Management Fee, Handling Charges and Profit Paid to the 
Shipyard on account of revised equipment and yard effort costs. 
(x) Increase in Base & Depot (B&D) Spares costs corresponding to increase 
in equipment cost.  
(xi) Increase in infrastructure augmentation at CSL. 

 
 
 
2. P 15A (M/s MDL, Mumbai) . The initial delivery schedule of the three ships was 
March 2008, March 2009 and March 2010 respectively. The delivery schedule was 
subsequently revised to May 2010, May 2011 and May 2012 respectively. The first two 
ships, INS Kolkata and INS Kochi were commissioned in August 2014 and September 
2015, respectively. The third ship, INS Chennai has delivered/commissioned on 21 st 
November 2016. The delay in delivery of the ships is mainly due to the delay in receipt 
of Heating Ventilation and Air Conditioning (HVAC), Propulsion System Integration (PSI) 
and Auxiliary Control System (ACS).   The original cost ofRs. 3580 Crore was revised 
toRs. 11662 Crore in February, 2006 with the approval of CCS. The cost overrun has 
been mainly due to the increase in equipment cost and Yard material, increase in cost 
of labour and labour overheads and identificatio n of realistic assessment of cost of 
weapons and sensors.  
 
3. P 28 (M/s GRSE, Kolkata). As per the Contract No. 285/DND(SSG)/C/12 -
13/P-28 dated 11.06.2012 the delivery dates for the 04 ships was October 2012, July 
2013, July 2014 and April, 2015 respectiv ely. The first two ships, INS Kamorta and INS 
Kadmatt have been commissioned in August 2014 and January 2016 respectively. The 
third and fourth ship are likely to be delivered by end 2016 and end 2017 respectively . 
The time overrun was attributed to delay in development of steel, delay in development 
of indigenised weapons and sensors and delay in completion of trials for critical 
equipment like Diesel Generators, AC Plants etc. The original cost ofRs. 3051.2 Crore 
was revised to Rs. 7852.39 Crore with the approval of CCS in March 2012.  The c ost 
overrun, is attributable to the increase in costs of developmental projects, and 
introduction of new/ state of the art equipment/ systems. 
 
4. NOPVs (M/s Pipavav Shipyard) .  The contract for construction of five Nav al 
Offshore Patrol Vessels (NOPVs) was awarded to M/s Pipavav Defence and Offshore 
Engineering Co. Ltd. on 27 March 2011 at a ‘fixed and firm’ cost of Rs. 2974.58 Crore. 
The contracted delivery schedule of the ships was November 2014 for the first NOPV 
and subsequent ships at an interval of six months each. The project has been delayed 
due to rework on constructed blocks and due to financial constraints of the shipyard. 
Consequent to the change in management to M/s Reliance Defence and Engineering 
Ltd (RDEL ), on 18 January 2016, the pace of work has improved. The yard has 
indicated that the five ships will be delivered by May 2017, July 2017, December 2017, 
February 2018 and April 2018 respectively. Being a fixed cost project, there has been 
no cost overrun. 
 
5. Fast Interceptor Crafts (FIC) (M/s Solas Marine Lanka, Sri Lanka) . The 
contract for procurement of 80 FICs was signed on 26 August 2011 with M/s Solas 
Marine Lanka, Sri Lanka for a total project cost of US$ 64,152,000. The contract 
stipulated that the first batch of four FICs were to be delivered by the shipyard in July  

 
 
2012, followed by a batch every three months thereafter, till April 2017. The FICs are 
being delivered in batches, with each batch consisting of four FICs. 15 out of 20 batches 
have been delivered by the shipyard, with the 15 th batch being inducted on 30 June 
2016. The project is presently behind schedule by six months. The 16 th batch is likely to 
be delivered by end October, 2016 with subsequent batches every two months to cover 
up the delay period by the delivery of the last batch. The delay was primaril y attributed 
to shipyard’s inability initially to achieve contracted speed of 45 knots. Applicable 
Liquidated Damages (LD) on FICs and on the B&D spares thereof have been levied on 
the Shipyard for late delivery of first 15 batches. Being a fixed cost proj ect, there has 
been no cost overrun. 
 
6. LCU Mk-IV (M/s GRSE, Kolkata).   The Contract for construction and 
delivery of eight Landing Craft Utility Mk -IV (LCU MK -IV) ships was signed with M/s 
GRSE, Kolkata on 29 September, 2011 at a total cost of Rs. 2,169  Crore. The 
contractual delivery of the first ship was scheduled in August, 2014 and for subsequent 
ships at an interval of three months each. The first ship is slated to be delivered by end 
September 2016, with a delay of 25 months. The subsequent ships a re likely to be 
delivered by December 2016, April 2017, July 2017, October 2017, January 2018, April 
2018 and July 2018. The delays are attributable to insufficient resource allocation by the 
shipyard. Being a fixed cost project, there has been no cost overrun. 
 
7. WJFACs (M/s GRSE, Kolkata) . The Contract for construction and delivery of 
four Follow -on Water Jet Fast Attack Crafts (WJ FACs) was signed with M/s GRSE, 
Kolkata on 01 March 2013 for Rs. 379.87 Crore. The contractual delivery of the first ship 
was scheduled in March 2015 and of subsequent ships at an interval of three months 
each. The first ship was delivered in April 2016 and commissioned on 23 May 2016. The 
balance three ships are likely to be delivered by July 2016, November 2016 and 
February 2 017, respectively. The delays are attributable to insufficient resource 
allocation by the shipyard.  Being a fixed cost project, there has been no cost overrun. 
 
8. Cadet Training Ships (M/s ABG Shipyard) .   The Contract for three Cadet 
Training Ships (CTS), two under main contract and one under option clause, was 
concluded with M/s ABG Shipyard on 27 June 2011 and 30 November 2012 at a total 
cost of Rs. 968.76 and          Rs. 484.38 Crore respectively. The  ships were to be 
delivered by December 2014, June 2015 and May 2016. The project progressed till 
September 2014 and thereafter slowed down due to financial status of the shipyard. The 
shipyard was subsequently shut down in June 2015 due to financial probl ems. An 
overall progress of 20.22 %, 12.27 % and 6.7 % was achieved for the three vessels. 
The project is being reviewed on account of delays in delivery. 
 
 
 

 
 
 
9. Survey Vessels (M/s Alcock Ashdown Gujarat Ltd, Bhavnagar) .    The 
contract for construction o f six Survey Vessels was signed with M/s Alcock Ashdown 
Gujarat (AAGL), a Government of Gujarat PSU, on 28 December 2006 at a cost of Rs. 
797.81 Crore. The first ship, INS Makar was delivered in September 2012 after a delay 
of almost 44 months. Post delive ry of the first ship, the project has stalled due to cash 
flow issues and financial constraints of the shipyard. The shipyard has been unable to 
renew and revalidate Bank Guarantees. As of now, the progress of the remaining five 
vessels stood at 70 %, 40 % , 40 %, 35 % and 20 % respectively. The project is being 
reviewed on account of delays in delivery.  
 
10. Project 75 (M/s MDL, Mumbai) .   The project cost for supply of 06 submarines 
was estimated at Rs. 18798 Crore in 2005 at the timing of signing of cont ract. The cost 
was revised to Rs. 23558.00 Crore (2010) approximately, primarily due to increase in 
cost of MDL procured material (MPM) as compared to earlier indicated cost. 
Subsequently, due to further delays in procurement of MPM items, MDL requested fo r 
revision of delivery schedule from June 2015 to September 2016. The revision in 
delivery schedule led to escalation in various cost elements of GoI -MDL contract. The 
first submarine is likely to be delivered by September 2016, with subsequent deliveries 
every nine months. 
 
Steps Taken to Reduce Time and Cost Overruns .    Various steps have been taken 
to reduce time overrun and cost escalation in Shipbuilding projects. These include:- 
 
(a) All projects are now being contracted on a ‘fixed cost’ basis. The variable cost 
option is exercised only where cost of equipment is uncertain. 
 
(b) Provision for Liquidated Damages is incorporated in all contracts for penalising 
any delay beyond contractual timelines. 
 
(c) Infrastructure augmentation of yards is being carried ou t to build capacity and to 
reduce the build time. 
 
(d) Provision for nomination of equipment for follow -on ships to reduce procurement 
time. 
 
(e) In order to reduce build time, construction of follow -on Ships is based on the 
same design, as is being done in the ca se of four follow -on Water Jet FACs under 
construction at M/s GRSE, Kolkata. 
 
(f) Regular Project Reviews of all shipbuilding projects are held every six months by 
the Apex Steering Committee {chaired by Secy (DP)} and by the Steering Committee 

 
 
{chaired by DG (Acq)} on a quarterly basis. B esides these, CWP&A Review Meeting 
(CPRM) is also held on a quarterly basis. 
 
(g) Project 75 is being reviewed by ‘Integrated Progress Monitoring Team’ chaired by 
CMD, M/s MDL on a monthly basis to enable quick decision making and  early resolution 
of critical issues. 
 
(j) P71 (IAC-I) is being reviewed by ‘Empowered Apex Committee (EAC)’ headed by 
Defence Secretary once in six months. Based on the mandate of CCS while according 
revised CCS sanction, an 'Expert Committee' under the chairmanship of VCNS has 
been constituted and the Project is reviewed by Expert Committee, quarterly. The 
project is also reviewed quarterly by Steering Committee headed by DG (Acq) and by 
the Controller Warship Production & Acquisition (CWP&A) in Controll er Warship 
Production & Acquisition Project Review Meetings (CPRMs). 
 
(k) Integrated Modular Construction for new Projects and shift from Telescopic 
Design to Frozen Design. 
 
(l) Enterprise Resource Planning though Information Technology management 
tools.' 
 
31. The Committee take note of the various measures which have repeatedly been 
initiated by the Ministry of Defence with regard to reduction in time and cost overruns  
witnessed in procurement of vessels and other equipments for Navy. The Committee  
further observe that unaccounted delays have taken a toll on Defence preparedness and 
the exchequer as well .  Therefore, very strict compliance related measures should be 
taken to ensure  timely delivery of vessels and optimum utilization of resources by  
various shipyards. Accordingly, Ministry of Defence should frame  timelines and ensure 
compliance with the targets envisaged for various acquisitions. 
J. Critical requirement of Force Level  
 
Recommendation (Para Nos. 30) 
 
32. The Committee had recommended as under:- 
 
`Furthermore, the Committee are constrained to observe that there is impetus to replace 
the aging platforms as these would be de -commissioned in the next 10 -12 years. The 
Committee are concerned to note that the current six Mine Counter Measure Vessels 
are over 25 years old. It is imperative to induct Indian Aircraft Carrier (IAC) which is 

 
 
being built in Cochin Shipyard as INS Virrat is set to be decommissioned. Now, Indian 
Navy is completely dependent on the recently acquired INS Vikramaditya. Therefore, 
the Committee strongly reiterated the recommendation made in their earlier report for 
extending the life span of INS Viraat. At the same time, the Committee strongly, desire 
that IN should have an additional Aircraft carrier. The Committee also desire that t he 
present force level be increased and the ageing platform be replace without loss of time 
so as to enable in facing the challenges of present day’s maritime security needs. 
Presently, 46 ships and submarines are under construction in various shipyards in  the 
country. Considering the fact that slippages have become a common feature of our 
acquisitions etc., the Committee cannot help expressing apprehension on the timely 
completion of these projects. Therefore, the Committee desire that the Ministry to 
Defence take every possible measure to ensure that these vessels are constructed in 
the stipulated time frame and the quality is not compromised at any level. The 
Committee may be kept apprised of the developments in this regard. 
 
 There is a plan to have 18 submarines in all. However, the existing strength of 
submarines is 15 and these too are 16 -30 years old. Six P -75 submarines are under 
construction at MDL, Mumbai. Also, serviceability is enhanced by Medium Refit Life 
Certification (MRLC) of submarines. Th e Committee are dissatisfied with the state of 
affairs with regard to the submarines. Ministry of Defence needs to look into the aspect 
of obsolescence of the submarines. The Committee also desire that a cost benefit 
analysis should also be done in regard to of procurement vis-à-vis refit for extending the 
life span and they be intimated of the outcome of the exercise.' 
 
33. The Ministry in its Action Taken Reply has stated as under :- 
 
`The modernisation of IN is being carried out in accordance with the Maritime Capability 
Perspective Plan (MCPP) 2012 -27 and Long Term Integrated Perspective Plan (LTIPP) 
2012-27. The modernisation is dictated primarily by the capabilities to be achieved, 
threat perceptions, prevailing external security environment, emerging technologies and 
availability of funds. The planned force levels envisaged in LTIPP were arrived at 
catering for new inductions and likely decommissioning/ de -induction of ships/ 
submarines in the coming years . In order to mitigate shortages and maintain minimum 
force levels, IN extends the service life of ships/ submarines through Service Life 
Extension (SLE) Programmes, based on the operational necessity, material state and 
anticipated delay in induction of r eplacement platforms. P resently 45 ships and 
submarines are under construction at various public and private shipyards.  The details 
pertaining to MCMV and IAC-1 are enumerated in succeeding paragraphs. 
 
Mine Counter Measure Vessels (MCMVs) .  At present the Indian Navy has six 
MCMVs. These MCMVs are scheduled to be de -inducted in the period 2016 -2018. The 

 
 
AoN for construction of 12 new MCMVs was accorded by DAC on 28 February 2015 on 
nomination basis to M/s Goa Shipyard Limited (GSL) with To T from a foreign 
collaborator for Rs. 32640 Crore. M/s GSL has issued RFP for selection of foreign 
collaborator for ToT on 01 December 2015 and M/s Kangnam Corporation (RoK) has 
submitted the bid on 11 January 2016.  
 
Indigenous Aircraft Carrier (IAC -1).  The CCS sanction for construction of India’s first 
Indigenous Aircraft Carrier (IAC -1), at Ms/ CSL Kochi was accorded in 20 November 
2002 and GoI sanction was issued in January 2003. The ship would be capable of 
operating a combination of aircraft, includi ng MIG 29K, Kamov 31 and Multi Role 
Helicopters (MRH). The Phase-I contract for construction was concluded with M/s CSL, 
Kochi in May 2007 for construction up to launching of the vessel. The ship was launched 
on 12 August 2013, after completion of Phase -I activities. The balance activities for 
delivery of the ship are being undertaken in two more phases. Phase -II covers the 
period from launch of the ship till completion off DG trials and setting -to-work of Gas 
Turbine support systems. The contract for Phase -II of the IAC was signed on 16 
December 2014. The hull fabrication work of IAC was completed, and the vessel was 
undocked in June 2015, post completion of the underwater work. Major outfitting work of 
the ship, up to setting to work of the gas turbine sup port system and commencement of 
diesel generator set trials, as part of Phase-II scope of work, is scheduled for completion 
by December 2016. The rest of outfitting and trials, till delivery of ship, would be 
undertaken under Phase -III contract.  Revised s anction of the Cabinet Committee on 
Security (CCS) for delivery of ship by December, 2018 at an estimated cost of Rs. 
19,341 Crore was accorded on 14 July 2014.  The main reasons for delay in delivery 
timelines are listed below:- 
 
(i)  Ordering of Long Lead Equipment and Design Studies. 
(ii)  Non-Availability of Steel. 
(iii)  Learning Curve for CSL. 
(iv) Delayed ordering of Propulsion System Integration (PSI). 
(v)  Delay in Russian approvals for design and supply of equipment for 
Aviation Facilities Complex (AFC).  
(vi)  Delay in receipt of critical/unique pre-launch indigenous equipment. 
 
Submarine Force Levels .  The Maritime Capability Perspective Plan (MCPP) 2012 -27 
envisages a force level of 18 conventional submarines. Presently, IN has 14 
conventional submarines {ten Sindhughosh class (EKM) submarines including 
Sindhurakshak and four Shishumar class (SSK) su bmarines}.  The induction of new 
class of submarines under Project 75 (Scorpene) has been delayed. The first submarine 
of this class is now scheduled to be commissioned in end 2016.  
 

 
 
Status of New Inductions .  The 30 year submarine building plan was appro ved by the 
CCS in 1999 which envisaged that 12 submarines under Phase I be commissioned by 
2012. However, no new submarine under the plan have been inducted so far. The 
scheduled induction of P 75 submarines (first six submarines under Phase I) has been 
delayed and it is now expected that first submarine will be inducted by end 2016. The 
next six submarines to be constructed under Phase I would be under Project 75 (I), for 
which RFP is yet to be issued.  
 
Alternative Options / Cost Benefit Analysis .  The proposal for undertaking MRLC has 
been comprehensively examined) vis -a-vis other options based on the requirements 
emanating from the required force levels and the status of new inductions. The detailed 
justification along with the options considered prior a rriving at decision for Medium Refit 
Life Certificate (MRLC) are as follows: - 
 
(a) Enhanced Number of Submarines – P75/ P75(I).The present force level of 14 
submarines would have become due for de -induction commencing 2016 based on the 
envisaged Service Life. The most optimistic induction timelines for P75 (wef 2016) and 
P75(I) (wef 2022) were considered. It is, therefore, evident that in the intervening period 
of 2016 -22, MRLC for submarines was required, in addition to planned inductions, in 
order to arrest acute decline in the submarine strength.  
 
(b) New Submarines .  The limited options available included outright purchase of 
new or existing class of submarines. In case submarines of a new class were procured 
(five to six years after contract conclusion), it wo uld have entailed additional cost of 
infrastructure, training, maintenance, etc and therefore this option was not considered 
due to considerable financial implications.  
 
(c) Procure Used Submarines of Existing Class .  Procurement of second hand 
submarines would have entailed cost of the submarines, refit and modernisation costs 
besides the uncertainty on availability of such second hand submarines.  
 
MRLC – Only Viable Alternative.  In view of the above mentioned cost benefit analysis 
and inherent time involved in procurement, it was felt that MRLC of six already 
modernised submarines (four EKM class and two SSK class) is a viable alternative. The 
refit period for each submarine is two to three years and all submarine s proposed for 
MRLC would have requisite combat capability. Further, the maintenance periods during 
the extended life are similar to those on an existing submarine and therefore there 
would be no decrease in the period of operational availability of the su bmarines 
undergoing MRLC. 
 
 
 

 
 
 
Present Status .  The Contract for the MRLC of the first EKM submarine has been 
concluded at a cost of Rs. 1191 Crore (approx). The submarine refit has commenced in 
mid-2016 and would be completed by end 2018. The 2 nd submarine refit would be 
completed by 2019. Therefore, submarines would be available in order to arrest acute 
decline in the fleet strength. 
 
The life of the six submarines post MRLC will be additional 10 years, which will be 
certified by the OEM, on completion of the Refit, thereby meeting the immediate 
operational necessity of the Navy.' 
 
34. The Ministry of Defence has informed that in respect of MCMVs the last bid was 
submitted by M/s Kangnam Corporation (RoK) on 11 January 2016.  The Committee note 
that even a fter a passage of almost an year , no decision could be taken  on the matter. 
The MCMVs are slated for de -induction by  2016-2018.  2016 has already passed and 
moreover, building the MCMVs will also take considerable time. Thus, the Committee 
feel that the en tire process of procurement of MCMVs will be delayed inordinately. 
Therefore, the Committee desire that sincere and concerted efforts must be made with 
urgency to resolve the situation. In case of IAC, the situation is equally grim and the 
Committee wish that necessary measures are put in place to ensure timely delivery with 
the stipulated targets and without any further delays.  
The Committee would like to be informed about the status of induction of 1st P75 
submarine which was  scheduled for induction by the end of 2016.  It is very 
disheartening to note that the Request for proposal (R FP) is yet to be issued. The 
process   should be hastened.  It is also very unfortunate that Navy has landed into such 
a critical  situation where  MRLC of six submarines is the only available option. Even 
MRLC will be completed only by 2019. In such a dismal scenario, it is very difficult for 
Navy to be adequately prepared for any eventuality.  Therefore, the Committee desire 
that the Ministry of De fence has to be sincere in the efforts for providing necessary 
support to the Navy.   
 
  

 
 
K. Revenue Budget- Humanitarian Assistance and Disaster Relief 
 
 
Recommendation (Para Nos. 38) 
 
35. The Committee had recommended as under :- 
 
`Air Force, provides humanitarian assistance and disaster relief. During the year 2015 -
16, the Air Force played a significant role in providing assistance during the floods in 
Tamil Nadu; in Fiji and rendered help and during the Nepal Earthquake. The Indian Air 
Force undertook 11 trips for evacuating 2096 Indian nationals in Yemen under operation 
‘Rahat’. The Air Force also distributed relief material and supplied drinking water in 
Maldives, on a sustained basis till normalcy resumed.  The Air Force also deployed 
helicopters to  tackle Naxal issues in Chhattisgarh and Jharkhand.  On being asked 
about the Heads of Account from where   the expenditure was being incurred on such 
measures, the Committee were apprised that this was being done from the Revenue 
Budget!!  Reimbursement o f the expenses is obtained by the Air Force in 2 – 3 years’ 
time.  This type of expenditure puts further pressure on the already stretched revenue 
resources. In view of this backdrop, the Committee strongly feel that there is a need to 
develop a systemic institutional solution for this by making a separate allocation for such 
measures or ensuring that the reimbursement is made in that particular year itself, so 
that other expenditures planned during annual budgeting do not get compromised.' 
 
36. The Ministry in its Action Taken Reply has stated as under :- 
 
 `The recommendations of the Committee will be brought to the notice of Ministry of 
 Finance for their consideration and further necessary action.'   
 
37. The Committee would like to be informed w hether any communication was made 
between Ministry of Defence  and  Ministry of Finance in this regard and if so the 
response of the Ministry of Finance thereon.  
 
 
  

 
 
 
L. Slow pace of Acquisitions/Procurements 
Recommendation (Para Nos. 45) 
 
38. The Committee had recommended as under :- 
 
`The committee came to know that there were 291 schemes planned under 12 th plan.  
60 schemes were added during the review (recast) of 12 th plan, thus taking the total 
number of schemes to 351.  Of the 351 schemes, 124 have been dropped, and 191 
schemes are ongoing/under progress.  Out of these 191 schemes, Acceptance of 
Necessity (AON) could be granted for merely 78  schemes.  As four years of the 12 th 
Plan have already elapsed, the Committee observe with concern, that 
procurements/acquisitions are moving at very slow pace.  Thus, there is an earnest 
need for expediting the procedure .  Besides, necessary budgetary assistance 
needs to be provided for taking care of the procurements/acquisitions.' 
39. The Ministry in its Action Taken Reply has stated as under :- 
 
`The schemes approved under the Five Year Plans are divided into Annual Acquisition 
Plans. Priority of each scheme is allotted in Annual Acquisition Plans and schemes are 
processed within the contours of the Capital Budget allotment.  Further, while 
formulating the Five Year Plans, additional schemes are planned to cater for any 
slippages in processing, thus utilizing the allotted budget. Additionally, even before grant 
of AoN, a scheme has to be progressed following various  stages defined in the Defence 
Procurement Procedure (DPP) vizSoC formulation, SEPC, RFI, ASQR formulation etc. 
DPP 2016 includes several initiatives to ensure faster procurements. Schemes for which 
AoN have not yet been accorded are being progressed for g rant of AoN and are at 
various stages of processing as per the new DPP 2016.'   
 
40. The Committee note that the Ministry has  put into place the revised DPP 2016, 
which includes several initiatives to ensure faster procurements.  However, the 
Ministry’s reply is silent with regard to providing necessary budgetary a ssistance for 
taking care of the procurement  / acquisition. Therefore, the Committee desire the 
Ministry to furnish specific response to this aspect.  
 
 
 
 

 
 
Recommendation (Para Nos. 46) 
 
 
41. The Committee had recommended as under :- 
 
 
`In all, 29 contracts signed with value above Rs. 50 crore were signed during the 12 th 
Plan period.  Of these, only one could be completed and the remaining are ongoing.  
Some of these projects are very crucial for development of the Air Force.  These 
include, procurement of PC -7 MK II aircraft and associated equipment, procurement of 
SU 30 MKI, procurement and infrastructure development of Addl C -130 & J 30 aircraft, 
attack helicopters etc.  Such delays are likely to have the negative implication of 
derailing the course of development of Air Force.  The Committee take note of the 
alarmingly slow pace of progress of the acquisition/procurement projects and desire that 
decision making and execution needs to be more proactive and precise.’  
 
42. The Ministry in its Action Taken Reply has stated as under :- 
 
`Out of 30 contracts signed since Apr il 2012, deliveries have been completed for five 
contracts and are under progress for the remaining contracts. The majority of the 
equipment  procured through Capital Budget are high value items and are not readily 
available for delivery . These equipment a re manufactured/fabricated only after signing 
of the contract and are to be supplied to Air Force as per delivery schedule agreed in 
the contract. Mechanisms are in place both at IAF and MoD to ensure compliance to the 
delivery schedule and to deal with the cases of delays.’  
 
43. The Committee have been informed that Mechanisms are in place both at IAF and 
MoD to ensure compliance with the delivery schedule and to deal with cases of delays . 
The Ministry may apprise  the Committee about the stage of progress of t he remaining 
25 contracts and the likely dates for completion of the contracts.  
  

 
 
 
M. Indigenization 
Recommendation (Para Nos. 48) 
 
 
44. The Committee had recommended as under :- 
 
`The Ministry of Defence had submitted that there have been both time and cost 
overruns in some cases which pertain mainly to indigenous ‘Make’ and ‘Design & 
Development’ (D&D) projects.  Procurement from foreign vendors is resorted to, only 
when the Indian industry is not in a position to provide  the desired equipment or supply 
the required equipment in the allotted time frame.  Out of 15 contracts signed since 
2013, only three have been completed till date.  In this regard, the Committee 
recommend that app ropriate penalty should be imposed whenever delays and lacunae 
are witnessed and this should be a part of the contract.’ 
45. The Ministry in its Action Taken Reply has stated as under:- 
 
`Out of 18 contracts signed since 01 April 2013, deliveries have been  completed for 
three contracts and are under progress for the remaining contracts. The delivery 
schedule is committed by the vendor in the contract. Penal clause for delays in 
fulfillment of contractual agreement is an integral part of contract document. A dequate 
steps are taken for safeguarding and ensuring that all contractual obligations are 
materialized within the stipulated contractual timeframe. Procedures are in place to deal 
with the cases of delay caused by the vendor in following the delivery time frames.’ 
 
46. The Committee observe from the ATR that out of 18 contracts signed since 1 
April, 2013, deliveries have been completed in respect to three contracts and the 
remaining contracts are under progress. Adequate steps are taken for safeguarding and 
ensuring that all contractual obligations are materialized within the stipulated 
contractual timeframe. Procedures are in place to deal with the cases of delay caused 
by the vendor in following the delivery time frames.  The Committee may be apprised of  
the stages of progress made thereon and the likely date of completion of these projects. 
  

 
 
N. Force Level 
Recommendation (Para Nos. 51) 
 
47. The Committee had recommended as under :- 
 
`The Indian Air Force (IAF) has projected a requirement of at least 45 fighter squadrons 
to counter a two front collusive threat.  However, the IAF presently is working with only 
33 active fighter squadrons as against Government authorized strength of 42 
Squadrons and requirement of 45.  The Ministry of Defence had informed that there is a 
gap in the Force Level since the rate at which fighter aircraft are retiring after completion 
of their total technical life exceeds the rate at which their replacements ar e being 
inducted into the IAF.  The Committee are, further concerned to find that many 
squadrons consisting of MiG planes are due for retirement and in such a dismal 
scenario it becomes very challenging for IAF to upgrade its squadron.  In this regard, 
the Ministry informed that IAF has contracted 272 Su-30 MKI fighter aircraft out of which 
213 Su-30 MKI have been delivered till date and balance are likely to be delivered by 
2020.  Further induction of Light Combat Aircraft (LCA) and Medium Multi Role Comba t 
Aircraft (MMRCA) is envisaged.  The MMRCA project is at Contract Negotiation 
Committee (CNC) stage.  IAF has accepted the first series of LCA production on 17 
January 2015.  Negotiations to finalise the Research and Development Phase contract 
for Fifth G eneration Fighter Aircraft (FGFA) are progressing with the Russian side.  In 
this regard, the Committee desire that measures be taken to ensure that all planned 
procurements fructify in stipulated time frame and the IAf achieves the 
Government authorized strength of 42 Squadrons.The Ministry of Defence should 
also pay heed to the IAF’s demand for 45 squadrons which IAF require to counter 
two front war.' 
 
48. The Ministry in its Action Taken Reply has stated as under :- 
 
`On 01 July 2016 IAF formed first LCA squadron and efforts are on to ensure that the 
fleet is operationalized in IAF at the earliest. IAF is also progressing the case for 
procurement of additional LCA Mk -1A aircraft to increase total number of LCA in IAF 
over six squadrons. Further, the IGA, Aircraft and Weapons Package Supply Protocols 
and Offset Contracts have been concluded for the Rafale fighter aircraft and supplies 
will commence from September, 2019.  The issues pertaining to the Research and 
Development of Fifth Generation Fighter Aircraft (FGFA) are under discussion with the 
Russian side.  
 

 
 
          The Ministry is considering the requirement of additional fighter aircraft to cover 
present and prospective shortages in the IAF and a decision will be taken soon.'  
49. The Committee take note of the various measures being taken by the Ministry of 
Defence to mitigate the gap between sanctioned and existing force  level in Indian Air 
Force. Shortage of squadron strength ha s been a matter raised by the Committee time 
and again. In this regard, the Committee would like to be apprised about the stages of 
progress of `acquisition of fighter aircraft by IAF  and the likely dates for the acquisition 
to materialize.   
 
O. Trainer Aircraft 
Recommendation (Para Nos. 56 & 57) 
 
50. The Committee had recommended as under:- 
 
`Trainer Aircraft held by IAF currently include Basic Trainer Aircraft (BTA), Intermediate 
Jet Trainer (IJT) and Advanced Jet Trainer (AJT).  The strength of existing trainer 
aircraft is 234 as against the sanctioned strength of 388.  Simulators have also b een 
provided for each type of aircraft.  IAF has requirement of 183 Basic Trainer Aircraft 
(BTA).  At present, IAF have 75 x PC -7 Mk -II aircraft.  The contract is likely to be 
concluded in the next financial year (2016 -17).  Additionally, HAL has been task ed to 
make 70 BTAs (HTT -40) for the balance requirement.  The Committee wish that 
requirement of basic trainer aircraft for Air Force be met without any further delay.' 
 
51. The Ministry in its Action Taken Reply has stated as under:- 
 
`Development of HTT -40:   First flight of HTT -40 prototype was test flown in May 16. 
Till now, five flights have been test flown. A total of 312 test flights are planned on HTT -
40. These test sorties will be flown on three different Prototypes.  
The number of trainer aircraft available in IAF is as given below:- 
S.No.  Trainer Aircraft Total No. of Aircraft 
(a) Hawk 100 
(b) PC-7 MK-II 75 
(c) Kiran MK-I 92 
(d) Kiran MK-II 42 
 Total 309 

 
 
 First flight of HTT -40 prototype -1 was carried out on 31/05/2016. First block of 
flights completed with twenty flights covering 40 test points. Envelope expansion is 
being undertaken.  Manufacture or PT2 is under progress.  A total of 3122 test flights 
are projected towards certification of HTT -40.  These test sorties will be carried o ut on 
three prototypes.' 
52. The Ministry has furnished information on existing trainer aircraft. However, the 
Committee observe that out of these aircraft, ‘Kiran’ is already due for being phased out. 
IJTs being developed by HAL are still underway. Therefore, the Committee are unhappy 
with the vague reply of the Ministry of Defence in this connection and desire that 
Ministry of Defence be more result oriented and specific in efforts toward acquisition of 
trainer aircraft at all levels. 
P. Night Landing Facilities  
Recommendation (Para No. 61) 
 
53. The Committee had recommended as under:- 
 
`There are a total of 53 IAF airfields of which permanent airfield lighting system is 
available at 42 airfields.  Limited night operations are being conducted at airfields not 
having permanent airfield lighting and the requirement is met using 
alternate/portable/mobile airfield lighting system.  The Committee desire that night 
landing facilities should be a part of all the airfields as in present era of technological 
advancement, this is not a far stretched requirement.’      
  
54. The Ministry in its Action Taken Reply has stated as under :- 
 
 `Permanent airfield lighting system (AFLS) is available at 42 out of total 53 IAF airfields. 
Installation of permanent AFLS at 10 more airfields excluding Kargil (on lease from AAI) 
is planned under Phase -II of Project  MAFI (Modernisation of Airfield Infrastructure).  
Permanent AFLS will be available at all 52 IAF airfields, on completion of Phase -II.   
Requirement at these airfields is presently being met through alternative means that 
includes six Mobile AFLS (MAFLS) already inducted in MAFI Phase -I and another six 
that will be inducted in Phase-II.’ 
55. The Committee may be apprised of the probabl e time of completion of phase II of 
the project MAFI (Modernisation of Airfield Infrastructure ) and the steps being taken by 
the Ministry for compliance with the scheduled time period. 
  

 
 
CHAPTER II 
(A) OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS  WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE 
GOVERNMENT 
Recommendation (Para Nos. 3 and 3A) 
 
 Under the Capital Head for 2016 -17, the Army is allocated only Rs. 26,935.81 crore, 
which is Rs. 11024.37 crore less than the projected amount of Rs. 37,960.18 crore. The 
allocation at BE for 2015-16 was Rs. 27,342.42 crore. The difference between BE 2015-16 and 
2016-17 is Rs. 406.61 crore. The percentage variation between BE 2015 -16 and BE 2016 -17 
is (-) 1.5 percent. The percentage differences between the projected amount and allocation is 
(-) 30 percent. Against the Capital Budget of Rs. 26,935.81 crore, the allocation for Committed 
Liabilities for BE 2016 -17 is Rs. 19,449.26 crore against the projection of Rs, 21,921.38 crore. 
The allocation for Committed Liabilities for 2015-16 was Rs. 20,513.44 crore. Hence, there is a 
reduction of Rs. 1,064.18 crore vis-à-vis the amount made available in the previous year. In so 
far as the Capital segment is concerned, funds are first set aside to meet the projected 
Committed Liabilities likely to materialize during the year. The remaining allocation is 
distributed to m eet the projected requirement for other items. This does not include price 
escalation.  
 For New Schemes, the allocation at BE 2015 -16 was Rs. 1,541 crore. Against the 
requirement of Army i.e. Rs. 7,749 crore, the allocation at BE 2016-17 is Rs. 2,086 crore i.e. 35 
percent more in comparison to BE 2015 -16 but ( -) 73 percent less in comparison to the 
projected amount. The Committee are concerned to note that the Army is operating with large 
scale vintage equipment. Furthermore, there is shortage in the numbe r of vehicles, small 
arms/infantry specialist weapons, sight and surveillance equipment, signal/communication 
equipment, Radars & power equipment and generators etc. Although there is a plan for 
modernizing the equipments, this is likely to take a consider able time to get fructified. The 
Committee are concerned to note that the Army's plans for capacity enhancement and 
heightened operational preparedness would suffer deeply due to reduced allocation of funds in 
the Capital head and this is an ominous foreboding for the National Security. 
Recommendation (Para No. 4) 
 The Committee also note that for Capital Expenditure for Army, from 2011 -12 to 2015 -
16, against the BE allocations of Rs. 19,210.69, Rs. 19,237.80, Rs. 17,883.83, Rs. 26,533.60 
and Rs. 27,342.42,  the actual expenditure has been Rs. 14,947.82, Rs. 14,760.69, Rs. 
14,433.29, Rs. 14,843.37 and Rs. 14,693.82 (upto end of January 2016), respectively. The 
Committee are highly disappointed to note the persistent trend of underutilization of funds 
meant for capital expenditure for Army even though the amount allocated under this head is 
always lesser than the projected one. This trend which is prevalent since long highlights the 
flaws in the planning and budgetary exercise undertaken by the Ministry. Theref ore, the 

 
 
Committee desire that the Ministry should sincerely introspect on these lapses, and overhaul 
their planning and budgeting mechanism to ensure greater financial discipline and optimum 
utilisation of funds. 
Reply of the Government 
 The recommendatio ns of the Committee are noted for compliance. Necessary 
instructions are being issued from time to time for adherence to financial propriety and 
avoidance of underutilization of funds/wasteful expenditure. 
 The Committee may be assured that all efforts wil l be made to ensure optimum 
utilization of scarce resources. 
Recommendation(Para No. 12) 
 
 The modernisation of the Armed Forces is a continuous process based on threat 
perception, operational necessity, technological changes and available resources. The 
Capital acquisitions flow from the 15 years Long Term Integrated Perspective Plan (LTIPP), 
Five year Services Capital Acquisition Plan (SCAP) and Annual Acquisition Plan (AAP). The 
current LTIPP spells out the capability desired to be achieved by the Armed Forces over the 
15 years' duration from 2012 to 2027. The LTIPP is translated into specific assets to be 
acquired, in the form of Services Capital Acquisition Plan 99 (SCAP 2012-17), covering a five 
year period. From the Services Capital Acquisition Plan ( SCAP), a list of equipment and 
weapon systems required to be procured immediately is listed in the form of the Annual 
Acquisition Plan (AAP) which is a two year roll -on-plan. Presently AAP 2015 -17 is in vogue 
and contains 147 schemes which are at various s tages of procurement. As submitted by the 
Ministry, budget allocation for modernization (Capital Acquisiton) of Army in BE 2015 -16 was 
Rs. 21,535.26 crore and upto the 3rd week of March 2016, an amount of Rs. 12,144.67 crore 
had been spent against Modified  Appropriation (MA) 2015 -16 allocation of Rs. 14,473.87 
crore. 
Recommendation(Para No. 13) 
 During the 11th Plan period, 180 contracts has been signed with cumulative value of Rs 
63,172.80 crore and in the 12 th Plan period 90 contracts has been signed so f ar with 
cumulative value of Rs 37,875.33 crore for capital acquisitions for the Army. The committee 
are given to understand that pendencies occur in procurement cases due to several reasons, 
such as insufficient and limited vendor base, non -conformity of t he offers to the RFP 
conditions, long field trials, complexities in contracts negotiations, stakeholder consultations 
and long lead time for indigenization, design and development projects etc. As per the 
Ministry, the measures such as provisions for chang e of name of vendor/entity, self -
certification by the vendor under the buy Indian designed, developed and manufactured 
(IDDM) category, conducting of field evaluation test by the user where equipment is most 

 
 
likely to be deployed, extensive interactions wi th the vendors by the Headquarters Integrated 
Defence Staff (HQ IDS) and Service Headquarters (SHQ), reduction of validity of acceptance 
of necessity, proceeding of single vendor cases at various stages with due justification and 
guidelines for handling of  complaints are introduced in DPP 2016 to address the issue of 
pendency and delays. The committee are concerned that due to delay in procurement 
process, by the time defence equipments would by procured their technology would have 
probably become obsolete.  The committee, therefore, desire that the Ministry, now armed 
with DPP 2016, would leave no stone unturned in addressing the procurement delays and fast 
track the long due modernisation process of the Army. 
Reply of the Government 
 The new DPP 2016 has be en promulgated with effect from 01.04.2016. The following 
provisions have been included / amended in DPP -2016 to cut down the procurement cycle 
and also to make it simpler and user friendly:- 
(a) HQIDS will bring out the Technology Perspective and Capabili ty Roadmap (TPCR) for 
use by the industry. This document will be made available on MoD website and ensure 
improved transparency and responsiveness as also facilitate advance planning and 
preparation by industry. 
(b) The RFI process has been laid down as th e first step of the acquisition process and 
elaborated in detail with an aim to have extensive interaction with vendors, after uploading 
broad details of the upcoming procurement case on MoD website. This enables the industry to 
understand requirements of the MoD and propose their solutions accordingly. 
(c)  The draft RFP has to be prepared and enclosed at AoN stage itself. This would help in 
reducing the timelines for issuing the RFP thereby reducing overall time for the procurement 
process. 
(d) AoN validity has been reduced to six months (from one year) for ‘Buy’ Cases and to one 
year (from two years) for ‘Buy and Make (Indian)’ cases. 
(e) Offset obligation are required only in cases where the cost of contract is more than        
Rs. 2000 crores. This would ease the conditions of business for foreign vendors and speed up 
decision making. 
(f) Provision for involving private industry as Production Agencies and ToT partners in 
addition to DPSUs have been incorporated. 
(g) The scope of Fast Track Procedure has been enlarged to cover peace time urgent 
operational requirement also. In addition, it can also be applied for cases where 
undue/unforeseen delay due to reasons beyond the control of the acquisition set up is seen to 
be adversely impacting the preparedness of the forces. 

 
 
 Concerted efforts are made to adhere to prescribed timelines so that capital 
procurement cases are concluded in a time bound manner. 
Recommendation (Para No. 14) 
  The Committee are further given to understand that there are no cost in creases after 
the commercial bids are opened and post signing of the contracts except on 100 account of 
exchange rate variation or variation in taxes, if provisions for such variations are included in 
the contracts. The Committee feel that given the comple xities in contract negotiations, due 
diligence and caution should be exercised by the Ministry to avoid lopsided agreements or 
contracts that lead to cost overruns. 
Recommendation (Para No. 15) 
 Army’s inventory consists of a mix modern, current and equipm ents approaching 
obsolescence. Though the Ministry failed to submit information regarding current percentage of 
equipments approaching obsolescence in Army, the Committee note that capital acquisition 
proposals for replacement of vintage equipment are bein g progressed under the provisions of 
Defence Procurement Procedure (DPP). The committee would like the ministry to give utmost 
priority to replacement of ageing equipments and modernise the Army with cutting -edge 
technology. 
Reply of the Government 
Replacement of ageing and obsolete defence equipment is part of modernization of 
Armed Forces which is a continuous process based on threat perception, operational 
challenges, technological changes and available resources. The process is based on a 15 year 
Long T erm Integrated Perspective Plan(LTIPP), five year Service Capital Acquisition Plan 
(SCAP) and Annual Acquisition Plan (AAP). 
 Government attaches high priority to ensuring that the Armed Forces are adequately 
equipped and operationally prepared to deal wit h the entire spectrum of security challenges 
facing the country. In this context, there is a constant endeavor to modernize the Armed Forces 
through acquisition of contemporary systems, development of new technologies and upgrading 
of conventional equipment. 
Recommendation (Para No. 16) 
The committee are surprised to note that the expenditure on capital acquisition for Army 
for orders placed on Indian vendors during the 11 th Plan period was Rs 43,271.36 crore, out of 
the total expenditure of Rs 51,153.94 cr ore. During last three financial years, 50 contracts have 
been signed with Indian vendors for capital procurement of Defence equipment for Army such 
as Tanks, Rockets, Missiles, Gun upgrades and simulators etc. The expenditure on capital 
acquisition in res pect of orders placed on Indian vendors from 2011 -12 to 2014 -15 was Rs 
1,38,630.82crore (56.02%). The new Defence Procurement Policy is also likely to have 

 
 
provision to further promote induction of indigenously designed, developed and manufactured 
defence equipment. The committee further note that a feature of the DPP 2016 is the 
introduction of a new procurement category of ‘Buy Indian Designed, Developed and 
Manufactured (IDDM)’. This category refers to products to be procured from Indian vendors that 
are indigenously designed, developed and manufactured and have at least 40 percent 
indigenous content. If the product is not designed and developed indigenously, it should have 
60 percent indigenous content.  
The committee appreciate that efforts are being ta ken in the direction of promoting 
indigenization in Defence production. Though it presents a huge opportunity to our country for 
being self-reliant and even a capable exporter in defence sector, the committee realize that in 
the present scenario where majo rity of defence requirements are met by imports, to set up a 
competitive and state -of-the-art domestic defence industrial base is going to be a gargantuan 
task. Therefore, they desire that the Ministry of Defence to create, support and implement time -
bound policies with unprecedented zeal and synergy for creating indigenous and globally 
acclaimed defence industrial base. 
Reply of the Government 
DPP–2016 focuses on institutionalising, streamlining and simplifying defence 
procurement procedure. It aims to giv e a boost to the ‘Make in India’ initiative of the 
Government, by promoting indigenous design, development and manufacturing of defence 
equipment, platforms, systems and sub - system. ‘Make’ Procedure has also been refined and 
expanded to ensure increased participation of the Indian industry. Enhancing the role of 
MSMEs in defence sector is one of the defining features of DPP-2016.  
Recommendation(Para No. 19) 
 The Committee have learnt that, as on 01.07.2015, there is shortage of 9,106 officers 
and 30,988 Junior Commissioned Officers (JCOs)/Other Ranks (ORs) in the Army (excluding 
Army Medical Corps/Army Dental Corps/Military Nursing Service). The Committee note the 
various measures initiated for reducing shortage of officers in Army, which include, making the 
Service more attractive by way of reduction in time required for promotions, introduction of 
Colonel (Time Scale) rank, enhancing promotional avenues by way of upgradation of posts in 
Select Ranks, providing additional family accommodation through Marr ied Accommodation 
Projects etc. Further, Army has undertaken a sustained image projection campaign to create 
awareness among the youth on the advantages of taking up a challenging and satisfying 
career. Awareness campaigns, participation in career fairs an d exhibitions, advertisements in 
print and electronic media, motivational lectures in schools, colleges are some of the measures 
in this direction. 
 The Committee are of the view that the long term shortage of manpower is an extremely 
serious matter which, if not addressed promptly, will ultimately cripple the country’s security. All 
well-intended plans for modernisation and acquisition for the Army ar e fruitless if there is 

 
 
dearth of personnel. Taking serious note of the current situation, the Committee opine that it is 
high time the Ministry’s efforts for inducting strengthening the human resource base in the 
Armed Forces were materialised and the problem of inadequacy of manpower was resolved. 
 
Reply of the Government 
ARMY: 
Officers: 
 Various measures undertaken to reduce the shortage of officers in the Army have 
resulted in progressive improvement with shortage of officers reducing from around 26% in  
2010 to approximately 18% in 2015, inspite of accretion of about 1800 posts during this period. 
This is a continuous process and various measures/ initiatives are expected to result in 
reduction in shortages further gradually depending on a number of vari able factors like future 
accretions, number of exits, actual intake etc.   
JCOs/OR: 
 The present shortage of JCOs/OR is 23,710 (2%) (as on 01.04.2016) and recruits under 
training are 87,322 (7.35%). The existing deficiency is nominal (2%) and will be met b y once 
the recruits (87,322) under training become trained soldiers. 
NAVY: 
 The Indian Navy has been undertaking various measures to mitigate the shortages of 
Officers and Sailors. The measures adopted by the Navy have resulted in progressive 
reduction of shortages. The shortage as on May 31, 2016 has reduced to 13.30 % and 14.25% 
from 21.46% and 22.65% in 2011 for officers and sailors respectively. This reduction is despite 
an increase in the sanctioned strength of Officers from 10405 to 11384 and for Sail ors from 
63130 to 67639. The progressive reduction indicates that the measures being taken are 
effective and hence will continue. 
AIR FORCE: 
Officers:  
There are no shortages in the officer cadre of IAF. Sanctioned and present strength of 
officers (except Medical & Dental branch) in IAF, as on June 1, 2016, is as follows:- 
 Sanctioned Present Strength 
12185 12150 
 
 

 
 
 
Airmen: 
Induction in airmen cadre has been planned for 5400 per annum for the year 2017 with 
provision to gradually increase it to 6000 per annum from the year 2018, by which IAF will be 
able to bring the strength at par with the authorized establishment. 
Recommendation (Para No. 20) 
 The Committee, in their Seventh report on Demands for Grants 2015 -16, had noted that 
the Defence Institute of Psychological Research (DIPR), under Defence Research and 
Development Organization (DRDO), carried out a study to identify the job trajectory of India 
youth, their propensity to join Armed Forces and to explore the perceived apprehensions in 
joining Armed Forces. In their findings, DIPR had inter alia observed that the inherent problems 
perceived by the students include separation from family, frequent transfers, transfer to remote 
areas, lesser number of holidays, hard training/physical labour etc. 
 The Committee desired to know whether Defence Institute of Psychological Research 
(DIPR) also studied the trends regarding inclination of youth towards joining Armed Forces, 
recruitment methods, facilities given to armed forces etc. in other countries. The Minis try 
replied that DIPR had studied the trends in India only. The Committee recommend that the 
Ministry should initiate a study of the best international practices regarding recruitment of youth 
in Armed Forces, their working environment, motivation provided  to them etc. and incorporate 
the findings suitable to our Army. 
Reply of the Government 
 The Study as recommended by the Committee will be taken up by the Defence Institute 
of Psychological Research. 
Recommendation (Para No. 25) 
 The Committee note that during the FY year 2015-16 the gross Budget at BE stage was 
Rs. 13,385.22 crore with the reduction vis-à-vis the projection being to the extent of Rs. 940.46 
crore.  During the year 2016 -17, against the projected amount of Rs. 16,391.30 crore the 
allocation at BE is Rs. 15,597.69 crore.  Thus, the gap vis -à-vis the projection is Rs.793.61 
crore.  This reduction will definitely have a negative impact, particularly on certain Heads of 
Account viz., transportation, repairs and refits, stores and works, which di rectly impact the 
operational preparedness. The Committee deplore following this pattern of ‘deficit’ funding,           
ad-hocism in approach and distributing the already constrained resources, which have the 
effect of compromising the   priorities.  Ther efore, additional allocations need to be provided to 
the Indian Navy so that no compromise is made on operational preparedness. 
 

 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 The Committee may be assured that Navy’s operational preparedness will not be 
compromised due to want  of funds.  Additional funds will be sought based on requirements 
projected by Navy at Supplementary/RE stage. 
Recommendation (Para No.26 
 During the year 2015 -16, the allocation for Capital Budget for Indian Navy was Rs. 
24,080.90 crore, which was, later on reduced to Rs. 19,032.25 crore. Hence, the reduction was 
to the extent of Rs.5048.65 crore. The allocation at BE 2016 -17 is Rs. 21,041.22 crore against 
the projection of Rs. 28, 807 crore. Thus, there is a difference of Rs. 7765.78 crore between 
the pro jected amount and the allocation made at BE 2016 -17. The difference between BE 
2015-16 (Rs. 24,080.90 crore) and BE 2016 -17 (Rs. 21,041.22 crore) is to the extent of Rs. 
3,039.68 crore. During the year, 2015 -16 the allocations for Committed Liabilities at BE stage 
was Rs. 22,248.12 crore. The modified allocation was Rs. 17,200 crore. During the FY 2016 -
17, the allocation for new schemes, is Rs. 18763.77 core. Therefore, there is reduction of Rs. 
3484.35 crore during BE 2016 -17. For new schemes during the ye ars 2015-16, the allocation 
was Rs. 1,112.78 crore and the modified allocation was Rs. 1193.38 crore. The allocations 
during BE 2016-17 is Rs. 1,600 crore.  
Recommendation (Para Nos.27 and  27A) 
 The Committee opine that such reduction in budgetary allocat ion will have a negative 
impact on the modernisation trajectory of the Indian Navy. During the deliberations on the 
Demands for Grants (2016 -17), the Committee were apprised that the Maritime Security 
Environment has undergone considerable changes. Against  the approved force level of the 
year 1964, which envisaged 138 ships and submarines and 198 ships and submarines by 
2027, the present force level is composed of only 123 ships, 15 submarines and 235 Aircraft. 
There are 46 ships and submarines under construction. So far as ships are concerned, there is 
a strong need to replace the 107 ageing platforms, induction of Indigenous Aircraft Carrier P -
15B and P -17A ships and induction of Mine Counter Measures Vessels. The Committee are 
dismayed over the fact that the Navy is already short of critical force level and infrastructure 
upgradation. The representatives of the Ministry too admitted before the Committee that the 
allocation for Capital Acquisition was not in accordance with the requirement and the Ministry 
of Defence merely accepts the whatever amount is allocated by the Ministry of Finance! 
 
 The Committee are dismayed to note that there is a mismatch between projections and 
allocations at BE and RE stage each year. The Committee have also expressed their a nguish 
over the fact that the reduction of allocations is not only ad -hoc but also results in the 
modernization programme getting postponed from year to year. This has become a routine 

 
 
feature. Mere planning for the acquisitions/procurements will not be ab le to do any service to 
the Navy unless and until the plans are supported with adequate budget and measures taken 
for timely execution. Therefore, the Committee strongly desire that the Ministry should take up 
this matter with the Ministry of Finance with due seriousness for allocating the amount desired 
for at the stage of revised estimates.  This would help in fully equipping the Indian Navy to 
meet the requirements of Operational Preparedness.  Since a financial crunch is always 
present, the Committee al so   desire that the Ministry of Defence to explore other alternatives 
of raising of resources for the Navy by way of leasing out ships etc. within the country during 
peace time and for extending bilateral assistance to friendly countries. The Action Taken  in this 
regard may be apprised to the Committee. 
Reply of the Government 
 This Ministry has been taking up the issue of lesser allocation than projections with the 
Ministry of Finance time and again.  However, no positive response is received from Ministr y of 
Finance in this regard.  The suggestions made by the Committee for exploring alternatives of 
raising resources has been shared with the Navy.  The Committee will be apprised of the 
outcome in due course. 
Recommendation (Para No. 28) 
 The proposal  for setting up of a  major Naval Base at Karwar, named as project 
‘Seabird’ was approved by the Government  of India in the year 1985 at a cost of Rs. 350 
Crore. The total amount allocated for Phase - I isRs. 2628.82 crore. All major works of  Phase - 
I have reportedly been completed. For Phase -II, the amount allocated is Rs. 19603.00 crore.  
Although, approval for Phase – II, which is planned to be completed by the year 2021 and was 
accorded in December, 2012, the Project Management Consultant  (PMC) was appointed in 
November, 2014 only. In view of the  competitive milieu in the Indian Ocean Region,  the 
Committee had,  in their earlier Report desired that setting up of the  Naval Base at  Karwar be 
accomplished as per plan and within the stipul ated  time  frame. However, the Committee are 
pained to note the fact that following the accordance of the approval for Phase II in 2012, the 
Project Management Consultant was appointed only two years later i.e. in Nov, 2014 . As the 
project is planned to b e completed within five years from now, the Committee desire that the 
Ministry make concerted efforts for completing the work in a time bound manner. The 
Committee wish to be kept apprised of the progress made in this regard. 
Reply of the Government 
 Phase –II  of  Project Seabird  was sanctioned by the Government on 06 th December 
2012 for augmentation of infrastructure and other facilities over a ten year period from 2011 to 
2021 at a cost of Rs. 13,161 Crore based  on  January 2010 rates (Rs 19,603 Crore with 6% 
annual escalation) .  The original timeline envisaged appointment of a Project Management 
Consultant (PMC) by June 2012 & Project completion by January 2021. With the appointment 
of PMC in November 2014, the Project completion date would now be Dece mber 2022.  

 
 
Review of Detailed Project Report (DPR), Contracting & Packaging Strategy and Block Cost 
Estimates by the PMC has been completed.   The work on ground is likely to commence by 
end 2016. 
 In order to overcome / mitigate the timeline slippages / cost overruns, due to delay in 
appointment of PMC, the following measures have been taken:- 
(a)  Concurrent execution and planning of major contracts so as to commence work on 
ground by end 2016. 
(b)   Concurrent Processing of Administrative Approval and Pre -qualification of contractors 
to enable approval and short-listing of contractors while the RFP is being finalised. 
(c)  Progress of Project activities with an even spread of expenditure over the Project 
duration as against spike in expenditure in the last two -three years as envisaged in the 
DPR. 
(d)  Efficient Site Management Plan to ensure minimum conflict between progress of Project 
activities and functioning of operational Naval Base at Karwar thus minimizing in 
execution timelines. 
Recommendation(Para No. 32) 
 
The Committee note that the Navy requires Aircraft and Helicopters as these are critical 
for surveillance and Stand -off targeting at sea. Further, the Committee have been informed by 
the representatives of Indian Navy that the Force is short of 61 integral  helicopters on existing 
ships. In order to maintain the surveillance level, Mid -Life Upgrade of Kamov -28 helicopter is 
being carried out. As far as procurement is concerned, case for acquiring Multi Role Helicopter 
is being progressed, case for P 8 -I Boeing Aircraft is in an advanced stage, and the case for 
acquiring 12 Dornier aircraft and Nine Medium range Maritime reconnaissance aircraft is also 
in progress. The Committee are unable to understand as to how, with an insufficient or meagre 
allocation for New Schemes, the Navy would be in a position to take care of the crucial 
acquisitions and refit plans. The Committee, therefore, wish to be kept apprised about the 
progress made with regard to each case of acquisition of helicopters and aircraft for the In dian 
Navy. 
Reply of the Government 
 
Mid Life Upgrade for Kamov 28 .The case was processed as a single vendor case 
(SVC) with M/s JSC ROE, Russian Federation.  After approval of the CCS, contract for MLU 
of Kamov 28 Helicopters has been signed on 29.07.2016 
 
Procurement of 16 Multi Role Helicopter (MRH). Contract Negotiations have been 
going on with M/s Sikorsky since December,2014.  The CNC has held several rounds of 
negotiations with the vendors in view of the high costs.  The matter is likely to be decided  
shortly.  

 
 
 
P-8I (Option Clause) .The case for exercising the ‘Option Clause’ for procurement of 
four additional P -8I aircraft was accorded DAC approval on 04 October 2010. The contract 
under option clause has been signed on 27.07.2016. 
 
ALH for Coastal Sec urity.A joint IN-ICG case for 32 ALH (16 for IN and 16 for ICG) for 
coastal security, with ICG as the lead service, was accorded AoN by DAC on 19 Jul 14. The 
primary role of the Naval ALH for Coastal security includes surface and sub -surface 
surveillance with secondary roles as envisaged for conventional naval helicopters. The aircraft 
is designed for operations by day, night and in adverse weather. The Naval ALH for Coastal 
security would be a wheeled version helicopter with blade fold capability.  The proposal is in 
the final approval stage. 
 
Dorniers for Coastal Security .    It is proposed to pro cure 12 Dornier aircraft with 
Glass cockpit and latest avionics/ equipment, associated spares and 12 engines from HAL. 
The proposal is in the stage of final approvals. 
 
Eight Chetaks.Procurement of Eight Chetaks is planned from HAL as a Repeat Order . 
The cost negotiation process is underway.   
 
Recommendation (Para No. 33) 
The Committee had been intimated that the shortage of officers and sailors has been 
reduced through initiation of various measures, aimed to mitigate the gap between the 
sanctioned strength and the borne strength. The initiatives taken during the XI th Plan (2007-12) 
and ongoingXII th Plan (2013 -17). Plan period have resulted in reduction in shortages. The 
manpower shortages, as on 31Dec 15 has reduced  to 13.31 per cent and 15.53 per cent,  
from  21.46 per cent and 22.65 per cent in 2011 for officers and sailors respectively, despite an 
increase in the sanctioned strength of officers from 10,405 to 11,215 and  for sailors from 
63,130 to 67,659. In this regard, the Committee recommended  that the recruitment should be 
followed in a time bound manner and essential training up gradation should be done so that 
our manpower is well trained to handle modern state of the equipments. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 The recruitment in the Indian Navy i s undertaken bi -annually for both Officers and 
Sailors through various entries in a time bound manner. The recruitment of Officers is carried 
out on an all-India basis through UPSC and non UPSC entries, whereas Sailors’ recruitment is 
carried out during Ma rch/September-October each year on “all India basis on State -wise merit 
of the eligible recruitable male population” as per Naval Recruitment Plan. The recruitment 
dates are advertised well in advance through leading newspapers, Employment News and 

 
 
Indian Naval Website www.joinindiannavy.gov.in for easy access to candidates. It is ensured 
that recruitment timelines are adhered to and  induction courses, for both Officers and Sailors, 
in respective training establishments commence on the scheduled dates.  
Upgradation of Training Facilities 
 Augmentation of Training Infrastructure. The induction for Officers and Sailors has been 
increasing continuously. Accordingly, a Training Infrastructure Perspective Plan (TIPP) was 
formulated by Headquarter Southern Naval Command (HQSNC) to cater for increased 
infrastructure requirements at downstream training establishments. The TIPP was thereafter 
subsumed in the Maritime Infrastructure Perspective Plan (MIPP) and the wo rks are 
progressively being undertaken under Annual Major Works Programme (AMWP). The details 
of augmentation in infrastructure at ab -initio establishments are enumerated in the following 
paragraphs. 
Sailors’ Training. 
 INS Chilka is the premiere training establishment for sailors’ ab -initio training.  The 
establishment was commissioned in 1980 with initial training infrastructure to undertake 
training of up to 700 recruits.  Since 2009, due to the enhanced inductions, the training load 
has gone up to appro ximately 5200 trainees annually. To meet the training requirement of 
enhanced inductions, approval of the GOI was accorded on 14 th September 2015 for (i) AIP for 
infrastructure  augmentation  at INS Chilka at  an  approx cost  of    Rs 205.27Crore; and (ii) 
‘Go Ahead’ sanction for consultancy and preparation of DPR.  In the proposal for infrastructure 
augmentation, the following works are included:- 
(i) Provision of Baffle Range to obviate loss of training time and provide adequate 
opportunity for trainees to achieve proficiency on small arm firing. 
(ii) Provision of deficient Technical Accommodation for Damage Control (DC) and Fire 
Fighting (FF) complex and seamanship hard and associated works with an aim of 
enhancement of training on NBCD aspects and firefighting a long with seamanship 
practical training. 
(iii) Addition/alteration and augmentation of boat yard to carry out watermanship 
exercises including whaler boat sailing, kayaking and enterprise boat sailing which is 
essential for sea-going service. 
(iv) Provision of integr ated sports complex with all sporting facilities including 
gymnasium, stadium and sports courts to develop essential military traits amongst 
trainees. 
(v) Provision of Computer Literacy Center (CLC) for conducting online examination and 
a separate IT complex for IT and LAN related activities. 
(vi) Addition/Alteration and Augmentation to Parade Ground and Drill Shed. 

 
 
(vii) Accommodation for trainees and staff. 
Officers’ Training. The Indian Naval Academy (INA) at Ezhimala, Kerala was dedicated to the 
nation on 08th  January 2009.  The Infrastructure augmentation at INA is being undertaken in a 
phased manner as follows:- 
(a) Phase-I. In 1995, the Government approved the setting up of a permanent INA at 
Ezhimala with BSc (Spl) curriculum for undertaking training of 600 cadets  of the Indian Navy 
and Indian Coast Guard.  Revised Government approval was accorded in 2004 to increase the 
training capacity to 750 cadets and commencement of B. Tech Curriculum.  90% of the 
infrastructure under phase-I is presently ready and being utilized at INA. 
(b) Phase II. Government approval for augmentation of infrastructure at INA (Phase -II) 
to cater for increase in training capacity from 750 to 1200 trainees was accorded on 19 th 
December 2011 at an approximate cost of Rs. 340 Crore.  The expect ed completion year of 
Phase II has been revised to 2018 in view of delay in commencement of works due to litigation 
by architect of Phase-I.  
Recommendation (Para No. 35) 
 The Committee have learnt that the Indian Navy had witnessed as many as 60 
accidents during the period from 2007-08 to 2014-15. The recurrence of accidents could not be 
controlled even after issuance of Standard Operating Procedures (SOPs) in the year 2011 -12. 
In view of this the Committee desire that efforts should be taken towards makin g our Navy a 
‘safe zone’ and in this regard all out efforts be made and the Committee intimated of the details 
of the same.   
Reply of the Government 
Indian Navy has instituted an IN Safety Organisation in Oct.12. At the apex level, the 
organisation compri ses Safety Class Authorities (SCAs) and coordinating Directorates. The 
SCAs are responsible for analysing incidents and accidents, reviewing safety regulations and 
procedures, issuing policy directives and conducting safety assessment during Operational 
Readiness Assessment (ORA) / Inspections as applicable to their respective domains. The 
coordinating Directorates liaise with SCAs for the above functions. 
A half yearly feedback is received at IHQ MoD(N)  from Command HQs and SCAs  on 
the effectiveness of measures implemented for enhancement of safety. The feedback includes 
aspects related to making the structure more robust with regard to developing a ‘Safety 
Culture‘ in the IN. 
At the command level, a ‘Committee on Safety’ under chairmanship of Chief of St aff has 
been established. Representative from other divisions and units of Fleet Safety Committee are 
members of this Committee. Executive Officers onboard ships and Second -in-Command / 

 
 
Safety Managers of shore establishments are also co -opted as additiona l members. This 
Committee acts as the single point authority to coordinate safety related aspects with SCAs. 
At the Fleet / Flotilla / Squadron level, a Fleet Safety Committee under Fleet Operations 
Officer is constituted from Fleet Staff / other officers.  The Committee meets on a quarterly 
basis. 
Onboard ships/ submarines, a separate Safety officer is nominated. In addition, all 
‘Instructor’ sailors borne onboard are part of  ‘Ship safety Committee‘ under Ship’s Safety 
Officer. They meet on a quarterly bas is to enhance Safety awareness by ensuring safe 
practices, analysing safely infringements and instituting corrective measures.  
 Consequent to 11 accidents of ships and submarines from Jan 13 to Jan 14, on 27 Feb 
14, IHQ MoD(N) promulgated directives for c onduct of  Safety Audits of Ships, Submarines 
and Aviation units by designated audit teams of respective Commands/Operational 
Headquarters to further strengthen the safety organisation. Every operational unit is required to 
undergo a Safety Audit either by  the Command Level Safety Audit Team (COMSAT) or an 
Operational Authority Level Safety Audit Team (OLSAT) at least once in a year. Further, Safety 
Audit for fire fighting preparedness and watertight integrity of ships under refit, is being 
undertaken at le ast once a quarter. The feedback from the President of the Audit Boards is 
being monitored at IHQ MoD(N) at the highest level for suitably addressing mitigation 
measures. This  organisation was further refined in Jul 15 by incorporating feedback received 
from naval units, to further enhance safety audits by inclusion of  SoPs, check lists, crew 
proficiency, standard  of knowledge assessment and material state assessment in the conduct 
of the safety audits. These SOPs are also being revised on a periodic bas is. Furthermore, on 
identification of possible vulnerabilities that may lead to an accident or occurrence of an 
accident Special Safety Audits have also been ordered. The findings of such Special audits are 
deliberated at IHQ MoD(N) and corrective procedural/ materiel  actions are instituted. 
 In addition, all Commands carry out a Safety Stand Down at regular interval for all units. 
During Safety Stand Down, various activities, lectures, drills, demonstrations, etc are carried 
out to reinforce the need for safety at all times by all personnel. 
 In case of a long lay -off, such as, refits of ships and submarines, Safety Checks in 
harbour and at sea are  undertaken prior  to declaring the ship / submarine ‘operational ’. 
Safety also forms an important aspect during the ‘work -up’ of a ship of submar ine. Work-up of 
ships are undertaken by a specialised team of officers and sailors operating under the Flag 
Officer Sea Training (FOST). Similar safety checks are undertaken for submarines by Flag 
Officer Submarines (FOSM) and for air -squadrons and air –bases by Flag Officer Naval 
Aviation (FONA). Safety standards are also ‘checked’ during surprise inspections by the 
Command Staff and during the Annual Inspections by the Operational Authorities. 
 To inculcate a ‘think safety‘ attitude amongst naval  personne l, training in safety is 
undertaken from the ab -initio stage itself  and is reinforced at all stages of the naval career. 

 
 
The syllabus for Command Exam, a mid career exam mandatory for all officers prior to getting 
appointed as Commanding Officer, has been  revised. ‘Safety‘ has been included in the 
syllabus with Standard of Knowledge (SOK) ‘Á’.  
Incident Study and Analysis Cells (ISACs) have been set up in the professional schools, 
which are entrusted with the task of formulating case studies out of the var ious incidents/ 
accidents. These case studies are disseminated to all trainees undergoing training at the 
schools and to the officers prior to assuming Command so as to derive meaningful lessons. 
 The extracts of a Board of Inquiry (BoI) along with a pan N avy advisory are forwarded 
by Professional Directorates at IHQ MoD(N) to Commands after the findings of the BoI are 
analysed. Further, IHQ MoD(N) regularly issues advisories for adherence to Standard 
Operating Procedures (SOPs). 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 36) 
 The amount projected as required by Indian Air Force in Budget Estimates (BE) for the 
Financial Year (FY) 2016 -17 was Rs. 66,995.01 crore while the allocated amount is Rs. 
53,451.25 crore. This amounts to a gap or shortfall of Rs. 13,544.76 crore as co mpared to the 
projected amount. The Committee note that the amount allocated to the Service is short of the 
amount projected by near about 20 per cent. On gleaning through the Budgetary data for the 
past years, the Committee found that the allocated amount , is almost always, much less than 
the projected amount. This is indicative of either the projections made by the Service being 
unrealistic and impractical or arbitrary cut in the Demands, which needs to be remedied.  Also, 
there is a need on the part of t he Ministry of Defence in ensuring that there is an element of 
consonance of the allocation vis -à-vis the projected amount. This sort of deficit budgeting in 
terms of Projection vs Allocation, which is being witnessed as an annual feature should be 
minimized to bring in better coordinated, disciplined and stringent budget regime. 
Reply of the Government 
 The difference in projection vis -à-vis allocations is due to reduced allocations conveyed 
by Ministry of Finance.  This Ministry is bound by ceilings conve yed by Ministry of Finance. 
Though reference were made to Ministry of Finance for augmentation of ceilings conveyed by 
them but no positive response is received in this regard.   
 
Recommendation (Para No. 37) 
 During the year 2015-16, as against the projection of Rs. 29,632.28 crore on account of 
Revenue Budget, the allocation at Budget Estimate (BE) was Rs. 23,000.09 crore. Thus, the 
difference between the projection and allocation was to the tune of Rs. 6,632. 29 crore; this 
amounts to allocation of nearly 70% of the projection! The allocation at the stage of Revised 

 
 
Estimate(RE) was further lesser at Rs. 21,827 crore.   Thus, the difference between the BE 
and RE allocations was Rs. 1,173.00 crore. In their  Eig hth Report on Demands for Grants 
(2015-16) of the Ministry of Defence,  the Committee had recommended that additional grant 
of Rs. 6,000 crore  be given to Air Force at RE stage during the year,  so that no compromises 
are made in training and in maintenance of existing systems. The  Committee are concerned to 
note that instead of providing the additional grant as recommended, there has been a 
REDUCTION of Rs. 1,173 crore in the allocation at RE stage vis -à-vis the BE allocation!! Once 
again, during the yea r 2016 -17, as against the projection of Rs.  27,629 crore, the BE 
allocation is Rs. 24,956 crore with the difference in the projection and allocation being to the 
extent of Rs. 2,673.00 crore. While tendering evidence, the Committee were apprised by the 
representatives of the Ministry that there was an additional requirement of Rs. 279 crore for 
critical areas, viz., Rs. 2,359 crore for stores, Rs. 199 crore for Works, Rs. 130 crore for 
Transportation and Rs. 84 crore for other items. Thus, the gap or short fall in the allocation for 
the Revenue Budget would impact the spares, fuel, training, maintenance of old systems, etc. 
As per the submission of representatives of Air Force, inability to procure spares  & Fuel, 
shortfall in training, affecting serviceabil ity - older systems require more maintenance, results 
into compromise of operational preparedness This is a grave and unacceptable situation. 
Reply of the Government 
 This Ministry is in agreement with Committee’s observation that the funds allocated are 
not adequate to meet the requirement of Services.  This fact has also been brought to the 
notice of Ministry of Finance but no positive response is received in this regard.    
 It may, however, be added that all efforts will be made to ensure that requireme nts of 
Services do not suffer due to want of funds. 
Recommendation (Para No. 37A) 
 Besides this, the expenditure on Humanitarian Assistance and Disaster Relief (HADR) 
Missions, (Uttarakhand, J&K Floods, etc.) and work pertaining to General elections adds 
further pressure on the already stretched resources of the Air Force. The Committee are of the 
strong view that in order to keep Air Force ever readily geared up for any challenge, it is of 
paramount importance that no compromises are made in regard to training and maintenance of 
existing systems for which fuel and spares are a necessary requirement. Therefore, there is an 
imminent need to ensure that the projections of the Air Force under the Revenue Head of 
Account are given due importance and adequacy of funds ensured. 
Reply of the Government 
 The recommendations of the Committee are noted for compliance. The 
projections/requirements of the Air Force will be forwarded to Ministry of Finance for 
consideration at RE stage.  In case the funds are not provided  as per projections by the 
Ministry of Finance, the available resources will be optimally utilized based on prioritized 
requirements of Air Force. 

 
 
Recommendation(Para No. 38) 
 Air Force, provides humanitarian assistance and disaster relief. During the year  2015-
16, the Air Force played a significant role in providing assistance during the floods in Tamil 
Nadu; in Fiji and rendered help and during the Nepal Earthquake. The Indian Air Force 
undertook 11 trips for evacuating 2096 Indian nationals in Yemen unde r operation ‘Rahat’. The 
Air Force also distributed relief material and supplied drinking water in Maldives, on a 
sustained basis till normalcy resumed.  The Air Force also deployed helicopters to tackle Naxal 
issues in Chhattisgarh and Jharkhand.  On bein g asked about the Heads of Account from 
where   the expenditure was being incurred on such measures, the Committee were apprised 
that this was being done from the Revenue Budget!!  Reimbursement of the expenses is 
obtained by the Air Force in 2 – 3 years’ time.  This type of expenditure puts further pressure 
on the already stretched revenue resources. In view of this backdrop, the Committee strongly 
feel that there is a need to develop a systemic institutional solution for this by making a 
separate allocati on for such measures or ensuring that the reimbursement is made in that 
particular year itself, so that other expenditures planned during annual budgeting do not get 
compromised. 
Reply of the Government 
 The recommendations of the Committee will be brought  to the notice of Ministry of 
Finance for their consideration and further necessary action.   
Recommendation (Para No. 39) 
 There have been wide gaps between the projections made by Air Force and the actual 
allocation in the Budget Estimates stage and Revised Estimates stage. During the year 2015 -
16 against the projected requirement of Rs. 45,191.96 crore, the allocation of Rs. 33,686.75 
crore was made at BE stage. At RE stage, the projection was Rs. 35,780.78 crore and the 
actual allocation was Rs. 30, 442.15 crore. There was a reduction of Rs. 3,244.60 crore. The 
actual expenditure upto January 2016 was Rs. 26,363.84 crore. 
Recommendation (Para No. 40) 
 Total Capital allocation for Air Force in BE 2015 -16 was Rs. 33,686.75 crore, while for 
the year 2016 -17, BE allocation is Rs.29,795.42 crore. Thus, there is a DECREASE of Rs. 
3891.33 crore from the previous Financial Year. This amount is allocated against a projection 
of Rs. 41,266.41 crore by the Indian Air Force. Considering the fact that Indian Air Fo rce is on 
the modernization trajectory as envisaged in LTIPP 2012 -27, with a view to mitigate huge 
shortfalls in defence preparedness and deterrence capabilities, the Committee are dismayed to 
find that the vision and plans are not being supported by the b udget. As informed by the 
Ministry of Defence, there are a lot of projects lined up for contract during the FY 2016 -17. 
These include, Rafale fighter aircraft, Medium Lift Helicopter Upgrade, Transport Aircraft along 
with Associated Equipment as Avro Repla cement, Addl Mi -17 V5, Manoeuvrable Expendable 
Aerial Targets (MEAT), Additional Akash Missile Systems, New Generation Precision Guided 

 
 
Munitions, Reccee Pods for Su -30 MKI, Weapons for Advance Light Helicopters for Advance 
Light Helicopter etc. While, on one hand, the LTIPP is finalized with intricate participation of the 
Service and the Ministry of Defence, on the other, the Ministry does not appear to be realistic 
in allocating the Budget. Evidently, there is lacuna in planning and budgeting which needs to 
be rectified. 
Reply of the Government 
 This Ministry had projected an amount of Rs. 1,21,929.80crore in Capital Budget for FY 
2016-17, whereas the an amount of Rs. 86,340 crore has been allocated i.e. reduced 
allocation of Rs. 35,589.80 crore.  This Min istry is bound by budgetary ceilings conveyed by 
Ministry of Finance.  Though references were made to Ministry of Finance for augmentation of 
ceilings conveyed by them but no positive response is received in this regard.  The reduced 
allocations were passed on uniformly among all the Services including Air Force. However, the 
Committee may be assured that the projections/requirements of the Air Force for 2016 -17 will 
be forwarded to Ministry of Finance for consideration at Supplementary/RE stage.  In case t he 
funds are not provided as per projections by the Ministry of Finance, the available resources 
will be optimally utilized based on prioritized requirements of Air Force. 
Recommendation (Para No. 41) 
Modernization Budget for Air Force 41. While going thro ugh the data on modernization budget 
during the Twelfth Plan Period, the Committee found that there is lesser allocation than 
Projection. In the year 2012 -13, the projection was Rs. 34,164.76 while the allocation was Rs. 
28,533.00 crore. In the year 2013 -14, the projection was Rs. 47,038.62 crore while 115 the 
allocation was Rs. 37049.06 crore. Similarly, for the entire Twelfth Plan Period, which is the 
First Five Year component of the fifteen years LTIPP 2012 -27, there is noticeable reduction in 
budget allocation for modernization from what has been demanded.  
Recommendation (Para No. 42) 
 In the Budget for 2016-17, the provision against Committed Liabilities has been reduced 
in comparison to BE 2015 -16. For the FY 2015 -16, the allocation made against Commi tted 
Liabilities was Rs. 28,246.53 crore while for the FY 2016 -17, it is Rs. 24,306.02. The 
Committed Liabilities for the FY 2016-17 includes payments in respect of contracts signed upto 
31 March 2016. This shows that owing to Budget constraints, lesser nu mber of contracts were 
signed during the FY 2015-16 and therefore, the Committed Liabilities have declined for the FY 
2016-17, which is definitely not in consonance with the modernization plans of the Service. 
Recommendation (Para No. 43) 
 The Budget for New Schemes in the FY 2016 -17 is much less than what was projected 
by the Air Force. Against a projected requirement of Rs. 9,937 crore, the allocation made is to 
the extent of Rs. 3,250 crore which amounts to one -third of the projected requirement! The 
representatives of Air Force had informed the Committee that due to immense shortfall in the 

 
 
budget for New Schemes, many contracts are likely to roll over to the next Financial Year 
which include 6 Flight Refuelling Aircraft, Jaguar Re -Enginning, Avionics UP G for IL -
76/78/AWACS, 38 PC & MK-II, D-26EW System for MIG-29, 48 MLH, 20X Additioan Hawk, 56 
x AVRO Replacement, 65 x Ka 226 -T RSH and LR SAM. Rolling over of projects to the 
following years appears to have become a common phenomenon in the Ministry of De fence. 
Such a scenario, the Committee observe, will not be helpful in arresting the draw -down that Air 
Force is presently facing. 
Reply of the Government 
 The funds for New Schemes are catered through Capital Acquisition Head of Capital 
Budget. Against projected requirement of Rs. 96,444.52 crore under Capital Acquisition head, 
an amount of Rs. 70,000 crore could be allocated based on ceilings conveyed by Ministry of 
Finance.  Of the allocated Rs. 70,000 crore, Rs. 53,291.55 croreare first kept for Commi tted 
Liabilities.  Of the remaining amount of Rs. 16,708.45 crore, an amount ofRs. 6541.79 crore 
has been allocated to Air Force under New Schemes and not Rs. 3,250 crore as mentioned in 
recommendations above.  It may, however, be added that all efforts wi ll be made to ensure 
that critical requirements of Services do not suffer due to want of funds. 
Recommendation (Para No. 44) 
 The overspending made by the Service on certain accounts evidently brings to the fore 
the aspect of deficiency of funds being assi gned to the Air Force, year after year. In the year 
2012-13, Air Force was provided a final grant of Rs. 32,735.34 crore while the expenditure was 
Rs. 32,980.11 crore, thus amounting to over spending of Rs. 244.77 crore. In the FY 2014 -15, 
the final grant was Rs. 26,536.22 crore while the final expenditure was Rs. 32,796.42 crore, 
thus amounting to an over spending of Rs. 6,260.20 crore. The data shows that the Service is 
not being supplied the requisite funds in time and a trend of last minute funding appe ars to be 
in vogue. In such a case, it is obvious that annual plans are not being met with adequate 
budget support and there is ad -hocism and indiscipline in funding pattern which is required to 
be addressed urgently. In this regard, the Committee desire t hat appropriate action be taken 
under intimation to the Committee. 
Reply of the Government 
 Defence Budget is peculiar in nature and is different from budget of other Civil 
Ministries.  Some of the projects being handled in Defence Ministry involve large payments and 
due to this fact there is a possibility that sometime particular service may end up in spending 
far less or more than the allocations.  This basically depends on last minute approvals/delay in 
certain cases. It may not be always possible to acc urately project the expenditure which is 
certainly not due to ad -hocism or indiscipline in funding pattern.  There is a continuous 
monitoring process for prioritisation of the projects/cases based on developments made in 
achieving milestones.  This helps t o ensure that limited resources are devoted to the most 

 
 
critical requirements.  The Committee may be assured that all efforts are made to ensure 
optimum utilization of available resources. 
Recommendation (Para No. 49) 
 The LTIPP for 2012 -2027 which was approved by the Defence Acquisition Council 
(DAC) on 02 April 2012 lays down the roadmap for the capability buildup of the IAF.  The 5 
year Services Capital Acquisition Plan (SCAP) and Annual Acquisition Plan (AAP), which is a 
two year roll over plan are prep ared in accordance with the objectives laid down in LTIPP 
2012-27 and progressed as per the desired timelines.  The LTIPP consists of three -five year 
plans namely twelfth plan 2012 -17, thirteenth plan 2018 -22 and fourteenth plan 2023 -28.  The 
targets under  LTIPP for the twelfth plan period envisaged induction of MMRCA, LCA, 
VHETAC, FRA, AWACS, Attack Helicopter, Heavy Lift Helicopter, MLH, Upgrade of Mirage -
2000, Jaguar, MiG -29, IL -76/78, Mi -17, Induction of Basic/Intermediate/Advance Jet Trainer, 
series of Air Defence system like Radars and Surface to Air Guided Weapons, etc.  However, 
even after a lapse of four years of the twelfth five year plan, most of these targets could not be 
achieved.  The Ministry had informed that the long term capability requirem ents of the IAF 
have been projected as part of the Long Term Perspective Plan (LTPP) of the IAF for the 
period 2012 -2027.  The Capital procurement to achieve these capabilities is undertaken in 
accordance with the guidelines contained in the Defence Procur ement Procedure (DPP).  The 
slippages as highlighted here certainly suggest that there is enormous digression  in 
achieving the planned targets.  Therefore, it is necessary that the planning should be 
based on actuality and not just on ideals. 
Reply of the Government 
 The LTIPP 2012 -2027 is a vision document for maintaining and enhancing the war 
fighting potential of IAF. This includes modernization, assets building and upgrade of the 
existing resources. However, depending on the threat perception, global en vironment scan, 
fiscal situation and indigenisation plans, priorities are redefined and new equipment included 
from time to time to ensure requisite capabilities are acquired in a given time frame. 
Additionally, LCA, VEHTEC, Basic trainer, additional MLH, Akash Missile system, LLTR, 
LLLWR etc planned in LTIPP (2012 -27) have been inducted in the Air Force. Contracts have 
been signed for procurement of Attack Helicopters and Heavy Lift Helicopter and Rafale while 
for procurement of AWACS, the Contact is expected to be signed in the current Financial Year. 
Inductions of upgraded Mirage 2000 and MiG -29 aircraft have commenced. Further, all 
procurement cases are initiated well in time so as to ensure that critical capability is available 
to execute entrusted task s. The Capital Procurement of the IAF is undertaken in accordance 
with the Defence Procurement Procedure (DPP), which lays down timelines for various stages 
of the procurement process.  All efforts are made to adhere to these laid down timelines. 
Periodic reviews are carried out at all levels in Air HQ as well as at MoD to ensure that the 
procurement schemes progress as per the laid down time lines and the final product is 
operationally capable while being technologically relevant. The recently rev ised DPP 2016 

 
 
includes several initiatives to ensure faster procurements. Notwithstanding the above, the 
recommendation of the Committee has been noted for compliance in future. 
Recommendation (Para No. 50) 
 The facts pertaining to the formulation of DPP b y itself is an indicator of the lethargy 
evident in the process of planning itself. The DPP was, at first introduced in 2002 and its scope 
has been refined through six revisions (in 2003, 2005, 2006, 2008, 2009 and 2011) before the 
issuance of DPP 2013! Th e DPP 2013 has been further revised and finalized, in part, only in 
2016. This is indicative of very slow pace of decision making in Defence Forces. The unduly 
long time taken in refining and finalising the DPP, in turn, affects the procurements for Air 
Force too. Nevertheless, with the new DPP is now in place, the Committee hope that 
procurements will no more move at a snail's pace and envisaged targets are accomplished in 
stipulated time frame 
Recommendation (Para No. 53) 
  With regard to the present stat us of induction of LCA, the Ministry informed the 
Committee that presently Series Production1(SP1) of Tejas Light Combat Aircraft (Tejas SP1) 
is under Customer Flying Acceptance Test. Tejas SP2 Engine Ground Run (EGR) has been 
completed and Tejas SP3 is li kely to be available by June/July 2016. In this connection, the 
Committee note that the project LCA is going on with HAL for a very long time. The Committee 
had been repeatedly and consistently raising the issue of delay in induction of LCAs. It is 
desired that the induction of LCAs is completed within the currently targeted time schedules. 
The Committee may be kept apprised of the progress made with regard thereto. 
Recommendation (Para No. 54) 
 An Inter -Governmental Agreement was signed in October 2007 between the 
Governments of the Republic of India and the Russian Federation for Design, Development, 
Production, joint marketing and product support of the Fifth Generation Fighter Aircraft (FGFA). 
The project is being executed in two phases, Preliminary D esign (PD) Phase and Detailed 
Design and Development Phase (called R&D Phase). The PD Phase commenced in February 
2011 and was completed in June 2013. The Contract for R&D Phase of the aircraft is under 
negotiation between the Indian and Russian sides. The  Committee desire that negotiations to 
finalise the Research and Development Phase contract for Fifth Generation Fighter Aircraft 
(FGFA) progress speedily with the Russian side. Necessary fund allocation to Indian Air Force 
in the Budget for the FY 2016-17 be made by the Ministry of Defence. 
Recommendation (Para No. 55) 
 The Ministry of Defence apprised the Committee that induction of new fighters is being 
planned through the delivery of remaining Su -30 aircraft, delivery of LCA Mk -1 and Mk -1A 
aircraft, Rafale aircraft and other suitable fighters.  Government is preparing the road map for 
induction of fighter aircraft in the IAF and all future induction will be as per this road map. IAF is 

 
 
likely to build up its fighter aircraft fleet to the required strengt h by the end of 15 th Plan period.  
In this connection the Committee cannot help expressing apprehension with regard to the 
early/timely induction of planned platforms for Air Force.  The plan for procuring LCA is under 
progress for very long time, MMRCA wa s approved in 2007 and is still underway, FGFA is 
continuing to be negotiated.  Moreover, the funding support is also not very encouraging.  In 
such a dismal scenario, the Committee are worried and wish that procurement of Rafale 
and Tejas Aircraft should be progressed to arrest the draw down and maintain credible 
deterrence.  The Committee wish that no stone be left unturned towards mitigating the 
gap in the squadron strength of the Air Force.  The progress made during the upcoming 
FY 2016 -17 should be bro ught to the notice of the Committee when the Action Taken 
Replies are furnished to the Committee on this Report. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 The induction of contracted 272 X Su -30MKI fighter aircraft is under progress and 224 
aircraft have been delivered t ill date.  All Su -30 MKI will be inducted by 2020. Inter -
Governmental Agreement to procure 36 X Rafale aircraft in flyaway condition has been signed 
on 23rd September 2016 and the deliveries of Rafale aircraft will commence from September, 
2019.  Two contr acts were signed with HAL for procurement of 20 X Light Combat Aircraft in 
Initial Operational Configuration (IOC) and 20 X LCA in Final Operational Configuration (FOC).  
The first LCA squadron has been formed on 01 July 2016.  All the IOC and FOC aircraft  are 
likely to be inducted by 2019.  This would be followed by four more squadrons of LCA MK 1A 
aircraft with improved capabilities of Active Electronically Scanned Array (AESA) radar, Beyond 
Visual Range (BVR) missiles, Air -to-Air Refueling (AAR) capabili ty and Electronic Warfare 
(EW) suite. Induction of these additional LCA MK 1A is likely to be completed by 2025, These 
inductions will assist in arresting the drawdown. MoD is preparing a roadmap for induction of 
fighter aircraft in IAF through ‘Make in In dia’ route in order to ensure that the IAF attains the 
required strength of fighter squadrons at the earliest.  If all procurements fructify as planned, 
the IAF is likely to achieve the authorized strength of 42 Sqns by the end of 15th Plan period.  
 
Recommendation (Para No. 58) 
 The IAF has contracted a total of 106 Hawk Mk -132 AJT aircraft.  The deliveries are 
likely to be completed by 2016.  The representatives of Air Force intimated the Committee that 
induction of Hawk aircraft may hit the roadblock due  to inadequate allocations in this year’s 
budget.  Such a case is not desirable and in this regard, the Committee wish that 
essential funding be provided for procurement of Hawk AJT.  The allocation made in 
this regard be intimated to the Committee. 
 

 
 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 All 106 X Hawk MK-132 AJT Aircraft have been delivered to IAF as per contractual time 
lines.  For the Financial Year 2016 -17, Rs. 209.09 Cr were allocated for the payments towards 
delivery of aircraft which is adequate. There was n o shortage of funds for procurement of this 
aircraft even last year.  
Recommendation (Para No. 59) 
 While examining the Demands for Grants 2016 -17 of the Ministry of Defence, the 
Committee came to know that the Defence Acquisition Council (DAC) had, on 29. 08.2014. 
directed that in order to balance the important issues of urgency and the country’s strategic 
interest, the tender for 197 R&S Helicopter be retracted and a fresh proposal under ‘Buy and 
Make Indian’ to include the option of buying the immediate r equirement and domestically 
manufacturing the balance be issued.  Hence, the Request for Proposal (RFP) for procurement 
of 197 Reconnaissance and Surveillance Helicopters was retracted on 28.10.204 and the case 
for 197 Reconnaissance and Surveillance Helic opters did not reach the contract stage.  The 
case for procurement of helicopters to replace the ageing Chetak/Cheetah fleet has been 
foreclosed thrice.  In May, 2015, the DAC approved the procurement of Qty 200 Ka -226T 
helicopters from Russia.  Out of the se 200 helicopters, 60 were to be procured in fly away 
condition and 140 were to be produced in India.  An Inter -Governmental Agreement on Ka -
226T helicopters has been signed during the Annual Summit between India and Russia in 
December, 2015.  Under the I GA, both India and Russia, through their authorized agencies 
namely Hal along with other registered Indian companies and Russian Helicopter and 
Rosoboronexport respectively will form a joint venture company to supply/manufacture the KA -
226T helicopters in India.  The Committee feel that the phasing out of all the transport 
planes and helicopters is undertaken as per their stipulated life spans.  In some cases, 
depending on the condition and utilization of the fleet, intensive life extension studies 
are conducted and the lifespan of the aircraft extended.  It is strongly recommended that 
no aircraft which has completed its operational life is in use with the IAF, otherwise 
such lapses would lead to accidents. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 To ensure airworthiness of the available machines and study of time based degradation 
in performance, the aircraft inventory of IAF undergoes various checks and procedures as per 
OEM specified periodicity. IAF follows stringent Aerospace Safety norms and it is further 
reiterated that no life expired aircraft are used for flying related activities in the IAF. 
 

 
 
KAMOV 226T Helicopters 
 
Discussions are in progress between HAL and the Russian Companies to work out the various 
modalities with an aim to establish the Joint Venture (JV) f or co-production of the helicopters. 
HAL and the Russian side represented by Russian Helicopters (RH) &Rosoboronexport (ROE) 
have mutually agreed upon the Share Holder Agreement (SHA), Memorandum Of Association 
(AOA) and Articles of Association (AOA).  The  SHA has been signed and exchanged between 
HAL and RH &  ROE during the BRICS Summit meeting in Goa on 15/10/2016. The Russian 
Side is awaiting the sanction of the President and Government of Russian Federation for the 
formation of the Joint Venture. 
 
           Formal incorporation of JV Company with the Registrar of Companies would be done 
upon receipt of clearance from respective Governments. 
Recommendation (Para No. 60) 
 During the course of examination of Demands for Grants (2016017), the Committee  
were apprised that IAF is in the process of upgrading the navigational facilities art all its 
airfields under the Modernisation of Airfield Infrastructure (MAFI) project.  Project MAFI 
involves installation of modern navigational aids at all the IAF airfi elds to improve the 
operational environment and enhance aerospace safety.  Modernisation of 52 IAF airfields 
(excluding Kargil) is planned under Project MAFI to be executed in two phases.  Pilot project at 
model base ‘Bhatinda’ and modernisation of 05 more airfields have been completed till Dec 15.  
Another 24 airfields are planned for modernisation in Phase -I.  The remaining 22 airfields will 
be modernized in Phase-II, for which AoN has been accorded by DAC. 
 The contract for Phase -I was signed on 16 March  2011 for the modernisation of 30 
airfields. Phase -I of MAFI project comprises of installation, integration, calibration and 
commissioning of following equipment/facilities at each airfields. These facilities include Air 
Traffic management (ATM) System, IL S Cat-II with low power DME, DVOR and high power 
DME, TACAN and RVR equipment, Air Field Lighting System Cat -II, Power rings, Data ring, 
Two each LMVs, Light Trucks and Bush Cutters, Fifty personal communicators, etc.  The 
Committee are dissatisfied with t he pace of progress of the work as till now only six 
airfields could be completed. Such delays should not become a regular and acceptable 
feature of the process and callousness in approach should be shed.  The 
implementation of MAFI Phase -II that involves 37 airfields of IAF, Navy and Ministry of 
Home Affairs has also been approved and procurement process has been initiated.  In 
the current financial year, budget allocation of Rs. 1330 Cr has been made for 
strengthening / re -surfacing of runways at the IAF airfields.  Over and above this, Rs. 
48.71 Cr has been allocated for the repairs of the facilities at the airfields.  Requirement 
of repair for newly constructed airfields is also a matter of concern.  Therefore, utmost 
importance should be given to quality of work. 

 
 
Reply of the Government 
 Contract for modernization of thirty IAF airfields under Project MAFI (Phase -I) was 
signed on 16 Mar 11. As on date, twelve airfields have been commissioned and work has 
commenced at next six airfields for which the Prob able Date of Completion (PDC) is 
December, 2016. The remaining 12 airfields under MAFI phase-I are expected to be completed 
by December, 2017.  
 
      MAFI being a complex project integrating more than seven technologically sophisticated 
services, the Crit ical Design Review and further finalization of the working model took longer 
time than envisaged.  After the initial delays, a template had been evolved which is being 
implemented and monitored by Project Management Group at all the remaining airfields.  
Presently, the execution of works has picked up pace and is progressing as per schedule. 
 
      The monitoring of the runway strengthening work and the quality control is undertaken 
through a Project Management Group (PMG) and E -in-C Branch.  Regular review  are being 
conducted through monitoring committees formed at Stations, Command HQ and Air HQ to 
ensure quality of work. 
              DAC has accorded AON on 24th March, 2014 for 30 airfields under Option Clause and 
07 airfields under Repeat Order in MAFI phase-II. Since the vendor has agreed to undertake 
all 37 airfields under Option Clause, DAC reviewed the AON on 28 th September, 2016 and 
accorded fresh AON for 37 airfields in MAFI phase-II under Option Clause. 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 63) 
 
 In addition to the regular operational airfields of NE region, certain ALGs are under 
construction as part of North East Project.  The State Govt of Arunachal Pradesh has agreed 
to transfer the maintenance of operations of Tuting, Mechuka, Along, Vihayanagar and Ziro 
ALGs to MoD vide a MoU signed on 09 Jun 2009.  The ALGs of Tawang and Walong were 
already under the operational control of Army.  For the development of defence infrastructure 
in the North -East, IAF separately had allocated total of Rs 355 Cr for developme nt of seven 
Advance Landing Grounds in Arunachal Pradesh.  The modernisation / upgradation 
programme of the said ALGs is underway.  However, the Committee are not satisfied with the 
rate of progress.  Out of seven, only one of these i.e. Walong, could be c ompleted. Therefore, 
the committee wish that the execution of work be expedited. 
 
 
 

 
 
 
Reply of the Government  
 
Progress of Upgradation Works for seven ALGs in Arunachal Pradesh. The progress of works 
at the seven ALGs is as indicated below. Out of the seven ALGs in Arunachal Pradesh which 
are being upgraded, works services at five ALGs has been completed.  Works at Tuting and 
Tawang is being hindered due to heavy rains in the region. However, efforts are being made to 
expedite the progress of work. The progress/updated status of works at the seven ALGs is 
indicated below: 
 
ALG Progress in %age Status/PDC 
Ziro 100 Completed  
Along 100 Completed  
Mechuka 100 Completed  
Walong 100 Completed 
Passighat 100 Completed  
Tuting 77 January 2017 
Tawang 39 April 2017 
 
Recommendation(Para No. 64) 
 
 It came to the knowledge of the Committee that there are 39 disused airfields with the 
IAF.  Out of these, 24 airfields have been identified for utilization by IAF.  These airfields are 
planned for operational utilization like deployment of long range vect ors, radars, Weapon 
Storage Areas (WSAs), as also emergency recovery strips for helicopters and fixed with 
aircraft.  The Committee with that work on these airfields should be started without 
further delay and also remaining 15 airfields be assessed for be ing used.  The 
Committee be apprised about the action taken in this connection. 
 
Reply of the Government  
 
 IAF has undertaken a detailed study in respect of the disused airfields in terms of the 
operational imperatives of using these airfields by Air Forc e for dispersal of strategic assets 
and as a back up to possible war damage to existing airfields and it was concluded that out of 
total 39 such airfields, 15 can be surrendered for utilisation of the other Government agencies.  
The list of disused airfiel ds which are not planned for utilisation by IAF has been forwarded to 
Army and Naval HQ for exploring the feasibility for their utilisation. Remaining 24 disused 
airfields have been identified for utilisation by IAF for different purposes such as deploymen t of 
long range radars, weapon storage, and dispersal of strategic assets during ops, emergency 

 
 
recovery strips, deployment of AD weapons, ranges, helicopter operations etc. Development of 
these airfields will be undertaken in a phased manner taking into c onsideration the induction 
plans   
Recommendation (Para No. 65) 
 During the deliberations on the subject, the Committee were informed that during the FY 
2015-16, a milestone was achieved in relation to Aircraft landing when IAF Aircraft Mirage 
2000 Aircraft had landed on Yamuna Express Highway.    It was further informe d that more 
roads, stretches are being identified for the purpose in line with the experience of Myanmar, Air 
Force is in touch with the State Governments and the matter is being pursued.  In the view of 
the Committee, availability of higher number of opti ons for emergency landing will definitely 
enhance the capability of AIF.  In this regard, while appreciating the initiative and 
congratulating the Air Force for their accomplishment, the Committee feel that when 
compared to international developments our S ervice has been a little late in reaching 
this landmark.  The Committee would like to see that our Air Force excels the Global 
standards of growth and recommend that more road stretches be explored and 
identified for this purpose during the coming year.  T he Committee wish to be intimated 
of the progress in this direction. 
 
Reply of the Government  
 The Indian Air Force has taken a step forward to use highway stretches as ‘landing 
strips’ in an emergency. A landing was carried out by a Mirage 2000 aircraft on the Yamuna 
Expressway on 21st May 2015. A generic plan for utilisation of National Highways as landing 
strips during eventualities at 21 locations identified by IAF has been sent to Ministry of Road 
Transport and Highways for implementation. 
Recommendation (Para No. 67) 
 The Committee were given to understand that presently, there is no shortage between 
the required and the existing manpower of officers (excluding medical and Dental branch) in 
the IAF.  There was a deficiency of 1445 officers in the begi nning of the 11 th Plan.  Concerted 
efforts were made and various initiatives have been taken from time to time to reduce the 
shortages which include proactive steps like publicity measures and simplification or selection 
process.  The Committee Opine that pilot-to-cockpit ratio should be maintained at par 
with sanctioned levels. 
Reply of the Government  
 
(a) Establishment and Strength of officers (except Medical & Dental branch) in IAF, as on 
01 Aug 2016, is 12244 and 12150 respectively. 

 
 
(b)  The proposal for accretion of 166 additional pilots for SU-30 aircraft has been approved 
by Ministry of Finance on 21.03.2016. Subsequent to the approval, IAF plans to induct these 
additional pilots in a methodical manner that follows a six monthly induction cycle.  Tra ining of 
these pilots would be as per the existing training program. This will address the issue of 
shortage of aircrew and will improve the pilot to seat ratio. 
Recommendation (Para No. 67A) 
 In case of Airmen, the sanctioned strength is 137097 while the actual strength is 
129081, thus a shortfall is 8016.  However, a total number of 8888 trainees are undergoing 
training thereby fulfilling the current requirement of airmen.  With regard to Medical and Dental 
Branch necessary recruitments should be made during the upcoming year. 
 
Reply of the Government  
 
 In case of airmen, the sanctioned establishment as on 01 Aug 16 is 138596 while the 
actual strength is 128216, thus shortfall of 10380.  Further, induction in airmen cadre has been 
planned for 5000 per ann um till the year 2016, with provision to gradually increase it to 6400 
per annum from the year 2017 and 7000 per year thereafter, by which IAF will be able to bring 
the strength at par with the authorized establishment.  Moreover, the shortages are address ed 
in a staggered manner to ensure a favourable HR environment in the long run to streamline 
wastages due to discharge/ superannuation.  
  

 
 
 
CHAPTER II 
(B) OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE 
GOVERNMENT AND ARE COMMENTED UPON  
Recommendation (Para No. 1) 
 The Committee note that during the year 2016 -17, Army has been allocated Rs. 
1,12,764.62crore, against the projection of Rs. 1,15,561.78 crore under the Revenue Head. 
The BE for 2015 -16 was Rs. 1,03,315.91crore. The percentage variation of BE 2015 -16 vis-à-
vis BE 2016-17 is 9.1 percent.  Under the revenue segment, provision is first made for pay and 
allowances and other obligatory expenses and the balance allocation is distributed to meet the 
requirement of stores (including ord nance), transportation (of personnel and stores), revenue 
works and maintenance, etc. These areas are likely to be impacted when allocation is lower 
than projection. As the revenue segment of the expenditure caters to welfare of the human 
resource and carrying out critical works related to stores and transportation etc., the Committee 
desire that adequate allocation of funds should be made after considering the total 
requirements of Army at the Revised Estimate or Supplementary Demands stage. While 
supporting the Army's need for more funds, the Committee would also like the Ministry to 
observe utmost financial discipline and keep a continuous watch on wasteful expenditure. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 The recommendations of the Committee are noted for complianc e.  The 
projections/requirements of the Army will be forwarded to Ministry of Finance for consideration 
at Supplementary/RE stage. Necessary instructions are being issued from time to time for 
adherence to financial propriety and avoidance of underutilizat ion of funds/wasteful 
expenditure. 
Recommendation (Para No. 2) 
 The Committee are baffled to note that the allocation under Non salary revenue for   BE 
2016-17 is Rs. 32,186 crore, which amounts to only 1.1 percent increase over last year’s BE of 
Rs. 31,835 crore. As per  the Ministry’s own admission, areas of new raisings and accretions, 
maintenance of existing weapons and equipment and  replenishment of War Wastage Reserve 
Ammunition, maintenance and repair of infrastructure, contingency allocation for hu manitarian 
assistance and disaster relief etc. are going to be affected due to such meagre increase in 
allocations during the year. Therefore, the Committee strongly recommend that the Ministry of 
Defence should enhance the allocation sufficiently at the t ime of Revised Estimate stage under 
Non-salary revenue Head so as to enable the Army in meeting the requirements of operational 
preparedness. 

 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 The recommendations of the Committee are noted for compliance.  The 
projections/requirements of the Army will be forwarded to Ministry of Finance for consideration 
at Supplementary/RE stage. 
(for comments of the Committee on Para Nos. 1and 2  please see Para No. 7 
of Chapter -I of the report)  
 
Recommendation(Para No. 5) 
 
 The Committee are aghast to note that 1,86,138 Bullet Proof Jackets(BPJs), for which 
the approval of Defence Acquisition Council was obtained on 19 October, 2009 and a Request 
For Proposal (RFP) through Capital route was issued on 7 December, 2012, are sti ll not 
available with the Army. And this, in spite of the Committee highlighting this again and again 
during the last eighteen months. The reason submitted by the Ministry was that the said RFP 
was retracted on 5 October, 2015 as all the three vendors who had participated in the ‘Trial 
Evaluation’ of BPJs from March -June 2015 had failed. The Committee fervently deplore that 
the procurement of these protective gears meant for our soldiers has been inordinately delayed 
due to  the loopholes and deficiencies ex isting in the procurement system. While taking a  
serious view of such amazing laxity on the part of the Ministry of Defence, the  Committee had 
in their earlier report recommended that the Ministry should fix  responsibility at the appropriate 
level for this glaring lapse. 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 6) 
 
 
 The Committee further note that a fresh Request For Proposal (RFP) for procurement of 
1,86,138 Bullet Proof Jackets(BPJs) is under preparation and will be issued shortly. In the 
meanwhile, 50,000 Bullet Proof  Jackets are under procurement through the Revenue route. 
The case is presently at Contract Negotiation Committee (CNC) Stage and the Supply Order is 
expected to be placed by end of March 2016 which is already over. The Committee are 
dismayed to note that despite repeated 96 recommendations made in their earlier Reports too 
on this issue, the procurement process is moving at a snail's pace and is effecting the 
operational efficiency of the troops. Therefore, the Committee, once again, strongly impress 
upon the Ministry to be on a mission mode for procuring the Bullet Proof Jackets. 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 7) 
 
 The Committee have also learnt that the Bullet Proof Jackets (BPJs) currently held by 
Indian Army are based on General Staff Qualitative Requirement s (GSQR) No. 878. This 
GSQR has since been revised and further procurement of BPJs in the Army is being 

 
 
undertaken as per revised GSQR, i.e. GSQR No. 1438. As per the Ministry, the new GSQR 
No. 1438 is at par with the world standards being followed and all ows addition/removal of 
external attachments to / from the BPJs as per operational requirement. The Committee 
sincerely hope that the Ministry's admission regarding the quality of BPJs is correct and our 
Army is equipped with State-of-the-Art armour. The Committee would like the Ministry to strictly 
monitor the quality of the BPJs being procured and leave no room for compromise in this 
aspect. The Committee wish to have a separate report on the subject, from the Ministry of 
Defence, within a month of the presentation of this Report. 
 
Reply of the Government  
 Ballistic Evaluation of samples provided by the vendors under RFP for quantity 1,86,138 
BPJs issued on 07 December 2012 was conducted at Terminal Ballistics Research Laboratory 
(TBRL), Chandigarh from 1 2th March 2015 to 16 th June 2015. The RFP was later retracted on 
05th October 2015 due to rejection of all samples in the trials conducted by the Indian Army. 
Analysis revealed lack of technology and manufacturing expertise as the reasons behind 
sample failure on evaluation. RFP for procurement of quantity 1,86,138 BPJs as per revised 
GSQR No. 1438 has been re -issued on 04 April 2016. TEC commenced w.e.f 1 st August 2016 
and was completed on 19 th September 2016. The trials will commence post approval of TEC 
report. Further progress of the case will be guided as per Defence Pr ocurement Procedure 
(DPP). Meanwhile, an immediate requirement of quantity 50,000 BPJs is being met through 
Revenue route and the complete quantity is likely to be received by April 2017 based upon 
earlier GSQR (GSQR 878). The procurement through Revenue R oute on GSQR 878 has been 
undertaken to ensure the availability of BPJs till the procurement of BPJs as per new GSQR 
(GSQR 1438) fructifies and is available for issue.  
The delay in procurement of BPJs as per GSQR 1438 is on account of the following 
reasons: 
(a) Change in GSQR The GSQR was amended twice between 2010 and 2012 due to 
increased safety concerns and latest trends available world over. The issue of frequent 
changes in GSQR by the Army are being addressed to avoid recurrence of such changes in 
future. 
(b) Procedural delays in TEC The RFP for procurement of Quantity 1,86,138 Bullet Proof 
Jackets was issued in December 2012 and tender bids were opened on 29 th March 2013. TEC 
was approved in November 2013. The trial directive was issued in January 2014 and 
subsequently, vendors sought certain clarifications, which were then issued in October 2014 
after consultations with TBRL Chandigarh. Further, some time was given to the vendors for 
submission of samples for trials. The trials were held from March 2015 to June 2015 and all the 
samples failed the tests. The RFP was thereafter retracted in October 2015. 
 

 
 
 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 8) 
  It is unpleasant information for the Committee that Mishra Dhatu Nigam Limited 
(MIDHANI) has manufactured and supplied Bu llet Proof Jackets to various State police but 
these are very heavy to carry or wear. However, as per the Ministry, developments are going 
on in association with Defence Metallurgical Research Laboratory (DMRL) and Ordnance 
Factory Board (OFB) for further improvement. It is further informed that Defence Materials and 
Stores Research and Development Establishment (DMSRDE), Kanpur based laboratory of 
Defence Research and Development Organisation (DRDO) is involved in design and 
development of Bullet Proof Jac kets. DMSRDE has designed and developed BPJs as per 
latest GSQR No. 1438. Thus, their production partners can participate in the RFP for 
procurement of BPJs scheduled to be issued shortly. The Committee are disappointed to note 
that while on one hand the ' Make in India' Program envisages to transform India into a global 
design and manufacturing 97 hub, on the other, no Defence Public Sector Undertaking is in a 
state to offer cuttingedge protective gear for our soldiers! Therefore, the Committee are of the 
considered opinion that the Ministry alongwith the Defence Public Sector Undertakings review 
the measures already initiated, besides innovating such world class technologies so as to 
make India self-reliant in Defence production. 
(for comments of the Committee on Para Nos.  5, 6, 7 and 8  please see Para 
No. 10 of Chapter -I of the report)  
 
Recommendation (Para No. 9) 
 The Committee have been informed about the shortages with Army in several areas 
ranging from modern assault rifles, bullet -proof jackets and  night-fighting capabilities to 
howitzers, missiles and helicopters. The Ministry, in its written reply, submitted that the 
Government constantly reviews the security scenario and accordingly decides to induct 
appropriate Defence equipment to keep the Arme d Forces in a state of readiness and 
remaining equipped with modern weapon systems. Mismatches between requirements and 
availability can sometimes occur which are continually addressed by the on -going procurement 
process. However, during oral deposition, t he representatives of the Ministry admitted to the 
shortage and attributed it to the incapability of Ordnance Factory Board (OFB) and delay in 
procurement process especially import. The Committee are deeply pained to hear the oft -
repeated plea of the Ministry regarding such critical issue of shortage of arms and ammunition. 
Therefore, the Committee recommend that the Ministry should now adopt the policy of zero 
tolerance for any factor causing this critical failure in operational preparedness of t he armed 
forces. 
 

 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 The present state of availability of Arms and Ammunition has certain shortages. The 
shortages are mainly due to limited production capability of the Ordnance Factories and some 
slippages in achieving production targets. Th e supply of ammunition is also dependent upon 
imports from foreign vendors to meet the requirements of the Indian Army. Apart from the 
above factors, the aspect of management of Shelf-life of ammunition also has an impact on the 
level of ammunition holding s. In the levels of WWR holdings for ammunition, out of an 
inventory of 160 ammunition items, 89 are considered operationally important by the Army. Of 
these items with stocks below 20(I) (i.e. below 50% holdings) are classified as critical 
ammunition. 79 out of 89 ammunition items were critical in 2012. Consequent to procurement 
actions in last two years, the deficiencies are likely to be reduced substantially by 2019. These 
projections are based on the assumption of no production shortfalls by OFB, expedi tious 
processing and timely budget allocations.  
 
Deficiencies have accumulated over prolonged period and cannot be made up in a 
compressed timeframe. The Action Plan to mitigate the deficiency is as under:  
 
a) A Five Year Roll on Indent has been placed o n OFB since to facilitate capacity 
planning and achieve zero production slippages. The currently on -going Second Roll 
on Indent has a value of Rs. 26,378 Crore.  
 
b) To ensure that the OFB produces as per plan, the Army HQ converts the annual 
financial goals to numerical targets by types of ammunition. The monthly production 
report received from OFB is compared to laid down numerical targets. In addition, 
quarterly reviews by MoD to resolve difficulties and course corrections for areas 
flagged by the Army are also being held. 
 
c) A concerted drive to acquire components and repair ammunition requiring 
maintenance has further added to ammunition holdings of the Indian Army. 
 
d)  ‘Ammunition Road Map’ approved in 2013 to ameliorate the deficiency of select 
important indigenous and ex-import ammunition items.  
 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 10) 
 
 The oral deposition of the representatives of the Ministry of defence highlighted the 
need for diversification of sources and selective private sector participation to address the 
shortage of arms and ammunition. The Committee, however, would recommend the  Ministry to 
tread with caution in this regard and not expect any miraculous turn of events just by involving 

 
 
private sector selectively in production of ammunition. Considering the fact that the OFB, 
supposedly a broad and versatile production base with m ulti-technology capabilities evolved 
over the years, is not able to deliver the required volume of Defence equipments, the 
Committee cannot held being skeptical on how the newly emerged Private Sector would be a 
panacea for the problem of shortage of arms and ammunition. The Committee, while 
consenting with the need for diversification of sources, recommend that the Defence Public 
Sector Undertakings and the OFB take this onus on themselves for providing State -of-the-Art 
equipments to our Defence personnel within a fixed time framework and take concerted and 
urgent steps in this direction.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 The observation of the Committee has been noted for compliance. 
 
(for comments of the Committee on Para Nos. 9 and 10  please see Para 
No.13 of Chapter -I of the report)  
 
Recommendation (Para No. 11) 
 
 The Committee note that two categories of weapon i.e. 5.56mm INSAS Rifle & 5.56mm 
INSAS LMG are available in Indian Small Arms System (INSAS) family of weapons. The 
weapons were designed by DRDO a nd have evolved over a period of time with upgraded 
versions coming in to take care of shortcoming. As per the written reply of the Ministry, the 
INSAS Rifle developed against the Army’s GSQR (GSQR 429) has fully met the QR and thus 
inducted into the Servi ce. The committee note that the Ministry seems satisfied with the 
currently induced INSAS rifle and hope that rifles would add to the capability enhancement and 
war preparedness of the Army. 
 
The committee have learnt that a case for capital procurement of  Assault Rifles is under 
process and a request for information is being formulated by Army HQs (AHQ) for the same. 
Simultaneously, DRDO and OFB are undertaking development of a 5.56 mm Assault Rifle 
wherein AHQ, as user, is also involved. The committee des ire that all requisite trials and 
processes for induction of assault rifles in Army are completed in a targeted time frame and 
cost implications. The committee would require to be updated regarding procurement of assault 
rifles and budgetary provision for the same. 
Reply of the Government 
  The capital procurement of Assault Rifles, is being progressed as per DPP -2016 which 
stipulates timelines for completion of procurement process. Various options of 5.56 mm and 
7.62 mm Assault Rifles are under consideration. Necessary budget provisions wou ld be made 
once the procurement is approved based on delivery and payment schedule of the equipment. 

 
 
(for comments of the Committee on Para No 11 please see Para No. 
16 of Chapter - I of the report)  
 
Recommendation(Para No. 24) 
 Against the projected amou nt of Rs. 48,725.87 crore as required by Indian Navy, the 
allocation at BE 2016 -17 is Rs. 39,424.88 crore. This amounts to a shortfall or gap of Rs. 
9,300.99 crore. The Committee note that there is a remarkable difference in the amount 
projected by the Service and the allocation made during the last five years. During the previous 
year 2015-16, the BE was Rs. 40,528.88 crore, against which an allocation of Rs. 34,375.24 
crore was made at RE. In this regard, the Committee feel that deficit budgeting at the s tage of 
RE 2015-16 is already present, and a further shortfall of   Rs. 9,300.99 crore at BE 2016 -17 as 
compared to the projected amount will put more pressure on the already stretched Naval 
Budget. The Committee are also concerned to note that the percent age share of Naval Budget 
out of the total Defence Budget has declined from 18.12 percent in the year 2012 -13 to 14.55 
percent in the year 2016 -17. Also, Navy has the lowest share of Defence Budget. During the 
deliberations on the Demands for Grants (2016 -17), the Defence Secretary admitted that the 
`Money’ that is allocated for Capital acquisition is not in accordance with the requirements. As 
submitted by the Defence Secretary, although the projections are made, the Ministry only gets 
whatever is allocat ed by the Ministry of Finance. This `procedure' needs to be critically 
examined. 
 
 In this backdrop of reduced allocations, it is pertinent to mention that   at the sea 
frontiers, India has an edge over her adversaries in comparison to all other domains. T he 
adversaries have their vulnerabilities in the form of sea lines of communications which are 
passing close to our coast. In Military parlance, Indian Navy operates in their internal line and 
the adversaries operate at the external lines. Therefore, there  is a need to exploit this 
advantage and there is a need for strong and capable Navy. The Committee, in this regard are 
of the view that there is a huge requirement of capital induction in the Navy as it is short of 
vessels, aircraft and helicopters. Addit ionally, shortage of manpower and presently prevalent 
inadequacies in training can also not to be ignored. Therefore, reduction in the share of Naval 
Budget is not desirable, especially in view of the fact that India’s larger chunk of trade takes 
place thr ough sea routes. Besides this, the new challenges for the Navy are enormous, as 
instances of hostility in the seas by the neighbouring countries have been on the increase over 
the years. Hence, equipping our Navy with high level of tactical proficiency wou ld indeed 
require ample budgetary support. Considering the requirements of training and modernization 
drive of the Navy as envisaged in accordance with the Maritime Capability Perspective Plan 
(MCPP) 2012 -27, the plummeting budgetary trend appears to be mi splaced. Therefore, in 
order to achieve the targeted outcome, the Ministry of Defence must ensure essential budget 
to the Navy and additional grants need to be provided at the RE stage. Or else, the "targets" 
envisaged need to be revised and re- formulated. 

 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 The recommendations of the Committee are noted for compliance.  The 
projections/requirements of the Navy will be forwarded to Ministry of Finance for consideration 
at RE stage.  In case the funds are not provided as per projectio ns by the Ministry of Finance, 
the available resources will be optimally utilized based on prioritized requirements of Navy. 
 
(for comments of the Committee on Para Nos. 24 and 25  please see Para 
No. 28 of Chapter -I of the report)  
 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 29) 
 
The Committee were informed that the emergency Cabinet Committee report of 1964 
had approved a Force Level of 138 ships and submarines for Indian Navy.  Since then the 
Maritime Security Environment of the country has undergone a sea -change. The present day 
Maritime Challenges include, Coastal Security in the light of terrorism emanating through sea 
route, increased threats of Piracy and amplified hostilities in Indian ocean Region by our 
neighbouring nations. Maritime infrastructure is a vital co mponent of economic development. 
The Committee have been informed that keeping in view the new challenges, a requirement of 
212 vessels and 458 aircraft have been contemplated for Indian Navy in MCPP 2012 -27. In 
2012, DAC had approved 198 ships and submarines by 2027. However, the present force level 
is only 123 ships, 15 submarines and 235 aircraft. The Committee were also apprised that due 
to slippages in contractual milestones, slow progress of work and delay in milestone, slow 
progress of work and delay  in milestone payments (P71, P 15A, P15B, NOPV, CTS, P17A 
etc.). The Committee are baffled to note that Indian Navy is struggling with low force level and 
still there are huge slippages being noticed in various acquisitions/ procurements. It should be 
dealt with stringently by the Ministry of Defence and the Committee be informed accordingly.  
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The Indian Navy has a force level of 137 ships and submarines. In addition, 45 ships 
and submarines are presently under construction at various public sector and private 
shipyards. Shipbuilding projects are time -intensive and are spread over several years. The 
major reasons for delay in Shipbuilding projects include: - 
 
(a) Infrastructural constraints of the DPSU Shipyards. 
(b) Delay in receipt of material/ equipment. 

 
 
(c) Delay in design finalisation/ finalisation of vendor-specific equipment. 
(d) Increase in material/ equipment cost, along with labour cost and overheads. 
(e) Financial constraints and design expertise limitations of the private shipyards. 
 
Specific issues pertaining to time overrun and cost escalations in specific projects are covered 
in the succeeding paragraphs.   
 
1. P 71 (M/s CSL, Kochi) .  The details pertaining to time and cost overruns of the 
Indigenous Aircraft Carrier (IAC-1) under construction at Cochin Shipyard Limited (CSL) are as 
follows:- 
 
(a) Time Overrun.   The main reasons for revision in timelines are listed below:- 
  
(i)  Ordering of Long Lead Equipment and Design Studies. 
(ii)  Non-Availability of Steel. 
(iii)  Learning Curve for CSL. 
(iv) Delayed ordering of Propulsion System Integration (PSI). 
(v)  Delay in Russian approvals for design and supply of equipment for 
Aviation Facilities Complex (AFC).  
(vi)  Delay in receipt of critical/unique pre-launch indigenous equipment. 
 
(b) Cost Overrun.  The revised estimated cost of the IAC of Rs. 19341 Crore at 
2018 prices is on a ‘not exceeding basis’. The main reasons contributing to revision 
in cost of the project are listed below:- 
 
(xii) Increase in equipment costs, including weapon & sensor and AFC 
equipment.  
(xiii) Increase in cost of yard materials, including steel.  
(xiv) Increase in labour wages, labour overheads (yard efforts) and  material 
overheads. 
(xv) Increase in other yard efforts pertaining to  CSL’s detailed engineering 
design. 
(xvi) Increase in shipyard design support cost and external design input costs.   
(xvii) Inclusion of costs towards tests, trials and guarantee repairs. 
(xviii) Inclusion of preservation & extended warranty cost of already ordered 
equipment. 
(xix) Inclusion of addition & alteration (i.e. modification cost) as per Defence 
Procurement Procedure (DPP). 
(xx) Increase in Management Fee, Handling Charges and Profit Paid to the 
Shipyard on account of revised equipment and yard effort costs. 
(xxi) Increase in Base & Depot (B&D) Spares costs corresponding to increase 
in equipment cost.  

 
 
(xxii) Increase in infrastructure augmentation at CSL. 
 
2. P 15A (M/s MDL, Mumbai) . The initial delivery schedule of the three ships was March 
2008, March 2009 and March 201 0 respectively. The delivery schedule was subsequently 
revised to May 2010, May 2011 and May 2012 respectively. The first two ships, INS Kolkata 
and INS Kochi were commissioned in August 2014 and September 2015, respectively. The 
third ship, INS Chennaihas  delivered/commissioned on 21 st November 2016. The delay in 
delivery of the ships is mainly due to the delay in receipt of Heating Ventilation and Air 
Conditioning (HVAC), Propulsion System Integration (PSI) and Auxiliary Control System 
(ACS).  The original cost ofRs. 3580 Crore was revised toRs. 11662 Crore in February, 2006 
with the approval of CCS. The cost overrun has been mainly due to the increase in equipment 
cost and Yard material, increase in cost of labour and labour overheads and identification o f 
realistic assessment of cost of weapons and sensors.  
 
3. P 28 (M/s GRSE, Kolkata). As per the Contract No. 285/DND(SSG)/C/12 -13/P-28 
dated 11.06.2012 the delivery dates for the 04 ships was October 2012, July 2013, July 2014 
and April, 2015 respectively. The first two ships, INS Kamorta and INS Kadmatt have been 
commissioned in August 2014 and January 2016 respectively. The third and fourth ship are 
likely to be delivered by end 2016 and end 2017 respectively . The time overrun was attributed 
to delay in development of steel, delay in development of indigenised weapons and sensors 
and delay in completion of trials for critical equipment like Diesel Generators, AC Plants etc. 
The original cost ofRs. 3051.2 Crore was revised to Rs. 7852.39 Crore with the approval of 
CCS in March 2012.  The cost overrun, is attributable to the increase in costs of developmental 
projects, and introduction of new/ state of the art equipment/ systems. 
 
4. NOPVs (M/s Pipavav Shipyard) .  The contract for construction of  five Naval Offshore 
Patrol Vessels (NOPVs) was awarded to M/s Pipavav Defence and Offshore Engineering Co. 
Ltd. on 27 March 2011 at a ‘fixed and firm’ cost of Rs. 2974.58 Crore. The contracted delivery 
schedule of the ships was November 2014 for the first  NOPV and subsequent ships at an 
interval of six months each. The project has been delayed due to rework on constructed blocks 
and due to financial constraints of the shipyard. Consequent to the change in management to 
M/s Reliance Defence and Engineering Ltd (RDEL), on 18 January 2016, the pace of work has 
improved. The yard has indicated that the five ships will be delivered by May 2017, July 2017, 
December 2017, February 2018 and April 2018 respectively. Being a fixed cost project, there 
has been no cost overrun. 
 
5. Fast Interceptor Crafts (FIC) (M/s Solas Marine Lanka, Sri Lanka) . The contract for 
procurement of 80 FICs was signed on 26 August 2011 with M/s Solas Marine Lanka, Sri 
Lanka for a total project cost of US$ 64,152,000. The contract stipulated  that the first batch of 
four FICs were to be delivered by the shipyard in July 2012, followed by a batch every three 
months thereafter, till April 2017. The FICs are being delivered in batches, with each batch 
consisting of four FICs. 15 out of 20 batches have been delivered by the shipyard, with the 15 th 

 
 
batch being inducted on 30 June 2016. The project is presently behind schedule by six 
months. The 16th batch is likely to be delivered by end October, 2016 with subsequent batches 
every two months to cover up the delay period by the delivery of the last batch. The delay was 
primarily attributed to shipyard’s inability initially to achieve contracted speed of 45 knots. 
Applicable Liquidated Damages (LD) on FICs and on the B&D spares thereof have been levied 
on the Shipyard for late delivery of first 15 batches. Being a fixed cost project, there has been 
no cost overrun. 
 
6. LCU Mk-IV (M/s GRSE, Kolkata).   The Contract for construction and delivery of 
eight Landing Craft Utility Mk-IV (LCU MK-IV) ships was signed with M/s GRSE, Kolkata on 29 
September, 2011 at a total cost of Rs. 2,169 Crore. The contractual delivery of the first ship 
was scheduled in August,  2014 and for subsequent ships at an interval of three months each. 
The first ship is slated to be delivered by end September 2016, with a delay of 25 months. The 
subsequent ships are likely to be delivered by December 2016, April 2017, July 2017, October 
2017, January 2018, April 2018 and July 2018. The delays are attributable to insufficient 
resource allocation by the shipyard. Being a fixed cost project, there has been no cost overrun. 
 
7. WJFACs (M/s GRSE, Kolkata) . The Contract for construction and del ivery of four 
Follow-on Water Jet Fast Attack Crafts (WJ FACs) was signed with M/s GRSE, Kolkata on 01 
March 2013 for Rs. 379.87 Crore. The contractual delivery of the first ship was scheduled in 
March 2015 and of subsequent ships at an interval of three m onths each. The first ship was 
delivered in April 2016 and commissioned on 23 May 2016. The balance three ships are likely 
to be delivered by July 2016, November 2016 and February 2017, respectively. The delays are 
attributable to insufficient resource all ocation by the shipyard.  Being a fixed cost project, there 
has been no cost overrun. 
 
8. Cadet Training Ships (M/s ABG Shipyard) .   The Contract for three Cadet Training 
Ships (CTS), two under main contract and one under option clause, was concluded with M/s 
ABG Shipyard on 27 June 2011 and 30 November 2012 at a total cost of Rs. 968.76 and          
Rs. 484.38 Crore respectively. The  ships were to be delivered by December 2014, June 2015 
and May 2016. The project progressed till September 2014 and thereafter slowed down due to 
financial status of the shipyard. The shipyard was subsequently shut down in June 2015 due to 
financial problems. An overall progress of 20.22 %, 12.27 % and 6.7 % was achieved for the 
three vessels. The project is being reviewed on account of delays in delivery. 
 
9. Survey Vessels (M/s Alcock Ashdown Gujarat Ltd, Bhavnagar) .    The contract for 
construction of six Survey Vessels was signed with M/s Alcock Ashdown Gujarat (AAGL), a 
Government of Gujarat PSU, on 28 December 2006 at a cost of Rs. 797.81 Crore. The first 
ship, INS Makar was delivered in September 2012 after a de lay of almost 44 months. Post 
delivery of the first ship, the project has stalled due to cash flow issues and financial 
constraints of the shipyard. The shipyard has been unable to renew and revalidate Bank 

 
 
Guarantees. As of now, the progress of the remain ing five vessels stood at 70 %, 40 %, 40 %, 
35 % and 20 % respectively. The project is being reviewed on account of delays in delivery.  
 
10. Project 75 (M/s MDL, Mumbai) .   The project cost for supply of 06 submarines was 
estimated at Rs. 18798 Crore in 2005 at the timing of signing of contract. The cost was revised 
to Rs. 23558.00 Crore (2010) approximately, primarily due to increase in cost of MDL procured 
material (MPM) as compared to earlier indicated cost. Subsequently, due to further delays in 
procurement of MPM items, MDL requested for revision of delivery schedule from June 2015 to 
September 2016. The revision in delivery schedule led to escalation in various cost elements 
of GoI -MDL contract. The first submarine is likely to be delivered by Septemb er 2016, with 
subsequent deliveries every nine months. 
 
Steps Taken to Reduce Time and Cost Overruns .    Various steps have been taken 
to reduce time overrun and cost escalation in Shipbuilding projects. These include:- 
 
(h) All projects are now being contract ed on a ‘fixed cost’ basis. The variable cost 
option is exercised only where cost of equipment is uncertain. 
 
(i) Provision for Liquidated Damages is incorporated in all contracts for penalising 
any delay beyond contractual timelines. 
 
(j) Infrastructure augmentation of yards is being carried out to build capacity and to 
reduce the build time. 
 
(k) Provision for nomination of equipment for follow -on ships to reduce procurement 
time. 
 
(l) In order to reduce build time, construction of follow -on Ships is based on the 
same design, as is being done in the case of four follow -on Water Jet FACs under 
construction at M/s GRSE, Kolkata. 
 
(m) Regular Project Reviews of all shipbuilding projects are held every six months by 
the Apex Steering Committee {chaired by Secy (DP)} and by the Steering Committee 
{chaired by DG (Acq)} on a quarterly basis. B esides these, CWP&A Review Meeting 
(CPRM) is also held on a quarterly basis. 
 
(n) Project 75 is being reviewed by ‘Integrated Progress Monitoring Team’ chaired by 
CMD, M/s MDL on a monthly basis to enable quick decision making and early resolution 
of critical issues. 
 
(m) P71 (IAC-I) is being reviewed by ‘Empowered Apex Committee (EAC)’ headed by 
Defence Secretary once in six months. Based on the mandate of CCS while according 

 
 
revised CCS sanction, an 'Expert Committee' under the chairmanship of VCNS has 
been constituted and the Project is reviewed by Expert Committee, quarterly. The 
project is also reviewed quarterly by Steering Committee headed by DG (Acq) and by 
the Controller Warship Production & Ac quisition (CWP&A) in Controller Warship 
Production & Acquisition Project Review Meetings (CPRMs). 
 
(n) Integrated Modular Construction for new Projects and shift from Telescopic 
Design to Frozen Design. 
 
(o) Enterprise Resource Planning though Information Technolo gy management 
tools. 
 
(for comments of the Committee on Para No. 29 please see Para No. 
31 of Chapter -I of the report)  
 
 
Recommendation No. 46 
 
 In all, 29 contracts signed with value above Rs. 50 crore were signed during the 12 th 
Plan period.  Of these, only one could be completed and the remaining are  ongoing.  Some of 
these projects are very crucial for development of the Air Force.  These include, procurement 
of PC-7 MK II aircraft and associated equipment, procurement of SU 30  MKI, procurement and 
infrastructure development of Addl C -130 & J 30 aircraft, attack helicopters etc.  Such delays 
are likely to have the negative implication of derailing the course of development of Air Force.  
The Committee take note of the alarmingly  slow pace of progress of the 
acquisition/procurement projects and desire that decision making and execution needs 
to be more proactive and precise. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 Out of 30 contracts signed since April 2012, deliveries have been completed for five 
contracts and are under progress for the remaining contracts. The majority of the equipment  
procured through Capital Budget are high value items and are not readily available for delivery . 
These equipment are manufactured/fabricated only after signin g of the contract and are to be 
supplied to Air Force as per delivery schedule agreed in the contract. Mechanisms are in place 
both at IAF and MoD to ensure compliance to the delivery schedule and to deal with the cases 
of delays.   
(for comments of the Committee on Para No. 46  please see Para No. 43 of 
Chapter -I of the report)  
 

 
 
 
Recommendation No. 48 
Indigenization 
 The Ministry of Defence had submitted that there have been both time and cost 
overruns in some cases which pertain mainly to indigenous ‘Make’ and ‘Design & 
Development’ (D&D) projects.  Procurement from foreign vendors is resorted to, only when the 
Indian industry is not in a position to provide  the desired equipment or supply the required  
equipment in the allotted time frame.  Out of 15 contracts signed since 2013, only three have 
been completed till date.  In this regard, the Committee recommend that appropriate 
penalty should be imposed whenever delays and lacunae are witnessed and this should 
be a part of the contract. 
Reply of the Government 
 Out of 18 contracts signed since 01 April 2013, deliveries have been completed for 
three contracts and are under progress for the remaining contracts. The delivery schedule is 
committed by the vend or in the contract. Penal clause for delays in fulfillment of contractual 
agreement is an integral part of contract document. Adequate steps are taken for safeguarding 
and ensuring that all contractual obligations are materialized within the stipulated con tractual 
timeframe. Procedures are in place to deal with the cases of delay caused by the vendor in 
following the delivery time frames.  
(for comments of the Committee on Para No. 48  please see Para No.46 of 
Chapter -I of the report)  
 
Recommendation (Para No. 51) 
 The Indian Air Force (IAF) has projected a requirement of at least 45 fighter squadrons 
to counter a two front collusive threat.  However, the IAF presently is working with only 33 
active fighter squadrons as against Government authorized strength of 42 Sq uadrons and 
requirement of 45.  The Ministry of Defence had informed that there is a gap in the Force Level 
since the rate at which fighter aircraft are retiring after completion of their total technical life 
exceeds the rate at which their replacements ar e being inducted into the IAF.  The Committee 
are, further concerned to find that many squadrons consisting of MiG planes are due for 
retirement and in such a dismal scenario it becomes very challenging for IAF to upgrade its 
squadron.  In this regard, the  Ministry informed that IAF has contracted 272 Su -30 MKI fighter 
aircraft out of which 213 Su -30 MKI have been delivered till date and balance are likely to be 
delivered by 2020.  Further induction of Light Combat Aircraft (LCA) and Medium Multi Role 
Combat Aircraft (MMRCA) is envisaged.  The MMRCA project is at Contract Negotiation 
Committee (CNC) stage.  IAF has accepted the first series of LCA production on 17 January 
2015.  Negotiations to finalise the Research and Development Phase contract for Fifth 
Generation Fighter Aircraft (FGFA) are progressing with the Russian side.  In this regard, the 

 
 
Committee desire that measures be taken to ensure that all planned procurements fructify 
in stipulated time frame and the IAf achieves the Government authorized s trength of 42 
Squadrons. The Ministry of Defence should also pay heed to the IAF’s demand for 45 
squadrons which IAF require to counter two front war. 
Reply of the Government 
 On 01 July 2016 IAF formed first LCA squadron and efforts are on to ensure that the 
fleet is operationalized in IAF at the earliest. IAF is also progressing the case for procurement 
of additional LCA Mk -1A aircraft to increase total number of LCA in IAF over six squadrons. 
Further, the IGA, Aircraft and Weapons Package Supply Protocol s and Offset Contracts have 
been concluded for the Rafale fighter aircraft and supplies will commence from September, 
2019. The issues pertaining to the Research and Development of Fifth Generation Fighter 
Aircraft (FGFA) are under discussion with the Russian side.  
 
          The Ministry is considering the requirement of additional fighter aircraft to cover present 
and prospective shortages in the IAF and a decision will be taken soon.  
(for comments of the Committee on Para No. 51  please see Para No. 49 of 
Chapter -I of the report)  
 
Recommendation(Para No. 61) 
 There are a total of 53 IAF airfields of which permanent airfield lighting system is 
available at 42 airfields.  Limited night operations are being conducted at airfields not having 
permanent airfield lighting and the requirement is met using alternate/por table/mobile airfield 
lighting system.  The Committee desire that night landing facilities should be a part of all 
the airfields as in present era of technological advancement, this is not a far stretched 
requirement. 
 
Reply of the Government  
 
  Permanent airfield lighting system (AFLS) is available at 42 out of total 53 IAF airfields. 
Installation of permanent AFLS at 10 more airfields excluding Kargil (on lease from AAI) is 
planned under Phase -II of Project MAFI (Modernisation of Airfield Infra structure).  Permanent 
AFLS will be available at all 52 IAF airfields, on completion of Phase -II.   Requirement at these 
airfields is presently being met through alternative means that includes six Mobile AFLS 
(MAFLS) already inducted in MAFI Phase-I and another six that will be inducted in Phase-II. 
(for comments of the Committee on Para No. 61  please see Para No. 55 of 
Chapter -I of the report)  
  

 
 
 
CHAPTER III 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS, WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT DESIRE TO 
PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
Recommendation ( Para No. 21) 
 The scheme to establish Sainik Schools was introduced in the year 1961. The objectives 
of Sainik School are to prepare boys academically, physically and mentally for entry into the 
National Defence Academy (NDA) and remove regional imbalance in the officer cadre of the 
Defence Services. Regarding the issue of admission of girls in Sainik Schools, a representative 
of the Ministry submitted that since Sainik Schools act as feeder institutions for NDA, until NDA 
sets up facility for entry of girls there is no proposal for admission of girls in Sainik Schools. In 
view of the shortage of Officers in Armed forces and willingness of girls to join the Forces, the 
Committee desire that NDA should create infras tructure and admit girl cadets. The Committee 
also desires the Ministry to seriously look into the matter and initiate the process of creating 
infrastructure for admission of girls into Sainik Schools. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 The primary aim of Sainik Sc hools is to prepare boys for entry into National Defence 
Academy. The entry into NDA is presently allowed only to male candidates at 10+2 level who 
after graduating through NDA are granted Permanent Commission (PC) into various branches 
of the respective S ervice. The induction of girls into NDA needs to be viewed holistically to 
ensure that the fighting efficiency, combat effectiveness and functionality of the Armed Forces 
are maintained. 
 However, women officers are already being inducted as Short Service Commission 
(SSC) officers in most of the branches except combat/sea going branches. Further, women 
SSC officers are also granted PC alongwith SSC men officers in several branches. Last year, 
SSC entry for women officers has been introduced in the fighter s treams on an experimental 
basis for 5 years. 
 It is felt that though, in principle, there may not be any serious objection to the entry of 
girl cadets as PC officers through NDA, it requires more deliberation and needs to be done in a 
calibrated manner. In  the first instance, more branches could be opened for SSC women 
officers for grant of PC as also SSC women officers could be considered for grant of PC in the 
branches where they are already being inducted as SSC officers. 

 
 
 Further, once it is decided to induct women officers into combat arms/sea going 
branches, it may be done initially through SSC entry route which will provide sufficient data 
regarding combat effectiveness of the women officers. The data on combat effectiveness of 
women fighter pilots al so will be available in due course. Based on the data, a policy decision 
on whether or not to give Permanent Commission through the NDA route could be made. 
 Admissions of girls in Sainik Schools can be considered only after intake of female 
officers in NDA is started. 
Recommendation(Para No. 22) 
 The Committee note that Central Government, State Government and Parents are the 
stakeholders in funding of the Sainik Schools. While the Central Government provides for 
defence scholarships, NDA incentive, fee and dietary subsidy, IT & training grant and grant-in-
aid for infrastructure developments, the State Government provides for land, building, 
maintenance and scholarships. The Committee are of the considered view that since Sainik 
Schools were conceived as dedicated feeder to the Defence Services and their establishment 
and maintenance do not amount to major expenditure, the Sainik Schools should be 
completely funded by the Central Government.   
 
Reply of the Government 
 The scheme of setting up Sainik Schools, as it was first conceived in the 60s, was  a 
collaborative effort between the Central Government and State Governments so as to remove 
regional imbalance in the officer cadre of defence services.  It is for this purpose that the 
scheme envisages 67% reservation for students domiciled in the State where the Sainik 
School is located.  
 The objective behind the present scheme is to ensure jointness in responsibility and 
pooling of resources by the Centre and the State Government.  It is for this reason that the 
decision to start a Sainik School is tak en based on a proposal received from the concerned 
State Government. It also stands to reason that for running a Sainik School, active 
administrative and financial support of the State Government is required. Thus the joint 
ownership and stake in opening a nd running of Sainik School in respect of the State 
Governments is vital for their growth and should not be dispensed with. 
 As per present estimates, apart from the cost of land, approximately Rs. 90 -100 Crore 
are required for basic infrastructure for est ablishing/raising a new Sainik School. There is also 
the annual expenditure on maintenance and upgradation of infrastructure. Therefore, the role 
of State Government in opening and running a Sainik School cannot be dispensed with. As 
and when requests are received from State Governments/UTs, they are examined on merit 
and necessary action is taken in the matter. 

 
 
 With respect to the recommendation of the Committee that Ministry of Defence could 
take initiative of arranging of finance for Sainik Schools, it is pertinent to mention that apart 
from the items indicated above in the Report of the Committee for which the Central Govt 
provides financial support, it also provides 100% additionality of Pay & allowances on 
implementation of 6 th CPC recommendations for  the employees of Sainik Schools and Grant -
in-aid for infrastructure development and modernization. 
 
Recommendation(Para No. 34) 
 In case of Sindhukirti, the Committee came to know that the work related to 
maintenance, repairing and Upgradation of Sindhuki rti was offloaded to Hindustan Shipyard 
Ltd. (HSL) in 2005. The refit commenced on 16 January, 2006 and was completed on 26 June 
2015. It took 10 years to complete the refit exercise on INS Sindhukirti. The Committee are not 
happy with the extremely slow p ace of execution of work pertaining to the vessel. Such delays 
lead to huge loss of money for the Service and therefore, necessary monitoring needs to be 
done by the Ministry of Defence to ensure that the targets stipulated are met and the works 
completed within the time schedules. 
 
Reply of Government 
 While, Sindhukirti MR-cum-Modernisation at M/s HSL has taken considerable time, it is 
submitted that the refit was the first ever upgradation of EKM submarine in India. The reasons 
are primarily due to major  scope of work associated with the refit and Growth of Work that 
arose during various stages of the refit. The proposed corrective measures are as follows: - 
 
(a) Dedicated refit monitoring teams are being positioned for offloaded refits in order 
to ensure timely liquidating of issues as and when they arise. 
 
(b) M/s HSL has been requested to position experienced manpower for conduct of 
submarine refit at Shipyard. 
 
(c) Augmentation of manpower resources at Shipyard and work in two or three shifts 
to be undertaken specially during critical phase of refit. 
 
(d) Effective monitoring of sub-contractors by Shipyard management for services and 
material support. 
 
 

 
 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 39A) 
 During the examination of Demands for Grants (2015-16), the Committee were apprised 
that the mismatch in the projections and allocations will lead  to slowing down  of 
modernization, delaying induction of  important capabilities, erosion of IAF’s superiority  over  
our adversaries, resultant asymmetry  in capability with respect to envisa ged  `Threat 
Perception' and flight safety  concerns due to obsolescence. Keeping in view need to sustain 
the momentum of modernization trajectory planned  in the 12th  and 13th Plan period and to 
clear important projects which were at critical stages, the Committee had, in their Eighth Report  
on Demands for Grants (2015-16), recommended  allocating an additional amount of Rs. 9,000 
crore at RE stage.  The Committee is amazed and feel concerned to note in this regard that 
instead of allocating the required  amount, the Ministry of Finance has reduced the funds   
further   to Rs. 3,244.60 crore at RE stage!  The Committee strongly feel that this is an 
alarming situation.  The reduced budgetary allocation will definitely have a cascading effect on 
the projects which are at critical stages. Therefore, the Committee stress the need for ensuring 
adequate budgetary support for fructification of these projects. Therefore, the funds required 
should be made available to the Service under intimation to the Committee. 
Reply of the Government 
 The facts/figures mentioned in the recommendations relates to year 2015 -16.  Since the 
financial year 2015 -16 is already closed, it may not be possible to allocate funds for 2015 -16 
now.  However the Committee may be assured that th e projections/requirements of the Air 
Force for 2016 -17 will be forwarded to Ministry of Finance for consideration at 
Supplementary/RE stage.  In case the funds are not provided as per projections by the Ministry 
of Finance, the available resources will be  optimally utilized based on prioritized requirements 
of Air Force. 
Recommendation (Para No. 47) 
 
 Besides the provisioning of adequate budgetary resources, it is also equally important 
that the Air Force is able to utilise the allocated budget completely and timely.  Some 
discrepancies were noted in the expenditure pattern of Air Force during the last five years.  For 
the year, 2010 -11, Rs 25,251.72 crore allocated in BE, whereas the actual expenditure was 
Rs. 23,625.41 crore.  Similarly for the year, 2011 -12, BE allocation was Rs. 30,282.03 crore 
and final expenditure incurred was Rs. 28,841.18 crore.  Even for the FY 2013 -14, the BE 
grant was Rs. 39,208.84 crore while the expended amount was Rs. 38,614.92 crore.  Such 
deviations in allocation and expenditure is a matter to be looked into.  The Committee opine 
that Air Force should vindicate the justifi cation of their demands by utilizing their 
budget optimally and also ascertain the project milestones are completed well in 
stipulated time frame. 
 

 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
Recommendation (Para No. 52) 
 The Ministry of Defence has informed that the RFP for 126 MMRCA was issued on 28 th 
August 2007.  The Contract negotiations in the procurement case could not be concluded 
because M/s Dassault Aviation did not confirm agreement with certain terms of the Request for 
Proposal (RFP) and its bid.  In view of the critical operational necessity for Multirole Combat 
Aircraft for Indian Air Force, the Government of India decided to procure 36 ‘Rafale’ aircraft in 
flyaway condition from Government of France through an Inter -Governmental agreement.  The 
RFP for procurement of 126 MMRCA was formally withdrawn on 24 th June 2015.  As per 
Ministry’s submission, Government of India would like to acquire 36 Rafale jets in fly -away 
 
The year wise fund allotment for the capital acquisition is tabulated below:- 
 
                                                              (Rs. in Cr) 
 
FY BE RE MA Actuals % Actuals Vs MA 
2010-11 25251.7
2 24266.79 23585.04 23625.41 0.17 
2011-12 30282.0
3 27734.78 28334.28 28841.18 1.76 
2012-13 30514.4
5 32734.81 32735.34 32980.10 0.74 
2013-14 39208.8
4 38350.44 38708.42 38614.92 -0.24 
2014-15 33710.6
8 33710.68 32894.00 32797.90 -0.29 
2015-16 33686.7
5 30442.15 30792.15 31215.34 1.37 
 
The BE is allocated by the MoD to the services before the start of the financial year. 
During the  course of year the expenditure projections in respect of the 
schemes/acquisitions change due to non -fulfillment of contract terms, non -completion of 
milestones due to various extraneous factors. The budget is reviewed at various stages 
(RE/MA) based on th e inputs received from the Air Hqrs. Based on the progress of 
expenditure and actual achievement of milestones, MoD makes the final allocation which is 
the MA stage; wherein any expected savings are withdrawn for fruitful utilisation by other 
services or s urrendered to GoI. There may also be occasions wherein the new schemes 
are concluded at the end of the financial year resulting in outgo of advance payments 
leading to minor expenditure in excess of MA. 
 

 
 
condition as quickly as possible.  The two countries agreed t o conclude an Inter-Governmental 
Agreement for supply of the aircraft on terms that would be better than conveyed by Dassault 
Aviation as part of a separate process underway, the delivery would be in a time -frame that 
would be compatible with the operation al requirement of IAF; the aircraft and associated 
systems and weapons would be delivered in the same configuration as had been tested and 
approved by IAF, and with a longer maintenance responsibility by France.  Subsequently, the 
negotiations between the Indian and the French side on price and all terms and conditions of 
purchase have begun in May 2015.  A Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) between Indian 
and French Government was signed on January 21, 2016 in this regard.  Negotiations with the 
French side are currently on.  As far as budget for ‘Rafale’ is concerned, the Committee were 
intimated that a separate proposal will be moved for additional funds in FY 2016 -17 to procure 
the 36 Rafale aircraft after details regarding cost and delivery timelines are  finalized.  The 
Committee are unhappy to note that although a considerable time has elapsed, 
negotiations with France on ‘Rafale’ could not be taken to a logical end. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 The Inter -Governmental Agreement (IGA) for procurement of 36 R afale aircraft was 
signed between the Government of India and Government of France on 23rd September 2016. 
 
 The 36 Rafale aircraft delivery is in time -frame compatible with the operational 
requirement of the IAF and will be delivered in fly away condition s from France between 
September 2019 and April 2022.  In addition, the Agreement provides for delivery of initial 
batch of weapons consisting of the Beyond Visual Range (BVR) METEOR Missiles and MICA 
Missiles in Air -to-Air missiles category and SCALP Missi les in Air -to- Ground category.  The 
METEOR missile is presently the most advanced operational Air -to-Air missile with very high 
launch range while the SCALP Air -to-Ground missile is a long range precision targeting 
missile.  Acquisition of METEOR and SCAL P missiles will provide a significant capability edge 
to IAF over our adversaries.  
 
 The Agreement includes longer maintenance responsibility by the French side in the 
form of Performance Based Logistics (PBL) initially for five years and extendable up to  12 
years with a minimum aircraft availability of 75% at all times.  The Indian side was able to 
include more stringent penalties in case PBL commitment is not met by the French side while 
not agreeing for better incentives as a quid pro quo sought by the French side retaining the 
same levels of incentives as before.  This has direct financial benefits over long duration 
product support through PBL.  
 
 The Indian side was able to obtain French commitment for increase in the Industrial 
Support from 40 years to 50 years.  

 
 
 
Recommendation( Para  No. 62) 
 
 In the context of the northern air stations, the Committee want that Air Force should take 
action regarding fast -tracking of Nyoma and Kargil projects.  The Committee also desire that 
Zanskar Air Station in No rthern region should be considered for development as this is 
strategically very important location.  The representatives of Air Force informed the Committee 
that no specific survey has been yet conducted with regard to Zanskar.  Therefore, the 
Committee r ecommend that this should be done at the earliest, under intimation to this 
Committee.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
(a) Development of NyomaALG into an Airbase .  Proposal seeking ‘in principle’ approval 
for the ‘Creation of a new Air Force Base at Nyoma in Eastern Ladakh’ to sustain operations by 
helicopters, fighter & transport aircraft along with civil airline operations is being processed.  
 
(b) Creation of A irbase at Kargil .  Proposal for ‘Acceptance of Necessity’ for 
establishment of an IAF Airbase at Kargil was examined and returned for obtaining op 
endorsement from Indian Army.     
 
(c) Zanskar Air Station. IAF team carried out survey of the Padam valley for possible 
construction of an airbase.  Two locations were identified in Padam Valley.  It was observed 
that sufficient length is available for approaches; however, as the width of the valley is only 3 -5 
km, there is not enough room available for manoeuvring by fixed wing aircraft for circuit 
patterns.  The elevation is 11,500 ft, which is approx 2000 ft higher than Kargil.  Zanskarvalley, 
enroute to Padam, is prone to severe turbulence.  Due to high peaks surrounding the location, 
R/T communication range with ATC will be at very short ranges due to terrain masking.  It was 
also found that the weather in the Padam valley (bowl) was not conducive to air operations, 
mainly due to clouding and the approaches no t being clear.  It was also observed that one 
location is in an avalanche prone area and the other location is between two rivers, being 
potentially subject to flooding and severe damage if the river changes course.  The area has 
also seen flash floods in May 2015. 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 66) 
 
 While examining the data on accidents that took place in Indian Air Force during the last 
eight years, the Committee were baffled to find that as many as 87 accidents had taken place, 

 
 
which works out to be more tha n 10 per year.  In these accidents as many as 75 lives were 
lost.  The Committee regret the irreparable loss of human lives in such accidents.  In addition 
to this, loss of huge money was incurred in those accidents.  It was found that huge amount of 
money was lost owning to these accidents.  The Committee also observed that even after 
promulgation of Standard Operating Procedures (SOP), the accidents are consistently 
recurrent.  In the year 2014 -15 itself, 10 accidents took place.  The Committee are immens ely 
distressed at the statistics and regret that, on one hand our service is short of trained 
manpower and on the other hand, we are losing manpower by such accidents.  It was further 
found that in most of the cases of accidents, the reason was established  to be either material 
failure, technical defect or human error.  In all cases, the onus culminates at the high level 
management.  The enquiry should not culminate at merely putting blame on the persons 
onboard, who lost their lives in the accidents and are not available to put forth their case.  Even 
in case of human error, the erring instructors who failed to give adequate training should also 
come into the loop of enquiry and charged with appropriate liability, be it procurements of 
equipments that may n ot be of standard or inadequacies in impartment of training.  The 
Committee desire that any form of lackadaisical attitude towards accidents should be 
got rid off and efforts be taken towards making our ‘Air Force an Accident Free Zone’.  
Befitting punishment should be awarded in accordance with the established fault. 
 
Reply of the Government  
 
(a) Study of all the 87 accidents reveal that 78 accidents have been categorised under the 
main heading of Human Error and Technical Defect. These categories are further subdivided 
into three to four levels for greater clarity. For example, Technical Defect is  subdivided into 
Airframe, Engine, Armament, Electrical, Radar etc. Airframe is further divided into Structural 
Fault, Control Fault, Fuel System, Brake Failure etc. Hence, an accident caused due to 
Structural Fault needs to be viewed differently from anot her such as Brake Failure or others, 
even though these accidents fall under the main category of Technical Defect.  
 
(b) During the investigations, supervisory and training lapses are mandatorily looked into 
and in the event of any lapses, suitable actions  are taken against those found guilty. In case of 
a fatality, if there has been a lapse on the part of the deceased aircrew, they are held 
responsible for their mistake but not blameworthy, as they are not present to defend 
themselves. In all cases of acci dents, organisational aspects at higher management levels are 
always looked into and remedial measures instituted.  
 
(c) The accident rate of the IAF has shown consistent reduction from earlier decades due to 
sustained and proactive effort, which is eviden t from the accident statistics. For example, MiG 
21 aircraft, which had 72 Cat -I accidents in the 70s, has had 14 accidents in the current 
decade. Human Error (Aircrew) cases showed a reduction from 21 to six during the same 

 
 
period. Accidents due to Techni cal Defects have reduced from 26 in the 70s to six in the 
present decade. 
 
(d) The number of pilots killed in aircraft accidents each year has remained three to four. In 
the Financial Year 2009 -10, there were eight fatalities, as these accidents involved A N 32, 
HPT-32 and Mi 17 in each of which, two pilots were killed. In the previous year, IAF did not 
have a single fatal accident. No efforts are spared by IAF to reduce and negate fatalities in 
aircraft operations.       
 
(e) Last year (FY 2015-16) recorded one of the lowest accident rate of 0.22 in the history of 
IAF. This is because of sustained proactive and positive steps. IAF is committed to reduce the 
accident rates further. 
 
  

 
 
CHAPTER IV 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS, IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE 
GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE AND WHICH 
REQUIRE REITERATION 
Recommendation (Para No. 17) 
 
 The Committee note that the Defence Acquisition Council approval was accorded for 
118 Nos. of Arjun Main Battle Tank Mk -II.  However, the validity has expired on 28 August, 
2015 and needs extension. With increase in weight, apprehensions have arisen in regard to its 
seamless application in semi -developed and developed sectors of the Western Front. The 
various aspects like trafficability, tra nsportability, agility, mobility and other 
operational/functional problems caused by 6 tonne of additional weight have been deliberated 
by the QR Committee and the report is under finalisation at Directorate General of Mechanised 
Forces (DGMF) office. The Committee are disappointed to note that even the improved version 
of Arjun MBT Tank Mk -I has raised apprehensions about its serviceability in the field. They 
desire that issues such as trafficability, transportability, agility, mobility and other 
operational/functional problems encountered in usage of Arjun MBT Mk -II should be resolved 
at the earliest and the Army be equipped with a world class product. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Development of Arjun MBT Mk-II 
 Arjun MBT Mk -II has been developed with 73 mutu ally agreed tank -fittable 
improvements out of which 15 are major tank -fittable improvements. Configuration of Arjun 
MBT Mk-II incorporating the mutually agreed improvements with weight has been deliberated 
in many Arjun Core Committee meetings constituted by Secretary (DP), which comprises all 
stakeholders. All the above improvements resulted in the additional weight of 6 t over and 
above Arjun MBT Mk-l. 
Agility, Mobility, Functional and Performance of Arjun MBT Mk -II in Desert and Semi -
Desert Terrains - During User Trials 
 Before commencement of the trials, the Arjun MBT Mk -II has been weighed and taken for 
trials by Users. The performance of Arjun MBT Mk -II with increased weight to 68.6 t is 
well proven during the various phases of User trials in terms of a gility, mobility and other 
operational / functional aspects in the desert and semi -desert terrains. User conducted 
these numerous and extensive trials in Mahajan Field Firing Ranges, Pokhran Field Firing 
Ranges, rocky terrains around Jaisalmer and forward areas closure to Jaisalmer sector. 
 

 
 
 Based on the above User trials of Arjun MBT Mk -II, User declared 67 improvements as 
successful and ordered for DGQA and MET evaluation. It is planned to conduct User 
trials for the balance 3 improvements viz., missile fi ring demonstration and two related 
improvements by end 2018. 
 
 Arjun MBT Mk-II has exhibited the required performance in all aspects of agility, mobility 
and other operational/ functional parameters in the desert and semi -desert terrains during 
various phases of User trials as indicated above.  
 
Agility, Mobility, Functional and Performance of Arjun MBT Mk -II in Developed and 
Semi-Developed Terrains – Operational Employability 
 DRDO is confident that that Arjun MBT Mk -II will have requisite agility, mobility and other 
operational/functional parameters in various developed and semi developed terrains also. 
As directed by Hon’ble RM, DRDO requested Army for mobility comparative trials with the 
'Arjun MBT Mk -II even with 68.6 t’ along with Tank T -90 to prove its tactical and 
operational mobility aspects in all envisaged terrains (including developed and semi 
developed terrains) for its future employability. However, Army intimated that Arjun MBT 
Mk-II and T90 are of different class& weight classification and their  deployment is as per 
assigned operational roles. Arjun MBT has operational employment restrictions to specific 
sectors (desert/semi desert) being heavy tank. Therefore, Army intimated that the 
conduct of comparative mobility trials is not required. 
 
Trafficability and Transportability of Arjun MBT Mk-II 
 Arjun MBT Mk -II is transportable by rail using the B -FAT wagons which are already in 
service. Road Transport of Arjun MBT Mk -II is possible through the 70 t trailer being 
developed by Indian Army. 70 t Brid ge Layer Tanks (such as BLT T -72 and Sarvatra) are 
available with which Arjun MBT Mk -II can cross an obstacle. 70 t Modular Bridge is also 
under development by DRDO. 
 
 However, there may be a requirement to strengthen/upgrade culverts, civil bridges, etc. i n 
strategic thrust areas at the developed and semi developed terrains by the GOI in 
consultation with Army to facilitate deployment of Arjun MBT Mk -II beyond the presently 
envisaged desert and semi-desert terrains. 
Status of QR Committee 
 On the directions of Hon'ble RM, QR Committee comprising members from Army and 
DRDO with then ADGMF as Chairman and Director, CVRDE asCo -Chairman, was 
formed to look into aspects of weight reduction keeping seamless application of 
ArjunMBT Mk ll in semi -developed and develo ped sectors of Western front. This QR 

 
 
Committee studied the possible areas of weight reduction including issues such as 
trafficability, transportability, agility, mobility and other operational/functional problems 
encountered in the usage of Arjun MBT Mk -II. The committee deliberated all these 
aspects and a finalised "QR Committee Report on Arjun MBT Mk -II" was signed and 
submitted to DGMF on 28 Feb 2016 and subsequently expected to have been submitted 
to Hon'ble RM. 
 
 Army-DRDO exercise (during QR Committee ) to carryout weight budgeting that could 
only yield a weight reduction of 1.045 t. An alternate solution could lie in achieving 
compactness through redesign of hull/turret and use of advanced armour materials. 
 
 DRDO intimated that the alternate solution i n achieving compactness through redesign of 
hull/turret including use of advanced armour material is not recommended considering the 
long development and validation cycle. 
 
Approach Plan for Weight Reduction 
 It was insisted by Army that an innovative solution in the form of redesign of hull/turret 
structures and use of newer materials to replace the conventional structure is to be 
worked out to achieve a reasonable reduction in weight, without removing any of the 
major improvements. As discussed during  the status review meeting held under the 
Chairmanship of Secy DD R&D wherein DCOAS(P&S) and DGMF participated on 27 
Sept 2016, it was decided to initiate redesign of hull & turret structure modules along with 
other potential systems where there is a scope  for weight reduction and to be 
demonstrated as modules to Users by taking up a project with a timeline of 18 months 
from the date of sanction. The anticipated weight reduction is about 3 t. Accordingly, 
actions have been initiated. 
 
 However, User accepted the weight reduction from 68.6 t to about 65 t during the above 
DCOAS meeting. Army also indicated that there are no major advantages from tactical 
and operational point of view with 65 t weight reduction also. However, CVRDE has 
initiated a project propo sal towards the above to meet the User requirements for 65 t 
Arjun MBT Mk -II. It is felt that even weight reduction to 62 t equal to that of Arjun MBT 
Mk-I may not provide any significant tactical/ operational advantages. The cycle time for    
65 t weight reductions of Arjun MBT Mk -II and validation will take about four to six years 
for successful acceptance by User after trials/procedures. 
Conclusion 
 It is stated that Arjun MBT Mk -II is superior state-of-art weapon system and a world -class 
product. In orde r to gainfully utilize this superior weapon system, Army is required to 
interact and ensure development of infrastructure in terms of culverts, civil bridges, etc. to 

 
 
ensure the transportability in strategic thrust areas leading to induction of Arjun MBT Mk-II 
in semi-developed and developed terrains also over a period of time. 
 
(for comments of the Committee on Para No. 17  please see Para No. 19 of 
Chapter -I of the report)  
 
Recommendation ( Para No. 18) 
 
 The Committee note that in regard to the proposal for raising the Mountain Strike Corps, 
sanction by the Govt. in 2013, the Army is grappling with the problem of non -release of funds 
for infrastructure development. During the oral evidence, the representatives of the Ministry 
submitted that the process was being hampered because the army is using its own Reserves 
to raise the formations. However, it was stated that the process of raising of the Corps was on 
track. The Committee feel that raising the Mountain Strike Corps is in the interest of security of  
the nation and recommend that necessary funds for infrastructure development be released for 
the Corps. Milking existing resources, which in some case are not fully upto the authorisation, 
is suicidal. The Committee suggest that this issue be critically e xamined. Action taken in this 
regard may be intimated to the Committee within two months of the presentation of this report. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 Equipping and arming of these forces has been done from existing stocks. Indents have 
been initiated to make up the depleted stocks. This cycle of initial equipping from existing 
stocks and making up depleted stocks will continue till completion of raising. Concrete steps 
have been initiated to ensure that there is  no further increase in hollowness. 
 
(for comments of the Committee on Para No. 18  please see Para No.22 of 
Chapter -I of the report)  
 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 23) 
 
 The Committee note that security arrangements in military establishments are dynamic 
in nature and are periodically reviewed . The observations and recommends of these reviews 
are progressively implemented to maintain a robust and strong response mechanism to 
emerging threats. In view of the recent Pathankot terror attack, the Government has 
constituted a Committee under the cha irmanship of a former Vice Chief of Army/Staff to inter 
alia suggest measures to strengthen security of various military establishments across the 
country and the Committee is expected to submit its report shortly. As directed by Government, 
the three Serv ices have carried out security audit of all their military establishments. The 
Committee desire that heightened security measure post Pathankot terror attack need to be 

 
 
sustained to face any eventuality. The recommendations of the Committee constituted by the 
Government in view of the attack need to be studied carefully and suitably implemented. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 The Committee constituted by Government under the chairmanship of Lt Gen (Retd.) 
Philip Campose, former Vice Chief of Army Staff, has submitted its report to Ministry of 
Defence on 20 th May, 2016. The report is under examination in consultation with all the 
stakeholders. 
(for comments of the Committee on Para No. 23  please see Para No. 25 of 
Chapter -I of the report)  
 
Recommendation (Para No. 30) 
 
Furthermore, the Committee are constrained to observe that there is impetus to replace 
the aging platforms as these would be de -commissioned in the next 10 -12 years. The 
Committee are concerned to note that the current six Mine Counter Measure  Vessels are over 
25 years old. It is imperative to induct Indian Aircraft Carrier (IAC) which is being built in Cochin 
Shipyard as INS Virrat is set to be decommissioned. Now, Indian Navy is completely 
dependent on the recently acquired INS Vikramaditya. Therefore, the Committee strongly 
reiterated the recommendation made in their earlier report for extending the life span of INS 
Viraat. At the same time, the Committee strongly, desire that IN should have an additional 
Aircraft carrier. The Committee also desire that the present force level be increased and the 
ageing platform be replace without loss of time so as to enable in facing the challenges of 
present day’s maritime security needs. Presently, 46 ships and submarines are under 
construction in various  shipyards in the country. Considering the fact that slippages have 
become a common feature of our acquisitions etc., the Committee cannot help expressing 
apprehension on the timely completion of these projects. Therefore, the Committee desire that 
the Min istry to Defence take every possible measure to ensure that these vessels are 
constructed in the stipulated time frame and the quality is not compromised at any level. The 
Committee may be kept apprised of the developments in this regard. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The modernisation of IN is being carried out in accordance with the Maritime Capability 
Perspective Plan (MCPP) 2012 -27 and Long Term Integrated Perspective Plan (LTIPP) 2012 -
27. The modernisation is dictated primarily by the capabilities to be  achieved, threat 
perceptions, prevailing external security environment, emerging technologies and availability of 
funds. The planned force levels envisaged in LTIPP were arrived at catering for new inductions 
and likely decommissioning/ de-induction of ships/ submarines in the coming years. In order to 
mitigate shortages and maintain minimum force levels, IN extends the service life of ships/ 
submarines through Service Life Extension (SLE) Programmes, based on the operational 

 
 
necessity, material state and anticipated delay in induction of replacement platforms. P resently 
45 ships and submarines are under construction at various public and private shipyards.  The 
details pertaining to MCMV and IAC-1 are enumerated in succeeding paragraphs. 
 
Mine Counter Measu re Vessels (MCMVs) .  At present the Indian Navy has six 
MCMVs. These MCMVs are scheduled to be de -inducted in the period 2016 -2018. The AoN 
for construction of 12 new MCMVs was accorded by DAC on 28 February 2015 on nomination 
basis to M/s Goa Shipyard Limited (GSL) with ToT from a foreign collaborator for Rs. 32640 
Crore. M/s GSL has issued RFP for selection of foreign collaborator fo r ToT on 01 December 
2015 and M/s Kangnam Corporation (RoK) has submitted the bid on 11 January 2016.  
 
Indigenous Aircraft Carrier (IAC -1).  The CCS sanction for construction of India’s first 
Indigenous Aircraft Carrier (IAC-1), at Ms/ CSL Kochi was accor ded in 20 November 2002 and 
GoI sanction was issued in January 2003. The ship would be capable of operating a 
combination of aircraft, including MIG 29K, Kamov 31 and Multi Role Helicopters (MRH). The 
Phase-I contract for construction was concluded with M/ s CSL, Kochi in May 2007 for 
construction up to launching of the vessel. The ship was launched on 12 August 2013, after 
completion of Phase -I activities. The balance activities for delivery of the ship are being 
undertaken in two more phases. Phase -II cove rs the period from launch of the ship till 
completion off DG trials and setting -to-work of Gas Turbine support systems. The contract for 
Phase-II of the IAC was signed on 16 December 2014. The hull fabrication work of IAC was 
completed, and the vessel was undocked in June 2015, post completion of the underwater 
work. Major outfitting work of the ship, up to setting to work of the gas turbine support system 
and commencement of diesel generator set trials, as part of Phase -II scope of work, is 
scheduled for c ompletion by December 2016. The rest of outfitting and trials, till delivery of 
ship, would be undertaken under Phase -III contract.  Revised sanction of the Cabinet 
Committee on Security (CCS) for delivery of ship by December, 2018 at an estimated cost of 
Rs. 19,341 Crore was accorded on 14 July 2014.  The main reasons for delay in delivery 
timelines are listed below:- 
(i)  Ordering of Long Lead Equipment and Design Studies. 
(ii)  Non-Availability of Steel. 
(iii)  Learning Curve for CSL. 
(iv) Delayed ordering of Propulsion System Integration (PSI). 
(v)  Delay in Russian approvals for design and supply of equipment for Aviation 
Facilities Complex (AFC).  
(vi)  Delay in receipt of critical/unique pre-launch indigenous equipment. 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 31) 
 
There is a plan to have 18 submarines in all. However, the existing strength of 
submarines is 15 and these too are 16 -30 years old. Six P -75 submarines are under 
construction at MDL, Mumbai. Also, serviceability is enhanced by Medium Refit Life 

 
 
Certification (MRLC) of submarines. The Committee are dissatisfied with the state of affairs 
with regard to the submarines. Ministry of Defence needs to look into the aspect of 
obsolescence of the submarines. The Committee also desire that a cost benefit analysis 
should also be done in regard to of procurement vis -à-vis refit for extending the life span and 
they be intimated of the outcome of the exercise. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Submarine Force Levels .  The Maritime Capability Perspective Plan (MCPP) 2012 -27 
envisages a force level of 18 conventional submarines. Presently, INhas 14 conventional 
submarines {ten Sindhughosh class (EKM) submarines including Sindhurakshak and four 
Shishumar class (SSK) sub marines}.  The induction of new class of submarines under Project 
75 (Scorpene) has been delayed. The first submarine of this class is now scheduled to be 
commissioned in end 2016.  
 
Status of New Inductions .  The 30 year submarine building plan was approv ed by the 
CCS in 1999 which envisaged that 12 submarines under Phase I be commissioned by 2012. 
However, no new submarine under the plan have been inducted so far. The scheduled 
induction of P 75 submarines (first six submarines under Phase I) has been del ayed and it is 
now expected that first submarine will be inducted by end 2016. The next six submarines to be 
constructed under Phase I would be under Project 75 (I), for which RFP is yet to be issued.  
 
Alternative Options / Cost Benefit Analysis .  The proposal for undertaking MRLC has 
been comprehensively examined) vis -a-vis other options based on the requirements 
emanating from the required force levels and the status of new inductions. The detailed 
justification along with the options considered prior ar riving at decision for Medium Refit Life 
Certificate (MRLC) are as follows: - 
 
(d) Enhanced Number of Submarines – P75/ P75(I).The present force level of 14 
submarines would have become due for de -induction commencing 2016 based on the 
envisaged Service Life.T he most optimistic induction timelines for P75 (wef 2016) and 
P75(I) (wef 2022) were considered. It is, therefore, evident that in the intervening period 
of 2016 -22, MRLC for submarines was required, in addition to planned inductions, in 
order to arrest acute decline in the submarine strength.  
 
(e) New Submarines .  The limited options available included outright purchase of 
new or existing class of submarines. In case submarines of a new class were procured 
(five to six years after contract conclusion), it would have entailed additional cost of 
infrastructure, tra ining, maintenance, etc and therefore this option was not considered 
due to considerable financial implications.  
 

 
 
(f) Procure Used Submarines of Existing Class .  Procurement of second hand 
submarines would have entailed cost of the submarines, refit and moder nisation costs 
besides the uncertainty on availability of such second hand submarines.  
 
MRLC – Only Viable Alternative.  In view of the above mentioned cost benefit analysis 
and inherent time involved in procurement, it was felt that MRLC of six already m odernised 
submarines (four EKM class and two SSK class) is a viable alternative. The refit period for 
each submarine is two to three years and all submarines proposed for MRLC would have 
requisite combat capability. Further, the maintenance periods during the extended life are 
similar to those on an existing submarine and therefore there would be no decrease in the 
period of operational availability of the submarines undergoing MRLC. 
Present Status .  The Contract for the MRLC of the first EKM submarine has been 
concluded at a cost of Rs. 1191 Crore (approx). The submarine refit has commenced in mid -
2016 and would be completed by end 2018. The 2 nd submarine refit would be completed by 
2019. Therefore, submarines would be available in order to arrest acute dec line in the fleet 
strength. 
 
The life of the six submarines post MRLC will be additional 10 years, which will be 
certified by the OEM, on completion of the Refit, thereby meeting the immediate operational 
necessity of the Navy. 
 
(for comments of the Committee on Para Nos. 30  and 31  please see Para 
No. 34 of Chapter -I of the report)  
 
Recommendation (Para  No. 45) 
 
 The committee came to know that there were 291 schemes planned under 12 th plan.  60 
schemes were added during the review (recast) of 12 th plan, thus taking the total number of 
schemes to 351.  Of the 351 schemes, 124 have been dropped , and 191 schemes are 
ongoing/under progress.  Out of these 191 schemes, Acceptance of Necessity (AON) could be 
granted for merely 78  schemes.  As four years o f the 12 th Plan have already elapsed, the 
Committee observe with concern, that procurements/acquisitions are moving at very slow  
pace.  Thus, there is an earnest need for expediting the procedure.  Besides, necessary 
budgetary assistance needs to be provid ed for taking care of the 
procurements/acquisitions. 
Reply of the Government 
 The schemes approved under the Five Year Plans are divided into Annual Acquisition 
Plans. Priority of each scheme is allotted in Annual Acquisition Plans and schemes are 
processed within the contours of the Capital Budget allotment.  Further, while formula ting the 
Five Year Plans, additional schemes are planned to cater for any slippages in processing, thus 

 
 
utilizing the allotted budget. Additionally, even before grant of AoN, a scheme has to be 
progressed following various stages defined in the Defence Pro curement Procedure (DPP) 
vizSoC formulation, SEPC, RFI, ASQR formulation etc. DPP 2016 includes several initiatives 
to ensure faster procurements. Schemes for which AoN have not yet been accorded are being 
progressed for grant of AoN and are at various stages of processing as per the new DPP 2016.    
 
(for comments of the Committee on Para No. 45 please see Para No. 40 of 
Chapter -I of the report)  
 
Recommendation No. 46: 
 
 In all, 29 contracts signed with value above Rs. 50 crore were signed during the 12 th 
Plan period.  Of these, only one could be completed and the remaining areongoing.  Some of 
these projects are very crucial for development of the Air Force.  These include, procurement 
of PC-7 MK II aircraft and associated equipment, procurement of SU 3 0 MKI, procurement and 
infrastructure development of Addl C -130 & J 30 aircraft, attack helicopters etc.  Such delays 
are likely to have the negative implication of derailing the course of development of Air Force.  
The Committee take note of the alarmingl y slow pace of progress of the 
acquisition/procurement projects and desire that decision making and execution needs 
to be more proactive and precise. 
Reply of the Government 
 Out of 30 contracts signed since April 2012, deliveries have been completed for five 
contracts and are under progress for the remaining contracts. The majority of the equipment  
procured through Capital Budget are high value items and are not readily available for delivery . 
These equipment are manufactured/fabricated only after signin g of the contract and are to be 
supplied to Air Force as per delivery schedule agreed in the contract. Mechanisms are in place 
both at IAF and MoD to ensure compliance to the delivery schedule and to deal with the cases 
of delays.   
(for comments of the Committee on Para No. 46  please see Para No. 43 of 
Chapter -I of the report)  
 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 56) 
 Trainer Aircraft held by IAF currently include Basic Trainer Aircraft (BTA), Intermediate 
Jet Trainer (IJT) and Advanced Jet Trainer (AJT).  The st rength of existing trainer aircraft is 
234 as against the sanctioned strength of 388.  Simulators have also been provided for each 
type of aircraft.  IAF has requirement of 183 Basic Trainer Aircraft (BTA).  At present, IAF have 
75 x PC-7 Mk-II aircraft.  The contract is likely to be concluded in the next financial year (2016 -
17).  Additionally, HAL has been tasked to make 70 BTAs (HTT -40) for the balance 
requirement.  The Committee wish that requirement of basic trainer aircraft for Air Force 
be met without any further delay. 

 
 
Reply of the Government 
Development of HTT -40:   First flight of HTT-40 prototype was test flown in May 16. Till now, 
five flights have been test flown. A total of 312 test flights are planned on HTT -40. These test 
sorties will be flown on three different Prototypes.  
The number of trainer aircraft available in IAF is as given below :- 
S.No.  Trainer Aircraft Total No. of 
Aircraft 
(a) Hawk 100 
(b) PC-7 MK-II 75 
(c) Kiran MK-I 92 
(d) Kiran MK-II 42 
 Total 309 
 
 First flight of HTT -40 prototype -1 was carried out on 31/05/2016. First block of flights 
completed with twenty flights covering 40 test points. Envelope expansion is being undertaken.  
Manufacture or PT2 is under progress.  A total of 3122 test flights are projected towards 
certification of HTT-40.  These test sorties will be carried out on three prototypes. 
Recommendation (Para No. 57) 
 The Committee found that the Kiran (IJT) aircraft were scheduled for retirement in 2016 
and some of these have already started retiring.  These were planned to be replaced by the 
HAL built IJT.  However , the IJT which has been under development since 1999 is yet to 
materialize.  In view of the above, the IAF is looking for other available options for Intermediate 
Flying Training.  This could include use of the BTA to also undertake the Intermediate stage  
training syllabus (Stage -II) Flying).  The Committee are dismayed to know that basic trainers 
will be undertaking stage -II training also.  Besides this, HAL in conjunction with Regional 
Centre for Military Airworthiness (RCMA) (A/C) has carried out life e xtension studies on Kiran 
aircraft.  The phase out will now commence from end of 2019.  It is also disturbing that HAL 
had not been able to develop a stage -II trainer aircraft in 17 years time period and therefore, 
the life span of Kiran aircraft is being extend for use till 2019, which otherwise were scheduled 
for phasing out in 2016 itself.  Air Force had been making payments to HAL for last 16 years 
for development of an IJT and at the same time Air Force will now have to pay for carrying out 
life extension exercises on Kiran Aircraft.  The Committee are anguished with this state of 
affairs in regard to IJT.  At one place, the Defence Service is facing budget constraints 
and meanwhile money is being spent since last 16 years without giving the desired 
results.  In any case, the Committee would like that the Ministry of Defence find some 
concrete solution to for induction of IJTs as accidents are recurrent in the Air Force and 
therefore, any sort of insufficiencies in training must be looked into and addressed. 

 
 
Reply of the Government 
 The Pilatus PC -7 Mk-II aircraft has been inducted for Stage -I flying training of ab -initio 
pilots. The feedback indicates that the PC -7 Mk-II with its state -of-the-art cockpit displays and 
avionics has proven to be an excellen t basic trainer aircraft which can also undertake several 
facets of Stage-II training. The Hawk Advanced Jet Trainer is already fully integrated into IAF’s 
training pattern. Both these trainer aircraft are supported by effective simulators. Hence, IAF 
has initiated a process for conducting Two-aircraft flying training pattern on the PC -7 Mk-II and 
HAWK AJT. Limited numbers of flight cadets have already started training on this pattern and 
the numbers will gradually increase with increase in the number of PC-7 Mk-II aircraft. 
        Meanwhile, with regard to the IJT, HAL has taken up continuation of IJT flight testing with 
the intention to update the mathematical model for better matching with the aircraft behavior in 
flight. Static wind tunnel testing on possible configurations under taken at HAL. 
        In view of the imminent retirement of existing trainer aircraft (Kiran) and delay in progress 
of IJT Design & Development (D&D) activities, Air Hqrs has studied the feasibility of conducting 
‘Two Aircraft Type Flying Training’ pattern instead of the currently followed ‘Three Aircraft Type 
Flying Training’ pattern. Most modern Air Forces in the world use two aircraft types for flying 
training wherein trainees graduate to an Advanced Jet Trainer (AJT) after fl ying turbo -prop 
Basic Trainer Aircraft (BTA) at ab initio stage of flying training. In the revised pattern, trainee 
pilots will graduate directly from the BTA (PC -7 Mk II) to Hawk AJT for which the trainees will 
be given increased flying training on both the BTA and AJT. Switching from ‘three Aircraft Type 
Flying Training’ to ‘Two Aircraft Type Flying Training’ pattern provides several advantages 
towards improving the quality of flying training due to increased continuity on same type and 
time saving associ ated with ground training and conversion onto another type. In addition, 
substantial benefits will accrue in terms of cost reduction, improved supply chain management 
and HR management. IAF has introduced two stage aircraft training.  
        A team of HAL  is also studying the feasibility of modifying the Kiran aircraft with new 
engine and advanced systems without changing the aerodynamic configuration and inertia 
distribution. 
 
(for comments of the Committee on Para Nos. 56 and 57 please see Para 
No. 52 of Chapter -I of the report)  
  

 
 
 
CHAPTER V 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS, IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL REPLIES OF THE 
GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NIL 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi;                                                                   Maj Gen  B C Khanduri, AVSM (Retd),  
February, 2017                                     Chairperson,  
Magha, 1938 (Saka)                                                  Standing Committee on Defence 
  

 
 
APPENDIX I 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE  
 
MINUTES OF THE SIXTH SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE   
ON DEFENCE (2016-17) 
 
 The Committee sat on Friday, the 16 th January, 2017 from 1130 hrs. to 1400 hrs. in Main 
Committee Room, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
MAJ GEN B C KHANDURI AVSM (RETD)       -  CHAIRPERSON 
Lok Sabha 
 
2. Shri H.D. Devegowda 
3. Shri G. Hari 
4. Shri Rodmal Nagar 
5. Smt Pratyusha Rajeshwari Singh 
6. Shri Partha Pratim Ray 
7. Smt. Mala Rajya Laxmi Shah  
8. Shri Shrirang Appa Barne 
9. Col Sonaram Choudhary(Retd) 
10. Km Shobha Karandlaje 
11. Shri A P Jithender Reddy 
 
      Rajya Sabha 
  
12. Shri Harivansh 
13. Shri Madhusudan Mistry 
14. Smt. Ambika Soni 
15. Shri Sanjay Raut 
 
 
 
SECRETARIAT 
1. Smt Kalpana Sharma   - Joint Secretary  
2. Shri T G Chandrasekhar            - Director 
3. Smt Jyochnamayi Sinha            - Additional Director  
4. Shri Rahul Singh   - Under Secretary 
  

 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members to the Sitting of the Committee 
and briefed about the Draft reports.  
3. The Committee then took up for consideration the following draft Reports on the action 
taken by the Government on the observations/recommendations contained in the following: 
(i)  Nineteenth Report (16th Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants of the  Ministry of  
Defence(2016-17) on General Defence Budget, Civil  Expenditure of Ministry of 
Defence (Demand No. 20) and Defence  Pension(Demand No. 21); 
(ii)  Twentieth Report (16th Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants of the  Ministry of 
Defence (2016-17) on Army, Navy and Air Force (Demand  No. 22);  
(iii)  Twenty-first Report (16th Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants of the 
 Ministry of Defence (2016 -17) on Ministry of Defence (Miscellaneous) 
 (Demand No. 20); and 
(iv)  Twenty-second Report (16th Lok Sabha) on Demands for G rants of the 
 Ministry of Defence (2016 -17) on Capital Outlay on Defence Services, 
 Procurement Policy and Defence Planning (Demand No. 23). 
4. After deliberation, the Committee adopted the above Reports and authorized the 
Chairperson to finalize the Repor ts in the light of the suggestions as may be received from the 
Members within a week. 
******* 
 A copy of verbatim record of the proceedings has been kept. 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
 
* Does not pertain to this Report. 
  

 
 
APPENDIX II 
ANALYSIS OF THE ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE OBSERVATIONS/ 
RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE TWENTIETH REPORT OF STANDING 
COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE (16TH LOK SABHA) ON ' DEMANDS FOR GRANTS OF 
MINISTRY OF DEFENCE FOR THE YEAR 2016 -17 ON ARMY, NAVY AND AIR  FORCE 
(DEMAND NO 22)' 
1. Total number of recommendations                        71 
2. Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the Government  
(please see Chapter II A): 
 
 Recommendation Nos. 3, 3A, 4, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16,19, 20, 25, 26, 27, 27A, 28, 32,  33, 35, 
36, 37, 37A, 38, 39, 40, 41, 42, 43, 44,  49, 50, 53, 54,  55, 58, 59, 60, 63, 64,  65, 67, 67A 
 
Total :      41   
Percentage:  56 %    
 
3. Observations/Recommendations which have been  accepted by the Government and 
commented upon (please see Chapter II B): 
  
 Recommendation Nos. 1, 2, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9,10,11, 24, 29  46, 48, 51 and 61 
Total :      15 
 
Percentage:    21 % 
 
4. Observations/Recommendations which the Committee  do not desire to pursue in view of the 
replies received from the Government (please see Chapter III): 
 Recommendation Nos. - 21, 22, 34, 39A,  47, 52, 62 and 66 
 
Total :        08 
Percentage:    11 % 
 
5. Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of Government have not been 
accepted by the Committee which require reiteration and commented upon (please see Chapter 
IV): 
Recommendation Nos. - 17, 18, 23, 30, 31, 45, 46 56 and  57 
 
Total :       09 
Percentage:   12 % 
 
6. Observations/Recommendations in respect of which Government have furnished interim 
replies/replies awaited (please see Chapter V): 
 
 Recommendation - Nil 
Total :    00  
   Percentage:  0 % 
 