STANDING COMMITTEE ON
DEFENCE
(2017-2018)
SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA
MINISTRY OF DEFENCE
[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/
Recommendations contained in the Thirtieth Report
(16th Lok Sabha) on Ordnance Factories, Defence
Research   and   Development   Organisation,
Directorate General of Quality Assurance
and National Cadet Corps]
38
THIRTY-EIGHTH REPORT
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
March, 2018/Phalguna, 1939 (Saka)
lR;eso t;rs


THIRTY-EIGHTH REPORT
STANDING COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE
(2017-2018)
(SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA)
MINISTRY OF DEFENCE
[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/
Recommendations contained in the Thirtieth Report
(16th Lok Sabha) on Ordnance Factories, Defence
Research  and   Development  Organisation,
Directorate General of Quality Assurance
and National Cadet Corps]
Presented to Lok Sabha on  13.03.2018
Laid in Rajya Sabha on  13.03.2018
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
March, 2018/Phalguna, 1939 (Saka)
lR;eso t;rs


CoD No. 189
Price : Rs. 73.00
© 2018 B Y LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business
in Lok Sabha (Fifteenth Edition) and printed by M/s. Akashdeep,
New Delhi- 110 002.

CONTENTS
PAGE
(i)
COMPOSITION  OF THE C OMMITTEE  (2017-18) ..................................... (iii)
INTRODUCTION .............................................................................. (v)
Chapter I Report..................................................................... 1
Chapter II Observations/Recommendations which have been
accepted by the Government.................................... 22
Chapter III Observations/Recommendations which the Committee
do not desire to pursue in view of the replies of the
Government............................................................. 42
Chapter IV Observations/Recommendations in respect of which
replies of the Government have not been accepted
by the Committee and which require reiteration......... 43
Chapter V Observations/Recommendations in respect of which
Government have furnished interim replies................. 47
APPENDICES
I. Minutes of the Eighth sitting of the Standing Committee
on Defence (2017-18) held on 12.03.2018................... 48
II. Analysis of Action Taken by the  Government  on  the
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Thirtieth
Report (16th Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on
Defence (2017-18)...................................................... 51

(iii)
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON
DEFENCE (2017-18)
Maj Gen B.C. Khanduri, A VSM (Retd.) — Chairperson
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Dipak Adhikari (Dev)
3. Shri Suresh C. Angadi
4. Shri Shrirang Appa Barne
5. Col. Sonaram Choudhary (Retd.)
6. Shri Thupstan Chhewang
7. Shri H. D. Devegowda
8. Shri Dharambir Singh
9. Shri Jayadev Galla
10. Shri Sher Singh Ghubaya
11. Shri Gaurav Gogoi
12. Dr. Murli Manohar Joshi
13. Km. Shobha Karandlaje
14. Dr. Mriganka Mahato
15. Shri Kalraj Mishra
16. Shri Partha Pratim Ray
17. Shri A. P . Jithender Reddy
18. Shri Rodmal Nagar
19. Shri B. Senguttuvan
20. Smt. Mala Rajya Lakshmi Shah
21. Smt. Pratyusha Rajeshwari Singh
Rajya Sabha
22. Shri K. R. Arjunan
23. Shri A. U. Singh Deo

24. Shri Harivansh
25. Shri Madhusudan Mistry
26. Shri Basawaraj Patil
27. Shri Sanjay Raut
28. Smt. Ambika Soni
#29. Dr. Subramanian Swamy
*30. Shri Vivek K. Tankha
SECRETARIA T
1. Smt. Kalpana Sharma — Joint Secretary
2. Shri T.G . Chandrasekhar — Director
3. Smt. Jyochnamayi Sinha — Additional Director
4. Shri Rahul Singh — Under Secretary
(iv)
# Resigned w.e.f.  16.11.2017
* Resigned w.e.f.  07.03.2018

(v)
INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairperson of the Standing Committee on Defence (2017-18),
having been authorised by the Committee, present this Thirty Eighth Report
of the Committee on 'Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/
Recommendations contained in the Thirtieth Report (16th Lok Sabha) on
Ordnance Factories, Defence Research and Development Organisation,
Directorate General of Quality Assurance and National Cadet Corps'.
2. The Thirtieth Report was presented to Lok Sabha on 9 March,
2017 and laid in Rajya Sabha on 10 March, 2017. The Report contained
28 Observations/Recommendations. The Ministry of Defence furnished
Action Taken Replies on all the Observations/Recommendations on
01 September, 2017.
3. The Report was considered and adopted by the Committee at
their Sitting held on 12 March, 2018.
4. For facility of reference and convenience, Observations/
Recommendations of the Committee have been printed in bold letters in the
Report.
5. An analysis of action taken by the Government on the
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Thirtieth Report of the
Committee is given in Appendix II.
 N
EW D ELHI; MAJ GEN BC KHANDURI, A VSM (RETD),
12 March, 2018 Chairperson,
21 Phalguna, 1939 (Saka) Standing Committee on Defence.

REPORT
CHAPTER  I
This report of the Standing Committee on Defence deals with Action
Taken by the Government on the observations/recommendations contained
in the Thirtieth Report of Standing Committee on Defence (16th Lok Sabha)
on 'Demands for Grants of the Ministry of Defence for the year 2017-18
on Ordnance Factory Board, Defence Research and Development
Organisation, Directorate General of Quality Assurance (DGQA) and National
Cadet Corps (NCC) (Demand No. 20)' which was presented to Lok Sabha
and laid in Rajya Sabha on 09 March, 2017.
2. The Committee's Thirtieth Report (16th Lok Sabha) contained
28 observations/recommendations on the following aspects:
Para No./Nos. Subject
12
Ordnance Factory Board
1 & 2 Budgetary Provisions
3, 4, 5, 6 & 7 Delays in Projects undertaken by
Ordnance Factories Board
8 Under spending on Modernization of
infrastructure
9 Manpower Shortage in Ordnance
Factories
10 Restructuring of Ordnance Factories
Defence Research and Development Organisation
11,12,13,14,15,16,17,18 Budgetary provisions
&19
20 Delays in Projects
21 Technological Road Map
1

2
12
Directorate General Quality Assurance
22, 23 Directorate General Quality Assurance
National Cadet Corps
24, 25, 26, 27 & 28 National Cadet Corps
3. Action Taken Replies have been received from the Government
in respect of all the Observations/Recommendations contained in the Report.
The replies have been examined and categorised as follows:
(i) (a) Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by
the Government:
Para Nos. 2, 4, 5, 7, 8, 17, 18, 19, 21, 22, 23, 24, 25, 26, 27
and 28
(16 Recommendations)
These are included in Chapter II of the Draft Report.
(b) Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by
the Government and are commented upon:
Para Nos. 3, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, and 20
(09 Recommendations)
These are included in Chapter II of the Draft Report.
(ii) Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire
to pursue in view of the replies received from the Government:
Para No. Nil
(00 Recommendations)
These are mentioned in Chapter III of the Draft Report.
(iii) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of
Government have not been accepted by the Committee which require
reiteration and to be commented upon:
Para Nos. 1, 6 and 9
(03 Recommendations)

3
These are included in Chapter IV of the Draft Report.
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which Government have
furnished interim replies/replies awaited:
Para No. Nil
(00 Recommendations)
These are included in Chapter IV of the Draft Report.
4. The Committee desire that the Ministry's response to their
comments made in Chapter I of this Report be furnished to them at
the earliest and in any case not later than six months of the
presentation of this Report.
A. Budgetary Provisions of Ordnance Factories
Recommendation (Para No. 1)
5. The Committee had recommended as under:
'The Committee, while examining the Demands for Grants 2015-16
and 2016-17 had observed that due to delayed sanction of allocations
and cuts imposed at RE stage, the Ordnance Factories Board was
compelled to cut short its committed Liabilities. This resulted in
shortfalls in meeting the financial targets. Ordnance Factories Board
was reportedly increasing the supplies on the basis of the requirements
of the Armed Forces. However, as a consequence of the cuts applied
at RE stage, and mismatch between the projections and actual
allocations, the Board could not produce the equipment as per the
orders placed by Army. Therefore, with a view to addressing the
problem of shortage of ammunition and vehicles, the Committee laid
emphasis on providing adequate budgetary allocation to the Board at
RE stage.'
6. The Ministry in its Action Taken Reply has stated as under:
'OFB being a production organization and requirement of funds is
projected at BE stage in commensurate with the planned supply. At
the time of allocation of fund if there is any reduction in the non-
salary Revenue Budget, the supply gets affected. In the year
2015-16, the original BE projection was Rs. 10,335 crore in the

4
non-salary budget and planned supply was Rs. 13,537 crore. However,
while finalizing the budget, only Rs. 9,015 crore was considered as
ceiling for non-salary revenue budget of OFB. Accordingly, OFB had
worked out the feasible target supply as Rs. 11,266 crore, so as to
restrict the expenditure within the allocated budget.
At the RE stage, the projection was made in October, 2015 for
additional Rs.1,599 crore in non-salary budget against a projected
value of supply figure of Rs.13,552 crore i.e. additional Rs. 2,286
crore over and above BE figure. Only in the month of February
additional allocation was made affecting the final issues to indentors.
With regard to RE 2016-17, Revenue Budget was approved with
minor variation. However, there was a reduction in allocation of fund
in Capital Outlay. Allotment of fund in Capital Outlay was Rs. 715.29
crore against OFB projection of Rs. 1,048.42 crore.
The above position was explained in different forum and as such in
2017-18 fund allocated in the Revenue Budget under Non Salary
segment is almost adequate to achieve the target. Yet, if there is any
need for change in projection due to impact of GST being introduced
from 1st July 2017, the same will be reflected in RE Projection.'
7. The Committee, while examining the Demands for Grants
for previous three years i.e. 2015-16, 2016-17 and 2017-18 had observed
that due to delayed sanction of allocations and cuts imposed at RE
stage, the Ordnance Factories Board was compelled to cut short its
Committed Liabilities thereby resulting in shortfalls in meeting the
financial targets. Therefore, with a view to addressing the problem of
shortage of ammunition and vehicles, the Committee laid emphasis
on providing adequate budgetary allocation to the Board at RE stage.
However, in the Action Taken Reply submitted by the Ministry, OFB
has put forth its grievance stating that being a production organization,
the requirement of funds projected at BE stage is commensurate with
the planned supply. Therefore, at the time of allocation of funds, if
there is any reduction in the non-salary Revenue Budget, the supply
gets affected. In the year 2015-16, the original BE projection was
Rs. 10,335 crore in the non-salary budget and planned supply was
Rs. 13,537 crore. However, while finalizing the budget, only

5
Rs. 9,015 crore was considered as ceiling for non-salary Revenue
Budget of OFB. Accordingly, OFB had worked out the feasible target
supply amounting to Rs. 11,266 crore, so as to restrict the expenditure
within the allocated budget.
Again, at the RE stage, the projection was made in October,
2015 for additional Rs. 1,599 crore in non-salary budget against a
projected value of supply figure of Rs. 13,552 crore i.e. additional
Rs. 2,286 crore over and above BE figure. Only in the month of
February additional allocation was made affecting the final issues to
indentors.
It has been further stated that with regard to RE 2016-17,
Revenue Budget was approved with minor variation. However, there
was a reduction in allocation of Capital Outlay. Allotment of fund in
Capital Outlay was Rs. 715.29 crore against OFB projection of
Rs. 1,048.42 crore. OFB has explained that in 2017-18 fund allocated
in the Revenue Budget under Non Salary segment is almost adequate
to achieve the target. Yet, change in projection due to impact of GST
introduced from 1st July 2017, would be reflected in RE Projection.
The Committee note that OFB has undertaken comprehensive
modernization plan to meet quantitative and qualitative requirements
of Armed Forces. Considering the fact that these plans have long
gestation period and due to lesser allocation, the plans are re-adjusted
based on priorities, thereby, affecting supplies to Armed Forces. The
Committee are of the view that as Ordnance Factories are the major
supplier of ammunition to the Forces, any cut in the budgetary
allocation would affect the productivity, thereby affecting the overall
performance of the Forces. Therefore, they desire that the Ministry
should re-prioritise the allocation and enhance budgetary allocation
to Ordnance Factory Board as per its projection.
B. Delays in projects undertaken by Ordnance Factories Board
Recommendation (Para No. 3)
8. The Committee had recommended as under:
'From the information furnished by the Ministry, the Committee note
that delays which are taking place not only pertain to individual projects
like T-72 variants, spares for T-72 and T-90, 750 engines, Akash

6
Booster and Sustainer, HMX Plant, Pinaka, Ammonium Percolate,
Mine Protected Vehicles (MPVs) and Large Caliber Weapons (LCWs).
Delays are also witnessed in regard to construction of Factories at
Nalanda and Korwa. The Committee also note that Ordnance Factories
depend to a large extent on Military Engineering Services (MES) for
execution of civil works related to their projects. Delay in completion
of civil works by MES is one of the major reasons affecting the
timely completion of the projects. The Committee view this factor,
which is affecting the operational preparedness of Army and other
consumers of Ordnance Factories with serious concern.'
9. The Ministry in its Action Taken Reply has stated as under:
'Present status of individual projects, like T-72 variants, spares for T-
72 and T-90, 750 Engines, Akash Booster and Sustainer, HMX Plant,
Pinaka, Ammonium Percolate, MPVs and LCWs are as under:
(i) T-72 Variants-50 Nos p.a.: Civil Works completed and 96.08%
of major machines have been ordered. Anticipated date of
completion is December, 2017.
(ii) Augmentation of Engines from 350 to 750 Nos p.a.: FMS
M/c which cost-wise contributes to 61% of the total project
will be delivered by Aug, 2017 which is the critical path of this
project. All the other machines were commissioned. Anticipated
date of completion is December, 2017.
(iii) Spares Project (T-72 OH/T-90 Tanks & BMPII): All the major
machines are ordered. Anticipated date of completion is
September, 2017.
(iv) Augmentation of T-90 Tanks form 100 Nos to 140 Nos p.a.:
Project is in progress at HVF, EFA, OLF &MTPF. 40% Civil
works and 86.89% procurement of P&M have been completed.
Anticipated date of completion is December, 2018.
(v) Akash Booster & Sustainer Augmentation Project: After
obtaining the requisite clearance and completing the tree cutting,
the Civil Work was entrusted to MES and is likely to be completed
by August, 2018. Most of the P&M has been received except
critical technological machines viz. Vertical Planetary Mixer

7
(CMTI Bangalore) and 4MeV Linear Accelerator (SAMEER) are
expected by 2019.
(vi) Pinaka Augmentation Project: After obtaining the requisite
clearance and completing the tree cutting, the Civil Work was
entrusted to DRDO and is likely to be completed by October,
2017. Most of the P&M has been received. However, critical
technological machines viz. Vertical Planetary Mixer (CMTI
Bangalore) and 4MeV Linear Accelerator (SAMEER) are expected
by 2019.
(vii) HMX plant: Contract was concluded between M/s DMP, Italy
& Ordnance Factory Bhandara (OFBA) on 10.10.2012 with
PDC is 30 months from effective date of contract
(i.e. 11.02.2016). The Erection is at the final stages and
Commissioning is expected to be completed in September, 2017.
(viii) Ammonium Perchlorate (AP) Plant: The Contract was signed
between GM/HEF & M/s Nuberg, Noida on 18.06.2015 for an
amount 28.50 crores with PDC is 15 months. All P&M are
received at High Explosive Factory (HEF). The erection &
commissioning is at final stages and expected to be completed
by October, 2017.
(ix) OF Nalanda and OF Korwa projects: The delay in projects
were due to reasons beyond control of OFB. These included
major policy decisions viz. blacklisting of M/s IMI, Israel by
MoD resulting in cancellation of contract for supply of Bi-
Modular Charge Systems (BMCS) Plant, non-finalisation of design
of CQB Carbine by the indenter etc. Moreover, the mandated
weapon, i.e. Close Quarters Battle (CQB) Carbine at OF Korwa
project is yet to be finalized by the Army. Moreover, the RFP
has also been retracted by the AHQ on 29.09.2016 and is under
process to be floated afresh. In the absence of CQB Carbine,
factory has undertaken production activities during project stage
itself with alternative items like 12 Bore Pump Action Gun,
components of 7.62 mm MAG, Chromium Plating of Obturating
Spindle for 155 x 45 Cal "Dhanush" etc. since 2014-15, as a
support system for sister ordnance factories. Regarding,

8
acquisition of 39.02 acres of land, final possession was given
on paper to Ordnance Factory Project Korwa (OFPKR) on
19/10/2016. The construction of residential accommodation is
to come up on the said land which is under process.
In order to minimize the delay in execution of civil works, the following
actions have been taken by OFB:
(a) Service of DRDO construction wing is being taken to execute
specialised, high value and time-bound Civil Works.
(b) General Managers (GMs) of Ordnance Factories have been
authorised to issue Admin Approval (AA) for execution of civil
works related to sanctioned projects to be executed through
MES/DRDO/Public Works Organisations. Thus, time will be
saved as factories need not refer to OFB for convening the
sitting of board to finalise the scope of work, scrutiny of the
same and issue of Admin Approval.
(c) Financial Powers for execution of Civil Works departmentally
by GMs have been enhanced from Rs. 25 lakh to Rs. 5 crore
for production buildings.
(d) SOP for civil works has been published in January, 2014. Factories
have been issued guidelines for measures to be taken while
preparing DPR so that variation in the scope of work envisaged
in the DPR and works to be executed remains minimum. Variation
between estimated cost and the AA also remains within
permissible limit.
10. The Committee are happy to note from the Action Taken
Replies furnished by the Ministry that work on individual projects
like T-72 variants including spares for T-72 and T-90, 750 Engines,
Akash Booster and Sustainer Augmentation Project, HMX Plant, Mine
Protected Vehicles (MPVs) and Pinaka Augmentation Project,
Ammonium Perchlorate (AP) Plant has progressed substantially. The
Committee would like to be kept apprised of the status of the projects
at the time of submission of final Action Taken Replies which are
updated within three months of the submission of this report to
Parliament.

9
The Committee have also noted that OFB has taken several
measures i.e. taking the services of DRDO construction wing to execute
specialised, high value and time-bound Civil Works, authorisation of
General Managers (GMs) of Ordnance Factories to issue
Administrative Approval (AA) for execution of civil works related to
sanctioned projects through MES/DRDO/Public Works Organisations,
enhancement of Financial Powers for execution of Civil Works
departmentally by GMs from Rs. 25 lakh to Rs. 5 crore for production
buildings etc. The Committee trust that these measures would help
OFB to complete its projects within the scheduled time. The Committee
would like to be apprised of the outcome of these measures.
Recommendation (Para No. 6)
11. The Committee had recommended as under:
'The Committee have also observed that at the supply stage delays
have been occurring as M/s Hindustan Machine Tools (HMT), one of
the major suppliers of the machine tools to OFB, has not been able
to supply machines to OFB within the delivery schedule. Consequently,
re-tendering has to be resorted to. The Committee desire that the
management of HMT should be called upon by the OFB for meetings
at the higher level and work out strategies so as to avoid delays.'
12. The Ministry in its Action Taken Reply has stated as under:
'Action has been taken for avoiding delay in supply by M/s HMT at
the supply stage. There is no instance of re-tendering any case, due
to inability of M/s HMT in execution of supply order. M/s HMT is
being regularly followed up by different OFs at various levels.
Discussions are also being held at OFB with senior level officials of
M/s HMT. Firm commitment for supply for the financial year is being
obtained in the meeting. Measures to avoid delay are discussed to sort
out probable factors responsible for delay in supply.'
13. Considering the fact that HMT was not able to supply
machine tools to OFB as per the delivery schedule, the Committee
recommended that the management of HMT should be called upon by
the OFB for meetings at the higher level and work out strategies so
as to avoid delays. However, the Action Taken Reply is silent on the

10
modalities formulated and adopted by the OFB to avoid delay. The
Committee suggested 're-tendering' as a means of addressing the
problem of delay in supply by M/s HMT. The Committee reiterate
their recommendation that if a firm commitment for ensuring the
supply during the financial year is not forthcoming, the Ministry
should consider re-tendering so as to avoid further delays in supply
of essential machinery.
C. Manpower in Ordnance Factories
Recommendation (Para No. 9)
14. The Committee had recommended as under:
'The Committee note that Ordnance Factories are suffering from
acute shortage of manpower. The Committee found that against a
sanctioned strength of 1,19,968 technical personnel in various
Ordnance Factories, the actual strength is only 70,810 as on
01.01.2017. This shows that there is a huge gap of almost 40.97 per
cent between the sanctioned and actual strength of technical personnel.
The existing strength of non-technical staff is only 15,083 as against
the sanctioned strength of 22,524. Thus, there is a significant shortfall
of 7,441 personnel in non- technical staff. Similarly, while the
sanctioned strength of Group 'A' officers is 2,981, the actual strength
is just 1,808. Thus, there is a significant shortfall of 1,173 Group 'A'
officers. The Committee are concerned to note that this huge shortage
of manpower in Ordnance Factories, particularly in the technical
category will have a negative impact on manufacturing and ensuring
improvement in the products. Therefore, the Committee recommends
that immediate steps should be taken to bridge the huge gap between
the sanctioned and actual strength in order to achieve manufacturing
of technically advanced products by Ordnance Factories. The
Committee would also like to know as to when the last exercise of
manpower planning was conducted, and whether the implications of
introduction of modern technologies, including that of computerization
of processes on efficiency has been factored for the purpose of
manpower planning.'
15. The Ministry in its Action Taken Reply has stated as under:
'Sanctioned strength of Ordnance Factories is intended towards
catering to peak load requirements of Indian Armed Forces, while,

11
existing strength is maintained for meeting the current load of the
Armed Forces on annual basis. The flexibility is required to help
Indian Ordnance Factories to augment the manpower at a very short
notice in times of exigency and to cater the workload from time to
time.
However, manpower is being sanctioned every year in respect of all
categories of employees based on vacancies available in the recruitment
grade and work load requirement.
The manpower (Gr. B & C) sanctioned after April, 2015 is as follows:
Category Month & Year No. of posts
sanctioned
Industrial Employees (Gr. C) May, 2015 4,895
May, 2016 4,033
Non-Industrial Employees May, 2016 965
(Gr. B & C)
Non-Gazetted Officers (Gr. B) July, 2016 846 (under review)
Gazetted Officers (Gr. B) May, 2015 188
July, 2016 127 (under review)
Total 1 1,054
The total number of posts sanctioned to be filled after April, 2015 is
therefore 11,054.
The action against the above sanctions is in various stages of
recruitment.
The last exercise of manpower planning for Ordnance Factories was
carried out by a Manpower Rationalisation Committee during
2015-16, which duly took into consideration various implications of
introduction of modern technologies and computerization of process
on efficiency. The committee accordingly recommended reduction of
total sanctioned strength including Industrial Employees of Ordnance
Factory Organisation from 1, 63,103 to 1,45,503, which has already
been approved by MoD, with the condition that the operating strength
of the organization will be 1.10 Lakh.'

12
16. The Committee had noted that Ordnance Factories were
suffering from acute shortage of manpower. The Committee found
that against a sanctioned strength of 1,19,968 technical personnel in
various Ordnance Factories, the actual strength was only 70,810 as
on 01.01.2017. This amounts to a gap of almost 40.97 per cent between
the sanctioned and actual strength of technical personnel. The
Committee had also noted that strength of non-technical staff was
only 15,083 as against the sanctioned strength of 22,524. A significant
shortfall in other categories was also noted. Expressing serious concern
over the matter, the Committee had recommended taking immediate
steps so as to bridge the huge gap between the sanctioned and actual
strength and thereby enable manufacturing of technically advanced
products by Ordnance Factories.
The Committee find the Action Taken Reply to be a little vague.
Instead of replying to the recommendation of the Committee on the
measures taken towards increasing the manpower, it has been
mentioned that manpower is being sanctioned each year in respect of
all categories of employees on the basis of vacancies available in the
recruitment grade and work load requirement. It is astonishing to
find that even though the recruitment is being done by calculating
the vacancies, a wide gap of sanctioned and actual manpower continues
to exist. Therefore, the Committee reiterate their recommendation
for taking appropriate steps to enhance the present manpower to
take it to 1.10 lakh, as recommended by the Manpower Rationalisation
Committee.
D. Restructuring of Ordnance Factories
Recommendation (Para No. 10)
17. The Committee had recommended as under:
'The Committee had, in their 9th Report presented earlier, recommended
constitution of a high level Committee to go into the functioning and
organizational structure of Ordnance Factories Board and give its
recommendations on restructuring of Ordnance Factories so as to
make them more professional in meeting the present day requirements.
The Committee, however, regret to note that there are no such plans
for restructuring of Ordnance Factories. The recommendations of

13
the Kelkar Committee, which has laid emphasized on restructuring of
Ordnance Factories, have also not been taken cognizance of by the
Ministry till date. The Committee express their concern on such
casual approach of the Ministry and strongly recommend that credence
should be accorded to the Kelkar Committee recommendations on
restructuring of Ordnance Factories. Action taken in this regard may
be intimated to the Committee.'
18. The Ministry in its Action Taken Reply has stated as under:
'The Kelkar Committee had emphasized on re-structuring of Ordnance
Factories with the aim that it would enable the OFB to refocus on its
areas of operation in flexible manner so as to respond not only to
market but also to strategic interests without compromising the interest
of the labour. The Committee recommended re-structuring of OFB
and to give autonomy to Ordnance Factories in areas like R&D, Raw
Material Selection, V endor Development, Quality Control, and Financial
Accounting etc. Several steps have been taken to provide autonomy
to OFB in the area mentioned above by delegating powers by MoD.
This will help improve efficiency of OFs and OFB will be able to re-
orient itself to face the challenges before it.
In order to achieve the above aim and in order to keep pace with the
rapid technological advancement and changing business scenario, OFB's
role now includes:
• Focus on in-house R&D including process improvement and
design
• Quality Management including Input material inspection
• Customer Diversification
• System Integration of platforms
To achieve the above role, the following activities have been initiated
with the aim of providing greater autonomy in functioning to OFB in
order to improve efficiency together with accountability:
Strengthening of in-House R&D - Focus on in-House R&D has been
identified. Thirteen (13) Ordnance Development Centres have been
opened in various locations/divisions for major products and

14
upgradation activities. To strengthen and consolidate R&D functions,
OFB further plans the following:
(a) Upgrade Infrastructure in ODCs.
(b) Research Assistance from Academic Institutes like IITs etc.
(c) Association with DPSU and DRDO—One MoU has been signed
with BEL.
Increased outsourcing and Vendor development—OFB Procurement
Manual is being revised with emphasis on 'Make in India' and facilitating
long term procurement.
Quality Management including Input material Inspection — OFB is
being entrusted with 1st Party QA functions in addition to existing
responsibility for input material inspection, as part of implementation
of Raman Puri Committee recommendations on QA functions, in the
pilot project mode. The Ministry has considered the recommendations
of Raman Puri Committee with regards to Quality function and
Integration of Finance at factory level.
In the first phase of the pilot project, 6 factories have been selected
where OFs will be responsible and accountable for the quality of their
products and DGQA will be responsible only for FAI (Final Acceptance
Inspection). Based on outcome of the pilot project, decision will be
taken for expanding the scope of the project to other factories under
OFB.
Preparation of Annual accounts as per the proforma of Commercial
Accounting format has been approved by C&AG and the same is
under compilation.
Moreover, action has also been initiated for Integration of Finance at
factory level to provide necessary financial autonomy to OFB.
Full power for procurement of stores has been delegated to OFB in
respect of procurement from foreign sources valuing Rs. 50 crore or
more with the stipulation that Approval-in-Principle shall be obtained
by OFB from DDP.

15
OFB has signed Umbrella MoU with BEL & BEML to develop new
products by harnessing technical expertise of these organisations.
The authority to sign MoU with any DPSU has been delegated to
OFB.
OFB is also planning to enter into collaboration with foreign OEMs
to jointly develop and manufacture state-of-the-art weapons and
ammunitions in the country against RFPs being issued by Service
HQs, in accordance with provisions of DPP-2016 (Para 103 of
Chapter-II)
The successful implementation of the above mentioned measures will
make the OFB more professional, efficient and accountable.'
19. From the Action Taken Reply submitted by the Ministry,
the Committee note that the Ministry has taken several measures to
modernise their Ordnance Factories. The steps proposed include,
strengthening of in-House R&D, Upgrading Infrastructure in Ordnance
Development Centres (ODCs), Research Assistance from Academic
Institutes like IITs etc, Association with DPSU and DRDO. The
Committee also note that OFB Procurement Manual is being revised
with emphasis on 'Make in India' and facilitating long term
procurement. The Committee has been apprised that in the first
phase of the pilot project, 6 factories have been selected where OFs
will be responsible and accountable for the quality of their products
and DGQA will be responsible only for FAI (Final Acceptance
Inspection). Based on outcome of the pilot project, decision will be
taken for expanding the scope of the project to other factories under
OFB. However, the Committee are surprised to find that no timelines
have been drawn to achieve the objective. Therefore, the Committee
desire that whatever steps the Ministry/OFB is taking for improving
the working of Ordnance Factories should be time bound and monitored.
The Committee also desire that outcome of the recommendations
of Raman Puri Committee with regards to Quality function and
Integration of Finance at factory level should be conveyed to them.
The Committee also desire that impact of the steps taken by the
OFB such as preparation of Annual accounts as per the proforma of
Commercial Accounting format which has already been approved by

16
C&AG and signing of Umbrella MoU with BEL & BEML for developing
new products by harnessing technical expertise of these organisations,
for which authority to sign MoU with any DPSU has been delegated
to the OFB should be conveyed to the Committee for their
consideration.
The Committee would also like to know the specific
recommendations of Kelkar Committee which have been implemented
and those that remain to be implemented. The Committee also desire
to be apprised of the timelines as drawn by the Ministry for its
execution.
DEFENCE RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT ORGANISATION
E. Budgetary Provisions of DRDO
Recommendation (Para Nos. 11, 12, 13, 14 & 15)
20. The Committee had recommended as under:
'The Committee note that there has always been a mismatch between
the projected amount and allocations made at the Budget Estimate and
Revised Estimate stages and the actual expenditure incurred. During
the year, 2017-18, as against the projected demand of Rs. 19,935.60
crore, the allocation, as per the BE is Rs. 14,818.74 crore, which
works out to around 74 per cent of the projected amount.
The Committee also note out of the total Defence Budget the share
of DRDO, which was 5.79 per cent in the year 2011-12 was reduced
to 5.34 per cent in 2013-14.The share had slightly improved to 6.5%
in 2014 -15, but was again reduced to 5.91% during 2015-16. This
has been further reduced to 5.46% during the year 2016-17 and
5.41% during the year 2017-18. The Committee in this regard, express
the need for ensuring that the R&D Budget is maintained at a healthy
percentage vis-a-vis the overall Defence Budget.
The Committee note that the budget requirement is projected by
DRDO on the basis of on-going projects/programmes and future
requirements. Nearly 80 percent of total budget is being utilised on
Mission Mode (MM) Projects with deliverables for Armed Forces.
Short falls in budget affect Technology Development (TD), Science

17
and Technology (S&T), Development of Infrastructure and Facilities
(IF), and projects related to Product Support (PS). Due to shortage
of funds, projects and other on-going activities are re-prioritized. The
Committee has been informed in this regard that all possible efforts
are being made to meet the budgetary requirement of DRDO, within
the available resources, so that its flagship programmes do not suffer
due to lack of funds.
DRDO is involved in the development of new technologies & systems
in domain areas of missiles, aeronautical systems, armaments & combat
engineering systems, naval systems, electronics & communication
systems etc. Some of the new weapons systems in testing phase are:
New Generation Anti Radiation Missiles (NGARM), Quick Reaction
Surface to Air Missile (QRSAM), Man-Portable Anti-Tank Guided
Missile (MPATGM), Kautilya, Pralay, Advanced Towed Array Advanced
Towed Artillery Gun Systems (ATAGS), 500 kg. general purpose
bomb, Advanced Light Weight Torpedo, Advance Light Towed Array
Sonar (ALTAS), Medium Power Radar (MPR) Arudhra, Nuclear,
Biological & Chemical (NBC) products to name a few.
Additionally, new projects have also been sanctioned this year for the
development of weapon systems for e.g. Anti Tank Guided Missile
(ATGM) for MBT Arjun Mk-II, corner shot weapon system for pistol
and Under Barrel Grenade Launcher(UBGL), Identification of Friend
or Foe (IFF) Mk XII(A) system variants, Electric Gun and Turret
Drive System (ELEGANT), Akash Mk-1S, Akash New Generation
(NG), Supersonic Missile Assisted Release of Torpedo (SMART),
Anvesha, RudraM-II, Stand-off Anti-tank Guided Missile (SANT).
The total cost of these sanctioned projects is Rs. 2,219 crore. About
65% of DRDO budget is expected to cater to new weapon system
development.'
21. The Ministry in its Action Taken Reply has stated as under:
'The recommendation of Standing Committee on Defence has been
noted. Efforts will be made to ensure that additional allocations sought
by DRDO at supplementary/RE stage are favourably considered by
Ministry of Finance.'

18
22. The Committee are happy to note that their
recommendations have been noted by the Ministry and efforts are
being made to ensure that additional allocations sought by DRDO are
favourably considered by Ministry of Finance. However, the Ministry
have not commented on the decreasing R&D allocation to the DRDO,
which has come down from 5.79 per cent in the year 2011-12 to
5.41% during the year 2017-18. Therefore, the Committee reiterate
their recommendation and urge the Ministry to ensure maintenance
of the R&D Budget at a healthy percentage vis-a-vis  the overall
Defence Budget.
Recommendation (Para No. 16)
23. The Committee had recommended as under:
'Taking into account the aspect of depleting allocation for R&D, both
in absolute and percentage terms, as well as the percentage share of
R&D activities w.r.t. overall R&D Budget, and overall resource crunch
of Government of India, the Committee had, in their report on DFG
(2016-17) desired that the Ministry explore the possibility of
considering the Budget for R&D platform as a sum total of R&D
Budget of DRDO, DPSUs and Ordnance Factories as well as Private
Sector. The Committee have been informed in this regard that the
nature of R&D carried out by DRDO and other agencies have a basic
difference. DRDO focus on basic/applied research and technology
development whereas the focus of the other agencies is more on
production/manufacturing related development. Therefore, requisite
flexibility and autonomy to let them decide their areas of interest has
been felt to be appropriate. The intention behind the view point
expressed by the Committee in this regard is for ensuring that due
care is taken to synergize the R&D activities being undertaken by all
these organizations in order to avoid duplication of R&D and thereby
save on cost & time. The Committee desire that necessary steps be
taken in this direction.'
24. The Ministry in its Action Taken Reply has stated as under:
'It is again reiterated that DRDO focuses on basic/applied research
and technology development whereas the focus of the other agencies
is more on production/manufacturing related development. Therefore,

19
requisite flexibility and autonomy to let them decide their areas of
interest has been felt to be appropriate.
Suitable mechanism will be drafted to ensure that Research and
Development (R&D) efforts between Defence Research and
Development Organisation (DRDO), Ordnance Factory Board (OFB)
and Defence Public Sector Undertakings (DPSUs) are not duplicated.
In this connection, it is proposed that a committee under the
chairmanship of Defence Secretary with Secretary, Defence Production
and Secretary, R&D as members be set up to discuss and review
new R&D projects to be taken by each of these agencies.'
25. The Committee note from the Action Taken Replies
submitted by the Ministry that suitable mechanism would be drafted
to ensure that Research and Development (R&D) efforts between
Defence Research and Development Organisation (DRDO), Ordnance
Factory Board (OFB) and Defence Public Sector Undertakings (DPSUs)
are not duplicated and a Committee under the Chairmanship of
Defence Secretary with Secretary, Defence Production and Secretary,
R&D as members be set up to discuss and review new R&D projects
to be taken by each of these agencies has been proposed. The
Committee welcome the step so taken and desire that they be kept
apprised of the progress in regard to formation of the Committee and
outcome of the working of the said Committee at the earliest.
F. Delays in Projects
Recommendation (Para No. 20)
26. The Committee had recommended as under:
'There are 93 on-going major projects in different DRDO labs. These
include Agni IV , Agni V , Nirbhay Cruise Missile, K-15, Nag, Astra,
AW ACS, Arjun Main Battle Tank, Tejas LCA, etc. The Committee are
dismayed to note that out of 30 major on-going projects (costing
more than Rs. 100 crore), there have been cost revisions in 06 and
time revisions in 16 projects. Besides, 12 projects are more than
5 years old, i.e. sanctioned prior to 2011. While 17 major projects
(costing more than Rs. 100 crore) were sanctioned during the
11th Five Year Plan (April 2002 to March 2007), none has yet been

20
completed. Moreover, three of these have been under closure, one
under short closure and three under evaluation. The Committee are
perturbed to observe that projects being undertaken are not executed
as per schedule and inordinate delay in execution of almost all the
projects has become a common phenomenon. The Committee, while
deploring this attitude, desire that concrete steps be taken to put in
place a time-bound mechanism to oversee project execution so that
they are implemented in a stipulated timeframe. Steps proposed to be
taken in this direction may be intimated to the Committee.'
27. The Ministry in its Action Taken Reply has stated as under:
'The steps taken/being taken by DRDO for expediting the completion
of defence projects are:
• Organisational re-structuring — Decentralization of authority and
responsibility with labs/cluster DGs.
• More stringent review mechanisms in place — various high
level committees including, Steering Committees, Advisory
Committees and Monitoring Boards.
• Involvement of Services & Production Partners during
development process and reviews — To know their views in
advance including finalisation of General Staff Qualitative
Requirements (GSQRs).
• Synergy among stakeholders — Quarterly interactions.
• While undertaking new projects pre-project activity including
preliminary design is being given greater focus.
• The periodicity of review is enhanced for projects which have
taken more than two Probable Date of Completion (PDC)
extensions.'
28. The Committee find that DRDO has taken some measures
for expediting completion of defence projects i.e. de-centralization of
authority and responsibility with labs/cluster DGs, putting stringent

21
review mechanisms in place, involvement of Services & Production
Partners during development process and reviews, Synergy among
stakeholders, greater focus on pre-project activity including
preliminary design and enhancement in periodicity of review for
projects which have taken more than two Probable Dates of Completion
(PDC) extensions.
The Committee hope that the above measure may avoid delays
in execution of projects. The Committee desire that steps should also
be taken so that above measures take off in reality and outcome of
each of the 93 ongoing major projects be intimated to the Committee.

22
CHAPTER II
A. OBSERV ATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HA VE BEEN
ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT
Recommendation (Para No. 2)
The Committee are of the view that the lesser than projected allocation
being made to DGOF would affect the process of modernisation of Ordnance
Factories, which may ultimately result in lower production and may finally
affect the quality of products. Therefore, the Committee strongly feel that
to improve the working of Ordnance Factories, requisite allocation should
be provided to them.
Reply of the Government
OFB has undertaken comprehensive modernization plan to meet
quantitative and qualitative requirements of Armed Forces. These plans
have long gestation period. Due to lesser allocation, the plans are
re-adjusted based on priorities.
Recommendation (Para No. 4)
The Committee note that several problems are encountered at different
stages. At the Tendering Stage, problems arise due to limited vendor base.
Since majority of the machine requirements are for customized Special
Purpose Machines (SPMs)/tooled up machines, very few offers are received.
Therefore, to have better competition, the Tender Opening Date (TOD)
gets extended several times. The Committee also find that there is lack of
indigenous technology base for Forging, Chemical, Metallurgical and
Explosive plants. Thus, in such cases, Global participation is required.
Moreover, since the Plant and Machinery (P&M) Procurement Manual
does not have provision for making advance payment, suppliers of machines
which are cost intensive do not participate in Tender Enquiry (TE).
Reply of the Government
In order to attract genuine bidders/suppliers, provision has been made
in the OFBPM-2013 for advance payment to the extent of 15% of the
contract value for cost intensive/turnkey plant and machinery.

23
Provision has also been made in OFBPM (P&M) — 2013 for floating
Expression of Interest (EOI) and Pre-bid Conference in technology intensive
procurement cases in order to frame broad based specifications in line with
the technologies available in the market.
Efforts are being made to bring the technologies to the country by
means of allowing consortium of Indian vendors with foreign collaborators/
technology partners. Provision for the same has already been made in
OFBPM-2013.
Recommendation (Para No. 5)
The Committee desires that the Ministry should try to develop the
indigenous industry for Forging, Chemical, Metallurgical and Explosive
plants, and introduce the facility of 'advance payment' for reputed business
houses, in respect of which there is no provision as of now.
Reply of the Government
Provision has been made in the OFBPM (P&M) — 2013 for advance
payment to the extent of 15% of the contract value for cost intensive/
turnkey Plant & Machinery and efforts are being made to bring the
technologies to the country by means of allowing consortium of Indian
vendors with foreign collaborators/ technology partners.
Recommendation (Para No. 7)
The Committee note that against the required investment of Rs. 2,394
crore in 2016, a substantial amount remained to be expended / invested.
Also, during the examination of Demands for Grants of the previous years
including 2016-17, the Committee had observed that augmentation of the
capacity for manufacturing of T-90 tanks from 100 to 140 Nos. was a
prioritized item. However, the process has been delayed. The Committee
find that lack of planning and co-ordination with the users as the main
reason of delay. The Committee desire that the Ministry/OFB should give
a serious thought to this matter and take appropriate action so as to avoid
such delays at any cost.
Reply of the Government
Sanctioned investment of Rs. 2,394 crore is for the following six

24
projects and has to be spread over the total span of execution of these
projects:
(i) Creation of capacity for T-72 variants,
(ii) Augmentation of capacity of Engines for 'A' vehicles,
(iii) Spares for O/H of T-72 & T-90 Tanks and O/H of BMP-II
engines,
(iv) Augmentation of capacity for T-90 Tanks,
(v) Augmentation of capacity of Large Calibre Weapons, and
(vi) Setting up of HMX Plant at OF Bhandara.
As on date, cumulative expenditure of Rs. 967 crore has been incurred
against the above mentioned projects.
Original sanctioned cost of the project was Rs. 971.36 crore in 2011.
Based on directives from MOD in December, 2013, to review the demand
of Army, investment on various projects were prioritised. The scope of
T-90 Augmentation project was restricted to Rs. 186 crore due to budgetary
constraints and non-availability of indent from the Indian Army. On receipt
of confirmation from the Indian Army, restriction was withdrawn in October,
2014 and procurement action as per original scope has been initiated by
Factories. During the period of restriction, all the tenders which were in
advanced stages were dropped and framing of specifications and other
technical inputs were kept on hold. After receipt of clearance, all the cases
were initiated afresh.
Project Augmentation of capacity of T-90 Tanks from 100 to 140
Nos., is being reviewed on monthly basis at factory level and Armoured
Vehicle Headquarters. Review is also done quarterly in Board meeting.
Based on the present status, the project is likely to be completed by
December, 2018.
It is further submitted that due to competitive bidding process for
procurement of plant and machinery, above projects are likely to be
completed within sanctioned cost of the project.

25
Recommendation (Para No. 8)
Modernization of infrastructure is a continuous process which needs
to be undertaken with a view to update the plants and machineries matching
both the qualitative and quantitative requirements of the products projected
in the prospective plans. During the years, 2011-12 to 2015-16, the Capital
Outlay for modernization programme was Rs. 5110.38 crore, against which
the actual expenditure was Rs. 5044.70 crore. Thus, Rs. 65.68 crore
remained unutilized. This is despite the fact that Ordnance Factories Board
manages 41 manufacturing units where the amount could have been utilized.
During the year 2016-17, Rs. 735.68 crore has been provided. The BE for
the year 2017-18 is Rs. 803.68 crore. The delays in respect of many
important projects like Pinaka Rocket System, T-90 tanks etc. have resulted
due to delay in augmentation of capacity for manufacturing by the Ordnance
Factories Boards. The Committee are not happy with the pace of
modernisation and under-utilization of funds by Ordnance Factories Board.
The Committee opine that optimum utilization should also be given due
importance and desire that appropriate steps should be taken to achieve the
goals of modernisation.
Reply of the Government
The allocated budget of Rs. 735.68 crore for 2016-17 was subsequently
revised to Rs. 715.29 crore against which Rs. 716.66 crore has been
expended. The following steps taken by OFB towards optimum utilization
of allotted fund:
(i) Utilisation of fund is being given due importance at OFB. System
has been put in place for periodic review and monitoring the
progress of projects under the chairmanship of Member/Chairman
to expedite the progress of projects.
(ii) Provision of advance payment has been introduced in OFBPM-
P&M 2013.
(iii) In order to execute civil works without time over run, in
Government sanctioned projects, measures have been taken as
brought out against point No. 3.
(iv) Recently, MoD has delegated full powers to the extent of powers
available with MoD for procurement of plant and machinery,

26
subject to obtaining Acceptance In Principle (AIP) from MoD
for case valuing more than Rs. 10 crore.
It is further mentioned that the allocated budget of Rs. 803.68 crore
(approved BE) for 2017-18 shall be fully utilized.
Recommendation (Para No. 17)
The Committee also note that DRDO's products and systems are
being developed with partnership of more than 1000 industries including
Small and Medium Enterprises (SMEs). In view of the limitation of funds
available with DRDO, the Committee had in their report of DFG (2016-17),
emphasised that DRDO needs to mainly play a role in assisting in design
and development of the products taken up for manufacture, without spending
from its own budget. The Committee note in this regard that DRDO has
pursued the Committee's recommendation in the right earnest in certain
cases like the case of development of Rustom-II.
Reply of the Government
The Committee's recommendation will be pursued in other cases
also.
Recommendation (Para No. 18)
It has also been emphasized in 'Procedures for Project Formulation
and Management (PPFM), 2016' that a Lab should:
(a) Identify possible production agencies at the stage of formulation
of project proposal, if needed, under the proposed project/
programme (for Mission Mode projects); and
(b) Identify Development Partners (DPs), if required, and take them
into loop right from beginning of project execution.
Recommendation (Para No. 19)
The Committee desires that DRDO should not limit this policy to one
or two projects. Rather it should be extended to more projects. The
Procedures for Project Formulation & Management (PPFM) 2016 should

27
be strictly implemented. The Committee desire to be informed about the
measures taken in this direction.
Reply of the Government
Defence Research and Development Organisation (DRDO) currently
has 300 on-going projects (excluding strategic projects) amounting to
approximately Rs. 68,306 crore (including User share) and all these projects
including new projects to be taken by the labs have been mandated to
follow the guidelines of PPFM 2016. The procedure is strictly implemented
at all levels and all projects are critically checked for PPFM compliance.
During the course of project, various review meetings are held which
check the progress of the project in a timely manner.
Out of these, about 80% of the cost of the project is dedicated to
Mission Mode (MM) projects which necessarily have involvement of
identified Production Agency (PA)/Development Partner (DP) in it. The
question of involving a PA/DP in MM projects is being actively encouraged
especially in cases where firm Qualitative Requirements (QRs) and Minimum
Order Quantity (MOQ) has been specified by the User. However, DRDO
cannot involve a DP in its Science & Technology (S&T) and Technology
Demonstration (TD) projects where there is no firm clarity on number
requirement from the Services.
Recommendation (Para No. 21)
The Committee note that as per the recommendations made by the
Committee, given in their 20th Report on DFG (2016-17), DRDO has
drawn out a Technology Road Map given by labs/clusters for a duration
of 10 years in blocks of 5 years each i.e. 2016-20. The Committee desire
that DRDO will strictly follow the road map so drawn. The Committee also
desire that they may be informed of the outcome.
Reply of the Government
The Technology Roadmap has been drawn up for DRDO in
August, 2016 which exists in the form of Technology Roadmap for duration
of 10 years in blocks of 5 years each i.e. 2016–20 and 2021–25. Details
are given as under:

28
Indicative Technology Roadmap of DRDO
Technologies Planned for Technologies Planned for
2016-2020 2021-2025
12
• Stealth Wing Flying Testbed • Liquid Fuel Ramjet Technology
• AESA based Integrated Sensor • Supersonic Target
Suite • ELINT     Satellite    Cluster
• Advanced Warhead Technologies Tech nologies
• Multifunctional Moisture Barrier • Stealth Airframe Technology &
• High Performance Explosive Materials
Compositions • High Performance Textiles for
• Advanced Thermobaric Decelerators and Inflatables
Explosive Compositions • High Efficiency High
• Swarm Robotics T emperature Turbine
• Mobile Transhorizon • Multi-hopping Smart Land
Communication Munitions
• Compact Airborne Multisensor • Next Generation Halon
Optronic Payload Alternatives
• Digital Active Phased Array • Integrated Advanced Datalink
• Solid Oxide Fuel Cell Stack Technologies
• Directional Sonobuoy • Next Gen Communication
• Compact High Performance Technologies
Imaging • Cyber Electronic Warfare
• Magnetic Signature Management Technologies
• Powder Metallurgy Nickel • Optronic Warfare Technologies
based Superalloy • Advanced Photonics
• Aeroengine Discs • Hybrid UV/IR LIDAR
• Advanced Functional Materials • Multi Static Air Defence Radar
• Multifunctional Hybrid technology
Nanocomposites • Wide Area Surveillance

29
12
• Advanced Nanofluid Technologies
Technologies • Materials for Kinetic Energy
• X-band Pulsed Helix TWT Penetrators
• GaN HEMT MMICs • Quantum Computing
• Terrahertz Electronics
• Semantic Big Data Analytics
• Radiation Countermeasures
DRDO's five year plan projections covering Mission Mode (MM),
Technology Demonstration (TD) and Science & Technology (S&T) projects
from the Technology Roadmap have been drawn from the roadmap and we
intend to take up a lot of technologies in the coming five years. Labs/
cluster has started taking projects in this direction, some of these include:
Stealth Wing Flying Testbed (SWiFT), AESA based Integrated Sensor Suite
(ABISS), Advanced Warhead Technologies, Multifunctional Moisture Barrier,
Solid Oxide Fuel Cell (SOFC) Stack Technology, Directional Sonobuoy,
Magnetic Signature Management, Powder Metallurgy Nickel based Super
alloy Aero engine Discs, Advanced Functional Materials, Multifunctional
Hybrid Nanocomposites, Advanced Nanofluid Technologies, X-band Pulsed
Helix TWT, GaN HEMT MMICs. Outcome of these projects will be visible
in coming years.
Recommendation (Para Nos. 22 & 23)
Directorate General of Quality Assurance (DGQA) provides Quality
Assurance (QA) cover for the entire range of Arms, Ammunitions,
Equipments and Stores supplied to Armed Forces. The organisation is also
responsible for import substitution and associates with Defence Research
and Development Organisation (DRDO) in the development projects. It also
ensures Documentation, Codification and Standardisation Action for
minimizing the variety of components / equipments. The other services
rendered are promotion of small scale industries, Post Procurement Services,
Defect Investigations.

30
The Committee note that for the year 2017-18, Director General of
Quality Assurance (DGQA) has been allocated Rs. 1,171.51 crore against
the projection of Rs. 1,307.14 crore. There is a shortfall of Rs. 135.63
crore. The Committee also note that DGQA carries out inspection of Defence
stores supplied by Ordnance Factories, DPSUs, Trade Firms and ex-import.
These inspections are done at various stages of manufacture and at Final
Acceptance stage. On an average, DGQA carries out approx. 18,000
inspections per month. Further, whenever a new system is inducted into
the Army, DGQA is an integral part of the process and plays a pivotal role
in all stages of induction right from the General Staff Qualitative Requirement
(GSQR) formulation stage till the Joint Receipt Inspection of the store.
Since there is a shortfall of Rs. 135.63 crore in budgetary allocation against
the projection of DGQA, the Committee would like to know whether any
compromises have been made or are likely to be made in the functioning
of DGQA due to reduced budgetary allocation and if any compromises are
made, then, the Committee may be informed of its consequences.
Reply of the Government
No compromises have been made in the functioning of the DGQA
due to shortfall of Rs. 135.63 crore in the budgetary allocation against the
projection as on date. Shortfall of funds will be projected as an additional
budgetary requirement at different stages i.e. first supplementary/second
supplementary/Revised Estimates (RE) (2017-18) Stage after ascertaining
the requirement.
Recommendation (Para No. 24)
The Committee note that for 'Revenue Works' in 2017-18, against the
projection of NCC of Rs. 19.09 crore for rentals, tariff, carry over works
& Spl. Works Revenues, the allocation for NCC is Rs. 10.00 crore. As the
pending Rentals and Tariffs are to be paid annually, non-Payment may lead
to litigation, committed liabilities may not be met and no new revenue
works would be taken up in the financial year 2017-18. Therefore, the
Committee recommend that the allocation for the NCC (Revenue Works)
should be increased to Rs. 19.09 crore as projected by the NCC to fulfil
its requirements and to ensure proper functioning of the NCC.

31
Recommendation (Para No. 25)
The Committee also note that for the financial year 2017-18 under
Revenue (Non-Salary) Head, against the BE projection of Rs. 420.76 crore
for NCC, the allocation for the year 2017-18 is Rs. 227.00 crore. There
is a significant shortfall of Rs. 193.76 crore. This will have an adverse
impact on training activities, and could lead to default in making allied
payments. Therefore, the Committee recommend that this shortfall of
Rs. 193.76 crore should be met so that proper functioning of the NCC
could be ensured.
Recommendation (Para Nos. 26 and 27)
Further, the Committee note that for the financial year 2017-18,
against the BE projection of Rs. 68.73 crore for infrastructure and MLs,
an allocation of Rs. 12.40 crore has been made under Capital Head. There
is a huge shortfall of Rs. 56.33 crore. This may adversely affect on the
Capital Work Projects (sanctioned / in progress) and Contractual Obligations
(Microlights). The infrastructure projects require deposit of funds. The
execution of infrastructure projects will be stalled. The Committed liability
may not be honoured and it would lead to breach of sovereign projects.
Therefore, the Committee recommends that the projection of NCC of
Rs. 68.73 crore be taken care of and the shortfall of Rs. 56.33 crore be
met so that the Capital Work Projects which are sanctioned/in progress,
contractual obligations made and execution of infrastructure projects could
be completed within stipulate time.
National Cadet Corps (NCC) was established under the NCC Act,
1948. Today it has presence in 683 districts of the country with authorised
cadet strength of 15 lakh. NCC aims at creating a pool of organized, trained
and motivated youth with leadership qualities in all walks of life, so that
they become useful citizens and serve the Nation with all their might
regardless of the career they choose. According to the data furnished by
the Ministry, the total number of educational institutions at present covered
by NCC is 10,472 Schools and 5546 Colleges. In all, 4244 schools and
2383 colleges are presently waitlisted. The Committee also noted that 01

32
Group Headquarter, 07 Army Units and 07 Naval Units were raised in the
third phase. This has raised the number of NCC Headquarters to 97 and
NCC Units to 814. The Total strength of NCC cadets has increased to
12,81,298 which includes 3,64,084 girl cadets. The ongoing Expansion
Plan is likely to be completed by 2018-19 and would reduce the current
waiting list marginally as this expansion is based on priorities laid down by
the Government.
Reply of the Government
The recommendation of Standing Committee on Defence has been
noted. Additional requirements projected by NCC will be forwarded to
Ministry of Finance at Supplementary/RE stage for favourable consideration.
Recommendation (Para No. 28)
The Committee are of the view, in the current times, when our
Defence Services are confronting the problem of shortage of personnel and
staff, inducting more schools and colleges into NCC, an institution aiming
at developing character, comradeship, discipline, a secular outlook, the
spirit of adventure and ideals of selfless service amongst young citizens, is
crying need of the hour. Therefore, the Committee recommend that the
expansion plan of the NCC be extended and adequate budgetary and logistic
support from the Ministry be provided. The Committee may be apprised of
the steps taken in this regard. They also desire that the State Governments
should encourage NCC in their respective States and make necessary
resources available.
Reply of the Government
There is an ongoing expansion plan for increase in the authorised
NCC cadet strength by two lakh NCC cadets (from 13 lakh to 15 lakh)
which is expected to be completed by the year 2020. Further expansion
plan of NCC is recommended only after assessing and addressing the
current deficiencies in terms of clothing, infrastructure, training facilities,
manpower and funding.
NCC makes continuous efforts through State NCC Directorates to
reach out to the State Governments for necessary encouragement, support
and funding of NCC activities.

33
(B) OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN
ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT AND ARE COMMENTED
UPON
Recommendation (Para No. 3)
From the information furnished by the Ministry, the Committee note
that delays which are taking place not only pertain to individual projects like
T-72 variants, spares for T-72 and T-90, 750 engines, Akash Booster and
Sustainer, HMX Plant, Pinaka, Ammonium Percolate, Mine Protected Vehicles
(MPVs) and Large Caliber Weapons (LCWs). Delays are also witnessed in
regard to construction of Factories at Nalanda and Korwa. The Committee
also note that Ordnance Factories depend to a large extent on Military
Engineering Services (MES) for execution of civil works related to their
projects. Delay in completion of civil works by MES is one of the major
reasons affecting the timely completion of the projects. The Committee
view this factor, which is affecting the operational preparedness of Army
and other consumers of Ordnance Factories with serious concern.
Reply of the Government
Present status of individual projects, like T-72 variants, spares for
T-72 and T-90, 750 engines, Akash Booster and Sustainer, HMX Plant,
Pinaka, Ammonium Percolate, MPVs and LCWs are as under:
(i) T-72 Variants-50 Nos p.a.: Civil Works completed and 96.08%
of major machines have been ordered. Anticipated date of
completion is Dec., 2017.
(ii) Augmentation of Engines from 350 to 750 Nos p.a.: FMS
M/c which cost wise contributes to 61% of the total project
will be delivered by Aug, 2017 which is the critical path of this
project. All the other machines were commissioned. Anticipated
date of completion is Dec., 2017.
(iii) Spares Project (T-72 OH/T-90 Tanks & BMPII): All the major
machines are ordered. Anticipated date of completion is Sep.,
2017.
(iv) Augmentation of T-90 Tanks form 100 Nos to 140 Nos p.a.:
Project is in progress at HVF, EFA, OLF&MTPF. 40% Civil

34
works and 86.89% procurement of P&M have been completed.
Anticipated date of completion is Dec., 2018.
(v) Akash Booster &Sustainer Augmentation Project: After
obtaining the requisite clearance and completing the tree cutting,
the Civil Work was entrusted to MES and is likely to be completed
by August, 2018. Most of the P&M has been received except
critical technological machines viz. Vertical Planetary Mixer
(CMTI Bangalore) and 4MeV Linear Accelerator (SAMEER) are
expected by 2019.
(vi) Pinaka Augmentation Project: After obtaining the requisite
clearance and completing the tree cutting, the Civil Work was
entrusted to DRDO and is likely to be completed by October,
2017. Most of the P&M has been received however,
critical technological machines viz. Vertical Planetary Mixer
(CMTI Bangalore) and 4MeV Linear Accelerator (SAMEER) are
expected by 2019.
(vii) HMX plant: Contract was concluded between M/s DMP, Italy
&Ordnance Factory Bhandara (OFBA) on 10.10.2012 with PDC
is 30 months from effective date of contract ( i.e. 11.02.2016).
The erection is at the final stages and Commissioning is expected
to be completed in September, 2017.
(viii) Ammonium Perchlorate (AP) Plant: The Contract was signed
between GM/HEF & M/s Nuberg, Noida on 18.06.2015 for an
amount 28.50 crores with PDC is 15 months. All P&M are
received at High Explosive Factory (HEF). The erection &
commissioning is at final stages and expected to be completed
by October, 2017.
(ix) OF Nalanda and OF Korwa Projects: The delay in projects
were due to reasons beyond control of OFB. These included
major policy decisions viz. blacklisting of M/s IMI, Israel by
MoD resulting in cancellation of contract for supply of
Bi-Modular Charge Systems (BMCS) Plant, non-finalisation of
design of CQB Carbine by the indenter, etc. Moreover, the
mandated weapon, i.e. Close Quarters Battle (CQB) Carbine at
OF Korwa Project is yet to be finalized by the Army. Moreover,

35
the RFP has also been retracted by the AHQ on 29.09.2016 and
is under process to be floated afresh. In the absence of CQB
Carbine, factory has undertaken production activities during
project stage itself with alternative items like 12 Bore Pump
Action Gun, components of 7.62 mm MAG, Chromium Plating
of Obturating Spindle for 155 x 45 Cal "Dhanush" etc. since
2014-15, as a support system for sister ordnance factories.
Regarding, acquisition of 39.02 acres of land, final possession
was given on paper to Ordnance Factory Project Korwa (OFPKR)
on 19/10/2016. The construction of residential accommodation
is to come up on the said land which is under process.
In order to minimize the delay in execution of civil works, the following
actions have been taken by OFB:
(a) Service of DRDO construction wing is being taken to execute
specialised, high value and time-bound Civil Works.
(b) General Managers (GMs) of Ordnance Factories have been
authorised to issue Admin Approval (AA) for execution of civil
works related to sanctioned projects to be executed through
MES/DRDO/Public Works Organisations. Thus, time will be
saved as factories need not refer to OFB for convening the
sitting board to finalise the scope of work, scrutiny of the same
and issue of Admin Approval.
(c) Financial Powers for execution of Civil Works departmentally
by GMs have been enhanced from Rs. 25 lakh to Rs. 5 crore.
for production buildings.
(d) SOP for civil works has been published in January 2014. Factories
have been issued guidelines for measures to be taken while
preparing DPR so that variation in the scope of work envisaged
in the DPR and works to be executed remains minimum. Variation
between estimated cost and the AA also remains within
permissible limit.
Recommendation (Para No. 10)
The Committee had, in their 9th Report presented earlier, recommended
constitution of a high level Committee to go into the functioning and

36
organizational structure of Ordnance Factories Board and give its
recommendations on restructuring of Ordnance Factories so as to make
them more professional in meeting the present day requirements. The
Committee, however, regret to note that there are no such plans for
restructuring of Ordnance Factories. The recommendations of the Kelkar
Committee, which has laid emphasized on restructuring of Ordnance
Factories, have also not been taken cognizance of by the Ministry till date.
The Committee express concern on such casual approach of the Ministry
and strongly recommends that credence should be accorded to the Kelkar
Committee recommendations on restructuring of Ordnance Factories. Action
taken in this regard may be intimated to the Committee.
Reply of the Government
The Kelkar Committee had emphasized on re-structuring of Ordnance
Factories with the aim that it would enable the OFB to refocus on its areas
of operation in flexible manner so as to respond not only to market but also
to strategic interests without compromising the interest of the labour. The
Committee recommended re-structuring of OFB and to give autonomy to
Ordnance Factories in areas like R&D, Raw Material Selection, Vendor
Development, Quality Control, and Financial Accounting etc. Several steps
have been taken to provide autonomy to OFB in the area mentioned above
by delegating powers by MoD. This will help improve efficiency of OFs
and OFB will be able to re-orient itself to face the challenges before it.
In order to achieve the above aim and in order to keep pace with the
rapid technological advancement and changing business scenario, OFB's
role now includes:
• Focus on In-house R&D including process improvement and
design
• Quality Management including Input material inspection
• Customer Diversification
• System Integration of platforms
To achieve the above role, the following activities have been initiated
with the aim of providing greater autonomy in functioning to OFB in order
to improve efficiency together with accountability:

37
Strengthening of in-House R&D- Focus on in-House R&D has been
identified. Thirteen (13) Ordnance Development Centers have been opened
in various locations/divisions for major products and up-gradation activities.
To strengthen and consolidate R&D functions, OFB further plans the
followings:
(a) Upgrade Infrastructure in ODCs
(b) Research Assistance from Academic Institutes like IITs etc.
(c) Association with DPSU and DRDO-One MoU has been signed
with BEL. Increased outsourcing and Vendor development -OFB
Procurement Manual is being revised with emphasis on 'Make
in India' and facilitating long term procurement.
Quality Management including Input material Inspection-OFB is being
entrusted with 1st Party QA functions in addition to existing responsibility
for input material inspection, as part of implementation of Raman Puri
Committee recommendations on QA functions, in the pilot project mode.
The Ministry has considered the recommendations of Raman Puri Committee
with regards to Quality function and Integration of Finance at factory level.
In the first phase of the pilot project, 6 factories have been selected
where OFs will be responsible and accountable for the quality of their
products and DGQA will be responsible only for FAI (Final Acceptance
Inspection). Based on outcome of the pilot project, decision will be taken
for expanding the scope of the project to other factories under OFB.
Preparation of Annual accounts as per the proforma of Commercial
Accounting format has been approved by C&AG and the same is under
compilation.
Moreover, action has also been initiated for Integration of Finance at
factory level to provide necessary financial autonomy to OFB.
Full power for procurement of stores has been delegated to OFB in
respect of procurement from foreign sources valuing Rs. 50 crore or more
with the stipulation that Approval-in-Principle shall be obtained by OFB
from DDP .
OFB has signed Umbrella MoU with BEL & BEML to develop new
products by harnessing technical expertise of these organisations. The
authority to sign MoU with any DPSU has been delegated to OFB.

38
OFB is also planning to enter into collaboration with foreign OEMs
to jointly develop and manufacture state-of-the-art weapons and ammunitions
in the country against RFPs being issued by Service HQs, in accordance
with provisions of DPP-2016 (Para 103 of Chapter-II)
The successful implementation of the above mentioned measures will
make the OFB more professional, efficient and accountable.
Recommendation (Para Nos. 11, 12, 13, 14 &15)
20. The Committee had recommended as under:
'The Committee note that there has always been a mismatch between
the projected amount and allocations made at the Budget Estimate and
Revised Estimate stages and the actual expenditure incurred. During
the year, 2017-18, as against the projected demand of Rs. 19,935.60
crore, the allocation, as per the BE is Rs. 14,818.74 crore, which
works out to around 74 per cent of the projected amount.
The Committee also note out of the total Defence Budget the share
of DRDO, which was 5.79 per cent in the year 2011-12 was reduced
to 5.34 per cent in 2013-14.The share had slightly improved to 6.5%
in 2014 -15, but was again reduced to 5.91% during 2015-16. This
has been further reduced to 5.46% during the year 2016-17 and
5.41% during the year 2017-18. The Committee in this regard, express
the need for ensuring that the R&D Budget is maintained at a healthy
percentage vis-a-vis the overall Defence Budget.
The Committee note that the budget requirement is projected by
DRDO on the basis of on-going projects/programmes and future
requirements. Nearly 80 per cent of total budget is being utilised on
Mission Mode (MM) Projects with deliverables for Armed Forces.
Short falls in budget affect Technology Development (TD), Science
and Technology (S&T), Development of Infrastructure and Facilities
(IF), and projects related to Product Support (PS). Due to shortage
of funds, projects and other on-going activities are re-prioritized. The
Committee has been informed in this regard that all possible efforts
are being made to meet the budgetary requirement of DRDO, within
the available resources, so that its flagship programmes do not suffer
due to lack of funds.

39
DRDO is involved in the development of new technologies & systems
in domain areas of missiles, aeronautical systems, armaments & combat
engineering systems, naval systems, electronics & communication
systems, etc. Some of the new weapons systems in testing phase are:
New Generation Anti Radiation Missiles (NGARM), Quick Reaction
Surface to Air Missile (QRSAM), Man-Portable Anti-Tank Guided
Missile (MPATGM), Kautilya, Pralay, Advanced Towed Array Advanced
Towed Artillery Gun Systems (ATAGS), 500 kg general purpose bomb,
Advanced Light Weight Torpedo, Advance Light Towed Array Sonar
(ALTAS), Medium Power Radar (MPR) Arudhra, Nuclear, Biological
& Chemical (NBC) products to name a few.
Additionally, new projects have also been sanctioned this year for the
development of weapon systems for e.g. Anti-Tank Guided Missile
(ATGM) for MBT Arjun Mk-II, corner shot weapon system for pistol
and Under Barrel Grenade Launcher(UBGL), Identification of Friend
or Foe (IFF) Mk XII(A) system variants, Electric Gun and Turret
Drive System (ELEGANT), Akash Mk-1S, Akash New Generation
(NG), Supersonic Missile Assisted Release of Torpedo (SMART),
Anvesha, RudraM-II, Stand-off Anti-tank Guided Missile (SANT).
The total cost of these sanctioned projects is Rs. 2,219 Cr. About
65% of DRDO budget is expected to cater to new weapon system
development.'
21. The Ministry in its Action Taken Reply has stated as under:
'The recommendation of Standing Committee on Defence has been
noted. Efforts will be made to ensure that additional allocations sought
by DRDO at supplementary/RE stage are favourably considered by
Ministry of Finance.
Recommendation (Para No. 16)
Taking into account the aspect of depleting allocation for R&D, both
in absolute and percentage terms, as well as the percentage share of R&D
activities w.r.t overall R&D Budget, and overall resource crunch of
Government of India, the Committee had, in their report on DFG
(2016-17) desired that the Ministry explore the possibility of considering
the Budget for R&D platform as a sum total of R&D Budget of DRDO,
DPSUs and Ordnance Factories as well as Private Sector. The Committee

40
have been informed in this regard that the nature of R&D carried out by
DRDO and other agencies have a basic difference. DRDO focus on basic/
applied research and technology development whereas the focus of the
other agencies is more on production/manufacturing related development.
Therefore, requisite flexibility and autonomy to let them decide their areas
of interest has been felt to be appropriate. The intention behind the view
point expressed by the Committee in this regard is for ensuring that due
care is taken to synergize the R&D activities being undertaken by all these
organizations in order to avoid duplication of R&D and thereby save on
cost and time. The Committee desire that necessary steps be taken in this
direction.
Reply of the Government
It is again reiterated that DRDO focuses on basic/applied research
and technology development whereas the focus of the other agencies is
more on production/manufacturing related development. Therefore, requisite
flexibility and autonomy to let them decide their areas of interest has been
felt to be appropriate.
Suitable mechanism will be drafted to ensure that Research and
Development (R&D) efforts between Defence Research and Development
Organisation (DRDO), Ordnance Factory Board (OFB) and Defence Public
Sector Undertakings (DPSUs) are not duplicated. In this connection, it is
proposed that a committee under the chairmanship of Defence Secretary
with Secretary, Defence Production and Secretary, R&D as members be
set up to discuss and review new R&D projects to be taken by each of
these agencies.
Recommendation (Para No. 20)
There are 93 on-going major projects in different DRDO labs. These
include Agni IV , Agni V , Nirbhay Cruise Missile, K-15, Nag, Astra, AW ACS,
Arjun Main Battle Tank, Tejas LCA, etc. The Committee are dismayed to
note that out of 30 major on-going projects (costing more than Rs. 100
crore), there have been cost revisions in 06 and time revisions in 16
projects. Besides, 12 projects are more than 5 years old, i.e. sanctioned
prior to 2011. While 17 major projects (costing more than Rs. 100 crore)
were sanctioned during the 11th Five Year Plan (April, 2002 to March,
2007), none has yet been completed. Moreover, three of these have been

41
under closure, one under short closure and three under evaluation. The
Committee are perturbed to observe that projects being undertaken are not
executed as per schedule and inordinate delay in execution of almost all the
projects has become a common phenomenon. The Committee, while
deploring this attitude, desire that concrete steps be taken to put in place
a time-bound mechanism to oversee project execution so that they are
implemented in a stipulated time-frame. Steps proposed to be taken in this
direction may be intimated to the Committee.
Reply of the Government
The steps taken/being taken by DRDO for expediting the completion
of defence projects are:
• Organisational re-structuring — Decentralization of authority and
responsibility with labs/cluster DGs.
• More stringent review mechanisms in place — various high
level committees including, Steering Committees, Advisory
Committees and Monitoring Boards.
• Involvement of Services & Production Partners during
development process and reviews — To know their views in
advance including finalisation of General Staff Qualitative
Requirements (GSQRs).
• Synergy among stakeholders — Quarterly interactions
• While undertaking new projects pre-project activity including
preliminary design is being given greater focus.
• The periodicity of review is enhanced for projects which have
taken more than two Probable Date of Completion (PDC)
extensions.

42
CHAPTER III
OBSERV A TIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE
DO NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE REPLIES
RECEIVED FROM THE GOVERNMENT
- Nil-

43
CHAPTER IV
OBSERV ATIONS/RECOMMENDA TIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH
THE REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT HA VE NOT BEEN
ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE AND WHICH
REQUIRE REITERATION AND
COMMENTED UPON
Recommendation (Para No. 1)
The Committee, while examining the Demands for Grants 2015-16
and 2016-17 had observed that due to delayed sanction of allocations and
cuts imposed at RE stage, the Ordnance Factories Board was compelled to
cut short its committed liabilities. This resulted in shortfalls in meeting the
financial targets. Ordnance Factories Board was reportedly increasing the
supplies on the basis of the requirements of the Armed Forces. However,
as a consequence of the cuts applied at RE stage, and mismatch between
the projections and actual allocations, the Board could not produce the
equipment as per the orders placed by Army. Therefore, with a view to
addressing the problem of shortage of ammunition and vehicles, the
Committee laid emphasis on providing adequate budgetary allocation to the
Board at RE stage.
Reply of the Government
OFB being a production organization and requirement of funds is
projected at BE stage in commensurate with the planned supply. At the time
of allocation of fund if there is any reduction in the non-salary Revenue
Budget, the supply gets affected. In the year 2015-16, the original BE
projection was Rs. 10,335 crore in the non-salary budget and planned
supply was Rs. 13,537 crore. However, while finalizing the budget, only
Rs. 9,015 crore was considered as ceiling for non-salary revenue budget
of OFB. Accordingly, OFB had worked out the feasible target supply as
Rs. 11,266 crore, so as to restrict the expenditure within the allocated
budget.
At the RE stage, the projection was made in October, 2015 for
additional Rs. 1,599 crore in non-salary budget against a projected value of

44
supply figure of Rs. 13,552 crore i.e. additional Rs. 2,286 crore over and
above BE figure. Only in the month of February additional allocation was
made affecting the final issues to indentors.
With regard to RE 2016-17, Revenue Budget was approved with
minor variation. However, there was a reduction in allocation of fund in
Capital Outlay. Allotment of fund in Capital Outlay was Rs. 715.29 crore
against OFB projection of Rs. 1,048.42 crore.
The above position was explained in different forum and as such in
2017-18 fund allocated in the Revenue Budget under Non-Salary segment
is almost adequate to achieve the target. Yet, if there is any need for change
in projection due to impact of GST being introduced from 1st July, 2017,
the same will be reflected in RE Projection.
(For comments of the Committee on Para No. 1 please See
Para No. 7 of Chapter-I of the report)
Recommendation (Para No. 6)
The Committee have also observed that at the supply stage delays
have been occurring as M/s Hindustan Machine Tools (HMT), one of the
major suppliers of the machine tools to OFB, has not been able to supply
machines to OFB within the delivery schedule. Consequently, re-tendering
has to be resorted to. The Committee desire that the management of HMT
should be called upon by the OFB for meetings at the higher level and work
out strategies so as to avoid delays.
Reply of the Government
Action has been taken for avoiding delay in supply by M/s HMT at
the supply stage. There is no instance of re-tendering any case, due to
inability of M/s HMT in execution of supply order. M/s HMT is being
regularly followed up by different OFs at various levels. Discussions are
also being held at OFB with senior level officials of M/s HMT. Firm
commitment for supply for the financial year is being obtained in the
meeting. Measures to avoid delay are discussed to sort out probable factors
responsible for delay in supply.
(For comments of the Committee on Para No. 6 please See
Para No. 13 of Chapter-I of the report)

45
Recommendation (Para No. 9)
The Committee note that Ordnance Factories are suffering from acute
shortage of manpower. The Committee found that against a sanctioned
strength of 1,19,968 technical personnel in various Ordnance Factories, the
actual strength is only 70,810 as on 01.01.2017. This shows that there is
a huge gap of almost 40.97 per cent between the sanctioned and actual
strength of technical personnel. The existing strength of non-technical staff
is only 15,083 as against the sanctioned strength of 22,524. Thus, there is
a significant shortfall of 7,441 personnel in non-technical staff. Similarly,
while the sanctioned strength of Group 'A' officers is 2,981, the actual
strength is just 1,808. Thus, there is a significant shortfall of 1,173 Group
'A' officers. The Committee are concerned to note that this huge shortage
of manpower in Ordnance Factories, particularly in the technical category
will have a negative impact on manufacturing and ensuring improvement in
the products. Therefore, the Committee recommends that immediate steps
should be taken to bridge the huge gap between the sanctioned and actual
strength in order to achieve manufacturing of technically advanced products
by Ordnance Factories. The Committee would also like to know as to
when the last exercise of manpower planning was conducted, and whether
the implications of introduction of modern technologies, including that of
computerization of processes on efficiency has been factored for the purpose
of manpower planning.
Reply of the Government
Sanctioned strength of Ordnance Factories is intended towards catering
to peak load requirements of Indian Armed Forces, while, existing strength
is maintained for meeting the current load of the Armed Forces on annual
basis. The flexibility is required to help Indian Ordnance Factories to augment
the manpower at a very short notice in times of exigency and to cater the
workload from time to time.
However, Manpower is being sanctioned every year in respect of all
categories of employees based on vacancies available in the recruitment
grade and work load requirement.

46
The manpower (Gr. B & C) sanctioned after April, 2015 is as follows:
Category Month & Year No. of posts
sanctioned
Industrial Employees (Gr. C) May, 2015 4,895
May, 2016 4,033
Non-Industrial Employees May, 2016 965
(Gr. B & C)
Non-Gazetted Officers (Gr. B) July, 2016 846 (under review)
Gazetted Officers (Gr. B) May, 2015 188
July, 2016 127 (under review)
Total 1 1,054
The total number of posts sanctioned to be filled after April 2015 is therefore
11,054.
The action against the above sanctions is in various stages of
recruitment.
The last exercise of manpower planning for Ordnance Factories was
carried out by a Manpower Rationalisation Committee during 2015-16,
which duly took into consideration various implication of introduction of
modern technologies and computerization of process on efficiency. The
Committee accordingly recommended reduction of total sanctioned strength
including Industrial Employees of Ordnance Factory Organisation from
1,63,103 to 1,45,503, which has already been approved by MoD, with the
condition that the operating strength of the organization will be 1.10 Lakh.
(For comments of the Committee on Para No. 9 please See
Para No. 16 of Chapter-I of the report)

47
CHAPTER V
OBSERV ATIONS/RECOMMENDA TIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH
THE GOVERNMENT HAVE FURNISHED INTERIM REPLIES/
REPLIES AW AITED
- Nil-
 N EW D ELHI; MAJ GEN B C KHANDURI, A VSM (RETD)
12 March, 2018 Chairperson,
21 Phalguna, 1939 (Saka) Standing Committee on Defence

48
APPENDEX I
STANDING COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE
MINUTES OF THE EIGHTH SITTING OF THE STANDING
COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE (2017-18)
The Committee sat on Friday, 12 March, 2018 from 1000 hrs. to
1030 hrs. in Committee Room 'C', Parliament House Annexe,
New Delhi.
PRESENT
Maj Gen B C Khanduri, A VSM (Retd) — Chairperson
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Suresh C Angadi
3. Shri Shrirang Appa Barne
4. Col Sonaram Choudhary(Retd)
5. Shri Dharambir Singh
6. Shri Gaurav Gogoi
7. Smt. Mala Rajya Lakshmi Shah
8. Smt. Pratyusha Rajeshwari Singh
Rajya Sabha
9. Shri Harivansh
10. Shri Sanjay Raut
S
ECRETARIA T
1. Smt. Kalpana Sharma — Joint Secretary
2. Shri T G Chandrasekhar — Director
3. Smt. Jyochnamayi Sinha — Additional Director
4. Shri Rahul Singh — Under Secretary
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members of the
Committee and informed them about the agenda for the Sitting. The
Committee then took up for consideration the following draft Reports:

49
(i) Thirty-Seventh Report on 'Action Taken by the Government on
the Observations/Recommendations contained in the Twenty
Eighth Report (16th Lok Sabha) on General Defence Budget,
Border Roads Organisation, Indian Coast Guard, Military Engineer
Services, Canteen Stores Department, Directorate General
Defence Estates, Defence Public Sector Undertakings, Welfare
of Ex-Servicemen, Defence Pensions and Ex-Servicemen
Contributory Health Scheme'.
(ii) Thirty-Eighth Report on 'Action Taken by the Government on
the Observations/Recommendations contained in the Thirtieth
Report (16th Lok Sabha) on Ordnance Factories, Defence
Research and Development Organisation, Directorate General of
Quality Assurance and National Cadet Corps'.
(iii) Thirty-Ninth Report on 'Action Taken by the Government on
the Observations/Recommendations contained in Thirty Fourth
Report (16th Lok Sabha) on Provision of Medical Services to
Armed Forces including Dental Services'.
(iv) Fortieth Report of the Standing Committee on Defence (16th
Lok Sabha) on 'Demands for Grants of the Ministry of Defence
for the year 2018-19 on General Defence Budget, Border Roads
Organisation, Indian Coast Guard, Military Engineer Services,
Directorate General Defence Estates, Defence Public Sector
Undertakings, Welfare of Ex-Servicemen, Defence Pensions and
Ex-Servicemen Contributory Health Scheme (Demand No. 19 &
22)'.
(v) Forty-First Report of the Standing Committee on Defence (16th
Lok Sabha) on 'Demands for Grants of the Ministry of Defence
for the year 2018-19 on Army, Navy and Air Force (Demand
No. 20)'.
(vi) F orty-Second Report of the Standing Committee on Defence
(16th Lok Sabha) on 'Demands for Grants of the Ministry of
Defence for the year 2018-19 on Capital Outlay on Defence
Services, Procurement Policy and Defence Planning (Demand
No. 21)'.

50
(vii) Forty-Third Report of the Standing Committee on Defence
(16th Lok Sabha) on 'Demands for Grants of the Ministry of
Defence for the year 2018-19 pertaining to Revenue Budget of
Ordnance Factories, Defence Research and Development
Organisation, DGQA and NCC (Demand No. 20)'.
3. After deliberations, the Committee adopted the above mentioned
reports with slight modifications.
4. The Committee authorized the Chairperson to finalise the above
draft Reports and present the same to the House on a date convenient to
him.
The Committee then adjourned.

51
APPENDIX II
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE
OBSERV ATIONS/RECOMMENDA TIONS CONTAINED IN THE
THIRTIETH REPORT (16TH LOK SABHA) ON 'DEMANDS
FOR GRANTS OF THE MINISTRY OF DEFENCE FOR
THE YEAR 2017-18 ON ORDNANCE FACTORY BOARD,
DEFENCE   RESEARCH   AND   DEVELOPMENT
ORGANISATION, DIRECTORATE GENERAL
OF QUALITY ASSURANCE (DGQA)
AND NA TIONAL CADET CORPS
(NCC) (DEMAND NO. 20)'.
1. Total number of Recommendations: 28
2. Observations/ Recommendations which have been accepted
by the Government (please see Chapter II A):
Recommendations Nos. 2, 4, 5, 7, 8 17, 18, 19, 21, 22,
23, 24, 25, 26, 27 and 28 Total : 16
Percentage : 57%
3. Observations/Recommendations which have been
accepted by the Government and commented upon
(please see Chapter II B):
Recommendations Nos. 3, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, and 20
Total : 09
Percentage : 32%
4. Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do
not desire to pursue in view of the replies received from
the Government (please see Chapter III):
Recommendation - Nil Total : 00
Percentage : 0%
5. Observations/Recommendations in respect of which
replies of Government have not been accepted by
the Committee which require reiteration and
commented upon (please see Chapter IV):
Recommendations Nos.1, 6 and 9 Total : 03
Percentage : 11 %
6. Observations/Recommendations in respect of which
Government have furnished interim replies/replies
awaited (please see Chapter V):
Recommendation - Nil Total : 00
Percentage : 0%

"All Parliamentary Publications including DRSC Reports are
available on sale at the Sales Counter, Reception, Parliament House
(Tel. Nos. 23034726, 23034495, 23034496), Agents appointed
by Lok Sabha Secretariat and Publications Division, Ministry
of Information and Broadcasting, CGO Complex, Lodhi Road,
New Delhi (T el. Nos. 24367260, 24365610) and their outlets. The
said information is available on website
‘www.parliamentofindia.nic.in’.
The Souvenir items with logo of Parliament are also available
at Sales Counter, Reception, Parliament House, New Delhi.
The Souvenir items with Parliament Museum logo are available
for sale at Souvenir Shop (T el. No. 23035323), Parliament
Museum, Parliament Library Building, New Delhi. List of these
items are available on the website mentioned above."