FIRST REPORT
STANDING COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE
(2014-2015)
(SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA)
MINISTRY OF DEFENCE
[Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations/observations
contained in the Twentieth Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) on
‘Demands for Grants (2013-2014) ’]
Presented to Lok Sabha on 16.12.2014
Laid  in  Rajya Sabha  on  16.12.2014
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
December, 2014/Agrahayana, 1936 ( Saka)


C.O.D. No. 144
Price : R  115.00
© 2015 B Y L OK SABHA S ECRETARIAT
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct
of Business in Lok Sabha (Fifteenth Edition) and printed by
Jainco Art India, New Delhi-110 005.

CONTENTS
PAGE
COMPOSITION OF THE C OMMITTEE (2014-2015) ............................. (iii)
INTRODUCTION ................................................................. (v)
CHAPTER I Report ....................................................... 1
CHAPTER II (a) Recommendations/Observations which have been
accepted by t he Govern ment ...................... 34
(b) Recommendations/Observations which have been
accepted by the Government and commended
upon ..................................................... 80
CHAPTER III Recommendations/Observations which the Committee
do not desire to pursue in view of the replies
received from t he Govern ment ........................ 95
CHAPTER IV Recommendations/Observations in respect of which
replies of Government have not been accepted by
the Committee which require reiteration and
Commented upon ......................................... 96
C
HAPTER V Recommendations/Observations in respect of which
Government have furnished  interim replies ......... 103
ANNEXURES
(i) Minutes of the Seventh sitting of the Standing
Committee on Defence held on 25 November , 2014 ... 105
 (ii) Analysis of Action Taken by the Government on the
recommendations/observations contained in the
Twentieth Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) on ‘Demands
for Grants (2013-2014) ’ ......................................................... 107
(i)

COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE
ON DEFENCE (2014-15)
  Maj Gen BC Khanduri, AVSM (Retd) —  Chairperson
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Suresh C Angadi
3. Shri Shrirang Appa Barne
4. Shri Dharambir
5. Shri Thupstan Chhewang
6. Col Sonaram Choudhary (Retd.)
7. Shri H D Devegowda
8. Shri Sher Singh Ghubaya
9. Shri G Hari
10. Shri Ramesh Jigajinagi
11. Dr. Murli Manohar Joshi
12. Km. Shobha Karandlaje
13. Shri Vinod Khanna
14. Dr. Mriganka Mahato
15. Shri Tapas Paul
16. Shri Malla Reddy
17. Shri Rajeev Satav
18. Smt. Mala Rajya Lakshmi Shah
19. Capt Amarinder Singh (Retd.)
20. Shri A P Jithender Reddy
*21. Shri Hemendra Chandra
**22. Shri Rajyavardhan Singh Rathore
(iii)
* Sad Demise on 05.09.2014.
** Ceased to be Member of the Committee on 09.11.2014.

Rajya Sabha
23. Shri K R Arjunan
***24. Shri Anand Sharma
25. Shri Rajeev Chandrasekhar
26. Shri A U Singh Deo
27. Shri Harivansh
28. Shri Vinay Katiyar
29. Shri Hishey Lachungpa
30. Shri Madhusudan Mistry
31. Smt. Ambika Soni
32. Shri Tarun Vijay
****33. Shri Narendra Budania
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri P K Misra — Additional Secretary
2. Shri R K Jain — Joint Secretary
3. Shri D S Malha — Director
4. Shri Lovekesh Kumar Sharma — Additional Director
5. Shri Rahul Singh — Under Secretary
6. Smt. Rekha Sinha — Executive Assistant
*** Nominated w.e.f. 08.10.2014.
**** Ceased to be Member of the Committee on 08.10.2014.
(iv)

(v)
INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairperson of the Standing Committee on Defence
(2014-15) having been authorized by the Committee to submit the
report on their behalf, present this First Report on Action Taken by the
Government on the Recommendations/Observations contained in the
Twentieth Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) on ‘Demands for Grants
(2013-14)’, relating to the Ministry of Defence.
2. The Twentieth Report was presented to Lok Sabha on
29 April, 2013 and laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha on the same day.
The Ministry furnished their Action Taken Notes on all the
Recommendations/Observations contained in the Twentieth report on
12 February, 2014.
3. The Report was considered and adopted by the Committee at
their sitting held on 25 November , 2014.
4. For facility of reference and convenience, Recommendations/
Observations of the Committee have been printed in bold letters in
the Report.
5. An Analysis of Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations contained in the Twentieth Report
(Fifteenth Lok Sabha) of the Committee is given at Annexure.
   N
EW D ELHI; MAJ GEN B C KHANDURI, AVSM (RETD),
16 December, 2014 Chairperson,
25 Agrahayana, 1936 (Saka) Standing Committee on Defence.

CHAPTER I
REPORT
This report of the Standing Committee on Defence deals with action
taken by the Government on the recommendations/observations
contained in the Twentieth Report (15th Lok Sabha) on ‘Demands for
Grants of the Ministry of Defence ’ for the year 2013-14 which was
presented to both the Houses of Parliament on 29 April, 2013.
2. The Committee ’s Twentieth Report (15th Lok Sabha) contained
84 recommendations/observations on the following aspects:—
Para No. Subject
12
1, 2, 3 Negative growth of Defence Budget
4 Huge difference between projection and allocated
budget
5 Larger share of Committed liabilities in comparison
with new Schemes
6, 7 Tight fiscal situation and under spending
8 Capital procurement — appointment of authorized
representative/distributor
9 Formulation of the General Staff Qualitative
Requirement
10 Growing indiscipline in three Services
11 Twelfth Defence Plan
12, 13, 14 Development of Infrastructure in Border Areas
15 Maintenance of roads in border areas
16 Cadre Management in BRO
17 Sainik Schools
18 Budgetary allocation for Army
19 Dwindling Capital: Revenue Ration
20, 21 Shortage of Officers in Army
22, 23, 24 Supply of defective ammunition

2
25, 26 Bullet Proof Jackets
27 Cease Fire Violations
28, 29, 30, 31 Army Aviation
32 Non-procurement of uniforms and microlites
33 Selection of NCC Cadets in Armed Forces
34 Waitlisted Institutions
35, 36 Lateral induction of Ex-servicemen in Central Armed
Police Forces and State Police Forces
37, 38, 39 Revenue Budget allocation to Air Force
40, 41 Manpower and Training
42 Stores and Inventory
43, 44, 45, 46 Capital Budget
47 Budget for New Schemes
48, 49 Trainer Aircraft
50, 51, 52, 53 Budget Outlay to Navy
54 Vikramaditya
55, 56, 57 Indigenous Aircraft Carrier
58 Relocation of Oil Tanker in Andaman and Nicobar
59 Issue of environmental clearances in Island areas
60, 61 Protection to Fishermen
62 Coastal Surveillance Network
63, 64 Coordination among maritime agencies/stakeholders
65, 66 Expenditure on Research and Development
67, 68 Development of Ammunition, Field Gun and other
products
69 Performance linked incentive scheme to the scientist
70 Import content of equipment developed by DRDO
71 Self-Reliance in Defence Production
72, 73 Defence Institute of Psychological Research
74, 75 Shortage of Manpower in DPSUs
76, 77 Declining value of production in DPSUs
78 Modernization of Ordnance Factories
79 Private Sector Partnership
12

3
80 Foreign Direct Investment in Defence Sector
81, 82, 83, 84 Dependence on foreign suppliers for military hardware-
Research and Development in DPSUs and Ordnance
Factories
3. Action Taken Replies have been received from the Government
in respect of all the recommendations/observations contained in the
Report. The replies have been examined and the same have been
categorized as follows:—
(i) (a) Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted
by the Government (please see Chapter II):
Para Nos. 3, 5, 7, 10, 18, 19, 21, 28, 29, 30, 31, 33, 34, 40,
41, 42, 43, 44, 46, 47, 48, 49, 51, 52, 53, 54, 55, 56, 57,
59, 60, 61, 62, 63, 64, 65, 66, 67, 68, 69, 70, 71, 72, 73,
74, 75, 77, 79, 80, 81, 82, 83, 84
(53 Recommendations)
(b) Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted
by the Government and commented upon (please see
Chapter II):
Para Nos. 1, 8, 11, 12, 13, 14, 16, 17, 20, 25, 26, 27, 32,
35, 36, 45, 50, 58, 76
(19 Recommendations)
(ii) Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do not
desire to pursue in view of the replies received from the
Government (please see Chapter III):
                N i l
(00 Recommendation)
(iii) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies
of Government have not been accepted by the Committee
which require reiteration and commented upon (please see
Chapter IV):
Para Nos. 2, 9, 15, 22, 23, 24, 37, 38, 39, 78
(10 Recommendations)
(iv) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which
Government have furnished interim replies (please see
Chapter V):
Para No. 4, 6
(02 Recommendations)
12

4
4. The Committee desire that the Ministry ’s response to their
comments made in Chapter I of this Report to be furnished to them
at the earliest and in any case not later than six months of the
presentation of this Report. Here, it may also be emphasized that
the final replies in response to the reply for which interim status
(Recommendation Para Nos. 4, 6 and 79) has been communicated to
the Committee may also be furnished within the prescribed time
frame.
A. Negative Growth of Defence Budget
Recommendation (Para No. 1)
5. The Committee had recommended as under:—
“The Committee note that Budget Estimates (Net) for the year
2013-14 are for Rs. 203672.12 crore, which comprises Rs. 116931.41
crore as Revenue Outlay and Rs. 86740.71 crore as Capital Outlay.
Although Defence expenditure is increasing in absolute terms over
the years the percentage increase in Defence expenditure since
2000-2001 has not been consistent. The Defence expenditure in
percentage term grew maximum during the year 2004-2005  i.e.
26.29% as compared to the previous years, followed by the growth
of 2008-09 and 2009-10, whereby the percentage growth was 24.59%
and 24.13% respectively. During the year 2010-11 the percentage
growth declined to 8.70% as compared to the growth of 24.13% of
the previous year. In the subsequent years although slight increase
was there but it did not match the level of 2004-05, 2008-09 and
2009-10. During the year 2011-12 the percentage increase was
10.91% while during the year 2012-13 the percentage increase has
been 13.15%. However, Revised Estimates of the same year brought
down the growth to 4.44%. Although apparently the growth seems
to be 14.10% in comparison with Revised Estimates 2012-13, but it
is just 5.05%, if compared with Budget Estimates 2012-13. ’
6. The Ministry in its Action Taken Reply has stated as under:—
“The growth of the Defence Service Estimates is based on the
increases approved by the Ministry of Finance which are in turn
dictated by several factors including the overall state of the
economy and government finances. It is pertinent to highlight that
the high percentage of growth in 2008-09 and 2009-10 was due to
the 6th CPC payments. ”
7. The Committee had observed that the growth in defence
expenditure seem to be 14.10% in comparison with Revised Estimates
2012-13, but it was just 5.05%, if compared with Budget Estimates
2012-13. However, in action taken reply, the Ministry simply stated
that the growth of the Defence Service Estimates was based on the
increases approved by the Ministry of Finance which were in turn

5
dictated by several factors including the overall state of the economy
and Government finances. In this respect, the Committee desire to
be apprised of the efforts made by the Ministry to take up the issue
with Ministry of Finance for increasing the budgetary allocations.
B. Negative Growth of Defence Budget
Recommendation (Para No. 2)
8. The Committee had recommended as under:—
“During oral evidence while examining Demands for Grants, the
Defence Secretary stated that allocation for the Budget depends
on the availability of resources and there has been a gap this year
and in the previous years also. The Committee also note from the
data supplied by the Ministry that the growth of Defence Budget
in comparison to percentage increase over the previous year as
well as total defence expenditure, if compared to total Central
Government expenditure clearly depict negative growth of Defence
expenditure. Even if total defence allocation is compared with
GDP , it again shows a downward trend. ”
9. The Ministry in its Action Taken Reply has stated as under:—
“The allocation for Defence expenditure has been constrained by
the overall economic and fiscal situation. ”
10. The Committee are least convinced with the reply of the
Ministry that the allocation for Defence expenditure has been
constrained by the overall economic and fiscal situation. Such a
reply is routine in nature and as per their view, the defence of the
country must have precedence over other aspects and the Ministry
of Finance should prioritize the entire budgetary allocation
appropriately so that there remains no dearth of funds for the
services and the security of the country is never compromised for
want of money. The Committee are also dismayed over the fact that
no corrective measures appear to have been taken with regard to
negative growth of GDP aspect at the supplementary demands stage.
C. Huge difference between Projection and Allocated Budget
Recommendation (Para No. 4)
11. The Committee had recommended as under:—
“From the data submitted by the Ministry, the Committee arrived
at a conclusion that there is an enormous gap in the projections,
allocations and expenditure for the three Services since 2009-10.

6
The allocations for the three Services are lesser than the projected
amount in all the years and also the actual utilization is lesser
than the amount allocated to them at Revised Estimates stage
except in regard to Army and Navy during the year 2009-10 and
2010-11, where the expenditure exceeded the Revised Estimates.
During 2011-12, Air Force was allocated slightly more than what it
actually projected at Revised Estimate stage. If the expenditure is
compared to the allocations projected at Revised Estimates stage,
in all the previous four years, the expenditure is short of allocation
made at Budget Estimate stage except for Navy in the year
2009-10 and Army in 2010-11. As submitted by the Ministry, revenue
expenditure includes expenditure on Pay & Allowances,
Transportation, Revenue Stores (like Ordnance Stores, supplies by
Ordnance Factories, Rations, Petrol, Oil and Lubricants, Spares,
etc.), Revenue Works (which include maintenance of Buildings,
water and electricity charges, rent rates, taxes, etc.) and the
Capital expenditure includes expenditure on Land, Construction
Works, Plant and Machinery, Equipment, Tanks, Naval Vessels,
Aircraft and Aero engines, Dockyards, etc. Therefore, allocating
less than what the services have projected would have catastrophic
effect on revenue as well as capital expenditure which is not a
healthy sign for the Services of a developing nation like India.
Therefore, the Committee desire that the Ministry should impress
upon the Ministry of Finance to allocate entire amount as per the
requirement of the Services otherwise the Services shall have to
reprioritize their activities, which may lead to cutting of expenditure
on essential items. ”
12. The Ministry in its Action Taken Reply has stated as under:—
“The recommendations of the Committee in this regard have been
conveyed to the Ministry of Finance vide MoD (Fin) I.D. No. 3(4)/
Bud-I/2013 dated 18.6.2013. ”
13. The Committee desire to know the outcome of the above
communication sent to the Ministry of Finance and steps taken by
the Ministry of Defence in the absence of desired funds. The
Committee may also be informed as to how the services re-prioritize
their activities and cope up with the difficulties faced by them
after the cut. They may also be apprised about the specific
procurement of items affected due to this.
D. Tight fiscal situation and under spending
Recommendation (Para No. 6)
14. The Committee had recommended as under:—
“The Committee note that because of tight fiscal situation as
admitted by a representative of the Ministry, the payments for the

7
acquisitions like aircraft and ships, are to be spread across four to
five years and sometimes the Ministry of Defence has to defer
certain payments because the Ministry of Finance was having some
constraints in providing the budget. The Committee desire that
the Ministry of Finance should itself re-prioritize the available
resources and create a situation where at least Ministry of Defence
does not have to constrain itself to an extent that it has to defer
the payments of capital acquisitions, which in long-term would
affect the modernization plan of the Services and devoid them of
crucial equipment. ”
15. The Ministry in its Action Taken Reply has stated as under:—
“The recommendations of the Committee have been conveyed to
the Ministry of Finance vide MoD (Fin) I.D. No. 3(4)/Bud-I/2013
dated 18.6.2013. ”
16. The Committee find that the casual reply attempts only to
shift responsibility instead of serving interest suitably. The Committee
desire to be apprised of the follow up action taken by the Ministry.
E. Capital procurement — appointment of authorized representative/
distributor
Recommendation (Para No. 8)
17. The Committee had recommended as under:—
“The Committee note that the Ministry of Defence has made
elaborate procurement procedures to ensure expeditious
procurement of requirement of Armed Forces. The procurement
procedure includes various stages of examination of required items.
The Committee contemplated over the reasons for increasing
number of scams in the procurements related to Defence despite
the above procurement procedure. One of the reasons which brought
before the Committee is that of non-availability of authorised
distributor/representative of foreign vendors. In this context, the
Defence Secretary apprised the Committee that way back in 2002
or 2001, the Government had tried to register the representatives
but no one responded. The Committee are of the view that as
more than a decade has passed since then and world over there
are changes in procedure to purchases defence related items and
regular interaction with the vendors in various defence expositions
have increased. Therefore, the Committee desire the Ministry to
revive this initiative for appointment of representatives/distributors
to avoid future irregularities in defence deals. ”

8
18. The Ministry in its Action Taken Reply has stated as under:—
“The Defence Procurement Procedure (DPP) guidelines in
Chapter I permit registration of vendors who are the Original
Equipment Manufacturers (applicable in the case of countries where
domestic laws do not permit direct export by OEMs), wherein,
those vendors desirous of responding to any of the proposals
advertised on MoD website can forward their request to the
Technical Managers as per the format given in DPP . In addition, the
DPP permits the vendors to depute their authorised representatives
to be present during opening of technical bids and opening of
commercial bids, if they so choose. Further as part of the RFP , a
provision exists for the foreign vendor to give details of agents,
technical consultants, authorised vendors that they may have
appointed for marketing their equipment in India. In view of the
foregoing, adequate provisions exists in the DPP for appointment
of the authorised representative/distributor, however , the
operational aspects of these provisions would require further
elaboration.”
19. The Committee desire the Ministry of Defence to take cue
from the developed countries or from the countries where practice
of appointing authorized representative/distributor of arms and
ammunition is in vogue and devise a methodology on the same
pattern to totally eradicate the irregularities leading to scams in
the defence purchases.
F. Formulations of the General Staff Qualitative Requirement
Recommendation (Para No. 9)
20. The Committee had recommended as under:—
“The Committee note that procurement process is a long drawn
one and there were mistakes committed in formulation of General
Staff Qualitative Requirement (GSQR) due to which many of the
projects had fallen through. The Committee desire that proper
coordination should be made between the users, Defence Research
and Development Organization, production and procurement
agencies while formulating GSQRs so that there remains no delay
in production or procurement of strategic items. ”
21. The Ministry in its Action Taken Reply has stated as under:—
“Formulation of GSQRs is an elaborate process involving various
agencies, wherein views of all stakeholders are taken and issues

9
discussed before finalizing the GSQR. The process leading to the
approval of GSQR is given in the following paras:—
(a) GSQRs are drafted by the user Dte. at SHQ with required
inputs being obtained by issue of RFIs on MoD website and
taking additional inputs from internet, defence journals/
magazine etc.
(b) The draft GSQR thereafter is circulated to other possible
user directorates, maintenance directorate, HQ IDS, DRDO,
DDP , DGQA/DGAQA, Dte. of Standardisation, Technical
Manager and any other branch/department for obtaining their
views/comments.
(c) Subsequently, the draft GSQR is fielded in General Staff
Equipment Policy Committee, which is a forum comprising of
representatives of all stakeholders/commenting and vetting
agencies. Herein, the proposed GSQR is ratified and approved.
(d) The aforesaid procedure is followed to ensure that GSQRs
while remaining broad based are also comprehensive and
inputs of the user, DRDO, production and procurement
agencies are aligned to ensure expeditious progress of the
scheme hereafter. Finalization of GSQRs prior to accord of
AoN has been incorporated in the DPP-2013. ”
22. The Committee are surprised to find that the Action Taken
Reply has apprised them on the modus operandi being adopted by
Ministry of Defence for finalization of GSQRs, which has been
projected as infallible. It also states that it is an elaborate process
involving various agencies, wherein views of all stakeholders are
taken and issues discussed before finalizing the GSQR, which gives
an impression that the coordination between the users and the
suppliers is flawless. However, the Ministry has not given any
plausible explanation that if the finalization of GSQRs consists of
views of various stakeholders as the draft GSQRs are circulated
before their finalization, then why there is always a delay in
production as well as for procurement of strategic items. The
Committee reiterate their recommendation and desire the Ministry
should devise methodology to formulate immaculate procurement
procedures to avoid delays in production as well as procurement of
crucial defence items.
G. Twelfth Defence Plan
Recommendation (Para No. 11)
23. The Committee had recommended as under:—
“The Committee are surprised to note that though the Ministry is
in the second year of Twelfth Defence Plan period but Twelfth Plan

10
is yet to be approved. The Committee desire that this Plan should
be approved at the earliest so that the Ministry can formulate
future strategies for the forces in a planned manner. The Committee
desire that the 12th Plan would not face the fate of the
11th Defence Plan which did not see the light of the day at all.
They, therefore want the Ministry to take up this task on priority
and approve the plan without delay. ”
24. The Ministry in its Action Taken Reply has stated as under:—
“The concerns of the Committee have been duly noted and the
Ministry is pursuing the matter with the Ministry of Finance for
approval of the Twelfth Plan. ”
25. The Committee take note of the initiative taken by the
Ministry of Defence, which has stated that the Ministry is pursuing
the matter with the Ministry of Finance for approval of the Twelfth
Plan. However, the Committee desire that concerted efforts be
made by the Ministry so that Twelfth Defence Plan could be finalized
at the earliest and action initiated in this regard may be
communicated to them.
H. Development of Infrastructure in the Border Areas
Recommendations (Para No. 12, 13 & 14)
26. The Committee had recommended as under:—
“The Committee note that Border Roads Organization (BRO) has
been given the task of development and maintenance of operational
road infrastructure specific to border areas. This Organization works
for other Ministries/Government agencies also in additions to the
Ministry of Defence, however, after a policy decision the number
of other agency work has now been reduced to 30% and general
staff roads are allocated 70% of work to be conducted by the BRO. ”
27. The Ministry in its Action Taken Reply has stated as under:—
“The break-up of work load of BRO from 2008-09 to 2012-13 with
regard to General Staff (GS) and agency works is given as under:
(Rs. in crore)
2008-09 2009-10 2010-11 2011-12 2012-13
GS 1535 2119 2396 2765 2765
Agency 1769.8 1942.90 1961 1328 1326
Total 3304.8 4061.9 4357 4093 4091

11
As per policy decision, BRO has been taking up new works primarily
for Army/General Staff requirement. The agency work shown above
also includes works being executed MHA (Strategic roads for ITBP)
and MEA (Works inside Bhutan for strategic reasons). ”
28. The Committee had recommended as under:—
“The Committee also note that BRO has a encounter major natural
challenges i.e. hard rock, extreme cold, deep and high snow,
avalanches, young mountains, heavy snowfalls, etc. In addition to
the manmade challenges include poor availability of labour , poor
quality of contractors, paucity of construction material, etc. The
Committee realize that these factors are hindrance in speedy
construction of roads and other infrastructure. However , the
Committee are of the view that while the ferocity of certain natural
phenomena can be mitigated by apt machines and guiding
instruments, the manmade problems can only be resolved through
proper management. ”
29. The Ministry in its Action Taken Reply has stated as under:—
“Emphasis is given on mechanizing road construction work. State
of the art vehicles/equipment/plant have been inducted and the
Annual Procurement Plans approved for last 5 years have seen
significant increase:
Years APP approved
2008-09 Rs. 157.15 cr.
2009-10 Rs. 252.13 cr.
2010-11 Rs. 403.00 cr. Including Rs. 100 cr. for
equipment bank.
2011-12 Rs. 429.85 cr.
2012-13 Rs. 470.66 cr.
Further Border Roads Organisation (BRO) has been allowed to
outsource works in all its Projects both for General Staff and
Agency works through an amendment to Border Roads Regulations.
In addition, efforts are being made to outsource some roads to
Central PSUs so as to augment the capacity of BRO. ”
30. The Committee had recommended as under:—
“Therefore, the Committee feel that permanent cadre of labour
and more incentives to the contactors with proven track can help
in checking the man made aspect of the problems. The Committee

12
also desire that the Ministry should collaborate and encourage
large companies also who have sufficient manpower and machinery
to carry out quick and reliable disposal of work. ”
31. The Ministry in its Action Taken Reply has stated as under:—
“The work load of the Organisation is spread over vast area in the
border region with different working seasons. The seasonality
precludes possibility of holding large number permanent labour as
it would only inflate the cost of job if they are to be paid without
working during non-working season. Since the Organization (BRO)
is work charged, it is not financially viable to have the more
number of permanent labour force because their Pay & Allowances
in the non working season get charged to the works.
The recommendation of Committee with regard to collaborating
with large companies is agreed. BRO has been allowed to outsource
works and also efforts are being made to outsource works to Central
PSUs who have requisite technical and financial competence. Long
stretches of road/complete road is proposed to be outsourced to
attract large companies with adequate credential. ”
32. The Committee desire that they may be informed about the
work which has been outsourced to other agencies and a timeline
in this regard may be given.
I. Maintenance of roads in border areas
Recommendation (Para No. 15)
33. The Committee had recommended as under:—
“On the responsibility of maintenance of roads in Uttarakhand, it
was informed that BRO is not getting any fund from the Ministry
of Road Transport and Highways for the purpose. Considering the
above facts, the Committee desire that adequate allocation should
be made to BRO by the Ministry of Road Transport and Highways
so that maintenance of roads in Uttarakhand as well as in other
border areas would not be a problem and motor ability is maintained
in all seasons and weather conditions. ”
34. The Ministry in its Action Taken Reply has stated as under:—
“Ministry of Road Transport & Highways has already been requested
for timely release of required maintenance funds. The revision of
the scale of these funds is in process. ”

13
35. In its reply, the Ministry of Defence has merely mentioned
that Ministry of Road Transport & Highways has already been
requested for timely release of required maintenance funds and the
revision of the scale of these funds is in process. The Committee
desire to know the complete details with regard to release of
required maintenance funds and the action initiated by the Ministry
of Road Transport and Highways thereon. The Ministry should furnish
this information without any further delay.
J. Cadre Management in BRO
Recommendation (Para No. 16)
36. The Committee had recommended as under:—
“The Committee note that the perennial problem of the cadre
management, especially in respect of General Reserve Engineer
Force has not been addressed to in the right perspective. During
the oral evidence, Defence Secretary also admitted that BRO being
a mixed Organisation, there exists some manning problem. The
Committee, after considering all the facts, desire that cadre review
of BRO should be taken on a priority so that officers and staff of
this mixed Organisation can work in harmony. ”
37. The Ministry in its Action Taken Reply has stated as under:—
“Proposal for Cadre review of subordinate grades ( i.e. Group ‘B’ &
Group ‘C’ including erstwhile Group ‘D’ staff) of General Reserve
Engineer Force (GREF) has been examined and has been referred
to Ministry of Finance for their consideration. Further , the issues
relating to ‘Cadre review of Group ‘A’ officers of GREF’ and ‘Review
of Manning Policy ’ were discussed in the meeting of the Border
Roads Development Board held on 4.2.2013 and a Committee has
been constituted to look into the issue of ‘Manpower needs of
Border Roads Organization (BRO) and the matter of manning ratio’.”
38. The Committee appreciate that proposal for cadre review of
subordinate grades of General Reserve Engineer Force (GREF) has
been examined and referred to the Ministry of Finance for their
consideration besides constituting a committee for the purpose.
The Committee desire that the Ministry should pursue vigorously
the matter with the Ministry of Finance for subordinate cadre and
the outcome of the Report along with action proposed to be taken
by the Ministry of Defence on the report of the Committee which
has been constituted to look into the issue of ‘Manpower needs of
Border Roads Organization (BRO) and the matter of manning ratio ’
may be provided to this Committee at the earliest.

14
K. Sainik Schools
Recommendation (Para No. 17)
39. The Committee had recommended as under:—
“The aim of establishing the Sainik Schools was to bring quality
public school education within the reach of common man, all round
development of personality and to remove regional imbalance in
the Officers ’ cadre of Armed Forces. Basically, these schools serve
as nurseries for entry into National Defence Academy. The
Committee note from the data supplied by the Ministry that there
are 24 Sainik Schools in 21 States, however , one of the most
populated States, Uttar Pradesh does not have a Sainik School so
far. Therefore, the Committee desire that initiatives should be
taken by the Ministry in consultation with the State Government of
U.P . to open Sainik School in the State and also in other States
which are not having Sainik Schools at the earliest. ”
40. The Ministry in its Action Taken Reply has stated as under:—
“As per the present dispensation, Sainik Schools are established on
receipt of a specific request from a State Government. No such
proposal has been received from the State Government of
Uttar Pradesh till date. Moreover , it is intimated that in January,
2010, the Government of Uttar Pradesh has declined the proposal
of setting up a Sainik School in Bundelkhand region of Uttar Pradesh.
However , keeping in view the recommendations of the Standing
Committee, the matter has been taken up again with the
Government of Uttar Pradesh. State Governments of Arunachal
Pradesh, Goa, Meghalaya, Mizoram and Tripura have also been
requested to examine the possibility of sending a suitable proposal
for setting up a Sainik School in these States and to convey their
decision in this regard at the earliest. ”
41. The matter has already been taken up in the Twenty-first
Report of the preceding Committee on Action Taken by the
Government on the recommendations/observations contained in the
Sixteenth Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) on ‘Critical Review of
Functioning of Sainik Schools ’. The Committee desire that issue of
setting up of Sainik School may be taken holistically.
L. Shortage of officers in Army
Recommendation (Para No. 20)
42. The Committee had recommended as under:—
“The Committee note the perpetual shortage of officers in the
Army which is around 9520 at present constitutes about 20 per cent

15
of the authorized strength of officers. The Committee also note
that due to various campaigns launched to create awareness and
attract the youth resulted in increase in the number of officers
commissioned in the last three years. The Ministry has informed
that two Army Selection Boards in Punjab will also result in improved
intake thereby believing the fact that shortage existed during all
these years as there were no additional SSBs and also increase in
services training institutes like NDA, IMA and OTA will have positive
effect in reducing shortage of officers. ”
43. The Ministry in its Action Taken Reply has stated as under:—
“The Government have been taking continuous steps to make career
in Armed Forces more attractive. Some of the steps include
substantive promotion to the officers including those in Short Service
Commission (SSC) to the ranks of Captain, Major and Lieutenant
Colonel after 2, 6 and 13 years of reckonable service respectively;
increase in tenure of SSC officers from 10 years to 14 years;
upgradation of 750 posts of Lt. Colonel to Colonel towards
implementation of AV Singh Committee Report (Phase-I); upgradation
of 1896 additional posts in the ranks of Colonel, Brigadier , Major
General and Lieutenant General and their equivalents in the other
two Services towards implementation of AV Singh Committee Report
(Phase-II). Additional family accommodation through Married
Accommodation Project (MAP); implementation of recommendations
of the VI Central Pay Commission with improved pay structure etc.
have also made the Services more attractive.
The Army have also undertaken sustained image projection and
publicity campaign to create awareness among the youth on the
advantages of taking up a challenging and satisfying career.
Awareness campaigns, participation in career fairs and exhibitions,
advertisements in print and electronic media, motivational lectures
in schools, colleges are also some of the other measures in this
direction.
Above efforts have resulted in increased intake/commissioning in
Army. This is expected to further increase with setting up of seven
additional Service Selection Boards. Accordingly, with a view to
accommodate more candidates, in-Service training capacity of NDA,
IMA and OTA has been increased as under:
Academy Training capacity Increased capacity
NDA 1800 1920
IMA 1650 1800
OTA Chennai 500 750

16
In case of Army, a Second OTA has been set up at Gaya (Bihar) with
a training capacity of 750 candidates, so as to cater for future
requirements.”
44. The Committee have been getting the same reply over the
years about the implementation of A.V. Singh Committee Report as
panacea for shortage of officers but there has been no substantial
increase in the recruitment to fill up the gap. Therefore, the
Committee while welcoming the steps taken by the Ministry regarding
increase in the training capacity of NDA, IMA and OTA, reiterate
their recommendation and desire that there is a need for the
continuous monitoring of the steps taken by the Ministry so as to
ensure talking of corrective measures immediately, the Committee
also desire that they may be informed about the impact of increase
in NDA ’s capacity on the three services at periodical interval of
six months.
M. Supply of Defective Ammunition
Recommendation (Para Nos. 22, 23 & 24)
45. The Committee had recommended as under:—
“The Committee also note from the statement tendered before
the Committee that 23 items of ammunition are giving trouble due
to its faulty design. The Committee are given to understand that
the ammunitions in the gun gets burst while firing. It is a serious
issue. The Committee further note that despite checking by the
Directorate General of Quality Assurance (DGQA) who is the
authority which inspects and assure the quality of products reaching
the users, this ammunition has reached to the users to scare them.”
46. The Ministry in its Action Taken Reply has stated as under:—
“Army had placed a demand for 113 items of ammunition against
a Roll-on-indent for the five year period 2009-2014; against this
demand of Army, OFB could not meet 80% of the requirement for
23 ammunition items. This was mainly on account of capacity
constraint and delay in product support from indigenous/import
sources. Action is being taken by OFB to reduce deficiencies in
supply of such ammunitions in consultation with Army.
The reference by the Committee on bursting of gun during firing
pertains to accidents occurring with 125 mm Tank Ammunition.
The ammunition manufactured by OFB are inspected by DGQA, as

17
per laid down inspection schedule. The ammunition is issued after
the same is accepted by DGQA based on conformance to stipulated
quality parameters. However , certain defects/accidents were
reported by User during bulk exploitation of tank ammunition. A
committee was formed in 2010 to look into the issue of barrel
bursting holistically and give its recommendations. These
recommendations are under implementation and their
implementation will lead to an improvement in quality of
ammunition and corresponding reduction in incidences of barrel
burst.
The pertinent point is that the indigenization process of an imported
ammunition or indigenous development of ammunition from scratch
is incremental in nature where success comes through a trial and
error approach and a certain degree of failure cannot be avoided.
While there is no denying the fact that defective ammunition did
reach the User but simultaneously corrective actions have been
taken based on the learning in the indigenization process and close
interaction with OEM, DRDO, DGQA and User representatives. ”
47. The Committee had recommended as under:—
“The Committee are not able to comprehend the various arguments
put forth by the representatives of various organizations over the
supply of defective ammunition. The committee are not able to
understand that despite having a premier research organization
like DRDO, how design problems persisted for such a long time.
Another factor which has disturbed the Committee that without
assuring this quality, how the ammunition reached the gunners.
Again, why the procurement of such a crucial ammunition was not
envisaged earlier so as to fill the void at the right time. It seems
that there was lack of coordination in various wings of the Ministry.”
48. The Ministry in its Action Taken Reply has stated as under:—
“As pointed out earlier , Indigenous development of weapon systems,
including ammunition is a long drawn process and failures are not
uncommon in the learning curve associated with the development
process. All the stakeholders, including DRDO, have been working
together to resolve the problem and a majority of the issues have
been identified and are being resolved.
Ministry had procured certain numbers of 125 mm Fin Stabilized
Armoured Piercing Discarding Sabot (FSAPDS) ammunition from
M/s IMI Israel. It was also envisaged to manufacture this ammunition

18
at OFB through co-production route. However , this route could not
fructify as the firm M/s IMI Israel got debarred from further business
dealings with the Ministry.
Ministry has initiated procurement of 66,000 rounds of 125 mm Fin
Stabilized Armoured Piercing Discarding Sabot (FSAPDS) ammunition
from Russia along with Transfer of Technology for indigenous
production to Ordnance Factory Board. In addition, DRDO is also
developing indigenous 125 mm FSAPDS MK-II version. ”
49. The Committee had recommended as under:—
“The Committee desire that in such cases, the Ministry should try
to find out the real reasons behind it and take stringent action
against the erring persons/organization. The Committee also desire
that some structured mechanism should be developed by it so that
in future such incidents do not recur. ”
50. The Ministry in its Action Taken Reply has stated as under:—
“Ministry has been working in close co-ordination with all
stakeholders to resolve the above issue. However , as pointed out
earlier, failures cannot be eliminated all-together in indigenous
development and productionization of weapon systems. However,
efforts can be made to minimize the failures. Whenever a failure
occurs, representatives from all stakeholders are called and they
get involved to address the problem; however the redressal process
has been an incremental/evolutionary one.
A structured mechanism already exists to investigate the accidents
and suggest recommendations to avoid such incidents in future.
Any accident involving defect in and/or failure of weapons,
ammunition or explosive is reported to respective Technical
Directorates of DGQA by the User. The concerned Technical
Directorate conducts investigation together with the User and the
manufacturer. Wherever required, assistance from DRDO is also
sought. In addition to it, regular interaction meetings between the
stakeholders including DRDO, DGQA, OFB, User do take place where
the problems are discussed and efforts made to resolve them. ”
51. The Committee appreciate the action taken by the Ministry
of Defence resulting in formation of a Committee in 2010 to look
into the issue of barrel bursting holistically which has given its
recommendations. The Ministry further informed that these
recommendations are under implementation and it will lead to an

19
improvement in quality of ammunition and corresponding reduction
in incidences of barrel burst. However, the Committee were not
informed as to how the defective ammunition reached the hands of
user, despite the presence of DGQA. The Committee may be apprised
of the action taken by the Ministry of Defence about the lapse
committed by DGQA. The Committee also desire that specific steps
are taken by DGQA to avoid recurrence of such incidences, which
give bad name to the production units as well inspecting organization
may be conveyed to them. The Committee are of the view that long
term corrective measures taken in a time bound manner will ensure
the Forces will get only high quality ammunition. On the issue of
existence of structured mechanism, the Committee desire that details
as well as remedial measures taken after such lapses/accidents during
the last three years may be conveyed to them.
N. Bullet Proof Jackets
Recommendation (Para Nos. 25 & 26)
52. The Committee had recommended as under:—
“The Committee during the course of examination of Demands for
Grants 2012-13 have noted that there was deficiency of 1,86,138
units of Bullet Proof Jackets (BPJs). Even when the approval of
Defence Acquisition Council was obtained on 19.10.2009 for purchase
of the requisite number of BPJs during the Eleventh Plan, the issue
of purchase of desired BPJs was fraught with various complications.
The Committee are concerned for saving the lives of soldiers who
are fighting low intensity warfare inside and along the border. It
has come to the Committee as a shock that these BPJs are still in
the process of procurement, even after the lapse of 4 years of
getting approval of DAC and Techno-Commercial Offers are yet to
be submitted by the vendors. ”
53. The Ministry in its Action Taken Reply has stated as under:—
“A RFP for procurement of BPJs was issued on 07 December , 2012
to 39 vendors out of which six vendors have responded. Presently
the TEC of the instant case is under progress. Efforts are afoot to
complete the acquisition process within the laid down timelines of
DPP .”
54. The Committee had recommended as under:—
“The Committee also note that Cabinet Committee on Security
(CCS) has approved scaling of quantity 3,53,765 BPJs for the Indian
Army, Units/formations deployed on Line of Control and in Low

20
Intensity conflict based on deficiency of Indian Army. The Committee
are disappointed with the lackadaisical attitude of the Ministry
and desire that all the required quantities of BPJs should be
purchased using fast track procurement procedures. While procuring
these BPJs, the Ministry should keep in mind the operational
requirements of the soldiers/officers, therefore, only light weight
jackets should be purchased for them. ”
55. The Ministry in its Action Taken Reply has stated as under:—
“Adaption of “Fast Track Procedure ” is deliberate decision by DAC
as per DPP . In the present case, DAC decision is categorized as
“Buy Indian ”. The DPP process for “Buy Indian ” would be followed
expeditiously, changing this approval to “Fast Track Procedure ” as
per DPP at this juncture will delay the acquisition process.
Further , it is intimated that the 1,86,138 Bullet Proof Jackets
being processed presently would be light enough as per GSQR to
meet the operational requirements of the Indian Army. ”
56. The Committee desire that timeline drawn for the
procurement in the present case as well as any action plan so
drawn for future procurement considering the requirement of Bullet
Proof Jackets (BPJs) due to regular recruitment taking place may
also be communicated to them. The Committee also want to know
the weight so finalized as per the GSQR along with any new
development that has taken place in the field of light weight BPJs
at the international level.
O. Cease Fire Violations
Recommendation (Para No. 27)
57. The Committee had recommended as under:—
“The Committee note the increasing number of Cease Fire Violations
(CFVs) across the border with Pakistan. The Committee are
perturbed over he beheading of one of our soldiers and killing of
the other. The Committee desire that apt and swift action should
be taken by the Government in order to create deterrence for
cease fire violations in future. ”
58. The Ministry in its Action Taken Reply has stated as under:—
“Apart from appropriate retaliation by the Army at the tactical
level, Government of India has taken up the issue of cease fire
violations with Pakistan consistently. All violations of cease fire are

21
taken up with Pakistan military authorities also at the appropriate
level through the established mechanism of hotline, flag meetings
as well as weekly talks between the Director Generals of Military
Operations. Based on periodic reviews, Pakistani activities across
the Line of Control are continuously and closely monitored by the
Indian Army. All necessary measures are taken to optimise
operational preparedness of the Indian Army. ”
59. The Committee have taken the issue in their 22nd Report
on ‘Threat perception and preparedness of the Forces including
incursion on borders, coordination mechanism with the Central
Armed Police Forces and border connectivity through Road, Air and
Rail’. The Committee desire that details of all the violations of
ceasefire during the last two years and the action taken by the
Ministry to avoid recurrence of the same may be conveyed to them
at the earliest.
P. Non-procurement of Uniforms and Microlites
Recommendations (Para No. 32)
60. The Committee had recommended as under:—
“From the Data furnished by the Ministry, it was learnt that NCC
could not able to utilize its allocated budget. In the year 2012-13,
NCC projected a demand of Rs. 121 crore under Capital Outlay but
it was allocated only Rs. 50 crore. The expenditure during this
period was just Rs. 0.58 crore. During deliberations before the
Committee, DG NCC clarified that NCC could not utilize allocated
sum due to non-procurement of 110 microlites and clothing for the
cadets. The Committee are exasperated over the fact that uniform
for NCC cadets now not purchased since 2011, and these have just
started coming in. The Committee desire the Ministry to take
remedial measures so that there are no lapses of this nature in
future and the budget as planned and projected is utilized entirely.”
61. The Ministry in its Action Taken Reply has stated as under:—
“Procurement of 28 retention clothing items for NCC cadets was
being made through open tender system till the year 2006-07. A
decision was thereafter taken in February, 2007 to switch over to
Rate Contract System of procurement to decentralize and enable
NCC Directorates to operate the same. The process of conversion
took about two years and the first such supply order could be
placed in September/October , 2009 only. The second set of supply

22
orders were placed in June/July, 2010. The supply position of the
items through rate contract system got reduced on account of
escalation in the cost of raw material ultimately resulting in no
supply during the year 2011-12 thus making the situation critical.
To tide over the situation, following remedial measures have been
taken to optimally utilize the budgetary allocations to NCC for NCC
uniforms and microlites:—
(i) To meet the immediate requirement of clothing items for
use by NCC cadets, National Textile Corporation (NTC) was
approached who had indicated that they shall be able to
meet the clothing requirements of NCC at the stipulated
(RC) rate of 2009.
(ii) Simultaneously, proposals for procurement of uniforms with
upgraded specifications of basic clothing material from
existing Polyester Cotton Mix to Poly viscose mix Dope Dyed
with a view to ensure shade consistency as also switching
over to open tender system of procurement before
termination of the existing rates contracts in March/April,
2012 have been moved.
NTC have till now supplied 1.32 lakh uniform items out of 9.57
lakh items (around 4.80 lakh pairs) ordered on them on 29.2.2012
as one time procurement to meet the immediate clothing
requirements of NCC. In addition, 1.5 lakh mtrs of cloth also stands
cleared by DGQA. The case for extension of Delivery Period has
been finalized so as to ensure delivery of uniforms by NTC. A
proposal to place orders on NTC for supply of 4.10 lakh pairs of
uniforms at an estimated cost of Rs. 20.43 crore has also been
initiated. After completion of the supplies, the total uniforms for
NCC cadets would approximately be 9.65 lakh sets which would be
sufficient to provide at least one pair of uniform to the enrolled
NCC cadets. The authorisation, likely availability and shortfall of
uniform are summarized as under:—
(i) Cadet strength as on date = 13.80 lakh
(ii) Uniforms approved in APR 2010-11 = 9.65 lakh pairs
(iii) Uniform for which supply order has = 5.58 lakh pairs
placed on NTC & vendors
(iv) Balance quantity left uncovered as = 4.07 lakh pairs
as per NCC Annual Provision (rounded off to 4.10
Review 2010-11 lakh pairs of uniforms)

23
Microlites
Against a requirement for procurement of 110 Microlite Aircrafts
for NCC, tenders were floated to be opened on 22nd June, 2010.
At the same time, Indian Air Force was also in the process of
procuring 150 Microlites for their requirement as well as the Indian
Navy. The requirement of NCC was subsequently merged with IAF
after detailed deliberations and with the approval of the Ministry
of Defence. The primary advantages of merger were reduced cost
due to larger quantity, vast experience/structural support of IAF ,
robust after sale support/maintenance due to similarity of
equipment with Air Hqrs. Technical Evaluation of all the microlites
offered by various vendors including their Field Trials have been
completed by the designated team. Name of members including
NCC have been finalized by the Air HQrs for opening of the
commercial bids which is expected very shortly. ”
62. The Committee are not convinced with the methodology
adopted by the Ministry in procurement of uniforms for NCC Cadets.
The Committee desire that pre-emptive action should have been
taken by the Ministry to avoid shortfalls. Therefore, the Committee
desire that in future, requirements of NCC Cadets should be
envisaged by the Ministry on the basis of numerical strength of the
cadets and procurement of uniforms, etc. be done accordingly. In
case of microlites, a timeline may be drawn and Committee may be
informed in this regard at the earliest.
Q. Lateral induction of Ex-servicemen in Central Armed Police Forces
and State Police Forces
Recommendation (Para Nos. 35 & 36)
63. The Committee had recommended as under:—
“In their various reports, the Committee have been recommending
for lateral induction of Ex-Servicemen in Central Armed Police
Forces and State Police Forces. However , the Committee found
from the reply of the Ministry that the issue is still lingering on and
the last meeting was held in this respect way back on 29.11.2011,
wherein it was inter alia, decided that options may be explored
for achieving lateral transfers from the Army to CAPFs and army
personnel are incentivized to join and the interests of resident
CAPFs are protected. In this regard, Ministry of Home Affairs (MHA)
have been requested to suggest a framework under which lateral
transfer of Army personnel to CAPFs could be made keeping in
view the suggestions of the Cabinet Secretariats. As informed by
the Ministry of Defence, the requisite framework/proposal from
Ministry of Home Affairs is still awaited.

24
The Committee are dismayed to note that even after lapse of
more than a year no response has been received from the Ministry
of Home Affairs, therefore, they desire that this matter should be
vigorously pursued and may be raised in the meetings of high
powered Committees, so lateral induction of Ex-Servicemen in
Central Armed Police Forces and State Police Forces come into
existence and profile of the Army is kept young. ”
64. The Ministry in its Action Taken Reply has stated as under:—
“As apprised earlier , pursuant to the decision taken in the meeting
held in Cabinet Secretariat on 29.11.2011 on the issue of lateral
transfer of Other Ranks (ORs) of Army to Central Armed Police
Forces (CAPFs), Ministry of Home Affairs (MHA) were requested to
suggest a framework under which lateral transfer of Army personnel
to CAPFs could be made. However , no framework/proposal has
been received from MHA.
In the absence of any framework/proposal from MHA to implement
lateral transfers from Army to CAPFs, a meeting under the
chairmanship of Additional Secretary was held in this Ministry on
24.06.2013 with the representatives of MHA. A suggestion was
made to MHA that, to begin with, lateral induction of service
personnel into CAPFs may be commenced on a pilot basis (say
about 1000 Nos. initially). A new cadre/sub cadre could be created
in the CAPFs for such lateral inductees, which will obviate inter-
se seniority issues etc. MHA agreed to examine the proposal.
Accordingly, the above proposal has been conveyed to Cabinet
Secretariat under intimation to MHA. The recommendations of the
Committee in the matter have also been communicated to Cabinet
Secretariat and MHA. ”
65. In their action taken reply, the Ministry has not given any
concrete plan for lateral induction of Ex-servicemen into CAPFs.
The Ministry merely stated that the proposal has been conveyed to
the Cabinet Secretariat under intimation to MHA. The Committee
desire to be apprised of the outcome at the earliest.
R. Budget allocation to Air Force
Recommendation (Para Nos. 37, 38 and 39)
66. The Committee had recommended as under:—
“In BE 2013-14, Air Force had made a projection of Rs. 25922.64
crore against the Revenue Head while the allocation actually made
available to them is Rs. 18295.10 crore, thus creating a deficit of

25
Rs. 7627.54 crore i.e. about 30 per cent. Though there have been
a trend of providing lesser allocations than the projected amount
to Air Force under Revenue Head during last 4 years, the amount
of gap used to be in the range of 10 to 20 per cent, which has
been inflated to the level of 30 per cent in the budget of the
present year.
The Committee understand that the Revenue Budget mainly caters
to the need of pay and allowances of the employees. The data
reveal that, for the current year , there is an increase of Rs. 590.29
crore in BE allocations under Revenue Head when compared to BE
allocations for 2012-13 under the same head accounting to an
enhancement of 3.33 per cent. Keeping in mind the present hike
of about 11 per cent in the rate of inflation, an increase of
Rs. 3.33 per cent will not be able to suffice even the obligatory
needs of Air Force, that ’s why leaving no scope for augmentation
of its recruitment, training, inventory and infrastructural
capabilities. Even during the course of deliberations the
representatives of Air Force admitted that shortfall in Revenue
Budget would adversely impact inability to procure spares and fuel
and shortfall in training resulting in compromises of operational
preparedness.
In addition to this the Committee also observe that RE 2012-13
allocation was lesser by Rs. 602.09 crore from BE 2012-13 allocation.
The Committee are perturbed by the very fact that the entire
regime of deficit budgeting will have a cascading effect on
preparedness of Air Force. The expenditure to RE allocations ratio
had been plummeting during the later part of the Eleventh Plan.
The Committee feel that this is a result of ad-hocism in planning
and budgeting and deserves immediate redressal. Therefore, the
Committee strongly recommend for provision of more and adequate
funds to Air Force under Revenue Head during the current financial
year.”
67. The Ministry in its Action Taken Reply has stated as under:—
“The revenue allocations have been based upon the increases
approved by the Ministry of Finance.
The allocations are based upon the growth rate allowed by the
ministry of Finance. However , requirement for additional allocations
would be projected at the Supplementary Demands stage.
Requirement of additional funds under the Revenue budget will be
projected to the Ministry of Finance at the Supplementary Demand
stage, based on the requirement projected by the Air Force and
the trend of utilisation of available funds. ”

26
68. In their 20th Report, the Committee stressed upon consistent
deficit budgeting and its negative effect on the preparedness of Air
Force. The Committee also took note of ad-hocism in planning and
budgeting which qualifies immediate redressal by MoD. However,
the replies of the Ministry with regard to lesser allocations both
under Capital and Revenue Heads appear to be vague and routine
in nature. The Committee take serious note of the routine reply
and also feel that the Ministry of Defence has not addressed if the
concern of the Committee in true spirit. The allocations which were
30 per cent less than projections should have been viewed seriously.
Therefore, the Committee reiterate that all out efforts be made
towards providing required funds to Air Force either through
supplementary grants or additional grants. Furthermore, it needs to
be ensured that Air Force does not suffer for want of resources so
that its capacity building and augmentation drive are not disrupted.
The Committee may also be apprised in detail about the measures
taken with regard to making up the shortfall in Revenue Budget
which would otherwise adversely impact ability to procure spares
and fuel and shortfall in training resulting in compromises of
operational preparedness.
S. Capital Budget
Recommendation (Para No. 45)
69. The Committee had recommended as under:—
“During discussions on Demands for Grants 2013-14, the Committee
came to know that there is a need of Rs. 62,039 crore for Capital
Modernization, out of which Rs. 15,000 crore are required exclusively
for MMRCA project. It was also informed to the Committee that
the LCAs and MMRCAs are contemporary imperative needs of Air
Force as the Squadron strength is just 34 against a sanctioned
number of 42. In the first instance, this Committee regret that a
huge difference in sanctioned and existing number of Squadrons
was allowed at all. This could have been checked since the aircraft
have a definite life span and decommissioning — commissioning
can be well calculated in advance. The present scenario depicts
lack of futuristic planning. Nevertheless, now all out efforts be
taken to mitigate this void in squadron strength during the 12th
and 13th Plans on priority basis. The Committee may be intimated
with regard to the efforts in this direction along with the progress
of LCAs and MMRCAs. ”

27
70. The Ministry in its Action Taken Reply has stated as under:—
“The phase out and induction plan for the fighter aircraft of the
IAF critically balances the twin requirements of combat capability
and obsolescence management. At present, the IAF has 34 fighter
squadrons against the Govt sanctioned strength of 42 squadrons.
Since the number of fighter aircraft due for retirement exceeds
the rate at which their replacements are being inducted, the number
of operational squadrons has reduced to 34. Along with the planned
phase out of the MiG-21 and MiG-27 aircraft and induction of
additional Su-30 MKI aircraft, the IAF plans to induct two Sqns of
LCA and five Sqns of MMRCA by the end of the 13th Plan period.
Based on the premise that the inductions of the LCA and MMRCA
will fructify as envisaged, the IAF will have 35 combat Sqns by the
end of the 13th Plan period. Detailed inputs on the progress
regarding the LCA and MMRCA are as under:—
(a) LCA: The delay in the LCA programme is one of the major
causes for shortfall in capability building of IAF . Two contracts
have been signed with HAL for procurement of 20, Light
Combat Aircrafts in Initial Operational Configuration (IOC)
and 20, LCA in Final Operational Configuration (FOC)
respectively. The delivery schedule for 20, LCA in IOC
configuration for Series Production was from April 2009 to
December 2011, while that for LCA in FOC configuration is
from June 2014 to December 2016 and both the delivery
schedules are linked to the IOC certification. The IOC
certification for LCA has been delayed due to challenges in
Design and Development of critical systems. Presently,
Aeronautical Development Agency has stated that IOC will
be achieved by mid 2013. Thus after IOC is achieved and
HAL commences deliveries of series production aircraft, LAC
will be inducted.
(b) MMRCA: M/s Dassault Aviation of France was declared as the
L1 vendor on 31 January 2012. The MMRCA Contract
Negotiations Committee (CNC) commenced negotiations with
M/s Dassault Aviation of France from 13 February 2012,
which is in progress. 126 MMRCA will be inducted into the
IAF between three to eleven years after the signing of the
contract.”
71. The Ministry in its reply has submitted that there is a shortfall
in capability building of IAF which is mainly attributable to delay in
LCA programme. The Ministry has further informed that both the

28
contracts signed with HAL for procuring LCAs, 20 in Initial Operation
Configuration(IOC) and 20 in Final Operational Clearance (FOC) are
delayed. The delivery schedule for IOC category LCA was from April
2009 to December 2011. However, the delivery has been delayed
due to challenges in Design and Development of critical systems. It
is also informed by the Ministry that Aeronautical Development
Agency has stated that IOC will be achieved by mid 2013. This reply
of the Ministry of Defence dated 12 February, 2014 does not contain
updated information on the status of IOC clearance which were
supposed to be achieved by mid 2013 as per Ministry ’s own
submission. The reply illustrates lackadaisical and callous approach
of the Ministry towards upgradation of Air Force squadron, which
the Committee deeply regret. The Committee desire to be updated
about the latest position of induction of LCAs. The delivery schedule
of LCA in FOC category, which is scheduled from June 2014 to
December 2016 be stringently followed and the Committee apprised
about the same.
In respect of MMRCA, the Committee would like to be intimated
about the latest position of negotiations alongwith the time line of
signing of the contract.
T. Budget Outlay to Navy
Recommendation (Para No. 50)
72. The Committee had recommended as under:—
“The analysis of financial allocations for the year 2013-14 reveal
that there are huge gaps in projected and allocated amount under
various heads. In the Capital Budget the projection was that of
Rs. 31682.53 crore while the actual allocation is Rs. 23408.95
crore resulting into a gap of Rs. 8273.58 crore. Especially in case
of the head ‘New Schemes ’ the amount allocated is meagre
5.5 per cent of the projection. Under this head the amount
projected was Rs. 7986.53 crore while the allocation made is
Rs. 442.86 crore. The Committee have been informed by the
representatives of Navy that Indian Navy is progressing on the path
of perspective plan with target of achieving additional blue water
platforms, aviation assets, anti-submarine warfare assets, standoff
amphibious capability, sea denial capability etc. Some of the crucial
acquisitions lined up for 2013-14 include ambitious capabilities
such as P-81, MiG 29K fighters, Advance Jet Trainers, total seven
ships of all categories etc. ”

29
73. The Ministry in its Action Taken Reply has stated as under:—
“Budget allocations have been constrained by the overall ceilings
conveyed by the Ministry of Finance. ”
74. Ministry of Defence has informed that the Budget allocations
have been constrained by the overall ceilings conveyed by the
Ministry of Finance. The Committee wish to be informed categorically
about the efforts made towards projecting the navy ’s budgetary
requirements before MoF. Also, they would like to know as to what
measures are being taken to effectively tackle the case of constrained
budgeting in the next budget. The Committee want to be informed
about the compromises made by Indian Navy due to constrained
budgeting during the financial year 2013-14 alongwith the remedial
measures taken/planned to obviate such situation in future.
U. Relocation of Oil Tanker in Andaman and Nicobar
Recommendation (Para No. 58 )
75. The Committee had recommended as under:—
“During one of the study tours, it came to the knowledge of the
Committee that near the floating dock in Port Blair there exists an
oil storage tank which is considered to be hazardous. In case of
any accident the entire infrastructure of the Naval Management
will be affected and may result into irreparable loss. The matter
was taken up with the Ministry of Defence and the Committee
have been informed that allocation of a suitable area by A & N
Administration in the Port Blair Master Plan for this purpose was
requested. Besides, M/s IOC has been impressed upon to identify
suitable land concurrently. It was further brought to the knowledge
of this Committee that M/s IOC has identified land which is presently
under lease of M/s Andaman plantation till December , 2014 and
have also taken up with the Chief Secretary and DC South Andaman
for assurance and clarity on its non-encumbrance and feasibility of
handing over the land after completion of lease period by December,
2014. The Committee observe that in the first instance, location
of IOC Terminal within the Defence Premises in close vicinity of
Naval Ship inviting some disaster to happen should not have been
allowed. In this regard, accountability has to be fixed at some
level and it should be ensured that such lapses do not recur. The
Committee should be appraised about the same. Meanwhile, Ministry
should endure for temporarily shifting IOC tanker to some safer
place till permanent land is allocated to them. ”

30
76. The Ministry in its Action Taken Reply has stated as under:—
“The information is being collected and will be made available
later.”
77. The Committee are dismayed to bring forth the fact that the
report on DFG 2013-14 was presented to the Parliament in April
2013. The Ministry had furnished their replies in the Month of
February, 2014. The Committee take serious note of the fact that
even after a lapse of more than nine months information could not
be furnished and desire that the same may be furnished forthwith.
The reasons for the delay in providing the information should also
be communicated to them.
V. Declining Value of Production in DPSUs
Recommendation (Para No. 76)
78. The Committee had recommended as under:—
“The value of production in some of the DPSUs has declined. These
include HAL where value of production in 2010-11 was Rs. 16450.74
crore, while it was Rs. 12693.19 crore in 2011-12. In case of MDL,
it was Rs. 2611.41 crore in 2010-11 which declined to Rs. 2523.69
crore in 2011-12. Even in Goa Shipyard Limited, the VOP has
decreased from Rs .990.32 crore in 2010-11 to Rs. 676.40 crore in
2011-12. Similarly, the value of production in HSL has also declined
from Rs. 603.84 crores in 2010-11 to Rs. 564.04 crore in 2011-12.
On being enquired, the Committee came to know that the main
reasons attributed for reduction in value of production are thin
order book position, lack of working capital delay in supply of
ingredient items etc. ”
79. The Ministry in its Action Taken Reply has stated as under:—
“The reasons for reduced Value of Production (VOP) of the DPSUs
indicated by the Committee are explained below:
In view of the nature of Aircraft and Aeronautical Industry contracts,
the production at HAL is on a batch mode production and is not
in the nature of mass production. This would result in variation in
VOP levels on a year to year basis, depending on orders in hand.
As the production of Sukhoi-30 (Phase IV - Raw material stage
manufacture), Production of Indigenous LCA and IJT in Series
Production Mode, Jaguar Darin-III fleet compliance, are scheduled
in coming years, there would be increasing trend in the Annual
Value of Production at HAL.

31
Value of production of MDL had declined during 2010-11 and
2011-12 mainly due to delay in receipt of Weapon platforms and
indigenous developmental equipment in case Missile Destroyers and
non-availability of critical MPM equipment for Submarine Project.
However , due to delivery of these weapon platforms and indigenous
developmental equipment for Missile Destroyers project in this
year and placement of orders for MPM equipment for Submarine
Project, MDL is expected to register higher VOP in 2013-14.
Due to the low order book position of GSL, the VOP has declined
considerably. It may be noted that modernization is underway in
GSL and on completion of the scheduled modernization programme,
GSL’s capacity and capability is expected to increase by nearly
three times. GSL has been nominated for manufacture of Mine
Counter Measures Vessels estimated to cost Rs. 6,000 cr. However,
the project is going to take some time. Efforts are being made to
secure more orders for GSL.
Reduction in Value of Production in HSL is mainly attributable to
low order book position. This has been partially mitigated with a
new order from Navy for a classified vessel with which value of
production is likely to improve in FY 2014-15. Further , HSL has
received nomination from the Ministry of Defence (MoD) for
construction of 2 Land Platform Dock, 2 Special Operations Vehicles
and P-751 (Submarine) which will lead to consequential increase in
Value of Production, once the orders are placed after due approval.”
80. The Committee take note of the reply that reduction in
value of production in HSL is mainly attributable to low order book
position. In this regard the Committee would like to know the reasons
for the same and whether any specific analysis was done thereon.
The Committee would specifically like to know as to what concerted
efforts were done by HSL to ensure good order flow
contemporaneously by gauging their difficulty in time. They would
also like to provide detailed information about the measures/
initiatives that have been taken/planned to be taken to improve the
position of order book in ensuing years so as to mitigate the
deficiencies of order. The Committee also desire that efforts should
be made for early approval of orders for construction of 2 Land
Platform Dock, 2 Special Operations Vehicles and P-751 (Submarine)
so that HSL would have healthy value of production in coming years.
W. Supply of Defective Ammunition
Recommendation (Para No. 78)
81. The Committee had recommended as under:—
“The analysis of budget utilization under Capital Head disclose
that during 2010-11 actual capital expenditure was Rs. 456 crore,

32
in 2011-12 it reduced to Rs. 20 crore. Modernization programme of
Ordnance Factories envisages continuous upgradation of their
infrastructure with the changing needs of the Defence Forces.
However , the Committee feel that in case of under-utilization of
funds under Capital segment, the modernization drive shall not
progress satisfactorily. The quality of products shall also deteriorate
for want of ample resources. As such the Committee found during
course of deliberations that one type of the ammunition available
with Indian Army was of poor quality and sometimes it fired in the
barrel itself. The Committee deeply deplore this kind of ammunition
availability in the hands of our soldiers. While examining the matter,
this Committee was assured that 66,000 round ammunition is now
arriving from Russia. The fact of the matter is that our Ordnance
Factories are not yet in a position to develop modern quality
ammunition. Therefore, the Committee desire that immediate
measures should be taken in the direction of overhaul and
modernization of OFs. The amount projected by OFB for
modernization and capacity augmentation in BE 2013-14 was
Rs. 1576 Crore while the actual allocation made is Rs. 1029 crore.
This amount will cater to the modernization needs of 41
manufacturing units and 32 other establishments under OFB. The
Committee understand that shortage of resources would lead to
compromises in production and modernization, therefore, adequate
funds be provided to OFB. At the same time accountability should
be fixed at the highest levels in Ordnance Factories for achievement
of tangible outputs during the 12th plan period, year-wise. The
Committee be apprised about the same. ”
82. The Ministry in its Action Taken Reply has stated as under:—
“As per Annual accounts of Ordnance Factories, the expenditure
(cash flow) under capital head during 2010-11 was Rs. 454.21 cr.
and during 2011-12 it was Rs. 278.48 cr. The reduction in
expenditure (cash flow) during 2011-12 was on account of recovery
of Rs. 166.34 crore by en-cashing Bank guarantee of M/s IMI Israel,
consequent upon debarring business dealings with the firm. In
fact, the expenditure under capital Head was Rs. 444.82 cr. (278.48
+ 166.34) which was almost at the same level as that of 2010-11.
As regards development of modern tank ammunition is concerned,
DRDO is already in the process of developing indigenous 125mm
FSAPDS MK-II ammunition. In addition the Ministry has also initiated
procurement of 66000 rounds of 125 mm Fin Stabilized Armoured
Piercing Discarding Sabot (FSAPDS) ammunition from Russia along

33
with Transfer of Technology for indigenous production to Ordnance
Factory Board. It is being envisaged to procure requisite modern
Plant & Machinery from Russia for indigenous production of this
ammunition so as to obviate quality related issues in future.
OFB has planned an investment of around Rs. 15000 crore on
modernization during 12th plan period. This includes investment
for replacement of old plant and machinery under ‘Renewal &
Replacement (RR) Head and procurement of new plant and
machinery under New Capital (NC) Head. The expenditure on
modernization is being closely monitored at the level of Board in
Ordnance Factories and Ministry. However, OFB shall be requiring
timely allotment of funds for keeping their modernization plan on
track.”
83. The Committee note that Ministry of Defence in its reply
has admitted that OFB shall be requiring timely allotment of funds
for keeping their modernization plan on track. In this regard, the
Committee would like to be apprised about allotment of necessary
allocations as well as the measures taken to ensure that the
modernization plan of OFBs is on track. It should also be ensured
that the expenditure on modernization is closely and effectively
monitored. The Committee are of the opinion that swift and apt
action should be taken to produce Fin Stabilized Armoured Piercing
Discarding Sabot (FSAPDS), either through transfer of technology
route or by developing same with the help of DRDO so that in case
of war, the country is not dependent on foreign suppliers and
preserve precious foreign exchange.

CHAPTER II
(A) RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN
ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT
Recommendation (Para No. 3)
The Committee are surprised over the downward movement of the
Defence budget, therefore, the Committee desire that the Ministry of
Defence should be given priority in allocation of desired budget and
more allocations should be made to the Services at the stage of
supplementary Demands for Grants.
Reply of the Government
The recommendations of the Committee have been conveyed to
the Finance Secretary vide MoD (Fin) I.D. No. 3(4)/Bud.-I/2013 dated
18.6.2013. Requirement of additional funds will be projected at the
stage of Supplementary Demands based on utilisation of available funds
and requirements projected by the Services.
Recommendation (Para No. 5)
The Committee note from the information supplied by the Ministry
that committed liabilities have a very large share in comparison with
new schemes in both Capital Modernisation Budgets 2012-13 as well as
in 2013-14. This year the Committed liabilities of the Army are to the
tune of Rs. 7024.31 crore while the allocation for new schemes is
made for Rs. 493.98 crore. The share of Navy in capital modernization
fund of Rs. 73444.59 crore is Rs. 22295.84 crore, while the allocation
for the new schemes is just for Rs. 442.86 crore. The largest share of
the capital modernization budget for 2013-14 is allocated to Air Force.
However , here also committed liabilities got the lion ’s share of
Rs. 35038.62 crore leaving very little amount for new schemes at
Rs. 2010.44 crore. In respect of the Coast Guard also the share of new
schemes in comparison of committed liabilities is very meagre. The
Committee are of the view that allocating very paltry sum to the new
schemes will jeopardize the modernization programme of the Forces.
They therefore, recommend that adequate allocations should be made
under this Head so that the Services could bridge the space created
between required and existing capabilities to make the country potent
power in the region.
34

35
Reply of the Government
The allocations for New Schemes under BE 2013-14 is indeed quite
meagre in view of the reduced allocation conveyed by the Ministry of
Finance given the prevailing economic situation and the accumulation
of Committed Liabilities of prior years.
Recommendation (Para No. 7)
Further analysis of Defence Budget reveals that the Ministry of
Defence has an under spending of Rs. 16040.41 crore under the Capital
head in 2012-13 and by the end of the February, 2013, the Ministry
could spend only 76.24% of the total allocated budget (RE) for the year
2012-13. The Committee wonder how the Ministry would spend the
remaining amount of Rs. 42420.83 crore in just one month. The
Committee feel that the Ministry should avoid such proclivity of casual
approach towards allocations. The last months spending should be
avoided as far as possible, because it depicts utter mismanagement of
budget. The Committee want the Ministry to spread its spending so as
to ensure there remains no huge unspent amount at the end of the
year.
Reply of the Government
It may be noted that 82.37% of the Defence capital budget
(RE 2012-13) had been utilized by the end of February, 2013. This is
broadly in consonance with the guidelines issued by the Ministry of
Finance.
In this regard, it may also be stated that while instructions have
been issued to ensure even flow of expenditure throughout the year
and avoid bunching of expenditure in the last quarter , and especially
in March, certain constraints do exist as far as capital expenditure is
concerned.
Capital expenditure is not routine in nature and involves relatively
fewer transactions, but of larger value. The trend of expenditure is
extremely volatile and would show extreme peaks and troughs if it
were plotted against a graph. Payments for committed liabilities depend
upon progress of contracted milestones which cannot be adapted to
ensure an even flow of expenditure. Further, capital works expenditure
in large parts of the country picks up pace in the second half of the
financial year after the monsoon is over. This also contributes to higher
proportion of expenditure being booked towards the later part of the
year.

36
Recommendation (Para No. 10)
The committee note from the reply submitted by the Ministry that
as per the reasons put forward by the Court of Inquiries (COI) poor
man management and lapses in command and control are the primary
causes of indiscipline in Army. In Navy, the major reasons for
indisciplinary cases are non-adherence to the laid down provisions,
moral turpitude and temptation to misappropriate public funds for
personal gains and in Air Force charges against officers mainly related
to accepting illegal gratification and involvement in theft cases. The
Committee are of the view that besides the COI, the Ministry should
find out the causes behind the growing number of cases of indiscipline
which are tarnishing the image of Armed Forces. The Committee
recommend that where the units are involved in cases of major
indiscipline they should be disbanded. The Committee also desire that
regular interaction of jawans and officers should be increased so that
the officers have better knowledge of mindset of their juniors and
have mutual respect and confidence in each other. The Committee
also want that development of character and moral education should
be the part of the regular training sessions to stop cases of illegal
gratification, theft and moral turpitude.
Reply of the Government
Following action points emerge from the above recommendations/
observations of the Standing Committee on the issue of indiscipline in
the services:
(i) Besides the COI, the Ministry should find out the causes
behind the growing number of cases of indiscipline which
are tarnishing the image of Armed Forces.
(ii) Where the units are involved in cases of major indiscipline
they should be disbanded.
(iii) Regu lar interaction of jawans and officers should be increased
so that the officers have better knowledge of mindset of
their juniors and have mutual respect and confidence in
each other.
(iv) Development of character and moral education should be
the part of the regular training sessions to stop cases of
illegal gratification, theft and moral turpitude.
2. With regard to the Committee ’s recommendations regarding
finding out the causes by the Ministry behind the growing number of

37
cases of indiscipline in the Armed Forces, it is stated that every
incident/act of indiscipline in Army is investigated as per provisions of
Army Act and Rules by the Army. Discipline in the Army is a command
function and investigation is ordered through the GOC-in-Chief of the
Command concerned or his subordinate Commanders in the chain of
Command. Normally, decisions in the Ministry in the set up of integrated
Headquarters of Defence are taken collectively in single file system in
consultation with Army HQrs. The Army and the Ministry discharge
their respective obligations under the provisions of Army Act and Rules.
As there are few cases of indiscipline in Army and these are aberrations
on which suitable action has been taken by the competent authority,
no intervention by the Government is required.
3. Primary reasons for indiscipline cases in Navy have been due to
non-adherence to the laid down provisions. Cases of indiscipline, moral
turpitude and misappropriation of public funds for personal gains are
investigated by convening an inquiry and exemplary punishment is
awarded to ensure a deterrent effect. However , to address these issues
holistically, apart from awarding exemplary punishments, the lessons
learnt from such cases are promulgated Navy wide in the form of
advisories. Additionally, the incidents are also discussed as case studies
at training institutes as part of remedial measures. Thus, adequate
checks and balances exist and the defaulters are dealt in a stern
manner. The indiscipline cases are as such integral to the Service and
are dealt as per extant provisions. The Services, therefore, are most
suited to address the cases of indiscipline, including trend analysis,
and institution of remedial measures.
4. Similarly, Air Force has adopted a policy of ‘Zero Tolerance ’
towards acts of misconduct committed by Air Force personnel. All
cases involving moral turpitude and financial improprieties are
expeditiously investigated and prompt disciplinary and administrative
action is taken against the erring officers and airmen, if warranted.
While deciding the quantum and nature of punishments/penalties, due
care is accorded to the nature of offences committed, its impact on
the Air Force society at large and element of deterrence necessary in
a combatant force like the IAF . The punishments awarded to delinquents
are duly published in the Air HQ Routine Orders for the information of
all the Air Force personnel.
5. With regard to the Committee ’s recommendation for disbanding
of units where they are involved in cases of major indiscipline, it is
intimated that proposals for disbandment of Army units can be
considered only on a case to case basis if received from the concerned

38
Directorate. Further, there have been no cases of major indiscipline in
the Navy, wherein there was a requirement to disband a unit. There
has also been no abnormal rise in the cases of indiscipline in Air Force.
Therefore, no recommendation is being made for disbanding any IAF
Unit.
6. As regards increasing of regular interaction of jawans and officers
and making development of character and moral education part of the
regular training sessions to stop cases of illegal gratification, theft and
moral turpitude, action taken by the Armed Forces are given in the
succeeding paragraphs:
Army
(i) All Army personnel/officers have been sensitized about the
lessons learnt from the incidents of collective indiscipline.
(ii) All Army personnel have also been sensitized about need for
harmony in officer-man relationship, higher discipline quotient
and aspiration of soldier. Special emphasis has been laid on
encouraging junior leadership and their inclusive participation
in unit/sub unit level activities with soldiers.
(iii) Participation of officers in all unit level activities with troops
has been ensured to maintain a harmonious and healthy
military environment for improving the officer-man
relationship.
(iv) Camaraderie has been encouraged amongst all Army personnel
thereby ushering in the ‘family’ in the service environment.
(v) Command and control echelons have been suitably energized
by issuance of advisories and through visits/inspections by
senior officers to prevent recurrence of aberrations.
(vi) Regular training on Human Resource Management and formal
lectures on core values of the Armed Forces are an integral
part of training activities across all training establishments.
These training courses/curricula are specifically designed to
cover aspects of man management and core values of moral
and ethics, integrity, loyalty, self discipline and such like
attributes. Commanders at all the levels are also emphasising
core values.
Navy
(i) In Navy, a Divisional system provides every officer the means
and the forum to interact with sailors. The Divisional Officer
is the first link in the system, which channelizes the growth

39
of the sailor in service while concurrently looking after his
personal interests. As such the Divisional Officers maintains
a delicate balance between the interests of the service
vis-a-vis personal aspiration of the sailors.
(ii) Further , the redressal mechanism has been established for
addressing complaints of personal oppression, injustice or
other ill-treatment. On receipt of any complaint under this
mechanism, the Commanding Officer examines the same and
communicates his decision to the complainant. If the
complainant is not satisfied with the decision or does not
get redressal within a period of one month from the date of
submission of his complaint, he may request that his
complaint be forwarded to the next superior authority and
so on to the Chief of the Naval Staff and finally to the
Government. The complainant may also appeal directly to
the next superior authority, if he does not receive the final
reply within a period of six months from the date of
submission of his complaint.
(iii) Regular Counselling capsules are being conducted for all
officers and sailors as part of their course curriculum whilst
undergoing ab-initio and advanced training to emphasize
the importance of discipline, honesty and integrity in the
Armed Forces. Formal lectures on morals and ethics are an
integral part of training activities across all training
establishments. There is a specific organisation in the Navy,
namely Centre for Leadership and Behavioural Studies
(CLABS), which undertakes customised capsules for various
levels of officer trainees in the Navy regarding core values
of the Armed Forces.
Air Force
(i) In the IAF from the ab-initio training stage onwards, special
emphasis is laid on character building, imbibing moral values,
etiquettes, customs, traditions and on improving inter-
personal relationships. During the basic training phase of
Officers, a total of 16 hours is earmarked for training on the
above topics.
(ii) Between three to seven years of service of an Officer ,
structured training is imparted on value systems during the
Basic Staff Course and Intermediate Staff Course.
(iii) The IAF has coined, “Mission, Integrity and Excellence ” as
Core Values and all measures are undertaken to ensure that
these principles are imbibed by all personnel in letter and
spirit.

40
(iv) The IAF conducts ‘Cohesion Day ’ once a month for informal
interaction at all levels to obtain realistic feedback on
personal and official matters. This close interaction amongst
Officers and Airmen helps to resolve a number of official
and personal problems.
(v) Periodical welfare meetings are held at all the field units to
identify areas of concern of the personnel and to take
necessary remedial actions on all the problems and issues
projected. This helps in development of camaraderie and
esprit-de-corps.
(vi) Annual Confidential Report of Indian Air Force lays specific
emphasis on integrity, honesty, discipline, welfare and loyalty
to ensure that personnel with impeccable qualities only are
placed at higher levels.
Recommendation (Para No. 18)
The Committee note that like every year , this year also Army got
the major share of Defence Budget. However, it projected a requirement
of Rs. 93355.38 crore for the Revenue outlay but was allocated only
Rs. 81119.20 crore. For the Capital outlay, as against Rs. 25528.08
crore projected, Rs. 17883.83 crore was allocated. The Committee
also note that during the Eleventh Plan period percentage share of
Army’s capital allocation remained somewhat near 12 per cent of the
total defence allocation but in the Twelfth Plan period in the year
2012, the percentage share was down to 9.95% and this year it further
dropped to 8.78% of the Defence Budget. From the analysis of data
submitted by the Ministry, the Committee infer that Capital allocation
of Army has been decreasing every year. The Committee are surprised
to observe that despite the consistent recommendation of the
Committee, the Capital allocation is going down. The Committee are
not happy over the strategy of the Government for reducing the capital
allocation for Army, while it is a known fact capital budget is used for
modernizing the force by procuring machinery, equipment, tanks etc.
Therefore, the Committee view it a serious situation and desire that
adequate allocation should be made after considering the total
requirements of Army at the supplementary demands stage.
Reply of the Government
It is submitted that allocation of capital budget for all Services/
agencies have been made on the same principles and there is no
attempt to reduce the allocation for the Army. Requirement for
additional funds would be made at the Supplementary Demand stage,
based on projections received from the Services, progress of schemes
and utilisation of available funds.

41
Recommendation (Para No. 19)
The Committee note from the data supplied by the Ministry, the
dwindling Capital Revenue Ratio for Army, which in 2008-09 was
27 : 73, 2009-10 it was 24 : 76, 2010-11 it was 23 : 77, 2012-13 it was
20 : 80 and 2013-14 it is 18 : 82. Although Army is revenue intensive
force due to its large number of personnel, the continuously reducing
ratio affects the procurement plans and modernization of this force as
very modest amount is left for the capital segment, therefore, the
Committee recommend that Army should be given more allocation so
that there would be increase in capital segment and free fall of capital
portion could be arrested for the modernisation of Army. The Committee
also desire that enough budgetary provisions may be made to strengthen
the Army Aviation Wing.
Reply of the Government
The projected committed liabilities of the Army have been fully
funded. The progress of New Schemes is being monitored continuously
and all efforts will be made to seek, and provide, additional funds if
the need should arise, based on progress of schemes.
Recommendation (Para No. 21)
The Committee are of the view that Ministry should enhance the
capacities of NDA, IMA, Air Force and Naval Academies for larger
intake of cadets or it should open more academies on the line of OTA
Gaya so that there would be no shortage of officers in Army and also
in other Services. Reply of the Government
Training capacities of various academies are as under:—
Academy Trg. Capacity Stretched Capacity
NDA 1800 1920
IMA 1650 1800
OTA Chennai 500 750
OTA Gaya 750 —
The incumbency position of officers as on 01st January, 2013 is
given below:—
(i) Authorised — 47,762
(ii) Held — 38,172
(iii) Deficiency —  9,590 (20%)

42
Officer Training Academy (OTA), Gaya has been sanctioned with a
designed training capacity of 750. In principle approval of Ministry of
Defence to enhance the strength of OTA, Chennai from 500 to 750 has
been accorded. The proposals for enhancing the training capacity of
NDA, Khadakwasla from 1800 to 2400 and that of IMA from 1650 to
1950 have already been initiated. The combined capacity of two OTAs
at 1500, and IMA at 1950 would meet both the existing and futuristic
recruitment and the assessed strength of officers getting commissioned
will be 2038 per year against a likely exit of 1100 per year. Thus a net
increase of 938 officers per year will result in bringing down deficiency
by approximately 2% every year. Capacity of two OTAs is, therefore,
considered to be adequate.
NDA is the only tri-Service institution, which trains cadets of all
three Services before induction into their respective pre-commissioning
training academies. The intake capacity of NDA was recently enhanced
from 1800 cadets to 1920 cadets with the sanction for raising an
additional Squadron (16th Squadron) at NDA. A proposal for raising an
additional Battalion (5th Battalion) with 4 Squadrons (4 x 120 cadets)
at NDA to further enhance the intake capacity of cadets to 2400
cadets by 2015, are under consideration of the Government. Increase
in capacity of NDA will have a positive effect on the reduction of
shortage of officers in the three services.
Recommendation (Para No. 28)
The Committee note that the purpose of Army Aviation is to enhance
ground mobility and exploit manoeuvre. Army Aviation achieves its
battle field leverage through a combination of mobility, speed and
firepower. This in turn enhances the ability of the field force commander
to apply the four fundamental principles of war — manoeuvre, mass,
surprise and economy of effort. The Committee also note from the
data supplied by the Ministry that there are in all 8899 officers, JCOs
and Other ranks in Army Aviation against the total sanctioned strength
of 9324, thereby leaving Army Aviation with a vacancy of 425 personnel.
The Committee feel that shortage of personnel in any force and in any
rank is not a healthy sign and the Ministry should chalk out strategies
to fill these vacancies.
Reply of the Government
The deficiencies of officers in Army Aviation Corps are in consonance
with the overall deficiency of officers in the Army. Action is at hand
by various concerned branches with Integrated Headquarters of Ministry
of Defence (Army) to make good the deficiencies of Junior Commissioned
Officers and Other Ranks in Army Aviation.

43
Recommendation (Para No. 29)
The Committee also desire that the proposal of Army to acquire
Attack Helicopters and Tactical Battle Support Helicopters should be
given priority to strengthen this corps so that Indian Army can have
more agility in its operations and leverage over the armies of
neighbouring countries in low intensity warfare.
Reply of the Government
The ownership of Attack Helicopters has been vested with Army,
Procurement of Attack Helicopters is part of 12th Army Plan. Indian Air
Force (IAF) is currently carrying out procurement of 22 x Attack
Helicopters. The case is at Contract Negotiation Committee (CNC)
stage. Whilst all future procurement of Attack Helicopters will be done
by the Army, as the ownership of all the Attack Helicopters will finally
vest with Army. Procurement of Tactical Battle Support Helicopters has
been planned as per Long Term Perspective Plan (LTPP) 2012-27.
Recommendation (Para Nos. 30 & 31)
The Committee note that since a long time, the Army is engaged
in various parts of the country in counter insurgency operations. As
commitments of the Army towards Counter Insurgency/Counter Terrorist
Operations strain its resources and is at the expense of its conventional
war fighting potential, the committee endorse the views expressed by
the Ministry that Counter Insurgency operations should ideally be
conducted by the State Police or Central Armed Police Force (CAPF).
The Committee feel that as the matter essentially falls within the
domain of internal security, the Army should be deployed in such
operations only as a last resort, when the State Police/CAPF have
proved to be ineffective.
Therefore, the Committee desire that Ministry should discuss the
matter with higher echelons in light of the recommendation of the
Committee and relieve Army from Counter Insurgency operations so
that the personnel deployed in the operations are available to undertake
their regular duties along the borders.
Reply of the Government
The Army is presently employed in Jammu & Kashmir and North
East States for Counter Insurgency/Counter Terrorism operations. Once
a substantial and permanent improvement in the situation is achieved,
selective areas in these States, as considered suitable, could be handed

44
over to Police/CAPF in phased manner. To that end, relevant indicators
are monitored constantly for evolving a dynamic security response,
including a flexible redeployment philosophy. Any reduction or
reinforcement of troops has to be contingent to the overall security
situation. To facilitate seamless transition as also to increase synergy,
the Army when deployed in Counter Insurgency/Counter Terrorism
environment, wherever feasible, conducts joint operations with CAPF/
Police.
Recommendation (Para No. 33)
The Committee note that various entry schemes are available for
NCC cadets to join Armed Forces and a number of vacancies are
reserved for them. However , as very few NCC cadets join the services
as officers, the Committee desired to know the reasons for the same.
One of the reasons which was brought before the Committee was that
although the candidates are eligible to apply for various entry schemes
in training academies in the last year of their college or after completing
their graduation, the NCC curriculum is only for two years and most
of the Senior Division cadets complete it in second year, leaving one
year’s gap between completion of NCC training and ex-NCC cadets
applying for Armed Forces. Resultantly, these candidates cannot be
given pre-SSB training as they cease to be NCC cadets. The Committee
desire that this dichotomy should be removed considering the reduction
of period of training from 3 to 2 years for NCC ‘C’ certificate holders,
pre-SSB training should also be given to ex-NCC cadets who are in their
final year of graduation so that NCC cadets get a fair chance in direct
entry scheme and vacancies existing in this cadre be filled.
Reply of the Government
It is informed that adequate number of NCC cadets are joining
Armed Forces as officers. As many as 119 NCC cadets have joined the
Army as officers during the year 2012. In order to further improve the
percentage of successful cadets, the period of Senior Division enrolment
has been increased to 3 years instead of 2 years w.e.f. 9th March,
2013. This will enable imparting of pre-SSB training to all the candidates
in the 3rd year of enrolment which would, in most cases, be just prior
to the SSB interview. In addition, as a part of pre-SSB training, NCC has
introduced personality development and life skills as a major subject,
basic leadership camps (total 17), advance leadership camps (total 06
with special emphasis on SSB) and pre-SSB course at Officers Training
Academy, Kamptee with a view to improve SSB interview results.

45
Recommendation (Para No. 34)
The Committee note that almost 6897 schools and colleges are
waitlisted for enrolment of NCC and out of these 60 per cent are
Government schools and 40 per cent private schools and most of schools
and colleges which are waitlisted have given assurance to comply with
the funding part. The Committee appreciate the concern of DG NCC
that NCC need much and more bigger infrastructure for accommodating
waitlisted schools/colleges. However, the Committee are of the views
that instead of outright inclusion of the entire waitlisted schools/
colleges, there should be a gradual increase in the number of schools/
colleges for enrolment of NCC. Meanwhile, additional allocations may
be sought to create infrastructure of such magnitude so that one day,
there would be no waitlisting in this regard, so that shortage of officers
in the forces could be addressed to. Otherwise also, the country would
have the benefit of matured, disciplined and responsible citizens.
Reply of the Government
The number of educational institutions waitlisted for introduction
of NCC is decreasing gradually. Following measures are being taken to
further reduce the number of waitlisted institutions:—
(a) Expansion of NCC through new raisings in five phases from
the year 2010 to the year 2015 is underway. This will absorb
considerable number of waitlisted institutions/afford
opportunity to more schools/colleges for enrolment into NCC.
(b) Government is also considering upgradation of existing minor
NCC units to full-fledged NCC units thereby increasing the
number of cadets to be enrolled. Feasibility of permitting
few private institutions to opt for NCC while they pay for
the cost of training is also being explored.
Observations of the Committee to seek additional allocations in
this regard have been noted.
Recommendation (Para No. 40)
The Committee while examining Demands for Grants for the year
2013-14, observed that there is conspicuous shortfall in strength of
officers and airmen in Air Force. The shortage in officer cadre was
that of 565 personnel in 2011 which increased to 961 in 2012. The
shortage with regard to airmen is that of 6407 personnel. The statistics
in context of manpower shortfall have been almost consistent for past

46
few years, and at the same time, owing to almost negligible
enhancement in Revenue Budget, it appears that Air Force will not be
in a position to mitigate the staff deficit during the financial year
2013-14 furthering the gap between sanctioned strength and existing
strength in the service. The Committee takes note of the situation and
desire that immediate measures be taken which include provision of
adequate funds to provide budgetary support towards filling of vacancies
and commensurate augmentation in training infrastructure. The
Committee may be appraised about the initiatives taken in this regard
and tangible outcome thereof.
Reply of the Government
(a) There is a shortage of 783 officers as on 01 July, 2013.
(b) Certain proactive steps taken by IAF over the last two years
to reduce the shortage of officers such as participation in
career fairs/exhibitions, advertisements in print and
electronic media, motivational lectures in schools, colleges,
visuals/signages at strategic locations etc. have yielded
results. The selection process has been simplified with the
introduction of the Air Force Common Admission Test (AFCAT)
for all non-UPSC entries. There has been a concerted effort
to induct more NCC cadets as officers in all the branches of
the IAF . 10% of vacancies in all branches of IAF are reserved
for NCC (Air Wing) cadets with ‘C’ Certificate.
(c) In order to enhance induction of officers, creation of two
additional Air Force Selection Boards (AFSBs) for officer
selection have been approved by Government at Gandhinagar
and Guwahati and is likely to be operational soon.
(d) Existing deficiency against authorized establishment does not
involve any financial implication. Due budgetary support is
in place for existing training in place for existing training
infrastructure.
(e) As on 01 July, 2013, strength of airmen in IAF is 130455
against an establishment of 134080 leading to a deficiency
of 3625. In addition, a total of 4990 recruits are undergoing
training. With the sustained induction against this existing
deficiency and attrition during the period, the strength is
likely to be at par with the establishment by the end of
year 2013.
Recommendation (Para No. 41)
Another area of concern that Committee understand is the
consistently growing requirement for upgradation of training facilities,
equipment, faculty and institutions to match the day to day development

47
of technology and innovations in the field of equipment and aircraft
so that the manpower in Air Force becomes technically empowered.
This would require continuous and ongoing training programmes and
technology orientation courses. However, in view of the Committee
the current gamut of budgetary constraints would lead to many
compromises in ameliorating training infrastructure. During the
examination of Demands for Grants 2013-14, the Committee have been
informed that induction of new basic trainer ‘Pilatus’ has commenced
from February, 2013, in addition to this, IJT is also scheduled to be
delivered from December , 2013, also some other aircraft and AWAC
systems are also streamlined. Therefore any compromise in training
expenditure will result in limiting the manpower capabilities to handle
and operate new aircraft and systems. During the course of deliberations
the Committee were informed that shortfall in Revenue Budget would
have adverse impact on training thereby resulting into compromise in
operational preparedness. Notwithstanding the fact that in the recent
past there had been large number of instances of aircraft accidents
due to human error , accounting for nearly 40 per cent accidents, the
Committee opine that lack of appropriate training is a major cause of
concern and qualifies immediate attention. As such the Committee
recommend for adequate budgetary support to Air Force channelized
towards development of training at all levels. The Committee may be
intimated about the training modules/upgradation incorporated for
newly inducted/scheduled aircraft during the year 2013-14.
Reply of the Government
1. Induction of Pilatus PC-7 Mk-II. A contract has been signed with
M/s Pilatus Aircraft Ltd. on 24 May, 2012, for supply of PC-7 Mk-II basic
trainer aircraft. Delivery of aircraft has commenced in Feb., 2013 as
per the delivery schedule and ab-initio training will commence shortly.
A syllabus comprising of 55 hrs. of flying training has been formulated.
Flying training will be supplemented with Computer Aided Learning
Systems (CALS) and Ground Based Training Systems (GBTS). Installation
of Simulators from Nov., 2013 onwards is expected to augment the
flying effort and improve the training value.
2. Induction of Hawk Mk-132 (AJT). Deliveries have also
commenced against contract of Additional Hawk AJT aircraft. Simulator
training has been embedded in the flying training syllabus. In keeping
with the hi-tech flying training environment, Ground Training is also
being revamped by making use of available technology for enhanced
teaching ability. Modernization plans are underway in all Training
Establishments to upgrade classroom environment.

48
3. Intermediate Jet Trainer (IJT). IJT is planned as a replacement
for the Kiran Mk-I/IA fleet. The initial operational clearance for the
aircraft has been revised to Dec., 2013. IJT is planned to enter service
by 2015.
Recommendation (Para No. 42)
The Committee have been given to understand that out of the
total Revenue Budget of Rs. 18295.10 crore, Rs. 7236 crore  i.e. 38 per
cent is allocated for stores. Further out of this amount, Rs. 4155 crore
is given for POL thus leaving only Rs. 3081 crore for other heads
including aircraft spares, fuel etc., which will lead to short supply of
spares. The representatives of Air Force submitted before the Committee
that the fleet serviceability in Air Force is 60 or 65 per cent and if the
spares were available they would be able to push it to 77-80 per cent
thereby implying larger availability. So, the picture is dismal even
when cannibalization is resorted to. This becomes even more critical
considering that our aircraft fleet comprises very old aircraft most of
them 30-40 years old, enlarging their requirement for serviceability, in
addition to this budgetary constraint in this segment will limit the fuel
expenditure hence impacting every activity ranging from transportation,
training, load carrying, testing etc. Insufficiency of resources will cause
inability to procure spare and fuel, therefore, funding towards this
end may be reconsidered and sufficient funds be provided.
Reply of the Government
The Ministry will seek additional funds at the Supplementary
Demands stage, based on trends of utilisation and projected
requirements. However, the Services have been advised to priorities
expenditure and effect economies in non-salary revenue spending to
ensure that operational requirements are met within available funds.
Recommendation (Para No. 43)
The Committee found that against Capital Head the amount actually
allocated to Air Force in BE 2013-14 is only about 60 per cent of the
amount projected by Air Force against the Capital Head. In terms of
figures the projected amount was Rs. 64607.84 crore while the allocation
made is Rs. 39208.84 crore that means lesser allocation by Rs. 25399.00
crore.
Reply of the Government
The Capital allocation is based upon the increase allowed by the
Ministry of Finance which dictates the total budget available for all
capital requirements of the Ministry. The Committed Liabilities have

49
been fully funded. Additional requirement will be sought for any
additional New Schemes that are likely to be finalised during the year,
for which funds may not be available under the current allocation.
Recommendation (Para No. 44)
Even during the previous years there had consistently been a gap
in projected and allocated funds under capital budget, however , the
quantum of gap used to deviate between 10 and 20 per cent during
the last four years. For the present year this difference has been
magnified to the extent of almost 40 per cent. In the RE 2012-13, Air
Force had made a projection of Rs. 36999.62 crore against ‘capital
head’ while the allocation made available to them was only Rs. 30517.95
crore. On the other hand, Air Force has utilized a sum of Rs. 32415.91
crore till February, 2013, so the rest of the amount has to be met by
way of supplementary grants. In this context, the Committee deplore
the whole scenario of ad-hocism in budgeting. The Committee desire
that capital budget should be made keeping mind long term goals and
targets envisaged in LTIPP so that the grandeur of Indian Air Force lost
in last two decades or so is restored by the end of LTIPP 2012-27.
Reply of the Government
While projections are made by the Services keeping in mind the
Five Year Defence Plan and LTIPP , actual availability of funds is
constrained by the ceilings conveyed by the Ministry of Finance which
in turn depend on a number of factors including the overall state of
the economy.
Recommendation (Para No. 46)
Besides this, most of the air fleet is aging and need timely
substitution otherwise obsolescence will further increase and the gap
in existing and sanctioned strength of squadrons will widen further
thereby leaving air defence in lurch. Therefore, the Committee conclude
that a gap of Rs. 25399.00 crore the Capital Budget will leave no scope
for Air Force to look forward to develop its air fleet and other
modernization drives. Therefore, the Committee recommend that
additional adequate grants be made under Capital Budget so that the
projects at various stages do not get hampered.
Reply of the Government
Additional requirement of funds for major projects like MMRCA will
be projected in the event that these cases reach an advanced stage
of finalisation during the year.

50
Recommendation (Para No. 47)
The Committee found that the number of contracts signed each
year during 11th Plan period are 84 in 2007-08, 61 in 2008-09, 49 in
2009-10, 50 in 2010-11 and 52 in 2011-12. The data reveal that there
is a steady decline in number of contracts fructified over the last five
years. For the present year merely Rs. 2000 crore have been made
available to the Air Force under the Head ‘New Schemes ’. It came to
the knowledge of this Committee that a sum of Rs. 15000 crore was
required exclusively for MMRCA project which is presently undergoing
negotiations with ‘The Rafale ’ company of France. Considering the
fact that number of squadrons is depleting, addition of MMRCA becomes
quintessential for restoring minimum operational capabilities of Air
Force. Here, the Committee fail to understand that with stingy funding
of Rs. 2000 crore how Air Force will be in a position to acquire MMRCA
and the other projects lined up which include additional C-130, AWACS,
flight Refuelling aircraft and also attack, heavy lift and Recce &
surveillance helicopters, MI-17 upgrade, etc. Any sort of delay in
induction of important capabilities will lead to resultant asymmetry in
capability with respect to threat perception. In view of the above, the
Committee strongly recommend that there is a much bigger need for
funds to be made available for ‘New Schemes ’ so that modernization
trajectory is not halted. The Committee may also be intimated about
the achievements made in case of each of the above planned inductions
during this fiscal.
Reply of the Government
Availability of funds for New Schemes is constrained by the overall
ceilings conveyed by the Ministry of Finance and the requirement to
first cater for contractual liabilities incurred in respect of contracts
concluded in previous years. Additional requirement of funds for major
projects like MMRCA will be projected in the event that these cases
reach an advanced stage of finalisation during the year.
It may be appreciated that major capital acquisitions involve
considerable lead time and several years may pass before a project
reaches the contract finalisation stage when actual payment may be
involved. Little purpose is served by allocated funds, especially in the
current fiscal situation, for projects that are yet to reach this stage.
Recommendation (Para No. 48)
The Committee have been looking into the issue of trainer aircraft
available with Air Force for last few years. In the 15th Report of the
Standing Committee on Defence on Demands for Grants 2012-13, it

51
was recommended for fast tracking procurement of basic trainer aircraft
since the basic trainer HPT 32 had to be grounded in September, 2009
after a series of accidents. From September , 2009 till date i.e. for a
period little over 3 Years Air Force was doing without a basic trainer.
The Committee during examination of Demands for Grants for the
current year were informed that basic trainer ’Pilatus’ have now been
procured from Switzerland and its delivery commenced from February
this year. In this regard, the Committee desire that all the contracted
75 basic trainers be procured in time and our pilots should be given
appropriate extensive training to fly new planes so that history of
HPT 32 is not repeated. The Committee may be apprised about the
measures taken in regard thereto.
Reply of the Government
Subsequent to signing of the contract for supply of 75 PC-7 Mk-II
on 24 May 2012, efforts were made to further expedite the deliveries
of the aircraft so that these aircraft are available for ab-initio training
of pilots at the earliest. Deliveries of PC-7 MK-II aircraft and associated
equipment have commenced as per the expedited delivery schedule
finalised with M/s. Pilatus Aircraft Limited. Ten aircraft have been
delivered till date and 14 aircraft are expected to be available by July
2013 to enable initiation of the partial flying training course on PC-7
Mk-II for the first time. All 75 aircraft are scheduled to be delivered
by August 2015. Considering the fact that the IAF ’s total requirement
of the Basic Trainer Aircraft (BTA) is 181, Acceptance of Necessity
(AoN) for 106 indigenous BTA was accorded by DAC on 01 February
2010. However , the indigenous BTA case was delayed on account of
delay on the part of HAL to progress the case further . The matter is
presently under re-examination.
Delivery of Pilatus PC-7 Mk-II aircraft has commenced in February
2013 as per the delivery schedule. Eight aircraft have been delivered
till date.
Ab-initio pilot training is planned for commencement from July,
2013 onwards. An extensive flying syllabus has been formulated.
Installation of simulators from November , 2013 onwards will augment
the flying effort and improve the training value, as simulator training
will be embedded in the flying syllabus. Adequate number of instructors
has been trained on the aircraft.
Recommendation (Para No. 49)
The Ministry informed that 2013 is the last year for intermediate
Jet Trainer ‘Kiran’ as it is to be phased out in 2014 and planned to be
substituted with IJT being developed by HAL. This project commenced

52
in 1999 and since then there have been repeated revision of ‘Initial
Operational Clearance (IOC) ’ dates. The latest ‘Initial Operation
Clearance ’ date is fixed for December, 2013. On enquiring, the
Committee were given to understand that HAL is in consultation with
BAE systems to resolve some design issues. The Committee were
appalled to learn that there is no contingency plan in case delivery of
IJT is further delayed for any reasons. The Committee take serious
note of the issue and apprehend that the void which was created in
case of basic trainer is not recreated in the case of intermediate
trainer. While realizing the seriousness of the matter , the Committee
strongly recommend that all out efforts be made so that delivery
schedule of IJT is strictly adhered to. The Committee should be apprised
about the initial operational clearances of IJT and follow up. The
Committee also regret that in such a critical situation when life of
‘Kiran’ was well anticipated the Ministry should have taken proactive
stand on development, production and procurement of Intermediate
Jet Trainer.
Reply of the Government
1. The IJT was initially sanctioned in 1999 based on an off-the-
shelf engine and very basic avionics as a replacement for the Kiran
aircraft as stage-II training platform. The project was envisaged to be
completed in 5 years and within 180 crore.
2. The Prototype development commenced with an off-the-shelf
engine and cockpit with dial gauge instruments as in Kiran and the first
prototype commenced flight testing in March 2003. When the first
prototype commenced its flight testing, the need for a higher thrust
engine was identified for improved performance. Also there was a
need to update the avionics suite to modern technology equipments
and the cockpit to be improved to glass cockpit to avoid the possibilities
of obsolescence and to stay on par with the current technology. Since
no engine of suitable power was available off-the-shelf there was a
need to get an engine developed. Accordingly the proposal for revision
to include the development of a higher thrust engine and incorporation
of modern avionics suite and glass cockpit (to be developed within the
country) was proposed. This revision was approved in 2005 with a
completion date of March 2008.
3. The contract for development of the engine was awarded to
M/s. Rosoboronexport/NPO Saturn based on the laid down Techno-
commercial procedures. The revision of the sanction envisaged the
commencement of development of higher thrust engine in October,

53
2004 and availability of flight worthy engine by March 2006. Due to
systemic delays the contract was awarded in June 2005 and the
development commenced in August 2005. Due to the various
developmental problems faced by the Russian agency, the flight worthy
engine was available only from January 2009. This delay in development
of higher thrust engine along with two unanticipated incidents on the
two prototype aircraft (in 2007 and 2009) leading to breaks in flight
testing led to delays in the development programme. Further there
was a failure of the structural test specimen in August 2010 leading to
the need for design modification to the rear fuselage and CAT-1 accident
on the first prototype on 28 April 2011, leading to the total re-design
of the flight control system as well as stiffening of structure causing
a break of more than 10 months in the flight testing.
4. The time line for completion of Operational clearance was
proposed as December 2011 after the STS failure and its recovery but
had to be revised to December 2013 after the CAT-1 accident and its
recovery actions. Accordingly, the approval of the Government has
been obtained in June 2013 for the operational clearance by December
2013 and to include the escalations in material and labour costs.
5. All the required modifications have been complied on all the
aircraft and as on date 696 test flights have been completed. Towards
operational clearance, the aircraft has been tested to full speed,
altitude and load envelope and all systems have been evaluated. Testing
under hot weather conditions and sea level have been completed. The
major tasks left towards the initial operational clearance are the
completion of stall and spin testing on aircraft and towards final
operational clearance are the armament trials.
6. Two aircraft have been modified with the Anti-Spin Parachute
System which is a mandatory requirement for stall and spin testing, for
proving it satisfactory. The Anti-Spin parachute system has been proven
by in Flight streaming and the stall tests have commenced. M/s. BAE
systems have been engaged as expert consultant to hasten up the
completion of stall and spin tests based on their experience in platforms
like Hawk.
7. One aircraft is fully modified for integrating the armaments and
is currently getting ready for the Ground Vibration tests, which is
required to obtain the clearance for flight. Another aircraft is also
being modified to augment the flying efforts for armament trials.
8. The first four Limited Series Production (LSP) aircraft (of the
twelve ordered by IAF) are already flying and currently participating
in developmental flight testing. The remaining eight are in various

54
stages of manufacture and will be completed within this financial year
(March 2014).
9. Six of the 73 Series Production (SP) aircraft ordered by IAF will
be ready this financial year (by March 2014) and the production line
is being augmented to increase the production rate from 2014-15 as
per the requirements projected by IAF .
10. Besides the regular internal reviews at highest levels of the
company, a Steering Committee chaired by Secretary (DP) reviews the
project every month.
11. With all the above, the Operation Clearance of the aircraft will
be obtained in December 2013. With the Operational clearance in
place, 12 LSP aircraft and 6 SP aircraft will be available to IAF for
training by March 2014.
12. The fleet strength of trainer aircraft duly factoring in phasing
out schedule of Kiran and production plan of IJT will be as below:
Year Phase Total Kiran Cumulative IJT Total
out of aircraft (HJT 36) Induction Trainer
Kiran Fleet Fleet
aircraft size strength
at the Annual Cumulative at the
end of end of
year the year
(a) (b) (c) (d) (e) (c+e)
2012-13 - 116 - - 116
2013-14 8 108 6+12 (LSP) 18 126
2014-15 5 103 20 38 141
2015-16 5 98 20 58 156
2016-17 17 81 24 82 163
2017-18 12 69 3 85 154
2018-19 15 54 - 85 139
2019-20 11 43 - 85 128
*Phase out of Kiran Aircraft starts from 2013-14.
13. It is evident from the above table that with the proposed
induction of IJT , trainer aircraft fleet available with IAF would maintain/
exceed the current fleet size.

55
Recommendation (Para No. 51)
The Committee feel that a meagre allocation of Rs. 442.86 crore
towards ‘New Schemes ’ are dichotomy since on the one hand big
acquisitions are planned while on the other hand funds are not provided
for. The fact that Indian Navy has to gear up for a multi dimensional
and deterrent role, the modernization plans would require adequate
budgetary support. Hence, the Committee recommend for adequate
funds for Navy. This makes all the more important in view of strategic
importance of Indian Ocean and Bay of Bengal and the consequential
need for Navy to be prepared to meet the strategic challenges by
strengthening manpower of joint command in Andaman and Nicobar,
Mandavan and Cape Cameroon in Indian Ocean.
Reply of the Government
Funds available for New Schemes have been limited given the
accumulation of committed liabilities which are to be met this year
and the limited availability of funds in view of the overall economic
situation.
Recommendation (Para No. 52)
In case of Revenue Budget, the projected amount was Rs. 17653
crore while allocation is just Rs. 10803.38 crore meaning a difference
of Rs. 6849.62 crore. So, the allocation is 61 per cent of the projections.
Out of this allocation Rs. 4891.42 crore i.e. 83 per cent is towards the
head ‘Pay & Allowances’ only Rs. 5911.96 crore was allocated to ‘other
heads’ against a projection of Rs. 11756.82 crore, which account for
50 per cent. The Committee found that this is the fifth successive year
of less allocation under ‘other than salary ’ segment.
Reply of the Government
Allocation of funds under the non-salary segment has been made
as per growth rates allowed by the Ministry of Finance.
Recommendation (Para No. 53)
The officials of Navy ascertained that there is demand to liquidate
carry over liabilities of FY 2012-13 to meet in addition to this years
obligatory requirements. The Committee understand that there are
huge gaps in money required and what is actually allocated. Therefore,
it is recommended that adequate funds be provided to Navy under
"other head ’ to cater to various needs which include training, stores,

56
repairs etc. since this would otherwise lead to many compromises in
operational preparedness of Navy. The demand should be vigorously
taken up with the Ministry of Finance.
Reply of the Government
Requirement of additional funds, including those required to meet
any carry over liabilities from the previous financial year , will be
pursued vigorously with the Ministry of Finance.
Recommendation (Para No. 54)
Vikramaditya
During examination of Demands for grants (DFG) 2012-13, the
Standing Committee on Defence was told by the Ministry of Defence
that the Aircraft Carrier Vikramaditya was scheduled to be inducted in
Indian Navy in 2012. However, the planned induction of Vikramaditya
was delayed due to defects observed in the boiler furnace brickwork
during the sea trails between June to September , 2012. The contract
for acquisition of the aircraft carrier was originally signed in January,
2004 at total cost of 974.28 million US Dollars which was revised in
March, 2010 to 2.3 Billion US Dollars. The Committee have now been
informed that the delivery date of Vikramaditya has once again been
extended to the last quarter of 2013. The Committee would like to
recommend that all measures be taken to ensure delivery of
Vikramaditya is not extended any further and the Committee be
intimated about the same.
Reply of the Government
As per the schedule of activities related to Vikramaditya ’s delivery
earlier scheduled in December , 2012, the ship was put to sea trials
from June to September, 2012, lasting 108 days. During the sea trials
the main propulsion plant of INS Vikramaditya could not complete the
‘full power trials ’ due to defects encountered on ‘boiler furnace
brickwork’ at higher speeds. The ship has been docked and rectification
of the defect on boiler brickwork is in progress. The repairs would be
followed by sea trials and practical training of the Indian crew.
Accordingly, the Russian side has submitted a revised schedule with
ship’s delivery in the last quarter of 2013. The cost of the project
remains unchanged despite revision of delivery to last Quarter of 2013.
Recommendation (Para Nos. 55, 56 & 57)
The CCS sanction for construction of Indigenous Aircraft Carrier
(IAC) at M/s. CSL, Kochi was accorded in November, 2002. The
commencement of construction of ship was envisaged from January,
2004 and delivered by December, 2010.

57
The Committee were informed that the Phase-I of contract with
CSL Kochi envisaged its first launch by December 2010. However , this
has been delayed due to arrival of critical pre-launch equipment such
as Gear Boxes and 3MW Diesel Generator (DG) sets essential for ships
pre-launch. Both these items have now been received. A technical
float out of ship has been carried out by CSL in 2011and the ship has
been re-docked in Februrary, 2013 for lowering of balance Phase-I
equipment. The progress of the project is monitored through the
Empowered Apex Committee headed by the Defence Secretary and
also through CWP&A at IHQ MoD(N) progress the review meetings. As
per the revised timelines Phase-II covers the period from first launch
of the ship till completion of DG trials, till delivery of the ship, would
be undertaken under Phase-III contract. The revised targeted delivery
of the ship would be in 2018.
The Committee would like to emphasise that no stone should be
left unturned in order to achieve the deadlines and stringent line of
action should be followed in this regard so as to ensure that unlike
Vikramaditya, timeline for IAC ’s delivery is not repeatedly extended.
Reply of the Government
The Cochin Shipyard has proposed first launch of Air Defence Ship
in August 2013, in place of the originally envisaged October , 2010, due
to delay in receipt of initial pre-launch equipment. All pre-launch
equipment has now been received and ship has been re-docked in
February, 2013 for installation of balance equipment prior to launch
planned in August 2013. The progress of the project is being reviewed
by the Empowered Apex Committee and by regular Progress Review
meetings. Since revised timeline is yet to be approved, not being
explicitly recommended for inclusion for consideration.
Recommendation (Para No. 59)
While examining the Demands for Grants of the Ministry of Defence
2013-14, the Committee found that there are many projects not
fructifying for want of environmental clearances from the Ministry of
Environment and Forests at various island sites such as Narcondam,
Keating Point & Sandy Point etc. The Committee observed that due to
such delays many important projects are hindered, affecting overall
development of surveillance network and operational preparedness of
country’s Defence. Here, the Committee recommend that such issues
may be taken up on monthly basis at the level of inter-ministerial
secretaries discussion so as to enable entire process getting fast tracked
and the Committee be apprised periodically about efforts made in this
area.

58
Reply of the Government
During the visit of the Standing Committee on Defence to Port
Blair in January, 2013, information on certain radars to be installed in
Andaman and Nicobar Islands, which were awaiting clearance from
Ministry of Environment and Forests concerning Indian Coast Guard and
Director General Lighthouse (DGLL), Ministry of Shipping was furnished
to the Committee.
The Indian Navy plans to set up one Air Route Surveillance Radar
(ARSR) at Port Blair and one Airport Surveillance Radar (ASR) each at
Campbell Bay and Shibpur. Presently, there are no outstanding objections
raised by the Ministry of Environment and Forest for these projects.
As a part of the project to establish a Chain of Static Sensors along
the Indian Coastline, Remote Radar Stations were required to be set
up at 04 sites in Andaman and Nicobar Islands viz., Narcondam Island,
East Island, Sandy Point (Little Andaman Island) and Keating Point (Car
Nicobar Island). However , implementation of the project at these four
sites has been hindered due to requisite clearances from Ministry of
Environment and Forests.
Recommendation (Para No. 60)
One of the mandated tasks of Coast Guard is to provide protection
and assistance to fishermen. The Coast Guard intimated this Committee
that in order to protect fishermen, the ICG ships maintain 24x7 presence
at Indo-Pak and Indo-Sri Lanka IMBL i.e. International Maritime Boundary
Line. In addition to this, air surveillance is resorted to by way of using
Dornier aircraft and Chetak helicopters. Further , the Committee were
apprised that so far 1778 Distress Alert Transmitter (DATs) have been
distributed to fishermen. The Committee found that despite various
measures undertaken by Indian Coast Guard (ICG) there were 37 Indian
Fishermen in Srilankan custody and 376 in Pakistani custody. The
Committee take note of the situation and regret that inspite of various
surveillance measures being taken, many fishermen are crossing the
IMBL. In this regard all out efforts may be taken to repatriate our
fishermen and ensure that such incidences do not recur.
Reply of the Government
The Indian Coast Guard regularly repatriates Indian fishermen when
released by the foreign countries. Since 2010, a total of 119 Indian
fishing boats and 644 crew have been repatriated from Sri Lanka.

59
Recommendation (Para No. 61)
In the 13th Report (15th Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on
Defence, the Committee had recommended for taking up the issue of
vessel monitoring system by way of installing GPS system on boats,
carrying out registration of fishing boats and providing I-Card to
fishermen. The Committee reiterated that the matter may be expedited
comprehensively. The matter may be taken up with Ministry of Shipping
(MoS) and this Committee may be informed about the progress made
in regard thereto.
Reply of the Government
The following steps have been taken to strengthen the security
issue of the fishermen:—
(a) Vessel Monitoring System: During 2006, Ministry of Agriculture
in association with Indian Space Research Organisation/Antrix
Corporation Limited, initiated a pilot project on Vessel
Monitoring System(VMS). The operationalisation of the same
has been held up due to non-availability of MSS reporting
licences. A meeting of the Committee of VMS was held on
03 June 2013 wherein the issues and modalities relating to
operationalisation of VMS was discussed. It was deliberated
that Ministry of Agriculture will submit a proposal to ISRO
for allocation of S-bandwidth to Ministry of Agriculture.
(b) Registration of Fishing Boats: As per information received
from the Ministry of Agriculture, total 1,82,126 fishing vessels
have been registered under the newly devised uniform online
registration system.
(c) Issue of Biometric ID cards to fishermen: As per the
information obtained from the Ministry of Agriculture, as on
21 June, 2013, data collection and digitisation of biometric
ID Cards has been completed in respect of 16,47,927 marine
fishers out of projected marine fishers population of
18,12,011. Further, 11.03 lakhs cards have been reportedly
been despatched to the concerned authorities.
Recommendation (Para No. 62)
Coastal Surveillance has attained greater significance ever since
the incidence of 26/11 took place. The Committee have consistently
been taking up the issue of coastal surveillance during past many
years. In this regard, some effective steps were initiated in Coastal

60
Surveillance Network (phase-I) which include setting up of Chain of
Static Radar, coastal stations, marine police stations, etc. The
Committee note that despite good efforts in this direction more needs
to be done in order to make our coastal borders absolutely imperative.
As CSN-I has come to an end and CSN phase-II has commenced, the
Committee desire that the targets set for CSN-II are achieved within
set time-frame besides covering the gaps emerging from Phase-I. The
Committee be apprised with regard to detailed information about
hitherto targets achieved vis-a-vis targets planned in Phase-I and
Phase-II.
Reply of the Government
The implementation of Coastal Security Network Phase-I is nearing
completion and 34 out of 36 Radar sites on the mainland have been
established and linked up to the respective Remote Operating Stations
(ROS), Regional Operating Centre (ROCs) and Control Center. The work
on the remaining 02 sites over the main land and 10 sites on the
Lakshadweep and Andaman and Nicobar Islands are also progressing
satisfactorily and same are likely to be established by the year end
provided that all Environment clearances are accorded. Based on the
experience gained during the implementation of CSN Phase-I,
requirement for Phase-II are also being drawn.
Recommendation (Para Nos. 63 & 64)
There are numerous number of agencies/stakeholders working in
the maritime environment which include Navy, Coast Guard, Ministry
of Home, Ministry of Shipping, Ministry of Agriculture, Ministry of
Petroleum and Natural Gas, Intelligence Bureau etc., therefore,
effective coordination among various agencies is just indispensable. In
this regard this Committee had been informed that National Committee
on Strengthening Maritime and Coastal Security (NCSMCS) with Cabinet
Secretary as the Chairman, against threats from the Sea was formed
in August 2009 with a view to ensure timely implementation of various
important decisions taken by the Government in respect of maritime
and coastal security of the country, consequent to the terrorists attack
in Mumbai on 26/11.
The Committee have come to know that till date seven meetings
of NCSMCS have been held. Meetings were held on 04 September2009,
22 January, 2010, 14 May, 2010, 23 November, 2010, 29 July, 2011,
8 June, 2012 and 30 November, 2012 respectively. The dates reveal
irregularity in frequency of meetings of NCSMCS as sometimes there

61
have been lapse of almost one year in between two meetings. From
the above dates the Committee deduces that the seriousness
incorporated in approach towards maritime security in the aftermath
of 26/11 episode has somewhere started diluting in course of time.
While taking note of the situation, this Committee recommend that as
NCSMCS has an onus of implementation of important decisions regarding
maritime and coastal security and has representation of all stakeholders,
therefore, consistency and regularity in talks should be maintained by
way of holding meetings at regular intervals so as to keep a track or
progress of execution of various schemes/projects. Coordinated action
with coastal state administration will strengthen constructive
implementation of action programmes.
Reply of the Government
For improved coordination amongst multiple agencies involved in
the Coastal Security construct, Raksha Mantry (RM) reviews Coastal
Security (CS) periodically, the last meeting was held on 15 May, 2013.
This apart, the NCSMCS also reviews Coastal Security issues from time
to time. The last NCSMCS meeting was held on 06.09.2013.
The implementation of decisions taken in the RM ’s Review/NCSMCS
is monitored at various levels in the Government. Periodic ‘update’
meeting are held by individual Secretaries as well. With specific
reference, on 19 July, 2013, issues related to Landing Points, Supply
of card readers and Security of Sundarbans/Patrolling in coastal areas,
was reviewed by the Secretary (BM) with all stakeholders present.
There are other forums, where issues of registration of fishing
boats, laning in harbours for streamlining fishing traffic, pre-arrival
notification etc. are deliberated.
Government agencies (Ministry of External Affairs/Ministry of Home
Affairs) handle issues related to repatriation of fishermen arrested by
Sri Lankan authorities. For ease of coordination of Coastal Security
aspects at the ground level, an IMBL Meeting construct between Indian
Navy/Indian Coast Guard and Sri Lanka Navy/Sri Lanka Coast Guard
exists. A meeting is held every six months in the Palk Strait which also
provides a platform for exchanging data on International Maritime
Boundary Line infringements, and issues related to security in the
region.
Recommendation (Para No. 65)
From the data supplied by the Ministry it can be gauged that
during 2012-13, budget for this premier research organization was
projected for an amount of Rs. 14462.66 crore, however , it was allocated

62
only Rs. 10,635.56 crore which is just 5.50 per cent of the total
defence allocation and Rs. 3827.10 crore less than the projection. This
year again the trend continued and in fact there is lower allocation
than the previous year. This year DRDO asked for Rs. 16483.20 crore
but it could only able to get Rs. 10610.17 crore which is 5.21 per cent
of total defence budget and Rs. 5873.03 less than the projected amount.
In percentage term with respect to GDP , Department of Defence R&D
is provided with only 0.09 percentage of overall GDP last year. The
Committee are surprised to find from the reply of the Ministry that
stated the allocation of Department of Defence R&D has increased in
absolute terms and no project suffered due to reduced allocations as
projected requirements were met by way of prioritization of activities.
The Committee are dismayed over the fact that a lower allocation
which even in absolute terms also is Rs. 25.39 crore less than the last
year’s allocation. While allocating the budget, the Ministry has not
taken into consideration the inflation part also. The Committee desire
to know from the Ministry that when the foremost Research Organization
is given such a low budget, which is not commensurate with the work
assigned and is almost 64 per cent of the projected requirements, how
could the country become self-reliant in defence production.
Reply of the Government
Allocation for Defence Research and Development has been made
within the overall ceilings conveyed by the Ministry of Finance and the
trends of utilisation.
Recommendation (Para No. 66)
Keeping in view the indigenous development of defence related
products and other strategically important items are the need of hour,
the Committee desire that projected requirements of Department of
Defence R&D should be provided and great care should be taken in
future as well so that research in the field of development of core
defence products does not suffer for want of money.
Reply of the Government
All efforts are made to meet the projected requirements within
the constraints of overall availability of funds.
Recommendation (Para No. 67)
The Committee note that as per the recent policy ammunition now
a day ’s come as a part of acquisitions along with the guns but the

63
Committee feel that in case of sanctions or black listing of some
company, supply of the same could be stopped by the foreign country
and our country would suffer for the want of the same. Therefore,
they desire that DRDO should try to develop these ammunitions so that
dependence on foreign supply can be reduced and the country will
also save lot of foreign exchange. The Committee also note from the
statement of SA to RM before the Committee that DRDO could not
start any programme on the development of a field gun and country
remain dependent on the technology transfer of Bofors. The Committee
desire that the Ministry and DRDO should visualize the requirement of
the Forces in consultation with them and include such items of critical
importance in their long-term perspective plans.
Reply of the Government
The recommendations/observations made by the Committee have
been noted for future reference and compliance. Defence Research
and Development Organisation (DRDO) is in the process of identification
of future requirements of Armed Forces. All such items of critical
importance are being included in DRDO ’s Long Term Technology
Perspective Plan (LTTPP) which is likely to be ready by the end of
2013.
Recommendation (Para No. 68)
Although the DRDO has stated that Private Sector , particularly in
Defence R&D is not desired but the Committee are of the view that
DRDO in consultation with Ministry of Defence should encourage private
sector in Defence R&D so that talent and capacity of private sector
scientists may be utilised in developing state-of-the-art products and
upgrading of conventional weaponry. The Department should believe in
the competence of private sector considering the fact that private
sector , particularly IT and pharmaceutical industries are developing
many new quality products.
Reply of the Government
The recommendation/observation of the Committee stated that
“Although the DRDO has stated that Private Sector , particularly in
Defence R&D is not desired ” is not correct and hence needs to be
amended. DRDO is of the view that Private Sector should be involved
in Defence R&D and the efforts need to be supported. In fact, DRDO
has been involving more than 800 big and small Private Sector Industries
in many of the development projects, right from the developmental
stage. DRDO has also supported the creation of Defence Technologies
Development Fund to support R&D activities by SMEs.

64
DRDO is also of the view that Private Sector should be encouraged
in Defence R&D so that the talent and capacity of Private Sector could
be harnessed fully in developing state-of-the-art projects as well as in
developing/upgrading the conventional weaponry.
Recommendations (Para No. 69)
The Committee note that the Department of Space and Atomic
Energy have implemented performance linked incentive scheme to
their scientists. The Committee desire that to motivate and encourage
the scientists of DRDO, the Ministry should take necessary measures to
implement the performance linked incentive scheme at the earliest.
Reply of the Government
Performance Related Incentive Scheme (PRIS) at the Organizational
and Group level has been approved by Government for Department of
Defence R&D employees including Scientists, for a period of two years
i.e. 2011-12 and 2012-13. The Organizational PRIS has been linked to
achieving the targets set for the Department in the beginning of the
Financial Year in the Results Framework Document (RFD) to be approved
by the Performance Management Division, Cabinet Secretariat. The
RFD for the year 2011-12 alongwith achievements reviewed by the
Secretary, Performance Management Division, Cabinet Secretariat, were
submitted to the Department of Expenditure, Ministry of Finance for
sanction of PRIS for the year 2011-12. A saving to the tune of 
R  150
Cr. for funding payment of the PRIS for 2011-12 was also ensured. The
proposal, however , has not been agreed to be the Department of
Expenditure, Ministry of Finance due to absence of metrics for
calculating the savings and the savings being notional in nature.
In this regard, it is submitted that the country expects self-reliance
in defence technologies from DRDO. Over the years, DRDO has increased
Self Reliance Index (SRI) in defence technologies from 30% in 1995 to
approximately 55% in 2013. It has developed systems produced by
Production Agencies worth more than R  1,55,000 cr. for induction into
the Armed Forces, which has saved a lot of foreign exchange and
reduced dependency on imports particularly critical systems besides
generation of employment in the country. Therefore, performance of
DRDO should be judged in terms of above contributions and not by
savings. In this context, Hon ’ble Raksha Mantri has also written to
Hon’ble Vitta Mantri for consideration of PRIS for DRDO. Further progress
in this regard, will be reported to the Standing Committee.

65
Recommendation (Para No. 70)
The Committee note that in case of Air Borne Early Warning and
Control System, the import content is very high which is 67 per cent
of the composition. This is closely followed by Supersonic cruise BrahMos
missile with a import content of 65 per cent, the Long Range Surface
to Air missile is not far behind with 60 per cent, MBT Arjun has 55 per
cent and LCA has 40 per cent import content. The Committee also find
that some of the equipment developed by DRDO has import content
less than ten per cent. The Committee desire that DRDO should in
collaboration with the Defence Public Sector Undertakings, Ordnance
Factories and private industries, try to develop import substitute
products so that dependence on the foreign supplies would be reduced
and the country become self-reliant.
Reply of the Government
The Airborne Early Warning & Control (AEW&C) System developed
by Centre for Air Borne System (CABS) of DRDO consists of Aircraft and
Mission Systems. Based on the Operational Requirements given by Indian
Air Force, CCS approval was accorded for development of AEW&C
system on modified EMB-145 Aircraft. Accordingly, three modified EMB-
145 Aircraft were procured from M/s Embraer , Brazil. As no facility
exists in India for manufacture of Aircraft suitable for AEW&C role, so
import of aircraft could not be avoided. The import content in AEW&C
system is 67% of the total programme because it includes cost of three
Aircrafts and associated equipment required for maintenance.
BrahMos is a joint venture between India and Russia and the missile
is a product of two countries with sub-systems produced at the industries
at both places. The ground systems and all support systems are
completely from India with import content of 15%. The import content
in missile was 65% which has now come down to 48% and it is being
progressively indigenised to reduce its import content further.
Long Range Surface-to-Air Missile (LR-SAM) is a joint development
programme undertaken by India and Israel and work share has been
worked out between both countries based on expertise available. Missile
complex is outsourcing products/components based on the competence
available with private/public sector.
Import content in Main Battle Tank (MBT), Arjun and Light Combat
Aircraft (LCA) will progressively come down in the Mark II versions
along with increased production order received from the users.

66
Most of the import content in the above systems are Commercially
Off The Shelf (COTS) items. These items are not critical in nature.
However , efforts are being made to collaborate with Defence Public
Sector Undertakings (DPSUs)/Private Industries to indigenize imported
items.
Recommendation (Para No. 71)
The Committee note the reason explained by the Secretary, Defence
Production that DPSUs and Ordnance Factories are not equipped to
develop completely new platforms, as R&D setup of the country is
small and the major imports that are occurring in the country are for
bigger platforms. The Committee also note the views of SA to RM, on
the role of DRDO in self-reliance in defence production that because
of the Missile Technology Control Regime which came into operation
sometime in 1989, paved the way for real self-reliance and the industry
also started to develop since then. On the development of Light Combat
Aircraft, the views of the Ministry seem somewhat convincing as all
other nations also took unduly long time in development of fighter
aircraft. However, the Committee feel that there is a lot to do in the
field of self-reliance because it may be seen from the data supplied
by the Ministry that products developed by DRDO also has a large share
of imported material. Therefore, the Committee desire that the Ministry
should encourage better co-ordination among users i.e. defence forces,
production units  i.e.  Ordnance Factories and DPSUs and DRDO to
enhance self-reliance in the country.
Reply of the Government
The recommendation of the Hon ’ble Committee has been noted.
The Ministry have given instructions to all the DPSUs and OFB that
the goal of self-reliance in defence production has to be met through
indigenisation. The DPSUs are making serious efforts towards design
and development of improved technology. Action is on to create a
separate R&D corpus by HAL for innovative projects. A number of steps
have been taken by the Ministry to enhance indigenous production, as
under:-
(i) ‘Make’ procedure is being streamlined to encourage more
projects keeping in view Technology Perspective and
Capability Roadmap (TPCR);
(ii) ‘Buy (Indian) ’ and ‘Buy and Make (Indian) ’ have been made
the most preferred categories under Defence Procurement
Procedure, 2013;

67
(iii) Definition of ‘indigenous content ’ has been revised to give
a thrust to indigenisation;
(iv) It has been decided to constitute a Raksha Mantri’s Production
Committee for effective coordination among the defence
forces, production units and DRDO;
(v) List of defence products for which industrial licence would
be required by the private sector industry has been finalised
and intimated to the Department of Industrial Promotion
and Policy;
(vi) Procedure for issuing ‘No Objection Certificate’ for export of
defence products has been streamlined; and
(vii) Offset guidelines are being reviewed to make them more
effective.
So far as encouraging better coordination among Users and
production agencies is concerned, quarterly meetings between
Department of Defence Production and the DRDO at Secretary level
have been started, to which Users are also invited. There is already
a good synergy between the Indian Navy and Defence Shipyards and
Naval teams are deployed to oversee manufacturing of all big platforms.
Dedicated teams of the Services are already there in BEL for
productionisation of products based on DRDO technology and the same
is being encouraged in other DPSUs and OFB.
HAL has, apart from platform development, undertaken design
development and production of airborne systems covering equipment
like communication, radar , data recorder in the field of avionics and
in the field of mechanical systems. Programmes like FGFA, MTA, LUH
etc., are examples of the efforts HAL is making towards self-reliance.
In BEL, the persistent thrust on R&D has enabled development of core
competencies in the field of Strategic Defence Electronics and the
company has manufactured indigenously designed state-of-the-art
complex surveillance, Fire control and Missile Guidance Radars, Weapon
systems etc., to meet the emerging needs of the defence forces. BEML
has consistently undertaken R&D to develop new products which has
resulted in a situation wherein the turnover from new products
developed/upgraded by in-house R&D in the last 5 years is around 25%
of the total turnover. Other DPSUs and OFB are making constant efforts
towards indigenisation of various products.
Recommendation (Para No. 72)
The Committee note that mandate of Defence Institute of
Psychological Research (DIPR) is to conduct research for the selection
of personnel for the Armed Forces. It provides training to the assessors

68
in order to man the selection centres. The charter was further extended
to the Para-military forces. The Committee also note DIPR is conducting
studies in the area of organizational behaviour like Leadership,
Motivation, Morale, Attitude, Combat Stress Behaviour, Psychological
Operations, human factors in man-machine systems and the effects of
extreme environmental conditions on the psychological adjustment,
efficiency and well being of service personnel.
Reply of the Government
The prime mandate of Defence Institute of Psychological Research
(DIPR) is to conduct research in the area of personnel selection,
organizational behaviour, and adaptation to extreme environmental
conditions. Over the years, these mandates have been extended to
Para Military Forces and researches in the areas of combat stress
behaviour.
Recommendation (Para No. 73)
The Committee note that only 118 number of Scientists and Junior
staff is conducting studies with regard to improvement in selection
procedure for the forces, their psychological behaviour , suicide,
fratricide, stress and many more areas. The Committee also note that
in selection procedure alone, Scientists of DIPR has to screen more
than 9 lakh applications for the officers post. The Committee feel that
to conduct all these studies and various selection procedures, training,
etc. the staff strength of DIPR is inadequate in comparison to the
responsibilities given. Therefore, the Committee recommend that DIPR
should be provided with more manpower and budget to build latest
laboratories to conduct advanced studies in the field of human
behaviour.
Reply of the Government
Three Service Headquarters and scientists of Defence Institute of
Psychological Research (DIPR) posted at Services Selection Board (SSB)
are involved in screening and selection of candidates. With the
introduction of online application process, volumes of application have
increased to more than 9 lakh for officers ’ cadre of the Armed Forces
per year. Raising of new Services Selection Boards (Army, Navy, Air
Force and Coast Guard) and ever increasing demand for psychological
support services (counseling services and mitigation of stress related
behaviour) in field and in peace stations would require enhancement
of manpower and infrastructure facilities. In view of the increased
workload and as recommended by the Committee, there is need to

69
enhance both the manpower and budget of DIPR substantially. The
case for enhancement of manpower and budget will be taken up with
the Government as per recommendation of the Committee.
Recommendation (Para No. 74)
The statistics with regard to shortage of manpower in various
DPSUs, disclose that DPSUs are not seriously taking up the matter. In
HAL, the percentage of difference in sanctioned and existing strength
was 7.31% in 2010-11, 10.9% in 2011-12 and 12.2% in 2012-13. Similarly,
in case of BEML, the manpower shortage in executive cadre increased
from 298 in 2010-11 to 421 in 2012-13 while it inflated from 859 in
2010-11 to 1690 in 2012-13 in respect of employees. In case of HSL,
the shortage in officers cadre has gone upto 16.97% in 2012-13 from
0.45% in 2010-11 and 19.14% in 2012-13 from 0.33% in 2010-11 for staff
category.
Reply of the Government
The DPSUs have formulated a framework of policies for attracting
the right talent with the ultimate objective of ensuring optimum and
effective utilisation of human resources. The process of manpower
planning is undertaken to assess the number of personnel required to
be recruited vis-a-vis the projected volume of business for the next 5
to 10 years. In this exercise, apart from studying the attrition figures,
the technology trends in various product domains are also analysed to
ascertain gaps in skill sets, if any. These gaps are made good either
by training the existing manpower or by external recruitment. Since
the requirements for the forces are not continuous for all the platforms,
the manpower requirement for handling various products are
concurrently realised through redeployment and multi-skilling as far as
possible so as to optimally utilise the existing manpower for greater
efficiency.
HAL is in the process of restructuring its operations in as much as
focus is now on the core area of Design and Development, Assembly
and Integration, Testing and Certification and Product Support areas
taking into account the recommendation of the expert Committee
headed by Mr. B.K. Chaturvedi which has recommended that outsourcing
level should be enhanced to 50% from the present level of 25%. It is
also submitted that induction in HAL has been continuously taking
place depending on the requirements in the last 3 years and nearly
3000 personnel have been recruited. BEML is currently operating under
stiff customer driven competitive market on more than 80% of its
business in non-defence sector through open competition. Therefore,

70
utilisation of manpower needs to be at optimum level to keep its
products competitive. HSL has initiated the process of recruitment of
both officers and staff as per the requirement. Other DPSUs are also
taking necessary action for addressing the problem of shortage of
manpower, taking into account the need.
Recommendation (Para No. 75)
The Committee observe that the above mentioned DPSUs have
undertaken some major and ambitious projects of the three defence
services which include intermediate jet trainer aircraft, IJT in HAL,
IAC and vessels to name a few. The steady and continuous reduction
in manpower in these DPSUs is a matter of concern. Therefore, the
Committee desire that all out efforts be made to contain steadily
expanding shortfall of manpower at various levels in these DPSUs and
the Committee be apprised about the same.
Reply of the Government
The DPSUs have formulated a framework of policies for attracting
the right talent with the ultimate objective of ensuring optimum and
effective utilisation of human resources. The process of manpower
planning is undertaken to assess the number of personnel required to
be recruited vis-a-vis the projected volume of business for the next 5
to 10 years. In this exercise, apart from studying the attrition figures,
the technology trends in various product domains are also analysed to
ascertain gaps in skill sets, if any. These gaps are made good either
by training the existing manpower or by external recruitment. Since
the requirements for the forces are not continuous for all the platforms,
the manpower requirement for handling various products are
concurrently realised through redeployment and multi-skilling as far as
possible so as to optimally utilise the existing manpower for greater
efficiency.
HAL is in the process of restructuring its operations in as much as
focus is now on the core area of Design and Development, Assembly
and Integration, Testing and Certification and Product Support areas
taking into account the recommendation of the expert Committee
headed by Mr. B.K. Chaturvedi. It is also submitted that induction in
HAL has been continuously taking place depending on the requirements
in the last 3 years and nearly 3000 personnel have been recruited.
BEML is currently operating under stiff customer driven competitive
market on more than 80% of its business in non-defence sector through
open competition. Therefore, utilisation of manpower needs to be at

71
optimum level to keep its products competitive. HSL has initiated the
process of recruitment of both officers and staff as per the requirement.
Other DPSUs are also taking necessary action for addressing the problem
of shortage of manpower, taking into account the need.
Recommendation (Para No. 77)
The Committee would like to recommend that these PSUs should
develop mechanism to tap orders in the international market also
especially Asian countries. The production capabilities of DPSUs be
extended to other than defence production also such as fast flying
craft, helicopters, sea vessels etc. In this context, more proactive
approach is required in the part of DPSUs and Ministry of Defence.
Reply of the Government
The recommendation of the Hon ’ble Committee is noted.
Department of Defence Production obtains information on value of
production in the form of monthly & quarterly returns from all the
DPSUs and OFB and monitors the same to resolve the bottlenecks and
problems faced by them to ensure optimum performance of DPSUs and
OFB. Appropriate actions as detailed below have been initiated by
some of the DPSUs in this regard.
In order to expand its market to other than defence production
requirements, HAL has been covering the requirements of ISRO for
satellite launch structures, propellant tanks etc., and industrial gas
turbines which are used for power generation by ONGC and GAIL.
Components assemblies to Airbus, Boeing, etc., are being exported.
The recommendation of the Standing Committee will be taken as one
of the main guiding parameters in formulation of the 25 years
perspective plan of HAL which has been initiated.
In BEL, to maintain the growing trend of Value of Production,
enhanced thrust is provided to exports and civilian segment to tap
potential business in line with its core technology. The company has
also developed various products in non-defence segment including
Electronic Voting Machine (EVM), Tablet PC, Doppler Weather Radar,
Socio Economic Caste Census (SECC), Homeland Security, etc. The
revenue generated from non-defence business is around 15-20%. BEML
has been on an average exporting around 4 to 6% of its turnover. It has
exported to various Middle East and developing countries, including
South East Asian countries. To cater to the enhanced requirement of
the Indian Armed Forces, BDL is investing in a huge way towards
revamping its production facilities.

72
MDL has embarked on a massive modernisation project to upgrade
and enhance its facilities leading to increased production capacity to
take up new projects. While MDL ’s capacity is being fully utilised with
naval orders, a joint venture with Indian Private Shipyards is being
formed to explore the possibility of export orders. While GSL is making
efforts for export of its products, consistent efforts are also being
made to explore business opportunities from other government sectors.
GSL has built SSTF for ONGC, constructed and delivered 116 Nos. of
boats for Ministry of Home Affairs under Coastal Security Scheme
Phase I and to Department of Forests, Government of Goa and
Department of Forests, Government of Maharashtra. GSL has received
orders for construction and supply of 4 Nos. patrol boats from Gujarat
Maritime Board and 1 No. Patrol boat for Captain of Port, Govt. of
Goa. GSL is also looking towards auxiliary vessels for other government
agencies such as BSF , Port Trusts, A&N Administration, Port Blair, etc.
GRSE is the first shipyard in the country to build a Warship for a
foreign nation. An export order for an Offshore Patrol Vessel (OPV)
worth US $ 58.5 millions received from the Republic Government of
Mauritius is under construction and is expected to be delivered by
September 2014. GRSE is also exporting Portable Bridges to Bhutan and
other neighbouring countries over the years to an approximate worth
of Rs. 4 crores. GRSE has a comprehensive plan to tap international
orders from Asian & Latin American countries for its shipbuilding and
engineering products.
Recommendation (Para No. 79)
From the information submitted to them, the Committee find that
Government does not give grant to the private sector for manufacturing
Defence items. The Committee also note that Defence Procurement
Procedure (Make) provides for sharing of development cost with the
developing agencies with the approval of DAC. The committee after
examination of the utilization part of allocation made in Defence Budget
2012-13 and confirmed by the Ministry, that the allocation for ‘Prototype
Development under Make Procedure ’ during the year 2012-13 was
Rs. 89.22 crore but to the surprise of the Committee no expenditure
has been incurred upto February, 2013. The Committee could not
discover any plausible reason for this non-expenditure except that
there is a lack of co-ordination among Government and private
industries. It seems that it is an instance of greatly misplaced priorities.
Therefore, the Committee desire that the Ministry should take all the
necessary steps to improve co-ordination with the private industry and
also consider giving grant/assured orders in manufacturing/development
of weapon systems to them.

73
Reply of the Government
1. The allocation of Rs. 89.22 crore for prototype development
under ‘Make ’ Procedure during the year 2012-13 was based on
projections made by Development Agencies towards prototype
development. However , the amount was surrendered at RE stage and
allocation reduced to nil with no expenditure being incurred during
the said year.
2. It is submitted that the non-utilisation of the allotted amount
for the ‘Make’ projects during the FY 2012-13 is not attributable to
lack of coordination between the Government and the private industry
but to the lack of clarity on certain activities of the existing ‘Make’
procedure. Based on feedback from ongoing ‘Make’ projects, the
Government has constituted a Committee on Simplification of ‘Make’
procedure. The revised ‘Make’ procedure is in final stages of its revision.
The issues identified for resolution in the revised ‘Make’ procedure are
as given below:—
(a) Guidelines for formation of consortia.
(b) Guidelines for approval and acceptance of Cost Sharing
Arrangements.
(c) Clarity on retention of Intellectual Property Rights (lPR)
between Government and industry.
(d) Clarity on contents of important documents such as Project
Definition Document, Expression of Interest, Responses to
EoI, Detailed Project Report, evaluation criteria for
assessment of responses to EOI etc.
(e) Procedure to be adopted for evaluation of DPRs as well as
filing of reimbursement claims by successful Development
Agencies.
3. In addition, the Government has taken following initiatives for
better participation of the private industry in the defence sector:—
(a) Sharing of ‘Technology Perspective Capability Roadmap
(TPCR)’ with the private industry with an intention to provide
the industry an overview of the direction in which the Armed
Forces intends to head in terms of capability over the next
fifteen years.
(b) Preference to ‘Buy (Indian)’, ‘Buy & Make (Indian) ’ & ‘Make’
categories over ‘Buy (Global)’ or ‘Buy & Make ’ categories of
Capital Acquisition cases.

74
(c) The procedure for ‘Buy & Make (lndian) ’ category has been
further simplified in order to make the category more
attractive for Indian Defence Industry.
(d) DPP 2013 provides for participation of Indian Private Sectors
also for Maintenance ToT in ‘Buy (Global) ’ cases. The MToT
partner is no longer required to be nominated by the
Department of Defence Production (DDP).
(e) Defence products list for the purpose of industrial licensing
has been pruned down and the revised list has been notified
vide Press Note No. 3(2014) dated 26/6/14 by DIPP .
(f) The Governnient has recently liberalised FDI regime for the
Defence sector wherein the composite cap of foreign
exchange has been raised to 49% with full Indian management
and control through the FIPB route.
Recommendation (Para No. 80)
The Committee note that defence industry sector was opened upto
100 per cent for Indian Private Sector participation with FDI permissible
upto 26 per cent, both subject to licensing in May 2001. Since then
190 letters of intent/industrial licenses have so far been issued for
manufacturing a wide range of defence items to 104 private companies.
The Committee also note the views expressed by Secretary, Defence
Production that certain proprietary technologies would always be kept
away from this country because this is the nature of the arms business
even if FDI is increased to 49 per cent or 74 per cent. The major
reason for not increasing FDI is that if there is a war situation and a
particular country which has set up a production facility in India
withdraws production process, it may prove suicidal for our national
interest. The Committee further note that the example given by the
Secretary, Defence Production that in the telecom sector also, it has
not happened despite liberalized FDI regime and Indian products
vanished. The same was the view of the Ministry on increasing the
limit of FDI. After considering the increasing globalised economy and
expanding markets world over, where free trade and investment are
being encouraged in every field, the Committee are not buying the
argument of Secretary, Defence Production and are of the view that
defence technology is not for civilian use and only Indian Government
would buy from the defence industry, therefore, worry of the Ministry
of Defence that increase in FDI limit would jeopardize the interest of
the country seems to be unjustified. The Committee further note the
views of the SA to RM which are in contradiction with that of Secretary,
Defence Production. After pondering over the views expressed by both

75
Secretaries incharge of different departments, the Committee desire
to recommend enhancement in the FDI limit to attract foreign companies
which in a long term would benefit not only the Indian Defence Industry
but also help in providing employment opportunities and saving precious
foreign exchange.
Reply of the Government
The issue of enhancement in the FDI limit in the defence sesctor
has been examined. It is the deliberated view of the Ministry of Defence
that the FDI cap in the defence manufacturing sector should remain at
26%. However , wherever FDI beyond 26% is likely to result in access to
modern and state of the art technology into the country, decisions can
be taken to allow higher FDI on a case to case basis by the Cabinet
Committee on Security.
Recommendation (Para No. 81)
The Committee note that the Department of Defence Production
has established wide ranging production facilities for various defence
equipment through the Ordnance Factories under the Ordnance Factory
Board (OFB) and nine Defence Public Sector Undertakings (DPSUs). The
products manufactured by them include arms and ammunition, tanks,
armoured vehicles, heavy vehicles, fighter aircraft and helicopters,
warships, submarines, missiles, ammunition, electronic equipment, earth
moving equipment, special alloys and special purpose steels. Despite
the wide range of products manufactured by DPSUs and Ordnance
Factories, during the course of discussions, the Committee found that
India is still importing a large part of the country ’s defence needs. It
also came to the knowledge of this Committee that our R&D set ups
are small and the real battle for the country is to develop more and
more large platforms in the country itself. In addition to this during
the study visit to some of Ordnance Factories, the Committee found
that most of the machinery are very old. The manufacturing set ups
are turning obsolete and substitution with modern state of the art
technology is not keeping pace with obsolescence.
Reply of the Government
The observations of the Hon ’ble Committee about the inadequate
R&D set-ups of the DPSUs have been a concern of this Department for
quite some time and more and more emphasis is being given on
developing in-house R&D capability by DPSUs and OFB. The DPSUs are
being constantly exhorted to upgrade their existing technology through
monthly and quarterly review meetings. All the DPSUs are engaged in

76
modernisation programmes for upgradation of technology in order to
bring about improvement in productivity, quality, reduction in cost,
reduction in rework by improvement in process, adherence to
environment and safety norms. In the 12th Five Year Plan, DPSUs plan
to spend approx. Rs. 12,725 cr. towards modernisation.
DPSUs have also been making noteworthy efforts in the above
direction. HAL plans to build design capabilities within the company to
design & develop aircraft, helicopters and allied products. Having
identified R&D as a thrust area to drive the business growth in future,
HAL has reorganised all the R&D establishments and strengthened them.
BEL is undertaking infrastructure upgradation/modernisation to cater
to changing needs of technology/products. Specific groups in all the
units scan technology upgrades that are taking place and induct new
machines/test instruments/facilities available in the world market. To
innovate, BDL has established four R&D labs, viz., establishment of
Radio Frequency (RF) Lab, Laser Lab, Propulsion & Aerodynamics Lab
and Seeker Head Lab at a cost of Rs. 55 cr.
MDL has, in quest of modernisation, established new processes and
machineries which will ultimately lead to greater self-reliance. GSL is
now designing & building a range of sophisticated Patrol Vessels which
are a result of in-house R&D efforts. These vessels include 29 M
Interceptor Boat, 72 M Shallow Water platform for ASW applications
etc. In-house design for cargo vessels has been developed by HSL
which is also implementing a modernisation plan.
Earlier OFB was mandated to productionise the items as per TOT
received from DRDO or abroad. However, with greater delegation of
powers for R&D activities during 2006, OFB has upgraded its R&D
infrastructure both in terms of human resources and equipments/labs.
The products such as Mine Protected Vehicle, Chaff Launcher KAVACH
MOD-II, Water Browser 5KL, 155x45 Arty Gun etc have been successfully
developed and evaluated. Major emphasis is being given during
12th five year plan and a comprehensive investment plan of over
Rs. 15,000 crores has been made to modernise the existing infrastructure
and creation of production capacities.
Recommendation (Para No. 82)
The Committee also note from the data supplied by the Ministry
that in manufacturing the items produced by DPSUs and OFs, the
import content varies. In respect of products of Garden Reach
Shipbuilders and Engineers Limited it is 52.23 per cent but it is

77
09.82 per cent in case of Ordnance Factories. In other DPSUs also
import content had substantial share. The Committee desire that the
Ministry should encourage Indian Defence Industries to cut dependence
on foreign supplies/import content which has become integral part of
defence production in India and try to develop in-house indigenous
products.
Reply of the Government
In continuation of the reply to Recommendation No. 71, it is stated
that action is being taken by DPSUs and OFB to continuously increase
the indigenisation level by enhancing vendor base.
HAL has an Avionic Division, Accessories Division and Strategic
Electronics Division where certain products are being developed and
manufactured. HAL is focusing on certain critical technology to realise
economies of scale.
The endeavour of BEL towards indigenisation is indicated by the
fact that 75% of turnover is generated by making use of in-house
infrastructure facilities and manpower.
GSL in its efforts towards indigenisation has developed several
designs of Patrol Vessels which have saved the country ’s considerable
amount of foreign exchange.
MIDHANI is playing a key role in indigenisation of strategic alloys
and finished products for military hardware. These products are supplied
to other DPSUs and Ordnance Factories.
OFB is importing only those items for which either the technology
has not been transferred by the OEM or it has not been economically
viable to enter into the TOT agreements.
In BEML, indigenisation has been a constant pursuit, consequently
in many products the indigenisation levels are as high as 90%.
Recommendation (Para No. 83)
The Committee understand that huge investments in R&D and
production units are required which probably will take more time.
However , in the meantime if inflow of funds by way of FDI in production
and R&D is considered, it can help in checking and mitigating steadily
expanding deficiency in country’s Defence Modernization when compared
to international defence advancements. The Ministry of Defence may
think on this line since in any case the country is dependent on foreign

78
countries for defence acquisitions. Along with this, larger private
partnership from Indian companies should also be considered. In this
regard the Ministry had assured the Committee that all out efforts will
be made to address the bottlenecks in private sector participation.
The Committee look forward to encouraging results on this front.
Reply of the Government
As already indicated in the reply to Recommendation No. 80,
although there is a cap of 26% on FDI in defence manufacturing sector,
it has been decided that wherever FDI beyond 26% is likely to result
in access to modern and state-of-the-art technology into the country,
decisions can be taken to allow higher FDI on a case-to-case basis with
the approval of the Cabinet Committee on Security.
Since the opening of Defence Industry Sector up to 100% for Indian
Private Sector Participation in May, 2001, 203 Letters of Intents/
Industrial Licenses have so far been issued till July, 2013 to various
defence companies in the private sector for manufacture of a wide
range of defence items. The Ministry has also finalized the defence
products list for the licensing purposes which will provide clarity to
the Indian industry in the private sector while seeking Industrial License
for manufacture of defence items.
Defence Procurement Procedures (DPP) are periodically reviewed
and refined bases on the stakeholders ’ feedback and the experience
gained in its implementation. Several new initiatives to boost the
Indian industry have been taken and incorporated in DPP-2013 which
is effective from 1st June, 2013.
DPP 2013 has introduced a system of ‘Order of preferred
categorization’ in decreasing order as “Buy (Indian) ”; “Buy & Make
(Indian)”; “Make (Indian)”; “Buy & Make and Buy (Global)”. In accordance
with the Order or preferred categorization, all Statement of Cases
(including cases of Defence Shipbuilding and cases under Fast Trace
Procedure) seeking AON (Acceptance of Necessity), shall invariably
contain a detailed justification for recommending categorization as
well as reasons why each of the higher preferred categorization has
not been considered suitable for the purpose. This is expected to
promote private sector participation and enhance indigenization in
defence production.
Recommendation (Para No. 84)
The Ministry can also endeavour for tapping best brains from country
as well as abroad in defence R&D Sector and entire dependency on
DRDO for R&D solutions is not justified. The Committee desire, since

79
these DPSUs & OFs are well versed with production needs, R&D within
these organisations should also be emphasized upon by the department
of Defence Production.
Reply of the Government
DPSUs have been formulating their recruitment policies in such a
manner that they are able to attract the right talent with the required
skill set to meet the desired organisational goals. Further , as already
been stated in reply to Recommendation No. 81, emphasis is being
given on development of in-house R&D capability by DPSUs and OFB.
In HAL a high level Design Policy guides R&D efforts. HAL is
developing capabilities in the design & development of aircraft,
helicopters, engines and niche technology areas like SDRs, AESA, Radar,
Aero Engines, UAVs etc., either through indigenous effort or through
collaborations. HAL has signed MOUs with various R&D institutions like
IIT , Kanpur and Indian Institute of Science for Strengthening the R&D
efforts.
In BEL, the recruitment is carried out through campus recruitment
from premier institutions across the country. Young budding engineers
are intensively trained to nurture their talent. In BEL, more than 50%
of the total engineers are working on R&D.
BDL is upgrading its R&D by recruiting people from IITs and Defence
Institute of Armament Technology and also having MOUs with DIAT &
BITS. BDL is also interacting with IITs and planning State of Art
Technology Facilities like Laser, Seeker Head etc.
For shipyards, the National Institute for R&D in Defence Shipbuilding
(NIRDESH), an autonomous society under the aegis of Ministry of
Defence, has been set up to develop complete and composite indigenous
technology solutions in Defence shipbuilding through R&D and to
compliment the efforts of Department of Defence Production, Indian
defence shipbuilding, DRDO, academic institutions, industry and all
other agencies involved in achieving self-reliance in the field of warship
and submarine construction.

(B) RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED
BY THE GOVERNMENT AND COMMENDED UPON
Recommendation (Para No. 1)
The Committee note that Budget Estimates (Net) for the year
2013-14 are for Rs. 203672.12 crore, which comprises Rs. 116931.41
crore Revenue outlay and Rs. 86740.71 crore as Capital outlay. Although
Defence expenditure is increasing in absolute terms over the years the
percentage increase in Defence expenditure since 2000-01 has not
been consistent. The Defence expenditure in percentage term grew
maximum during the year 2004-05 i.e. 26.29% as compared to the
previous years followed by the growth of 2008-09 and 2009-10, whereby
the percentage growth was 24.59% and 24.13% respectively. During the
year 2010-11 the percentage growth declined to 8.70% as compared to
the growth of 24.13% of the previous year. In the subsequent years
although slight increase was there but it did not match the level of
2004-05, 2008-09 and 2009-10. During the year 2011-12 the percentage
increase was 10.91% while during the year 2012-13 the percentage
increase has been 13.15%. However , Revised Estimates of the same
year brought down the growth to 4.44%. Although apparently the growth
seems to be 14.10% in comparison with Revised Estimates 2012-13, but
it is just 5.05%, if compared with Budget Estimates 2012-13.
Reply of the Government
The growth of the Defence Service Estimates is based on the
increases approved by the Ministry of Finance which are in turn dictated
by several factors including the overall state of the economy and
government finances. It is pertinent to highlight that the high percentage
of growth in 2008-09 and 2009-10 was due to the 6th CPC payments.
Recommendation (Para No. 8)
The Committee note that the Ministry of Defence has made
elaborate procurement procedures to ensure expeditious procurement
of requirement of Armed Forces. The procurement procedure includes
various stages of examination of required items. The Committee
contemplated over the reasons for increasing number of scams in the
procurements related to Defence despite the above procurement
procedure. One of the reasons which brought before the Committee is
that of non-availability of authorised distributor/representative of
80

81
foreign vendors. In this context, the Defence Secretary apprised the
Committee that way back in 2002 or 2001, the Government had tried
to register the representatives but no one responded. The Committee
are of the view that as more than a decade has passed since then and
world over there are changes in procedure to purchases defence related
items and regular interaction with the vendors in various defence
expositions have increased. Therefore, the Committee desire the
Ministry to revive this initiative for appointment of representatives/
distributors to avoid future irregularities in defence deals.
Reply of the Government
The Defence Procurement Procedure (DPP) guidelines in Chapter 1
permit registration of vendors who are the Original Equipment
Manufacturers (applicable in the case of countries where domestic
laws do not permit direct export by OEMs), wherein, those vendors
desirous of responding to any of the proposals advertised on MoD
website can forward their request to the Technical Managers as per
the format given in DPP .
In addition, the DPP permits the vendors to depute their authorised
representatives to be present during opening of technical bids and
opening of commercial bids, if they so choose.
Further as part of the RFP , a provision exists for the foreign vendor
to give details of agents, technical consultants, authorised vendors
that they may have appointed for marketing their equipment in India.
In view of the foregoing, adequate provisions exists in the DPP for
appointment of the authorised representative/distributor , however, the
operational aspects of these provisions would require further
elaboration.
Recommendation (Para No. 11)
The Committee are surprised to note that though the Ministry is in
the second year of Twelfth Defence Plan period but Twelfth Plan is yet
to be approved. The Committee desire that this Plan should be approved
at the earliest so that the Ministry can formulate future strategies for
the forces in a planned manner. The Committee desire that the
12th Plan would not face the fate of the 11th Defence Plan which did
not see the light of the day at all. They, therefore want the Ministry
to take up this task on priority and approve the plan without delay.
Reply of the Government
The concerns of the Committee have been duly noted and the
Ministry is pursuing the matter with the Ministry of Finance for approval
of the Twelfth Plan.

82
Recommendation (Para No. 12)
The Committee note that Border Roads Organisation (BRO) has
been given the task of development and maintenance of operational
road infrastructure specific to border areas. This Organisation works
for other Ministries/Government agencies also in addition to the Ministry
of Defence, however , after a policy decision the number of other
agency work has now been reduced to 30% and general staff roads are
allocated 70% of work to be conducted by the BRO.
Reply of the Government
The break-up of work load of BRO from 2008-09 to 2012-13 with
regard to General Staff (GS) and agency works is given as under:
2008-09 2009-10 2010-11 2011-12 2012-13
(Rs. in cr.) (Rs. in cr.) (Rs. in cr.) (Rs. in cr.) (Rs. in cr.)
GS 1535 2119 2396 2765 2765
Agency 1769.8 1942.90 1961 1328 1326
Total 3304.8 4061.9 4357 4093 4091
2. As per policy decision, BRO has been taking up new works
primarily for Army/General Staff requirement. The agency work shown
above also includes works being executed MHA (Strategic roads for
ITBP) and MEA (Works inside Bhutan for strategic reasons).
Recommendation (Para No. 13)
The Committee also note that BRO has a encounter major natural
challenges i.e. hard rock, extreme cold, deep and high snow, avalanches,
young mountains, heavy snowfalls, etc. In addition to the manmade
challenges include poor availability of labour, poor quality of contractors,
paucity of construction material, etc. The Committee realize that
these factors are hindrance in speedy construction of roads and other
infrastructure. However , the Committee are of the view that while the
ferocity of certain natural phenomena can be mitigated by apt machines
and guiding instruments, the manmade problems can only be resolved
through proper management.
Reply of the Government
Emphasis is given on mechanizing road construction work. State of
the art vehicles/equipments/plants have been inducted and the Annual

83
Procurement Plans approved for last 5 years have seen significant
increase:
Years APP approved
2008-09 Rs. 157.15 cr.
2009-10 Rs. 252.13 cr.
2010-11 Rs. 403.00 cr. Including Rs. 100 cr. for
equipment bank.
2011-12 Rs. 429.85 cr.
2012-13 Rs. 470.66 cr.
2. Further Border Roads Organisation (BRO) has been allowed to
outsource works in all its Projects both for General Staff and Agency
works through an amendment to Border Roads Regulations. In addition,
efforts are being made to outsource some roads to Central PSUs so as
to augment the capacity of BRO.
Recommendation (Para No. 14)
Therefore, the Committee feel that permanent cadre of labour
and more incentives to the contactors with proven track can help in
checking the manmade aspect of the problems. The Committee also
desire that the Ministry should collaborate and encourage large
companies also who have sufficient manpower and machinery to carry
out quick the reliable disposal of work.
Reply of the Government
The work load of the Organisation is spread over vast area in the
border region with different working seasons. The seasonality precludes
possibility of holding large number of permanent labour as it would
only inflate the cost of job if they are to be paid without working
during non-working season. Since the Organisation (BRO) is work
charged, it is not financially viable to have the more number of
permanent labour force because their Pay & Allowances in the non
working season get charged to the works.
2. The recommendation of Committee with regard to collaborating
with large companies is agreed. BRO has been allowed to outsource
works and also efforts are being made to outsource works to Central
PSUs who have requisite technical and financial competence. Long
stretches of road/complete road is proposed to be outsourced to attract
large companies with adequate credential.

84
Recommendation (Para No. 16)
The Committee note that the perennial problem of the cadre
management, especially in respect of General Reserve Engineer Force
has not been addressed to in the right perspective. During the oral
evidence, Defence Secretary also admitted that BRO being a mixed
Organisation, there exists some manning problem. The Committee,
after considering all the facts, desire that cadre review of BRO should
be taken on a priority so that officers and staff of this mixed
Organisation can work in harmony.
Reply of the Government
Proposal for Cadre review of subordinate grades ( i.e. Group ‘B’ &
Group ‘C’ including erstwhile Group ‘D’ staff) of General Reserve
Engineer Force (GREF) has been examined and has been referred to
Ministry of Finance for their consideration. Further , the issues relating
to ‘Cadre review of Group ‘A’ officers of GREF’ and ‘Review of Manning
Policy’ were discussed in the meeting of the Border Roads Development
Board held on 4.2.2013 and a Committee has been constituted to look
into the issue of ‘Manpower needs of Border Roads Organisation (BRO)
and the matter of manning ratio ’.
Recommendation (Para No. 17)
The aim of establishing the Sainik Schools was to bring quality
public school education within the reach of common man, all round
development of personality and to remove regional imbalance in the
Officers’ cadre of Armed Forces. Basically, these schools serve as
nurseries for entry into National Defence Academy. The Committee
note from the data supplied by the Ministry that there are 24 Sainik
Schools in 21 States, however , one of the most populated States,
Uttar Pradesh does not have a Sainik School so far. Therefore, the
Committee desire that initiatives should be taken by the Ministry in
consultation with the State Government of U.P . to open Sainik School
in the State and also in other States which are not having Sainik
Schools at the earliest.
Reply of the Government
As per the present dispensation, Sainik Schools are established on
receipt of a specific request from a State Government. No such proposal
has been received from the State Government of Uttar Pradesh till
date. Moreover, it is intimated that in January, 2010, the Government
of Uttar Pradesh has declined the proposal of setting up a Sainik

85
School in Bundelkhand region of Uttar Pradesh. However , keeping in
view the recommendations of the Standing Committee, the matter has
been taken up again with the Government of Uttar Pradesh. State
Governments of Arunachal Pradesh, Goa, Meghalaya, Mizoram and
Tripura have also been requested to examine the possibility of sending
a suitable proposal for setting up a Sainik School in these States and
to convey their decision in this regard at the earliest.
Recommendation (Para No. 20)
The Committee note the perpetual shortage of officers in the
Army which is around 9520 at present constitutes about 20 per cent
of the authorized strength of officers. The Committee also note that
due to various campaigns launched to create awareness and attract
the youth resulted in increase in the number of officers commissioned
in the last three years. The Ministry has informed that two Army
Selection Boards in Punjab will also result in improved intake thereby
believing the fact that shortage existed during all these years as there
were no additional SSBs and also increase in services training institutes
like NDA, IMA and OTA will have positive effect in reducing shortage
of officers.
Reply of the Government
The Government have been taking continuous steps to make career
in Armed Forces more attractive. Some of the steps include substantive
promotion to the officers including those in Short Service Commission
(SSC) to the ranks of Captain, Major and Lieutenant Colonel after 2,
6 and 13 years of reckonable service respectively; increase in tenure
of SSC officers from 10 years to 14 years; upgradation of 750 posts of
Lt. Colonel to Colonel towards implementation of A.V . Singh Committee
Report (Phase-I); upgradation of 1896 additional posts in the ranks of
Colonel, Brigadier , Major General and Lieutenant General and their
equivalents in the other two Services towards implementation of
A.V. Singh Committee Report (Phase-II). Additional family
accommodation through Married Accommodation Project (MAP);
implementation of recommendations of the VI Central Pay Commission
with improved pay structure etc. have also made the Services more
attractive.
The Army have also undertaken sustained image projection and
publicity campaign to create awareness among the youth on the
advantages of taking up a challenging and satisfying career. Awareness
campaigns, participation in career fairs and exhibitions, advertisements
in print and electronic media, motivational lectures in schools, colleges
are also some of the other measures in this direction.

86
Above efforts have resulted in increased intake/commissioning in
Army. This is expected to further increase with setting up of seven
additional Service Selection Boards. Accordingly, with a view to
accommodate more candidates, in-Service training capacity of NDA,
IMA and OTA has been increased as under:
Academy Training capacity Increased capacity
NDA 1800 1920
IMA 1650 1800
OTA Chennai 500 750
In case of Army, a Second OTA has been set up at Gaya (Bihar) with
a training capacity of 750 candidates, so as to cater for future
requirements.
Recommendation (Para No. 25)
The Committee during the course of examination of Demands for
Grants 2012-13 have noted that there was deficiency of 1,86,138 units
of Bullet Proof Jackets (BPJs). Even when the approval of Defence
Acquisition Council was obtained on 19.10.2009 for purchase of the
requisite number of BPJs during the Eleventh Plan, the issue of purchase
of desired BPJs was fraught with various complications. The Committee
are concerned for saving the lives of soldiers who are fighting low
intensity warfare inside and along the border. It has come to the
Committee as a shock that these BPJs are still in the process of
procurement, even after the lapse of 4 years of getting approval of
DAC and Techno-Commercial Offers are yet to be submitted by the
vendors.
Reply of the Government
A RFP for procurement of BPJs was issued on 07 December , 2012
to 39 vendors out of which six vendors have responded. Presently the
TEC of the instant case is under progress. Efforts are afoot to complete
the acquisition process within the laid down timelines of DPP .
Recommendation (Para No. 26)
The Committee also note that Cabinet Committee on Security (CCS)
has approved scaling of quantity 3,53,765 BPJs for the Indian Army,
Units/formations deployed on Line of Control and in Low Intensity
conflict based on deficiency of Indian Army. The Committee are
disappointed with the lackadaisical attitude of the Ministry and desire

87
that all the required quantities of BPJs should be purchased using fast
track procurement procedures. While procuring these BPJs, the Ministry
should keep in mind the operational requirements of the soldiers/
officers, therefore, only light weight jackets should be purchased for
them.
Reply of the Government
Adaption of ‘Fast Track Procedure’ is deliberate decision by DAC as
per DPP . In the present case, DAC decision is categorised as
‘Buy Indian ’. The DPP process for ‘Buy Indian ’ would be followed
expeditiously, changing this approval to ‘Fast Track Procedure as per
DPP at this juncture will delay the acquisition process.
Further , it is intimated that the 1,86,138 Bullet Proof Jackets
being processed presently would be light enough as per GSQR to meet
the operational requirements of the Indian Army.
Recommendation (Para No. 27)
The Committee note the increasing number of Cease Fire Violations
(CFVs) across the border with Pakistan. The Committee are perturbed
over the beheading of one of our soldiers and killing of the other. The
Committee desire that apt and swift action should be taken by the
Government in order to create deterrence for cease fire violations in
future.
Reply of the Government
Apart from appropriate retaliation by the Army at the tactical
level, Government of India has taken up the issue of cease fire violations
with Pakistan consistently. All violations of cease fire are taken up
with Pakistan military authorities also at the appropriate level through
the established mechanism of hotline, flag meetings as well as weekly
talks between the Director Generals of Military Operations. Based on
periodic reviews, Pakistani activities across the Line of Control are
continuously and closely monitored by the Indian Army. All necessary
measures are taken to optimise operational preparedness of the Indian
Army.
Recommendation (Para No. 32)
From the Data furnished by the Ministry, it was learnt that NCC
could not able to utilize its allocated budget. In the year 2012-13, NCC
projected a demand of Rs. 121 crore under Capital Outlay but it was

88
allocated only Rs. 50 crore. The expenditure during this period was
just Rs. 0.58 crore. During deliberations before the Committee, DG
NCC clarified that NCC could not utilize allocated sum due to non
procurement of 110 microlites and clothing for the cadets. The
Committee are exasperated over the fact that uniform for NCC cadets
now not purchased since 2011, and these have just started coming in.
The Committee desire the Ministry to take remedial measures so that
there are no lapses of this nature in future and the budget as planned
and projected is utilized entirely.
Reply of the Government
Procurement of 28 retention clothing items for NCC cadets was
being made through open tender system till the year 2006-07. A decision
was thereafter taken in February, 2007 to switch over to rate contract
system of procurement to decentralize and enable NCC Directorates to
operate the same. The process of conversion took about two years and
the first such supply order could be placed in September/October,
2009 only. The second set of supply orders were placed in June/July,
2010. The supply position of the items through rate contract system
got reduced on account of escalation in the cost of raw material
ultimately resulting in no supply during the year 2011-12 thus making
the situation critical. To tide over the situation, following remedial
measures have been taken to optimally utilize the budgetary allocations
to NCC for NCC uniforms and microlites:-
(i) To meet the immediate requirement of clothing items for
use by NCC cadets, National Textile Corporation (NTC) was
approached who had indicated that they shall be able to
meet the clothing requirements of NCC at the stipulated
(RC) rate of 2009.
(ii) Simultaneously, proposals for procurement of uniforms with
upgraded specifications of basic clothing material from
existing Polyester Cotton Mix to Poly viscose mix Dope Dyed
with a view to ensure shade consistency as also switching
over  to open tender system of procurement before
termination of the existing rates contracts in March/April,
2012 have been moved.
NTC have till now supplied 1.32 lakh uniform items out of
9.57 lakh items (around 4.80 lakh pairs) ordered on them on 29.2.2012
as one time procurement to meet the immediate clothing requirements
of NCC. In addition, 1.5 lakh mtrs. of cloth also stands cleared by
DGQA. The case for extension of Delivery Period has been finalized so

89
as to ensure delivery of uniforms by NTC. A proposal to place orders
on NTC for supply of 4.10 lakh pairs of uniforms at an estimated cost
of Rs. 20.43 crore has also been initiated. After completion of the
supplies, the total uniforms for NCC cadets would approximately be
9.65 lakh sets which would be sufficient to provide at least one pair
of uniform to the enrolled NCC cadets. The authorisation, likely
availability and shortfall of uniform are summarized as under:-
(i) Cadet strength as on date = 13.80 lakh
(ii) Uniforms approved in Apr . 2010-11 = 9.65 lakh pairs
(iii) Uniform for which supply order has = 5.58 lakh pairs
placed on NTC & vendors
(iv) Balance quantity left uncovered = 4.07 lakh pairs
as per NCC Annual Provision (rounded off to 4.10
Review 2010-11 l akh pairs of uniforms)
Microlites
Against a requirement for procurement of 110 Microlite Aircrafts
for NCC, tenders were floated to be opened on 22nd June, 2010.
At the same time, Indian Air Force was also in the process of procuring
150 Microlites for their requirement as well as the Indian Navy. The
requirement of NCC was subsequently merged with IAF after detailed
deliberations and with the approval of the Ministry of Defence. The
primary advantages of merger were reduced cost due to larger quantity,
vast experience/structural support of IAF , robust after sale support/
maintenance due to similarity of equipment with Air HQrs. Technical
Evaluation of all the microlites offered by various vendors including
their Field Trials have been completed by the designated team. Names
of members including NCC have been finalized by the Air HQrs for
opening of the commercial bids which is expected very shortly.
Recommendation (Para Nos. 35 & 36)
In their various reports, the Committee have been recommending
for lateral induction of Ex-Servicemen in Central Armed Police Forces
and State Police Forces. However, the Committee found from the reply
of the Ministry that the issue is still lingering on and the last meeting
was held in this respect way back on 29.11.2011, wherein it was
inter alia, decided that options may be explored for achieving lateral
transfers from the Army to CAPFs and army personnel are incentivized
to join and the interests of resident CAPFs are protected. In this
regard, Ministry of Home Affairs (MHA) have been requested to suggest

90
a framework under which lateral transfer of Army personnel to CAPFs
could be made keeping in view the suggestions of the Cabinet
Secretariats. As informed by the Ministry of Defence, the requisite
framework/proposal from Ministry of Home Affairs is still awaited.
The Committee are dismayed to note that even after lapse of
more than a year no response has been received from the Ministry of
Home Affairs, therefore, they desire that this matter should be
vigorously pursued and may be raised in the meetings of high powered
Committees, so lateral induction of Ex-Servicemen in Central Armed
Police Forces and State Police Forces come into existence and profile
of the Army is kept young.
Reply of the Government
As apprised earlier , pursuant to the decision taken in the meeting
held in Cabinet Secretariat on 29.11.2011 on the issue of lateral transfer
of Other Ranks (ORs) of Army to Central Armed Police Forces (CAPFs),
Ministry of Home Affairs (MHA) were requested to suggest a framework
under which lateral transfer of Army personnel to CAPFs could be
made. However, no framework/proposal has been received from MHA.
In the absence of any framework/proposal from MHA to implement
lateral transfers from Army to CAPFs, a meeting under the chairmanship
of Additional Secretary was held in this Ministry on 24.06.2013 with
the representatives of MHA. A suggestion was made to MHA that, to
begin with, lateral induction of service personnel into CAPFs may be
commenced on a pilot basis (say about 1000 Nos. initially). A new
cadre/sub cadre could be created in the CAPFs for such lateral
inductees, which will obviate inter-se seniority issues etc. MHA agreed
to examine the proposal.
Accordingly, the above proposal has been conveyed to Cabinet
Secretariat under intimation to MHA. The recommendations of the
Committee in the matter have also been communicated to Cabinet
Secretariat and MHA.
Recommendation (Para No. 45)
During discussions on Demands for Grants 2013-14, the Committee
came to know that there is a need of Rs. 62,039 crore for Capital
Modernization, out of which Rs. 15,000 crore are required exclusively
for MMRCA project. It was also informed to the Committee that the
LCAs and MMRCAs are contemporary imperative needs of Air Force as
the Squadron strength is just 34 against a sanctioned number of 42.

91
In the first instance, this Committee regret that a huge difference in
sanctioned and existing number of Squadrons was allowed at all. This
could have been checked since the aircraft have a definite life span
and decommissioning — commissioning can be well calculated in
advance. The present scenario depicts lack of futuristic planning.
Nevertheless, now all out efforts be taken to mitigate this void in
squadron strength during the 12th and 13th Plans on priority basis. The
Committee may be intimated with regard to the efforts in this direction
along with the progress of LCAs and MMRCAs.
Reply of the Government
The phase out and induction plan for the fighter aircraft of the IAF
critically balances the twin requirements of combat capability and
obsolescence management. At present, the IAF has 34 fighter squadrons
against the Government sanctioned strength of 42 squadrons. Since
the number of fighter aircraft due for retirement exceeds the rate at
which their replacements are being inducted, the number of operational
squadrons has reduced to 34. Along with the planned phase out of the
MiG-21 and MiG-27 aircraft and induction of additional Su-30 MKI
aircraft, the IAF plans to induct two Sqns. of LCA and five Sqns. of
MMRCA by the end of the 13th Plan period. Based on the premise that
the inductions of the LCA and MMRCA will fructify as envisaged, the
IAF will have 35 combat Sqns. by the end of the 13th Plan period.
Detailed inputs on the progress regarding the LCA and MMRCA are as
under:—
(a) LCA: The delay in the LCA programme is one of the major
causes for shortfall in capability building of IAF . Two contracts
have been signed with HAL for procurement of 20 Light
Combat Aircrafts in Initial Operational Configuration (IOC)
and 20 LCA in Final Operational Configuration (FOC)
respectively. The delivery schedule for 20 LCA in IOC
configuration for Series Production was from April, 2009 to
December, 2011, while that for LCA in FOC configuration is
from June, 2014 to December , 2016 and both the delivery
schedules are linked to the IOC certification. The IOC
certification for LCA has been delayed due to challenges in
Design and Development of critical systems. Presently,
Aeronautical Development Agency has stated that IOC will
be achieved by mid-2013. Thus after IOC is achieved and
HAL commences deliveries of series production aircraft, LAC
will be inducted.

92
(b) MMRCA: M/s Dassault Aviation of France was declared as the
L1 vendor on 31 January, 2012. The MMRCA Contract
Negotiations Committee (CNC) commenced negotiations with
M/s Dassault Aviation of France from 13 February, 2012,
which is in progress. 126 MMRCA will be inducted into the
IAF between three to eleven years after the signing of the
contract.
Recommendation (Para No. 50)
The analysis of financial allocations for the year 2013-14 reveal
that there are huge gaps in projected and allocated amount under
various heads. In the Capital Budget the projection was that of
Rs. 31682.53 crore while the actual allocation is Rs. 23408.95 crore
resulting into a gap of Rs. 8273.58 crore. Especially in case of the head
New Schemes ’ the amount allocated is meagre 5.5 per cent of the
projection. Under this head the amount projected was Rs. 7986.53
crore while the allocation made is Rs. 442.86 crore. The Committee
have been informed by the representatives of Navy that Indian Navy
is progressing on the path of perspective plan with target of achieving
additional blue water platforms, aviation assets, anti-submarine warfare
assets, standoff amphibious capability, sea denial capability etc. Some
of the crucial acquisitions lined up for 2013-14 include ambitious
capabilities such as P-81, MiG 29K fighters, Advance Jet Trainers, total
seven ships of all categories etc.
Reply of the Government
Budget allocations have been constrained by the overall ceilings
conveyed by the Ministry of Finance.
Recommendation (Para No. 58)
During one of the study tours, it came to the knowledge of the
Committee that near the floating dock in Port Blair there exists an oil
storage tank which is considered to be hazardous. In case of any
accident the entire infrastructure of the Naval Management will be
affected and may result into irreparable loss. The matter was taken
up with the Ministry of Defence and the Committee have been informed
that allocation of a suitable area by A & N Administration in the Port
Blair Master Plan for this purpose was requested. Besides, M/s IOC has
been impressed upon to identify suitable land concurrently. It was
further brought to the knowledge of this Committee that M/s IOC has
identified land which is presently under lease of M/s Andaman Plantation
till December, 2014 and have also taken up with the Chief Secretary

93
and DC South Andaman for assurance and clarity on its non-encumbrance
and feasibility of handing over the land after completion of lease
period by December , 2014. The Committee observe that in the first
instance, location of IOC Terminal within the Defence Premises in close
vicinity of Naval Ship inviting some disaster to happen should not have
been allowed. In this regard, accountability has to be fixed at some
level and it should be ensured that such lapses do not recur. The
Committee should be appraised about the same. Meanwhile, Ministry
should endure for temporarily shifting IOC tanker to some safer place
till permanent land is allocated to them.
Reply of the Government
The information is being collected and will be made available
later.
Recommendation (Para No. 76)
The value of production in some of the DPSUs has declined. These
include HAL where value of production in 2010-11 was Rs. 16450.74
crore, while it was Rs. 12693.19 crore in 2011-12. In case of MDL, it
was Rs. 2611.41 crore in 2010-11 which declined to Rs. 2523.69 crore
in 2011-12. Even in Goa Shipyard Limited, the VOP has decreased from
Rs. 990.32 crore in 2010-11 to Rs. 676.40 crore in 2011-12. Similarly,
the value of production in HSL has also declined from Rs. 603.84 crore
in 2010-11 to Rs. 564.04 crore in 2011-12. On being enquired, the
Committee came to know that the main reasons attributed for reduction
in value of production are thin order book position, lack of working
capital delay in supply of ingredient items etc.
Reply of the Government
The reasons for reduced Value of Production (VOP) of the DPSUs
indicated by the Committee are explained below:—
In view of the nature of Aircraft and Aeronautical Industry contracts,
the production at HAL is on a batch mode production and is not in the
nature of mass production. This would result in variation in VOP levels
on a year to year basis, depending on orders in hand. As the production
of Sukhoi-30 (Phase IV — Raw material stage manufacture), Production
of Indigenous LCA and IJT in Series Production mode, Jaguar Darin-III
fleet compliance, are scheduled in coming years, there would be
increasing trend in the Annual Value of Production at HAL.
Value of production of MDL had declined during 2010-11 and
2011-12 mainly due to delay in receipt of Weapon platforms and
indigenous developmental equipment in case Missile Destroyers and

94
non-availability of critical MPM equipment for Submarine Project.
However , due to delivery of these weapon platforms and indigenous
developmental equipment for Missile Destroyers project in this year
and placement of orders for MPM equipment for Submarine Project,
MDL is expected to register higher VOP in 2013-14.
Due to the low order book position of GSL, the VOP has declined
considerably. It may be noted that Modernisation is underway in GSL
and on completion of the scheduled modernisation programme, GSL ’s
capacity and capability is expected to increase by nearly three times.
GSL has been nominated for manufacture of Mine Counter Measures
Vessels estimated to cost Rs. 6,000 cr. However , the project is going
to take some time. Efforts are being made to secure more orders for
GSL.
Reduction in Value of Production in HSL is mainly attributable to
low order book position. This has been partially mitigated with a new
order from Navy for a classified vessel with which value of production
is likely to improve in FY 2014-15. Further , HSL has received nomination
from the Ministry of Defence (MoD) for construction of 2 Land Platform
Dock, 2 Special Operations Vehicles and P-751 (Submarine) which will
lead to consequential increase in Value of Production, once the orders
are placed after due approval.

CHAPTER III
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE REPLIES RECEIVED
FROM THE GOVERNMENT
-NIL-
95

CHAPTER IV
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF
THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE
WHICH REQUIRE REITERATION AND COMMENTED UPON
Recommendation (Para No. 2)
During oral evidence while examining Demands for Grants, the
Defence Secretary stated that allocation for the Budget depends on
the availability of resources and there has been a gap this year and
in the previous years also. The Committee also note from the data
supplied by the Ministry that the growth of Defence Budget in
comparison to percentage increase over the previous year as well as
total defence expenditure, if compared to total Central Government
expenditure clearly depict negative growth of Defence expenditure.
Even if total defence allocation is compared with GDP , it again shows
a downward trend.
Reply of the Government
The allocation for Defence expenditure has been constrained by
the overall economic and fiscal situation.
Recommendation (Para No. 9)
The Committee note that procurement process is a long drawn one
and there were mistakes committed in formulation of General Staff
Qualitative Requirement (GSQR) due to which many of the projects
had fallen through. The Committee desire that proper coordination
should be made between the users, Defence Research and Development
Organisation, production and procurement agencies while formulating
GSQRs so that there remains no delay in production or procurement of
strategic items.
Reply of the Government
Formulation of GSQRs is an elaborate process involving various
agencies, wherein views of all stakeholders are taken and issues
discussed before finalising the GSQR. The process leading to the approval
of GSQR is given in the following paras:—
(a) GSQRs are drafted by the user directorate at SHQ with
required inputs being obtained by issue of RFIs on MoD website
and taking additional inputs from internet, defence journals/
magazines etc.
96

97
(b) The draft GSQR thereafter is circulated to other possible
user directorates, maintenance directorate, HQ IDS, DRDO,
DDP , DGQA/DGAQA, Dte. of Standardisation, Technical
Manager and any other branch/department for obtaining their
views/comments.
(c) Subsequently, the draft GSQR is fielded in General Staff
Equipment Policy Committee, which is a forum comprising of
representatives of all stakeholders/commenting and vetting
agencies. Herein, the proposed GSQR is ratified and approved.
(d) The aforesaid procedure is followed to ensure that GSQRs
while remaining broad based are also comprehensive and
inputs of the user, DRDO, production and procurement
agencies are aligned to ensure expeditious progress of the
scheme hereafter. Finalisation of GSQRs prior to accord of
AoN has been incorporated in the DPP-2013.
Recommendation (Para No. 15)
On the responsibility of maintenance of roads in Uttarakhand, it
was informed that BRO is not getting any fund from the Ministry of
Road Transport and Highways for the purpose. Considering the above
facts, the Committee desire that adequate allocation should be made
to BRO by the Ministry of Road Transport and Highways so that
maintenance of roads in Uttarakhand as well as in other border areas
would not be a problem and motorability is maintained in all seasons
and weather conditions.
Reply of the Government
Ministry of Road Transport & Highways has already been requested
for timely release of required maintenance funds. The revision of the
scale of these funds is in process.
Recommendation (Para No.22)
The Committee also note from the statement tendered before the
Committee that 23 items of ammunition are giving trouble due to its
faulty design. The Committee are given to understand that the
ammunitions in the gun gets burst while firing. It is a serious issue.
The Committee further note that despite checking by the Directorate
General of Quality Assurance (DGQA) who is the authority which inspects
and assure the quality of products reaching the users, this ammunition
has reached to the users to scare them.

98
Reply of the Government
Army had placed a demand for 113 items of ammunition against a
Roll-on-indent for the five year period 2009-14; against this demand of
Army, OFB could not meet 80% of the requirement for 23 ammunition
items. This was mainly on account of capacity constraint and delay in
product support from indigenous/import sources. Action is being taken
by OFB to reduce deficiencies in supply of such ammunitions in
consultation with Army.
The reference by the Committee on bursting of gun during firing
pertains to accidents occurring with 125mm Tank Ammunition. The
ammunition manufactured by OFB are inspected by DGQA, as per laid
down inspection schedule. The ammunition is issued after the same is
accepted by DGQA based on conformance to stipulated quality
parameters. However , certain defects/accidents were reported by User
during bulk exploitation of tank ammunition. A Committee was formed
in 2010 to look into the issue of barrel bursting holistically and give
its recommendations. These recommendations are under implementation
and their implementation will lead to an improvement in quality of
ammunition and corresponding reduction in incidences of barrel burst.
The pertinent point is that the indigenization process of an imported
ammunition or indigenous development of ammunition from scratch is
incremental in nature where success comes through a trial and error
approach and a certain degree of failure cannot be avoided. While
there is no denying the fact that defective ammunition did reach the
User but simultaneously corrective actions have been taken based on
the learning in the indigenization process and close interaction with
OEM, DRDO, DGQA and User representatives.
Recommendation (Para No. 23)
The Committee are not able to comprehend the various arguments
put forth by the representatives of various organizations over the
supply of defective ammunition. The Committee are not able to
understand that despite having a premier research organization like
DRDO, how design problems persisted for such a long time. Another
factor which has disturbed the Committee that without assuring this
quality, how the ammunition reached the gunners. Again, why the
procurement of such a crucial ammunition was not envisaged earlier
so as to fill the void at the right time. It seems that there was lack
of coordination in various wings of the Ministry.

99
Reply of the Government
As pointed out earlier , Indigenous development of weapon systems,
including ammunition is a long drawn process and failures are not
uncommon in the learning curve associated with the development
process. All the stakeholders, including DRDO, have been working
together to resolve the problem and a majority of the issues have
been identified and are being resolved.
Ministry had procured certain numbers of 125 mm Fin Stabilised
Armoured Piercing Discarding Sabot (FSAPDS) ammunition from M/s IMI
Israel. It was also envisaged to manufacture this ammunition at OFB
through co-production route. However , this route could not fructify as
the firm M/s IMI Israel got debarred from further business dealings
with the Ministry.
Ministry has initiated procurement of 66,000 rounds of 125 mm Fin
Stabilised Armoured Piercing Discarding Sabot (FSAPDS) ammunition
from Russia along with Transfer of Technology for indigenous production
to Ordnance Factory Board. In addition, DRDO is also developing
indigenous 125 mm FSAPDS MK-II version.
Recommendation (Para No. 24)
The Committee desire that in such cases, the Ministry should try
to find out the real reasons behind it and take stringent action against
the erring persons/organization. The Committee also desire that some
structured mechanism should be developed by it so that in future such
incidents do not recur.
Reply of the Government
Ministry has been working in close co-ordination with all stakeholders
to resolve the above issue. However , as pointed out earlier , failures
cannot be eliminated all-together in indigenous development and
productionization of weapon systems. However , efforts can be made to
minimize the failures. Whenever a failure occurrs, representatives from
all stakeholders are called and they get involved to address the problem;
however the redressal process has been an incremental/evolutionary
one.
A structured mechanism already exists to investigate the accidents
and suggest recommendations to avoid such incidents in future. Any
accident involving defect in and/or failure of weapons, ammunition or
explosive is reported to respective Technical Directorates of DGQA by

100
the User. The concerned Technical Directorate conducts investigation
together with the User and the manufacturer. Wherever required,
assistance from DRDO is also sought. In addition to it, regular interaction
meetings between the stakeholders including DRDO, DGQA, OFB, User
do take place where the problems are discussed and efforts made to
resolve them.
Recommendation (Para No. 37)
In BE 2013-14, Air Force had made a projection of Rs. 25922.64
crore against the Revenue Head while the allocation actually made
available to them is Rs. 18295.10 crore, thus creating a deficit of
Rs. 7627.54 crore i.e. about 30 per cent. Though there have been a
trend of providing lesser allocations than the projected amount to Air
Force under Revenue Head during last 4 years, the amount of gap used
to be in the range of 10 to 20 per cent, which has been inflated to
the level of 30 per cent in the budget of the present year.
Reply of the Government
The revenue allocations have been based upon the increases
approved by the Ministry of Finance.
Recommendation (Para No. 38)
The Committee understand that the Revenue Budget mainly caters
to the need of pay and allowance of the employees. The data reveal
that, for the current year , there is an increase of Rs. 590.29 crore in
BE allocations under Revenue Head when compared to BE allocations
for 2012-13 under the same head accounting to an enhancement of
3.33 per cent. Keeping in mind the present hike of about 11 per cent
in the rate of inflation, an increase of 3.33 per cent will not be able
to suffice even the obligatory needs of Air Force, that ’s why leaving
no scope for augmentation of its recruitment, training, inventory and
infrastructural capabilities. Even during the course of deliberations
the representatives of Air Force admitted that shortfall in Revenue
Budget would adversely impact inability to procure spares and fuel and
shortfall in training resulting in compromises of operational
preparedness.
Reply of the Government
The allocations are based upon the growth rate allowed by the
ministry of Finance. However , requirement for additional allocations
would be projected at the Supplementary Demands stage.

101
Recommendation (Para No. 39)
In addition to this the Committee also observe that RE 2012-13
allocation was lesser by Rs. 602.09 crore from BE 2012-13 allocation.
The Committee are perturbed by the very fact that the entire regime
of deficit budgeting will have a cascading effect on preparedness of
Air Force. The expenditure to RE allocations ratio had been plummeting
during the later part of the Eleventh Plan. The Committee feel that
this is a result of ad-hocism in planning and budgeting and deserves
immediate redressal. Therefore, the Committee strongly recommend
for provision of more and adequate funds to Air Force under Revenue
Head during the current financial year.
Reply of the Government
Requirement of additional funds under the Revenue budget will be
projected to the Ministry of Finance at the Supplementary Demand
stage, based on the requirement projected by the Air Force and the
trend of utilisation of available funds.
Recommendation (Para No. 78)
The analysis of budget utilization under Capital Head disclose that
during 2010-11 actual capital expenditure was Rs. 456 crore, in
2011-12 it reduced to Rs. 20 crore. Modernization programme of
Ordnance Factories envisages continuous up-gradation of their
infrastructure with the changing needs of the Defence Forces. However,
the Committee feel that in case of under-utilization of funds under
Capital segment, the modernization drive shall not progress
satisfactorily. The quality of products shall also deteriorate for want
of ample resources. As such the Committee found during course of
deliberations that one type of the ammunition available with Indian
Army was of poor quality and sometimes it fired in the barrel itself.
The Committee deeply deplore this kind of ammunition availability in
the hands of our soldiers. While examining the matter , this Committee
was assured that 66,000 round ammunition is now arriving from Russia.
The fact of the matter is that our Ordnance Factories are not yet in
a position to develop modern quality ammunition. Therefore, the
Committee desire that immediate measures should be taken in the
direction of overhaul and modernization of OFs. The amount projected
by OFB for modernization and capacity augmentation in BE 2013-14
was Rs. 1576 Crore while the actual allocation made is Rs. 1029 Crore.
This amount will cater to the modernization needs of 41 manufacturing
units and 32 other establishments under OFB. The Committee understand

102
that shortage of resources would lead to compromises in production
and modernization, therefore, adequate funds be provided to OFB. At
the same time accountability should be fixed at the highest levels in
Ordnance Factories for achievement of tangible outputs during the
12th plan period, year-wise. The Committee be apprised about the
same.
Reply of the Government
As per Annual accounts of Ordnance Factories, the expenditure
(cash flow) under capital head during 2010-11 was Rs. 454.21 Crore
and during 2011-12 it was Rs. 278.48 Crore. The reduction in expenditure
(cash flow) during 2011-12 was on account of recovery of Rs. 166.34
Crore by en-cashing Bank guarantee of M/s. IMI Israel, consequent
upon debarring business dealings with the firm. In fact, the expenditure
under capital Head was Rs. 444.82 Crore (278.48 + 166.34) which was
almost at the same level as that of 2010-11.
As regards development of modern tank ammunition is concerned,
DRDO is already in the process of developing indigenous 125mm FSAPDS
MK-II ammunition. In addition the Ministry has also initiated procurement
of 66000 rounds of 125 mm Fin Stabilised Armoured Piercing Discarding
Sabot (FSAPDS) ammunition from Russia along with Transfer of
Technology for indigenous production to Ordnance Factory Board. It is
being envisaged to procure requisite modern Plant and Machinery from
Russia for indigenous production of this ammunition so as to obviate
quality related issues in future.
OFB has planned an investment of around Rs. 15000 Crore on
modernization during 12th plan period. This includes investment for
replacement of old plant and machinery under ‘Renewal & Replacement
(RR) Head and procurement of new plant and machinery under New
Capital (NC) Head ’. The expenditure on modernization is being closely
monitored at the level of Board in Ordnance Factories and Ministry.
However , OFB shall be requiring timely allotment of funds for keeping
their modernization plan on track.

CHAPTER V
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH
GOVERNMENT HAVE FURNISHED INTERIM REPLIES
Recommendation (Para No. 4)
From the data submitted by the Ministry, the Committee arrived at
a conclusion that there is an enormous gap in the projections, allocations
and expenditure for the three Services since 2009-10. The allocations
for the three Services are lesser than the projected amount in all the
years and also the actual utilization is lesser than the amount allocated
to them at Revised Estimates stage except in regard to Army and Navy
during the year 2009-10 and 2010-11, where the expenditure exceeded
the Revised Estimates. During 2011-12, Air Force was allocated slightly
more than what it actually projected at Revised Estimate stage. If the
expenditure is compared to the allocations projected at Revised
Estimates stage, in all the previous four years, the expenditure is short
of allocation made at Budget Estimate stage except for Navy in the
year 2009-10 and Army in 2010-11. As submitted by the Ministry, revenue
expenditure includes expenditure on Pay & Allowances, Transportation,
Revenue Stores (like Ordnance Stores, supplies by Ordnance Factories,
Rations, Petrol, Oil and Lubricants, Spares, etc.), Revenue Works (which
include maintenance of Buildings, water and electricity charges, rent
rates, taxes, etc.) and the Capital expenditure includes expenditure
on Land, Construction Works, Plant and Machinery, Equipment, Tanks,
Naval Vessels, Aircraft and Aeroengines, Dockyards, etc. Therefore,
allocating less than what the services have projected would have
catastrophic effect on revenue as well as capital expenditure which is
not a healthy sign for the Services of a developing nation like India.
Therefore, the Committee desire that the Ministry should impress upon
the Ministry of Finance to allocate entire amount as per the requirement
of the Services otherwise the Services shall have to reprioritize their
activities, which may lead to cutting of expenditure on essential items.
Reply of the Government
The recommendations of the Committee in this regard have been
conveyed to the Ministry of Finance vide MoD (Fin) I.D. No. 3(4)/Bud-
I/2013 dated 18.6.2013.
103

104
Recommendation (Para No. 6)
The Committee note that because of tight fiscal situation as
admitted by a representative of the Ministry, the payments for the
acquisitions like aircraft and ships, are to be spread across four to five
years and sometimes the Ministry of Defence has to defer certain
payments because the Ministry of Finance was having some constraints
in providing the budget. The Committee desire that the Ministry of
Finance should itself re-prioritise the available resources and create a
situation where at least Ministry of Defence does not have to constrain
itself to an extent that it has to defer the payments of capital
acquisitions, which in long-term would affect the modernization plan
of the Services and devoid them of crucial equipment.
Reply of the Government
The recommendations of the Committee have been conveyed to
the Ministry of Finance vide MoD (Fin) I.D. No. 3(4)/Bud-I/2013 dated
18.6.2013.
   N
EW D ELHI; MAJ GEN B C KHANDURI, AVSM (RETD),
16 December, 2014 Chairperson,
25 Agrahayana, 1936 (Saka) Standing Committee on Defence.

ANNEXURE I
STANDING COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE
MINUTES OF THE SEVENTH SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE
ON DEFENCE (2014-15)
The Committee sat on Tuesday, the 25th November , 2014 from
1500 hrs. to 1540 hrs. in Committee Room 139, Parliament House
Annexe, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Maj Gen BC Khanduri AVSM (Retd) — Chairperson
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Col Sonaram Choudhary (Retd.)
3. Shri H D Devegowda
4. Shri Sher Singh Ghubaya
5. Shri G Hari
6. Km. Shobha Karandlaje
7. Shri Vinod Khanna
8. Dr. Mriganka Mahato
9. Shri Malla Reddy
10. Shri Rajeev Satav
11. Smt. Mala Rajya Lakshmi Shah
12. Shri A P Jithender Reddy
Rajya Sabha
13. Shri K R Arjunan
14. Shri Rajeev Chandrasekhar
15. Shri Harivansh
16. Shri Tarun Vijay
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri P K Misra — Additional Secretary
2. Shri R K Jain — Joint Secretary
3. Shri D S Malha — Director
4. Shri Lovekesh Kumar Sharma — Additional Director
5. Shri Rahul Singh — Under Secretary
105

106
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the members to the
sitting of the Committee and briefed about the report.
3. The Committee then took up for consideration and adoption of
the draft report on Action Taken by the Government on the
recommendations/observations contained in the T wentieth Report (15th
Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants (2013-14) of the Ministry of Defence.
4. During the course of discussion, some Members expressed their
desire to give their suggestions in writing and sought one week ’s time
for the same. They desired that if Hon ’ble Chairperson deemed fit,
their suggestions might be included in the Action Taken Report.
5. It was also decided to add additional categorization in para 1
under the heading ‘accepted and commented ’ in the Action Taken
Report.
6. The Committee, then, authorised the Chairperson to finalise the
above draft Report in the light of the suggestions received from the
Members, if any, and present the report to the House on a date
convenient to him.
7. *** *** ***
The Committee then adjourned.
***Not related with the Report.

ANNEXURE II
ANALYSIS OF THE ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT OF THE
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS CONTAINED IN THE
TWENTIETH REPORT (FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA)
ON DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2013-2014)
Total Percentage
of Total
1. Total number of recommendations 84 100
2. Recommendations/Observations which have 53 63.09
been accepted by the Government
(please see Chapter II):.
Para Nos. 3, 5, 7, 10, 18, 19, 21, 28, 29, 30,
31, 33, 34, 40, 41, 42, 43, 44, 46, 47, 48, 49,
51, 52, 53, 54, 55, 56, 57, 59, 60, 61, 62, 63,
64, 65, 66, 67, 68, 69, 70, 71, 72, 73, 74,75,
77, 79, 80, 81, 82, 83, 84
3. Recommendations/Observations which have 19 22.61
been accepted by the  Government and
commented upon (please see Chapter II):
Para Nos. 1, 8, 11, 12, 13, 14, 16, 17, 20, 25,
26, 27, 32, 35, 36, 45, 50, 58, 76
4. Recommendations/Observations which  the 00 Nil
Committee do not desire to pursue in view
of the replies received from the Government
(please see Chapter III):
5. Recommendations/Observations  in  respect 10 11.90
of which replies of Government  have  not
been accepted by  the  Committee  which
require reiteration  and  commented  upon
(please see Chapter IV):
Para Nos. 2, 9, 15, 22, 23, 24, 37, 38, 39,
78
107

108
6. Recommendations/Observations in  respect 02 1.68
of which Government have furnished interim
replies (please see Chapter V):
P a r a  N o s .  4 ,  6