39
STANDING COMMITTEE
ON DEFENCE
(2017-2018)
SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA
MINISTRY OF DEFENCE
[Action taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations
contained in Thirty Fourth Report (16th Lok Sabha) on Provision of
Medical Services to Armed Forces including Dental Services]
THIRTY-NINTH REPORT
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
March, 2018/Phalguna, 1939 ( Saka)


THIRTY-NINTH REPORT
STANDING COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE
(2017-2018)
(SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA)
MINISTRY OF DEFENCE
[Action taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations
contained in Thirty Fourth Report (16th Lok Sabha) on Provision of
Medical Services to Armed Forces including Dental Services]
Presented to Lok Sabha on 13.03.2018
Laid in Rajya Sabha  on  13.03.2018
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
March, 2018/Phalguna, 1939 ( Saka)


C.O.D. No. 198
Price : R 99.00
' 2018 B Y L OK SABHA S ECRETARIAT
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct
of Business in Lok Sabha (Fifteenth Edition) and printed by
Aegean Offset Printers, New Delhi.

CONTENTS
PAGE
COMPOSITION OF THE C OMMITTEE (2017-18) ................................ (iii)
INTRODUCTION ................................................................. (v)
CHAPTER I Report ...................................................... 1
CHAPTER II (A) Observations/Recommendations which have
been accepted by the Government ............ 19
(B) Observations/Recommendations which have
been accepted by the Government and to be
\ commented upon .................................. 52
CHAPTER III Observations/Recommendations which the Committee
do not desire to pursue in view of the replies of
the Government .......................................... 60
C
HAPTER IV Observations/Recommendations in respect of
which Replies of the Government have not been
accepted by the Committee and which require
reiteration and commented upon .................... 65
C
HAPTER V Observations/Recommendations in respect of which
Government have furnished interim replies........ 67
APPENDICES
I. Minutes of the Eighth sitting of the Standing Committee
on Defence (2017-18) held on 12.03.2018 ................ 68
II. Analysis of Action Taken by the Government on the
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Thirty
Fourth Report (16th Lok Sabha) of the Standing
Committee on Defence (2017-18) ........................... 71
(i)

COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE
ON DEFENCE (2017-18)
  Maj Gen B C Khanduri, AVSM (Retd) — Chairperson
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Dipak Adhikari (Dev)
3. Shri Suresh C Angadi
4. Shri Shrirang Appa Barne
5. Col Sonaram Choudhary (Retd)
6. Shri Thupstan Chhewang
7. Shri H D Devegowda
8. Shri Dharambir Singh
9. Shri Jayadev Galla
10. Shri Sher Singh Ghubaya
11. Shri Gaurav Gogoi
12. Dr Murli Manohar Joshi
13. Km Shobha Karandlaje
14. Dr Mriganka Mahato
15. Shri Kalraj Mishra
16. Shri Partha Pratim Ray
17. Shri A P Jithender Reddy
18. Shri Rodmal Nagar
19. Shri B Senguttuvan
20. Smt Mala Rajya Lakshmi Shah
21. Smt Pratyusha Rajeshwari Singh
Rajya Sabha
22. Shri K R Arjunan
23. Shri A U Singh Deo
24. Shri Harivansh
25. Shri Madhusudan Mistry
(iii)

(iv)
26. Shri Basawaraj Patil
27. Shri Sanjay Raut
28. Smt Ambika Soni
29. Dr Subramanian Swamy #
30. Shri Vivek K. Tankha*
SECRETARIAT
1. Smt Kalpana Sharma Ñ Joint Secretary
2. Shri T G Chandrasekhar Ñ Director
3. Smt Jyochnamayi Sinha Ñ Additional Director
4. Smt Rekha Sinha Ñ Sr. Executive Assistant
*Resigned w.e.f. 16.11.2017.
#Resigned w.e.f. 07.03.2018.

(v)
INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairperson of the Standing Committee on Defence (2017-18)
having been authorised by the Committee, present this Thirty-Ninth
Report of the Committee on ÔAction Taken by the Government on the
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Thirty-Fourth Report
(16th Lok Sabha) on Provision of Medical Services to Armed Forces
including Dental Services Ô.
2. The Thirty-Fourth Report was presented to Lok Sabha on 9 March,
2017 and laid in Rajya Sabha on 10 March, 2017. The Report contained
56 Observations/Recommendations. The Ministry of Defence furnished
Action Taken Replies on all the Observations/Recommendations on
21 November, 2017.
3. The Report was considered and adopted by the Committee at
their Sitting held on 12 March, 2018.
4. For facility of reference and convenience, Observations/
Recommendations of the Committee have been printed in bold letters
in the Report.
5. An analysis of action taken by the Government on the
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Thirty-Fourth Report
of the Committee is given in Appendix II.
   N
EW D ELHI; MAJ GEN B C KHANDURI, AVSM (RETD),
12 March, 2018 Chairperson,
21 Phalguna, 1939 (Saka) Standing Committee on Defence.

CHAPTER I
REPORT
This report of the Standing Committee on Defence deals with action
taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations
contained in the Thirty-fourth Report (16th Lok Sabha) on ÔProvision of
Medical Services to Armed Forces including Dental Services Õ, which
was presented to Lok Sabha on 10.08.2017 and laid in Rajya Sabha on
09.08.2017.
2. The CommitteeÕs Thirty-fourth Report (16th Lok Sabha) contained
56 Observations/Recommendations on the following aspects:Ñ
Para No./Nos. Subject
12
1 Role and Responsibilities of Armed Forces
Medical Services (AFMS)
2-3 Shortage of Manpower
4 Shortage in Army Dental Corps (ADC)
5 Shortage in Military Nursing Services (MNS)
6 Shortage of Paramedical Staff of Armed Forces
7-12 Specialists/Super Specialists
13 Mitigation of shortfall in manpower
14 Periodic revision of manpower
15-17 Upgradation of super-speciality facilities
18 Deployment in tough terrains
19-22 Modernization and infrastructure Upgradation
23 Mobile Medical treatment facilities
24-27 Air Ambulances
28 Alternate medicine
29 Preparedness for Nuclear , Biological, Chemical
war

2
30-33 Training
34-40 Armed Forces Medical College
41-43 Artificial Limb Centre
44 Funding
45 Medicines and Medical Stores
46 Indigenization
47 Contagious diseases
48 High altitude diseases
49 Psychological disorders
50 Digitization
51 Telemedicine
52-53 Research and Development
54-56 Collaboration with International Research
organisations
3. Action Taken Replies have been received from the Government
in respect of all the Observations/Recommendations contained in the
Report. The replies have been examined and the same have been
categorised as follows:Ñ
(i) (a) Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted
by the Government (please see Chapter II):
Para Nos. 1, 2, 3, 4, 6, 9, 10, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 23,
25, 26, 28, 29, 30, 31, 32, 33, 36, 38, 39, 40, 41, 43, 46,
47, 48, 49, 50, 51, 52, 53, 55, 56
(39 Recommendations)
(b) Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted
by the Government and commented upon (please see Chapter
II):
Para Nos. 5, 20, 21, 22, 34, 35, 37, 42, 45 & 54
(10 Recommendations)
(ii) Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not
desire to pursue in view of the replies received from the
Government (please see Chapter III):
Para Nos. 11, 24, 27, 44
(4 Recommendations)
12

3
(iii) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies
of Government have not been accepted by the Committee
which require reiteration and commented upon (please see
Chapter IV):
Para Nos. 7, 8, 12
(03 Recommendations)
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which
Government have furnished interim replies (please see
Chapter V):
Para No. Nil
(00 Recommendation)
4. The Committee desire that the Ministry Õs response to their
comments made in Chapter 1 of this Report to be furnished to them
at the earliest and in any case not later than six months of the
presentation of this Report.
A. Shortage of Military Nursing Services (MNS)
Observations/Recommendations (Para No. 05)
5. The Committee had, in their Thirty-fourth Report recommended
as under:Ñ
ÒThe Military Nursing Service is intended to perform nursing duties
in hospitals including family wards. MNS officers also perform
administrative duties relating to their service in hospitals and
formation HQ. Nursing Assistant (NA) and Nursing Technician (NT)
in the rank of Personnel Below Officers Rank are also available for
the performance of nursing duties in hospitals. In case of Military
Nursing Services (MNS), the authorization is 4943 whereas the actual
strength is 4036. In case of Army, the authorization is 4082 nurses
while the held strength is 3379. For Navy, held strength is 288
against sanction of 382 and Air Force has on its roll 369 nurses
against an authorization of 479.
Under MNS (NT) for Army, the authorization is 370 and held strength
is 352. In case of Navy and Air Force there is no sanctioning of the
posts. In case of General Duty Medical Officers, the authorization
is 4360 while the held strength is 3978. For specialists, the
authorization is 2295 and actual strength is 2068. The authorization
for super speciality is 210 and held strength is 208. The number of

4
nurses and paramedical staff in AFMS hospitals is less than civil
hospitals. For nearly 1000 bedded R&R hospital in Delhi, only 214
nurses are available, which is 1 nurse for 5 beds. This is far less
than the position in AIIMS or in comparison to a corporate hospital
like Apollo. In case of AIIMS, the ratio is 1.2 nurse per bed and in
Apollo it is two nurses per bed. The nurse-bed ratio, therefore,
needs drastic improvement. Ó
6. The Ministry, in its Action Taken Reply, has stated as under:Ñ
ÒCurrent authorisation of MNS is 5317 and recruitment of 353 nursing
officers will be carried out from civil this year and 210 will be
commissioned this year which will reduce the existing deficiency.
Regarding the perceived deficiency in Army Hospital (Research &
Referral) (AH R&R), a large number of male nursing assistants are
carrying out nursing duties in male wards. However after approval
of suggested staffing norms by Govt of India, any upgradation or
new hospital will have staffing patterns as per new norms. Ó
Comments of the Committee
7. The Committee had expressed concern over shortage of nurses
and paramedical staff in AFMC. Therefore, they had desired
undertaking appropriate measures for improving the nurse-bed ratio.
In pursuance thereof, in the Action Taken Replies, the Ministry has
stated that 353 nurses will be recruited during this year. The
Committee wish that the latest status of recruitment be
communicated to them. Further, the Ministry of Defence has stated
that commissioning of 210 posts of nurses will take place this year.
The developments in this regard may be intimated to the Committee.
The efforts being taken towards getting approval for the staffing
norms and the progress relating thereto may also be brought to the
knowledge of the Committee.
B. Specialists/Super-specialists
Recommendations/Observations (Para Nos. 7, 8 & 12)
8. The Committee had, in their Thirty-fourth Report recommended
as under:Ñ
ÒThe sanction or the current pool of specialists in the AFMS is for
2295 posts as laid down vide Govt. of India letter No. 10040/IX/
DGAFMS/DG-1D/869/16/D(Med) dated 04 May 16.5% cushion for
future unforeseen requirement has been provided which works out

5
to around 78. However , presently there is no enrolment under this
category. The Committee desire that efforts should be made to fill
up these vacancies at the earliest. In case of annotated
appointment, the authorization is 665 while held strength is 519.
A Board of Officers has been ordered for revision of the strength
of pool of specialists. This is also linked with revision of staffing
norms for the AFMS, which is under consideration.
Further , the Committee found that Specialist facilities are provided
in service hospitals taken into account the number of beds in the
particular hospital. In case of 76-100 bedded hospitals, only
medicine, surgery and anaesthesia specialities are available. The
super specialities like Cardiology, Neurology, Nephrology, Urology,
Reconstructive Surgery, Oncology, Joint Replacement,
Gastroenterology, Endocrinology are available only in Command
hospitals which have more than 600 beds. The Committee feel that
the specialities such as Psychiatry, Dermatology, Eye, ENT ,
Paediatrics and Orthopaedics which are presently available only in
zonal hospitals should also be extended to smaller hospitals, which
have around 100 to 400 beds. Further, the Committee view that
the specialities like Obstetrics and Gynaecology, Radiology and
Pathology which are presently available only in Ômore than
100 bedded hospitals Õ need to be upgraded even in lower level
hospitals which have less than 100 beds as these specialities are
coherent with other levels of specialities treatment.
The Committee were keen to know about the impact of shortfall
of super specialists in offering services to the clientele of the
AFMS. On this matter, the Ministry informed that the AFMS has a
minimal deficiency of super specialists and specialists. Further it
was submitted that although the impact of deficiency of super
specialists is felt in terms of extended man-hours, rationalized
leave and frequent move on temporary duties, emergency care of
patients is not hampered. Further , constant and vigorous efforts
are being made to reduce the deficiency minimum levels. The
Committee feel that the issues like retirement, release, promotion
etc. are well calculated in advance. Therefore, their recovery
should be proactively planned and executed. Ó
9. The Ministry, in its Action Taken Reply, has stated as under:Ñ
ÒChanges with regard to staffing patterns of specialist and super
specialist will be done prospectively in new hospitals and
upgradations of existing hospitals, once staffing norms for AFMS
hospitals are approved. Ó

6
Comments of the Committee
10. The Ministry of Defence has made a vague reply to the
concerns of the Committee regarding shortage of specialists/super
specialists in Armed Forces Medical Services. In their original
observation/recommendation, the Committee had noted that the
impact of deficiency of super specialists is felt by way of extended
man-hours, rationalization of leave and frequent move of the
specialists on temporary duties. The Ministry has in their reply,
stated that changes with regard to staffing pattern of specialists/
super specialists will be carried out once the staffing norms for
AFMS hospitals is approved. The Committee observe that the role of
super specialities is very crucial in providing life saving medical
treatment to the patients. Therefore, sincere and concerted efforts
need to be made for mitigating the shortage of specialists/super-
specialists in institutions falling under Armed Forces Medical Services.
The Committee wish to be apprised of the developments in regard
to the issue of approval for the proposed staffing norms.
C. Modernization and Infrastructure Upgradation
Recommendations/Observations (Para No. 20)
11. The Committee had, in their Thirty-fourth Report recommended
as under:Ñ
ÒOn long term plan projection particularly with regards to
upgradations of the existing facilities, the Committee have been
apprised that for Army, there are plans to provide comprehensive
medical support. Army Medical Corps has identified the existing
voids and has proposed for raising of 07 Military/General hospitals
and upgradation of 04 Militray/General hospitals. These have been
done with the aim of ensuring requisite medical cover to the
entire Indian Army. The raising of 03 Military hospitals and
upgradation of 02 military/General hospitals in border areas has
been sanctioned by Govt of India, MoD as part of Capability
Development Plan for Northern borders. Further , the Committee
have been told that there are various projects going on which
include raising three hospitals in the Eastern Command, one at
Rangapahar and Panagarh, and the location for the third one is yet
to be confirmed. Also, there are two up gradations again in Eastern
Command at Misamari and one at Northern Command in Leh. Besides
this, there is Long Term Perspective Plan, which include 225 bedded
Military Hospital (MH) for Jaisalmer , 50 bedded MH at Chungthang
and 49 bedded MH at Borarupak (Near Likabali). There is a proposal
for Upgradation of MH Kargil from 44 to 149 beds and 200 Bedded
MH for Eastern Ladakh. Upgradation of MH Jaipur to 600 bedded
Command Hospital is also in pipeline. The Committee desire the
Ministry of Defence to monitor and ensure all the projects mentioned

7
here are progressed in target oriented manner and details of
progress are submitted to the Committee in the Action Taken
Replies.Ó
12. The Ministry, in its Action Taken Reply, has stated as under:Ñ
ÒAs part of long term plan projection particularly for upgrading
Capability Development along Northern Borders and Long Term
Prospective Plan, following are being progressed by this Directorate
General:Ñ
(a) Capability Development along Northern Borders
Sl. Type of No. Remarks
No. establish-
ment
(i) MH 03 01 x 200 bedded Military Hospital at
Likabali being raised with effect from
01 Mar. 2017.
01 x 200 bedded Military Hospital in
support of planned to be raised in FY
2018-19.
01 x 75 bedded Military Hospital
planned to be raised in Eastern sec in
FY 2020-21.
(ii) Upgradation 02 153 GH at Leh from 200 to 300 beds.
of MH 180 MH at Misamari from 148 to 250
beds.
(b) Long Term Prospective Plan (LTPP).  DGAFMS has identified the
above mentioned voids and have proposed for raising/upgradation.
The same has been processed with Directorate General of Officer
Logistic (DGOL & SM/OL-1) vide letter No B/73185/DGMS-3C dated
16 Nov. 2015.
Sl. Type No. Remarks
No of est.
(i) MH 04 01 x 200 beds Military Hospital
planned in Eastern Ladakh.
01 x 49 beds Military Hospital planned
at Sitapur Military station.
01 x 50 bedded Military Hospital
planned at Chungthang.
01 x 49 Beds Military Hospital planned
at Borarupak.
(ii) Upgradation 02 01 x Military Hospital Jaipur 166 beds
of Military planned for upgradation to Comd.
Hospital Hospital Jaipur 600 beds.
01 x Military Hospital Kargil planned
to upgrade from 44 to 149 Beds. Ó

8
Comments of the Committee
13. The Committee take note of the information submitted by
the Ministry. In the reply, the Ministry has informed of details
pertaining to eleven projects of upgradation/establishment of Military
Hospitals. The Committee would like to be apprised about the
developments and details of completion of each of these projects.
In addition to the above, more areas, where a void exists in
provisioning of medical services in Armed Forces may be identified
for upgradation/establishment of military hospitals. Further,
information in this regard may be brought to the notice of the
Committee.
D. Modernization and Infrastructure Upgradation (Navy)
Recommendations/Observations (Para No. 21)
14. The Committee had, in their Thirty-fourth Report recommended
as under:Ñ
ÒIn case of Navy, the Committee were assured that periodic review
was being carried out regularly of the facilities available in various
hospitals and the need for upgradation of some of these hospitals,
which is based on operational needs and clientele requirements
are carried out, INHS Kalyani, Sanjivani, Nivarini, Patanjali,
Dhanvantrari, Navjivan and Karanja are currently under various
stages of upgradation. The Committee should be provided details
of progress made in each case. Ó
15. The Ministry, in its Action Taken Reply, has stated as under:Ñ
ÒThe details of work on upgradation in respect of Naval hospitals
is as under:Ñ
S.No. Name of work Present status
12 3
1. Upgradation of INHS Kalyani from Detailed Project Report (DPR) is under
206 bed to 604 bed preparation by Consultant hired by Chief
Engineer (Navy), Visakhapatnam.
2. Upgradation of INHS Sanjivani from Consultant has been hired by Chief Engineer
275 bed to 439 bed (Navy), Kochi, who is undertaking preliminary
study.

9
3. Upgradation of INHS Patanjali P roject accorded Cabinet Committee on
from 141 bed to 400 bed Security (CCS) approval. The work is in design
stage by the consultant.
4. Upgradation of INHS Dhanvantari Case being steered by Head Quarter Integrated
from 107 bed to 394 bed Defence Staff (HQIDS) for CCS approval.
5. Upgradation of INHS Nivarini Proposal under consideration with MoD, after
from 72 bed to 104 bed receiving Approval in Principal (AIP) of Vice
Chief of Naval Staff (VCNS).
6. Upgradation of NHKaranja Infrastructure work for construction of new
from 16 bed to 30 bed hospital building has been included in Annual
Major Works Plan (AMWP) 2017-18.
7. Upgradation of INHS Navjivani Case being steered by (Indian Naval Academy)
from 60 bed to 151 bed INA Project for CCS approval.
8. Upgradation of Naval Institute of Case is under consideration of MoD for accord
Dental Sciences, Mumbai to the of Govt Sanction for accretion of manpower,
equivalent of a Command equipment and transport.
Military Dental Centre
Comments of the Committee
16. The Committee would like to be informed in detail about
the dates of sanction and originally targeted dates of completion of
the eight projects enumerated in the reply of the Ministry. The
Committee desire to be kept apprised of the progress of the
upgradation projects and wish that the Ministry take necessary steps
in order to ensure timely completion so that essential medical
services are made available to the defence personnel.
E. Modernization and Infrastructure Upgradation (Air Force )
Recommendations/Observations (Para No. 22)
17. The Committee had, in their Thirty-fourth Report recommended
as under:Ñ
ÒWith regard to Air Force, the Committee were apprised that Policy
Page revision of Air Force Hospitals (AFH) has been completed with
comprehensive review of all the required facilities. 7 AFH Kanpur
has been authorized Cardiology Centre, Gastroenterology Centre,
Gastrointestinal Centre and Urology Centre. Enhancement of the
12 3

10
facilities at Air Force Hospitals is an ongoing process. A proposal
for upgradation of 11 and 12 AFH from peripheral hospital to Zonal
hospital is under consideration. While taking note of the details,
the Committee would like to be informed about the progress in
this direction. Ó
18. The Ministry, in its Action Taken Reply, has stated as under:Ñ
ÒThe proposal of upgradation of 11 AFH & 12 AFH to zonal was
considered & approved by Chief of Air Staff (CAS). However, the
proposal was deferred in view of the ban on creation of plan and
non-plan posts and purchase of vehicles by M/o Finance. Ó
Comments of the Committee
19. The Ministry has in the reply stated that the proposal for
upgradation of the earmarked peripheral Air Force Hospitals to zonal
level hospitals, though approved by Chief of Air Staff was deferred
due to the ban on creation of plan and non-plan posts and purchase
of vehicles by M/o Finance. In this connection, the Committee would
like to be apprised of the reasons for imposing the ban, particularly
for the Defence Services and the time frame of the ban imposed.
At the same time, the Committee desire that the Ministry of Defence
take appropriate steps towards progressing the two projects and
convincing the Ministry of Finance of the importance and significance
of the projects in providing healthcare to the personnel. The
Col_ittee may be apprised accordingly.
F. Armed Forces Medical College
Recommendations/Observations (Para No 34 & 35)
20. The Committee had, in their Thirty-fourth Report recommended
as under:Ñ
ÒThe Armed Forces Medical College (AFMC) was established on
04 August 1962. During deliberations on the subject, the Committee
were informed by the representatives of the Ministry of Defence
that around 20 per cent students leave AFMC despite a bond amount
of Rs. 25,00,000 at graduate level and Rs. 28,00,000 at PG level.
The Committee wished to be provided with a report on reasons for
drop out which was not readily available with the Ministry of
Defence. The Committee desire that a report should be made
available to them in this regard. On the concern of attrition, the
Committee desire that efforts should be made to enhance the

11
retention rate and it should be reduced from current 20 percent
to at least 10 per cent, if not lesser from the upcoming batches
as huge resources and time are involved in training of these cadets.
One of the methods can be to increase the bond amount from
Rupees T wenty-five lakh to one crore for MBBS and from Rupees
twenty-eight lakh to two crore for Post Graduate students. Besides
this, other motivational methods may also be fruitfully utilized. In
this context, the representatives of Armed Forces Medical Services
made an argument that if the deterrence is made so high, then
they do fear that students will not come and they may lose the
merit. The Committee observe in this regard, that India is hugely
populated and there is no dearth of talent. Motivational service
conditions publicized through various mediums of publicity may be
used to approach the talented youth. Ó
21. The Ministry, in its Action Taken Reply, has stated as under:Ñ
ÒThe reasons given by the students for opting out of service liability
are as under:Ñ
(a) Desire to pursue PG immediately after passing MBBS.
(b) Family commitments e.g. Family Migrating Abroad.
(c) Parents have set up a practice for them.
(d) Did not get a service of choice. (Navy/Air Force)
(e) Did not get Permanent Commission (PC).
(f) Stagnation in AFMS.
The college has taken the following steps to reduce the rate of
opting out of service liability:Ñ
(a) The medical cadets are sent on visits to service units/
formations for motivating them to join the Armed Forces.
(b) Faculty members are nominated as ÒFaculty Mentor Ó to
motivate the students.
(c) The ambience of AFMC campus has been improved with
installation of military equipment/aircrafts.
(d) At the time of admission, the Brig Adm (UG), Dy DGAFMS
(P & T) and Senior Faculty members motivate the prospective
candidate.Ó

12
Comments of the Committee
22. The Committee are appreciative of the various steps being
taken to arrest attrition from AFMC. One of the reasons for attrition
as stated by the Ministry of Defence, is owing to not securing the
service of choice. The Committee feel that AFMC needs to consider
giving the option of choosing the service to the students. Any
inhibition with regard thereto may be brought to the notice of the
Committee. Also, the reply of the Ministry of Defence is silent on
increasing the ÔbondÕ amount for the MBBS students. The Committee
wish to be intimated about the views of the Ministry regarding
increasing the ÔbondÕ amount.
G. Armed Forces Medical College
Recommendations/Observations (Para No. 37)
23. The Committee had, in their Thirty-fourth Report recommended
as under:Ñ
ÒDuring the aforementioned study visit, the Committee also came
to know that there is an urgent need to get Pharmacy Council of
India (PCI) affiliation to department of Pharmacy which has been
in existence since 2000. In this connection, affiliation from All
India Council of Technical Education and Pharmacy Council of India
are awaited. In this connection, the Ministry of Defence must
speed up the necessary approvals and the Committee be informed
about the action taken in this regard. Ó
24. The Ministry, in its Action Taken Reply, has stated as under:Ñ
ÒAFMC had approached Pharmacy Council of India (PCI) in 2015 for
approval to start the Diploma in Pharmacy course. Conditional
approval for academic year 2016-17 was accorded by PCI subject
to appointment of teaching faculty. The course has not yet been
started for want of faculty. Government of India has sanctioned
the faculty and the proposal of framing of recruitment rules for
the posts of Professor, Reader and Lecturers of Pharmacy is under
consideration. AFMC has approached All India Council for Technical
Education (AICTE) in 2017 for grant of approval to start the
Department of Pharmacy for conducting Diploma in Pharmacy course.
The approval was denied for want of original land and building
documents. The facts that these original documents are held with
Government offices, that is, original land documents are held with
Defence Estate Office and original building documents are held
with Garrison Engineer , have been brought to the notice of
Chairman, AICTE at New Delhi and outcome is awaited. Ó

13
Comments of the Committee
25. The Committee would like to know for how long the original
land and building documents are held with Defence Estates Office
and M/s Garrison Engineer respectively. The Committee also desire
that the Ministry of Defence may look into the matter and they be
informed of the outcome. Simultaneously, action be initiated for
framing of recruitment rules for the posts of Professor, Reader and
Lecturers of Pharmacy. The progress made in this direction may be
informed to the Committee.
H. Artificial Limb Centre
Recommendations/Observations (Para No. 42)
26.The Committee had, in their Thirty-fourth Report recommended
as under:Ñ
ÒWith regard to the Research and Development in ALC, the
Committee were informed that there is no R&D set up in ALC.
However , certain Armed Forces Medical Research projects have
been undertaken by the officers posted to ALC from time to time.
Also, ALC is in the process of collaborating with IIT Guwahati and
BARC in development of economical, state of the art passing
prosthetic knee joint and micro processor controlled hand joint
and feet. A very high level and sophisticated R&D is required to
improve upon the existing carbon fibre foot and joints which is not
possible in ALC. It was further informed that no separate budget
is allocated to ALC for R&D. However, when it is undertaken,
research projects are forwarded to O/o DGAFMS, for approval and
work is carried out accordingly. The Committee observe that the
officers posted at ALC have undertaken certain projects despite
infrastructure deficit for the purpose. While appreciating this, the
Committee want that a dedicated R&D centre must be opened up
at ALC with direct funding. This will help in direct need oriented
research and will also curb time lags in receiving various approvals
and coordination. The research centre should be well equipped
and necessary manpower recruited. Further , the Committee strongly
view that the institution must be declared as a Centre of
Excellence.Ó
27. The Ministry, in its Action Taken Reply, has stated as under:Ñ
ÒPrime role of ALC, Pune is provision of comprehensive rehabilitation
to amputees and the locomotor disabled. The centre is presently

14
not equipped to carry out the R&D in the field of prosthetics and
orthotics it being a technologically sophisticated field. However,
ALC has had meaningful discussions for collaboration with other
organizations such as:Ñ
(a) IIT Guwahati for development of Prosthetic Knee (awaiting
delivery of the final product to be used for trials).
(b) BARC Mumbai for development of advance robotic prosthesis
limb (Draft MOU is being processed).
(c) C-DAC for development of myoelectric prosthetic arms.
In the long term, ALC and Indian Armed Forces will benefit from
a dedicated R&D unit working in the field of Rehabilitative
Engineering, Biomedical Engineering, advance Prosthetics &
Orthotics as suggested. Ó
Comments of the Committee
28. The Committee note that at present ALC Pune is not equipped
to carry out Research and Development in the field of prosthetics
and orthotics because of this being a technologically sophisticated
field. For carrying out R&D, ALC had meaningful discussions for
collaboration with IIT Guwahati, BARC Mumbai and C-DAC. However,
in the Action Taken Reply, the Ministry has submitted that in the
long run, ALC and Indian Armed Forces will benefit from prosthetics
and orthotics. In view of this, the Committee wish to reiterate their
earlier recommendation for setting up of a dedicated R&D centre.
Requisite infrastructure and budget must be provided for the
purpose. The Committee may be informed accordingly.
I. Medicines and Medical stores
Recommendations/Observations (Para No. 45)
29. The Committee had, in their Thirty-fourth Report recommended
as under:Ñ
ÒMedical stores are organised in AFMS to meet the objective of
efficient and effective medical store supply chain management.
Presently, four Armed Forces Medical Store Deports (AFMSDs) are
functioning under this Directorate General i.e. AFMSD Lucknow,
AFMSD Mumbai, AFMSD Delhi Cantt and AFMSD Pune. These depots
are responsible for supply of Medical, Dental and Veterinary stores

15
and equipment to all the dependant units within the area of
responsibilities besides provisioning of medical/dental stores to all
the ECHS Polyclinics under the area of responsibility. These depots
are also responsible for periodic checks, conditioning and
preservation of stocked stores as well as for holding of additional
medical and dental stores for any emergency in case of natural or
man-made disaster. The Committee found that the above stores
are presently housed mostly in old buildings which are not optimally
equipped with modern storage and warehousing infrastructure.
Therefore, renovation and modernization of buildings and
equipments is immediate need of the hour. Every measure should
be taken towards achievement of this end in a systematic and time
bound manner. The Committee be apprised about the same. Ó
30. The Ministry, in its Action Taken Reply, has stated as under:Ñ
ÔAFMSD Lucknow
It is submitted that this depot has already initiated KLP project
worth Rs. 4720.47 Lakhs and the case file of the above project has
been forward to E-in-C vide QMG branch letter No. R/52/904/
Wks(P&W) dated 14 Aug 2017.
AFMSD Mumbai
AFMSD Mumbai is responsible for provisioning of medical, dental
and veterinary stores and equipment for 547 units/establishments
of Army, Navy, Air Force, Coast Guard, DRDO, Ordnance Factories
and 132 Polyclinics of ECHS located across 10 States in Western,
Central and Southern India. AFMSD Mumbai is located at Kandivali
(East) and has a land holding of 43.95 acres. The Depot was raised
in 1942 at Sewri and moved to its present location in 1976.
The stores are accommodated in 14 old buildings with over 17000
SM plinth area of Food Corporation of India godowns of 1960 vintage
and are in poor State and need exhaustive repairs and maintenance
in order to optimize utilization of scarce resources and effectively
manage the supply chain to ensure delivery of high quality of
health care to troops and their families.
The following initiatives have been taken up to improve and
modernize the ware house infrastructure of the depot. These are
enumerated in the succeeding paragraphs.
(i) Special repairs to AC to AC Plant & Cold Storage Room:Ñ
A number of drugs and vaccines are required to be stored at

16
low temperatures. The depot has facility to store these at a
cold storage (Temp 2oC - 8oC) and a Cool Room (Temp 15 oC-
25oC). The Special Repair Works for this facility has been
sanctioned vide HQ UM & G Sub Area letter No. 1612/SPR/
BLDG/GE (N)/AA 16-17/Q3P dated 01 Nov. 16. The repair is
likely to cost Rs. 56.42 lakhs and has a PDC of 102 Weeks.
Tender action is in progress.
(ii) Special Repairs to Floor, Verandah & Plinth Protection for
Group-III, Group-II & Receipt:ÑProposal of special repairs of
Floor , Verandah & Plinth Protection for Group-II & Receipt
Sec building costing Rs. 145 lakhs have been submitted to HQ
UM & G Sub Area and are awaiting Admin Approval.
(iii) Provision of False Ceiling in Group-I:ÑThe proposal has been
submitted to GE (North) for costing.
(iv) Provision of Fork Lift Trucks :ÑFour fork lift trucks have been
introduced in the revised PE of this depot and are awaiting
release.
(v) Provision of New Software for Supply Chain Management:Ñ
The Medical Stores Management System (MSMS) is being
replaced by i-Aushadhi, a new software capable of not only
inventory control but also enable dependent units to submit
their indents on line. The servers for the same have been
procured at a cost of Rs. 1,69,638/- and LAN is being laid.
User Id and log in passwords for dependent units are being
generated and migration is likely to be completed shortly.
Relocation of AFMSD:ÑA proposal to relocate the Depot to aggregate
resources of Central Ordnance Depot (COD) is under consideration
of HQ Southern Command. If approved; AFMSD will be relocated
from Kandivali to Malad. The storage accommodation at the
proposed location is similar to the one currently occupied by the
depot, but is being used to keep ordnance stores. These stores will
require works to make them suitable for housing medical stores
including provisioning of Cold Storage and Cool Room prior to
shifting. A proposal for complete revamp of the AFMSD in modern
pre fabricated structure with multistoried racks is being worked on
Commandant, Dy Commandant & Adm Officer of this depot visited
a Modern Medical Ware house at Bhiwandi on 05 Aug., 2017 to
study the functioning and architecture.
AFMSD Pune
Two works have been projected by this depot for building up of
modern storage and warehousing infrastructure.

17
AFMSD Delhi Cantt
AMWP - Projection of Annual Major Works Programme (AMWP) for
AFMSD Del- Proposal for Essential Storage Accommodation for Med
Stores amounting to INR 4996.35 Lakh projected under AMWP for
AFMSD Del. The Board proceedings duly completed were submitted
to HQ Del Areas however the work was not listed in the approved
List of works as approved by HQ (WC). Ó
Comments of the Committee
31. The Ministry has stated that the medical stores/depots are
in poor State and need exhaustive repairs and maintenance in order
to optimize utilization of scarce resources. The supply chain needs
to be effectively managed to ensure delivery of high quality of
health care to troops and their families. The Committee wish that
timely action should have been taken to avoid such a pathetic
condition of the medical stores/depots. In case of AFMSD Delhi Cantt,
the work, as submitted to HQ Del Areas was not listed in the approved
List of Works by HQ (WC). The Committee would like to be informed
about the reason/s given for the same. While taking note of the
various details regarding various projects of modernization/uphaul
of AFMS stores/warehouses/buildings as furnished by the Ministry of
Defence, the Committee desire that these be expedited and
completed within stipulated timeframe under intimation to the
Committee.
J. Collaboration with International Research Organisations
Recommendations/Observations (Para No. 54)
32. The Committee had, in their Thirty-fourth Report recommended
as under:Ñ
ÒThe Armed Forces Medical Services conduct medical research in
all fields of medicine with an emphasis on military medicine and
combat medical support. The Armed Forces Medical Research
Committee (AFMRC) headed by the DGAFMS is a Committee of the
DRDO which oversees all medical research taking place in the
AFMS. Approximately 125 projects are funded annually. In addition
to this, AFMS actively collaborates with the Indian Council of Medical
Research (ICMR), Department of Biotechnology (DBT), Laboratories
of Life Sciences Division of Defence Research Development
Organisation (DRDO) [Defence Institute of Physiology & Allied
Sciences (DIPAS), Institute of Nuclear Medicine & Allied Sciences

18
(INMAS), Defence Institute of Psychological Research (DIPR), Defence
Bio-Engineering & Electro Medical Laboratory (DEBEL), Defence
Research & Development Establishment (DRDE)], and the Ministry
of Health in the field of medical research. The Committee opine
that the AFMS should explore ways and means to enhance
international collaboration for medical research and technology. Ó
33. The Ministry, in its Action Taken Reply, has stated as under:Ñ
ÒAFMC, Pune is participating in a Centre for Disease Control &
Prevention (CDC)-USA funded project being conducted by AIIMS,
New Delhi titled ÒCapacity Building and Strengthening of Hospital
Acquired Infection Control to Detect and Prevent Antimicrobial
Resistance in India. Ó
Comments of the Committee
34. The Committee are happy to note that AFMC, Pune is
participating in a research programme conducted by AIIMS named
ÒCapacity Building and Strengthening of Hospital Acquired Infection
Control to Detect and Prevent Antimicrobial Resistance in India Ó.
The Committee desire that more such collaborations and participative
research projects be taken up by AFMS for various institutions
functioning under its echelon so that quality of medical services are
improved. The Ministry of Defence need to take steps towards
boosting such projects within the country as well as in collaboration
with international institutions of medical excellence.

CHAPTER II
(A) OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS, WHICH HAVE BEEN
ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT
Recommendation (Para No. 1)
The Committee, while deliberating on the subject, observed that
at the time of independence, AFMS was established to provide
comprehensive healthcare to only the serving Armed Forces personnel
and their families (spouse and children). Over the years, its role and
responsibilities have expanded considerably with its services being
extended to parents of service personnel (in 1965) and its clientele is
ever increasing. In 1962, the Service catered to a clientele dependency
of 20 lakhs. The total number of beds allotted to AFMS hospital in 1965
were 24,996. During the corresponding period 3,353 Medical Officers
were held on the strength of AFMS. This comes to around 596 persons
per doctor. As on 01 October 2016, the authorization of Medical Officers
was 7,000, whereas the dependency approximately 2.5 crores for
inpatient/outpatient care. This gives an average ratio of 01 doctor per
3572 dependent clientele. The data reveals that there is a tremendous
decrease in proportionate doctor to patient ratio in AFMS when
compared from 1962 to the present situation (Six fold decrease). The
Committee feel aghast at the situation and wish that timely and
necessary measures should have been taken by ensuring commensurate
increase in Medical Officers in Armed Forces Medical Services to meet
with the increased data of clientele. The issue of manpower and
infrastructure deficit is discussed in detail in the succeeding paragraphs
of the Reports.
Reply of the Government
In order to improve the doctor patient ratio, in Sept., 2006, Air
Marshal JK Gupta DGHS (AF) had worked out a comprehensive
requirement of 28306 additional medical personnel for manning of
AFMS hospitals,against which, the Govt. of India, agreed to recruitment
of 10590 in three phases of 3530 each and currently recruitment of the
third phase is on. Concurrently, the Government has sanctioned TDLR
(Training Drafting and Leave Reserve) of 525 Medical Officers (MOs)
and 32 Dental Officers (DOs), who are currently being recruited.
19

20
Recommendation (Para No. 2 & 3)
Manpower in medical services is a critical component having a
direct bearing on patient care. Over the years the mandate of AFMS
has been extended to include medical coverage for families and
dependents of service personnel, paramilitary organisations and, from
2003 onwards, ex-servicemen and their dependents. There have been
periodic revisions of manpower in AFMS based on studies carried out
by various committees, such as Lt Gen Foley Committee, Lt Gen
Chandrashekhar Committee and Bhardhwaj Committee on the
requirement of specialists and super specialists for AFMS. The report
of the Parliamentary Standing Committee on Ministry of Defence, tabled
in the Lok Sabha in August 2006 recommended, inter alia, appointment
of a high level committee to comprehensively review and re-assess the
overall increase in work and responsibilities of AFMS and to suitably
recommend ideal strength for each cadre. The high level committee
of DGAFMS, in its report of September 2006, after reckoning the
limitations of the existing norms of manpower to adequately handle
the workload and the requirement of specialities at peripheral and
mid-zonal hospitals and super specialities at different levels of hospitals,
recommended an increase of 28,306 officers and personnel to be
recruited in a phased manner. While approving in principle, an increase
of 10,590 (3,348 Officers, 7,042 PBORs and 200 Civilians) the Ministry,
in May 2009, authorised an increase of 3530 personnel in AFMS in the
first phase.
Against this backdrop, the Committee observe that in Armed Medical
Corps (AMC), as on 01 November 2016, the held strength is 6254
against a sanctioned strength of 6865. The shortage is to the extent
of 611 personnel. The highest shortage is in case of Army, where the
held strength is only 4845 against an authorization of 5399. In case of
Navy, the held strength is 699 against the authorized strength of 694.
With the Air Force, the held strength is 740 against the authorized
strength of 772. On the basis of calculation of ideal doctor-patient
ratio and the steps being taken to improve the doctor-patient ratio,
the Committee were apprised that ÔCalculation of ideal doctor patient
ratioÕ is based on a large number of factors. This ratio is different in
different settings. However , an average of 1:4 is applied in All India
Institute of Medical Sciences (AIIMS) and most corporate hospitals like
Sir Ganga Ram Hospital in New Delhi. In AFMS, the present doctor-
patient ratio is one doctor per 10-12 individuals against an ideal ratio
of 1:4.

21
Reply of the Government
The Ôdoctor-patient ratioÕ of 1:4 in AIIMS and most other corporate
hospitals like Sir Ganga Ram Hospital, as mentioned in the
recommendations above,may please be corrected as Ôdoctors-bed ratioÕ.
The Ôdoctors-bed ratio Õ in AFMS is one doctor per 10-12 beds against
the ideal ratio of 1:4.
Authorisation of Medical Officers (MOs) as on 01 Aug., 2017 is as
under:Ñ
Service MO DOs MNS NT Offrs
Auth Held Auth Held Auth Held Auth Held
Army 5542 4953 641 597 4389 3720 373 354
Navy 714 680 44 29 412 361 0 0
AF 883 804 40 31 516 407 0 0
Total 7139 6437 725 657 5317 4488 373 354
Current authorisation of manpower includes 1224 MOs, 75 DOs,
2049 MNS and 7042 JCOs/OR and 200 civilians, authorised in 03 phases
of augmentation of manpower and 557 officers as a part of TDLR (525
MOs+32 DOs). The current deficiency is due to the augmentation of
manpower this year alongwith TDLR. It will stabilise once recruitment
has been done against this augmentation.
Recommendation (Para No. 4)
In case of Army Dental Corps (ADC), the authorized strength is 700
and the held strength is 633. The difference between the authorized
and held strength is 67. In Command Military Dental Centres, the
authorised strengths is 71 while the held strength is 64. In Field Units,
the authorisation is 262 dentists whereas actual posting is 252.
Reply of the Government
Dental Services in Armed forces are designed to provide echelon
based care & accordingly the authorization & component of officers
held at various establishment is varied. The details are as under:
(a) In addition to the Command Military Dental Centres & Field
Units (Field Hospitals), Army Dental Corps is authorized dental

22
units, which cater for dental treatment needs of clientele,
in all three Services as under:Ñ
(i) Armed Forces Dental Clinic, New Delhi
(ii) Army Dental Centre (Research & Referral), Delhi Cantt
(iii) Corps Dental Units
(iv) Type ÔAÕ Military Dental Centres
(v) Type ÔBÕ Military Dental Centres
(vi) Type ÔCÕ Military Dental Centres
(vii) Dental Centres in Navy
(viii) Dental Centres in Air Force
(b) There is a certain deficiency in the above establishments as
well. Further , 32 x Dental Officers were authorized to Army
Dental Corps as Training Drafting Leave Reserve (TDLR)
component on 01 Jan., 2017. This manpower is floating in
nature & not authorized to any particular establishment.
This is meant to meet the functional deficiency of the
Organization in terms of Courses, Study Leave, Foreign
Assignment Commitments etc.
(c) The existing deficiency of Army Dental Corps and 32 x TDLR
component have been merged to commission Dental Surgeons
from civil to meet this deficiency. Selection Board has already
been held from 31 July, 2017 to 12 Aug., 2017, for filling up
deficiency of 56 vacancies.
Recommendation (Para No. 6)
The authorised and held strength of Paramedical Staff of Armed
Forces Medical Services at Command Hospitals and Field Medical Units
for Air Force services is 3191 against a sanction of 3779. Therefore,
the Committee strongly recommended that the Ministry of Defence
should make all out efforts to recruit adequate number of paramedical
staff and nurses to meet the growing number of patients. In any case,
AFMS should not remain far behind in comparison to AIIMS and private
hospitals such as Sir Ganga Ram Hospital. The Committee may be
apprised of the steps taken in this regard.
Reply of the Government
DGAFMS Paramedical staff of Armed Forces consists of largely
combatants and some non-combatants who are deployed in hospitals

23
and combat medical zones in rotation. The suggested staffing norms
for para medic by Army Standing Establishment Committee ( ASEC) is
1.25 per bed while the existing is 0.8 per bed. The details of paramedical
staff in different directorate are as under:
DGMS (Army) Presently, there is no major deficiency of Para Medical
Personnel in Army Medical Corps. It is also mentioned that no adverse
effect with regard to patient care has been noticed due to deficiency
of Paramedical Staff at hospital of Army Medical Corps. Comprehensive
medical care to ensure highest level of clientele satisfaction is being
provided in all the hospitals of Army Medical Corps.
DGMS (Air) The total authorised strength of Medical Assistants was
4135 and of Medical Assistants (Dental) was 122. Hence, the total
authorised strength of Medical Assistants is 4257 (including Dental) and
3779 is the authorised strength of Medical Assistants only for other
units excluding Command Hospital.
As per Air Force Record Office (AFRO) letter No. RO/S 2032/Stats
(143) dated 18 Nov 16, the authorised strength of Para medical staff
of Armed Forces Medical Services for Air Force at Command Hospitals
and Field Medical Units is 4102 against the sanctioned strength of
4257.
A planned recruitment process is followed by Centre Airmen
Selection Board (CASB) to fulfil the deficiency of Para Medical Staff
(Medical Assistants) arising due to discharge/release. The data of
recruitment of Medical Assistants Tradesman of last five years is as
follows:Ñ
Year 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 Total
Strength 135 182 240 244 129 930
DGMS (Navy)
(a) Progressive increase in intake of paramedical sailors in Navy
to cater for upgradation of Naval Hospitals and setting up of
additional hospitals.
(b) Enhancement of infrastructure at training establishments to
accommodate and train larger numbers of trainees.
(c) Special Recruitment drives and rallies in various parts of the
country with suitable publicity campaigns by Directorate of
Manpower recruitment (DMPR) to address the shortages.

24
(d) Increase in number of medical assistants being offered
diploma/Bachelor in Paramedical Technology (BPMT) Courses.
(e) Reduction in number of paramedical sailors leaving service
on completion of initial engagement period by instituting
measures for improving promotion prospects.
Recommendation (Para Nos. 9 & 10)
Further , with regard to the specialities in AFMC, the Committee
were further given to understand that super specialist care not only
needs trained manpower but also adequate equipment and support
infrastructure. The AFMS Rationalizes the provisioning of such services
so that all available resources are optimally utilized. On extension of
super specialist facilities like Cardiology and Neurology in all zonal
hospitals and induction of adequate number of Specialists in peripheral
hospitals in order to provide proper medical care to the soldiers and
officers in their vicinity, the Ministry of Defence has admitted that
super specialist facilities need adequate basic speciality support. The
distribution of super specialists at Armed Forces hospitals is a function
of both requirement as well as availability of support staff and
infrastructure.
At present, Cardiology and Neurology super specialist facility is
available at Base Hospital (BH), Delhi Cantt and Military Hospital (MH),
Jalandhar. Adequate numbers of Specialists are posted to various
peripheral hospitals to provide quality medical care to troops and
families in remote and far flung areas. All peripheral Indian Air Force
hospitals situated across the country have been posted with specialists
of only basic specialties. Zonal hospitals of the Air Force(AF) like 7 AF
Hospital and 5 AF Hospital have been provided super specialist services
like Cardiology, Gastro-intestinal surgery and Oncology. In the Navy,
INHS Sanjivani, a 439 bedded Zonal hospital, is being upgraded to
include all major super specialities .
Reply of the Government
No comments as the recommendation is statement of fact as
furnished earlier by Ministry to the Standing Committee.
Recommendation (Para No. 13)
In the light of the observation made in the preceding paras,
highlighting in detail, the existing deficiencies pertaining to medical
personnel, along with acute shortage of doctor-patient ratio as well as
nurse-patient ratio, and ever increasing clientele, the Committee are

25
of the view that the situation merits immediate attention. Firstly,
concrete steps should be taken towards filling up of the presently
sanctioned strength under intimation to the Committee. In addition to
this, the Committee are of the view that a Ôcadre reviewÕ needs to be
done in AFMS and there is an urgency for sanctioning of more posts
under AFMS. The requirement being huge, the sanctioned strength size
needs to be doubled in the upcoming years. The procedure must be
initiated at the earliest and the Committee be informed accordingly.
Reply of the Government
Cadre restructure of AFMS is being carried out in piece meal manner.
Currently, cadre restructure of MNS and AMC (NT) officers is underway.
Cadre restructure of Medical Officers (MOs) & Dental Officers (DOs)
will be carried out in due course of time.
Recommendation (Para No. 14)
During the course of deliberations, the Committee wished to be
apprised about the Ministry Õs plan of action towards mitigation of the
above noted deficiencies. In this connection the Ministry furnished
that the held strength is a dynamic figure. The apparent shortage is
due to factors like officer Õs Release/Superannuation, resignation,
promotions and move to annotated appointments. Further , the Ministry
of Defence added that current authorization of Medical officers is 6605
and the physical deficiency is 570. This number is labile to change as
officers superannuate, retire prematurely and are commissioned on a
regular basis. Along with this deficiency, there exists a functional
deficiency due to doctors being unavailable to the organization while
undergoing in-service training courses like MD/MS, Diploma of National
Board (DNB) and Super specialization as well as mandatory military
courses. This results in a deficiency of about 1700 per year in a staggered
fashion. Hence, total deficiency works out to 1270 or 19.2%. The
physical deficiency mitigation is a constant process as medical officers
are commissioned every year to fill physical vacancies. The Committee
were keen to know whether there is necessity for improving the staffing
pattern, particularly in specialist and Super-specialist cadres. To this
pointed query, the Ministry of Defence affirmed that there is a need
for improving the staffing pattern. The proposal for improving staffing
pattern has been submitted to Ministry of Health and Family Welfare
(MoH & FW) for vetting in Jan. 2016. The proposed pattern has been
approved by a board of officers including Senior Consultant, Medicine
and Senior Consultant, Surgery. The template used by the board was
IPHS norms (Indian Public Health Services). The Committee observe
that there has been a lapse of one and half years since submission of

26
the proposal for improving the staffing pattern. Every action should be
taken to get the approval at the earliest and the Committee apprised
about the same in the Action Taken Replies. Further on the matter of
mitigation of shortfall in medical personnel, the Committee learnt
that over the years, augmentation of technical medical manpower to
the tune of 10,590 medical personnel including 1224 doctors has been
authorized. The recruitment against the same will be over by 2018.
The functional deficiency of officers will be met by the advent of
Training, Drafting, Leave Reserve (TDLR) to the tune of 1229 Medical
Officers, 77 Dental Officers and 169 members of MNS. In addition to
this, the proposal of Training, Draft, Leave, Reserve (TDLR) for 557
medical and dental personnel (525+32) for making up deficiency of
doctors/dentists proceeding on long courses like PG/Super specialization
as well as lady doctors/dentists moving on maternity leave has also
been approved. The Committee view the shortage of manpower seriously
and strongly feel that the steps taken so far are inadequate and the
process of recruitment is tardy. Therefore, the Committee recommend
that the current recruitment should be completed in a time bound
manner to mitigate the shortages and to ensure adequate and timely
service to its clientele.
Reply of the Government
The following steps have been taken to mitigate the shortage:
1. Augmentation of Manpower: The Govt. sanction for the
recruitment of 10590 manpower in three phases were
accorded. Currently recruitment of third phase of
augmentation of manpower is being carried out. These
doctors, nurses, dentists and paramedical staff are being
placed in peripheral medical units to enhance medical
capability of those establishments.
2. TDLR (Training Drafting and Leave Reserve): The Govt.
sanction/approval was accorded to increase the number of
doctors by 1229 and number of Dentists by 77 over the period
of 10 years from 2014. First phase of TDLR including 525
Doctors and 32 Dental Officers has already been sanctioned.
These doctors and Dentists will be deployed in place of those
who are doing long course like post graduation or on long
leave like maternity leave.
3. Decentralisation of recruitment of medical officers has been
carried out. Doctors are now being interviewed in four parts
of the country every year to increase the catchment area.
Last year 637 doctors have been recruited from civil.

27
Recommendation (Para Nos. 15 & 16)
The AFMS Specialist Services currently work on the paradigm of
specialist pool. Depending on requirement of specialists, based on bed
strength of hospitals and Strength of garrison, specialists are posted to
various hospitals. This optimizes use of specialists. Those patients
requiring services of other specialists are currently being referred/
evacuated to the hospitals holding the specialists concerned. The
specialist facilities are being provided taking into account the number
of beds in the hospitals. Medicine, Surgery and Gynaecology are
categorized as basic specialist facilities while ENT , Orthopaedics, Skin
are available only in zonal hospitals. Medicine, Surgery and Gynaecology
can handle life threatening emergencies related to all other specialties
and super specialties owing to which they are considered as basic
specialties.
The new staffing pattern proposed by AFMS has suggested the
inclusion of specialists of ENT , Orthopaedics and Skin in all hospitals
of bed strength having more than 100 beds. The specialist facilities of
Cardiology and Neurology are available only in Command Hospitals.
The Committee desire that the specialist facilities like cardiology,
neurology and orthopaedics should be extended even in zonal hospitals
so that the immense burden on Command Hospitals is eased and also
larger catchment areas are covered.
Reply of the Government
Changes with regard to staffing patterns of specialist and super
specialist will be done prospectively in new hospitals and upgradations
of existing hospitals once staffing norms for AFMS hospitals are approved.
Recommendation (Para No. 17)
Further, the Committee enquired whether any study has been
conducted to identify the number of deaths that may have occurred
in Armed Forces due to non-availability of timely expert treatment. To
this query, the Ministry replied that no such study has been conducted
till date. AFMS ethos dictates that if a patient is unable to reach a
doctor , the doctor reached out to him/her whether by land or air or
sea. The Senior Medical Officer (SMO) in the station ensures that
timely medical care is given. Due to natural reasons like extremely
rapid deterioration of a patient or weather related inability or casualty
evacuation, some deaths do occur. However , these are very few and
the cause is pin pointed in every case. Hence, a separate study to
identify the number of deaths occurring due to lack of timely expert

28
treatment has not been considered necessary by the Services. While
appreciating the ethos of AFMS, the Committee strongly urge that a
record should be maintained in this regard.
Reply of the Government
The details of number of deaths occurring due to lack of timely
expert treatment in respect of various DGMS are as under:
DGMS (Army): Record of deaths occurring due to Enemy Action/
Terrorist action after reaching the hospital is maintained at the
respective hospitals.
DGMS (Air): In IAF medical services, no such record is maintained.
However , there is a system of reporting of all deaths of serving personnel
through proper channel with necessary information like date with time,
nature, mode of death and availability of definitive treatment along
with history of pre-existing illness. The information is transmitted
from units where death has occurred to Command Head Quarter (HQ)
and to DGMS (Air).
DGMS (Navy): Indian Navy has a robust system of chain of evacuation
of patients from the place of duty to hospitals with specialists/super-
specialists. In case of stations where such facilities are not available,
MoU has been concluded with private hospitals for specialists/super-
specialists care. The records pertaining to deaths of all Naval personnel
are maintained at IHQ MoD (Navy).
Recommendation (Para No. 18)
The Committee desired to be provided detailed information about
such soldiers who died during treatment after reaching hospitals
including the name of the hospital, kind and level of injury and whether
their treatment faced lack of any equipment, medicine, or specialist
doctors. It was found that during one period from Jan 16 to Jan 17,
04 soldiers who sustained injuries during terrorist activities in J & K
died during treatment after reaching the hospital. 01 soldier expired
at 92 Base Hospital and 03 soldiers expired at Army Hospital (R &R).
Their treatment did not face lack of any equipment, medicine and
specialist doctors. While going through the data, the Committee found
that two Naiks, one Hawaldar and one Sepoy ranked personnel died on
reaching hospitals due to bullet injuries after encounters. On this
note, the Committee would like to observe that in case of a soldier
being injured in encounters, depending upon the gravity of injuries,
proper treatment which include air lifting, specialists etc. should be

29
provided without considering the ranks of the personnel. Also, there
should be a policy in place to ensure availability of specialists/super-
specialists at all times in critical areas along with highest level of
judicious monitoring.
Reply of the Government
DGMS (Army): All serving personnel are treated based on gravity of
injury/illness irrespective of the rank. Facilities for evacuation of
patients by air/road are being provided to all those patients who
required evacuation to higher medical centres. The required specialist/
super specialist facilities are available in critical areas as well as in
times of requirement, specialist/super specialist are moved to forward
areas/peripheral hospitals.
DGMS (Air): The system for early evacuation of causalities from the
field to the nearest medical centre and from a peripheral hospital
already exists in IAF . Immediate air support for casualty air evacuation
is provided as and when required. The guidelines for the same are laid
down in the Air Force order on the subject. All efforts are made by
all concerned agencies including medical and operations to facilitate
the early casualty evacuation as a life and limb saving measure.
DGMS (Navy): Specialists and super-specialists are made available
in all Naval Hospitals as per the authorization. In case of stations,
where such facilities are not available, MoU has been concluded with
private hospitals for specialists/super-specialists care. Telemedicine
project in Indian Navy is in the final stage of implementation. Once
implemented, the Medical Officers onboard ships and in peripheral
establishments can obtain the opinion of Specialists/Super-specialists
posted at Naval Hospitals.
Recommendation (Para No. 19)
The Committee observe that modernization of equipment at Armed
Forces Hospitals is affected through Annual Acquisition Plans (AAPs).
Proposals for new equipment are sent by hospitals through staff
channels.The proposals are vetted by Expert Committees and Senior
Consultants. Cases are processed through MoD. Approximately Rs. 100
crore is spent on equipment modernization annually.
Reply of the Government
Delegation of financial power to Defence Services (DFPDS) is revised
from time to time and was last revised in 2016. As per DFPDS 2016,

30
DGAFMS is authorised to procure equipment up to following financial
limits:
Revenue Head
(a) Scaled Price Vocabulary Medical Store (PVMS): Up to 20 crore
(b) Non in Vocabulary (NIV): Upto 10 crore
Capital Head : 25 crore
Recommendation (Para No. 23)
The Committee came to know that there are presently 98 Field
Hospitals existing in the Indian Army. These are medical units that
provide sector-wise medical cover to the respective army formations
both during war and peace. To accomplish this role, the Field Hospitals
have the capability of establishing various detachments viz. Medical
Aid Posts (MAP), Advance Dressing Station (ADS) and Forward Surgical
Centre (FSC). These units have the capability to hold and treat casualties
and also to evacuate them rearwards to different medical
establishments, if required, secondary and tertiary level healthcare
facilities are provided through the network of Border Static Military/
General Hospitals and Base Hospitals located in field areas. Further , to
facilitate provisioning of mobile medical treatment facilities in far
away forward areas, the procurement proposals for Mobile Disaster
Relief Equipment (MDRE) are also being progressed. To build up the
capability of Army Medical Corps to provide improved medical support
in combat zone and forward areas, procurement of 05 sets of 10
bedded MDRE as a Capital acquisition has been included in the 12th
Army Plan. These can be transported by road/rail/air/sea. The Request
for Proposal (REP) is being progressed by Indian Navy, being the lead
service. Proposal for procurement of 50 bedded containerised and soft
shelter based, rapidly deployable medical facilities through Capital
Route has been included in the Recast 12th Army Plan. Formulation of
Qualitative Requirements for the same is in progress. The Committee
wish that the above mentioned proposals are progressed at a better
pace and be informed about the progress made in each case.
Reply of the Government
1. Mobile Medical Treatment Facilities:
(a) A case for procurement of Mobile Disaster Relief Equipment
(MDRE) for Indian Navy and Indian Air Force was fielded
during the Service Capital Acquisition Procurement

31
Categorisition Committee (SCAPCC) meeting held on
16 June, 2014. SCAPCC recommended that requirement for
similar equipment by Indian Army be examined and included
in the total quantity in revised Statement of Case to build up
the capability of Indian Army. To provide efficiency combat
medical support, it has been proposed to procure 05 sets of
10 bedded MDRE as a Capital acquisition through the
12th Defence Plan. The Non Service Qualitative Requirement
developed for the purpose were acceptable to Indian Army.
Proposal was endorsed by Directorate General of Prospective
Planning in July 2014 and endorsed by Directorate General of
Military Operation in Sept. 2014 and approval accorded for
inclusion of the scheme in the 12th Plan by Vice Chief Of
Army Staff (VCOAS).
(b) Present Status:
(i) Inclusion of scheme in Annual Acquisiton Plan (AAP)
2014-16 was approved by Defence Procurement Board
(DPB) and in Recast 12th Army Plan by Defence Acquisition
Council (DAC). The following proposal for scaling of 5x
MDRE for Indian Army (01 MDRE set per unit) has been
approved:-
Sl. Formation/ Medical Unit Total
No. Command
(aa) Northern Command 4016 Field Hospital 01
(ab) Eastern Command 4004 Field Hospital & 02
4033 Field Hospital
(ac) Western Command 422 Field Hospital 01
(ad) Central Command 306 Field Hospital 01
(ae) Total 05
Recommendation (Para No. 25)
The Committee also found that there is only one ship with Navy
which is being upgraded with all super specialities. The Committee
desire that efforts should be made by AFMS towards development of
one more Naval ship with all super specialities so that Indian Navy can
have at least one fully equipped ship each on both Eastern and Western
shores.
Reply of the Government
It is clarified at the outset that there is no dedicated Hospital Ship
in the Indian Navy and that there is no ship with Indian Navy which is
equipped with all super specialties.

32
In case of any requirement, a Survey Vessel (Large) is converted
to a Hospital Ship in its secondary role to look after the requirements.
In addition, a National Hospital Ship is being envisaged wherein a
dedicated Hospital Ship operated by the Indian Navy and funded by
various Ministries of the Government of India would operate not only
along our coastline, but also in the Indian Ocean Region (IOR). Such a
vessel would meet the requirement of the nation both in war and
during natural disasters (HADR).
However , a 250-bedded National Hospital Ship operated by the
Navy, with all tertiary care facilities is being envisaged in collaboration
with various Ministries of the Government of India.
Recommendation (Para No. 26)
On considering the details provided by the Ministry of Defence, the
Committee feel that there is a need for modernisation of hospital
infrastructure, renovation and reconstruction of hospitals. Steps should
be taken towards this end in a phased manner. A comprehensive plan
outlay may be made and the Committee be informed about the progress
of the projects.
Reply of the Government
Modernisation project of the Hospitals of Armed Forces are
undertaken in a phased manner depending upon the budgetary ceiling
allotted to the Directorate General of Medical Services (Army) under
AMWP every year. Currently, 45 hospital works of various types are in
different phases of construction.
2. The Comprehensive Proposal for Modernisation of 46 Military
Hospitals was undertaken in May 2005 with a vision to reconstruct
entire hospital infrastructure of the Armed Forces Medical Services at
an approx. cost of Rs. 8428.38 crore. However , the proposal has not
yet fructified due to issues related to budgetary support. The current
proposal is being considered as an additional to the Army Budget. An
annual cash outgo of Rs. 700-800 crore per year has been proposed for
modernisation of all the 46 Military Hospitals in a phased manner
across a period of 09 years.
Recommendation (Para No. 28)
To the distress of the Committee, they were apprised by the Ministry
of Defence that presently AFMS does not include alternate medicine in

33
their regime. Ayurveda clinics with 10 beds each at Base Hospital Delhi
Cantt and Command Hospital, (Southern Command), Pune were
sanctioned vide GoI, MoD letter No. 10(2)/2004/D (Med) dated
15 March, 2004 on an experimental basis for one year. The service was
reviewed after one year and then shut down. Efforts for integration of
AYUSH system have been initiated once again by appointing a committee
with DGHS (AF) as Presiding Officer and representatives from AYUSH,
Ministry and Service Headquarters. Based on the recommendations of
the Committee, action has been initiated for opening of two AYUSH
life style centres at Army Hospital (R&R), Delhi Cantt and Air Force
Hospital, Hindon on trial basis. In this case, the Committee feel that
alternate medicine system is beneficial for preventive and basic
healthcare. Also, the traditional system of medicine should be applied
wherever suitably required. Therefore, steps should be taken in this
direction in all earnest.
Reply of the Government
Based on the recommendation of committee constituted by DGAFMS
with DGHS (AF) as presiding officer with representatives from AYUSH
Ministry, actions have been initiated for opening of life style centres
at AH (RR) & AF Hospital, Hindon on trial basis. The centres would
provide preventive, promotive and rehabilitative services of AYUSH.
Non-pharmacological aspects of Ayurveda, Lifestyle modifications,
dietary interventions along with yoga and meditation have been
recommended. Assistance of AYUSH Ministry has been sought for
manpower resources for the centres. Once qualified AYUSH doctors are
detailed by AYUSH Ministry, the centres will be operationalised.
Recommendation (Para No. 29)
The Committee were informed that with regard to Chemical
Biological Radiological Nuclear Warfare (CBRN), as of now, AFMS has no
experience. However, training module has been started and preparation
is on. With regard to the present position of preparedness of AFMS to
deal with CBRN warfare, the Committee were apprised that AFMS is
presently responsible for conducting of training of medical officers and
paramedics as part of capacity building for CBRN preparedness. A data
bank of CBRN training manpower in AFMS has been prepared. Command,
Corps and Division level training are also being conducted periodically.
Procurement issues and replenishment of Individual Protective
Equipments (IPEs) and CBRN equipment for medical units are
being managed as per Equipment Management Policy issued by
Directorate General Prospective Planning (DG PP) (CBRN) vide their

34
letter No. A/12047/GS/PP(CBRN)/Lgs. dated 07 Oct. 2013. The mother
depot of all CBRN equipment is Stores Depot at earmarked Forward
Medical Stores Depot (FMSD)/Advance Medical Stores Depot (AMSD)/
Field Hospitals under the overall arrangement of DGMS (Army). While
appreciating the pro active approach of AFMS in this regard, the
Committee desire that more comprehensive efforts are made towards
research oriented study, training and development module to deal
with CBRN threats as there has been as increasing threat of
non-conventional warfare.
Reply of the Government
(a) Head Quarter Integrated Defence Staff (Medical Branch) has
undertaken a holistic approach in the field of CBRN Training. This
includes workshops demonstration, theory lectures, evidence based
and research oriented training. Training also includes range of topics
covered by prominent authorities in field of CBRN from Bhabha Atomic
Research Institute (BARC), Institute of Nuclear Medicine & Allied
Sciences(INMAS), Defence Research Development Institute (DRDE),
National Disaster Management Authority (NDMA) and the Armed Forces.
(b) In addition to above, demonstration sessions are conducted by
experts of 422 Fd Hosp and Air Force Institute of Nuclear Biological
Chemical (NBC) Protection, Arjangarh.
(c) Further efforts are continued towards improving CBRN training
and development of modules.
Recommendation (Para No. 30)
With regard to the training institutions under the purview of AFMS,
the Committee found that there are six Colleges of Nursing (CoN) and
one School of Nursing (SoN) to impart training to nursing students. All
the Colleges are imparting B.Sc (Nursing) degree under respective
Universities and are duly recognized by the Indian Nursing Council and
State Nursing Council. In order to strengthen the training and to have
better medical services in the hospitals, the upgradation of various
Schools to Colleges is undertaken in phased manner. The details of
upgradation of various nursing schools should be provided to the
Committee in the Action Taken Replies.
Reply of the Government
All Schools of Nursing have been upgraded to Colleges of Nursing
in a phased manner and the AFMS now has 06 Colleges of Nursing. The

35
details of upgradation of Schools of Nursing to Colleges of Nursing are
as under:Ñ
CoN, AFMC, Pune Ñ since 1964
CoN, INHS Asvini, Mumbai Ñ 2010
CoN, Command Hospital (Eastern Command), Kolkata Ñ 2010
CoN, Command Hospital (Central Command), Lucknow Ñ 2013
CoN, Army Hospital (Research & Referral), Delhi Cantt Ñ 2013
CoN, Command Hospital (Air Force), Bangalore Ñ 2016.
Recommendation (Para No. 31)
On the issue of training of paramedical staff, the Committee found
that there is no formal recognition to the training being imparted to
Ex-Servicemen under Paramedical forces. Further , on the matter , it
was informed that a large number of the courses being run for
paramedical personnel are recognised by the statutory bodies. However,
in service courses conducted at AFMS Hospitals do not have formal
recognition at present. Steps should be taken to obtain formal
recognition to these courses and the Committee be intimated
accordingly.
Reply of the Government
DGMS (Army)
It is submitted that various universities/medical faculties/medical
colleges have been approached for recognition of training/courses
imparted to paramedical personnel. Uttar Pradesh State Medical Faculty
has agreed to affiliate various medical training courses imparted to
paramedical staff of Army Medical Corps (AMCs). Accordingly, AMC
Centre and College Lucknow has been directed to conclude the MoU
for the same.
DGMS (Air)
Before the year 2006, only in-service specialist courses were
imparted to Para Medical Staff of IAF , which were not recognised by
any statutory body. Presently detailment for in-service courses is minimal
and subject to service requirement. The in-service courses were of 24
weeks to 52 weeks duration and do not fulfil the stipulated criteria for
recognition by any statutory body. Since 2006, various specialists Para
Medical Courses have been started under the aegis of recognised
institutes/statutory bodies. T wenty two such specialist courses have
been recognised by universities/boards.

36
2. Recognising the need for post retirement resettlement, Skill
Certification Course is being conducted from December , 2015 at Medical
Training Centre (MTC) Bengaluru in liaison with National Skill
Development Corporation (NSDC) on volunteer basis. This course is
being conducted for retiring Para Medical Staff in four domains i.e.
Emergency Medical Technician (Basic), General Duty Medical Assistant,
Home Health Aid and Medical Lab. Technician.
DGMS (Navy)
1. Training to Ex-Servicemen Para Medical Personnel.
(a) No training is presently being imparted at School of Medical
Assistant (SoMA), Mumbai for training of Para Medical
personnel.
(b) However , under the National Skill Development Mission, train
the trainer programme for Indian Navy, SoMA, is conducting
the following courses for skilling of personnel who are due
for release from the service:Ñ
Sl.No.            Skilling Group
(i) Emergency Medical Technician-Advance (EMT-Advance)
(HSS/Q/2302)
(ii) Emergency Medical Technician-Basic (EMT-BASIC) (HSS/
Q/2301)
(iii) Operation Theatre Technician (OTT) (HSS/Q/2601)
(iv) Medical Laboratory Technician (MLT) (HSS/Q/0301)
2. Certificate Courses at School of Medical Assistants (SoMA) .
SoMA, the training institute for Para Medics in Indian Navy does conduct
Certificate Courses in various specialities recognized by MUHS, Nashik.
3. Two Year Paramedical Diploma Course. The Maharashtra
University of Health Sciences (MUHS) Nashik has given affiliation to
SoMA for conduct of Two Years Para Medical Diploma Courses in fifteen
various specialities.
Recommendation (Para No. 32)
As far as dental training is concerned, the Committee were
intimated that there are only two institutes where training for dental
services is imparted. One is Armed Forces Medical College, Pune and
the second is Army Dental Centre, R&R which is located within the

37
Army Hospital, R&R complex. The Committee feel that just two
institutions is too less and therefore, efforts should be made towards
sanctioning and increasing the number of dental institutions under the
purview of AFMS.
Reply of the Government
(a) The Oral Healthcare in the Armed Forces is provided on a tier
basis, namely the Primary, Secondary and Tertiary levels. Primary Dental
care is delivered at forward areas and peripheral Dental Centres.
Secondary Dental care along with primary care is delivered at Corps
and Zonal levels. Tertiary Dental care along with, secondary and primary
Dental care is delivered at Commands and IHQ level at Delhi. Thus, a
requirement of about 40% of the cadre meets the specialist services
for the Armed Forces to fulfil the designated role of the Army Dental
Corps.
(b) Various PG training programmes are being conducted at the
two service institutes namely AFMC, Pune & AdC (R&R), Delhi Cantt.
(c) The Post-Graduate training programme is governed by the Dental
Council of India Regulations on the subject. The present faculty and
infrastructure has the provisions to increase the annual intake from
02 to 03 seats per speciality in each year in each of the above mentioned
institutions without any augmentation of faculty. However , as the
present intake of 18 per year and certain number of Specialist Dental
Officers joining in each commissioning cycle are sufficient to meet the
necessity, the requirement of another institution for the purpose is not
considered appropriate as this will entail manpower , infrastructure
and armamentarium in accordance with the Dental Council of India
Regulations, which will be a financial burden on the exchequer.
Furthermore, increasing the seats for Post-Graduate will lead to
functional deficiency in the establishment affecting delivery of oral
and dental care to the clientele.
Recommendation (Para No. 33)
On account of the above noted deficiencies, the Committee are of
the view that in case of unavailability of any training facility in the
AFMS institutions, the Defence Medical personnel may be sent to other
training institutions/organisations functioning outside the purview of
AFMS for attainment of necessary training/capacity building.
Reply of the Government
The Specialists of the Armed Forces Medical Services are granted
Study Leave every year to pursue Super Specialisation after they have

38
become Post Graduates in a Basic Speciality. These Specialists mostly
undertake these courses in reputed institutes within India/abroad.
Recommendation (Para No. 36)
The Committee observe that AFMC, Pune was established in 1962.
Since then, the needs of Armed Forces have augmented manifold.
Therefore, there is a requirement for establishment of more colleges
on the lines of AFMC which is a prestigious institution in the field of
medical training. The Committee recommend that at least three more
AFMCs may be established in various zones of the nation. In this regard,
efforts should be made towards development of plan proposal and
acquiring approvals from the Ministry of Finance. In addition of
increasing number of colleges, more seats may also be sanctioned at
AFMC, Pune. During the recently undertaken study visit of the
Committee from 04 to 08 July, 2017 to AFMC, they found that the
present annual intake is 135. Out of this the number of intake for boys
is 105, girls is 25 and foreign students is 5. The case for increasing
cadets intake to 150 is under process and pending approval from
Maharashtra University of Health Sciences and Medical Council of India.
The Committee desire that the Ministry of Defence should take necessary
steps in this regard so that more seats can be created in AFMS, Pune
and the entire process be expedited under the intimation to this
Committee. The Committee also recommend that some of the seats so
created should be reserved for the wards of Ex-servicemen especially
Junior Commissioned Officers and Non-Commissioned Officers.
Reply of the Government
Armed forces Medical College (AFMC), Pune caters to the
requirement of Medical officers for Armed Forces Medical Services
(AFMS). The shortfall is filled up from recruiting officers from medical
colleges all over the country, thus providing representation across all
states of the nation. These measures presently meet the annual
requirement of Medical Officers of AFMS.
2. It is further stated that there is a limited availability of qualified
manpower of teaching faculty, non teaching staff and Nurse in AFMS.
It is at present stretched to provide requisite at AFMS Pune and other
Post graduate Teaching Institutions of AFMS and also to support the
Army College of Medical Sciences.
3. A case was taken up with Medical Council of India (MCI) for
increase in seats for MBBS intake in AFMC from the academic year
2018-19. MCI inspection for the same has been conducted on
06-07 Oct. 2017.

39
4. There exists a provision to give preference to wards of serving
& Ex-servicemen specially JCOÕs & NCOÕs during interview stage subject
to their condition that they qualify the National Eligibility cum Entrance
Test (NEET) for selection for MBBS course.
Recommendation (Para No. 38)
The Committee were further apprised that a Department of sports
medicine has been started on Ad hoc basis. Such a department is first
of its kind in any Government college. For this purpose, there is an
increased requirement of trained doctors to improve fitness standards
for the Armed Forces. These posts should be filled at the earliest.
Reply of the Government
The Medical Council of India permitted the Armed Forces Medical
College to start new course of MD in Sports Medicine with annual
intake of 02 students per year from 2014. In July 2017, the first batch
of two students successfully passed the MD degree. One of the student
who is an AFMS Officer has subsequently been posted to the Department
of Sports Medicine as a faculty. The second student, a civilian doctor
too has opted to join the AFMS and is awaiting commissioning. The
inclusion of the Department of Sports Medicine will be undertaken in
the next revision of Peace Establishment (PE) of AFMC.
2. The Department of Sports Medicine is also conducting a 24
weeks certificate course for Medical Officers, with a course capacity
of 06. These Medical Officers will be an asset to the organisation in
promoting fitness and health of the Armed Forces.
Recommendation (Para No. 39)
AFMC, Pune is one of the premier institutions in the field of Medical
Sciences. Therefore, efforts should be made in the direction of providing
the national status to this institution at par with AIIMS, New Delhi.
Reply of the Government
Case will be taken up for grant of status of Institute of National
Importance through an Act of Parliament in due course.
Recommendation (Para No. 40)
Efforts should be made to augment the number of seats in various
colleges of nursing, paramedical, medical and specialists so that they
are matched with increasing requirement of manpower in Armed Forces

40
Medical Services. Possibilities and limitations on the same may be
furnished to the Committee in the Action Taken Replies.
Reply of the Government
Efforts made to augment UG seats.  Case has been taken up with
Medical Council of India for increase in seats for MBBS intake in AFMC
to 150 per year from the academic year 2018-19.
2. Efforts made to augment Paramedical seats.
(a) AFMC has been authorized training of 1200 JCOs/OR annually
as per PE of 2013. The training for paramedical course is
carried out at AFMC as per the vacancies available at Army
Medical Corps Record Office.
(b) AFMC has projected a case to Southern Command for provision
of land, building and accommodation for a separate Institute
for training of these Paramedics. The number of seats for
Paramedical courses will be augmented subsequently.
3. Efforts made to augment number of seats of M.Sc (N), PB B.Sc
(N) & B.Sc (N)
(a) The proposal to increase the seats for MSc Nursing from
existing 10 seats to 20 seats at College of Nursing, AFMC,
Pune has been approved by Medical Services Advisory
Committee. This augmentation of number of seats at College
of Nursing (CoN), AFMC, Pune will be implemented in due
course.
(b) PB B.Sc Nursing was started in College of Nursing (CoN),
Command Hospital (Central Command) Lucknow in the year
2016 with the annual intake of 15 students and has been
enhanced to 30 seats in 2017.
(c) The proposal of augmenting the number of seats at CoN
AFMC for B.Sc (N) intake will be reassessed in future according
to the vacancies.
Recommendation (Para No. 41)
The Committee paid a visit to the Artificial Limb Centre, Pune on
05 July, 2017. The Committee are highly impressed with the kind of
work this institution is carrying out and it would not be any exaggeration
to call it God Õs Work. The Artificial Limb Centre has received ISO
9001:2000 certification. The motto of the centre is to ÒMake the Dream

41
of Every Amputee to Walk Come True Ó. During the study visit from
4-8 July, 2017, the Committee also visited Artificial Limb Centre, Pune
and found that the existing infrastructure of ALC is very old. In this
connection, the Committee were candidly informed that upgradation
of infrastructure on polyclinic concept has been planned in approved
Computer Aided Design and Computer Aided Manufacture building which
will have ultra modern facilities. The Committee are keen that
modernization work must be hastened up and developments be
intimated to the committee. In addition to this, the Committee
recommend that a special team of experts may be constituted and
sent by MoD to ALC, Pune with a purpose of exploring further possibilities
in enhancing the infrastructure and modernization of the centre.
Reply of the Government
Revamping of existing infrastructure of ALC Pune is already in the
pipeline. The new facility will have a state of art polyclinic designed
to serve the needs of persons with disabilities (PwD). New Computer
Aided Design (CAD)ÑComputer Aided Management (CAM) facility
infrastructure is already approved as an Annual Major Works Plan (AMWP)
presently in tendering stage.
Recommendation (Para No. 43)
The Committee were informed that ALC is being supported by five
Artificial Limb Sub Centres (ALSC) by providing facilities to clientele in
other parts of the country. In the view of the Committee, the role and
function of ALC is of tremendous significance and appreciable. The
Ministry of Defence should take up the matter of expansion of ALC by
way of opening up more ALSCs. A target of starting at least five more
ALSCs may be taken up initially. In addition to this one more institution
on the lines of ALC, Pune may be taken up for consideration by the
Ministry of Defence. The possibilities and limitations in this connection
may be apprised to the Committee in the Action Taken Replies.
Reply of the Government
It is submitted that all efforts are being made to achieve fully
functional and operational status for the current 05 ALSCs by making
them adequately equipped in terms of trained manpower and machinery
required for manufacturing and fabrication of Prosthetics and Orthotics.
The recommendation for additional 05 ALSCs may be looked into in
future depending upon the requirements.

42
Recommendation (Para No. 45)
Medical stores are organised in AFMS to meet the objective of
efficient and effective medical store supply chain management.
Presently, four Armed Forces Medical Store Deports (AFMSDs) are
functioning under this Directorate General i.e. AFMSD Lucknow, AFMSd
Mumbai, AFMSD Delhi Cantt. and AFMSD Pune. These depots are
responsible for supply of Medical, Dental and Veterinary stores and
equipment to all the dependant units within the area of responsibilities
besides provisioning of medical/dental stores to all the ECHS Polyclinics
under the area of responsibility. These depots are also responsible for
periodic checks, conditioning and preservation of stocked stores as
well as for holding of additional medical and dental stores for any
emergency in case of natural or man-made disaster. The Committee
found that the above stores are presently housed mostly in old buildings
which are not optimally equipped with modern storage and warehousing
infrastructure. Therefore, renovation and modernization of buildings
and equipments is immediate need of the hour. Every measure should
be taken towards achievement of this end in a systematic and time
bound manner. The Committee be apprised about the same.
Reply of the Government
AFMSD Lucknow
It is submitted that this depot has already initiated KLP project
worth Rs. 4720.47 Lakhs and the case file of the above project has
been forward to E-in-C vide QMG branch letter No. R/52/904/Wks
(P&W) dated 14 Aug. 2017.
AFMSD Mumbai
AFMSD Mumbai is responsible for provisioning of medical, dental
and veterinary stores and equipment for 547 units/establishments of
Army, Navy, Air Force, Coast Guard, DRDO, Ordnance Factories and 132
Polyclinics of ECHS located across 10 states in Western, Central and
Southern India. AFMSD Mumbai is located at Kandivali (East) and has
a land holding of 43.95 acres. The Depot was raised in 1942 at Sewri
and moved to its present location in 1976.
2. The stores are accommodated in 14 old buildings with over
17000 SM plinth area of Food Corporation of India godowns of 1960
vintyage and are in poor state and need exhaustive repairs and
maintenance in order to optimize utilization of scarce resources and
effectively manage the supply chain to ensure delivery of high quality
of health care to troops and their families.

43
3. The following initiatives have been taken up to improve and
modernize the warehouse infrastructure of the depot. These are
enumerated in the succeeding paragraphs.
(i) Special repairs to AC to AC Plant & Cold Storage Room:Ñ
A number of drugs and vaccines are required to be stored at
low temperatures. The depot has facility to store these at a
cold storage (Temp 2oC - 8oC) and a Cool Room (Temp 15 oC-
25oC). The Special Repair Works for this facility has been
sanctioned vide HQ UM & G Sub Area letter No. 1612/SPR/
BLDG/GE (N)/AA 16-17/Q3P dated 01 Nov . 2016. The repair
is likely to cost Rs. 56.42 lakhs and has a PDC of 102 Weeks.
Tender action is in progress.
(ii) Special Repairs to Floor, Verandah & Plinth Protection for
Group-III, Group- II &Receipt:ÑProposal of special repairs of
Floor , Verandah & Plinth Protection for Group-II & Receipt
Sec building costing Rs. 145 lakhs have been submitted to HQ
UM & G Sub Area and are awaiting Admin. Approval.
(iii) Provision of False Ceiling in Group-I:Ñ The proposal has been
submitted to GE (North) for costing.
(iv) Provision of Fork Lift Trucks:- Four fork lift trucks have been
introduced in the revised PE of this depot and are awaiting
release.
(v) Provision of New Software for Supply Chain Management:Ñ
The Medical Stores Management System (MSMS) is being
replaced by i-Aushadhi, a new software capable of not only
inventory control but also enable dependent units to submit
their indents on line. The servers for the same have been
procured at a cost of Rs. 1,69,638/- and LAN is being laid.
User Id and log in passwords for dependent units are being
generated and migration is likely to be completed shortly.
4. Relocation of AFMSD:- A proposal to relocate the Depot to
aggregate resources of Central Ordinance Depot(COD) is under
consideration of Hq Southern Command. If approved; AFMSD will be
relocated from Kandivali to Malad. The storage accommodation at the
proposed location is similar to the one currently occupied by the
depot, but is being used to keep ordnance stores. These stores will
require works to make them suitable for housing medical stores including
provisioning of Cold Storage and Cool Room prior to shifting. A proposal
for complete revamp of the AFMSD in modern pre fabricated structure
with multistoried racks is being worked on Commandant,

44
Dy. Commandant & Adm. Officer of this depot visited a Modern Medical
Warehouse at Bhiwandi on 05 Aug., 2017 to study the functioning and
architecture.
AFMSD Pune
Two works have been projected by this depot for building up of
modern storage and warehousing infrastructure.
AFMSD Delhi Cantt.
1. AMWP - Projection of Annual Major Works Programme (AMWP)
for AFMSD Del- Proposal for Essential Storage Accommodation for Med.
Stores amounting to INR 4996.35 Lakh projected under AMWP for AFMSD
Del. The Board proceedings duly completed were submitted to HQ Del
Areas however the work was not listed in the approved List of works
as approved by HQ (WC).
Recommendation (Para No. 46)
The Committee found that the indigenous component of items
procured by AFMS was much less than the import component. During
the year 2015-16 the import component was to the tune of Rs. 78.80
crore whereas the indigenous component was to the tune of Rs. 26.60
crore. In the year 2016-17, the import component was of Rs. 90.34
crore while indigenous content was up to Rs. 23.83 crore. This amounts
to a huge gap in both the ratios. The Committee desire that a series
of steps should be taken to increase the indigenous content of
procurement in AFMC and in the upcoming year it would be desirable
to increase the indigenous component upto 50 per cent. The Committee
would like to be updated on the initiatives taken towards this end.
Reply of the Government
The Armed Forces Medical Services (AFMS) is committed to procure
and promote the use of ÔMake in India Õ technology for medical stores
and equipment from indigenous manufacturers. However , this is subject
to qualification of minimum essential specifications required for
functional efficiency and patient safety. To this end, the Bureau of
Indian Standard (BIS) publishes Indian Standards, in a very limited
range of medical, dental and veterinary instruments, surgical dressings,
artificial limbs, rehabilitation equipment, diagnostic kits and does not
undertake certification of high end sophisticated critical care
equipment.

45
2. It has been the endeavour of AFMS to procure medical appliances
based on Indian Standards which are available.
3. However, since most medical devices have an impact on the
patientÕs morbidity profile and lifestyle and are required to be used
for diagnosis/treatment of patients, it has been the endeavour of
O/o DGAFMS to procure best quality equipment/devices which have
proven record of having a positive impact on diagnosis and treatment
of patients.
4. Moreover , BIS certified devices are not readily available in market.
In order to ensure that the equipment work uninterruptedly and
optimally even in extreme conditions, it is of paramount importance
that such equipment, which become decisive tools in the life and limb
saving efforts, are procured only after passing stringent quality
certification tests, in terms of defined parameters.
5. Since, most of the procurement being carried out by O/o DGAFMS
belong to sophisticated high end critical equipment, hence, the
indigenous component of items procured is less than the imported
items in both FY 2015-16 and FY 2016-17.
Recommendation (Para No. 47)
The Committee, during the course of examination of the subject,
came to know that various efforts are being made towards medical
preparedness to contain various types of contagious diseases in Armed
Forces. Some of these efforts include, formulation of policies with
regard to contagious diseases in consonance with the National Health
Programme, Robust mechanism of surveillance and monitoring of the
diseases, starting from unit level, health education is undertaken for
troops and preventive measures are instituted for communicable
diseases, in-built reporting mechanism and updation of health statistics
by units, station health organisations, Medical Directorates at various
echelons, etc. The Committee observe that AFMS is responsible for
provision of health facilities to Armed Forces and therefore it becomes
utmostly important to take measures for checking contagious diseases
as any such outbreak would lead to serious threat. While taking note
of the various measures as stated above, the Committee desire that
continuous efforts must be made for preventive and timely action by
AFMS on this front.
Reply of the Government
Actions elaborated in the para are being implemented and monitored
diligently, by the concerned authority in the Armed Forces. This will
be so continued in all earnest in future as well.

46
Recommendation (Para No. 48)
In the recent past, many cases of casualties of soldiers have been
reported form the high altitude areas like Leh and Ladakh. On the
issue, the committee were reported that as per morbidity data available,
medical casualties have not shown an increasing trend since the past
decade. All troops being inducted into high altitude and extreme cold
climate areas undergo compulsory acclimatization as per extant army
orders. This is followed by a detailed medical examination to assess
the fitness for induction into those areas with hazardous climate. The
Committee wish to be apprised about the details of medical care being
taken and facilities being provided for checking high altitude diseases.
Reply of the Government
1. For Prevention of Cold Related Diseases.
(a) Extreme cold climate clothing and other personal protective
equipments are issued to all inducted into these areas to
safeguard their health from effects of cold.
(b) Fibre Re-inforced Huts/Shelters are provided for soldiers are
provided for soldiers deployed in High Altitude Areas (HAA)
regions to prevent cold related diseases/injuries.
(c) Devices to keep the living environment warm are provided
at posts/shelters for troops.
2. For High Altitude related illnesses.
(a) All individuals undergo acclimatization as laid out in Army
Orders to prevent any high altitude related illnesses.
(b) A detailed medical exam of all troops inducting into Leh and
Ladakh is carried out prior to induction.
(c) Early evacuation of patient by air is facilitated.
(d) Portable oxygen cylinders, Battery operated one man High
Altitude Pulmonary Oedema (HAPO) bags are available on
posts in addition to other emergency medicines and medical
equipments.
(e) The posts are manned by paramedical staff/medical officers
at high altitude areas. The casualties /patients are initially
assessed and managed by them.
(f) Field Hospitals at Partapur and Drass, MH Kargil and 153 GH
(Leh) have requisite specialist facilities for treatment of
individuals suffering from high altitude related illness and if
required they are evacuated to CH (WC)/AH (R&R) or other
hospitals of Armed Forces for treatment.

47
Recommendation (Para No. 49)
While examining the subject, the Committee found that there had
been an increase in number of Psychiatric cases in Armed Forces. In
this connection, the Committee were given to understand that the
suicide or killing rates in Armed Forces are not abnormally high
compared to other Armed Forces in the world. However , the Committee
desire that a report may be submitted on reasons for stress, suicides
and killings in the Armed Forces that have taken place during last ten
years. Also, a policy for justifiable and fair transfers especially in case
of tough terrain deployments must be kept in place. In addition to
this, a mechanism to observe and identify Armed Forces personnel
with psychiatric problems should be formulated and timely psychiatric
treatment provided. The Committee may be apprised about the action
taken in this regard.
Reply of the Government
Mechanism to observe and identify Armed Forces personnel with
Psychiatry problems is in place. Mental health programme for the
Armed Forces has been implemented and various actions to be taken
have been elaborated in the programme. Detailed guidelines for
psychiatric examination, diagnosis, treatment and disposal of service
personnel and their families suffering from psychiatric disorders have
been promulgated vide DGAFMS Memorandum No. 171.
Recommendation (Para No. 50)
The Committee were keen to have details on the status of
digitization in AFMS. In this regard, the Committee were informed that
different aspects of functioning have different percentage of
digitization. A rough estimate of 60% digitization exists across the
board in AFMS. The Committee feel that digitization will help in curbing
pilferage and other malpractices to a great extent along with providing
better efficiency and accuracy. Therefore, vigorous efforts should be
made towards achievement of 100 per cent digitization in AFMS. The
entire process of digitization in AFMS may be done keeping in mind the
threats of cyber security.
Reply of the Government
DGMS (Army)
Army Medical Corps have strived relentlessly and successfully to
implement IT enabled administrative and patient related processes in

48
all medical units under Directorate General Medical Services (Army)
and is fast progressing towards the development of Army Medical Corps
into a centre of excellence in Digitisation at par with the best. The
aim is to bring about a digital and electronic transformation in all the
spheres of the functioning of the medical services, so as to ultimately
enable the delivery of quality healthcare to its large number of
dependent clientele. This also includes improvements in internal
processes of hospital administration and military logistics. Towards this
end and realization of the ÔDigital India-e-Kranti Õ objectives, a
comprehensive project on Hospital Information System (HIS) has been
initiated which is fully compliant with National and International
Electronics Health Records.
2. In addition, thrust has been provided to a focused approach
towards meticulous planning, budgeting and implementation of
integrated IT Projects which include establishment of Campus Wide
Network, National Knowledge Network (NKN) for hosting virtual
classrooms and online open courses. Cancer Registry System in
collaboration with Indian Council of Medical Research (ICMR), Human
Organ Transplant Registry System, Online OPD Registration, Medical
Stores Inventory Management System (MSIMS), Medical Store supply
chain management system (I-Aushadhi) for Armed Forces Medical Stores
Depots (AFMSDs) for transparent and streamlined online indenting,
accounting and issue of expendable and non-expendable medical
supplies. Human Resource Management System (HRMS) and Telemedicine
projects with ISRO and DEBEL, DRDO in all hospitals under DGMS (Army).
3. As part of capacity building, establishment of Computer Training
Labs (CTLs) and IT Trained Cadre has also been planned to be created
in AMC wherein training will be imparted to IT qualified AMC personnel
in advanced computing, Networking and Hospital Information System.
Moreover, keeping the patients as the centre of focus, Army Medical
Corps has enthusiastically dedicated itself to improve the quality of
management being imparted to them through cost effective, transparent
and integrated IT solutions of Government e-Market place and
e-Procurement.
DGMS (Air)
Centralised web based software applications for automation of
various processes in healthcare delivery to clientele have been
implemented in IAF . The applications are capable of digitizing the
patient record and create the electronic medical records and inventory
management of medical stores. With the implementation of these
applications the electronic medical record of all patients reporting to

49
IAF healthcare facilities is being created except for digital archiving of
radiological and other images, automation of lab investigations at
primary healthcare centres. Feasibility study for procuring the Picture
Archiving and Communication System (PACS) which will digitize the
radiological and other images and integrate with the current available
software applications is under progress. The project for digitization of
legacy medical records of IAF personnel by scanning and archiving is
also under progress.
2. With the implementation health smart card project being
executed by Head Quarter Integrated Defence Staff (HQ IDS) the medical
records of IAF personnel created at Army and Navy healthcare
establishments will be digitized and can be integrated with IAF
application.
3. Road map for creating complete digitization facilities for IAF
medical services by 2020 is being executed.
DGMS (N)
The Indian Navy has already installed Naval Hospitals Information
Management System (NHIMS) in INHS Asvini as well as in INHS Kalyani.
The implementation of the same is in progress in five more Naval
Hospitals as part of the roll-on phase of the project which is envisaged
to be completed by 2018. This will lead to about 80% digitization in
the hospital services of Navy.
Recommendation (Para No. 51)
In the view of the Committee, one of the ways of tackling manpower
shortage would be through augmenting telemedicine facilities in AFMS.
Also, a dedicated mobile application for AFMS clientele may be
formulated and started so that deficiencies in manpower can be tackled
to some extent. Detailed note on efforts being taken in this direction
may be submitted to the Committee.
Reply of the Government
The initiative taken by AFMS in augmenting telemedicine facilities
are not designated to tackle manpower shortage. However , the
recommendation of the committee for development of a dedicated
mobile application for AFMS clientele to tackle deficiency in manpower
is under consideration.

50
Recommendation (Para Nos. 52 & 53)
The Committee were apprised that for undertaking research
activities for AFMS they are liaising with the DRDO who also extend
financial assistance for the purpose. DRDO, under the Ministry of
Defence, is mandated to conduct research to meet the requirement of
Defence sector. Life Sciences Division of DRDO is authorised research
funds for the purpose. Sanction was accorded to set up Armed Forces
Medical Research Committee under DRDO by Ministry of Defence. The
research funds for AFMS are thus allotted by DRDO.
The Committee desired to be informed whether the Ministry has
explored the possibilities of dedicated funds for Research to AFMS. On
this, the MoD apprised the Committee that the proposal to make
DGAFMS, a direct budget controller as part of the revision of Delegation
of Financial Power to Defence Services-2015 (DFPDS-2015) has not
been included in the revised Delegation of Financial Power to Defence
Services- 2016 (DFPDS-2016). However, this proposal forms a part of
the recommendations of the review committee submitted to the HonÕble
Raksha Mantri. The Committee wish that the matter should be pursued
and dedicated funds for Research directly to AFMS may be considered.
Reply of the Government
The AFMS is an inter-services organization, headed by the DGAFMS
with the status and privileges of Principal Staff Officer (PSO) responsible
directly to GOI/MOD for the overall policy matters. He is vested with
all the responsibilities for quality healthcare of the entitled clientele,
medical stores provisioning and supply chain and equipment
management, selection and promotion of personnel, training and
research matters of all AFMS establishments.
2. Consequently, a proposal to formalise and promulgate
appointment of DGAFMS as top-level Budget holder from FY 2017-18
onwards with sole responsibility of entire AFMS so as to bring in harmony
between budgetary operations and preparation of sound budget
estimates under various code heads and to achieve the terminal
objective of provision of quality healthcare to the entitled clientele of
the Armed Forces, is under process. The delegated financial powers of
the DGAFMS for Research and Development through Government/
Autonomous R&D Organizations and through Private Sector and Armed
Forces Medical Research Committee has been included in Schedule - 4,
Sub-Schedule 4.1 and 4.2 of DFPDS 2016.

51
Recommendation (Para No. 55)
With regard to Medical Research, the Committee were further
intimated that the current annual outlay is Rs. 6.60 crore. The
Committee feel that the said amount is not enough to meet the
challenges of modern day research technologies and therefore the
amount for research and development to AFMS may be increased to
Rs. 12 crore annually.
Reply of the Government
Defence Research Development Organisation (DRDO) has increased
the fund allocation for medical research from Rs. 6.6 crore to Rs. 9
crore from FY 2016-17 onward. Case has been taken up with DRDO to
further enhance the annual research funds to Rs. 12 crore.
Recommendation (Para No. 56)
The Committee were given to understand that approximately
125 research projects are funded annually by AFMS. In this connection,
the Committee feel that emphasis and focus should be given on fewer
but more meaningful large scale multi-location projects. Also, an
increased focus on Military Medicine research may be given.
Reply of the Government
A large share of research funds is being allotted to large scale
multi centric projects on military medical issues.

(B) OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED
BY THE GOVERNMENT AND TO BE COMMENTED UPON
Recommendation (Para No. 5)
The Military Nursing Service is intended to perform nursing duties
in hospitals including family wards. MNS officers also perform
administrative duties relating to their service in hospitals and formation
HQ. Nursing Assistant (NA) and Nursing Technician (NT) in the rank of
Personnel Below Officers Rank are also available for the performance
of nursing duties in hospitals. In case of Military Nursing Services
(MNS), the authorization is 4943 whereas the actual strength is 4036.
In case of Army, the authorization is 4082 nurses while the held strength
is 3379. For Navy, held strength is 288 against sanction of 382 and Air
Force has on its roll 369 nurses against an authorization of 479.
Under MNS (NT) for Army, the authorization is 370 and held strength
is 352. In case of Navy and Air Force there is no sanctioning of the
posts. In case of General Duty Medical Officers, the authorization is
4360 while the held strength is 3978. For specialists, the authorization
is 2295 and actual strength is 2068. The authorization for super speciality
is 210 and held strength is 208. The number of nurses and paramedical
staff in AFMS hospitals is less than civil hospitals. For nearly
1000 bedded R&R hospital in Delhi, only 214 nurses are available,
which is 1 nurse for 5 beds. This is far less than the position in AIIMS
or in comparison to a corporate hospital like Apollo. In case of AIIMS,
the ratio is 1.2 nurse per bed and in Apollo it is two nurses per bed.
The nurse-bed ratio, therefore, needs drastic improvement.
Reply of the Government
Current authorisation of MNS is 5317 and recruitment of 353 nursing
officers will be carried out from civil this year and 210 will be
commissioned this year which will reduce the existing deficiency.
Regarding the perceived deficiency in Army Hospital (Research &
Referral) (AH R&R), a large number of male nursing assistants are
carrying out nursing duties in male wards. However after approval of
suggested staffing norms by Govt. of India, any upgradation or new
hospital will have staffing patterns as per new norms.
(Please see Para No. 7 of Chapter-I of the Report)
52

53
Recommendation (Para No. 20)
Modernization and Infrastructure Upgradation
On long term plan projection particularly with regards to
upgradations of the existing facilities, the Committee have been
apprised that for Army, there are plans to provide comprehensive
medical support. Army Medical Corps has identified the existing voids
and has proposed for raising of 07 Military/General hospitals and
upgradation of 04 Militray/General hospitals. These have been done
with the aim of ensuring requisite medical cover to the entire Indian
Army. The raising of 03 Military hospitals and upgradation of 02 military/
General hospitals in border areas has been sanctioned by Govt. of
India, MoD as part of Capability Development Plan for Northern borders.
Further , the Committee have been told that there are various projects
going on which include raising three hospitals in the Eastern Command,
one at Rangapahar and Panagarh, and the location for the third one
is yet to be confirmed. Also, there are two upgradations again in
Eastern Command at Misamari and one at Northern Command in Leh.
Besides this, there is Long Term Perspective Plan, which include 225
bedded Military Hospital(MH) for Jaisalmer, 50 bedded MH at Chungthang
and 49 bedded MH at Borarupak (Near Likabali). There is a proposal
for Upgradation of MH Kargil from 44 to 149 beds and 200 Bedded MH
for Eastern Ladakh. Upgradation of MH Jaipur to 600 bedded Command
Hospital is also in pipeline. The Committee desire the Ministry of
Defence to monitor and ensure all the projects mentioned here are
progressed in target oriented manner and details of progress are
submitted to the Committee in the Action Taken Replies.
Reply of the Government
As part of long term plan projection particularly for upgrading
Capability Development along Northern Borders and Long Term
Prospective Plan, following are being progressed by this Dte. Gen.:-
(a) Capability Development along Northern Borders
Sl. Type of No. Remarks
No. establishment
12 3 4
(i) MH 03 01 X 200 bedded Military Hospital at
Likabali being raised with effect from
01 March 2017.

54
01 X 200 bedded Military Hospital in
support of planned to be raised in FY
2018-19.
01 X 75 bedded Military Hospital
planned to be raised in Eastern sec. in
FY 2020-21.
(ii) Upgradation 02 153 GH at Leh from 200 to 300 beds.180
of MH MH at Misamari from 148 to 250 beds.
(b) Long Term prospective plan (LTPP). DGAFMS has identified
the above mentioned voids and have proposed for raising/upgradation.
The same has been processed with Directorate General of Officer
Logistic (DGOL & SM/OL-1) vide letter No. B/73185/DGMS-3C dated
16 Nov., 2015.
Sl. Type No. Remarks
No. of est.
(i) MH 04 01 x 200 beds Military Hospital planned
in Eastern Ladakh.
01 x 49 beds Military Hospital planned
at Sitapur Military station.
01 x 50 bedded Military Hospital planned
at Chungthang.
01 x 49 Beds Military Hospital planned
at Borarupak.
(ii) Upgradation of 02 01 x Military Hospital Jaipur 166 beds
Military Hospital pl anned for upgradation to Comd.
Hospital Jaipur 600 beds.
01 x Military Hospital Kargil planned to
upgrade from 44 to 149 Beds.
(Please see Para No. 13 of Chapter-I of the Report)
Recommendation (Para No. 21)
In case of Navy, the Committee were assured that periodic review
was being carried out regularly of the facilities available in various
hospitals and the need for upgradation of some of these hospitals,
which is based on operational needs and clientele requirements are
carried out, INHS Kalyani, Sanjivani, Nivarini, Patanjali, Dhanvantari,
12 3 4

55
Navjivan and Karanja are currently under various stages of upgradation.
The Committee should be provided details of progress made in each
case.
Reply of the Government
The details of work on upgradation in respect of Naval hospitals is
as under:Ñ
Sl.No. Name of work Present status
1. Upgradation of INHS Detailed Project Report (DPR) is under
Kalyani from 206 bed preparation by Consultant hired by Chief
to 604 bed Engineer (Navy), Visakhapatnam.
2. Upgradation of INHS Consultant has been hired by Chief
Sanjivani from 275 Engineer (Navy), Kochi, who is
bed to 439 bed undertaking preliminary study.
3. Upgradation of INHS Project accorded Cabinet Committee on
Patanjali from 141 Security (CCS) approval. The work is in
bed to 400 bed design stage by the consultant.
4. Upgradation of INHS Case being steered by Head Quarter
Dhanvantari from Integrated Defence Staff (HQIDS) for CCS
107 bed to 394 bed approval.
5. Upgradation of INHS Proposal under consideration with MoD,
Nivarini from 72 bed after receiving Approval in Principal
to 104 bed (AIP) of Vice Chief of Naval Staff (VCNS).
6. Upgradation of NH Infrastructure work for construction of
Karanja from 16 new hospital building has been included
bed to 30 bed in Annual Major Works Plan (AMWP)
2017-18.
7. Upgradation of INHS Case being steered by (Indian Naval
Navjivani from 60 Academy) INA Project for CCS approval.
bed to 151 bed
8. Upgradation of Naval Case is under consideration of MoD for
Institute of Dental accord of Govt. Sanction for accretion
Sciences, Mumbai to of manpower , equipment and transport.
the equivalent of a
Command Military
Dental Centre
(Please see Para No. 16 of Chapter-I of the Report)

56
Recommendation (Para No. 22)
With regard to Air Force, the Committee were apprised that Policy
Page revision of Air Force Hospitals (AFH) has been completed with
comprehensive review of all the required facilities. 7 AFH Kanpur has
been authorized Cardiology Centre, Gastroenterology Centre,
Gastrointestinal Centre and Urology Centre. Enhancement of the
facilities at Air Force Hospitals is an ongoing process. A proposal for
up gradation of 11 and 12 AFH from peripheral hospital to Zonal
hospital is under consideration. While taking note of the details, the
Committee would like to be informed about the progress in this
direction.
Reply of the Government
The proposal of upgradation of 11 AFH & 12 AFH to zonal was
considered & approved by Chief of Air Staff (CAS). However, the proposal
was deferred in view of the ban on creation of plan and non-plan posts
and purchase of vehicles by M/o Finance.
(Please see Para No. 19 of Chapter-I of the Report)
Recommendation (Para No. 34 & 35)
Armed Forces Medical College
The Armed Forces Medical College (AFMC) was established on
04 August 1962. During deliberations on the subject, the Committee
were informed by the representatives of the Ministry of Defence that
around 20 per cent students leave AFMC despite a bond amount of
Rs. 25,00,000 at graduate level and Rs. 28,00,000 at PG level. The
Committee wished to be provided with a report on reasons for drop
out which was not readily available with the Ministry of Defence. The
Committee desire that a report should be made available to them in
this regard.
On the concern of attrition, the Committee desire that efforts
should be made to enhance the retention rate and it should be reduced
from current 20 percent to at least 10 per cent, if not lesser from the
upcoming batches as huge resources and time are involved in training
of these cadets. One of the methods can be to increase the bond
amount from Rupees twenty-five lakh to one crore for MBBS and from
Rupees twenty-eight lakh to two crore for Post Graduate students.
Besides this, other motivational methods may also be fruitfully utilized.
In this context, the representatives of Armed Forces Medical Services
made an argument that if the deterrence is made so high, then they

57
do fear that students will not come and they may lose the merit. The
Committee observe in this regard, that India is hugely populated and
there is no dearth of talent. Motivational service conditions publicized
through various mediums of publicity may be used to approach the
talented youth.
Reply of the Government
The reasons given by the students for opting out of service liability
are as under:Ñ
(a) Desire to pursue PG immediately after passing MBBS.
(b) Family commitments e.g. Family Migrating Abroad.
(c) Parents have set up a practice for them.
(d) Did not get a service of choice. (Navy/Air Force).
(e) Did not get Permanent Commission (PC).
(f) Stagnation in AFMS.
The college has taken the following steps to reduce the rate of
opting out of service liability:Ñ
(a) The medical cadets are sent on visits to service units/
formations for motivating them to join the Armed Forces.
(b) Faculty members are nominated as ÒFaculty Mentor Ó to
motivate the students.
(c) The ambience of AFMC campus has been improved with
installation of military equipment/aircrafts.
(d) At the time of admission, the Brig Adm (UG), Dy DGAFMS
(P & T) and Senior Faculty members motivate the prospective
candidates.
(Please see Para No. 22 of Chapter-I of the Report)
Recommendation (Para No. 37)
During the aforementioned study visit, the Committee also came
to know that there is an urgent need to get Pharmacy Council of India
(PCI) affiliation to Department of Pharmacy which has been in existence
since 2000. In this connection, affiliation from All India Council of
Technical Education and Pharmacy Council of India are awaited. In this
connection, the Ministry of Defence must speed up the necessary
approvals and the Committee be informed about the action taken in
this regard.

58
Reply of the Government
AFMC had approached Pharmacy Council of India (PCI) in 2015 for
approval to start the Diploma in Pharmacy course. Conditional approval
for academic year 2016-17 was accorded by PCI subject to appointment
of teaching faculty. The course has not yet been started for want of
faculty. Government of India has sanctioned the faculty and the proposal
of framing of recruitment rules for the posts of Professor, Reader and
Lecturers of Pharmacy is under consideration.
AFMC has approached All India Council for Technical Education
(AICTE) in 2017 for grant of approval to start the Department of
Pharmacy for conducting Diploma in Pharmacy course. The approval
was denied for want of original land and building documents. The facts
that these original documents are held with Government offices, that
is, original land documents are held with Defence Estate Office and
original building documents are held with Garrison Engineer, have been
brought to the notice of Chairman, AICTE at New Delhi and outcome
is awaited.
(Please see Para No. 25 of Chapter-I of the Report)
Recommendation (Para No. 42)
With regard to the Research and Development in ALC, the
Committee were informed that there is no R&D set up in ALC. However,
certain Armed Forces Medical Research projects have been undertaken
by the officers posted to ALC from time to time. Also, ALC is in the
process of collaborating with IIT , Guwahati and BARC in development
of economical, state of the art passing prosthetic knee joint and micro
processor controlled hand joint and feet. A very high level and
sophisticated R&D is required to improve upon the existing carbon
fibre foot and joints which is not possible in ALC. It was further
informed that no separate budget is allocated to ALC for R&D. However,
when it is undertaken, research projects are forwarded to O/o DGAFMS,
for approval and work is carried out accordingly. The Committee observe
that the officers posted at ALC have undertaken certain projects despite
infrastructure deficit for the purpose. While appreciating this, the
Committee want that a dedicated R&D centre must be opened up at
ALC with direct funding. This will help in direct need oriented research
and will also curb time lags in receiving various approvals and
coordination. The research centre should be well equipped and
necessary manpower recruited. Further , the Committee strongly view
that the institution must be declared as a Centre of Excellence.

59
Reply of the Government
1. Prime role of ALC, Pune is provision of comprehensive
rehabilitation to amputees and the locomotor disabled. The centre is
presently not equipped to carry out the R&D in the field of prosthetics
and orthotics, it being a technologically sophisticated field. However,
ALC has had meaningful discussions for collaboration with other
organizations such as:Ñ
(a) IIT , Guwahati for development of Prosthetic Knee (awaiting
delivery of the final product to be used for trials).
(b) BARC, Mumbai for development of advance robotic prosthesis
limb (Draft MOU is being processed).
(c) C-DAC for development of myoelectric prosthetic arms.
2. In the long term, ALC and Indian Armed Forces will benefit from
a dedicated R&D unit working in the field of Rehabilitative Engineering,
Biomedical Engineering, advance Prosthetics & Orthotics as suggested.
(Please see Para No. 28 of Chapter-I of the Report)
Recommendation (Para No. 54)
The Armed Forces Medical Services conduct medical research in all
fields of medicine with an emphasis on military medicine and combat
medical support. The Armed Forces Medical Research Committee
(AFMRC) headed by the DGAFMS is a Committee of the DRDO which
oversees all medical research taking place in the AFMS. Approximately
125 projects are funded annually. In addition to this, AFMS actively
collaborates with the Indian Council of Medical Research (ICMR),
Department of Biotechnology (DBT), Laboratories of Life Sciences
Division of Defence Research Development Organisation (DRDO) [Defence
Institute of Physiology & Allied Sciences (DIPAS), Institute of Nuclear
Medicine & Allied Sciences (INMAS), Defence Institute of Psychological
Research (DIPR), Defence Bio-Engineering & Electro Medical Laboratory
(DEBEL), Defence Research & Development Establishment (DRDE)], and
the Ministry of Health in the field of medical research. The Committee
opine that the AFMS should explore ways and means to enhance
international collaboration for medical research and technology.
Reply of the Government
AFMC, Pune is participating in a Centre for Disease Control &
Prevention (CDC), USA funded project being conducted by AIIMS,
New Delhi titled ÒCapacity Building and Strengthening of Hospital
Acquired Infection Control to Detect and Prevent Antimicrobial
Resistance in India Ó.
(Please see Para No. 31 of Chapter-I of the Report)

CHAPTER III
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE REPLIES RECEIVED
FROM THE GOVERNMENT
Recommendation (Para No. 11)
With regard to the Extension of specialities like Cardiology and
Neurology to zonal hospitals, the matter is considered based on above
factors and is not rigidly bound by hospital class (number of beds). The
facility of super specialist care is being extended to zonal hospitals of
Army Medical Corps in a phased manner for selected super specialities
depending on patient work load. The Committee have been informed
that the number of orthopaedic specialists in the AFMS is presently 57.
The numbers being trained annually is a function of service requirement
and availability of training capacity is not a constraint in this case.
Seats offered to service candidate are based on vacancies arising due
to retirement/release and requirements of service. In the course of
examination of the related issues, the Committee found that number
of service specialists being trained in Orthopaedics in various AFMS
institutes were 09 in number in 2014 batch, 07 in 2015 batch and only
04 in 2016 batch. The Committee take note of the decline in number
of candidates and feel that such a trend should not be allowed. Even
in case of Cardiology and Neurology, there are 18 Neurologists and
Neurosurgeons in AFMS. The number of specialist Doctors being trained
in Neurology and Neuro Surgery in the last 03 years is as 2 each in 2014
and 2015 batch while it was only 01 in 2016 batch.
Reply of the Government
The specialists, including Orthopaedic surgeons, neurologists, neuro-
surgeons, etc., are trained annually as per service requirements and
vacancy created due to retirement or release from the specialists
pool. Hence, it varies every year according to the requirement. There
is no deliberate reduction in the number of specialists trained.
Recommendation (Para No. 24)
During the deliberations, the Committee came to know that AFMS
does not have an air ambulance fleet. On this issue, even the
representatives of AFMS candidly deposed before the Committee that
60

61
undoubtedly they would require an air ambulance fleet if the budgetary
constraints do not come in the way. The Committee found that presently
Air Force and the Army Aviation are used for providing air effort
whenever it is required. An air ambulance will have pre-equipped
aircraft with intensive care material, monitors, ventilators etc. so that
they can be immediately flown in. In the opinion of the Committee,
during critical times, especially in insurgent areas, every second is
crucial. Thus, a normal aircraft cannot serve as an alternative to an
air ambulance. Therefore, the Committee recommend that necessary
initiatives should be taken to acquire a fleet of airambulances in AFMS
and the Committee be informed accordingly.
Reply of the Government
DGMS (Army)
The Directorate General is in the process of procurement of medical
equipment on ÔRoll in Roll out Õ basis for equipping Advanced Light
Helicopter (ALH) in consultation with Directorate General of Army
Aviation for tasking of assets as Air Ambulance with the approval of
Directorate General Military Operations & Directorate General
Operations Logistics and Strategic Movement. Directorate General
Operations Logistics and Strategic Movement has confirmed that
01 x C-17 fixed wing air craft is available with Indian Air Force with
fitment for casualty evacuation, vide its letter No. 05103/Lgs/OL-1
(Air Amb) dt. 14 Sept. 2012.
DGMS (Air)
1. No Armed forces across the world have dedicated Air Ambulance,
as these are very costly. However , the regular transport aircraft and
helicopter are being used in an Air Ambulance role by them after
converting them into ambulance version using medical equipment and
available infrastructure. The transport aircraft available with IAF can
be modified and fitted with stretchers and medical equipment to convert
them into ambulance version. The optimal capacity of carrying lying
patients for C17 is 36 and for C130 is 76 and seating capacity is 90 and
128 respectively.
2. Additionally a proposal for procurement of a Roll-on-Roll off
module that can serve as an ICU for C17 and C130 aircraft is under
active consideration at this Headquarters. This will ensure that the
patient receives best possible care in the air and it will not take much
time to load the module into the aircraft, nor will it take time for
stretcher installation. This module is a container that is wheeled in

62
and out of the aircraft will have all medical equipment and up to four
patients can be loaded.
3. However, to carry a large number of patients, who do not
require an ICU setting but are still stretcher bound, a change of role
of aircraft is required. The fitment of the equipment takes 2-3 hrs for
change of role of an aircraft to Aero-medical ambulance. This equipment
is already available with the IAF .
DGMS (Navy)
1. At present whenever there is a need, suitable aircraft is made
available by Naval Aviation, depending on the condition and number of
patients, which is then suitably equipped by medical authorities with
stretchers and other medical equipment for transfer/evacuation of
patient from lower echelon to higher echelon.
2. The Directorate of Naval Air Staff is pursuing a case for
procurement of Medium Range Maritime Reconnaissance (MRMR) aircraft
for the Indian Navy which shall have capability for Casualty evacuation
(CASEVAC) and Medical evacuation (MEDEVAC). Airbus C-295 is being
considered as one of the possible platforms.
Recommendation (Para No. 27)
The Committee also came to know that there are only two
transfusion centres with AFMC, one at AFTC, New Delhi and second at
transfusion centre, Kolkata. The Committee recommend that at least
two more transfusion centres be developed with one of them in Northern
insurgent areas of the country and another in Southern Command so
that larger catchment area is covered.
Reply of the Government
(a) As per existing authorization, there are three Transfusion Centres
in the AFMS namely:Ñ
(i) AFTC Delhi Cantt. for Northern and Western Commands
(including parts of Central Command).
(ii) Eastern Command Transfusion Centre (ECTC), Kolkata for
Eastern Command.
(iii) Blood Transfusion Department (BTD) AFMC Pune for Southern
Command.

63
(b) Additional Transfusion Centres are not found feasible to be
recommended due to the following reasons:Ñ
(i) Adequate Transfusion Cover. Apart from the above dedicated
transfusion units, every service hospital has a blood bank
Command Hospitals and larger Zonal hospitals in each
Command Zone have larger blood banks with component
facilities.
(ii) Shortage of Technical Manpower. There is already an existing
shortage of Blood Transfusion Assistants (BTAs) in the Corps
as well as Transfusion Medicine (TM) specialists in existing
blood banks and transfusion centres. Increasing the number
of centres will require more number of BTAs & TM Specialist
Officers, thereby, further increasing the functional deficiency.
Recommendation (Para No. 44)
The Committee desired to be apprised about the opinion of the
Ministry of Defence in making the Capital Fund for AFMS non-lapsable.
On this, the Ministry intimated that there is no proposal to make the
Capital Budget non-lapsable and roll-on. However , during the last five
years, on no occasion was any substantial amount of surplus funds
available for rolling over. The Committee observe that the Capital
Budget for next financial year is projected in the month of September
of the current financial year depending on the utilization trends of the
last three financial years and also the projects which are likely to
fructify. The Capital project have an incubation period ranging any
time between 180 and 270 days and it is prudent to project for a
provisional Budgetary Estimate considering that not all projects are
likely to fructify in the same financial year. The total value of Annual
Action Plans (AAPs) for the Financial Year (FY) 2013-14, 2014-15 and
2015-16 was approximately Rs. 329.49 crore, Rs. 225.81 crore and
Rs. 503.45 crore respectively. The fructification of AAPs cases has
been analyzed and it is seen that only 0-30% cases materialize due to
extended timelines involved in capital procurement process. This
becomes a constraining factor in projected budget figure. In view of
the facts stated above, a roll on capital Budget will assist in unhampered
procurements. The Ministry of Defence should look into the possibilities
of making capital budget a roll on budget.
Reply of the Government
The details of the allocated capital funds and expenditure in during

64
the previous years are as under:Ñ
Sl. Financial Allocation Expenditure
No. Year
1. 2013-14 110.9000 111.2912
2. 2014-15 100.0000 102.4059
3. 2015-16 115.0000 114.1879
4. 2016-17 121.5089 121.7108
From the above table it emerges that the allocated fund under
Capital Head is exhausted within the same financial year (FY) and that
on no occasion has there been any substantial amount of surplus funds
available for rolling over to the next financial year. Hence, there does
not appear any scope for the provision of roll on Capital Budget.

CHAPTER IV
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF
THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE
AND WHICH REQUIRE REITERATION AND COMMENTED UPON
Recommendation (Para Nos. 7, 8 & 12)
Specialists/Super Specialists
The sanction or the current pool of specialists in the AFMS is for
2295 posts as laid down vide Govt. of India letter No. 10040/IX/DGAFMS/
DG-1D/869/16/D (Med.) dated 04 May, 2016. 5% cushion for future
unforeseen requirement has been provided which works out to around
78. However , presently there is no enrolment under this category. The
Committee desire that efforts should be made to fill up these vacancies
at the earliest. In case of annotated appointment, the authorization
is 665 while held strength is 519. A Board of Officers has been ordered
for revision of the strength of pool of specialists. This is also linked
with revision of staffing norms for the AFMS, which is under
consideration.
Further , the Committee found that Specialist facilities are provided
in service hospitals taken in to account the number of beds in the
particular hospital. In case of 76-100 bedded hospitals, only medicine,
surgery and anaesthesia specialities are available. The super specialities
like Cardiology, Neurology, Nephrology, Urology, Reconstructive Surgery,
Oncology, Joint Replacement, Gastro-enterology, Endocrinology are
available only in Command hospitals which have more than 600 beds.
The Committee feel that the specialities such as Psychiatry,
Dermatology, Eye, ENT , Paediatrics and Orthopaedics which are presently
available only in zonal hospitals should also be extended to smaller
hospitals, which have around 100 to 400 beds. Further , the Committee
view that the specialities like Obstetrics and Gynaecology, Radiology
and Pathology which are presently available only in Ômore than 100
bedded hospitals Õ need to be upgraded even in lower level hospitals
which have less that 100 beds as these specialities are coherent with
other levels of specialities treatment.
The Committee were keen to know about the impact of shortfall
of super specialists in offering services to the clientele of the AFMS.
On this matter , the Ministry informed that the AFMS has a minimal
deficiency of super specialists and specialists. Further it was submitted
65

66
that although the impact of deficiency of super specialists is felt in
terms of extended man-hours, rationalized leave and frequent move
on temporary duties, emergency care of patients is not hampered.
Further , constant and vigorous efforts are being made to reduce the
deficiency minimum levels. The Committee feel that the issues like
retirement, release, promotion etc. are well calculated in advance.
Therefore, their recovery should be proactively planned and executed.
Reply of the Government
Changes with regard to staffing patterns of specialist and super
specialist will be done prospectively in new hospitals and upgradations
of existing hospitals, once staffing norms for AFMS hospitals are
approved.
(Please see Para No. 13 of Chapter-I of the Report)

CHAPTER V
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH
GOVERNMENT HAVE FURNISHED INTERIM REPLIES
-Nil-
   N EW D ELHI; MAJ GEN B C KHANDURI, AVSM (RETD),
12 March, 2018 Chairperson,
21 Phalguna, 1939 (Saka) Standing Committee on Defence.
67

APPENDIX I
STANDING COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE
MINUTES OF THE EIGHTH SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON
DEFENCE (2017-18)
The Committee sat on Friday, 12 March, 2018 from 1000 hrs. to
1030 hrs. in Committee Room ÔCÕ, Parliament House Annexe,
New Delhi.
PRESENT
Maj Gen B C Khanduri AVSM (Retd) — Chairperson
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Suresh C Angadi
3. Shri Shrirang Appa Barne
4. Col Sonaram Choudhary (Retd.)
5. Shri Dharambir Singh
6. Shri Gaurav Gogoi
7. Smt. Mala Rajya Lakshmi Shah
8. Smt. Pratyusha Rajeshwari Singh
Rajya Sabha
9. Shri Harivansh
10. Shri Sanjay Raut
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Smt. Kalpana Sharma Ñ Joint Secretary
2. Shri T .G. Chandrasekhar Ñ Director
3. Smt. Jyochnamayi Sinha Ñ Additional Director
4. Shri Rahul Singh Ñ Under Secretary
68

69
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members of the
Committee and informed them about the agenda for the Sitting. The
Committee then took up for consideration the following draft Reports:Ñ
(i) Thirty-seventh Report on ÔAction Taken by the Government
on the Observations/Recommendations contained in the
T wenty-eighth Report (16th Lok Sabha) on General Defence
Budget, Border Roads Organisation, Indian Coast Guard,
Military Engineer Services, Canteen Stores Department,
Directorate General Defence Estates, Defence Public Sector
Undertakings, Welfare of Ex-Servicemen, Defence Pensions
and Ex-Servicemen Contributory Health Scheme Õ.
(ii) Thirty-eighth Report on ÔAction Taken by the Government on
the Observations/Recommendations contained in the Thirtieth
Report (16th Lok Sabha) on Ordnance Factories, Defence
Research and Development Organisation, Directorate General
of Quality Assurance and National Cadet Corps Õ.
(iii) Thirty-ninth Report on ÔAction Taken by the Government on
the Observations/Recommendations contained in Thirty-fourth
Report (16th Lok Sabha) on Provision of Medical Services to
Armed Forces including Dental Services Õ.
(iv) Fortieth Report of the Standing Committee on Defence
(16th Lok Sabha) on ÔDemands for Grants of the Ministry of
Defence for the year 2018-19 on General Defence Budget,
Border Roads Organisation, Indian Coast Guard, Military
Engineer Services, Directorate General Defence Estates,
Defence Public Sector Undertakings, Welfare of Ex-Servicemen,
Defence Pensions and Ex-Servicemen Contributory Health
Scheme (Demand No. 19 & 22) Õ.
(v) Forty-first Report of the Standing Committee on Defence
(16th Lok Sabha) on ÔDemands for Grants of the Ministry of
Defence for the year 2018-19 on Army, Navy and Air Force
(Demand No. 20) Õ.
(vi) Forty-second Report of the Standing Committee on
Defence(16th Lok Sabha) on ÔDemands for Grants of the
Ministry of Defence for the year 2018-19 on Capital Outlay on
Defence Services, Procurement Policy and Defence Planning
(Demand No. 21) Õ.
(vii) Forty-third Report of the Standing Committee on Defence
(16th Lok Sabha) on ÔDemands for Grants of the Ministry of
Defence for the year 2018-19 pertaining to Revenue Budget
of Ordnance Factories, Defence Research and Development
Organisation, DGQA and NCC (Demand No. 20) Õ.

70
3. After deliberations, the Committee adopted the above mentioned
reports with slight modifications.
4. The Committee authorized the Chairperson to finalise the above
draft Reports and present the same to the House on a date convenient
to him.
The Committee, then adjourned.

APPENDIX II
ANALYSIS OF THE ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE
THIRTY-FOURTH REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE
(SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA) ON PROVISION OF
MEDICAL SERVICES TO ARMED FORCES
INCLUDING DENTAL SERVICES
1. Total number of recommendations: 56
2. Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by
the Government (please see Chapter II):
Para Nos. 1, 2, 3, 4, 6, 9, 10, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 23, 25,
26, 28, 29, 30, 31, 32, 33, 36, 38, 39, 40, 41, 43, 46, 47, 48,
49, 50, 51, 52, 53, 55, 56
Total: 39
Percentage: 70%
3. Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by
the Government and commented upon (please see Chapter II):
Para No. 5, 20, 21, 22, 34, 35, 37, 42, 45 & 54
Total: 10
Percentage: 18%
4. Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not
desire to pursue in view of the replies received from the
Government (please see Chapter III):
Para No. 11, 24, 27, 44
Total: 04
Percentage: 7%
5. Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of
the Government have not been accepted by the Committee
which require reiteration and commented upon (please see
Chapter IV):
Para Nos. 7, 8, 12
Total: 03
Percentage: 5%
71

72
6. Observations/Recommendations in respect of which Government
have furnished interim replies (please see Chapter V):
Para No. Nil
(00 Recommendation)
Total: Nil
Percentage: 0%