STANDING COMMITTEE
ON DEFENCE
(2015-2016)
SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA
MINISTRY OF DEFENCE
[Action Taken by the Government on the observations/recommendations contained in the
Eighth Report of the Committee (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants (2015-16)
of the Ministry on Navy and Air Force (Demand Nos. 24 and 25)]
SIXTEENTH REPORT
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
February, 2016 / Phalguna, 1937 (Saka)
16

SIXTEENTH REPORT
STANDING COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE
(2015-2016)
(SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA)
MINISTRY OF DEFENCE
[Action Taken by the Government on the observations/recommendations
contained in the Eighth Report of the Committee (Sixteenth Lok Sabha)
on Demands for Grants (2015-16) of the Ministry on Navy and
Air Force (Demand Nos. 24 and 25)]
Presented to Hon’ble Speaker, Lok Sabha on 27.1.2016
Presented to Lok Sabha on 26.2.2016
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 26.2.2016
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
February, 2016/Phalguna, 1937 (Saka)

C.O.D. No. 167
Price : Rs. 84.00
© 2016 B Y L OK S ABHA S ECRETARIAT
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of
Business in Lok Sabha (Fifteenth Edition) and printed by National Printers,
New Delhi-110 028.

(i)
CONTENTS
PAGE
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (2015-2016) ....................................... (iii)
INTRODUCTION ........................................................................................... (v)
CHAPTER I Report ............................................................................... 1
CHAPTER II (a) Observations/Recommendations which have
been accepted by the Government ....................... 21
(b) Observations/Recommendations which have
been accepted by the Government and
commented upon .................................................... 38
C
HAPTER III Observations/Recommendations which the
Committee do not desire to pursue in view of the
replies received from the Government ....................... 47
C
HAPTER IV Observations/Recommendations in respect of which
replies of Government have not been accepted by the
Committee which require reiteration and commented
upon ................................................................................. 50
C
HAPTER V Observations/Recommendations in respect of which
Government have furnished interim replies ............. 55
APPENDICES
I. Minutes of the seventh sitting of the Standing
Committee on Defence (2015-16) held on 8.1.2016 .... 56
II. Analysis of Action Taken by the Government on the
Observations/Recommendations contained in the
Eighth Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing
Committee on Defence (2015-16) ................................. 60

COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE
(2015-2016)
Maj Gen BC Khanduri, AVSM (Retd)— Chairperson
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2.  Shri Suresh C. Angadi
3. Shri Shrirang Appa Barne
4. Shri Dharambir
5. Shri Thupstan Chhewang
6. Col Sonaram Choudhary (Retd)
7. Shri H.D. Devegowda
8. Shri Sher Singh Ghubaya
9. Shri G. Hari
10. Shri Ramesh Jigajinagi
11. Dr. Murli Manohar Joshi
12. Km. Shobha Karandlaje
13. Shri Vinod Khanna
14. Dr. Mriganka Mahato
15. Shri Tapas Paul
16.  Shri Ch. Malla Reddy
17. Shri Rajeev Satav
18. Smt. Mala Rajya Lakshmi Shah
19. Capt Amarinder Singh (Retd.)
20. Shri A.P . Jithender Reddy
21. Smt. Pratyusha Rajeshwari Singh
(iii)

(iv)
Rajya Sabha
22. Shri K. R. Arjunan
23. Shri Anand Sharma
24. Shri Rajeev Chandrasekhar
25. Shri A.U. Singh Deo
26. Shri Harivansh
27. Shri Vinay Katiyar
28. Shri Hishey Lachungpa
29. Shri Madhusudan Mistry
30. Smt. Ambika Soni
31. Shri Tarun Vijay
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Smt. Kalpana Sharma — Joint Secretary
2. T.G. Chandrasekhar — Director
3. Smt. Jyochanamayi Sinha — Additional Director
4. Shri Rahul Singh — Under Secretary
5. Smt. Rekha Sinha — Sr. Executive Assistant

INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairperson of the Standing Committee on Defence (2015-16),
having been authorised by the Committee to submit the report on their
behalf, present this Sixteenth report on Action Taken by the Government
on the Observations/Recommendations contained in the Eighth Report
of the Standing Committee on Defence (16th Lok Sabha) on ‘Demands
For Grants (2015-16) of the Ministry of Defence on Navy and Air Force
(Demand Nos. 24 and 25)’.
2. The Eighth Report was presented to Lok Sabha/laid on the Table
of Rajya Sabha on 27 April, 2015. The Action Taken Notes on the
Observations/Recommendations were received from the Ministry of
Defence in October, 2015.
3. The Committee considered and adopted this Report at their
Sitting held on 8 January, 2016.
4. An analysis of action taken by the Government on the
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Eighth Report of the
Committee is given in Appendix II.
5. For facility of reference and convenience, Observations/
Recommendations of the Committee have been printed in bold letters in
the Report.
N
EW DELHI; MAJ GEN B C KHANDURI, AVSM (RETD.),
8 January, 2016 Chairperson,
18 Pausa, 1937 (Saka) Standing Committee on Defence.
(v)

CHAPTER I
REPORT
This Report of the Standing Committee on Defence deals with Action
Taken by the Government on the observations/recommendations contained
in the Eighth Report of the Standing Committee on Defence (16th Lok
Sabha) on ‘Demands for Grants of the Ministry of Defence for the year
2015-16 on Navy and Air Force (Demand Nos. 24 and 25)’ which was
presented to Lok Sabha and laid in Rajya Sabha on 27.04.2015.
2. The Committee’s Eighth Report (16th Lok Sabha) contained
33 observations/recommendations on the following aspects:—
Para No./Nos. Subject
NAVY
1, 2 and 3 Budget Outlay 2015-16
4 Budget Analysis 2014-15
5 Decline in Naval Budget share
6 and 7 Force Level
8 Time and Cost Overruns
9 and 10 Manpower Shortage
11, 12 and 13 Accidents
14 Coastal Security
15 Naval Base at Karwar
AIR FORCE
16, 17, 18 and 19 Budget Outlay 2015-16 Air force
20 Budget Analysis 2014-15
21 Modernization budget for Air Force
22, 23 and 24 Force Level
25, 26 and 27 Trainer Aircraft
28 and 29 Modernisation of Airfields
30 Hardened shelters
31 Accident Data of Indian Air Force
32 Manpower and Training
33 Pilot - Cockpit ratio

2
3. Action Taken Replies have been received from the Government
in respect of all the observations/recommendations contained in the Report.
The replies have been examined and the same have been categorised as
follows:—
(i) (a) Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted
by the Government:
Para Nos. 2, 9, 10, 15, 16, 17, 20, 21, 22, 23, 24, 25, 26, 27,
28, 29 and 32
(17 Recommendations)
These may be included in Chapter II of the Draft Report.
(b) Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted
by the Government and commented upon:
Para Nos. 1, 4, 8, 11, 12, 13, 19, 30 and 33
(09 Recommendations)
These may be included in Chapter II of the Draft Report.
(ii) Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not
desire to pursue in view of the replies received from the
Government:
Para Nos. 5, 14 and 18
(03 Recommendations)
These may be included in Chapter III of the Draft Report.
(iii) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies
of Government have not been accepted by the Committee
which require reiteration and commented upon:
Para Nos. 3, 6, 7 and 31
(04 Recommendations)
These may be included in Chapter IV of the Draft Report.
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which
Government have furnished interim replies:
Para No. Nil
(00 Recommendation)
This may be mentioned in Chapter V of the Draft Report.

3
4. The Committee desire that the Ministry’s response to their
comments made in Chapter I of this Report to be furnished to them at
the earliest and in any case not later than six months of the presentation
of this Report.
A. Budget Outlay
Recommendation (Para No. 1)
5. The Committee had recommended as under:—
“This year Navy had projected an amount of Rs. 44,814.71 crore
while the allocations made by the Ministry is that of Rs. 40,528.88
crore i.e. less by Rs. 4,285.83 crore. In the year, 2014-15, RE projection
was Rs. 38,656.82 crore whereas actual allocation was that of
Rs. 32,442.86 crore, thus a deficit budget by Rs. 6,213.96 crore. The
Committee feel that the deficit budgeting at RE 2014-15 stage is
already there and a further shortfall of approx. Rs. 4,200 crore in
this year’s BE will not only put more pressure on already stretched
Naval budget but is also not understandable as to how a shortfall
of Rs. 10,499.96 crore will be managed during 2015-16. The Ministry
of Defence may explain this. Navy , in any case, is facing fleet and
manpower crunch which have been separately dealt with in the
succeeding paragraphs of this Report. Therefore, adequate budgetary
support is quintessence for desired performance outcome of the
Service.”
6. The Ministry in its Action Taken Reply has stated as under:—
“The Ministry is constrained by the allocations made by the Ministry
of Finance which are lower than the requirements projected by this
Ministry. Nevertheless, additional requirement of funds, as required
by the Services, will be projected for inclusion in the Supplementary
Grants.”
7. For enabling optimum performance of the Navy, the Committee
had desired for adequate budget allocation. During examination of
Demands for Grants 2015-16, the Committee had highlighted the fact
about the deficit in the budget being of the order of Rs. 10,499.96 crore,
which is a substantial amount. In response to this, the Ministry has
stated that they are also severely restricted by lower allocations made
by the Ministry of Finance and that they would seek additional funds
in the Supplementary Grants. The Committee are not happy with the

4
routine nature of the replies pertaining to the Navy being furnished
each year by the Ministry of Defence. The Committee would like to
be informed in detail about the amount sought by Navy as a part of
the Supplementary Grants and the amount actually allocated. Besides
this, the Committee may be informed about the compromises the Navy
may have made due to the lower financial allocation during the current
financial year. The information desired for may be provided to the
Committee at the earliest.
B. Time and Cost Overruns
Recommendation (Para No. 3)
8. The Committee had recommended as under:—
“The Capital Budget projected for the financial year 2015-16 is
Rs. 27,059.12 crore and the allocation made at BE is Rs. 24,080.90
crore. Out of this, the amount required for the New Schemes is
Rs. 4,091.00 crore while the allocated amount is Rs. 1,112.78 crore,
thus the amount provided is merely 25% of the amount actually
sought. While keeping in mind the Naval modernization and
upgradation plans, the Committee are dismayed at provision of
meager allocation against new schemes. This indicates lack of
coordination between the Naval Headquarters and Ministry of
Defence. Therefore, it is recommended that additional funds are
provided under this head.”
9. The Ministry in its Action Taken Reply has stated as under:—
“The Ministry is constrained by the allocations made by the Ministry
of Finance which are lower than the requirements projected by this
Ministry.
It may be noted that projection of requirement for ‘New Schemes’
includes several cases at varying stages of approval which are
unlikely to reach finality in the current financial year. Nevertheless,
all efforts will be made to ensure that no ‘New Scheme’ approved
is delayed for want of funds. Additional funds will be sought, if
required.”
10. Keeping in view the budget deficit, which is to the extent
of 75% for the new schemes, the Committee had desired for providing
additional funds. The Committee are constrained to note that on the

5
one hand, the Ministry has stated that lower allocations made by the
Ministry of Finance has restricted them by way of cutting short their
schemes/projects. On the other hand, the Ministry has also stated that
the projection of requirements for new schemes includes several cases
at varying stages of approval which are unlikely to reach finality in
the current financial year. This is indicative of inadequacies in planning
on the part of the Naval Headquarters. Keeping in view the past
instances of reduction of allocations made by the Ministry of Finance
at RE stage, the Committee cannot help expressing apprehension on
the likelihood of additional funds being provided at the supplementary
or RE stage. Therefore, the Committee strongly desire that the Naval
Headquarters and Ministry of Defence chalk out a project wise plan
indicating their status, timeframe by which these are expected to reach
finality and the funds required at each stage. They should send the
plan to the Ministry of Finance for providing allocations at BE Stage
and additional allocation at supplementary grants as well as RE stage.
The Committee are of the view that without this kind of plan of
action and limited budgetary provisions, the modernization
programme of Navy will continue to be in a sorry state. Therefore, the
Committee strongly desire that the Ministry of Defence ensures
effective co-ordination with the Naval Headquarters and finalize the
plan of action at the earliest under intimation to the Committee. The
Committee further desire the Ministry to take up the matter of providing
adequate allocations with the Ministry of Finance at the highest level
so that no scheme that may have been approved is delayed for want
of funds.
C. Budget Analysis 2014-15
Recommendation (Para No. 4)
11. The Committee had recommended as under:—
“In the year 2014-15, for new schemes, the amount allocated at RE
stage was Rs. 663.92 crore and the amount actually spent upto
16 March 2015 was Rs. 2,457.07 crore i.e. 370.08% of the RE
allocations. In this context, the Committee further feel that provision
of funds at a very late stage could also be a reason for inadequacies
in budgeting and expenditure pattern. Therefore, the situation needs
to be rectified and time bound decisions on allocations and
expenditure should be taken at all levels, be it Ministry of Finance,
Ministry of Defence or Navy. It is suggested that a Standard

6
Operating Procedure (SOP) be laid down, giving the time frame
within week various decisions and actions ought to be taken by
the Ministry of Finance, Ministry of Defence and the Service
concerned. It is needless to say that the Committee be informed
about the steps taken with regard.”
12. The Ministry in its Action Taken Reply has stated as under:—
“It may be noted that allocation for New Schemes of the Navy
during 2014-15 was lower than the projections. However, as approval
of schemes proceeded beyond funds allocated for Navy, additional
funds were provided for the same. In this case prompt and time
bound decision was taken to ensure optimum utilisation of scarce
resources.”
13. In the year 2014-15, Rs. 663.92 crore was initially allocated
to Navy under ‘New Schemes’ while it was escalated to Rs. 2457.07
crore in the Revised Estimates. It is indeed appreciable that the amount
required was provided so as to enable in proceeding with the ‘New
Schemes’ for which Budget provisioning was not made initially. In this
regard, the Committee desire to be informed of the details of
expenditure of Rs. 2457.07 crore during the year 2014-15 under the
head, ‘New Schemes’.
D. Force Level
Recommendation (Para No. 6)
14. The Committee had recommended as under:—
“The Committee were informed that Emergency Cabinet Committee
report of 1964 had approved a force level of 138 ships and
submarines for Indian Navy. However, since then, maritime security
environment of the country has undergone considerable changes
and present day maritime challenges include coastal security in
light of terrorism emanating though sea route, increased threats of
piracy and amplified hostilities in Indian Ocean Region by our
neighbouring nations. The Committee were updated that keeping
new challenges in mind, a requirement of 212 vessels and 458 aircraft
have been contemplated for Indian Navy in MCPP 2012-27, i.e, by
the end of the 14th Plan period. While examining the subject, the
Committee found that presently, Navy has 140 vessels and 236
aircraft in their inventory. These sums up to a gap of 72 vessels

7
and 222 aircraft/helicopters, which are envisaged for induction till
2027 or in the next 12 years. Furthermore, the Committee came to
know that most of the existing naval vessels are ageing and would
necessitate de-commissioning in next 10-12 years, i.e., by the end
of 14th Plan period (2027). The Committee are concerned to further
find that current six Mine Counter Measure Vessels (MCMVs) are
over 25 years old. Here, the Committee, are further concerned to
find that during last 15 years of timeline, the induction plan for
vessels had progressed at a snail’s pace. Moreover, Navy
imperatively require acquisition of Indian Aircraft Carrier (IAC)
which is being built in Cochin Shipyard, as Viraat is set to
decommission, thus leaving Navy completely dependent on the
recently acquired Vikramaditya. Therefore, the Committee are of
the view that the service of INS Viraat may be extended till IAC
is commissioned into the Navy. However, it would be more desirable
to have an additional Aircraft Carrier even if not fully fit rather
than just one Aircraft Carrier. Further, impetus ought to be given
at highest degree to replace ageing platforms, induction of IAC,
P-17A Ships and induction of MCMVs. The Committee be informed
about the same.”
15. The Ministry in its Action Taken Reply has stated as under:—
“Creation of Naval assets is a time and cost intensive process. Hence,
it is executed on the basis of the Long Term Perspective Plan
formulated by the Navy. The current Maritime Capability
Perspective Plan (2012-27), which is subsumed in the LTIPP (2012-27),
is based on a ‘capability dominant and threat-cum-mission based
approach. The induction schedule promulgated in the MCPP caters
for the planned de-commissioning of existing ships along with the
scheduled induction of new platforms. Therefore, the Force level
of 212 ships and 458 aircraft by 2027 is all encompassing, which
includes scheduled induction and planned decommissioning. As
part of the planned force accretion, 48 ships and submarines are
being constructed in Indian shipyards. Cases for induction of
additional assets (ships/submarines and aircraft), envisaged in MCPP
(2012-27) are being progressed as per timelines.
Decommissioning of INS Viraat. INS Viraat was commissioned
on 02 May 1987. The ship has been in service for over 27 years in
the Indian Navy. However, the ship had also served the Royal Navy
for 27 years, thereby having been in commissioned service for a

8
cumulative period of over 54 years. Therefore, further Service Life
Extension (SLE) of the ship considering difficulties in maintenance,
obsolescence of equipment, spares availability and material state
of the ship is not considered financially prudent and a safe option.
It is, therefore, intended to decommission the ship in mid 2016
after participation in International Fleet Review (IFR-16). Further,
INS Vikramaditya along with integral air component of MiG-29K
fighter aircraft is a potent platform, and has enhanced the
operational capability and reach of the IN.
Induction Schedule. All efforts are being put in at the Apex Level
to ensure timely induction of these ships in the IN.”
16. In the recommendation made in the earlier Report, the
Committee had noted that there was a shortage of 72 vessels and 222
aircraft/helicopters. As per the Ministry‘s reply, the Ships and
submarines being constructed in various Indian Shipyards is only 48.
The Committee observed in this regard that in the next 10-12 years
some more ships/vessels would be lined up for decommissioning.
Hence, 48 ships will not suffice to meet the requirements. Therefore,
the Ministry needs to be more pro-active in bridging the likely gap
in the requirement. The Ministry has also not given any reply in regard
to planes/helicopters. The Committee desire to be updated on this matter
as well as the status of Mine Counter Measure Vessels (MCMVs) and
Indian Aircraft Carrier (IAC). The Committee also expect to be apprised
of complete details of the present status and expected date of
commissioning of the ships/vessels in the Action Taken Notes.
Recommendation (Para No. 7)
16a. The Committee had recommended as under:—
“Further research of the Committee revealed that the
deficiency is not only limited to vessels. Even in case of
integral helicopters which are critical for surveillance and
stand-off targeting at sea, there is a deficiency of 61 integral
helicopters on existing ships. To tackle the situation, it was
informed that Mid Life Upgrade of Kamov-28 helicopters
and case of Multi Role Helicopter are being progressed. The
Committee feel that case of induction of helicopters and planes
should be progressed without delay under intimation to the
Committee.”

9
16b. The Ministry in its Action Taken Reply has stated as under:—
“The observations of the Hon’ble Committee with respect to
the two specific ongoing procurement cases are noted.”
16c. The Committee wish to be informed in detail about the
status of the Mid-Life Upgrade of Kamov-28 helicopters and Multi
Role Helicopters including their present status and expected date of
commissioning in the Action Taken Notes.
E. Time and Cost Overruns
Recommendation (Para No. 8)
17. The Committee had recommended as under:—
“The Committee were informed that acquisition of defence
equipment is undertaken in accordance with the Defence
Procurement Procedure. After gleaning through the documents
submitted by the Ministry, the Committee found that there had
been huge cost and time overruns in almost all the production/
developmental projects presently being undertaken for Navy.
In case of P-15A, which is being constructed at Mazagaon Dock Limited
(MDL), the initial delivery dates of the Yards 12702 and 12703 were
Mar 09 and Mar 10 respectively. However the same were revised
to May 11 and May 12 in that order. The project could not be
accomplished even by the re-scheduled dates. As a result, the
targeted delivery dates have once again been reset as Jun 15 and
Dec 15. As far as the cost of the project is concerned, the original
cost was Rs. 3580 crores which has been revised to Rs. 11662 crores.
Similar is the case of P-28 (M/s GRSE) where the initial delivery
dates of Yard 3018, 3019 and 3020 were 2009, 2011 and 2012
respectively, which were revised to Mar 15, Mar 16 and Mar 17
in that order. Also, the original cost of Rs. 3051.20 crores was revised
to Rs. 7852.39 crores. Just like, the delivery schedule of IAC has
been revised from Dec 10 to Dec 18, along with cost revision for
the same from Rs. 3261 crores to Rs. 19341 crores. Identical are the
cases of Naval Offshore Patrol Vessels (M/s Pipavav Shipyard), Fast
Interceptor Crafts (M/s Solas Marine Lanka, Sri Lanka), Landing
Craft Utility (M/s GRSE, Kolkata), Water Jet Fast Attack Crafts
(M/s GRSE, Kolkata), Cadet Training Ships (M/s ABG Shipyard)
and Survey Vessels (M/s Alcock Ashdown Ltd, Gujarat), where

10
repeated time revisions and enormous cost escalations have taken
place and have become a routine. The Committee were given to
believe varied reasons for the above mentioned delays such as
untimely supply of material, infrastructural constraints, delay in
commencement of the projects, etc. Yet, the Committee
unambiguously make an observation that such delays could
have been avoided by bringing in better intelligibility, vision and
co-ordination among the development agencies, production units
and final users along with periodical performance appraisals.
Accordingly, it is suggested that in future, result oriented efforts
must be made in order to ensure highest level of precision,
transparency and probity, whilst achieving timely induction of
planned capabilities. In this regard, suitably designed structural
mechanism, where well-defined responsibilities are preset, must be
prepared. Frivolous handling and wastage of National monetary
resource cannot be justified by any means. On this point, the
Committee feel that Ministry of Defence needs to take pro-active
stand and send strong signals by penalizing those held accountable
for the inordinate delays that have taken place during past decade.
Effectual guidelines with regard thereto should be formulated and
the Committee are informed about the same.”
18. The Ministry in its Action Taken Reply has stated as under:—
“The following steps have been taken to reduce ‘Time and Cost
Overruns’ in Shipbuilding cases:
(i) To prevent cost overruns, all projects are now ‘Fixed Cost’.
Variable cost option is only considered, where cost is
uncertain. Further, provision for revised CCS sanction exists
only for variable cost components.
(ii) Regular Project Reviews are undertaken through Steering
Committees.
(iii) Construction of follow-on ships is undertaken based on same
design to reduce build time.
(iv) Provision for liquidated damages for delay .”
19. The Committee appreciate the fact appropriate measures have
been initiated by the Ministry for tackling the problem of time and
cost overruns in construction and induction of naval vessels. The

11
Committee desire to be informed of the details of implementation of
these measures and the outcome thereof.
F. Accidents
Recommendation (Para No. 11)
20. The Committee had recommended as under:—
“The Committee came to know that there were a total of 59 cases
of accidents that took place in Indian Navy’s Fleet since 2007 till
Nov 14. In view of the Committee, this is an alarming situation
as on one hand we have shortage of fleet and manpower, and on
the other hand we are losing our trained manpower to accidents.
The Committee have been given to understand that Standard
Operating Procedures (SOPs) had been promulgated in the year to
check spurt of accidents. However, it was observed that even after
promulgation of SOPs, the pace of accidents has not plummeted
and in the year 2014 itself, 14 number of accidents had taken place.
Therefore, the Committee is of the opinion that promulgation of
the current SOPs is ineffective by any extent or mere posturing.
This is a very sad state-of-affairs as the Country’s men and money
are being worn out in accidents. The Committee takes very serious
note of the matter and desire that immediate and apposite action
needs to be taken in this regard. It is regretted that Ministry of
Defence failed to curb the continuity in occurrence of accidents for
over a decade. The situation becomes more grave in the light that
Defence Force is considered to be one of the most disciplined
organisations. It is pertinent to mention that Ministry of Defence
should take cognizance of the matter and take appropriate action.
The buck has to stop somewhere. Remedial action taken in regard
thereto must be intimated to the Committee.”
Recommendation (Para No. 12)
21. The Committee had recommended as under:—
“In most cases of accidents, the reason specified to the Committee
is either material failure or human error. In this context, the
Committee would like to be updated on number of cases of these
accidents, where the supplier of sub-standard material has been
penalized. Details in this regard may be furnished to the Committee
in the Action Taken replies.”

12
Recommendation (Para No. 13)
22. The Committee had recommended as under:—
“Even if the cause of accident is human error, the Committee opines
that there is lacuna in training modules which needs to be rectified
at the earliest. Ministry of Defence and Naval Headquarters must
ensure that proper training is imparted to the Officers/ sailors who
are deputed onboard the ships/ submarines as well as ground
staff. Unambiguously any kind of delinquencies results into
not just material loss but also irreparable human loss.
Appropriate action taken thereon should be brought to notice of
the Committee.”
23. The Ministry in its Action Taken Reply has stated as
under:—
“Standard Operating Procedures (SOPs): A number of steps have
been undertaken by the Navy to ensure strict adherence to the laid
down SOPs and precautionary measures for various evolutions.
Towards this, adherence to promulgated SOPs by all operational
units of the Indian Navy is continuously monitored, at all levels,
by concerned authorities through the following measures:
(a) Assessment of adherence to laid down SOPs, through
Operational Readiness Assessment (ORA) by Flag Officer
Sea Training (FOST);
(b) Assessment of adherence to laid down SOPs, through
Operational Readiness Inspection (ORI) by respective
Commanders-in-Chief;
(c) Inspection by Class Authorities; and
(d) Inspection of all operational units annually by
Operational Authorities to assess their operational
efficiency and adherence to laid down SOPs.
2. In last three years (since 2012), 24 accidents involving Indian
Naval ships, aircraft and submarines have taken place, out
of which seven have been attributed to material failure.
However, in none of these seven accidents, the Board of
Inquiry had attributed the material failure due to supply of
sub-standard material.

13
3. Training in the Indian Navy is a dynamic process and
is regularly imparted to naval personnel right from
induction stage. Based on feedbacks, any lacunae in
training is regularly analysed and correction is made in
the training curriculum/module. Besides this all operational
units undergo Safety Audit at least once every year which
encompasses all aspects of safety pertaining to men and
material of the unit.
4. To ensure that the lessons learnt from any accident/
incident in the IN are disseminated to everyone and
correctly incorporated in the training curriculum, Incident
Study and Analyses Cells (ISAC) have been established
at all the IN training establishments. The ISAC analyses
all incidents and prepares training material and Computer
Aided Instructional (CAI) packages for dissemination
of ‘Lessons Learnt’ during various courses, including
PCT classes. In order to facilitate the analysis, ISAC is
provided with extracts of Bol/Court Martial proceedings.
Similarly, Collision and Grounding Analysis Cell (CAGAC)
is functioning at Navigation and Direction school, Kochi
for study and analysis of navigational accidents. All this is
aimed at creating a ‘shared awareness’ of findings,
recommendations and lessons learnt related to various
accidents/incidents. Speedy dissemination through
advisories and Case Studies is also carried out in order to
avoid recurrence of such incidents in future, and enables
requisite course correction to various training modules and
courses.”
24. The Ministry, in Point No. 2 of the reply appears to have
contradicted itself by stating that in the last three years (since 2012),
24 accidents involving Indian Naval ships, aircraft and submarines
have taken place, of which seven have been attributed to material
failure. However, none of the Board level enquiries constituted to look-
into these accidents, has attributed material failure due to supply of
sub-standard material, etc. as having led to the accidents. The Committee
expect a detailed explanation on this apparent contradiction in
furnishing the information. The required information may be submitted
in the Action Taken Notes.

14
G. Budget Outlay 2015-16 Air Force
Recommendation (Para No. 19)
25. The Committee had recommended as under:—
“The projection under Capital head given by Air Force is Rs. 42,758
crore while allocation is Rs. 33,687 crore amounting to a shortfall
of Rs. 9,071 crore. The Capital Budget pertains to two main
components viz. Committed Liabilities + Works and New Schemes.
The projection in New Schemes segment is Rs. 12,000 crore whereas
the allocation is Rs. 3,264 crore, thus amounting to a noticeable
difference of Rs. 9,071 crore. This depicts clear lack of
coordination between the Service Headquarters and the Ministry
of Defence. The Committee wanted to know the impact that Air
Force will face due to deficit by nearly three-fourth of the
projected amount under non-salary head. The representatives
of Air Force, during oral evidence, submitted that this shortfall
would lead to slowdown of modernisation, delay in induction of
important capabilities, erosion of IAF’s superiority over our
adversaries, resultant asymmetry in capability with respect to
envisaged “Threat Perception” and flight safety concerns due
to obsolescence issues. This is a grave situation. The
representatives of Air Force had also submitted that Air Force has
been getting very meagre amount of nearly 1 to 2 thousand crore
and that is why there is a huge shortfall of Rs. 9,000 crore.
Accordingly, it is requested that the shortfall of Rs. 9,000 crore be
met. The Committee understand that IAF had been on the
modernisation trajectory in the 11th Plan. There is a need to sustain
this momentum in the 12th and 13th Plan periods. Important projects
are at critical stages (CNC/CFA approval), hence, slow pace of
modernisation will have a cascading effect on those projects as
well. For that reason, the Committee observe that adequate
budgetary support is required to ensure fructification of these
projects. Accordingly, requisite funds be provided to the Service
under intimation to the Committee.”
26. The Ministry in its Action Taken Reply has stated as
under:—
“This observation of the Committee was conveyed to the
Ministry of Finance vide D.O. No. 3(7)/Bud-I/61/DefSecy/2015
dated 18th May, 2015. Response has been received from

15
Ministry of Finance vide D.O. letter No. 2(30)-B(AC)/2014 dated
22nd June, 2015 (copy attached). In their reply Ministry of
Finance has stated that the observations/recommendations of
the Standing Committee on Defence are mostly relating to
inadequate allocation of funds for different Services with
specific reference to important schemes/projects. Ministry of
Finance recognize these commitments and at the time of
formulation of budget/revised estimates, resources are
allocated on the basis of trend of expenditure, the absorptive
capacity in the financial year and the fiscal space available
to Government.”
27. The Committee feel that the Ministry of Defence has to put
forth their requirement before Ministry of Finance in a more affirmative
manner. It is well understood that the allocations would be made subject
to factors relating to the fiscal space available. However, the fact that
the Air Force is short of critical requirements cannot be ignored. During
the past two decades, the pace of modernization has slowed down
tremendously and any kind of financial pressure will further hamper
the modernization drive of the Service. Therefore, the Committee desire
that adequate budgetary provision be made for the Air Force.
Accordingly, the Committee expect that the case of the Air Force be
presented appropriately before the Ministry of Finance.
H. Hardened shelters
Recommendation (Para No. 30)
28. The Committee had recommended as under:—
“During presentation, the Committee came to know that Su-30
aircraft has no hardened shelters. The Committee are concerned to
find that our Air Force is already short of planes and worse than
that hardened shelters are not available for even the limited number
of aircraft that is available with the Service. In the opinion of the
Committee, it is extremely pertinent that no damage is caused to
the available aircraft. In this connection, the Committee note
that although, the New Generation Hardened Aircraft Shelter
(NGHAS) project is conceptualised for this purpose, nevertheless,
the Committee desire that there should not be any delay in
execution, as such delays have become a common feature of all the
projects.”

16
29. The Ministry in its Action Taken Reply has stated as under:—
“IAF has constructed 16 shelters for Su-30 Class of aircraft between
2004-2007. Further, New Generation Hardened Aircraft Shelter
(NGHAS) have been designed by DRDO based on operational
requirements projected by the IAF. Presently, the proposal for
108 NGHAS is being examined in the Ministry in consultation with
Ministry of Finance.”
30. The Ministry has informed that the case for constructing 108
NGHAS is being examined. The Committee would like to know
whether 108 shelters would suffice to meet the requirement of Air
Force planes and wish to be updated on the status of constructing the
shelters, in the Action Taken Notes. Besides this, the Committee wish
to be informed of the date of finalization of the NGHAS design by
DRDO and whether the design meets the requirements of and is to
the satisfaction of the Air Force. The feedback from Air Force may be
furnished to the Committee in the Action Taken Note.
I. Accident Data of Indian Air Force
Recommendation (Para No. 31)
31. The Committee had recommended as under:—
“ After going through the Papers submitted by the Ministry, the
Committee noted that from May 2007 to January 2015, a total of
83 accidents have taken place in the Air Force. The Committee
were baffled to find that these accidents have been consistent over
the last decade. The Committee are further perturbed to find that
even after formation of so many enquiry committees and their
reports, the rate of accidents have not come down which was 6 in
2013 and 7 in 2014. In most of the cases of accidents, the cause
was either human error or technical defect. From the above
information, it is evident that there is either lacuna in training that
is being imparted to our pilots and support officials or the systems
installed are technically ill-equipped. In both the cases, the onus
lies on the senior level management. It is highly regrettable that
consistently large number of accidents have taken place during
past decade and as such, Ministry of Defence should have taken
cognizance of the matter and made efforts to check the accidents.
At this point, the Committee would like to be informed about the
action taken by Ministry of Defence against the guilty officials and

17
suppliers of faulty system during the past ten years. Also, it is
extremely important that necessary action be taken to rectify the
position so as to ward off accidents and concrete steps be taken
in this regard under intimation to the Committee.”
32. The Ministry in its Action Taken Reply has stated as under:—
“IAF conducts Court of Inquiry for all aircraft accidents and
take necessary Disciplinary/Administrative action against
the personnel held responsible for the accident. It may be
noted that for the accidents that occurred during the last 10 financial
years (from FY 2005-2006 to till date) IAF has taken Disciplinary
action against 14 personnel and Administrative action at
various level against 87 personnel. The Indian Air Force has
taken various measures as enumerated below to reduce aircraft
accidents.
(a) Invigoration of Aerospace Safety Organization by constitution
of an Aircraft Accident and Investigation Board (AAIB) at
Air HQ to carry out investigation of all major accidents.
(b) Analytical Studies and Quality Audits of the aircraft fleets
are being carried out to identify vulnerable areas and to
institute remedial measures.
(c) Ornithology Cell has been established at Air HQ, which carries
out bird surveys at flying bases and suggests bird prevention
modules.
(d) Regular visits of all flying bases by senior Aerospace Safety
functionaries of IAF are being undertaken to apprise and
caution the operating units about the causes of the accidents
and to obtain views towards enhancing Aerospace Safety.
Measures like Operational Risk Management (ORM), Crew
Resource Management (CRM) and Air Force System of Error
Management (AFSEM) have been implemented to generate
a safe flying culture.
(e) Accident prevention programmes such as Accident Probability
Factors (APF) have been given an added thrust to identify
risk prone/hazardous areas specific to the aircraft fleet
and operational environment to ensure safe practices/
procedures.

18
(f) The use of simulator is an important tool towards accident
prevention. IAF resorts to use of simulators for training of
pilots on various inducted aircraft fleet. In a simulator a
previous situation can be revisited for better appreciation
and actions practised to perfection with no danger to aircrew/
machinery loss. Varying flight conditions and critical
emergencies can be regularly practised. Since there is no
danger to life/loss of machine, assimilation is enhanced. IAF
has inducted various types of simulators in the recent past
and is in the process of acquiring more simulators.”
33. The Committee had desired for being furnished with details
regarding action taken against the guilty personnel and suppliers of
sub-standard material. In their reply, the Ministry has stated that
disciplinary action has been taken against 14 personnel and
administrative action against 87 personnel. In this regard, the Committee
wish to be apprised of the cause of errors that resulted in the accidents,
which may inter alia  include aspects such as improper training,
inefficient infrastructure, psychological pressure etc.
In addition, details regarding action taken on the suppliers of
faulty material was also sought, which has not been furnished in the
reply. The Committee desire to be informed of relevant details in the
Action Taken Note.
J. Pilot - Cockpit ratio
Recommendation (Para No. 33)
34. The Committee had recommended as under:—
“The Committee came to know that the sanctioned Pilot to Cockpit
ratio in Indian Air Force is 1.25 for fighters, 1.5 for transport planes
and just 1 for helicopters. The Committee were astonished to find
that the existing ratio is just 0.81 for fighter planes. In the opinion
of the Committee, this could also be one of the reasons for high
accident rates of our planes. In USA, this ratio is 2:1 and even in
Pakistan this is 2.5:1. The Committee take serious view of the fact
that our squadron strength is already short of what has been
authorised by the Government and moreover, insufficiency in
number of available pilots in Air Force further deteriorates our
operational capabilities. This attains even greater seriousness as
during war time attrition rate is also higher. Our sanctioned strength

19
for Pilots is less than that of our adversaries and furthermore
the existing strength is even much short of the sanctioned
strength. The Committee earnestly want that the situation
needs overhaul and Ministry of Defence should not close their
eyes to the miserable condition of Service. The Pilot to cockpit
ratio in Indian Air Force for all types of planes/ helicopters
merits urgent attention and therefore, the Committee want all
initiatives be taken in this regard and the same be brought to their
knowledge.”
35. The Ministry in its Action Taken Reply has stated as
under:—
“ As on 01.07.2015, there is no shortage in the Officers Cadre,
however as brought out at para 33 of the report of the Standing
Committee, the existing Pilot to Cockpit ratio in the fighter fleet
is 0.81 which is way below the stipulated ratio of 1.25 pilots per
seat. The causative factor for this variation emanates from the actual
induction of weapon systems and the equipment in the last decade
that did not have corresponding sanction of additional manpower.
For example, the induction of SU-30 aircraft was a replacement for
the MiG-21 fleet and the associated manpower for SU-30 fleet was
to be provisioned from the establishment of erstwhile MiG-21
squadrons. SU-30 being a twin seater aircraft requires more pilots
than the MiG-21 and hence their induction, without an
increment of the establishment of pilots, adversely affected the
Pilot to Cockpit ratio. Cabinet Committee on Security (CCS) has
accorded in-principle approval inter-alia for 166 additional pilots
for the SU-30 aircraft on 06.05.2015. The detailed proposal is
being examined in consultation with Ministry of Finance. The
induction of pilots for these additional authorized posts would
completed by December, 2017. Consequent to that, the pilot to
Cockpit ratio is expected to reach the stipulated ratio of 1.25
sanctioned in 1991.”
36. The Committee note that Pilot-Cockpit ratio of 1.25 was
sanctioned in 1991. The Committee are perturbed to find that for the
last decade the sanctioned strength of pilots has not been commensurate
with the requirement. Twin-seater SU-30 planes were inducted in
place of MiG planes while pilots were not hired accordingly,
thus leaving a void. The fighter planes would obviously be of no use
in the absence of trained pilots to fly them. Moreover, the Air force

20
has already been short of planes. Thus, the fact about shortage of pilots
is indeed disturbing to note. The sanctioning of 153 posts of pilot is
expected to help in taking the pilot cockpit ratio to 1.25 by 2017.
The Committee desire that the induction of pilots be done in a
time bound manner and appropriate and adequate training imparted
to them.

21
CHAPTER II
A. OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN
ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT
Recommendation (Para No. 2)
During deliberations on the subject, the Committee enquired as to
how Navy would manage their expenditure with constrained budget and
were informed that more grants will be demanded at RE stage. However,
the Committee have noted that since the beginning of the 12th Plan period,
severe gaps have emerged between BE and RE allocations, which was
not so earlier. In the year 2012-13, BE was Rs. 37,314.44 crore while RE
was Rs. 29,668.33 crore and in the year 2013-14, the BE was Rs. 36,343.46
crore whereas RE was Rs. 33,582.92 crore. The Committee find it difficult
to understand that on one hand, certain amount is allocated at BE which
is further declined at RE stage.
In view of the Committee, the situation is grave as provision of
much lesser amount at RE than what was committed at BE as a routine,
would only lead to ad-hocism in budgeting and subsequently in budget
related planning. The Service and Ministry has to put things in order so
that more clarity in planning, budgeting and expenditure is visible.
Concrete steps towards this end needs to be taken out rightly under
intimation to this Committee.
Reply of the Government
The Ministry is constrained by the allocations made by the Ministry
of Finance which are lower than the requirements projected by this
Ministry. Lesser allocation in RE as compared to BE is due to cut imposed
by Ministry of Finance at RE stage. However, additional requirement of
funds, as required by the Services, will be projected for inclusion in the
Supplementary Grants.
Recommendation (Para No. 9)
As per the data furnished to the Committee, it was found that
presently there is a sanctioned strength of 65,468 posts for sailors in
Navy, while existing strength of sailors is 54,358. Hence, a shortage of

22
11,110 or 16.97 per cent. This shortage was 6.39 per cent in 2007. The
Committee feels that the country is not short of men and therefore,
shortage of manpower in the services could be abridged with properly
designed recruitment drive. The Committee wishes to be informed about
the specific reasons for this lacuna and appropriate action should be
taken in this regard.
Recommendation (Para No. 10)
Even in case of offices, the presently sanctioned and existing strength
are 10848 and 9237 respectively, hence a shortage of 1578 or 14.50%. The
Committee wishes to know specific reasons for this shortage. Further,
Committee, hereby recommend that necessary initiatives be taken to fill
the gaps in manpower strength of the Indian Navy.
Along with recruitment, concerted training facilities should also be
incorporated so that our Navy is prepared with trained manpower. The
Committee may be apprised about the proposed methodology by the
Indian Navy to overcome this problem.
Reply of the Government on Para Nos. 9 and 10
Reasons for Shortages. Shortage of sailors in the Indian Navy is
being reduced progressively. These shortages have appeared due to
accretions in the sanctioned strength for new inductions. Recruitment has
also been increased to fill the shortages in a gradual manner. The Navy
plans the induction of personnel through a 10-year induction plan in
respect of all branches/trades of sailors. The induction plan factors the
training capacity of ab initio and downstream training institutions. Efforts
are being made to avoid cyclic variations in recruitment, which have
adverse implications from Human Resource point of view. Measures
instituted to mitigate other reasons for shortages among sailors in the
Indian Navy, despite robust recruitment, are as follows:—
(a) Augmentation of Selection Infrastructure.  In addition to the
existing 12 Naval recruitment Establishment (NREs), the Navy
utilizes recruitment centres of the Indian Army, Indian Air
Force and civilian establishments for recruitment purposes.
(b) Training Capacity Constraints. To address the deficit in training
infrastructure, a consolidated case for infrastructure
augmentation at INS Chilka is being progressed. Enhanced
recruitment would be concurrently planned to reduce extant
shortages.

23
Reasons for Shortage of Officers. The specific reasons for shortages
among officers are as follows:—
(a) Availability of multiple alternative career avenues for youth
with the growth of economy.
(b) The Navy maintains stringent selection criteria to ensure that
no compromise in quality in candidates is made at the entry
level.
Concerted training facilities.  The Indian Navy has also initiated
actions to augment training facilities in keeping with the growing
recruitment of personnel. Augmentation of training infrastructure at Indian
Naval Academy (INA) to cater for the increased training load has been
planned in a phased manner.
Recommendation (Para No. 15)
The Committee was informed that Indian Navy is planning a Naval
base at Karwar. In this regard, the Committee was informed that all
major works in Phase-II approved in Dec. 12, is planned to be completed
by 2021. In addition, to enhance basing of ships at Kochi to meet various
contingencies in Indian Ocean Region (IOR), Indian Navy plans to acquire
500 meter of berth ( extendable to 4.7 km in subsequent phases) and 650
acres of land in the Kochi other Harbour Project. Furthermore, Forward
Operating Bases (FOBs) at Tuticorin, and Haldia, OTR Bases at Paradip
and various Islands in A&N Islands are also planned. In view of the
competitive milieu in the Indian Ocean Region, Committee wise that the
aforesaid base at Karwar be accomplished as definitely boost the edge
of Indian Navy in the region which is vulnerable to piracy and also beset
by security related challenges. The Committee wishes to be updated on
the progress made in this regard.
Reply of the Government
The Naval Base at Karwar, comprising of Base depot ship, INS
Kadamba, Naval Ship Repair Yard, Material Organisation, Hospital and
allied facility are fully operational. Presently, eight ships, including INS
Vikramaditya are based at Karwar. The Phase – II A of Project
Seabird was sanctioned by the CCS on 06 Dec. 12 for augmentation of
infrastructure and other facilities over a ten year period from 2011 to
2021 at a cost of Rs. 13161 crores, based on Jan. 10 rates. Preparatory
work for the same is being carried out. Work on ground is likely to
commence in mid-2016.

24
2. The Kochi Outer Harbour Development Plan of Cochin Port
Trust (Copt) includes reclamation of 650 acres of land, creation of
breakwater and 2000 metre jetty , infrastructure and manpower. The case
is still at a planning stage.
3. The project of Forward Operating Bases (FOBs) at Haldia is
being processed Rough Indicative Cost (RIC) is under formulation by
GE(N) (Kolkata) and thereafter proposal will be examined and processed
further.
4. The projects of FOB at Tuticorin and Operational Turn Round
(OTR) Base at Paradip are at preliminary stage. Presently , lease of land
is being progressed by DEO (Chennai) with Tuticorin Port Trust and
DEO (Bhubaneswar) with Paradip Port Trust respectively.
5. The OTR Bases at Kamorta, Campbell Bay and Diglipur in A&N
islands are being examined for their viability.
Recommendation (Para No. 16)
The amount projected by Air Force for the year 2015-16 is
Rs. 75,824.24 crore, while actually allocated amount is Rs. 56,686.24 crore,
thus amounting to a shortfall of Rs. 19,138.00 crore. The Committee note
that the allocation is approximately 70% of the projection. As a long term
measure, Indian Air Force needs to sustain its modernization trajectory
in the coming years to equip itself for collusive threat on two fronts. The
Committee feel that curtailment in budgetary provisions will certainly
hamper the momentum of the Service to attain deterrence posture against
our adversaries. Closing eyes to the short term requirements would only
mean compromising the capabilities envisaged in long term plans.
Therefore, the Committee desire that sanction of funds should be made
in accordance with annual requirements as well as the long-term plans
of the Service. The Committee also observe that deficit budgeting is not
being pointed out for the first time, rather this has become a common
feature of annual budgeting processes of the Ministry of Defence.
Therefore, it is desired that stringent and disciplined funding-expenditure
pattern should be followed by the Government so that time-bound
development initiatives are not derailed for want of resources.
Reply of the Government
This observation of the Committee was conveyed to the Ministry
of Finance vide D.O. No.3(7)/Bud-I/61/Def Secy/2015 dated 18th May, 2015.
Response has been received from Ministry of Finance vide D.O. letter
No. 2(30)-B(AC)/2014 dated 22nd June, 2015 (copy attached). In their

25
reply Ministry of Finance has stated that the observations/
recommendations of the Standing Committee on Defence are mostly
relating to inadequate allocation of funds for different Services with
specific reference to important schemes/projects. Ministry of Finance
recognize these commitments and at the time of formulation of budget/
revised estimates, resources are allocated on the basis of trend of
expenditure, the absorptive capacity in the financial year and the fiscal
space available to Government.
Recommendation (Para No. 17)
Revenue head projection given by the Service is Rs. 30,932 crore
while the actual allocation is Rs. 24,300 crore, thereby amounting to a
shortfall of Rs.6,632 crore. The Revenue Budget has two main components
viz. salary and non-salary expenditure. The projected amount in non-
salary segment for BE 2015-16 is Rs. 18,679 crore whereas the fund actually
allocated is Rs. 12,550 crore, consequently a shortfall of Rs. 6,129 crore.
The Committee wanted to know the impact that Air Force will face due
to deficit budgeting by nearly one-third of the solicited amount under
non-salary head. With regard to this, during deliberations, the Committee
were informed that this fund crunch would lead to inability to support
requisite spares and fuel procurement, limitations in training, affecting
service ability as older systems require more maintenance, resulting in
compromise of Operational Preparedness. This is a grave and unacceptable
situation. Besides this, the Committee were also educated that expenditure
for Humanitarian Assistance and Disaster Relief missions (Uttarakhand,
Jammu and Kashmir Floods) and General Elections added further pressure
on already stretched resources. The Committee understand that in order
to keep Air Force ever readily geared up for any challenge, it is paramount
that no compromises are made in relation to training and maintenance
of existing systems which would always require fuel and availability of
spares. Therefore, provision of adequate funding under revenue head is
of utmost importance. So, the Committee recommend that the Ministry
of Defence must ensure provision of additional Rs. 6,000 crore to Air
Force at RE 2015-16 stage.
Reply of the Government
This observation of the Committee was conveyed to the Ministry
of Finance vide D.O. No. 3(7)/Bud-I/61/Def Secy/2015 dated 18th May ,
2015. Response has been received from Ministry of Finance vide D.O.
letter No. 2(30)-B(AC)/2014 dated 22nd June, 2015 (copy attached). In
their reply Ministry of Finance has stated that the observations/
recommendations of the Standing Committee on Defence are mostly
relating to inadequate allocation of funds for different Services with

26
specific reference to important schemes/projects. Ministry of Finance
recognize these commitments and at the time of formulation of budget/
revised estimates, resources are allocated on the basis of trend of
expenditure, the absorptive capacity in the financial year and the fiscal
space available to Government.
Recommendation (Para No. 20)
For the year 2014-15, the BE projection was Rs. 89,481.74 crore
while BE allocation was that of Rs. 54,217.52 crore. The projection and
allocation made at RE 2014-15 stage were Rs. 61,316.75 crore and
Rs. 53,896.54 crore respectively. It is observed that the fund provided at
RE stage is even less than the amount committed at BE stage, leave aside
provision of additional grants at RE stage. The Committee opine that RE
allocation being even lesser than the BE allocations, the budgetary trend
needs severe corrections. Unfortunately, non-seriousness of Government
towards needs of Air Force is visible in the budget pattern which needs
to be relooked into with all gravity. In relation to this, the Committee
desire that corrective measures be taken, at once, so as to ensure that
the Service does not suffer for want of resources. The Committee be
informed about the same.
Reply of the Government
Lesser allocation in RE as compared to BE is due to cut imposed
by Ministry of Finance at RE stage. However, additional requirement of
funds, as required by the Services, will be projected for inclusion in the
Supplementary Grants.
Recommendation (Para No. 21)
The Committee observe that the financial year 2011-12 onwards,
Air Force had been able to fully utilize modernization budget provided
to them. It was also evident that the spending pattern of Air Force had
steadily improved over the 11th Plan period and their actual expenditure
had, in fact, exceeded the RE allocations during the last three years. In
the current year, a provision of Rs. 33,686.75 crore has been made in BE
for modernisation of the Air Force against a projection of Rs. 42,758
crore, hence a shortfall of Rs.9,071 crore. In this context, the representatives
of Air Force deposed before the Committee that the amount of money
allocated for Capital schemes has reduced over the last two-three years.
As a consequence, Air Force has not signed major contracts. The Air
Force is getting only Rs. 1,000 crore to Rs. 2,000 crore for new schemes.
In the view of the Committee, upgradation of Air Force is indispensable
as the squadron strength and cockpit to pilot ratio is already grim which

27
are separately mentioned in the paragraphs here under. Therefore
provision of adequate budget is imperative for modernization of Air
Force.
Reply of the Government
This observation of the Committee was conveyed to the Ministry
of Finance vide D.O. No. 3(7)/Bud-I/61/DefSecy/2015 dated 18th May, 2015.
Response has been received from Ministry of Finance vide D.O. letter
No. 2(30)-B(AC)/2014 dated 22nd June, 2015 (copy attached). In their
reply Ministry of Finance has stated that the observations/
recommendations of the Standing Committee on Defence are mostly
relating to inadequate allocation of funds for different Services with
specific reference to important schemes/projects. Ministry of Finance
recognize these commitments and at the time of formulation of budget/
revised estimates, resources are allocated on the basis of trend of
expenditure, the absorptive capacity in the financial year and the fiscal
space available to Government.
Recommendation (Para No. 22)
The Committee, while examining the subject, had found that the
required and existing strength of Air Force are not analogous. The IAF
today has 35 active fighter squadron as against Government authorised
strength of 42 squadrons. With regard to this, the representatives of Air
Force deposed before the Committee that a drawdown has already begun
and by 2022 Air Force will be around just 25 squadron thereby losing
even the slight edge over rival neighbouring nation. More to the point,
the country has to look at the threat vis-à-vis other hostile countries in
the region as well. Consequently, it was intimated that the IAF requires
at least 45 fighter squadrons to counter a two front collusive threat. On
enquiring about the reasons for gap in the squadron strength, the
Committee were informed that the gap exists because the rate at which
fighter aircraft are retiring, after completion of their total technical life
exceeds the rate at which their replacements are being inducted into the
IAF. The Committee while being concerned to know how the Ministry
proposes to fill the gaps during the ongoing and ensuing Plan periods,
found that in order to fill the gap, IAF has contracted 272 Su-30 MKI
fighter aircraft to form 13 Squadron. The delivery of Su-30 MKI will
continue till 2030, resulting in equipping 3 more squadron in the next
4 to 5 years. Further, induction of Light Combat Aircraft (LCA) and
Medium Multi Role Combat Aircraft (MMRCA) is also envisaged. The
MMRCA project is at Contract Negotiation Committee (CNC) stage. IAF
has accepted the first Series Production LCA on 17 January 2015 and the
second aircraft is expected to be inducted by March 2015. In addition

28
to these, design/ development of Fifth Generation Fighter Aircraft (FGFA)
is under progress. If all procurements fructify as planned, the IAF is
likely to achieve the Government authorised strength of 42 Squadron
only by the end of the 15th Plan Period. However, in spite of all the
efforts being undertaken in this regard, the Committee are perturbed to
note that no concrete results have come out so far from MMRCA
negotiations and LCA has certain design/development related issues that
needs to be relooked into or else it will not serve any purpose for Air
Force. With regard to the budgetary provision, this year an amount of
Rs. 18,866.00 crore have been allocated towards procurement of aircraft
and aero engines. This amount is much less than the actual expenditure
incurred under this head during the last two years i.e. 2013-14 and 2014-
15, which were Rs. 29069.00 and Rs. 21280.38 respectively. At this point
of time, the Committee opine that there is a dire need for paradigm shift
from complacency to perfection. The Committee desire that these projects
are accelerated and at the same time all efforts be made to initiate design/
development of FGFA, so that the country’s long term air defence needs
are addressed and our Air Force earns crucial strategic advancement over
the adversaries.
Reply of the Government
As per India-France Joint Statement issued by the two countries
during the Prime Minister’s visit to France, Government of India conveyed
to the Government of France that in view of the critical operational
necessity for Multirole Combat Aircraft for Indian Air Force, Government
of India would like to acquire 36 Rafale jets in fly-away condition as
quickly as possible. The two leaders agreed to conclude an Inter-
Governmental Agreement for supply of the Aircraft on terms that would
be better than conveyed by Dassault Aviation as part of a separate process
underway; the delivery would be in time-frame that would be compatible
with the operational requirement of IAF; and that the aircraft and
associated systems and weapons would be delivered on the same
configuration as had been tested and approved by Indian Air Force, and
with a longer maintenance responsibility by France.
A negotiating Team has been constituted under the Chairmanship
of DCAS, Air HQrs to negotiate the terms and conditions of procurement
of 36 Rafale jets in fly-away condition and recommend the draft agreement.
The Negotiating Team is presently conducting negotiations with the French
side and after completion of the same it will submit its report.
Further, Infrastructure is in place for production of 8 Light Combat
Aircraft (LCA) per annum and HAL is ready for production of the aircraft.
However, Standard Operative Procedure (SOP) of the aircraft to be frozen

29
will happen after Final Operation Clearance (FOC), which is planned in
December, 2015. Against 20 Initial Operation Clearance (IOC) Contract,
First Series Production aircraft was handed over to IAF on 17.01.2015.
Production of 3 aircraft has been planned during Financial Year 2015-
16. Balance aircraft are planned to be completed by 2017-18. Delivery of
20 FOC standard aircraft is linked to the FOC clearance.
The development of Fifth Generation Fighter Aircraft (FGFA) is
under active discussion between India and Russia.
Recommendation (Para No. 23)
For New schemes, this year, Air Force had projected an amount
of Rs. 12,000 crore, however, the allocation earmarked is merely of
Rs. 3,264 crore. It is recommended that sufficient funds must be allocated
to Air Force for new schemes so that contracts for aircraft design,
development and acquisition are not hampered in any way. Accordingly,
Ministry of Finance should be impressed upon and the Committee wish
to be apprised about the requisite action taken in this regard.
Reply of the Government
This observation of the Committee was conveyed to the Ministry
of Finance vide D.O. No. 3(7)/Bud-I/61/DefSecy/2015 dated 18th May, 2015.
Response has been received from Ministry of Finance vide D.O. letter
No. 2(30)-B(AC)/2014 dated 22nd June, 2015 (copy attached). In their
reply Ministry of Finance has stated that the observations/
recommendations of the Standing Committee on Defence are mostly
relating to inadequate allocation of funds for different Services with
specific reference to important schemes/projects. Ministry of Finance
recognize these commitments and at the time of formulation of budget/
revised estimates, resources are allocated on the basis of trend of
expenditure, the absorptive capacity in the financial year and the fiscal
space available to Government.
Recommendation (Para No. 24)
In addition to this, the Committee also desire that such necessary
framework should be brought in place so as to ensure that induction and
de-induction processes are commensurate with each other and occurrence
of such wide gaps in fleet strength is not allowed at all. In this regard,
re-structured mechanism must be created where responsibility is assigned
at appropriate levels and Committee be informed about the same.

30
Reply of the Government
To ensure that the de-induction and induction process are
commensurate with each other, IAF has been initiating new procurement
cases sufficiently in advance to cater for systemic and institutional delays,
and projecting the requirements of new aircraft so that they can be
inducted in time. While as an immediate step, monitoring of all defence
acquisition schemes has been strengthened at MoD and Service HQ, MoD
is in the process of revising the Defence Procurement Procedures with
an objective of aligning it with the ‘Make in India’ initiative of the
Government and also to bring in greater accountability and assigning
responsibility at the appropriate levels of defence acquisition planning
and execution.
Recommendation (Para No. 25)
During the examination of the subject, the Committee came to know
that trainer Aircraft held by the IAF currently include Basic Trainer Aircraft
(BTA). Intermediate Jet Trainer (IJT) and Advance Jet Trainer (AJT). The
related research of the Committee brought out that the existing trainer
aircraft strength is 274 as against the sanctioned strength of 430. Simulators
have also been provided for each type of aircraft. The Committee came
to know that in the year 2014-15, an amount of Rs. 2,245.48 crore was
allocated for procurement of trainer aircraft whereas for the year 2015-16
an amount of Rs. 1197.17 crore has been allocated for this purpose. As
far as the basic trainers are concerned, in view of the delays in the
development of HTT-40 BTA by Hindustan Aeronautics Limited (HAL),
Defence Acquisition Council (DAC) on 28th February 2015, approved the
procurement of additional 38 PC-7 MK-II aircraft under ‘Option Clause’
of the procurement contract, subject to certain conditions. The Committee
desire that necessary funds are provided and measures be taken to fulfil
the requirement of basic trainer in Air Force at the earliest.
Reply of the Government
The Defence Acquisition Council (DAC) on 28th February, 2015,
accorded AoN for procurement of additional 38 x PC-7 MK-II aircraft
and associated equipment under ‘Option Clause’ of the procurement
contract dated 24.5.2012 subject to certain conditions, at an estimated cost
of Rs. 1766 crore. DAC also directed M/s HAL to develop 70 Basic Trainer
Aircraft and to commit itself to specific developmental timelines that
would be monitored on a periodic basis by an appropriately constituted
empowered Committee or by the Integrated Project Management Team (IPMT).

31
Further, the DAC on 13th May , 2015 approved the issuance of Letter of
Intent (LoI) for procurement of additional 38 x PC-7 MK-II aircraft. The
LoI has been issued by Ministry of defence on 21.5.2015.
Recommendation (Para No. 26)
The Intermediate stage of flying training is presently being
conducted on the Kiran aircraft which has already started retiring. The
Kiran aircraft were planned to be replaced by the HAL built Intermediate
Jet Trainer (IJT). However, the IJT has been under development for the
past 15 years and has still not achieved Initial Operational Clearance
(IOC). As a consequence IAF is planning to extend the life of the Kiran
aircraft. Simultaneously, IAF is looking at options to meet the Intermediate
flying training requirements of pilot trainees. This could include use of the
BTA to also undertake the Intermediate stage training syllabus (Stage-II
flying). The Committee are baffled to find that using Stage-I trainer aircraft
to fulfil requirement of Stage-II flying is being considered as an option
to compensate for unavailability of trainer aircraft at Stage-II. It is difficult
for the Committee to understand that in a span of 15 years, HAL could
not deliver IJTs. At this point, the Committee would like to be informed
in detail about the action taken against HAL by the Ministry of Defence
for their non-performance. Besides this, the Committee also recommend
that appropriate steps be taken to acquire the IJTs so that our pilots
training module is not compromised at any stage as such compromises
are bound to be detrimental. Further, it is recommended that adequate
funds should be provided to meet these requirements of Air Force under
intimation to the Committee.
Reply of the Government
Present Status of IJT:  The Initial Operational Clearance (IOC) for
the IJT scheduled in 2004 has still not been achieved as the IJT project
has encountered design flaws, which prevent it from being cleared for
safe execution of Stall and Spin. HAL had contracted BAES of UK as a
consultant for resolving the Stall and Spin issues on 26 December, 2012.
The joint analysis by HAL and BAES revealed that major Structural
modifications will have to be incorporated in the IJT for it to achieve the
requisite spinning characteristics.
2. The IJT after undergoing structural modifications would need
to be again flight tested for handling characteristics in the entire flight
envelope before undertaking Stall tests prior to Spin testing. The entire
flight test campaign for ‘Spin Testing’ on a trainer class of aircraft is time
consuming and can take minimum two to five years to certify the trainer
aircraft for ‘Spinning’.

32
3. The Russian OEM initially delivered the ‘ AL-55i’ engine for IJT
with a ‘Time Between Overhaul’ (TBO) of only 100 hours against the
contracted specification of 1200 hours. After three years, the Russian OEM
has increased the ‘Time Between Overhaul’ to 300 hours.
4. All Design and Development Projects have an inherent risk of
not succeeding. There is always a scope to induct systems off a Design
and Development Project with marginally lower performance with an
aim to improve its performance in future but such a scope does not exist
while inducting the IJT, wherein in the shortfalls have ‘Training
Inadequacy’ and ‘Flight Safety’ implications. HAL is still carrying out
redesigning of the IJT.
5. Future Flying Training Pattern in IAF and Action Taken:
In view of the slow progress in the Design and Development process of
IJT wherein the aircraft performance, aero-engine life and induction
timelines cannot be predicted and the reality of Kiran aircraft retiring
before induction of IJT, Air HQ has been in the process of ascertaining
various options to conduct Intermediate Flying Training. Recently, Air
HQ has also studied the feasibility of conducting ‘Two Aircraft Type
Flying Training’ pattern instead of the currently followed ‘Three Aircraft
Type Flying Training’ pattern. In the revised pattern trainee pilots will
graduate directly from the Basic Trainer Aircraft (BTA) to ‘Hawk’
Advanced Jet Trainer (AJT) for which the trainees will be given increased
flying training on both the BTA and the AJT. ‘PC-7 Mk II’ recently inducted
in IAF for Stage-I flying training of ab-initio pilots, is an excellent basic
trainer as per the feedback from Training Command and the ‘Hawk’ AJT
is already operational in IAF for Stage-III flying training of fighter pilots.
IAF has decided to introduce ‘Two Aircraft Type Flying Training’ pattern
wherein Stage-I will be conducted on the BTA and flying of Stage-II will
be suitably divided between BTA and AJT from the ‘Flying Course’
commencing in June 2015. The number of flying trainees being switched
from ‘Three Aircraft Type Flying Training’ pattern to ‘Two Aircraft Type
Flying Training’ pattern will be initially low and will progressively increase
commensurate to the increase in the number of BTA inducted.
6. In view of the observations of C&AG, all payments for IJT were
stopped from financial year 2013-14. DDP , MoD has been asked to continue
with Design and Development activities on the IJT but the series
production of IJT should be put on hold until Stall and Spin related
issues are fully resolved and the Standard of Preparation is frozen/
approved by Centre for Military Airworthiness and Certification
(CEMILAC).

33
Recommendation (Para No. 27)
With regard to the advance trainers, IAF has contracted a total of
106 Hawk Mk-132 AJT aircraft. The deliveries are likely to be completed
by 2016. The Committee wish that stringent timelines are followed in
delivery of these aircraft and requisite funding be dedicated to meet the
requirement.
Reply of the Government
Against the contracted 106 Hawk Mk-132 AJT aircraft from British
Aerospace Systems (BAES), 90 aircraft have been delivered till date. The
balance 16 aircraft are likely to be delivered by July 2016, as per the
contract.
Recommendation (Para No. 28)
The Committee came to know that there are total of 53 airfields,
of which permanent Airfield Lighting System (AFLS) is available at 42
airfields. The reasons for not having night landing facilities at all bases
were stated as Limited night operations being conducted at airfields not
having permanent airfield lighting and the requirement is met using
alternate/portable/mobile airfield lighting system. It was informed that
installation of permanent Airfield Lighting System is planned under Project
“Modernisation of Airfield Infrastructure”. The project is planned in two
phases viz. MAFI phase-I and MAFI phase-II. The envisaged date of
completion of Modernisation of Airfield Infrastructure (MAFI) Project
Phase-I is September 2016. The contract for MAFI Project Phase-II has
not been signed. However, it is envisaged that MAFI Project Phase-II of
37 airfields, at the rate of six airfields in a period of six months, will take
three and half years after the signing of contract. The Committee were
informed that in the current financial year, a budget allocation of Rs. 235
crore had been made for strengthening/re-surfacing of runways at the
IAF airfields. Over and above this, Rs. 49 crore had been allocated for
the repair of the facilities at the airfields. The Committee desire that these
funds are optimally and transparently utilized during the year and desired
results are achieved. The Committee wish to be apprised about the
spending of these funds during the year ahead and outcome thereof.
Reply of the Government
MAFI
The envisaged date of completion of Modernisation of
Airfield Infrastructure (MAFI) Project Phase-I is September 2016. In MAFI

34
Project Phase-II, the modernisation of 37 airfields is expected to be
completed at the rate of six airfields every six months after signing of
contract.
2. Strengthening/Resurfacing of Runways. There were total of seven
projects costing Rs. 1612 crore for resurfacing of runway planned in Annual
Major Works Plan of 2014-15. These seven airfields were:—
(a) BakshiKa Talab
(b) Jamnagar
(c) Suratgarh
(d) Sirsa
(e) Bagdogra
(f) Pune
(g) Barrackpore
Out of these seven runways, three runway resurfacing works
(at Sl. No. (a), (b) and (c) above) have been approved and funds
released by 31 March 2015. Rs. 235.32 Crore were sanctioned during the
FY 2014-15 towards runway resurfacing. The expenditure as per Monthly
Expenditure Return (MER) is Rs. 225.46 crore. Under Runway/Airfield
maintenance Rs. 48.14 crore had been allotted to all commands. The
entire amount of funds allotted under Runway/Airfield maintenance has
been spent.
Recommendation (Para No. 29)
The State Government of Arunachal Pradesh had agreed to transfer
the maintenance of operations of Tuting, Mechuka, Along, Vijayanagar
and Ziro Advance Landing Grounds (ALGs) to Ministry of Defence (MoD)
vide a Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) signed on 09 June 2009.
The ALGs of Tawang and Walong were already under the operational
control of Army. The modernisation/upgradation programme of the ALGs
for provisioning of operational, maintenance and administrative
infrastructure are being undertaken. For the development of Defence
infrastructure in the North-East, IAF separately had allocated a total of
Rs. 389 crore for development of seven Advance Landing Grounds in
Arunachal Pradesh. The Committee are dismayed at very slow pace of
progress and desire that the work is accomplished in efficient manner
and the same be brought to the knowledge of the Committee.

35
Reply of the Government
The reasons for slow progress of work in the beginning of the
contract was due to:—
(a) Land acquisition cases
(b) Security related reasons in the NE region
(c) Threat to the contractors and their personnel/labour from the
local population/mafia.
(d) Removal of encroachment cases
(e) Non-availability of labour in certain areas
(f) Difficulty in Mobilization of resources by the contractors due
to road conditions and adverse weather conditions (landslides,
etc.)
2. All the above reasons were major contributing factors during
initial period which resulted in time loss. Regular follow-up meetings
by Apex Steering Committee are being held to resolve all these issues
and to ensure timely action.
3. The progress of each ALG (as on 10 May 2015) along with
Probable Date of Completion (PDC) is as given below:—
Sl.No. ALG OVERALL % PDC
1. Walong 90 Jul. 2015
2. Ziro 72 Jun. 2015
3. Passighat 49 Sep. 2015
4. Mechuka 42 Oct. 2015
5. Tuting 32 Nov . 2015
6. Along 46 Jun. 2015
7. Tawang 13 Dec. 2016
4.(a) The CCS Sanction to develop 8 ALGs was accorded on
26 June 2009 for Rs. 1753.32 crore. Out of 8 ALGs, work could
not commence at Vijayanagar ALG due to lack of road connectivity
between Miao and Vijayanagar, a distance of 157 KM.
(b) The case was taken up with ADGMO (B) for construction of
road between Miao and Vijaynagar by the BRO. ADGMO has
stated that with present capability , BRO is finding it difficult
to meet the laid down targets. ADGMO suggested to take

36
up the issue with State Government to task PWD to undertake
the repair work. Construction of road was also planned by
the State Government of Arunachal on a different alignment.
During the 20th Apex Steering Committee (ASC), when
enquired, the Resident Commissioner expressed difficulty in
taking up the project due to paucity of funds. However, he
stated that he will once again take up the issue with the State
Government of Arunachal Pradesh.
(c) The issue was again taken up in 21st Apex Steering Committee
Meeting where representative of ADGMO informed that the
priority is now on completion of old projects some of which
are delayed upto 10 years. No new proposal is being accepted
and Vijayanagar is at low priority .
5. Hence, this ALG will be developed after road connectivity to
Vijayanagar is established by the State Government.
Recommendation (Para No. 32)
The sanctioned posts for officers in Air Force is 11,895 and actual
strength is 11,743. In case of airmen, the sanctioned strength is 1,35,227
and the existing strength is 1,32,922, thus the shortfall in strength is
2,305. The Ministry had mentioned that concerted efforts are made and
various initiatives have been taken from time to time to curtail the
shortages which include proactive steps like publicity measures and
simplification of selection process. As regards airmen, a total of 4,144
recruits are undergoing training thereby fulfilling the current requirement
of airmen. While appreciating the efforts, the Committee desire that these
measures should be taken in all earnest so that differences in existing
and sanctioned strength is abridged in the coming year.
Reply of the Government
Concerted efforts and proactive steps instituted by IAF in the recent
past have fructified in reducing the shortages of Officers and Airmen.
IAF has instituted measures that would ensure maintaining the strength
of IAF at par with the authorized establishment. The present efforts would
be sustained in the right earnest.
The Establishment and the present strength of officers as on
01.07.2015 is same i.e. 11978. The strength of airmen as on 01.07.2015 is
129610 against an establishment of 136274 leading to a deficiency of 6664.

37
Presently, a total of 6152 recruits are undergoing training thereby
fulfilling the current requirement. Induction in airmen cadre has been
planned for 5000 per annum till the year 2016, with provision to
gradually increase it to 6000 per annum from the year 2018, by which
time IAF will be able to bring the strength at par with the authorized
establishment.

38
B. OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN
ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT AND COMMENTED UPON
Recommendation (Para No. 1)
This year Navy had projected an amount of Rs. 44,814.71 crore
while the allocations made by the Ministry is that of Rs. 40,528.88 crore
i.e. less by Rs. 4,215.83 crore. In the year, 2014-15, RE projection was
Rs. 38,656.82 crore whereas actual allocation was that of Rs. 32,442.86
crore, thus a deficit budget by Rs. 6,213.96 crore. The Committee feel that
the deficit budgeting at RE 2014-15 stage is already there and a further
shortfall of approx. Rs. 4,200 crore in this year’s BE will not only put
more pressure on already stretched Naval budget but is also not
understandable as to how a shortfall of Rs. 10,413.96 crore will be managed
during 2014-15. The Ministry of Defence may explain this. Navy, in any
case, is facing fleet and manpower crunch which have been separately
dealt with in the succeeding paragraphs of this Report. Therefore, adequate
budgetary support is quintessence for desired performance outcome of
the Service.
Reply of the Government
The Ministry is constrained by the allocations made by the
Ministry of Finance which are lower than the requirements projected by
this Ministry. Nevertheless, additional requirement of funds, as required
by the Services, will be projected for inclusion in the Supplementary
Grants.
(For comments of the Committee please  see Para No. 7
of Chapter-I)
Recommendation (Para No. 4)
In the year 2014-15, for new schemes, the amount allocated at RE
stage was Rs. 663.92 crore and the amount actually spent upto 16 March
2015 was Rs. 2,457.07 crore i.e. 370.08% of the RE allocations. In this
context, the Committee further feel that provision of funds at a very late
stage could also be a reason for inadequacies in budgeting and expenditure
pattern. Therefore, the situation needs to be rectified and time bound
decisions on allocations and expenditure should be taken at all levels,
be it Ministry of Finance, Ministry of Defence or Navy. It is suggested
that a standard operating procedure (SOP) be laid down, giving the time
frame within a week various decisions and actions ought be taken by

39
the Ministry of Finance, Ministry of Defence and the Service concerned.
It is needless to say that the Committee be informed about the steps
taken with regard.
Reply of the Government
It may be noted that allocation for New Schemes for the Navy
during 2014-15 was lower than the projections. However, as approval
of schemes proceeded beyond funds allocated for Navy, additional
funds were provided for the same. In this case prompt and time
bound decision was taken to ensure optimum utilisation of scarce
resources.
(For comments of the Committee please  see Para No. 13
of Chapter-I)
Recommendation (Para No. 8)
The Committee was informed that acquisition of defence equipment
is undertaken in accordance with the Defence Procurement Procedure.
After gleaning through the documents submitted by the Ministry, the
Committee found that there had been huge cost and time overruns in
almost all the production/developmental projects presently being
undertaken for Navy. In case of P-15A, which is being constructed at
Mazagaon Dock Limited (MDL), the initial delivery dates of the Yards
12702 and 12703 were March 2009 and March 2010 respectively. However
the same were revised to May 2011 and May 2012 in that order. The
project could not be accomplished even by the re-scheduled dates. As
a result, the targeted delivery dates have once again been reset as
June 2015 and December 2015. As far as the cost of the project is concerned,
the original cost was Rs. 3580 crores which has been revised to
Rs. 11662 crores. Similar is the case of P-28 (M/s GRSE) where the initial
delivery dates of Yard 3018, 3019 and 3020 were 2009, 2011 and 2012
respectively, which were revised to March 2015, March 2016 and March
2017 in that order. Also, the original cost of Rs. 3051.20 crores was revised
to Rs. 7852.39 crores. Just like, the delivery schedule of IAC has been
revised from December 2010 to December 2018, along with cost revision
for the same from Rs. 3261 crores to Rs. 19341 crores. Identical are the
cases of Naval Offshore Patrol Vessels (M/s Pipavav Shipyard), Fast
Interceptor Crafts (M/s Solas Marine Lanka, Sri Lanka), Landing Craft
Utility (M/s GRSE, Kolkata), Water Jet Fast Attack Crafts (M/s GRSE,
Kolkata), Cadet Training Ships (M/s ABG Shipyard) and Survey Vessels

40
(M/s Alcock Ashdown Ltd. Gujarat), where repeated time revisions and
enormous cost escalations have taken place and have become a routine.
The Committee was given to believe varied reasons for the above
mentioned delays such as untimely supply of material, infrastructural
constraints, delay in commencement of the projects, etc. Yet, the Committee
unambiguously make an observation that such delays could have been
avoided by bringing in better intelligibility, vision and co-ordination
among the development agencies, production units and final users
along with periodical performance appraisals. Accordingly, it is
suggested that in future, result oriented efforts must be made in
order to ensure highest level of precision, transparency and probity,
whilst achieving timely induction of planned capabilities. In this
regard, suitably designed structural mechanism, where well-defined
responsibilities are preset, must be prepared. Frivolous handling
and wastage of National monetary resource cannot be justified by
any means. On this point, the Committee feels that Ministry of
Defence needs to take pro-active stand and send strong signals
by penalizing those held accountable for the inordinate delays that
have taken place during past decade. Effectual guidelines with
regard thereto should be formulated and the Committee is informed
about the same.
Reply of the Government
The following steps have been taken to reduce ‘Time and Cost
Overruns’ in Shipbuilding cases:—
(i) To prevent cost overruns, all projects are now ‘Fixed Cost’.
Variable cost option is only considered, where cost is
uncertain. Further, provision for revised CCS sanction exists
only for variable cost components.
(ii) Regular Project Reviews are undertaken through Steering
Committees.
(iii) Construction of follow-on ships is undertaken based on same
design to reduce build time.
(iv) Provision for liquidated damages for delay.
(For Comments of the Committee please  see Para No. 19
of Chapter-I)

41
Recommendation (Para No. 11)
The Committee came to know that there were a total of 59 cases
of accidents that took place in Indian Navy’s Fleet since 2007 till Nov.
2014. In view of the Committee, this is an alarming situation as on one
hand we have shortage of fleet and manpower, and on the other hand
we are losing our trained manpower to accidents. The Committee have
been given to understand that Standard Operating Procedures (SOPs)
had been promulgated in the year to check spurt of accidents. However,
it was observed that even after promulgation of SOPs, the pace of accidents
has not plummeted and in the year 2014 itself, 14 number of accidents
had taken place. Therefore, the Committee is of the opinion that
promulgation of the current SOPs is ineffective by any extent or mere
posturing. This is a very sad state-of-affairs as the Country’s men and
money are being worn out in accidents. The Committee takes very serious
note of the matter and desire that immediate and apposite action needs
to be taken in this regard. It is regretted that Ministry of Defence failed
to curb the continuity in occurrence of accidents for over a decade. The
situation becomes more grave in the light that Defence Force is considered
to be one of the most disciplined organisations. It is pertinent to mention
that Ministry of Defence should take cognizance of the matter and take
appropriate action. The buck has to stop somewhere. Remedial action
taken in regard thereto must be intimated to the Committee.
Recommendation (Para No. 12)
In most cases of accidents, the reason specified to the Committee
is either material failure or human error. In this context, the Committee
would like to be updated on number of cases of these accidents,
where the supplier of sub-standard material has been penalized. Details
in this regard may be furnished to the Committee in the Action Taken
replies.
Recommendation (Para No. 13)
Even if the cause of accident is human error, the Committee opines
that there is lacuna in training modules which needs to be rectified at
the earliest. Ministry of Defence and Naval Headquarters must ensure
that proper training is imparted to the Officers/sailors who are deputed
onboard the ships/submarines as well as ground staff. Unambiguously
any kind of delinquencies results into not just material loss but also
irreparable human loss. Appropriate action taken thereon should be
brought to notice of the Committee.

42
Reply of the Government on Para Nos. 11, 12 and 13
Standard Operating Procedures (SOPs) a number of steps have been
undertaken by the Navy to ensure strict adherence to the laid down SOPs
and precautionary measures for various evolutions. Towards this,
adherence to promulgated SOPs by all operational units of the Indian
Navy is continuously monitored, at all levels, by concerned authorities
through the following measures:—
(a) Assessment of adherence to laid down SOPs, through
Operational Readiness Assessment (ORA) by Flag Officer Sea
Training (FOST);
(b) Assessment of adherence to laid down SOPs, through
Operational Readiness Inspection (ORI) by respective
Commanders-in-Chief;
(c) Inspection by Class Authorities; and
(d) Inspection of all operational units annually by Operational
Authorities to assess their operational efficiency and
adherence to laid down SOPs.
2. In the last three years (since 2012), 24 accidents involving Indian
Naval ships, aircraft and submarines have taken place, out of which seven
have been attributed to material failure. However, in none of these seven
accidents, the Board of Inquiry had attributed the material failure due
to supply of sub-standard material.
3. Training in the Indian Navy is a dynamic process and is
regularly imparted to naval personnel right from induction stage.
Based on feedbacks, any lacunae in training is regularly analysed and
correction is made in the training curriculum/module. Besides this
all operational units undergo Safety Audit at least once every year
which encompasses all aspects of safety pertaining to men and material
of the unit.
4. To ensure that the lessons learnt from any accident/incident in
the IN are disseminated to everyone and correctly incorporated in the
training curriculum, Incident Study and Analyses Cells (ISAC) have been
established at all the IN training establishments. The ISAC analyses all
incidents and prepares training material and Computer Aided Instructional
(CAI) packages for dissemination of ‘Lessons Learnt’ during various

43
courses, including PCT classes. In order to facilitate the analysis, ISAC
is provided with extracts of Bol/Court Martial proceedings. Similarly,
Collision and Grounding Analysis Cell (CAGAC) is functioning at
Navigation and Direction School, Kochi for study and analysis of
navigational accidents. All this is aimed at creating a ‘shared awareness’
of findings, recommendations and lessons learnt related to various
accidents/incidents. Speedy dissemination through advisories and Case
Studies is also carried out in order to avoid recurrence of such incidents
in future, and enables requisite course correction to various training
modules and courses.
(For comments of the Committee please  see Para No. 24
of Chapter- I)
Recommendation (Para No. 19)
The projection under Capital head given by Air Force is
Rs. 42,758 crore while allocation is Rs. 33,687 crore amounting to a shortfall
of Rs. 9,071 crore. The Capital Budget pertains to two main components
viz. Committed Liabilities + Works and New Schemes. The projection in
New Schemes segment is Rs. 12,000 crore whereas the allocation is
Rs. 3,264 crore, thus amounting to a noticeable difference of
Rs. 9,071 crore. This depicts clear lack of coordination between the
Service Headquarters and the Ministry of Defence. The Committee
wanted to know the impact that Air Force will face due to deficit by
nearly three-fourth of the projected amount under non-salary head. The
representatives of Air Force, during oral evidence, submitted that this
shortfall would lead to slowdown of modernisation, delay in induction
of important capabilities, erosion of IAF’s superiority over our adversaries,
resultant asymmetry in capability with respect to envisaged “Threat
Perception” and flight safety concerns due to obsolescence issues. This
is a grave situation. The representatives of Air Force had also submitted
that Air Force has been getting very meagre amount of nearly 1 to
2 thousand crore and that is why there is a huge shortfall of
Rs. 9,000 crore. Accordingly, it is requested that the shortfall of
Rs. 9,000 crore be met. The Committee understand that IAF
had been on the modernisation trajectory in the 11th Plan. There
is a need to sustain this momentum in the 12th and 13th Plan
periods. Important projects are at critical stages (CNC/CFA
approval), hence, slow pace of modernisation will have a
cascading effect on those projects as well. For that reason, the
Committee observe that adequate budgetary support is required to

44
ensure fructification of these projects. Accordingly, requisite
funds be provided to the Service under intimation to the
Committee.
Reply of the Government
This observation of the Committee was conveyed to the
Ministry of Finance vide D.O. No. 3(7)/Bud.-I/61/DefSecy/2015 dated
18th May, 2015. Response has been received from Ministry of
Finance vide D.O. letter No. 2(30)-B(AC)/2014 dated 22nd June, 2015 (copy
attached). In their reply Ministry of Finance has stated that
the observations/recommendations of the Standing Committee
on Defence are mostly relating to inadequate allocation of funds
for different Services with specific reference to important schemes/
projects. Ministry of Finance recognize these commitments and
at the time of formulation of budget/revised estimates, resources
are allocated on the basis of trend of expenditure, the absorptive
capacity in the financial year and the fiscal space available to
Government.
(For comments of the Committee please  see Para No. 27
of Chapter-I)
Recommendation (Para No. 30)
During presentation, the Committee came to know that Su-30
aircraft has no hardened shelters. The Committee are concerned to find
that our Air Force is already short of planes and worse than that hardened
shelters are not available for even the limited number of aircraft that is
available with the Service. In the opinion of the Committee, it is extremely
pertinent that no damage is caused to the available aircraft. In this
connection, the Committee note that although, the New Generation
Hardened Aircraft Shelter (NGHAS) project is conceptualised for this
purpose, nevertheless, the Committee desire that there should not be any
delay in execution, as such delays have become a common feature of all
the projects.
Reply of the Government
IAF has constructed 16 shelters for Su-30 Class of aircraft between
2004-07. Further, New Generation Hardened Aircraft Shelter (NGHAS)
have been designed by DRDO based on operational requirements projected

45
by the IAF. Presently, the proposal for 108 NGHAS is being examined
in the Ministry in consultation with Ministry of Finance.
(For comments of the Committee please  see Para No. 30
of Chapter-I)
Recommendation (Para No. 33)
The Committee came to know that the sanctioned Pilot to Cockpit
ratio in Indian Air Force is 1.25 for fighters, 1.5 for transport planes and
just 1 for helicopters. The Committee were astonished to find that the
existing ratio is just 0.81 for fighter planes. In the opinion of the Committee,
this could also be one of the reasons for high accident rates of our planes.
In USA, this ratio is 2:1 and even in Pakistan this is 2.5:1. The Committee
take serious view of the fact that our squadron strength is already short
of what has been authorised by the Government and moreover,
insufficiency in number of available pilots in Air Force further deteriorates
our operational capabilities. This attains even greater seriousness as during
war time attrition rate is also higher. Our sanctioned strength for Pilots
is less than that of our adversaries and furthermore the existing strength
is even much short of the sanctioned strength. The Committee earnestly
want that the situation needs overhaul and Ministry of Defence should
not close their eyes to the miserable condition of Service. The Pilot to
cockpit ratio in Indian Air Force for all types of planes/ helicopters merits
urgent attention and therefore, the Committee want all initiatives be taken
in this regard and the same be brought to their knowledge.
Reply of the Government
As on 01.07.2015, there is no shortage in the Officers Cadre, however
as brought out at para 33 of the report of the Standing Committee, the
existing Pilot to Cockpit ratio in the fighter fleet is 0.81 which is way
below the stipulated ratio of 1.25 pilots per seat. The causative factor for
this variation emanates from the actual induction of weapon systems and
the equipment in the last decade that did not have corresponding sanction
of additional manpower. For example, the induction of SU-30 aircraft
was a replacement for the MiG-21 fleet and the associated manpower for
SU-30 fleet was to be provisioned from the establishment of erstwhile
MiG-21 squadrons. SU-30 being a twin seater aircraft requires more pilots
than the MiG-21 and hence their induction, without an increment of the
establishment of pilots, adversely affected the Pilot to Cockpit ratio.
Cabinet Committee on Security (CCS) has accorded in-principle approval

46
inter-alia for 166 additional pilots for the SU-30 aircraft on 06.05.2015. The
detailed proposal is being examined in consultation with Ministry of
Finance. The induction of pilots for these additional authorized posts
would completed by December, 2017. Consequent to that, the pilot to
Cockpit ratio is expected to reach the stipulated ratio of 1.25 sanctioned
in 1991.
(For comments of the Committee please  see Para No. 35
of Chapter-I)

47
CHAPTER III
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE
DO NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE REPLIES
RECEIVED FROM THE GOVERNMENT
Recommendation (Para No. 5)
The Committee observe that the Naval Budget as a percentage share
of total Defence Budget has declined from 18.14% in the year 2006-07
to 16.51% in the year 2015-16. The Committee opine that Navy has huge
requirement for capital induction as it is short of vessels, aircraft and
helicopters. In addition to this, manpower shortage and presently prevalent
inadequacies in training can also not be ignored. Therefore, reduction in
share of Naval Budget is not desirable, especially in view of the fact that
India’s larger chunk of trade takes place through sea routes. Besides this,
the new challenges of Navy are enormous, as the hostilities in sea by
neighbouring countries have increased over the years. Hence, in order
to equip our Navy with high level of tactical proficiency would indeed
require ample budgetary support. While taking into account the
tremendous training requirements and modernization drive of Navy as
envisaged in accordance with Maritime Capability Perspective Plan(MCPP)
2012-27, the plummeting budgetary trend appears to be dichotomous, in
view of the Committee. Therefore, in order to achieve the targeted
outcome, Ministry of Defence must ensure essential share of budget to
Navy andadditional grants must be provided to them at RE stage or else,
the “targets” should be revised and printed.
Reply of the Government
Additional requirement of funds, as required by the Services, will
be projected at Supplementary/RE stage.
Recommendation (Para No. 14)
The Committee was given to understand that there are 15 different
agencies functioning in maritime domain. Some of these include Ministry
of Shipping, Ministry of Environment and Forests, Coast Guard
Organization, State Governments, which govern variety of activities that
take place in sea waters such as fishing, merchant shipping, offshore

48
explorations etc. therefore, proper coordination is not only desirable but
indispensable for full proof coastal security . During deliberations, the
Committee came to know that though Navy is the nodal agency
responsible for coastal security, not all the agencies working in maritime
domain are directly responsible to report to Navy for their activities. The
only coordination among them is through National Committee for
Strengthening Maritime and Coastal Security (NCSMCS), which came
into picture subsequent to the Mumbai terrorist attacks of 26/11/08. In
any case the Committee believes that the delinquencies and lacunae in
coordination mechanism have to be sorted out for high level proficiency
in coastal security. The Committee would like to be ensured that an
invincible coastal defence network is there in place and the measures
taken in this area should be intimated to the Committee.
Reply of the Government
The IN has been designated as the agency responsible for overall
maritime security, including coastal and offshore security . Initiatives to
strengthen coastal security are being undertaken by a number of agencies
of Central and State Governments. Regular monitoring/review of the
measures is undertaken at Ministry of Defence and National Committee
on Strengthening Maritime and Coastal Security (NCSMCS). A Coastal
Security Bill is also being steered by Ministry of Home Affairs.
2. The measures undertaken by Coast Guard Headquarters (CGHQ)
for Coastal Security includes the Hub and Spoke concept and the Coastal
Surveillance Network. The Coast Guard is following ‘Hub and Spoke’
concept towards coordination of coastal security mechanism wherein ICG
acts as Hub and coordinates with other agencies like Coastal Police,
Customs, CISF, Fisheries and Port authorities. Towards Coastal
Surveillance Network, the chain of static sensors are conceived and
configured to ensure automatic monitoring of all vessels transiting/
operating along the coast are monitored electronically and optically up
to 25 n miles and 15 n miles respectively. Besides this, the joint efforts
of the various stakeholder viz. IN, ICG, Coastal Police and various state
authorities have positively contributed towards strengthening the Coastal
Security apparatus.ICG also undertakes the Training and Community
Interactions Programme for strengthening the Coastal Security.
Recommendation (Para No. 18)
The Committee were given to understand that the expenditure
incurred in Humanitarian Assistance and Disaster Relief (HADR) activities
undertaken by Air Force (Jammu and Kashmir floods and Uttarakhand)
and in general elections 2014 added further pressure on the already

49
stretched resources of Air Force. In this regard, the Committee recommend
that a procedure needs to be evolved to reimburse the revenue expenditure
incurred on HADR missions and other aid to civil authorities, to IAF’s
Budget so that operational preparedness and modernization activities of
the Service are not compromised. The measures initiated thereon be
intimated to the Committee at the earliest.
Reply of the Government
Indian Air Force has been actively involved in all the Humanitarian
Assistance and Disaster Relief (HADR) operations. The bills for recovery
of the expenditure on these HADR operations is raised by Directorate
of Accounts, Air HQ against the Government/State Government based
on the recovery rates notified by Ministry of Defence. The expenditure
incurred during these operations is debited in the relevant Financial Year
estimates and credited to the consolidated fund of India during the year
when these recoveries are made. Further, Services are required to estimate
likely receipts and recoveries each year. These figures are revised during
the Revised Estimate (RE). The gross expenditure ceilings of the Services
are calculated after including the estimated receipts to the net ceiling
approved by the Ministry of Finance. As such, these receipts are available
for spending. However, they are usually received in later years after a
deficiency has been created on account of expenditure on disaster relief
activities.

50
CHAPTER IV
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH
REPLIES OF GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED
BY THE COMMITTEE WHICH REQUIRE REITERATION
AND COMMENTED UPON
Recommendation (Para No. 3)
The Capital Budget projected for the financial year 2015-16 is
Rs. 27,059.12 crore and the allocation made at BE is Rs. 24,080.90 crore.
Out of this, the amount required for the New Schemes is
Rs. 4,091.00 while the allocated amount is Rs. 1,112.78 crore, thus the
amount provided is merely 25% of the amount actually sought. While
keeping in mind the Naval modernization and upgradation plans, the
Committee are dismayed at provision of meagre allocation against new
schemes. This indicates lack of coordination between the Naval
Headquarters and Ministry of Defence. Therefore, it is recommended
that additional funds are provided under this head.
Reply of the Government
The Ministry is constrained by the allocations made by the Ministry
of Finance which are lower than the requirements projected by this
Ministry.
It may be noted that projection of requirement for ‘New Schemes’
includes several cases at varying stages of approval which are unlikely
to reach finality in the current financial year. Nevertheless, all efforts will
be made to ensure that no ‘New Scheme’ approved is delayed for want
of funds. Additional funds will be sought, if required.
(For comments of the Committee please  see Para No. 10
of Chapter-I)
Recommendation (Para No. 6)
The Committee was informed that Emergency Cabinet Committee
report of 1964 had approved a force level of 138 ships and submarines
for Indian Navy. However, since then, maritime security environment of

51
the country has undergone considerable changes and present day maritime
challenges include coastal security in light of terrorism emanating through
sea route, increased threats of piracy and amplified hostilities in Indian
Ocean Region by our neighbouring nations. The Committee was updated
that keeping new challenges in mind, a requirement of 212 vessels and
458 aircraft have been contemplated for Indian Navy in MCPP 2012-27,
i.e., by the end of the 14th Plan period. While examining the subject, the
Committee found that presently, Navy has 140 vessels and 236 aircraft
in their inventory. These sums up to a gap of 72 vessels and 222 aircraft/
helicopters, which are envisaged for induction till 2027 or in next
12 years. Furthermore, the Committee came to know that most of the existing
naval vessels are ageing and would necessitate de-commissioning in next
10-12 years, i.e, by the end of 14th Plan Period (2027). The Committee
is concerned to further find that current six Mine Counter Measure Vessels
(MCMVs) are over 25 years old. Here, the Committee, is further concerned
to find that during last 15 years of timeline, the induction plan for vessels
had progressed at a snail’s pace. Moreover, Navy imperatively require
acquisition of Indian Aircraft Carrier (IAC) which is being built in Cochin
Shipyard, as Viraat is set to decommission, thus leaving Navy completely
dependent on the recently acquired Vikramaditya. Therefore, the
Committee is of the view that the service of INS Viraat may be extended
till IAC is commissioned into the Navy. However, it would be more
desirable to have an additional Aircraft Carrier even if not fully fit rather
than just one Aircraft Carrier. Further, impetus ought to be given at highest
degree to replace ageing platforms, induction of IAC, P-17A Ships and
induction of MCMVs. The Committee be informed about the same.
Reply of the Government
Creation of Naval assets is a time and cost intensive process. Hence,
it is executed on the basis of the Long Term Perspective Plan formulated
by the Navy. The current Maritime Capability Perspective Plan (2012-27),
which is subsumed in the LTIPP (2012-27), is based on a capability
dominant and threat-cum-mission based approach. The induction schedule
promulgated in the MCPP caters for the planned de-commissioning of
existing ships along with the scheduled induction of new platforms.
Therefore, the Force level of 212 ships and 458 aircraft by 2027 is all
encompassing, which includes scheduled induction and planned
decommissioning. As part of the planned force accretion, 48 ships and
submarines are being constructed in Indian shipyards. Cases for induction
of additional assets (ships/ submarines and aircraft), envisaged in MCPP
(2012-27) are being progressed as per timelines.

52
Decommissioning of INS Viraat. INS Viraat was commissioned on
02 May 1987. The ship has been in service for over 27 years in the Indian
Navy. However, the ship had also served the Royal Navy for 27 years,
thereby having been in commissioned service for a cumulative period
of over 54 years. Therefore, further Service Life Extension (SLE) of the
ship considering difficulties in maintenance, obsolescence of equipment,
spares availability and material state of the ship is not considered
financially prudent and a safe option. It is, therefore, intended to
decommission the ship in mid 2016 after participation in International
Fleet Review (IFR-16). Further, INS Vikramaditya along with integral air
component of MiG-29K fighter aircraft is a potent platform, and has
enhanced the operational capability and reach of the IN.
Induction Schedule. All efforts are being put in at the Apex Level
to ensure timely induction of these ships in the IN.
(For comments of the Committee please  see Para No. 16
of Chapter-I)
Recommendation (Para No. 7)
Further research of the Committee revealed that the deficiency is
not only limited to vessels. Even in case of integral helicopters which
are critical for surveillance and stand-off targeting at sea, there is a
deficiency of 61 integral helicopters on existing ships. To tackle the
situation, it was informed that Mid Life Upgrade of Kamov-28 helicopters
and case of Multi Role Helicopter are being progressed. The Committee
feel that case of induction of helicopters and planes should be progressed
without delay under intimation to the Committee.
Reply of the Government
The observations of the Hon’ble Committee with respect to the two
specific ongoing procurement cases are noted.
(For comments of the Committee please  see Para No. 16C
of Chapter-I)
Recommendation (Para No. 31)
After going through the papers submitted by the Ministry, the
Committee noted that from May 2007 to January 2015, a total of 83
accidents have taken place in the Air Force. The Committee were baffled
to find that these accidents have been consistent over the last decade.
The Committee are further perturbed to find that even after formation

53
of so many enquiry committees and their reports, the rate of accidents
have not come down which was 6 in 2013 and 7 in 2014. In most of the
cases of accidents, the cause was either human error or technical defect.
From the above information, it is evident that there is either lacuna in
training that is being imparted to our pilots and support officials or the
systems installed are technically ill-equipped. In both the cases, the onus
lies on the senior level management. It is highly regrettable that
consistently large number of accidents have taken place during past decade
and as such, Ministry of Defence should have taken cognizance of the
matter and made efforts to check the accidents. At this point, the
Committee would like to be informed about the action taken by Ministry
of Defence against the guilty officials and suppliers of faulty system
during the past ten years. Also, it is extremely important that necessary
action be taken to rectify the position so as to ward off accidents and
concrete steps be taken in this regard under intimation to the Committee.
Reply of the Government
IAF conducts Court of Inquiry for all aircraft accidents and take
necessary Disciplinary/Administrative action against the personnel
held responsible for the accident. It may be noted that for the accidents
that occurred during the last 10 financial years (from FY 2005-2006 to
till date) IAF has taken Disciplinary action against 14 personnel and
Administrative action at various levels against 87 personnel. The Indian
Air Force has taken various measures as enumerated below to reduce
aircraft accidents:
(a) Invigoration of Aerospace Safety Organization by constitution
of an Aircraft Accident and Investigation Board (AAIB) at
Air HQ to carry out investigation of all major accidents.
(b) Analytical Studies and Quality Audits of the aircraft fleets
are being carried out to identify vulnerable areas and to
institute remedial measures.
(c) Ornithology Cell has been established at Air HQ, which carries
out bird surveys at flying bases and suggests bird prevention
modules.
(d) Regular visits of all flying bases by senior Aerospace Safety
functionaries of IAF are being undertaken to apprise and
caution the operating units about the causes of the accidents
and to obtain views towards enhancing Aerospace Safety.
Measures like Operational Risk Management (ORM),

54
Crew Resource Management (CRM) and Air Force System of
Error Management (AFSEM) have been implemented to
generate a safe flying culture.
(e) Accident prevention programmes such as Accident Probability
Factors (APF) have been given an added thrust to identify
risk prone/hazardous areas specific to the aircraft fleet and
operational environment to ensure safe practices/procedures.
(f) The use of simulator is an important tool towards accident
prevention. IAF resorts to use of simulators for training of
pilots on various inducted aircraft fleet. In a simulator
a previous situation can be revisited for better appreciation
and actions practised to perfection with no danger to aircrew/
machinery loss. Varying flight conditions and critical
emergencies can be regularly practised. Since there is no
danger to life/loss of machine, assimilation is enhanced. IAF
has inducted various types of simulators in the recent past
and is in the process of acquiring more simulators.
(For comments of the Committee please  see Para No. 32
of Chapter-I)

55
CHAPTER V
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH
GOVERNMENT HAVE FURNISHED INTERIM REPLIES
-Nil-
NEW DELHI; MAJ GEN B C KHANDURI, AVSM (RETD),
08 January, 2016 Chairperson,
18 Pausa, 1937 (Saka) Standing Committee on Defence.

56
APPENDIX I
MINUTES OF THE SEVENTH SITTING OF THE STANDING
COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE (2015-16)
The Committee sat on Friday, the 08th January , 2016 from 1430 hrs.
to 1700 hrs. in Main Committee Room, Parliament House Annexe,
New Delhi.
PRESENT
Maj Gen B C Khanduri AVSM (Retd)— Chairperson
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Dharambir
3. Shri Thupstan Chhewang
4. Col. Sonaram Choudhary (Retd.)
5. Shri Sher Singh Ghubaya
6. Shri G. Hari
7. Shri Ramesh Jigajinagi
8. Shri Tapas Paul
9. Shri A.P . Jithender Reddy
10. Smt. Pratyusha Rajeshwari Singh
Rajya Sabha
11. Shri Anand Sharma
12. Shri Harivansh
13. Shri Vinay Katiyar

57
14. Shri Madhusudan Mistry
15. Smt. Ambika Soni
16. Shri Tarun Vijay
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Smt. Kalpana Sharma — Joint Secretary
2. Smt. J.M. Sinha — Additional Director
3. Shri Rahul Singh — Under Secretary
WITNESSES
Representatives of the Ministry of Defence
1. Shri Ashok Kumar Gupta — Secretary (DP)
2. Smt Surina Rajan — AS (DP)
3. Lt Gen MMS Rai — VCOAS
4. Air Marshal B S Dhanoa — VCAS
5. Lt Gen Ravi Thodge — MGO
6. Lt Gen A K Ahuja — DCIDS (PP&FD)
7. Dr S Christopher — Secretary (R&D)
8. Smt Bharat Khera — JS (NS)
9. Smt Kusum Singh — JS (P&C)
10. Shri K K Pant — JS (Aero)
11. Shri Sanjay Prasad — JS (LS)
12. Shri V Udaya Bhaskar — CMD, BDL
13. Dr T Suvarna Raju — CMD, HAL
14. Shri S K Sharma — CMD, BEL
15. RAdm LV Sarat Babu (Retd) — CMD, HSL
16. Shri P Dwarakanath — CMD, BEML
17. RAdm Shekhar Mital (Retd) — CMD, GSL
18. RAdm A K Verma (Retd) — CMD, GRSE
19. Dr. D K Likhi — CMD, MIDHANI
20. RAdm R K Shrawat (Retd) — CMD, MDL

58
21. AVM BR Krishna — ACAS (Proj.)
22. RAdm Dinesh K Tripathi — ACNS (P&P)
23. Dr. Sudershan Kumar — Chief Controller
(PC and SI)
24. Shri G.S. Mallik — Chief Controller
(R&M and Imp.)
25. Dr. G. Athithan — Chief Controller (SAM)
26. Dr. C.P . Ramanarayanan — Director General (ACE)
27. Dr. J.P . Singh — Director, Parliamentary
Affairs
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members of the
Committee and informed them about the agenda for the sitting.
3. The Committee then took up for consideration the following
draft reports:—
(i) Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/
Recommendations contained in the Second Report of the
Standing Committee on Defence (16th Lok Sabha) on
‘Demands for Grants (2014-15) of the Ministry of Defence on
General Defence Budget (Demand Nos. 20, 21 and 27)’;
(ii) Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/
Recommendations contained in the Sixth Report of the
Standing Committee on Defence (16th Lok Sabha) on
‘Demands for Grants (2015-16) of the Ministry of Defence on
Civil Expenditure of the Ministry of Defence and Capital
Outlay on Defence Services (Demand Nos. 21, 22 and 28)’;
(iii) Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/
Recommendations contained in the Eighth Report of the
Standing Committee on Defence (16th Lok Sabha) on
‘Demands for Grants (2015-16) of the Ministry of Defence on
Navy and Air Force (Demand Nos. 24 and 25)’; and
(iv) Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/
Recommendations contained in the Ninth Report of the
Standing Committee on Defence (16th Lok Sabha) on
‘Demands for Grants (2015-16) of the Ministry of Defence on
Ordnance Factories and Defence Research and Development
Organisation (Demand Nos. 26 and 27)’.

59
4. After deliberations, the Committee adopted the above Reports
without any modifications. The Committee, then, authorised the
Chairperson to present the same to Hon’ble Speaker under Direction
71(A) of Directions by the Speaker and subsequently present the same
during the coming Budget Session.
*** *** *** *** ***
8. A copy of verbatim record of the proceedings has been kept.
The Committee then adjourned.

60
APPENDIX II
ANALYSIS OF THE ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON
THE OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE
EIGHTH REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE (SIXTEENTH LOK
SABHA) ON DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2015-16) OF THE
MINISTRY ON NAVY AND AIR FORCE
(DEMAND NOS. 24 AND 25)
1. Total number of recommendations 33
2. Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted by the
Government (please  see Chapter II):
Para Nos. 2, 9, 10, 15, 16, 17, 20, 21, 22, 23, 24, 25, 26, 27, 28, 29 and 32
Total : 17
Percentage : 52%
3. Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted by the
Government and Commented upon (please  see Chapter II):
Para Nos. 1, 4, 8, 11, 12, 13, 19, 30 and 33
Total : 09
Percentage : 27%
4. Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do not desire
to pursue in view of the replies received from the Government
(please see Chapter III):
Para Nos. 5, 14 and 18
Total : 03
Percentage : 9%
5. Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of
Government have not been accepted by the Committee which
require reiteration and commented upon (please  see Chapter IV):
Para Nos. 3, 6, 7 and 31
Total : 04
Percentage : 12%
6. Recommendations/Observations in respect of which Government
have furnished interim replies (please  see Chapter V):
-Nil-
Total : Nil
Percentage : 0%

“All Parliamentary Publications including DRSC Reports are 
available on sale at the Sales Counter, Reception, Parliament House 
(Tel. Nos. 23034726, 23034495, 23034496), Agents appointed 
by Lok Sabha Secretariat and Publications Division, Ministry 
of Information and Broadcasting, CGO Complex, Lodhi Road, New 
Delhi (Tel. Nos. 24367260, 24365610) and their outlets. The said 
information is available on website ‘www.parliamentofindia.nic.in’.
The Souvenir Items with logo of Parliament are also available at Sales 
Counter, Reception, Parliament House, New Delhi. The Souvenir 
items with Parliament Museum logo are available for sale at Souvenir 
Shop (Tel. No. 23035323), Parliament Museum, Parliament Library 
Building, New Delhi. List of these items are available on the website 
mentioned above.”