 
 
 
47 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE 
(2018-2019) 
 
(SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
MINISTRY OF DEFENCE 
 
 
[ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS CONTAINED IN THE FORTY -FIRST REPORT 
OF STANDING COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE (SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA) ON  
`DEMANDS FOR GRANTS OF THE MINISTRY OF DEFENCE FOR THE YEAR 2018 -19 
ON ARMY, NAVY AND AIR FORCE (DEMAND NO. 20)’] 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
FORTY-SEVENTH REPORT 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
January, 2019/ Pausa, 1940 (Saka) 
 
 


 
 
FORTY-SEVENTH REPORT 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE 
(2018-2019) 
  
(SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
MINISTRY OF DEFENCE 
 
[ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS CONTAINED IN THE FORTY -FIRST REPORT 
OF STANDING COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE (SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA) ON 
`DEMANDS FOR GRANTS OF THE MINISTRY OF DEFENCE FOR THE YEAR 2018 -19 
ON ARMY, NAVY AND AIR FORCE (DEMAND NO. 20)’] 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 7.1.2019 
 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 7.1.2019 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
January, 2019/ Pausa, 1940 (Saka) 
  


 
 
 
CONTENTS 
            
PAGE 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE(2018-19).……………………….....….......... 
.    
INTRODUCTION..…………………………………………………….….…...................     
 
CHAPTER I Report…………………………………………………………………..... 
 
       
 
CHAPTER II a) Recommendations/Observations which have been  
  accepted by the Government …………………………………….. 
 
 b) Recommendations/Observations which have been  
  accepted by the Government and commented upon................. 
 
CHAPTER III Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do not 
 desire to pursue in view of the replies received from the Government . 
 
CHAPTER IV Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies  
 of Government have not been accepted by the Committee  
 which require reiteration and commented upon ………………….….... 
 
CHAPTER V Recommendations/Observations in respect of which  
 Government have furnished interim replies……………………….......... 
 
APPENDICES 
 
     
  I Minutes of the third Sitting of the Standing Committee on 
                  Defence (2018-19) held on 04.01.2019……………..................... 
 
 II    Analysis of the Action Taken by the Government on 
  the recommendations/observations contained in the 
  Forty-first Report of Standing Committee on Defence 
  (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) on `Demands for Grants of the  
  Ministry of Defence for the year 2018-19 on Army, Navy 
  and Air Force (Demand No. 20)............................................ 
  
   
 
  

 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE (2018-19)  
 
 
SHRI KALRAJ MISHRA  -  CHAIRPERSON 
 
Lok Sabha 
 
 
   
* Shri Thupstan Chhewang resigned w.e.f. 13.12.2018  
2. Shri Deepak Adhikari (Dev) 
3. Shri Suresh Chanabasappa Angadi 
4. Shri Shrirang Appa Barne 
5. Col Sona Ram Chaudhary VSM (Retd) 
6. Shri H D Devegowda 
7. Shri Jayadev Galla 
8. Shri Sher Singh Ghubaya 
9. Shri Gaurav Gogoi 
10. Dr Murli Manohar Joshi 
11. Km Shobha Karandlaje 
12. Dr Mriganka Mahato 
13. Shri Rodmal Nagar 
14. Shri Partha Pratim Ray 
15. Shri A P Jithender Reddy 
16. Shri B Senguttuvan 
17. Smt Mala Rajya Laxmi Shah 
18. Shri Dharambir Singh 
19. Smt Pratyusha Rajeshwari Singh 
20. Shri Rakesh Singh 
 
  Rajya Sabha 
 
21. Shri K R Arjunan 
22. Dr Ashok Bajpai 
23. Shri Joginipally Santosh Kumar 
24. Shri Madhusudan Mistry 
25. Shri Soumya R Patnaik 
26. Shri G V L Narasimha Rao 
27. Shri Sanjay Raut 
28. Smt Ambika Soni 
29. Shri Ram Nath Thakur 
30. Lt. Gen. Dr D P Vats 

 
 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1.  Smt. Kalpana Sharma  - Joint Secretary 
2. Shri Srinivasulu Gunda  - Director 
3. Smt. Jyochanamayi Sinha  - Additional Director 
4.  Smt. Rekha Sinha   - Senior Executive Assistant 
 

 
INTRODUCTION 
 
I, the Chairperson of the Standing Committee on Defence (2018 -19), having been authorised by 
the Committee, present this Forty -seventh Report on `Action Taken by the Government on the 
recommendations/observations contained in the Forty -first Report of Standing Committee on 
Defence (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants 2018 -19 of  the Ministry of Defence on 
Army, Navy  and  Air Force (Demand  no. 20)’. 
 
2.       The  Forty -first Report was  presented  to Lok  Sabha and laid  in  Rajya  Sa bha on 
13.03.2018.  It contained 71 Observations/Recommendations. The Ministry  of Defence furnished 
Action  Taken Replies on  all  the Observations/Recommendations in November  2018. 
 
3.  The Report was considered and adopted by the Committee at their Sit ting held on 
04.01.2019. 
 
4.  For facility of reference and convenience, Observations/Recommendations of the 
Committee have been printed in bold letters in the Report. 
 
5. An analysis of Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations 
contained in the Forty-first Report of Standing Committee on Defence (16th Lok Sabha) is given in 
Appendix II. 
 
 
New Delhi;                                                            Kalraj Mishra,   
4  January, 2019                            Chairperson,  
14  Pausa, 1940 (Saka)                                              Standing Committee on Defence 
  

 
REPORT 
CHAPTER – I 
 This report of the Standing Committee on Defence deals with action taken by the 
Government on the observations/ recommendations contained in the Forty -first Report (16th Lok 
Sabha) on ‘ Demands for Grants of the Ministry of Defence for the year 2018 -19 on Army, Navy 
and Air Force (Demand No. 20)’,  which was presented to Lok Sabha and laid in Rajya Sabha on 
13.03.2018.  
    2. The Co mmittee's Forty -first Report (16th Lok Sabha) contained 71 observations/ 
recommendations on the following aspects:- 
Para No./Nos. Subject 
 
                                 ARMY 
1-5 Security of Defence Personnel and Establishments 
6-9 Army Budget 2018-19 
10&11 Modernization 
12 Indigenization  
13 Budget Allocation over the years 
14-20 Bullet Proof Jackets 
21-26 Arms and Ammunition 
27&28 Manpower and Training 
                                 NAVY 
29&30 Budget Estimate 2018-19 
31 Share of Naval Budget  
32-35 Modernization 
36-38 Delay in Projects 
39&40 Force Level 
41 Naval Base 
42&43 Coastal Security 
44 Islands Security 
45 Accidents 
46 Manpower 
47&48 Joint Staff-Budgetary Provisions 2017-18 
                              AIR FORCE 
49-52 Budget 2018-19 
53 Budget Review 
54 Modernization 
55-57 Force Level 
58-62 Trainer Aircraft 
63&64 Transport Planes and Helicopters 
65&66 Accidents 
67 Modernisation of Air Fields 
68&69 Manpower and Training 
70&71 Pilot-Cockpit Ratio 
 3.    Action Taken Replies have been received from the Government in respect of all the 
recommendations/observations contained in the Report.  The replies have been examined and the 
same have been categorised as follows:- 

 
(i)  (a)  Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted by the  Government 
(please see Chapter II A) : 
Para Nos.   4, 5, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18 , 20, 21, 22, 23,  24,  25,  26, 28,  36, 37, 38, 41, 42, 
44, 45, 46,  47, 48, 55, 56, 57, 65, 66, 67, 69,  70 &  71 
         (34 Recommendations) 
(b) Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted by the  Government  and 
commented upon (please see Chapter II B): 
 Para Nos.  6, 7, 8 & 9   
        (04 recommendations) 
(ii) Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do not desire to pursue  in view of 
the replies received from the Government (please see Chapter III): 
 Para Nos. 12, 13, 19, 39, 40 & 68 
           (06 Recommendations) 
(iii) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of Government  have not 
been accepted by the Committee which require reiteration and  commented upon (please see 
Chapter IV): 
 Para Nos.1, 2, 3, 10, 11, 27,  32-35, 58-62 ,  63 & 64 
         (17 Recommendations) 
                           
(iv) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which Government have furnished interim 
replies (please see Chapter V): 
   
 Para No.  29, 30, 31, 43, 49-52, 53 & 54        
                    (10 Recommendation) 
4. The Committee desire that the Ministry’s response to their comments made in 
Chapter I of this Report and  final replies to the recommendations/ Observations for which 
only interim replies have been given by the Government  to be furnished to them at the 
earliest and in any case not later than six months of the presentation of this Report.  
 
  A. SECURITY OF DEFENCE PERSONNEL AND ESTABLISHMENTS 
 
Recommendation (Para Nos. 1, 2 & 3) 
 
5. The Committee had, in their Forty-first Report recommended as under:- 
"The Committee, in their Twenty -ninth Report (16thLok Sabha), had expressed concern on 
the frequent terror attacks taking place on military bases, Defence establishments, critical 
facilities and even family quarters of soldiers. The Committee have been unanimou s in 
condemning such acts of cowardice and desired that safety of our soldiers along with that of 
their families must be of prime concern, without any compromise. The Committee are, 
however, perturbed to find that such incidences have become a recurring af fair. The recent 
terror attack on Sunjuwan Army Camp, Kashmir on 10 th February2018 wherein families of 
soldiers were targeted is a fresh reminder that substantial efforts need to be made on the part 
of the Government. This is the latest in a series of atta cks on military installations witnessed 

 
over the last few years. What is particularly worrisome in this regard is the repeated success 
of terrorists in infiltrating high -security military complexes. The Sunjuwan attack exposes the 
vulnerabilities in ‘perim eter security’ and the scant progress made in improving the security 
protocols since the attack on the Pathankot Air Force station in January 2016. Following the 
Pathankot incident, there have been major attacks in Uri, Handwara, Nagrota and Panzgam, 
all of which involved a substantial number of casualties. 
 On the issue of terrorist attack on Defence establishments, the Committee would like to point 
out that after the attack on the Pathankot air base, the Defence Ministry had appointed a 
Committee headed by Lieutenant General Phillip Campose, the then Vice Chief of Army Staff 
for reviewing the security set -up at the military bases and to suggest ways of improvement. 
The Committee, which submitted its Report to the then Defence Minister (in May 2016), had 
found gaping holes in the security set up at many installations. These should have been 
given top priority for being addressed. However, it took a series of attacks and numerous 
casualties for raising the brows and delegation of power to the Vice Chief (VCOA S) to spend 
Rs.14,097 crore for strengthening ‘perimeter security’. But for the attack, it's quite possible 
that funds for strengthening "perimeter security" may not have been sanctioned for quite 
some time to come. 
  The Committee cannot help expressing u nhappiness with the state of affairs in the Ministry 
with regard to existing scenario of ‘perimeter security’ of defence establishments and 
installations, including offshore establishments. The Sunjuwan attack underscores the need 
for speedy measures, whic h go beyond ‘inquiries’ and ‘policy announcements’, so as to 
overhaul the security system. The implementation needs to be broad -based, and go beyond 
‘ad-hoc measures’. It must be borne in mind that a successful attack does not necessarily 
mean that the sol dier on the ground is lax in performing his duties. Many bases along the 
border are located in tough terrain, and are in close proximity to civilian dwellings. This 
demands care from the soldier for avoiding civilian casualties in the event of a cross fire . For 
a country that takes pride in its modern, technologically advanced military, India continues to 
rely heavily on putting more ‘soldiers on the ground. 
In this backdrop, the Committee observe that Defence mechanisms have to be modified in 
accordance wi th the changing dynamics of threat perception. Equipping our soldiers with 
state-of-the-art weapons for retaliating any attack is a necessity. Over and above this, it is 
inevitable to equip our Defence establishments with latest global technologies of surv eillance 
and tracking systems. Promptness in monitoring and precision in detection of potential threat 
elements using software-based intelligence inputs will help in tracking the insurgent elements 
well in advance. In this manner, the trouble can be identi fied and nipped in the bud before it 
actually causes any damage. For this purpose, the Ministry of Defence needs to take 
measures for introducing the latest and best available surveillance technologies. In the 
current scenario, mere dependence on manual su rveillance will definitely not suffice. 
Therefore, along with the installation of the requisite equipments, commensurate emphasis 
should be laid upon intellectual inputs and technology driven software based detection 
practices. Preventing terrorists from s coring a strike being the best line of Defence, it is time 
the Defence Ministry adopts a holistic approach, by making sure that the soldier is fully 
backed by technology and calibrated security drills." 
6. The Ministry in its Action Taken Reply has stated as under: 
"Government has issued broad guidelines for Security of Defence Installations on 28/11/2016 
to the Defence Services. In compliance to the said Guidelines, the Defence Services have 
taken a number of actions including risk categorisation of milita ry bases; appraisal and up 
gradation of intelligence gathering capabilities; strengthening and streamlining of the 
response mechanism; Unmanned Aerial Vehicles (UAVs); periodic security audit of all 
military installations etc. 

 
Government has sanctioned Rs.  1487.27 crore for upgradation of security infrastructure of 
locations identified as initial priority. Government has also sanctioned additional Rs. 100 
crore for execution of projects under operational works in vulnerable stations." 
Indian Army has constructed an Anti Infiltration Obstacle System (AIOS) along the Line of 
Control (LC) and International Border (IB) in Jammu & Kashmir, under its operational control. 
Radars, Sensors, Thermal Imagers etc. along with surveillance have been incorporated on 
this fence to detect and intercept infiltration by terrorists. AIOS is further strengthened by 
deployment of troops and construction of defence works based on threat perception for an 
effective multi -tiered counter infiltration grid. Government is taking m easures to ensure 
modernization of Indian Defence Forces to keep them in a state of readiness to meet 
operational and security challenges. This is being achieved by inducting new equipment, 
technologically upgrading existing equipment and systems, training etc." 
 
7.  In view of the frequent terror attacks that took place on military bases, Defence 
establishments, critical facilities and even family quarters of soldiers, the Committee, in 
their report had emphasized the need for substantial efforts on the pa rt of the Government 
to prevent the recurrence of such attacks.  The Ministry in its action taken reply stated that 
Government had  issued broad guidelines for Security of Defence Installations  and in 
compliance of  the said Guidelines, the Defence Servic es have taken a number of actions 
including risk categorization of military bases; appraisal and up gradation of intelligence 
gathering capabilities; strengthening and streamlining of the response mechanism; 
Unmanned Aerial Vehicles (UAVs); periodic securi ty audit of all military installations, etc.   
The Government has also stated that Rs. 1487 crore was allocated for upgrading of 
security infrastructure at identified stations and Rs. 100 crore for operational works in 
vulnerable stations.   
     While taking note of the reply of the Government, the Committee observe that even after 
issuance of the afore mentioned  guidelines for security of Defence Installations  terror 
attacks took place in  Nagrota, Handwara, Sunjuwan ( Army bases / installations), 
Panzygam ( CRPF base/camp), etc  which in turn shows the  need for effective 
implementation of the guidelines. Further, the funds allocated for strengthening the 
security at military installations should be utilized at the earliest to prevent recurrence of 
such attacks.  
     The Committee had also desired to equip our Defence establishments with latest global 
technologies of surveillance and tracking system for preventing the terrorists along with 
equipping the soldiers with state -of-the-art weapons for retalia ting the attack. The MoD in 
its action taken  reply informed that  an Anti Infiltration Obstacle System (AIOS) has been 
constructed by Indian Army along the Line of Control and International Border in Jammu 
and Kashmir under its operational control. The Co mmittee feel that such a system has to 
be developed at all sensitive locations including those which are not in direct control of 

 
Army where Army can play the role of nodal agency. A coordinated system has to be put in 
place because a terrorist entering from any area is a potential threat of equivalent intensity. 
The Committee, therefore, while reiterating their recommendation suggest that such 
systems be put in place in all the military installations.    
                                             B.    ARMY BUDGET 2018-19 
                                      
Recommendation (Para Nos. 6-9) 
 
8. The Committee had, in their forty first Report recommended as under: 
 "The Budgetary Grant to Army for the Financial Year (FY) 2017 -18 is a part of the Grant No. 
20 (Defence Services - Revenue).  In the Budget Estimates (BE) 2018 -19, the total projection 
made by Army (including Revenue and Capital Budget) is Rs.1,96,387.36 crore. The 
allocation made against this projection is Rs.1,53,875.22 crore. This amounts to a shortfall of 
Rs. 42,512.14 crore or a ‘budget deficit’ of nearly 23 per cent vis -à-vis the projection. Keeping 
in view the increasing threat perception, which inc ludes various occurrences of external strife 
and internal dissidence such as Doklam, increased external activities in Tibet over a year, 
rampant cross border firing, militant activities etc. the current budget is not supportive to the 
inevitable needs of t he Army. Considering the facts of the matter, the Committee are of the 
view that providing adequate budgetary support is unavoidable. 
   Further, on this count, a representative of the Army submitted while deposing before the 
Committee that taking into con sideration, the possibility of a ‘two front war’, it is of utmost 
importance to remain conscious and pay due attention to modernization and bridging the 
deficiencies. Much to the distress of the Committee, however, they have been briefed that, 
over the years, the Indian Army has accumulated a substantial deficiency of weapons, stores 
and ammunition. This is because adequate attention has been lacking both in terms of policy 
and budget for modernizing the aging armory.  
   However, what has been added as som e sort of relief to the Committee, is the deposition of 
the representatives of the Army stating that a new Defence procurement policy for 
streamlining the procedures, delegation of emergency procurement powers to the Vice Chief, 
as also for purchasing ammu nition, armaments, and spares, which enable for ‘10 days of 
intensive war’{10 (I)} are some of the steps that have been taken recently. Besides this, a 
series of systems and structural reforms undertaken in consultation with the Ministry of 
Defence have also empowered the Army in utilizing the allocation fully. These positives apart, 
the Committee cannot help noting the candid submission made by the representative of the 
Army, that the increase in the BE, 2018 barely accounts for the inflation and does not even 
cater for the increased tax burden. 
   With regard to the Revenue part of the Budget, Army had made a projection of Rs.1,40,515 
crore while the allocation made is merely to the tune of Rs. 1,28,164 crore. In RE 2017 -18, 
Army was allocated a fund of Rs.1,22,628 crore. Hence, the increase in budget is to the extent 
that of Rs.5,536 crore or 4.51%.The Committee have been given to understand that bulk of 
this 4.5% increase in the revenue allocation would go towards the hike in pay on account of 
the 7th Pay Commission. There has been an increase o f Rs. 4,427 crore (4.76%) in salary 
expenditure on account of the Pay Commission. The balance amounts to an increase of just 
over three per cent, which is not even on par with the trend of inflation. 
    The Committee view that the allocation under Operati ons and Maintenance is needed to 
meet basic sustenance requirements. While examining the Demands for Grants of the Ministry 
of Defence, the Committee found that there has been significant shortfall in budget allocation 

 
for operations and maintenance. Under this head, against a projection of Rs. 40,073 crore, an 
allocation of Rs. 30,791 crore has been made. Hence, Shortfall is to the extent of Rs. 9,282 
crore. The increase in allocation for operations and maintenance over RE 2017 -18 is Rs. 
1,109 crore (3.73% ) which does even match the general level of inflation. The various 
components of significance under this head of account include, Transportation, Works, 
Supplies, Ordnance Stores and the Rashtriya Rifles. There is a noticeable budget deficit 
under all the se heads of accounts. In transportation, against a projection of Rs. 4,156 crore, 
the allocation is Rs. 3,267 crore, thus resulting into a shortfall of Rs. 889 crore For Works, 
against a projection of Rs. 7,877 crore, allocation is Rs. 6,464 crore, which a mounts to a 
shortfall of Rs. 1,413 crore. Similarly, for Stores, there is a budget shortfall of Rs. 6,844 crore 
as the projection is Rs. 25,181 crore and allocation is Rs.18,337 crore. Under the head, 
Supplies, the allocation in BE 2018 -19 is Rs. 6,324 cro re against a projection of Rs.7,743 
crore, which has resulted in a shortfall of Rs. 1,419 crore. 
     Additionally, the Committee found that due to introduction of GST and the closure of 
Military Farms, an amount of Rs. 545 crore for rations and Rs.874 cro re for FOL, would be 
required. Also, there is a shortfall of Rs.136 crore in the allocation of funds for Rashtriya 
Rifles. Therefore, an additional requirement of Rs. 9,282 crore is needed to meet the 
mandatory sustenance requirements under Transportation (Rs. 889 crore), Works (Rs. 1,413 
crore), Supplies (Rs. 1,419 crore), Ordnance Stores (Rs. 5,425 crore) and Rashtriya Rifles 
(Rs. 136 crore).   
  In the view of the Committee, the budget for operations and maintenance is a critical 
component for ensuring operational preparedness at any given point of time. Problems on this 
count will not only affect the serviceability of the equipment that the Army is holding, but may 
lead to legal issues that may arise on account of not making payments in time. Therefore, the 
Committee desire that the essential budgetary support to Army be provided for making up the 
shortfall of Rs.9,282 crore under Revenue Head, by way of providing additional grants during 
the financial year, 2018-19.   
 The Committee are also given to und erstand that additional burden of Rs. 5,000 crore will be 
levied upon Army because of the new taxation laws, in the form of GST. This has not been 
accounted for in the current year’s Budget. The Committee, therefore, desire that reasonability 
be shown in t he budget for the Army, by way of providing for the additional burden to the 
extent of Rs. 5000 crore due to the changes in the taxation laws. The Committee desire to be 
apprised of the measures taken in this direction." 
9. The Ministry in its Action Taken Reply has stated as under: 
"This Ministry had forwarded the projected requirements made by the Services for FY 2018-19 
to M/o Finance amounting to Rs. 2,23,648.04 crore under Revenue head (Rs. 1,43,488.02 
crore under Salary and Rs. 80,160.02 crore under N on-Salary).  Out of these projections, 
Army had projected an amount of Rs. 1,49,942.81 crore under Revenue head (which included 
Salary component of Rs. 1,01,578.90 crore and Non -salary component of Rs. 48,363.91 
crore).  In response, M/o Finance conveyed c eiling of Rs. 1,85,323.91 crore (Rs. 1,38,983.57 
crore - Salary and Rs. 46,339.62 crore - Non-Salary) under Revenue head of Defence 
Services for 2018 -19, which was  Rs. 38,324.85 crore lesser than projected amount.  Since 
Ministry of Finance conveyed reduc ed allocation than projected amount, accordingly an 
amount of Rs. 1,25,497.70 crore was allocated under Revenue Head to Army (Rs. 97,372.21 
crore under Salary and Rs. 28,125.49 crore under Non-Salary).    
 
 It may be relevant to point out that this Ministr y is bound by the budgetary ceilings 
conveyed by M/o Finance. The reduced allocations were passed on uniformly among all the 
Services. The issue of additional burden of tax was highlighted during discussion on RE/BE 
with MoF.  All efforts will also be made  to ensure that critical requirements of Defence 
Services are met within allocated budget. The Committee may be assured that projections / 

 
requirements of Army will be forwarded to Ministry of Finance for favourable consideration at 
Supplementary/RE stage." 
 
10. Referring to the budgetary allocations for the Services, the Committee had observed 
that during the year 2018 -19, against the projection of RS. 1,96,387,36 crore  the allocation 
was Rs. 1,53,875.22 crore and the allocation  was not commensurate with the  requirements 
of funds for facing increasing threat perception and the need for modernization programme 
of the Army to face ‘two front war’. With regard to Revenue Budget of Army, the Committee 
had noted that against a projection of Rs. 1,40,515 crore   the allocation was only Rs. 
1,28,164 crore which  represents an increase of Rs. 5536 crore vis-a-vis RE  for 2017 -18  at 
Rs.1,22,628 crore. This meager hike in allocation, after accounting for increase in salary 
expenditure at Rs.4427 crore, does not eve n offset the increase in rate of inflation. Further 
additional burden of Rs.5000 crore due to GST is also not factored into while allocating 
funds for 2018-19.  The Ministry in their Action Taken Replies has submitted that it is bound 
by the budgetary ceiling imposed by the Ministry of Finance.   Such meager allocations, the 
Committee believe, may deprive the Army of the much needed funds for other important 
plans which are funded from revenue expenditure. The Committee, therefore, reiterating 
their earlier recommendation, desire that allocation of funds may be increased for the said 
purpose.    
                                                       C. MODERNIZATION OF  ARMY  
                                                   Recommendation (Para Nos.  10-11) 
 
11. The Committee had, in their forty first report recommended as under: 
"During the course of the deliberations on Demands -for-Grants, the Committee learnt that any 
modern Armed Forces should have one -third of its equipment in the vintage category, one -
third in the current category and one-third in the state of the art category. However, the current 
position in the Indian Army reveals that 68 per cent of  equipment is of vintage category, just 
about 24 per cent of the current category, and only eight per cent of the state -of-the-art 
category. To be prepared for the scenario of a two front war, the huge deficiencies and 
obsolescence of weapons, stores and ammunition existin g in Indian Army, does not auger 
well. It is, therefore, important to channelize sufficient budget towards modernising the aging 
armoury and filling up the gaps. However, the allocation for modernization in this year's 
budget has a different story to tell. 
 The Committee note that allocation of Rs. 21,338 crore for modernisation is insufficient even 
to cater to committed payments to the extent of Rs.29,033 crore, earmarked for 125 on -going 
schemes, emergency procurement of armaments and weaponry for 10 days  of intense war 
{10(I)} and other Director General Ordnance Factories requirements.   
  Further, the Committee have been made to realize that committed liabilities of 2017 will also 
get passed on to 2018, thereby accentuating the situation further. Therefo re, liquidation of the 
committed liabilities will hardly leave any funds for new schemes in 2018 -19.The Committee 
feel agonised by the current state of affairs with regard to financial provisions made towards 

 
the requirement of modernization of Army and de sire that requisite budgetary support be 
given in this regard.   
  Furthermore, on this count, the Committee learnt that from the total Budget, 63 per cent goes 
towards paying salaries of Army personnel. The normal maintenance and operational 
requirements works out to 20 per cent and infrastructure takes around three per cent. Hence, 
the resources available for modernization amount to a mere 14 per cent of the allocation, 
which is grossly inadequate. According to the submission made by a representative of t he 
Army, the budget for modernization has to be anything between 22 to 25 per cent of the 
overall budget, lest the Army is found to be wanting. With a view to equipping the Army to 
meet any eventuality, the Committee wish that the requisite budgetary provi sion is made for 
the specific purpose of modernization." 
12. The Ministry in its Action Taken Reply has stated as under: 
"This Ministry had forwarded the projected requirements made by the Services amounting to 
Rs. 1,72,203.30 Crore under Capital Budget for FY 2018 -19 to M/o Finance for favourable 
consideration. The said projected amount included amount of Rs. 1,41,387.66 crore for 
Capital Acquisition (Modernization) of which Army had projected an amount of Rs. 37,121.54 
crore. In response, M/o Finance conveyed ceiling of Rs. 93,982.13 crore under Capital Budget 
which was Rs. 78,221.17 crore less than projected requirement.  The reduced allocations 
were passed on uniformly among all the Services including Army.  Against the projected 
requirement, Army was allocated Rs. 21,338.21 cr. under Capital Acquisition budget.   
 
 The requirement of further allocation of funds will be ta ken up at the time of Supplementary/ 
RE stage with Ministry of Finance." 
  
13. The Committee referring to the funds allocated for modernization at Rs. 21,338 crore 
felt that the amount  is insufficient  even to cater to Committed payments  to the extent of  
Rs.29,033 crore, earmarked for 125 on -going schemes, emergency procurement of 
armaments and weaponry for 10 days of intense war {10(I)} and other Director General 
Ordnance Factories’ requirements. The Committee had further observed that the 
Committed liab ilities of 2017 will also get passed on to 2018, thereby accentuating the 
situation further. The Ministry in its action taken reply merely stated that the reduced 
allocations vis-a-vis its projections   were passed uniformly among all the services 
including army.   The Committee are of opinion that the allocation may be may be 
increased at least to cover Committed Liabilities as any default in payment of contractual 
obligations will not send right signal to the future vendors. The Committee, therefore 
reiterate their recommendation made in this regard.    
D.MANPOWER AND TRAINING 
Recommendation (Para No. 27) 
 
14.The Committee had, in their forty first report recommended as under: 
"The Committee, while deliberating on the Demands for Grants 2018 -19, have noted that the 
Army is facing shortage of manpower. In case of officers, the sanctioned strength is 49,932 
whereas the held strength is 42,253. With regard to JCOs/ORs the existing strength is 

 
11,94,864 against an authorised strength of 12,15,049. Further, the Committee have found 
that the recruitment in the Armed Forces is a continuous process and the Government has 
taken a number of measures to reduce the shortages. These include, sustained image 
projection, participation in career fairs and exhibitions and publicity campaign to create 
awareness among the youth on the advantages of taking up a challenging and satisfying 
career. Further, Government has taken various steps to make job s in armed forces attractive, 
including by way of improvement in promotion prospects. Recruitment of Personnel Below 
Officers Ranks (PBORs) in Army is carried out through Open Rally System being conducted 
regularly throughout the country. Efforts are made to cover the entire country including remote 
and tribal areas. The Committee wish to be apprised of the outcome achieved on account of 
implementation of various measures as mentioned above.  
15.. The Ministry in its Action Taken Reply has stated as under: 
 "Shortage of Officers: The shortage of Officers and Junior Commissioned Officer/Other 
Ranks in the Indian Army is as under:- 
Sl.No. Category Authorised 
Strength 
Held 
Strength 
Deficiency/Surplus 
1 Officers (excluding 
AMC, ADC & MNS) 
49,933 42,253 (-) 7,680 (15.38%) 
2 Officers (AMC & 
ADC) 
5,972 5,855 (-) 117 (1.96%) 
3 MNS 
 
4,389 3,743 (-) 646 (14.72%) 
 Total Officers 
(including AMC/ADC 
& MNS) 
60,294 51,851 (-) 8,443 (14%) 
4 JCOs/ORs 12,16,247 11.94,864* (-) 21,383 (1.76%) 
 * Excluding 2198 APS Non Regular Junior Commissioned Officers/Other Ranks 
 Certain measures to make up the shortage of officers is as under:- 
Present deficiency in officer cadre of Indian Army stands at approximate 14% and is 
planned to be reduced at the rate of 1% per year. 
 
Moreover, shortage of officers in Indian Army is mainly due to deficiency in intake of 
support cadre. The intake of support cadre has been lower than allocated vacancies. In 
order to ensure enhanced induction of Support Cadre, the proposal of making Servic e 
Selection Commission attractive is being considered.  
 
In addition, the following steps have been taken to make Army as an attractive option:- 
 
Image Projection Campaign. A number of Recruiting Campaigns and advertisement / 
hoardings have been launched by the Recuriting Directorate to attract youth to join the 
Army. Process has been intiated to further improve and modify the Image Projection 
Campaign to attract the youth of today in the changing socio-economic environment.  
 
Enhanced Physical Interaction with Target Audience . Enhanced physical interaction with 
target audience has been undertaken in which officers from Recruiting Directorate and 
teams from Command Headquarter s visit various Universities and Colleges. Video films on 
‘Army as a Career’ and publicity material have been prepared and circulated to various 
schools and colleges through these teams. In addition, NCC units and Recuriting 
Organisations have been incorporated to deliver motivation talks in educational institutions.  
 

 
Interactive Web Site of Recuriting Directorate . The new website of Recruiting Directorate 
(www.joinindianarmy.nic.in) has been launched. It gives all the information required by a 
candidate to become an officer. It enables candidate to know his/her eligibility based on the 
age and educational qualifications.  
Shortage of Junior Commissioned Officers/Other Ranks . The existing deficiency is nominal 
and will be met by passing out of recruits undergoing training as trained soldiers." 
16. While taking note of the numerous measures being taken towards mitigation of 
manpower shortage, the Committee cannot help pointing out that reduction at the rate of 
1% per year to mitigate the shortage of 14% takes  14 years to do away with the shortage. 
This, the Committee are of the view appears to be a tardy process and hence requires a 
review. The concrete measures initiated may be brought to the knowledge of the 
Committee.   
 E. SHARE OF NAVAL BUDGET   
Recommendation ( Para nos.32-35) 
  
17.    The Committee in their forty- first report observed and recommended as follows:  
  “The Committee also note that the major part of the modernisation budget of the Service 
comes from the Capital component. For BE 2018-19, while the Navy made a projection of  Rs. 
33458.38 crore for the capital segment, the allocation made has been Rs. 20 003.71 crore. 
Furthermore, in the case of committed Liabilities, the projection was Rs. 25106.74 crore 
whereas the allocation is to the extent of  Rs. 15083.00 crore.  This amounts to a huge 
shortfall of almost 40 per cent of the budget projected as required.  
 
   In this regard, the representative of the Navy, while deposing, confided to the Committee 
that this has been the case for the last three financial years. There has always been disparity 
over the last three financial years in the modernization Budg et vis-à-vis committed liabilities. 
The Committee have also learnt that the budget is managed through the financial year by 
deferring certain committed liability payments so that a certain amount can be earmarked for 
the purpose of modernization and implementation of new schemes. 
 
   While going through the information submitted by the Ministry, the Committee have also 
noted that the percentage share of capital segment of Naval Budget to the total defence 
budget has declined from 12.81 per cent in the year 2012-13 to 7.46 per cent in the year 
2017-18. This data, by itself is reflective of the unsympathetic attitude towards the 
modernization drive of the Naval Forces. 
 
  The Committee, while taking note of the grossly dismal scenario, cannot also help pointin g 
out that this may lead to delay in induction of ‘critical capabilities’ and resultant cost overruns. 
A ‘budget deficit’ by nearly 40% will indeed have a cascading impact on the operational 
preparedness and technological upgradation of the Navy. This will  also possibly impact the 
progress of infrastructure projects and efforts to mitigate shortage of accommodation for the 
naval personnel.  Therefore, it is expected that necessary funds for modernization of the 
Indian Navy are channelized and the Committee informed of the details thereof.  
  In this connection, a representative of the Navy also intimated the Committee of the 
possibility of the budgetary hampering the modernization work by confiding that the Naval ship 
building programmes do not run on time, and the stage wise payments get deferred at times. 
Therefore, on occasions, the committed liabilities get deferred and are carried over to the next 
financial year.  

 
 
 The Committee feel aghast to note that there appears to be an element of complacency with  
regard to ‘acquisition projects’, and shortfall, and delays in meeting the payment obligations 
are responsible for the same. All the Departments from the Headquarters to the Shipyards 
appear to be habituated to delays. Also, this has become a regular feat ure of the 
manufacturing and induction plan. The system, therefore, merits a revisit, and improvisation. 
Thus, a concrete plan of budgeting and expenditure needs to be put in place. In case, the 
Navy has certain commitments of payments for procurement, the se should be abided with 
stringently. Similarly, if companies delay deliveries, these should be taken up with due 
concern so that the Force does not suffer.” 
 
18.   The Committee in its action taken reply submitted as under:  
 
   “Indian Navy has optimally utilised the allocation under the Capital Budget. The budgetary 
outgo under Modernisation Heads is closely monitored at IHQ MoD(N). Outgo under 
committed Liabilities is linked to delivery/ achievement of milestone/ stage payment, etc. Due 
to the complex a nd dynamic nature of shipbuilding, slippages are common. However, the 
slippages under committed liabilities are more than offset by progress of New Schemes. 
Indian Navy, thus, has a mitigation strategy to cater for any slippage and the Capital Budget is 
being fully utilised so as to ensure that the modernisation plans are on track.” 
 
 19.    Referring to the lower allocations at Rs.15083 Crore for Committed liabilities vis-a- vis 
projections of Rs. 25106.74 crore, for the year 2018 -19 (BE)  for Indian Navy (IN) the 
Committee observed that allocation amounts to a shortfall of 40% of the  projection . 
Further, the representatives of M/o Defence also confided to the Committee that the 
shortfall in allocations vis-a-vis the projections in respect of Committed liabilities has been 
there for the last three financial years. While expressing con cern at the steep cuts in 
allocations for Committed liabilities, which   may have an adverse impact on the 
modernisation and acquisition plans of IN resulting in consequent cost escalation,   the 
Committee had  recommended for suitable measures to address the issue.  The Ministry in 
its action taken reply inter- alia stated that outgo under committed liabilities is linked to 
delivery/ achievement of milestone/ stage payment, etc and due to the complex and 
dynamic nature of shipbuilding, slippages are common . However, it has stated that the 
slippages under committed liabilities are more than offset by progress of New Schemes. 
   The Committee are of the view that shortfall in allocations in respect of committed 
liabilities may have led to either default or po stponement of payment of committed 
liabilities during the past few years.  This Committee believe, as mentioned elsewhere in 
the report,  such default/ postponement do not send the right signal to the future vendors. 
The Committee also would like to be app rised of the penalties, if any paid/ liable to be paid, 
to the contractors/ suppliers of goods and services for defaulting or deferring contractual 
payment/Committed liabilities.  In view of the foregoing, while reiterating their 
recommendation, the Commit tee suggest that the sufficient allocations may be made to 
ensure payment of contractual payment obligations.   

 
  
F. TRAINER AIRCRAFT  
Recommendation (Para No. 58-62) 
 
20. The Committee had, in their forty first Report, recommended as under: 
“With regard to the number of authorised trainer aircraft/simulators and their existing 
strength, the Committee have been informed that the Trainer Aircraft held by IAF currently 
include Basic Trainer Aircraft (BTA), Intermediate Jet Trainer (IJT) and Advanced Jet Trainer 
(AJT). The existing strength of trainer aircraft is 310 as against the sanctioned strength of 
432. Simulators have also been provided for each type of aircraft. The procurement of 
simulators is built into the contracts of all aircraft and the IAF is no w undertaking the 
procurement accordingly. 
 
  As regards  the basic trainer, the Committee have been informed by Ministry of Defence 
that IAF has a requirement of 183 Basic Trainer Aircraft (BTA). At present, IAF has 75 PC -7 
Mk-II BTA. Case for procurement of additional 38 PC -7 Mk-II aircraft is being progressed. 
The remaining 70 Basic Training Aircraft are to be manufactured by HAL under 'Make in 
India' Project. The Committee desire that HAL delivers these basic trainers within the 
stipulated time frame. 
 
With regard to the Intermediate Jet Trainer, the Committee have been apprised that the 
Kiran (IJT) aircraft have already started retiring and are planned to be replaced by the HAL 
built IJT. However, in view of the imminent retirement of existing trainer ai rcraft (Kiran) and 
delay in progress of IJT Design & Developmental (D&D) activities, Air HQ has studied the 
feasibility of conducting ‘Two Aircraft Type Flying Training pattern’ instead of the normally 
followed ‘Three Aircraft Type Flying Training pattern’ . As per the information furnished the 
‘Two Aircraft Type Flying Training pattern’ is being implemented successfully. 
 
The Committee are perturbed to note that due to non -availability of IJT and failure on the 
part of HAL to deliver the same, despite being  in the process since 1999, the Indian Air 
Force has had to modify their training programme from a ‘three level approach’ to two levels. 
This is indicative of an unsavory state of affairs. Training is a very critical component from 
the point of view of cap acity building of Air Force. It involves lives of our valuable personnel 
and any lacuna, on this front can possibly result into fatalities. Therefore, any delinquencies 
in this regard cannot be acceptable. Modification of the training pattern appears to be  an 
effort to conceal the factual position of non-availability of IJTs. 
 
Even in case of two aircraft type flying pattern, only 75 basic trainers are available as against 
the sanctioned strength of 183 aircraft. On this front, the Committee fail to underst and as to 
how, the IAF will manage to continue with the two level training pattern with the scarcity of 
first level trainer aircraft being to the extent of 60 per cent. While taking note of the dismal 
scenario, the Committee desire that the Ministry of Def ence undertake earnest efforts 
towards bridging the gaps in availability of trainer aircraft with the IAF. The Committee desire 
to be kept informed of the progress made in this regard.” 
 
21. The Ministry in its action taken reply submitted as follows: 
  “Simulators are being supplied as per requirement along with the various Trainer Aircraft. 
Against the recent contract for manufacture and supply of 40 Hawk aircraft to IAF and 17 to 
Navy, one each simulator/training aid comprising of Computer Aided Learning  system 
(CALS), Cockpit Procedure Training (CPT), Avionics Part Task Trainer (APTT) and Flight 
Training Device (FTD) have been supplied to IAF and Navy. 

 
 
  HAL has undertaken the Design and Development of HTT 40 Basic Trainer Aircraft, 
with internal funds to meet the requirement of ab initio trainer for IAF. 
 
 The prototype aircraft, PT-1 had its first flight on 31 st May 2016. Presently there are two 
prototypes undergoing flight testing and have together completed around 125 flights. 
 
 The aircraft has demonstrated compliance to all major PSQR requirements and is 
gearing up for the critical stall and spin trials to commence shortly. 
 
 The certification of the aircraft is planned in Dec 2018. 
 
 DAC has approved acquisition of 70 HTT -40 aircraft and series production will 
commence post signing of contract with MoD/IAFand is planned to complete over a 
period of 5 years. 
 
  Feasibility of conducting ‘Two Aircraft type flying training pattern’ instead of ‘Three Aircraft 
type flying training pattern’ was a pilot  project started by IAF to study its feasibility.  The 
project was planned for three years.  Presently, this has been stopped and the ‘Three 
Aircraft type flying training pattern’ is being followed.  As of now Stage -II (F) training is being 
conducted on Kiran Mk I/IA to ensure maximum utilization of the available Kiran aircraft. 
 
  The D&D project for the IJT aircraft was sanctioned by Government of India in 1999. 
Contract was signed with HAL to supply 12 Limited Series Production (LSP) aircraft (in 
2005) a nd 73 Series Production (SP) aircraft (in 2010). However, D&D is yet to be 
completed due to HAL’s inability to resolve the critical design issues related to Spin/ Stall 
characteristics of IJT. A case is being taken up for foreclosure of the program. 
 
  Additionally, HAL is undertaking Design & Development of Basic Trainer Aircraft HTT -40, 
wherein HAL has manufactured two prototypes which have flown a total of 123 development 
sorties. The spin test is yet to begin. The execution of First Flight has been dela yed by 3 
years from the stipulated PDC (February2013 to May 2016). 
 
  Further, to meet the trainer requirement , procurement of 38 x PC -7 Mk II Basic Trainer 
Aircraft and 20 x Hawk aircraft are under progress. 
 
  The pilot project for modification of traini ng pattern to two ac training was undertaken to 
study feasibility of this pattern of training in case such a requirement becomes unavoidable 
due to reduced availability of IJT.  The method was not undertaken to conceal non -
availability of IJT ac as stated in Para 61, instead it was a step taken to ensure adequacy of 
training within the available resources.” 
 
22. The Committee observe that the Trainer Aircraft held by IAF currently include Basic 
Trainer Aircraft (BTA), Intermediate Jet Trainer (IJT) and Advanced Jet Trainer (AJT) and 
the existing strength of trainer aircraft is 310 as against the sanctioned strength of 432. 
   As against the requirement of 183 BTAs IAF has about 75 PC -& MK –II BTA and the  case 
for procurement of additional 38 PC -& Mk -II  BTAs is stated to be under  process. The 
remaining 70 Basic Training Aircraft are stated to be  to be manufactured by Hindustan 
Aeronautics Limited(HAL) under 'Make in India' Project.  The MoD stated that HAL would be 

 
undertaking   Design and Development  (D&D)  of 40 HTT BTA and the prototype, PT -I had 
its first flight on 31 st  May , 2016 and the certification of BTA is planned for Dec.2018. The 
delivery of contracted volume of 70 BTA with HAL is planned to be completed over a period 
of five years post si gning of the contract. As the trainer aircraft HTT 40 is yet to obtain 
certification even two years after first flight of prototype -I and the contract is yet to be 
signed and the Ministry’s reply is conspicuously silent as to when the trainer air craft is 
finally pressed into service, the Committee feel that IAF may have to persist with the 
shortages of trainer aircraft in the foreseeable future.  
    Despite  Design & Development (D&D) project for Intermediate Jet trainer(IJT) was 
sanctioned way back in in  1999 and a contract was signed with HAL for 12 Limited Series 
Production (LSP) aircraft in 2005 and 73 Series Production  (SP) aircraft in 2010 ,  HAL  is 
yet to complete Design & Development (D&D) of IJT.  In view of the inordinate delay, and 
there does not appear to be  any prospects of its development and delivery in   the next 
couple of years, the Committee apprehend that that  IAF has to  depend on imports or has 
to put up with its existing aircraft for training purposes. Further,   due to inordinate delay 
on the part of HAL, which could not even finalize D&D of IJT even after 18 years of the 
sanctioning of the project , the cost might have escalated manifold and the IAF have been 
forced to face the shortages and the consequent compromises made in the intensity of the 
training of their personnel.  The Committee therefore want the MOD to fix responsibility.  
The Committee, therefore, reiterate their recommendation made in this regard.   
                                 
 
G.  TRANSPORT PLANES AND HELICOPTERS 
     Recommendation (Para Nos.63 & 64) 
 
23. The forty first Report, recommended as under: 
"On the issue of procurement Committee had, in their of light utility helicopters, the 
Committee have been intimated that the case for procurement of 197 Reconnais sance & 
Surveillance Helicopters had been withdrawn in the recent past. The case for procurement 
has reportedly been withdrawn on three different occasions at different stages of owing to 
various reasons. Acceptance of Necessity was accorded by Defence Acquisition Committee 
on 13 May, 2015 for procurement of 200 kamov 226T helicopters (60 flyways and 140 to be 
manufactured in India) from Russia through the Inter- government Agreement (IGA) route in 
accordance with the provisions of Para 71 of DPP 2013. An I GA has been signed with 
Russian government in Dec 2015. JV has been registered on 2.5.2017 as M/s Indo Russian 
Helicopters Limited. The case is presently at Request for Proposal(RFP) Stage. Cheetah/ 
Chetak fleet is proposed to be replaced by these 200xKamo v 226T Helicopters from 
Russia. The Committee desire that the above mentioned procurements progress in a time -
bound manner and they be informed of the developments. 

 
 The Committee have come to know that presently IAF has 27 Units of Transport aircraft 
and 36 Units of Helicopters as against the sanctioned strength of 29 Units of Transport 
aircraft and 39 Units of Helicopters.  As regards phasing out, the Committee have been 
given to understand that phasing out of all the transport planes and helicopters is 
undertaken as per their stipulated life span.  In some cases, depending on the condition 
and utilisation of the fleet, intensive life extension studies are conducted and the lifespan of 
the aircraft extended.” 
 
24. The Ministry in its Action Taken Reply has stated as under: 
"Request for proposal (FGP) for capital procurement of 200 Kamov 226T Helicopters has 
been issued to Indo Russian Helicopters Ltd [Joint Venture (JV) between Hindustan 
Aeronautics Ltd (HAL) and Russia Helicopters) on 09 May, 2018. Bids ar e to be submitted 
by 01.08.2018." 
25. In the context of shortage of Transport Aircrafts and Helicopters against the sanctioned 
strength, the Committee were informed that procurement action had been initiated and is 
under process. Accordingly, the Committee  had desired that the procurement should be 
progressed in a time bound manner. The Committee are surprised to note that, the replies 
of the Ministry of Defence were received on 27 November 2018. However, it is stated in the 
reply that bids are to be submit ted by 01.08.2018. It is not clear as to why updated 
information could not be given by MoD. They therefore want MoD to furnish the latest/ 
updated information on the issue at the earliest. 
---- 
  

 
 
  
CHAPTER II 
(A) OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS, WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE 
GOVERNMENT 
 
SECURITY OF DEFENCE PERSONNEL AND ESTABLISHMENTS 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 4) 
 The representative of the Army, while deposing before the Committee on the issue 
stated that the overall situation is very disturbing and the Defence Forces should get their due, 
with more attention paid to them. While the Ministry of Defence has delegated powers to the 
VCOAS to spend a little over Rs.14,000 crore towards security related issues, there is no 
separate allocation made in this rega rd. The money has to be located from within the Army’s 
Budget, thereby leaving no choice but to re -prioritize expending the budgetary resources by 
way of going slow on some planned acquisitions, reducing the spending etc. Therefore, the 
need for creation o f a separate Head of account for installation/hiring of security related 
equipment/technology has to be taken into account. This, the Committee feel to be essential 
so as to ensure that there is no laxity or incorrect spending of the budget allocations. 
Reply of the Government 
 The Ministry does not subscribe to the view that the overall situation is very disturbing. 
The Armed Forces are accorded the highest possible consideration. It is not correct to say that 
perimeter security would cost Rs. 14,000 Crore . In fact, it is less than 1,500 Crore. These 
funds have already been budgeted for and allocated. If required, additional funds would be 
sought at the Supplementary/ RE stage. 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 5) 
 The Committee opine that the security of the Natio n is paramount and safety of those 
defending the country cannot be left in a state of abandonment. The Forces must be 
capacitated in maintaining a robust and effective response mechanism to counter emerging 
threats. However, the budgetary provisions made under the Demands For Grants (DFG) 2018-
19 do not reciprocate the seriousness required towards meeting ‘perimeter security’. 
Therefore, the Committee urge upon the Ministry of Defence to implement the afore-mentioned 
measures in order to strengthen the secu rity of various military establishments across the 
country. The establishments include, cantonment areas, institutions, living quarters etc. 
belonging to the three Services viz. Army, Navy and Air Force. 
 The Committee also desire that Para -military Forces like Border Security Force (BSF) 
etc. also need to be taken into confidence for introducing appropriate surveillance technologies 
in the areas under their jurisdiction so that terrorist/insurgent elements do not make use of 
porous borders for infiltration . Implementation of the aforesaid measures would require 
induction of more funds during the year, 2018 -19. The Committee desire and hope that the 
concerns and opinions expressed are taken with due seriousness and progressively 
implemented. The Committee wi sh to be kept apprised of the developments in this regard. 
More specifically, they wish to be informed of the budgetary provisions made exclusively for 
installation/hiring of security related equipments/software in the upcoming financial year, 

 
without waiting for more crises that may involve irreparable loss of lives of our soldiers and 
their families. 
Reply of the Government 
 
 Defence Services have taken a number of actions including risk categorisation of 
military bases; appraisal and upgradation of intelligence gathering capabilities; strengthening 
and streamlining of the response mechanism; Unmanned Aerial Vehicles (UAVs); periodic 
security audit of all military installations etc. The Army also carries out indepth analysis of the 
terrorist incidents  and security breaches that are identified with various incidents. Perimeter 
security projects of all the three Armed Forces have been sanctioned by the Government. 
Mutual Aid Schemes have been formalised with other Services. Necessary Coordination and 
liaison with these establishments are being carried out periodically. Response mechanisms to 
include ‘Second Tier’ and ‘Subsequent Tiers’ of response for all Defence Establishment have 
been streamlined. These are being rehearsed periodically. Necessary coordi nation is being 
carried out with Civil Administration, State Police and Central Armed Police Forces (CAPFs). 
 
ARMY 
 
BULLET PROOF JACKETS 
Recommendation (Para Nos. 14-17) 
 
 The issue of non -availability of Bullet Proof Jackets (BPJs) has been consistently t aken 
up by the Committee in the last five years. Unfortunately, however, tangible results are yet to 
be seen. In this regard, the Committee were assured that as a part of drive towards 
modernization of infantry, improvement in individual protective gear has been given the highest 
priority with a view to ensuring better ‘survivability’ of the soldier against the enemy and 
terrorists. An immediate requirement of 50,000 BPJs based on earlier GSQR has been met 
through Revenue route. The process of procuring a q uantity of 1,86,138 BPJs as per revised 
GSQR No. 1438 is presently at Trial stage. 
 
 The Committee have been given to understand that information pertaining to details of 
the total authorization of Bullet Proof Jackets (BPJs) in the Indian Army is of sensi tive nature. 
The Committee, nevertheless, feel that while authorizing the total quantity of BPJs , the ever 
increasing threat need to be adequately  taken care of. 
 
 Furthermore, with regard to the quality of BPJs , the Committee have been apprised 
that th e new GSQR 1438 prepared for the BPJs is at par with the extant standards being 
followed by the Armies of the development countries. The Committee, while taking note of the 
assurances given by the Ministry regarding BPJs, wish to reiterate the need for ens uring that 
there shall be no compromise with regard to availability of BPJs both in terms of quantity to our 
soldiers, especially those stationed in high risk or combat areas. Any casualty in Indian Army 
due to lack of BPJs either in terms of quality or quantity does not deserve to be pardoned. 
 
 To the concern expressed by the Committee on the issue of ‘full body jackets’, the 
Ministry informed that as per available information, there are no full body proof suits in the 
international market. This is due to  the restriction such suits impose on the body movement as 
also the weight such suits would have. However, Bullet proof jackets being procured for the 

 
Indian Army afford protection all around the body, above waist line, in order to protect all vital 
organs. The Committee opine that along with jackets, ample emphasis has to be paid for 
providing bullet proof helmets as well to the troops. The committee wish to be intimated of the 
details of progress made in regard of procurement of Bullet Proof Jackets and helmets. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Combined Action taken/replies on the recommendation No. 14, 15, 16 & 17 
 
 Procurement of qty 50,000 BPJ through revenue route (GSQR 878) was contracted in 
March 2016 and delivery of the entire quantity has been completed.  
 
 The contract for capital procurement of 186,138 Bullet Proof Jackets (BPJs) has been 
signed on 09.04.2018. As per delivery schedule in the contract, the delivery of BPJs is to 
commence at the earliest and is to be completed within three years. The diffe rences between 
old GSQR(878) and new GSQR (1438) primarily relate to area of protection, Size, weight, 
modular, flexibility etc. it is endeavor of the Government that the BPJs being procured match 
upto the international standards in terms of protection afforded. 
 
  As for helmets, the contract for capital procurement of Qty 1,58,279 ballistic helmets 
was signed on 16 December, 2016. Qty, 28,250 Ballistic helmets have been delivered so far.  
 
Recommendation (Para No. 18) 
 
 With regard to the present position  on manufacturing of Bullet Proof Jackets, the 
Committee found that Industrial licenses for manufacturing of Bullet Proof Jackets and Vests 
have been issued to 10 companies by DDP. Four companies have reportedly commenced 
production.  Nevertheless, the Com mittee recommend that the Ministry remain vigilant and 
cautious in regard to the quality of BPJs being supplied by these companies.   
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 The contract for procurement of 1,86,138 Bullet Proof Jackets (BPJs) as per GSQR 
1438 has been concluded with M/s SMPP Pvt. Ltd., New Delhi on 09.04.2018.  Delivery of the 
BPJs will start within 12 months from the date of signing of contract and will be completed 
within 36 months from the date of signing of contract. 
 
 Further, in order to ensure that production of items by Defence Industrial Licensees is 
of desired quality, the following condition has been included in the license issued to Defence 
Industrial Licensee companies: -  
  
 The standards and testing procedures  for equipment to be produced under License 
from foreign collaborators or from indigenous R&D will have to be provided by the 
Licensee to the Government nominated quality assurance agency.  The nominated 
quality assurance agency would inspect the finished products and would conduct 
surveillance and audit of the quality assurance procedures of the Licensee.  Self 
certification would be permitted by the Ministry of Defence on case to case basis, which 
may involve either individual items, or group of items man ufactured by the Licensee. 
Such permission would be for a fixed period and subject to renewals. 
 

 
 For ascertaining the quality of BPJ as per GSQR parameters, Acceptance Test 
Procedure (ATP) has been included as part of contract. ATP has been designed based  on 
Ballistic Tests conducted during Field Evaluation Trials and will be monitored by the testing 
agencies. All Quality Assurance aspects, other than Ballistic Testing will be checked by 
testing, agencies before delivery of any lot being offered by vendor. 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 20) 
 
 ‘Going by the detailed description of the issue pertaining to the matter, as made in the 
foregoing paragraphs, the Committee cannot help expressing deep anguish over the fact that 
even after the approval by the DAC in 2009;  and the matter having been taken up by the 
Committee time and again, our soldiers continue to suffer due to the ‘insufficiency/ inadequacy’ 
of BPJs. What is particularly worrisome to note in this regard is that presently there is a huge 
deficiency of Bull et Proof Jackets vis -a-vis the authorization level in all the Commands, units 
etc. of the Indian Army. 
Further, the Committee observe that when the trial is rejected, all the expenditure 
incurred from the stage of sanction of the procurement, up to the tri al stage goes in vain. 
Therefore, the Committee sternly wish and hope that the procurement of 1,86,138 BPJs of 
GSQR No. 1438 is made within the stipulated time frame. This is notwithstanding the fact that 
even following the procurement, a huge deficiency o f BPJs would continue to remain in the 
Army vis-à-vis the requirement. The Committee, therefore, recommend that necessary efforts 
are made towards timely procurement of the balance BPJs also, as safeguarding the lives of 
our soldiers is a prime responsibil ity in regard to which compromises of any kind cannot be 
made. The Committee would like to be apprised of the developments made in this direction. 
Reply of the Government 
Bullet Proof Jackets (BPJs) are provided to soldiers as per laid down specifications and 
authorisation.  
The Acceptance of Necessity (AoN) for the procurement of quantity 3,53,765 (quantity 
1,86,138 in 11 th Army Plan) Bullet Proof Jackets through the Capit al procurement route, was 
accorded by the Defence Acquisition Council (DAC), based on GSQR 1318 on 19 th Oct 2009 
and categorised as ‘BUY (INDIAN)’. The Request for Proposal (RFP) was issued on 03 rd 
March 2011. After two amendments, fresh RFP for procuremen t of Qty 1,86,138 BPJs, as per 
GSQR 1438, through Capital route was issued on 07 th December 2012 to 39 vendors. Six 
vendors responded to the RFP. Ballistic evaluation of samples provided by the vendors was 
conducted at TBRL, Chandigarh from 12 th March to 1 6th June 2015. The RFP was later 
retracted on 05 th October 2015 due to rejection of all samples in the trials conducted by the 
Indian Army. Analysis revealed lack of technology and manufacturing expertise as the reasons 
behind sample failure on evaluation.    Post retraction of RFP, DRDO achieved success in 
developing a BPJ meeting all QRs of GSQR 1438 and cleared all ballistics trials on 20 th 
January 2016. In view of the same, fresh RFP, without any change in qualitative requirements 
was issued on 04 th April 2016.  Five Indian vendors responded to the RFP. The trials were 
conducted with effect from 03 rd April 2017 to 12 th December 2017. GS Evaluation report was 
approved on 20 th December 2017. Approval of competent authority for the procurement of qty 
1,86,138 was accorded on 03rd April 2018. Contract has been concluded on 09th April 2018. 
Making up of stock of Bullet Proof Jackets to desired level, as per laid down policy, is a 
continuous process for which necessary steps are taken from time to time. 

 
 
ARMS AND AMMUNITION  
Recommendation (Para Nos. 21-24) 
Recommendation No. 21 
 With regard to the authorization of arms and ammunition held with the Indian Army, the 
Committee have been given to understand that the details of authorized and held strength of 
equipment i.e. guns, missiles, aircraft, tanks, ammunition etc. with the Indian Army is sensitive 
in nature. However, during the course of the deposition by the representatives, it has been 
learnt that the Army endures with a huge deficiency of arms and am munition. This is possibly 
the outcome of continued negligence over the years. Furthermore, on this aspect, the 
Committee learnt that the deficiencies of in -service weapons and equipment are identified 
every year through Annual Provision Review and procurements are carried out accordingly. To 
the knowledge of the Committee, some of the steps that have been taken in the recent past to 
build up the ammunition stock levels in the Indian Army, include Five -Year Roll-on-Indent for 
ammunition which has been placed on OFB for the period 2014 -19 and according approval for 
procurement of 35 ammunition items which were not being produced by OFB through import. 
Moreover, in order to ensure that the Armed Forces are always well -equipped for meeting 
emergent operational requirements, the powers for procurement to maintain minimum levels of 
critical ammunition and critical spares, have been delegated to the Service Headquarters vide 
MoD Order dated 30th December, 2016.  
Recommendation No. 22 
 The power and responsibility is, therefore, given to the Armed Forces to ensure that the 
minimum critical levels for ammunition and spares are maintained at all times. Financial 
powers have been delegated to Vice Chief of Army Staff for undertaking procurement of some 
critical armament s & mines vide Order dated 16.08.2017.To facilitate development of 
indigenous capacity and reduce dependence on import with the long -term objective of building 
capacity within the industry as a robust alternative source of ammunition, the Government 
have approved manufacturing of selected ammunition for the Indian Army by Indian Industry.  
Recommendation No. 23 
 With regard to the issue of shortage of ammunition, the Committee understand that a 
Five Year Roll on Indent for ammunition has been placed on the OFB for the period 2014 -19. 
Further, MoD had accorded Emergency Procurement Powers to VCOAS under Schedule 23 of 
DFPDS 2016. This will enable in fast -tracking the procurement. However, the build -up of 
stocks will depend on the vendors capacity to supply th e ammunition being procured. Eight 
types of ammunition have been identified for manufacture by Indian Industry. RFI has been 
uploaded and responded to by 23 vendors. Preparation of RFP is under progress. MoD has 
delegated the powers for procurement to SHQ in order to maintain minimum levels of critical 
ammunition (10(i) levels of WWR) and critical spares. Here, the Committee are concerned to 
note that although measures like increasing vendor base within the country and delegation of 
powers are good, insuffi ciency of budget continues to be a major roadblock. The Committee 
wish that the concern expressed in this regard is addressed and appropriate allocation is made 
available. This would be essential as insufficiency of quantity as well as the quality of 
ammunition can be detrimental to the overall capabilities of the Army.  
 

 
Recommendation No. 24 
 The Committee found that DRDO has been associated in bringing about improvement 
in INSAS Rifle. The current in service version of the 5.56 mm INSAS Rifle INSAS MK 1B 1 was 
introduced after carrying out minor improvements based upon the feedback of Operation Vijay 
in 1999. DAC, vide decision dated 20.11.2009 had accorded AoN for procurement of Assault 
Rifles under “Buy & Make” category with ToT to OFB. Request for Propo sal (RFP) was issued 
for procurement of dual calibre Assault Rifle in November, 2011. However, as the equipment 
fielded for trials did not fulfil General Staff Qualitative Requirement (GSQRs), the RFP was 
retracted in June, 2015. Meanwhile, AHQ has decided  to change the calibre of the Assault 
Rifles to 7.62x51mm, based on their adoption of a different operational philosophy. 
Accordingly, the case for capital procurement of 7.62x51mm Assault Rifle to meet the desired 
operational requirement is reportedly bei ng progressed with as per the extant Defence 
Procurement Procedure (DPP). 
Reply of the Government 
 The authorisation and holding of arms and ammunition is as per operational 
requirement of the Armed Forces. Adequate reserves have been authorised to cater for 
contingencies. There are adequate stocks of arms and ammunition with the Armed Forces and 
these are well equipped for meeting any operational requirements. 
Making up of stock of arms and ammunition to desired level is a continuous process, 
the requirements for which are identified every year and procurements  undertaken accordingly 
after following due procedure in Defence Procurement Procedure (DPP) and Defence 
Procurement Manual (DPM) and adequate budgetary provisions are made, accordingly. 
During the last three years and current year (upto June, 2018), 106 contracts have been 
signed with Indian vendors and 62 with foreign vendors including those from Russia, Israel, 
USA and France and for procurement of defence equipment for armed forces, such as Tanks , 
Rifles, Ships, Frigate, Aircraft, Helicopters, Radar, Ballistic Helmet, Artillery Guns, Simulators, 
Missiles, Bullet Proof Jackets, Electronic Fuzes and ammunition. 
The capital Budget and expenditure for the Armed Forces for the last three years are 
given below:- 
(Rs. in crore) 
Year Revised Estimates Expenditure 
2015-16 65400.00 62235.54 
2016-17 62619.36 69280.17 
2017-18 68965.24 72732.28 
 
 
Recommendation (Para Nos. 25 & 26) 
Recommendation No. 25: 
 The committee are aghast to note the repeated failure of trials, which also involve 
substantial costs. It is disheartening that OFB has not been able to develop the guns as per 
the requirement/specifications of the Army and a diluted QR cannot be used on the frontline. In 
this context , the Committee have learnt that the Army is importing a certain quantity and for 
the rest, the work is in progress. The Committee desire that the guns be procured after 

 
following the successful completion of trials. Any compr omise in this regard would not be 
acceptable. 
Recommendation No. 26: 
 The Committee have been informed that Air Defence Guns, L70 and shilka which are 
vintage equipment and are becoming obsolete , are being upgraded. 100 L70 guns and 48 
Shilka guns have been given for refurbishment. In the absence of a viable replacement the 
Army has gone for a comprehensive upgrade whose main element is electro optics, under 
which the sighting system gives enhanced range and visibility in the battlefield scenario. The 
committee appreciate the above mentioned efforts and desire that such innovative initiatives 
are encouraged. However, at the same time, they emphasize that these measures shall not be 
taken as a permanent alternative to the requirement of modernization. Ther efore, a positive 
and multi-faceted approach in needed for procuring and upgrading the weaponry available with 
the Army. 
 
Reply of the Government 
Combined Action taken/replies to recommendation No. 25&26 
Modernisation of Army is a continuous process based on the threat perception, 
operational challenges, technological changes and available sources to keep the Army in state 
of readiness and remaining equipped with modern weapons system. Government is taking 
measures for modernisation of Army, through procurement of new equipment and upgrading of 
existing equipment and system. Hence, two pronged strategy is followed for achieving 
modernization through induction of new weapon system and qualitatively improving the 
existing weapons system through upgrades. 
 
 The modernisation projects are being progressed on the basis of Service Qualitative 
Requirement (SQRs)  as per the extant Defence Procurement Procedure (DPP -2016) which 
incorporates provisions of trials and evaluation of the equipment. The government regularly  
monitors progress of on-going procurement projects so as to ensure that the Army is equipped 
to meet the entire spectrum of security challenges.  
 
 During the last three years and current year (June, 2018) 65 contracts worth about Rs. 
54,203.57 crore have  been signed for capital procurement of defence equipment such as 
radars, helicopters, missile s, tank, bullet proof jackets, ballistic helmets, artillery guns, 
ammunition and simulator. 
  
 The cases for procurement of defence equipment including Towed Gun  System, 
Upgunning of guns, Surface to Air Missile System, Air Defence Gun Missile System are at 
advance stage of procurement. 
  
Recommendation (Para Nos. 28) 
 Along with recruitment, the Committee feel that necessary training also needs to be 
imparted to the manpower so that the Army is well equipped with handling newer technologies. 
The advancement made with regard to development of training facilities in consonance with 
technological up gradations may be brought to the know of the Committee. 
  

 
Reply of the Government 
 The Army has devised a Training Programme that has modules to cover the technology 
domain.  Revamping of Training for Defence Personnel in the light of latest technological 
advancements is being regularly undertaken in Indian Army.  The trai ning establishments are 
evolving with the infusion of technology for not only enhancing and facilitating quality training 
but also to increase transparency in assessment and digitisation.  Emphasis is also being laid 
on exploiting technology for evaluation  of training effectiveness of an Institute and to mitigate 
the problem of plagiarism.  Notable initiatives in various spheres of training are as follows: 
1. Connectivity:  In order to improve connectivity in the Institutes as well as among the 
Institutes, Campus Wide Network (CWN) and Computer Labs have been established in 
Category ‘A’ training establishment to access training material, knowledge repository, etc., 
so that research papers, project reports, technological updates are available to both faculty 
and the trainees.  Further, National Knowledge Network (NKN), an initiative of Government 
of India providing pan -India networking is being utilised by the Training Instit utes for 
country-wide virtual classroom, collaborative research, grid computing, virtual library and 
sharing of computing resources. 
2. Conduct of Training:  The initiatives undertaken by the Indian Army are as follows: 
a) Distance Learning Package (DLP) and Entrance Test (ET):   DLP assist preparing the 
trainees for the courses in advance. ETs are also planned to be conducted online within 
the campus in future. DL & ET for officers implemented with effect from Training Year 
2017-18 and the same has been implemented for Junior Commissioned Officers (JCOs) 
& Other Ranks (OR) courses with effect from 01 Jan 2018. 
b)  E-learning:    The entire course content of courses of instructions conducted in the 
training institutes is planned to be available online through Army Intranet.  A pilot project 
is being processed on the basis of freeware ‘Modular Object Oriented Dynamic 
Learning Environment’.   
c)  Smart & Integrated Classrooms.    Smart classrooms with latest audio visual display and 
link to CWN to access Training material are being established in all Category ‘A’ 
establishments to enable easier assimilation by the trainees. Theory  portion are 
conducted in classrooms which have been integrated with cut models of various 
assemblies, CCT diagrams, textbooks and complete equipment. 
d)  Training  Films and Computer Based Training (CBT): Training Films and CBTs are 
extensively used at Ca tegory ‘A’ establishments for training all ranks. A total of 324 
training films and 739 CBTs are being utilised. Training films are developed by Armed 
Forces Film and Photo Division, MoD. 
e) Sports Medicine Centre:   Sports Medicine Centres (SMCs) have been  established at 
Pre-Commission Training Academies wherein various fitness training equipment have 
been procured for different medical rehab programs.  This has resulted in drastic 
reduction of training related injuries. 
f) Firing Practice:   Baffle ranges b eing utilised for firing practice have been augmented 
through digitised system for indicating for indicating fall of shots on target, forming one 
of the most modern marksmanship facilities available.  Auto Scoring System is 
employed for accurately calculat ing the score which is otherwise required to be 

 
 carried out physically.  Also, Infra-red sensors and remote controlled targets have 
been incorporated to facilitate firing practice. 
3.  Modernisation of Labs and Training Infrastructure (MOLTI):   Modernisation of labs and 
training infrastructure of all the training institutes and is in vogue. Each of the training 
institutes plan modernisation projects based on their specific requirement.  The various 
aspects are modernisation of laboratories, modernisation o f training infrastructure, 
development of necessary combat techniques, development of various skills such as 
survival skills, firing techniques, casualty evacuation technique, combat trauma and 
medical care skills, fighting in counter-insurgency environment and built-up area, etc. 
4. Besides, Language Training, Library Management, Music Training and Gymnasium 
facilities have been established to ensure delivery of proper and adequate training in all 
aspects to the personnel.  
INDIAN NAVY 
 
Recommendation (Para Nos. 36-38) 
 
The Committee have also noted that repeated delays in procurement projects have 
become a part and parcel of the procedure. More seriously, there appears to be a level of 
complacency in the system in regard to addressing the deviations th at occur in meeting the 
stipulated targets. From the details furnished, it is observed that considerable delays have 
been taken place in case of a number of projects of the Navy. These include, P15A, P 28, 
Indian Aircraft Carrier, Naval Offshore Patrol Ves sels, P -75, P -17A, Fast Interceptor Crafts, 
Landing Craft Utility Mk -IV, Water Jet Fast Attack Crafts etc. The delays have also adversely 
impacted the exchequer. As for the reasons for the delays, the Committee note that delivery of 
steel from Russia is a cause for the delay in P 15A and IAC. In this regard, the Committee 
would like to know of the details of the action on the supplier for the delays. The other reasons 
attributed include, unrealistic assessment of the cost of weapons and sensors, and increas e in 
equipment cost and yard material. The Committee are distressed to note that factors relating to 
costing are not assessed and calculated well in advance. The revision of cost from Rs. 3580 
crore to Rs. 11662 crore, in the case of P 15A Project is immense and hard to be believed. 
 
In the case of cadet training ships which was contracted out to ABG shipyard in June 
2011 at a cost of Rs. 1453.14 crore, the ships were to be delivered in 2014. In all, it included 
three vessels, but by 2014, the project was completed to a level of 20, 12 and 6 percent 
respectively in case of each of the three ships. The shipyard was subsequently shutdown in 
June 2015. As no progress was made on the CTS Project since June 2015, a letter terminating 
the contract, was issued in Sept 2017. To the dismay of the Committee, apart from the 
required capability not being handed over to the Navy, the cost incurred on the project turned 
to a complete waste. The Committee, in this regard, would like to be informed of the action that 
was taken against the ABG shipyard and the holders of the Company. 
 
The Committee would like to recommend that due care be taken in concluding 
contracts. Also, regular follow ups are an inescapable necessity. Otherwise, the precious funds 
of the exchequer will c ontinue to keep going in vain. The remedial measures taken on these 
aspects may be brought to the know of the Committee. 

 
 
Reply of the Government  
 
1. Action Taken on Steel Supplier for Delays in Delivery. 
 
(i) Project 15A.The special steel (D40S grade) required for construction of P15A ships 
was ordered on M/s Prometey, Russia as it could not be sourced indigenously. The 
steel was negotiated to be delivered in three phases and the cost of steel was fixed 
accordingly. After supplying the first lot steel, according to negotiated price, in May 
2004, the firm stopped supplies demanding higher prices on account of the sharp 
increase of steel prices in international market. The shipyard was left with no other 
option but to negotiate with the firm. It took sever al rounds of discussion to settle the 
issue and supplies only recommenced in September 2005 after a break of 18 
months. No other action was taken on the firm. 
 
(ii) In order to obviate such recurrences in future, the indigenization of this special grade 
steel was expedited. Accordingly, DMR 249A steel was developed indigenously by 
Defence Metallurgical Research Laboratory (DMRL) and M/s SAIL for manufacture 
of steel. P15B ships, the follow -on project of P15A, are being manufactured using 
DMR 249A steel. 
 
(i) Project 71 (IAC -1).The construction of IAC -1 was planned to start in 2004. The 
ship’s construction, however, could commence only by 2006 due to non -availability 
of imported steel for hull construction, as was initially planned. The order for the first 
batch of ab out 5000 tons steel was placed on Rosoboron export (ROE), Russia in 
2003 and as per the contract, M/s Cochin Shipyard Limited (CSL) was required to 
pay a percentage of the contract value as advance against a corporate guarantee 
furnished by ROE. The corpor ate guarantee was recommended by Navy and 
accepted by M/s CSL based on a letter of comfort signed between MoD and the 
Russian Government. In 2003, by a government order, all advance payments 
exceeding a certain value were restricted without a Bank Guarante e from the 
supplier. Despite best efforts by the Navy to either get M/s ROE to submit a Bank 
Guarantee or get for a one -time waiver on the restriction placed by the Government, 
the issue could not be resolved. In the meanwhile, ROE sought revision in steel  
price due to the delay in ordering that had ensued. 
 
(ii) At this juncture, a conscious decision was taken to construct the ship with 
indigenous high tensile warship quality steel, developed by the DMRL, Hyderabad 
and produced by the Steel Authority of India L td (SAIL). SAIL had to grapple with 
several issues associated with a first -time development in terms of technology, 
process, financial viability etc. These challenges were however overcome 
successfully with dedicated efforts of Navy, DMRL and SAIL. 
 
(iii) Progress Thereafter .  The construction of entire hull of IAC has been undertaken 
using indigenous DMR 249A steel produced by SAIL. The greatest spin -off from this 
has been that now Indian industry indigenously manufactures all grades of steel for 
warships in Ind ia thus eliminating Navy’s dependence on foreign sources of supply 

 
for this most basic but ‘critical’ input material. In the wake of indigenous development 
of special steel under the nomenclature DMR 249A & B grades, extensive training 
was imparted to the welders of the yard. This is because special care is required to 
be taken to prevent distortion during cutting and welding operations. This new type 
of steel also required compatible weld consumables. These were developed by the 
Naval Materials Research La boratory (NMRL). Weld processes were defined for 
various types of welding needs, based on the steel thickness and type of joints. Over 
a period of time, CSL has managed to train more than 500 welders including in -
house and contracted labour, so as to keep adequate number of qualified workers at 
hand all the time. 
 
(iv) Action Taken .  Consequent to non -availability of steel from Russia, the ship has 
been constructed with indigenous steel developed by DMRL and produced by SAIL, 
and steel is not being procured from  ROE/ Russia for any indigenous warship 
building project. 
 
2. Reasons for Revision of Cost from Rs. 3580 crore to Rs. 11662 crore - P15A. 
 
(a) CCS approval was accorded in March 2001 for the construction of three ships under 
Project 15A at an estimated cost of Rs. 3580 Crore (including Rs. 465 crore towards 
cost of B&D spares). The cost estimates of P15A ships were at 1999 price levels and 
based on the cost of the third ship of Project 15 that was nearing completion at the time. 
This estimated cost also did not include escalations  that would occur during the build 
period of the ships, which was scheduled from 2003 to 2010. 
 
(b) Further, during CCS sanction for revision of cost of the project, it was observed that 
there was a delay in production schedule (whic h caused additional escalation) view the 
following:- 
 
(i) Infrastructural constraints at MDL to simultaneously construct hulls and undertake 
outfitting work of P17 and P15A (to obviate such problems in future, Rs. 217 crore 
was catered within P17 for modernization of infrastructure at MDL). 
 
(ii) Availability of special grade steel from Russia (to obviate recurrence, the steel has 
been indigenized and is being used in current projects). 
 
(c) Fixed Component .  As against the estimated  cost of  Rs. 2405 crore for fixed cost 
components (in initial CCS sanction), the shipyard had quoted Rs. 5840.55 crore 
catering for inflation/ price increase over the build period. A CNC was constituted in 
September 2004 to negotiate the cost of the compo nents of this category. The CNC 
fixed Rs. 4652 crore as the cost of the fixed cost elements of the project in January 
2005, majorly attributing the increase in cost to the following:- 
 
(i) Increase in Equipment Cost & Yard Material .  The estimated cost of equi pment and 
yard material was made at 1999 price levels during initial sanction. Annual 
escalation of 7% for indigenous equipment, 5% for Russian equipment and 3% for 
western equipment was applied to cover build period of the three ships. The rate of 

 
annual escalation was accepted by CNC in which Advisor (Cost) was also a 
member. This caused an increase of  Rs. 567.08 crore. 
 
(ii) Increase in Yard Effort.  Cost of labour & LOH witnessed a sharp escalation in prices 
view provision that had to be made to accommodate the impact of wage revision 
from October 2003 and another that was then scheduled to take effect from January 
2007. This registered an increase  of Rs. 1126.63 crore. The expenditure towards 
securing services of Russian specialists was also revised from those based on 
Soviet era rates to current rates. This marked an increase of Rs. 511.95 crore. 
 
(d) Variable Component.  The approval of weapon and se nsor package was obtained from 
CCS in May 2001 on estimated cost basis. The approval was obtained on estimated 
cost as many of the systems were in developmental stages. Further, the decision to 
equip the ship with LRSAM/ MFSTAR in place of conventional SAM  to provide Long 
Range attack and defence capability against air targets was taken post submission of 
the initial proposal to CCS. Special emphasis was also placed on indigenization wherein 
the developmental cost of the indigenous weapons and sensors is to  be primarily 
financed by this project, although its spin off effects would include the reduction in cost 
of future projects. Post identification of the weapon and sensor package, enabling 
realistic assessment of their costs, revised CCS sanction was obtai ned to increase 
Variable Component cost from Rs. 700 crore to Rs. 5592 crore. 
 
(e) MOH and Profit.  Corresponding to increase in equipment cost (both fixed and variable), 
there was a pro rata increase in MOH from Rs. 66 crore to  Rs. 267.01 crore and in 
profit from Rs. 186 crore to Rs. 686 crore. This resulted in an increase of  Rs. 701.01 
crore to the project cost. 
 
3. Cadet Training Ship - Actions Taken Against ABG Shipyard. 
 
(a) Encashment of Bank Guarantees (BG) .  Out of the total project cost of Rs. 1453.14 
crore, a total of Rs. 711.045 crore was paid to the shipyard as part of stage payments. 
As part of the contract, the stage payments were covered by BGs of equivalent value in 
addition to the Performance BGs. Post termination of the contracts, all BGs i.e Stage 
and Performance BGs are being en -cashed. A total of 20 Bank Guaratnees (BGs) 
amounting to a sum of Rs. 782.874 crore would be recovered from the shipyard as 
against the payment of Rs. 711.045 crore. 11 B Gs to a total of Rs. 458.14 crore have 
already been encashed till date and encashment of nine BGs amounting to Rs. 324.734 
crore [Rs. 82.8 crore of Andhra Bank (two BGs) and Rs. 241.934 crore of IDBI Bank 
(Seven BGs)] are still pending view stay order pass ed by the Hon'ble High Court of 
Guajarat based on a writ petition filed by the Interim Resolution Professional appointed 
by the National companies Law Tribunal on behalf of ABG Shipyard.  The case is being 
pursued by Asst Solicitor General, High Court of G ujarat.  The BGs would be encashed 
post vacation of the stay order.  
 
(b) Tender Holiday for ABG shipyard .  An independent Capacity Assessment by MoD/ 
Financial Advisor (Defence Secy) of the ABG Shipyard was presented to Defence 
Acquisition Council (DAC) c haired by Hon’ble RM, on 23 February 2016. On the basis 

 
of the presentation by FA(DS), DAC of August 2016 concluded that the financial health 
of the shipyard is weak and barred the shipyard from participating in any new Defence 
projects. DAC further directed, not to consider the bids of the shipyard for projects which 
have been submitted by the shipyard and are yet to be opened. It is therefore submitted 
that ABG shipyard is not been considered for any of the MoD projects since August 
2016.   
 
4. Remedial Measures against Delays .  The following steps have been taken to reduce 
‘Time and Cost Overruns’ for various projects:- 
 
(a) Continuous monitoring by Apex meeting and CPRM, in addition to regular CWP&A 
review meetings. 
 
(b) Provisions of Liquidated Damages  exist in the contracts. Liquidated Damages would be 
levied on the shipyard in accordance with contractual provisions, as and when 
applicable. 
 
NAVAL BASE  
Recommendation (Para No. 41) 
 
 Upgradation and modernisation of the Naval Base need to be advanced progressively. 
In this connection, the Committee have been told that all the major works envisaged as part of 
Phase I of the Project Sea Bird  have been completed. The Naval Base is being f urther 
augmented and upgraded as part of Phase IIA. While applauding the efforts being made, the 
Committee express the opinion the aid Naval base is very crucial from the strategic point of 
view. The landmarks achieved in this area may be furnished to the Committee in the Action 
Taken Notes. 
Reply of the Government 
 
1. Accord of CCS Sanction. Phase IIA of Project Seabird was sanctioned by the 
Government on 06 Dec 12 for augmentation of infrastructure and other facilities over a ten 
year period from 2011 to 2021.  
 
2. Appointment of Project Management Consultant . M/s AECOM India Pvt Ltd was 
appointed as the Project Management Consultant for Phase IIA in Nov 2014.  
 
3. Award of Contract for MWC 01 Package. The first contract for Marine Works 
Package (MWC 01) has been awarded to the JV of M/s L&T, International Seaport Dredging 
Pvt Ltd and Dredging  International at a cost of Rs 899 crore on 20 March, 2017 and the work 
has commenced on ground. The scope of work includes 11.5 million CuM of dredging, 57 
hectares of reclamation, 4.5 km of revetment, 11 MMT of quarrying and installation of Nav 
Aids. 
 
4. Award of Contract for DB 01 Package. The contract for Construction of 2770 dwelling 
units and amenities has been awarded to M/s Shapoorji Pallonji in December, 2017 for Rs 
1342 crore.     
 

 
5. Design Consultancy -Dockyard and Fleet Base Buildings .  The cont ract has been 
awarded to a JV of M/s MECON and M/s Royal Haskoning DHV on 18 July 2017 at a cost of 
Rs. 231.09 crore. The work package envisages master planning for Dockyard, design of 
workshops, tendering action for selection of works contractor and super vision during 
construction of Dockyard and other Fleet Support complexes.   
 
6. Design and Supervision Consultancy for Armament Storage Facilities . The contract has 
been awarded to M/s SS Infrastructure Development Consultants Pvt Ltd on 06 December, 
2017 at a cost of Rs 19.25 crore. The scope of this consultancy is for augmentation of 
Armament Storage Facilities at Karwar and involves master planni ng, design of magazines, 
tendering action for selection of works contractor and supervision during construction phase. 
 
COASTAL SECURITY 
Recommendation (Para No. 42) 
 
 There are many agencies/stakeholders working in the maritime domain. Nevertheless, it 
is incumbent upon Indian Navy, being the lead agency responsible for coastal security to take 
all possible measures towards ensuring coastal security. One of the essentialities is ample 
coordination among all the agencies. These agencies include the Indian N avy, Indian Coast 
Guard, Ministry of Home Affairs, Coastal State Governments, IB, R&AW, Ministry of 
Agriculture/ Fisheries, DG/Ministry of Shipping, Port and Customs Authorities, Ministry of 
P&NG, Private operators, CISF etc. The Committee wish to be informed of the measures taken 
towards enhancing co -ordination and building collective response mechanism by various 
agencies. 
Reply of the Government 
 
1. The various measures taken towards enhancing coordination and collective response 
mechanisms by various agencies are as follows:- 
 
(a) National Committee on Strengthening Maritime and Coastal Security  (NCSMCS), under 
the Chairmanship of Cabinet Secretary monitors the progress in respect of maritime and 
coastal security initiatives. Ministerial level review of coastal security is also periodically 
undertaken along with similar reviews at State and Distri ct level Coastal Security 
Committees.  
 
(b) In addition to the above, coordination of security issues is also undertaken at  a number 
of sectoral forums such as the Offshore Security Coordination Committee (OSSC) and 
Joint Venture Offshore Protection Advisory Committee (JVOPAC) for the offshore 
sector; National Shipping Board (NSB) and Maritime States Development Council 
(MSDC). 
(c) Four Joint Operations Centres (JOCs) have been set -up in Mumbai, Visakhapatnam, 
Kochi and Port Blair. The four JOCs, are linked to Operations Centres of the IN and ICG 
through the National Command Control Communication and Intelligence (NC3I) 
Network for seamless real -time communication and development of common 
operational plot. 
(d) To facilitate working level coordination, IN-ICG SOPs on C oastal Security was 
formulated in Aug 09. The SOPs also cater for joint operations, and are currently under 

 
revision. The ICG is the designated agency for coordination with Central and State 
Agencies, and works with the State Marine Police under the ‘hub and spoke’ model. The 
ICG has also promulgated SOPs for coastal States. 
(e) Operational issues are also coordinated under the aegis of the IN-ICG Op and 
Communication Working Group at the level of IHQ MoD (N), and CGHQ and 
COMNAVGUARD at the Command levels. 
(f) Periodic coastal security exercises are being conducted by ICG and monitored from 
JOCs.  
 
ISLAND SECURITY 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 44) 
 
 Along with long coastline, India boasts of a large number of island territories which 
consist of 1382 islands. These islands are very sensitive areas from the point of view of their 
geographical location, demography and vicinity. The Committee wish that Navy takes up the 
security aspects of these island territories with all sincerity and sensitivity. 
Reply of the Government 
 
1. As per the Island Security Scheme prepared by MHA in August 2017, the jurisdictional 
Marine Police Stations (MPSs), Marine Check Posts (MCPs) and Marine Outposts (MOPs) 
opened under Coastal Security Scheme (CSS) and the Police of the concerned districts of the 
State/ UT is tasked with pat rolling of the islands located under their jurisdiction. However, the 
overall responsibility of patrolling in the areas near the islands continues to remain with Coast 
Guard.    
Island Surveillance 
2. Enhanced patrolling and surveillance is being undertaken by IN and ICG surface assets. 
3. Enhanced aerial surveillance with air effort focused towards poaching/ illegal activities is 
being progressed. 
4. Regular patrols are undertaken at various unmanned islands (in A&N). During inclement 
weather and rough conditions, these patrols are aerially inserted on remote islands. 
5. Surveillance off uninhabited island also enhanced by conducting Coastal Security 
Exercises in their vicinity and using electronic means like Coastal Security Network (CSN) 
radars/ National Automatic Identification System (NAIS) chain for surveillance.  
6. The islands are also being kept under vigil by sensitising the coastal community through 
Community Interaction Programmes. The local populace proactively participates in coastal 
security exercises and report any suspicious crafts operating off the Islands. 
7. For electronic surveillance of islands, the CSN chain already has 10 radars in the island 
chains and 8 more are being set-up as part of CSN phase II. 
8. The National Automatic Identific ation System (NAIS) chain also has 13 stations on the 
island chains. 
9. In order to enhance the Maritime Domain Awareness (MDA), a National MDA Project is 
being steered by IN to integrate all maritime data bases. 
10. A National Coastal Vessel Traffic Syste m (VTS) is also being set -up under the aegis of 
Directorate General of Light Houses and Light Ships for integrating coastal VTS chain and 
linking the same with NC3I Network. 

 
11. An Island Information System Software developed by ISRO and hosted on Bhuwan, is 
provided to all stakeholders to facilitate better monitoring of islands.  
12. In sum, Indian Navy along with ICG are maintaining surveillance of the islands using 
active and remote means. The States/ UTs are being provided the requisite support, where ver 
sought. 
 
ACCIDENTS 
Recommendation (Para No. 45) 
 
 The Committee have been concerned about the occurrence of accidents in the Navy. 
Further, the Committee have been informed that certain measures have been taken to mitigate 
recurrence of accidents. The Committee hope that these measures are implemented in letter 
and spirit and turn fruitful in mitigating accidents. This has to be ensured by way of putting in 
place all matters of relevance right from procurement, maintenance, training etc. to execution. 
In the event of an accident taking place, appropriate remedial action by way of imposing 
penalty/ punishment needs to be meted out. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
1. Safety aspects have always been accorded utmost importance by the Indian Navy. 
Adherence to safe working practices is a pre -requisite for operational effectiveness for the IN, 
wherein personnel operate in an equipment intensive and potentially hazardous en vironment. 
To ensure safe conduct of all operations within their respective domains, Class Authorities, 
namely Flag Officer Sea Training (for surface), Flag Officer Naval Aviation (for aviation) and 
Flag Officer Submarines (for sub -surface) have been exist ing for a long time. The measures 
taken to enhance safety awareness and mitigate accidents are as follows: - 
 
(a) Establishment of Indian Navy Safety Organisation in October 12. 
 
(b) Promulgation of policies w.r.t. Safety for various disciplines. 
 
(c) Conduct of Safety Stand Downs in units. 
 
(d) Safety awareness campaign in industrial units for the civilian workers and employees 
about safe working practices. 
 
(e) Impetus on safe working practices during Operational Sea Training (OST) by Flag 
Officer Sea Training (FOST) an d during inspection of aviation and submarine units by 
Flag Officer Naval Aviation (FONA) and Flag Officer Submarines (FOSM) respectively. 
 
(f) Installation of Safety Oversight boxes and recording of safety infringements at all units 
of Indian Navy. 
 
(g) Concerted efforts are being put in at all levels towards ensuring that a ‘safety culture’ is 
created and nurtured onboard all units. 
 
(h) Maintenance of high standards of proficiency of equipment operators. 

 
 
(i) Professional capsules in training establishments to further reinforce the basic skills of 
individuals in watch-keeping, bridge work and navigation on regular basis. 
 
(j) Examination of crew knowledge and drill relating to safety aspects in equipment/ 
machinery operations along with materiel preparedness. 
 
(k) Promulgation of Safety equipment allowance for IN ships and submarines. 
 
(l) Training of officers in modern accident investigation procedures such as Human Factor 
Analysis and Classification system (HFACS) and AcciMap to ascertain organisation 
vulnerabilities impinging on accident causation. 
 
(m) Enhancement of safety training as part of all courses commencing from ab -intio for 
both officers and sailors. 
 
2. The implementation of Safety Consciousness is a process in continuation. The above 
mentioned measures facilitate improve ment in the working environment from the safety point 
of view, without curbing the traditional naval ethos of initiative and boldness. IN continues to 
keep ‘safety’ at work and in operations in prime focus and constantly endeavours to minimise 
accidents/ incidents through the established process of sensitisation of personnel, adherence 
to safety check lists/ procedures and proper briefings/ debriefings. 
 
MANPOWER 
Recommendation (Para No. 46) 
 
32. The Committee had recommended as under: 
"As against a sanctioned strength of 11827 officers in Indian Navy, the borne strength is 
10384. Thus, there is a shortfall of 1443 officers. In case of sailors, the borne strength is 
57310 personnel against a sanctioned strength of 71,656 personnel. The shortage is thu s 
to the extent of 14346 personnel. The Committee observe that along with the desired force 
levels, trained manpower is equally significant for an efficient and powerful Navy. They wish 
that the Ministry of Defence take necessary steps towards mitigating t he deficiency of 
manpower. Along with induction of the requisite manpower, necessary emphasis needs to 
be laid on up -gradation of training programmes inter -alia taking into account the latest 
technological developments. The developments made in this direct ion may be brought to 
the know of the Committee." 
33. The Ministry in its Action Taken Reply has stated as under: 
 
"1. Visits to Schools/ Colleges.   IN officers visit a large number of schools and colleges 
across the country, especially their alma -mater to spread awareness. University Entry 
Scheme (UES) is specifically designed to pick up candidates who are still in colleges. 
 
2. Sainik Schools/Rashtriya Indian Military College (RIMC).Naval officers are appointed 
to various Sainik Schools and RIMC to motivate the young students to choose the Navy as 
a preferred career option. 
 

 
3. Induction of NCC Cadets .   In order to make the naval career attractive to t he 
country’s youth, Indian Navy  offers incentives to NCC Cadets opting to join the Navy as 
Officers and Sailors. 
 
(a) Officers’ Entry .  A total of 12 vacancies out of the 90 annual vacancies of the 
Graduate Cadet Special Entry Scheme (GSES) are reserved fo r NCC ‘C’ certificate 
candidates. These candidates are exempted from appearing the Combined Defence 
Services Examination.  
 
(b) Sailors’ Entry .  The NCC candidates are given additional credit points which are 
added to the marks obtained in the written examination for preparation of merit.  Additional 
credit of 6, 4 and 2 points are given to NCC ‘C’, NCC ‘B’ and NCC ‘A’ Certificate holders 
respectively. 
  
4. Candidate Friendly Recruitment Process .    In order to connect with the young tech -
savvy generation, Indian Navy ’s recruitment website has been provided with the facility for 
filing online applications and forwarding of call up letters on email. Further, online access to 
admit cards, results and merit list has also been introduced. The facility has re duced 
timelines and enhanced candidate satisfaction, while projecting the Naval recruitment 
process as transparent and candidate friendly. 
5. Introduction of New Entry Schemes for Specific Induction of Officers .  Today the 
youth aspires to join the specialisation of their choice. To facilitate this, the Navy has 
introduced dedicated and specific entries in the specialised fields of Naval Architecture, 
Aviation, Information Technology and Submarines. 
 
6. Re-employment of SSC Officers in Indian Navy .   Provision for grant of re -
employment to SSC officers up to a period of four years on completion of 14 years of 
service, has been included in the draft Navy Instructions on Re -employment, currently 
under revision at IHQ MoD (N).    
 
7. Re-employment in ICG.    Indian Navy  has finalised modalities and has facilitated 
employment of SSC officers into the Coast Guard, on completion of 12/14 years of service 
in the Navy. 
 
8. Enhancing the Infrastructure Capabilities of the Indian Naval Academy for Officers .    
The current capacity of Indian Naval Academy (INA) is 750 trainees. The interim expansion 
of the capacity to accommodate 1200 officer trainees is likely to be completed by 2020. The 
enhanced training capacity would enable larger inductions, thereby reducin g shortages at a 
faster rate. It is intended to enhance training capacity further to address the Navy’s growing 
manpower requirements. 
 
9. Augmentation of INS Chilka Capacity for Sailors . The training capacity of Chilka has 
been enhanced from 1633 to 2800 trainees per six months. The inductions of larger 
numbers in synchronisation with the augmented training capacity are being undertaken to 
mitigate the shortages and thereafter maintain the borne strength at the optimal levels. 
 
10. Additional Services Sele ction Board (SSB) .  To augment the interviewing capacity 
provided by existing SSBs, the MoD has approved setting up of one SSB at Diamond 
Harbour, Kolkata. The infrastructure development at SSB at Diamond Harbour is being 
progressed. In addition, CCS appro val has been accorded for setting up of one more 
Selection Centre comprising three SSBs for the Navy. Against this approval, one SSB has 
already been operational at a temporary location at Visakhapatnam since 28 Jul 14. The 
complete Selection Centre is likely to be ready by 2019. Once operational, more number of 
candidates could be sent for SSB interviews thereby further facilitating larger inductions.  

 
 
11. B Tech Degree at Naval Academy and National Defence Academy.    Over the years 
Indian Navy has evolved into a very technically sophisticated service. To operate in a highly 
technical environment a need was felt to upgrade the technical knowledge and skills of 
naval personnel. Therefore, B Tech curriculum was introduced for officers at Indian Naval 
Academy (INA) in 2009. B Tech curriculum has also been introduced for cadets at NDA 
with effect from Jul 16. Award of B Tech degree to 10+2 cadets on completion of four years 
training at the INA has also helped to attract the youth. 
 
12. Introduction of Indian Navy Entrance Test . The Indian Navy Entrance Test (INET) 
has been started with first test conducted on 25 th February, 2018 for Artificer Apprentice 
entry. With the introduction of the INET more number of eligible youth would be able to 
apply for appearing in the exam at enhanced number of locations. The scheme is planned 
to be extended to all sailor entries and most officer entries in the future. 
 
13. Miscellaneous Actions.   The Navy celebrates the first week of December every year 
as the Navy Week.  This opportunity is taken to connect with the population of our country.  
As part of the celebrations, following activities are undertaken:- 
 
Ships and establishments are thrown open to general public to give them an insight of the 
life on Naval ships and units. 
 
Visits of school/college students are organised onboard Naval ships to educate them on 
career opportunities.  
 
Visits by Naval ships are organised to small and medium ports of the country to facilitate 
visit by the local population who would otherwise not get this opportunity.   
 
Medical Camps are organised at remote locations to make the Navy conspicuous and also 
render social service. 
 
Navy Melas are organised to increase popularity of the service.  
 
Publicity material like calendar, diaries, pamphlets, posters blowups etc, are being 
distributed to approximately 11,000 Schools/Colleges, Sainik Schools, local institutions by 
respective Commands and NCC units.   
 
A movie on Navy titled ‘Mission Navy’ has  been hosted on ‘You Tube’ and has also been 
screened on National Geographic and Rajya Sabha Channel for popularising the service 
amongst youth.  
 
14. Image Projection Campaign (IPC) . In order to restructure the publicity measures, a 
new publicity strategy was envisaged keeping in mind the changing aspirations and career 
requirement by the youth of the country. Consequently, Image Projection Campaigns, for 
attracting better quality youth in the Navy, are being conducted since 2007. IPCs, which are 
reviewed and refined every alternate year,  are being carried out by the Navy involving 
campaigns on Electronic Media (TV Advertisements on News Channels), Advertisements in 
popular Magazines and publicity through Hoardings/Bus Panels. 
 
15. Recruitment Publicity. Following publicity actions are being undertaken to increase 
awareness about various entries and jobs in the Indian Navy:- 
Advertisements in print and electronic media. 
Special stalls/helpdesks are set up at various Exhibitions and Job Fairs. 

 
Hoardings are placed at key locations in cities. 
Advertisements are also being placed in popular magazines/papers with Quick Response 
(QR) codes. 
Advertisements on job portals on the internet." 
 
JOINT STAFF - BUDGETARY PROVISIONS 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 47) 
 
 For the year 2018-19, Joint Staff has made a projection of Rs.5796.53 crore while the 
allocation is Rs.3796.94 crore. The Committee note that the Head Quarters - Integrated 
Defence Staff is a growing organisation. The Committee note that the allocation is grossly  
inadequate for executing the critical role of the organisation, particularly from the point of view 
of intelligence gathering and dissemination. Major requirement of funds is for the purpose of 
building infrastructure for ‘new raisings’ and to maintain the existing operational assets. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 This Ministry is bound by ceilings conveyed by Ministry of Finance. This Ministry 
conveys the projections made by the Services, including Joint Staff, to Ministry of Finance for 
their consideration. In case Ministry of Finance does not accede to request made for additional 
funds and imposes cut on Budget Estimates, the approved allocations are passed on to the 
Services based on their prioritized requirements. 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 48) 
 The Committ ee wish that the allocated funds are optimally and fully utilized towards 
operational activities and the schemes reprioritized as per necessity/importance so as to 
ensure that urgent and critical capabilities are acquired without any compromise to the 
operational preparedness. 
Reply of the Government 
 Directions have been issued and regular monitoring is being done to ensure requisite 
capabilities for maintaining operational preparedness. 
 
FORCE LEVEL 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 55) 
 
 At present, the Indian Air Force has 31 active fighter squadrons. With regard to the 
sanctioned requirement of the Force level, the Committee have been apprised that the related 
information is of sensitive nature. The Committee, however, are given to under stand that there 
is a gap in the force level since ‘induction’ is not commensurate with ‘de -induction’. As regards 
the existing capabilities, the representatives of Air Force, stated that, undoubtedly it is 
challenging to fight a two -front war with the cur rent resources that the Air Force holds though 
they are in a position to take any challenge head on.  As per the submission, the cost of victory 
could be a little more. Further, the representative also added that Air Force is a Service where 
innovativeness is essential and there is an inherent ability to do more with less; and this is 
being carried on with for a very long time. The Committee further note that presently, there are 
four types of aircraft in the possession of the Air Force. These are, Mig -21 that is upgraded to 

 
‘Bison’, Mig -27 that is upgraded to ‘Mig -27 upgrade’, upgraded ‘Mirage -2000’ and upgraded 
‘Mig-29’.There is likely to be a substantial increment in the performance following the exercise 
of upgradation. 
Reply of the Government 
 The fighter aircraft currently operating in IAF are MiG-21, MiG-27, MiG-29, Mirage-2000, 
Jaguar,Su-30 MKI and LCA. IAF upgrades its existing aircraft so that they remain relevant, 
contemporary and cater to obsolescence management. The upgrade of MiG -29 aircraf t is 
being carried out by IAF’s Base Repair Depot while Jaguar and Mirage 2000 aircraft are being 
upgraded by HAL. 
 
Recommendation (Para Nos. 56 & 57) 
Recommendation No. 56 
 The Committee are appreciative of the innovative efforts being taken and accomplis hed 
by the Air Force.  However, at the same time, the Committee wish that endeavor shall be 
made to move the trajectory of squadron strength from the present downward level to an 
upward one with a view to enabling Air Force to take up and seize the task at  their hands.  The 
representatives of Air Force also confided to the Committee that so far as priorities are 
concerned, which is already available with the Ministry of Defence, requirement of fighter 
aircraft is the first. 
Recommendation No. 57 
 As regards the induction plan of Air Force, the Committee found that the production of 
balance Su -30 MKI at HAL out of the contracted number is under process and will be 
completed by 2020. Induction of LCA into the IAF has commenced. Induction of 36 x Rafale 
aircraft will commence by 2019. Recently, the RFP has been issued for procurement of LCA 
MK 1A. Meanwhile, the Government is also examining other suitable options. The shortfall in 
fighter aircraft is a matter that the Committee have been concerned about since lo ng. The 
‘Rafale deal’ is under process and LCA programme is under the aegis of HAL for decades, and 
has involved huge costs and repeated time overruns. The Committee expect that the apparent 
sluggishness and insincerity is overcome with dedication and acti on. This is a necessity, as 
otherwise, the existing strength will be further depleted as older platforms will retire after a 
stipulated time. Induction and de -induction schedules do not occur unexpectedly but can be 
well anticipated and calculated in advance and planned for appropriately. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 The issue of drawdown in the strength of the fighter squadron in the IAF is being given 
due emphasis. Till date eight LCA aircraft have been inducted and the ninth aircraft is under 
delivery.  T o boost the production capacity of the indigenously developed Tejas (LCA) fighter 
by HAL, the Government has sanctioned enhancement of production rate of LCA from existing 
eight aircraft per year to sixteen aircraft per year. Recent issue of RFI by Indian A ir Force for 
110 Fighter aircrafts is another step to improve the squadron strength. 
 
ACCIDENTS 
Recommendation (Para No. 65) 
 Accidents in Air Force aircraft is a cause of concern as they not only involve material 
loss but also the irreparable loss of human lives. To the concern expressed by the Committee 
in this regard, the representative of Air Force, while tendering evidence s tated that earlier, the 

 
Air Force used to loose almost 30 to 40 aircrafts in a year. This has now come down to close 
to 10. The committee, in this regard, expressed the need for ensuring that this number is 
brought down further by way of adhering to the st andard operational procedures and imposing 
penalty on those found guilty by the Board of Inquiries.    
Reply of the Government 
1. The number of accidents has reduced from an average of 13 accidents per year in 11 th 
plan (01 April, 2007 to 31 March, 2012) to an average of 7.6 accidents per year in 12 th plan (01 
April, 2012 to 31 March, 2017). In 2017 -18, a total of six Cat -I accidents have taken place and 
in addition two accidents of ALH and Microlite categorised as NFS (Not For Statistics). 
2. In the last t wo decades, IAF had flown approximately 2.5 lakh hours per year, with the 
available inventory of aircraft. During this period, IAF has put in dedicated effort to reduce the 
number of accidents. Comparing safety records in a block of five years, it is evide nt from the 
data given below that accident rate has decreased considerably in the last two decades. 
Comparison of accident rate in block of five years (financial years) for the last 25 years is as 
given below:- 
 
Block of Five Financial Years Average No of  Accidents per 
Year 
Accident Rate 
1990-95 27 1.07 
1995-00 25 0.95 
2000-05 22 0.93 
2005-10 12 0.49 
2010-15 10 0.41 
2015-18 
(From 01 Apr 15 to 18 Mar 18) 
7.33 
(as on 18 Mar 18) 
0.28 
 
Accident rate = (No. of Accidents x 10,000)/ Flying Hours 
 
3. Implementation of Expert Committee on Aircraft Accidents (EXCOM) 
Recommendations. An expert committee was constituted by MoD in Dec 2004 to identify the 
root cause of aircraft accidents and to prepare a comprehensive action plan so as to reduce 
the losses to a minimum. The committee finalized its report in May 2005 and the 
recommendations of EXCOM have been implemented by IAF.  
4. The areas where significant improvements have been made are attached as Annexure 
I.  
5.  All aircraft accidents are investigated  by a Court of Inquiry.  Whenever the Courts of 
Inquiry have attributed the cause of the accident to human error on the part of 
aircrew/servicing, administrative/disciplinary action has been taken by Air HQ/Command level 
against the erring individuals.  
Annexure I 
         (Refer para 4 of reply) 
           
AREA OF SIGNIFICANT IMPROVEMENT 
 
1. Invigoration of Aerospace Safety Organization. The flight safety organisation has been 
revamped and executive independence of the flight safety branch has been ensured  at all 
levels by placing the functionaries directly under the Commanders. The safety functionaries in 

 
a station are specially chosen and posted to ensure effectiveness of accident prevention 
strategy. A pool of officers with specialist training on acciden t investigation is being maintained 
at Air HQ and all Cat-I accidents are investigated by them.  
2. Database of Accidents & Incidents. A data base of all accidents and incidents in 
IAF has been created and maintained in Directorate of Aerospace Safety that can be accessed 
by safety functionaries of all Air Force Stations, Command HQs and Air HQ. This helps in real 
time monitoring and reporting of incidents and accidents. Accident Prevention Strategy at each 
base is being worked out by studying the trend of accidents/incidents specific to the fleet and 
place. 
3. Revised Training Methodology. The training methodology of aircrew and technicians 
has been reviewed. Stage wise training of pilots has been implemented for enhancing the 
quality of training. New Basic  Trainer (Pilatus) and Advanced Jet Trainer (Hawk 132) have 
been inducted for enhancing the quality of training. Emphasis has been laid on effective 
training of technicians in TETTRA (Technical Type Training) Schools to enhance their skill and 
knowledge.  
4. Simulators. Simulators have been inducted to impart training of aircrew in realistic 
environment without increasing the risk involved in actual flying. Simulators are mandatorily 
procured for all new aircraft inductions. HPHC (High Performance Human Cen trifuge) and 
DISO (Disorientation) Simulators have been procured for the conduct of OPTRAM 
(Operational Training in Aerospace Medicine) courses for all operational aircrew and flight 
cadets. Such training has resulted in a marked reduction in the incidents  / accidents of 
disorientation and ‘G-Loc’ (G Induced Loss of Consciousness) in aircrew. 
5. Air Force System on Error Management (AFSEM) & Other Measures.    AFSEM is 
an online tool which helps IAF in recognizing errors with potential to cause accidents an d 
institute timely remedial measures. Concepts like Operational Risk Management (ORM) and 
Crew Resource Management (CRM) are being followed to integrate safety aspects into 
operations. Accident Probability Factor (APF) calculator, a software based tool, is  utilized to 
identify risks and hazards specific to the aircraft fleets and operational environment at IAF 
bases with a view to formulate effective accident prevention programme. 
 
6. Courts of Inquiry. Every aircraft accident in the IAF is followed by an i nvestigation by 
a Court of Inquiry and institution of remedial measures based on the recommendations. The 
accident/incident reporting procedure has been further streamlined. Enhanced interactions with 
DI (Defect Investigation) agencies like NAL (National A erospace Laboratory), DMRL (Defence 
Metallurgical Research Laboratory) and HAL have resulted in qualitative improvement in defect 
investigation of aircraft components involved in accidents. 
7. Visits by Senior Functionaries. Regular visits to various flyin g stations in each 
 command are regularly undertaken by senior aerospace safety functionaries of IAF to 
 promote safety awareness amongst operators and support service providers at the field 
level  as well as to obtain grass root level inputs that need to be addressed to strengthen 
aerospace  safety environment. 
8. Operating Environment .  Improvements in operating infrastructure have been catered 
for in new inductions as well as upgradation of facilities of existing fleet. 
9. Human Factors Analysis and Classification System (HFACS) . HFACS has been 
introduced during accident investigation to identify root cause of human error and use it  in 
prevention of similar accidents. 

 
10. Aviation Psychology.  Aviation  Psychology courses are being conducted for airc rew 
as one of the means to curb ‘Human Error’ accidents. 
11.  Bird Hazard Management Measures .  Bird Hazard Management Measures have been 
revamped to suit the local conditions. The other measures instituted are studies undertaken by 
the Ornithology cell, close monitoring of bird activities. A case for procurement of Avian radars 
(Bird Detection  and Monitoring radars) has been taken up to  strengthen bird hazard 
control measures. IAF has inducted new Microlite aircraft for survey of birds and to enhance 
bird hazard management measures. Of the 72 aircraft contracted for, 46 have already been 
delivered and operationalised.  
12. Enhancement of Aerospace Safety Awareness. Impetus has been given to 
enhancement of awareness on human factors and error -prone situati ons amongst aircrew 
through dissemination of information on past accidents, voluntary error reporting by personnel 
and improving the standard and content of the aerospace safety magazine. Command 
Aerospace Safety Inspections Officers’ Conferences/Workshops  are conducted regularly that 
provide a forum for exchange of ideas on accident/incident prevention. Representatives from 
sister services, OEM and National Laboratories are also invited in these conferences to 
discuss aerospace safety issues. 
13. Aerospace Safety Courses.  Institute of Aerospace Safety conducts dedicated classes 
on aerospace safety to inculcate safety culture and to strengthen the aerospace safety 
organisation in terms of prevention strategies and investigations. Further the intake for 
aerospace safety courses has been increased to spread more awareness about aerospace 
safety.  
14. Analytical Studies/Quality Audits. Analytical studies are carried out to identify critical 
vulnerabilities of aircraft and equipment. Regular theme based studies and joint quality audits 
of aircraft fleets are being carried out to identify vulnerable areas and institute effective 
remedial measures. Quality Audits of aircraft production/overhaul at HAL divisions/BRDs (Base 
Repair Depot) are conducted, as and when necessary. 
 
15. Sharing of Aerospace Safety Information .    Sharing of Aerospace Safety information 
between IAF /Army / IN /Coast Guard / HAL / CEMILAC / DGAQA has been introduced for 
better / faster trend analysis of failures and speedy implementation of remedial measures. 
16. MOU with Foreign Countries. Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) has been 
signed for sharing of aerospace safety information with Russia. An ‘Out -Visit’ to UK by a 
composite IAF Inspection and Safety delegation is planned during Feb/Mar 2 018. Efforts are 
being made to have MoU with Australia, Malaysia, Oman and SAARC countries for enhanced 
sharing of information on common operating fleets. 
17.   Interaction Visits/FOD Audits.  The aerospace safety branch carries out interaction visits 
to various flying bases to assist the station in indentifying hazards and resolving the issues. 
IAF has also initiated FOD audits of its bases to reduce cases of FOD damage. It has 
undertaken FOD audit of IN (Indian Navy) base at Goa and INS Vikramaditya also in this FY. 
18. Action in case of HE Accidents.   All cases of Human Error are dealt with suitable action 
against the erring individuals.   
 
ACCIDENTS 
Recommendation No. 66: 
 The Committee found that as per priority list of Air Force, long range SAM S -400 
System is a high priority requirement.  The Air Force has also placed its bet on the same.  This 

 
is expected to substantially change our posture, both towards the adversary in the Northern 
front as well as the one on the Western front.  The Committee, therefore, recommend that fund 
outgo towards procurement of S -400 system be made during the year as per the upcoming 
demand. 
Reply of the Government 
 The allocation of fund is sought as per the timelines mentioned in the contract and the 
funds are earmarked for the scheme. Presently, the S -400 Long Range Surface to Air Missile 
(LRSAM) proposal is at procurement stage. 
 
MODERNISATION OF AIR FIELDS 
Recommendation (Para No. 67) 
 
 The Committee found that there are 53 IAF airfields which are presently being used.  
The airfields are being modernised through Modernisation Air Field Infrastructure (MAFI) 
Project. MAFI Phase -I Works in all Stations of Batch I, II, III & IV are complete except for 
Pathankot in Batch -IV. The works are in progress in all Batch -V stations.  The phase-II work 
has commenced at various stations. However, the Committee have been apprised that 
inadequate budgetary support for works is adversely affecting the time schedule for 
modernisation of airfields. Budget inadequacies will lead to delays as well as cost overruns 
which will ultimately put more pressure on the exchequer. Therefore, the Committee desire 
that the requisite budget be provided for the same in accordance with the work requirements. 
Reply of the Government 
 The Committee may be assured that projections / requirements of the Air Force will be 
forwarded to Ministry of Finance for favourable consideration. Further, the available resources 
will be optimally utilized based on prioritized requirements of the Air Force to ensure that 
critical requirements of Air Force are catered for. 
 
Recommendation (Para No.69) 
 In the case of Airmen, the present sanctioned strength is 1,42,529 while the held 
strength is 1,27,510.  Thus, the shortage is to the extent of 15019 personnel.  Last year, whi le 
examining the Demands (2017-18), the shortage was found to be to the extent of 13,001. The 
Committee take serious note of the increasing shortfall as compared to the last year and wish 
that henceforth, concrete measures be taken for making up the shorta ge of officers & Airmen 
in a time bound manner. 
Reply of the Government 
1. The shortages are caused due to accretion of establishment, which was approved for 
5435 posts in airmen cadre to cater for induction of new aircrafts/systems.  To reduce the 
deficiency, improvements in training infrastructure were carried out and resultantly the 
available resources (infrastructure and manpower) are being judiciously utilized and efforts are 
being taken to ensure maximum induction. 
2. Induction in airmen cadre was 500 0 per annum till the year 2015 and has been 
gradually increased.  From January, 2018, it has been enhanced to 6800, because of which 
IAF will be able to bring the strength at par with the authorised establishment. Further, the 
shortages are being addressed in a staggered manner to ensure a favourable HR environment 
in the long run to streamline wastages due to discharge/superannuation. 
 
  

 
PILOT-COCKPIT RATIO 
Recommendation (Para Nos. 70) 
 During examination of Demands for Grants (2015 -16), the Committee were informed 
that the sanctioned Pilot to Cockpit ratio in Indian Air Force was 1:25 for fighter planes, 1:5 for 
transport planes and just 1 for helicopter.  The Committee had opined that this could be one of 
the reasons for high accident rates.  With reg ard the present pilot to cockpit ratio, the 
Committee have been informed that this information is said of sensitive nature.  However, it 
has been informed that currently there is no problem in terms of recruitment.  But the capacity 
is limited by the numbe r of people that can be trained because the training period of a fighter 
pilot is quite long.  By the time they mature, enormous amount of investment is already made 
on the fighter pilots.  The Committee wish that concerted efforts are put in place to achi eve the 
desired levels of pilot to cockpit ratio and training infrastructure be augmented as per the 
requirement. 
Reply of the Government 
 Presently Pilot to Seat ratio is considered adequate to meet the existing requirements of 
the IAF.  However, to meet the future requirements of the IAF, especially so with inductions of 
twin seat fighters, norms may be revised. Actual pilot availability is dependent on rate of 
accretion of aircraft and corresponding increase in aircrew to achieve the desired pilot to sea t 
ratio.  Both accretion of aircraft and aircrew have long gestation periods.  Induction of aircrew 
is dependent on availability of suitable candidates and training capacity including availability of 
adequate trainer aircraft.  As and when these resources are enhanced (aircraft & pilot 
trainees), the pilot to seat ratio would further improve in future. 
Recommendation (Para No. 71) 
 The Committee have observed that on the lines of other modern Air Forces, Indian Air 
Force is also resorting to pharmaceutical interventions to ensure that our pilots are not 
fatigued.  The same pilots with pharmaceutical intervention are able to fly more. While noting 
the innovativeness of the approach, the Committee cannot also refrain from expressing the 
need for ensuring that such pharmaceutical interventions are well researched and tested, and 
do not have any other implications. 
Reply of the Government 
 IAF has introduced pharmaceutical interventions towards fatigue mitigation in aircrew 
after due diligence and years of study on the subject. Aviation Medicine specialists from IAM 
Bengaluru have carried out long term phase wise studies and have carried out in -depth 
analysis of all phases.  These interventions have in -built safeguards to ensure complete safety 
of personnel, inclu ding aircrew, assigned various operational tasks. These interventions were 
already in clinical use, had minimal side effects and had minimal abuse potential. Their use is 
purely voluntary and is done only after a special notification permitting the use, in each case. 
 
  

 
(B) OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE 
GOVERNMENT AND COMMENTED UPON: 
ARMY 
ARMY BUDGET 2018-19 
Recommendation (Para Nos. 6-9) 
Recommendation No. 6 
 The Budgetary Grant to Army for the Financial Year (FY) 2017 -18 is a part of the Grant 
No. 20 (Defence Services - Revenue).  In the Budget Estimates (BE) 2018 -19, the total 
projection made by Army (including Revenue and Capital Budget) is Rs.1,96,387.36 crore. The 
allocation made against this projection is Rs.1,53,875.22 crore. This amounts to a shortfall of 
Rs. 42,512.14 crore or a ‘budget deficit’ of nearly 23 per cent vis -à-vis the projection. Keeping 
in view the increasing threat perception, which includes various occurrences of external strife 
and internal dissidence such as Doklam, increased external activities in Tibet over a year, 
rampant cross border firing, militant activities etc. the current budget is not supportive to the 
inevitable needs of the Army. Considering the facts of the matter, the Committee are of th e 
view that providing adequate budgetary support is unavoidable. 
Recommendation No. 7 
 Further, on this count, a representative of the Army submitted while deposing before the 
Committee that taking into consideration, the possibility of a ‘two front war’, it is of utmost 
importance to remain conscious and pay due attention to modernization and bridging the 
deficiencies. Much to the distress of the Committee, however, they have been briefed that, 
over the years, the Indian Army has accumulated a substantial deficiency of weapons, stores 
and ammunition. This is because adequate attention has been lacking both in terms of policy 
and budget for modernizing the aging armoury.  
However, what has been added as some sort of relief to the Committee, is the 
deposition of the representatives of the Army stating that a new Defence procurement policy 
for streamlining the procedures, delegation of emergency procurement powers to the Vice 
Chief, as also for purchasing ammunition, armaments, and spares, which enable for ‘10 days 
of intensive war’{10 (I)} are some of the steps that have been taken recently. Besides this, a 
series of systems and structural reforms undertaken in consultation with the Ministry of 
Defence have also empowered the Army in utilizing the allocation fu lly. These positives apart, 
the Committee cannot help noting the candid submission made by the representative of the 
Army, that the increase in the BE, 2018 barely accounts for the inflation and does not even 
cater for the increased tax burden. 
Recommendation No. 8 
 With regard to the Revenue part of the Budget, Army had made a projection of 
Rs.1,40,515 crore while the allocation made is merely to the tune of Rs. 1,28,164 crore. In RE 
2017-18, Army was allocated a fund of Rs.1,22,628 crore. Hence, the incre ase in budget is to 
the extent that of Rs.5,536 crore or 4.51%.The Committee have been given to understand that 
bulk of this 4.5% increase in the revenue allocation would go towards the hike in pay on 
account of the 7th Pay Commission. There has been an in crease of Rs. 4,427 crore (4.76%) in 

 
salary expenditure on account of the Pay Commission. The balance amounts to an increase of 
just over three per cent, which is not even on par with the trend of inflation. 
Recommendation No. 9 
 The Committee view that the allocation under Operations and Maintenance is needed to 
meet basic sustenance requirements. While examining the Demands for Grants of the Ministry 
of Defence, the Committee found that there has been significant shortfall in budget allocation 
for operations and maintenance. Under this head, against a projection of Rs. 40,073 crore, an 
allocation of Rs. 30,791 crore has been made. Hence, Shortfall is to the extent of Rs. 9,282 
crore. The increase in allocation for operations and maintenance over RE 2017-18 is Rs. 1,109 
crore (3.73%) which does even match the general level of inflation. The various components of 
significance under this head of account include, Transportation, Works, Supplies, Ordnance 
Stores and the Rashtriya Rifles. There is a noticeable bu dget deficit under all these heads of 
accounts. In transportation, against a projection of Rs. 4,156 crore, the allocation is Rs. 3,267 
crore, thus resulting into a shortfall of Rs. 889 crore For Works, against a projection of Rs. 
7,877 crore, allocation i s Rs. 6,464 crore, which amounts to a shortfall of Rs. 1,413 crore. 
Similarly, for Stores, there is a budget shortfall of Rs. 6,844 crore as the projection is Rs. 
25,181 crore and allocation is Rs.18,337 crore. Under the head, Supplies, the allocation in B E 
2018-19 is Rs. 6,324 crore against a projection of Rs.7,743 crore, which has resulted in a 
shortfall of Rs. 1,419 crore.   
Additionally, the Committee found that due to introduction of GST and the closure of 
Military Farms, an amount of Rs. 545 crore for  rations and Rs.874 crore for FOL, would be 
required. Also, there is a shortfall of Rs.136 crore in the allocation of funds for Rashtriya Rifles. 
Therefore, an additional requirement of Rs. 9,282 crore is needed to meet the mandatory 
sustenance requirement s under Transportation (Rs. 889 crore), Works (Rs. 1,413 crore), 
Supplies (Rs. 1,419 crore), Ordnance Stores (Rs. 5,425 crore) and Rashtriya Rifles (Rs. 136 
crore).   
                In the view of the Committee, the budget for operations and maintenance i s a critical 
component for ensuring operational preparedness at any given point of time. Problems on this 
count will not only affect the serviceability of the equipment that the Army is holding, but may 
lead to legal issues that may arise on account of not  making payments in time. Therefore, the 
Committee desire that the essential budgetary support to Army be provided for making up the 
shortfall of Rs.9,282 crore under Revenue Head, by way of providing additional grants during 
the financial year, 2018-19.   
The Committee are also given to understand that additional burden of Rs. 5,000 crore 
will be levied upon Army because of the new taxation laws, in the form of GST. This has not 
been accounted for in the current year’s Budget. The Committee, therefore, des ire that 
reasonability be shown in the budget for the Army, by way of providing for the additional 
burden to the extent of Rs. 5000 crore due to the changes in the taxation laws. The Committee 
desire to be apprised of the measures taken in this direction. 
Reply of the Government 
 This Ministry had forwarded the projected requirements made by the Services for FY 
2018-19 to M/o Finance amounting to Rs. 2,23,648.04 crore under Revenue head (Rs. 
1,43,488.02 crore under Salary and Rs. 80,160.02 crore under Non -Salary).  Out of these 

 
projections, Army had projected an amount of Rs. 1,49,942.81 crore under Revenue head 
(which included Salary component of Rs. 1,01,578.90 crore and Non -salary component of Rs. 
48,363.91 crore).  In response, M/o Finance conveyed ceili ng of Rs. 1,85,323.91 crore (Rs. 
1,38,983.57 crore - Salary and Rs. 46,339.62 crore - Non-Salary) under Revenue head of 
Defence Services for 2018 -19, which was  Rs. 38,324.85 crore lesser than projected amount.  
Since Ministry of Finance conveyed reduced allocation than projected amount, accordingly an 
amount of Rs. 1,25,497.70 crore was allocated under Revenue Head to Army (Rs. 97,372.21 
crore under Salary and Rs. 28,125.49 crore under Non-Salary).    
 It may be relevant to point out that this Ministry is bound by the budgetary ceilings 
conveyed by M/o Finance. The reduced allocations were passed on uniformly among all the 
Services. The issue of additional burden of tax was highligh ted during discussion on RE/BE 
with MoF.  All efforts will also be made to ensure that critical requirements of Defence Services 
are met within allocated budget. The Committee may be assured that projections / 
requirements of Army will be forwarded to Mini stry of Finance for favourable consideration at 
Supplementary/RE stage. 
 
(For comments of the Committee on paras 6-9 please see para 10 of the Chapter I of this 
Report) 
  

 
CHAPTER III 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT DESIRE TO 
PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE REPLIES RECEIVED FROM THE GOVERNMENT 
Recommendation (Para No. 12) 
 The Committee feel that ‘Make in India’ is a great step taken towards development and 
self-reliance in Defence capabilities. A large number of systemic changes outlined in the 
Defence Procurement Procedure of 2016 are aimed at achieving greater indigenization. With 
regard to the projects earmarked for indigenized production, Army had identified as many as 
25 projects for ‘Make in India’. Nevertheless, the Committee find it d isheartening to note that 
there is no adequate Budget made to support this. As a consequence, there appears to be a 
possibility of many of these projects getting foreclosed. 
Yet another significant step which has been taken up by the Government relates to the 
strategic partnership of allowing a foreign company to partner with an Indian concern for 
making larger platforms including aircraft, submarines, ships and tanks etc. The 
representatives of the Army informed that they were looking forward to manufactur ing the 
future ready combat vehicles (FRCVs) and Future Infantry Combat Vehicles (FICVs), through 
these schemes. However, with the kind of Budget that has been allocated, this process may 
get unduly delayed. Thus, there appears to be no certainty of their future. The Committee note 
in this regard that while on one hand, indigenization in the Defence Sector is being 
emphasized, on the other, budget support for the same is denied. The proposals for 
augmenting and indigenization and self -reliance by identifyin g dedicated projects for the 
purpose is appreciable. The Committee, nevertheless, are distressed to note that no 
substantial progress is being made in this direction. The Committee desire to be intimated of 
the extent to which the Army has proceeded on the  Make in India initiatives with regards to the 
projects mentioned above. Also, the Committee wish that the Ministry take appropriate steps to 
financially support the indigenization efforts of Army. The Committee wish to be informed about 
the steps taken in this regard. 
Reply of the Government 
Strategic Partnership model has been promulgated as Chapter VII of DPP -2016 in four 
selected segments viz submarines, Fighter a/c, Helicopter & Armoured Fighting 
vehicles/Tanks, RFIs have been issued by the Services fo r all the four identified segments viz. 
Indian Navy for Submarines under project P75 (I) and Naval Utility Helicopters (NUH), Indian 
Army for Future Ready Combat Vehicles (FRCVs) and Indian Air Force for Fighter Aircrafts. 
The responses received against RF Is for Naval Helicopters and Submarines are under 
evaluation. The discussions with foreign OEM to ascertain the technologies being offered, 
methodology to incentivize advanced and higher percentage of technologies and higher 
indigenization have been held. EOI is being formulated. 
 In the Defence Procurement Procedure for capital acquisition, the ‘Make’ category of 
capital acquisition is the most important category from the perspective of fostering indigenous 
capabilities through design and development of re quired defence equipment/product/systems 
or upgrades/ sub -systems/components/ parts by both public and private sector industry/ 
organization in a faster time frame. In order to streamline the ‘Make’ procedure, it was 
revised and promulgated in March 2016. Two sub-categories were introduced: 

 
 Make-I (Government  Funded): 90% of the development  cost will be borne by the MoD, 
and 10% of the development cost will be borne by the selected Development Agencies 
(DAs). Projects with prototype development cost <Rs 10 Crore, earmarked for MSMEs. 
 Make-II (Industry Funded): No funding by the MoD for prototype development.However, 
there is an assurance of orders after successful prototype development. Projects with 
prototype development cost <Rs 3 Crore, earmarked for MSMEs. 
After the promulgation of DPP-2016, a need for separate ‘ Make-II’  procedure was realised 
due to the following aspects: 
 Since Make -II sub -category does not envisage any funding by the Government for 
development of prototype, role of the Government sh ould be limited to facilitation & 
handholding of Development agencies during prototype development. 
 
 There should be minimal documentation requirement and shorter timelines for various 
process. 
 
 Eligibility criteria for vendors may be further relaxed. 
In accordance with the above, MoD revised the Make-II Procedure in January 2018, and 
has since promulgated the Revised Make -II Procedure. The salient features of revised Make -II 
Procedure include, prototype development by industry at no cost from Government; e asier 
engagement with industry; and reduction of time taken for finalization of contract. 
Till date, 26 Projects have been granted ‘Approval in Principle’ (AIP) by the collegiate 
under Secretary (Defence Production) which are also uploaded on the Make in I ndia Website. 
Out of the above, 5 Projects have been accorded AoN (Acceptance of Necessity). 
As per the timelines of the new Make II Procedure, after the grant of AoN, the 
placement of order i.e. initiation of financial implication takes about 45-79 weeks. Therefore, no 
immediate outgo from the budget is expected. 
BUDGET ALLOCATION OVER THE YEARS 
Recommendation (Para No. 13) 
 In the course of examination of the Demands for Grants of the Ministry of Defence for 
the year 2018-19, the Committee noted that during the first seven years (i.e. 2012 till 2018) of 
Long Term Integrated Plan Period (LTIPP) 2012 -2027, the total amount soug ht by Army was 
Rs.1064336 crore (approx.) whereas the allocation made was Rs.878001 crore (approx). This 
accounts to a shortfall of Rs.1,86,335 crore (approx.). These seven years constitute the first 
part of the LTIPP which was outlined to alleviate the hu ge shortages that cropped up in the 
Army.  The Committee cannot help noting in this regard that the trend of budgetary allocation 
with a decline in capital share is indicative of inadequate emphasis being given to 
modernization and technological up-gradation. The Army faces critical shortage of good quality 
Bullet Proof Jackets (BPJs), Arms and Ammunition, Assault Rifles, Battle Tanks and 
surveillance and monitoring networks etc.  
 The Committee are of the view that funding merits serious attention and prov ision of 
adequate funds is an inevitable need that has to be met. As pointed out earlier too, the Indian 

 
Army has, over the years, accumulated a huge deficiency of weapons, stores and ammunition. 
It has also been highlighted that the Government has not awa rded adequate attention both in 
terms of policies and budget for modernizing the aging armoury of the Army.  The Committee 
desire that the Government introduce and Implement appropriate positive measures 
categorically to address the shortcomings and channe lize adequate funds, which would have 
the effect of generating some optimistic results during the current FY 2018 -19 and the years to 
follow. The measures taken in this direction may be brought to the information of the 
Committee.   
Reply of the Government 
 The reply contains information classified as Secret and, therefore, the same is being 
sent directly to the Hon’ble Chairperson Standing Committee on Defence with request that the 
contents of this may not be incorporated in the Report of the Committee. 
Recommendation (Para No. 19) 
 The Committee have also been given to understand that OFB, on its own initiative, in 
association with MIDHANI, has taken up the task of development of Bullet Resistant Jackets. 
After development, the same can be offered to the A rmy as per their requirement. In this 
connection, the Committee express the hope that the Bullet Resistant Jackets are not a diluted 
alternative to Bullet Proof Jackets. Relevant information, inclusive of the progress made in this 
direction, needs to be furnished to the Committee. 
Reply of the Government 
 Bullet Resistance Jackets (BRJs) have been developed by OFB in collaboration with 
MIDHANI which conforms to the Qualitative Requirements (QR) & trial directives issued by 
MHA. However, no BRJs have been developed by the OFB for Indian Army. 
FORCE LEVEL 
Recommendation (Para Nos. 39 &  40) 
Recommendation No. 39 
 Information regarding currently approved Force Level of Navy is of sensitive nature. The 
existing strength of the Naval force is 136 ships and submar ines and 219 aircraft. The 
Committee, in this regard, have been informed that the capability voids are reviewed by MoD 
on regular basis. In order to mitigate the shortages, the Service life of ships/submarines is 
extended through Service Life Extension (SL E) Programme, based on the operational 
necessity, material state and anticipated delays in induction of replacement platforms. While 
examining the Demands for Grants, 2017 -18, the Committee observed that the force level of 
the Indian Navy was 138 ships and  submarines and 235 aircraft. Thus, there has been a 
decline in the Force Level held by the Indian Navy as compared to the previous year. The 
Committee are of the view that this information would suffice in highlighting the apathetic and 
unfortunate state of affairs prevalent towards capability building of Naval Forces. In light of the 
above, the Committee are hard pressed to opine that the Long Term Integrated Plan 2012 -27 
is of little relevance as no substantive efforts are being made at the ‘ground level ’ to turn this 
into a realistic development programme. 

 
Recommendation No. 40 
 Further on the issue, the Committee understand that some major Projects, which are 
aimed at alleviating the capability gaps are in the pipeline. The procurement/acquisition 
programmes include, Ships and Submarines under construction in India. The Committee, in 
this regard, express the hope that the projects are progressed in a time -bound manner. They 
would like to be apprised in detail of the progress of these projects in the Action Taken Notes.  
Reply of the Government 
 The reply contains information classified as ‘Secret’ and therefore the same has directly 
been sent to the Hon’ble Chairperson Standing Committee on Defence with a request that the 
contents of this may not be incorporated in the Report of the Committee. 
MANPOWER AND TRAINING 
Recommendation (Para No. 68) 
 During the deliberations on the Demands for Grants, 2018 -19, the Committee have 
learnt that in the case of officers, the sanctioned strength is 12549 while hel d strength is 
12340. Hence there is a shortage of 209 officers. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
1. The Government sanctioned Establishment and Strength of officers (except Medical 
and Dental branch) in IAF, as on 01 April 2018, is as follows:- 
 
Establishment Strength 
12581 12354 
 
2. The difference of 227 (as on 01 April 18) is a variable figure which keeps fluctuating 
depending on commissioning cycle, premature separation of officers etc. and is considered 
negligible. The induction plans are revamped so as to gradually bring the strength at par with 
the sanctioned establishment. In addition, due to robust cadre management planning and 
implementation, there is likely to be no shortage of officers in the IAF in due course. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

 
 
CHAPTER IV 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF GOVERNMENT 
HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE WHICH REQUIRE REITERATION AND 
COMMENTED UPON: 
SECURITY OF DEFENCE PERSONNEL AND ESTABLISHMENTS 
Recommendation (Para  No 1) 
 The Committee, in their Twenty-ninth Report (16thLok Sabha), have expressed concern 
on the frequent terror attacks taking place on military bases, Defence establishments, critical 
facilities and even family quarters of soldiers. The Committee have been unanimous in 
condemning such acts of cowardice and desired that safety of our soldiers along with that of 
their families must be of prime concern, without any compromise. The Committee are, 
however, perturbed to find that such incidences have become a recurring affair. The rec ent 
terror attack on Sunjuwan Army Camp, Kashmir on 10thFebruary2018 wherein families of 
soldiers were targeted is a fresh reminder that substantial efforts need to be made on the part 
of the Government. This is the latest in a series of attacks on militar y installations witnessed 
over the last few years. What is particularly worrisome in this regard is the repeated success of 
terrorists in infiltrating high -security military complexes. The Sunjuwan attack exposes the 
vulnerabilities in ‘perimeter security’  and the scant progress made in improving the security 
protocols since the attack on the Pathankot Air Force station in January 2016. Following the 
Pathankot incident, there have been major attacks in Uri, Handwara, Nagrota and Panzgam, 
all of which involved a substantial number of casualties. 
Reply of the Government 
 Government has issued broad guidelines for Security of Defence Installations on 
28/11/2016 to the Defence Services. In compliance to the said Guidelines, the Defence 
Services have taken a numb er of actions including risk categorisation of military bases; 
appraisal and up gradation of intelligence gathering capabilities; strengthening and 
streamlining of the response mechanism; Unmanned Aerial Vehicles (UAVs); periodic security 
audit of all military installations etc. 
Recommendation No. 2: 
 
 On the issue of terrorist attack on Defence establishments, the Committee would like to 
point out that after the attack on the Pathankot air base, the Defence Ministry had appointed a 
Committee headed by Lieu tenant General Phillip Campose, the then Vice Chief of Army Staff 
for reviewing the security set -up at the military bases and to suggest ways of improvement. 
The Committee, which submitted its Report to the then Defence Minister (in May 2016), had 
found gaping holes in the security set up at many installations. These should have been given 
top priority for being addressed. However, it took a series of attacks and numerous casualties 
for raising the brows and delegation of power to the Vice Chief (VCOAS) to spend Rs.14,097 
crore for strengthening ‘perimeter security’. But for the attack, it's quite possible that funds for 
strengthening "perimeter security" may not have been sanctioned for quite some time to come. 
 
  

 
Reply of the Government 
 
 Government has sanctioned Rs. 1487.27 crore for upgradation of security infrastructure 
of locations identified as initial priority. Government has also sanctioned additional Rs. 100 
crore for execution of projects under operational works in vulnerable stations. 
Recommendation (Para No. 3) 
 The Committee cannot help expressing unhappiness with the state of affairs in the 
Ministry with regard to existing scenario of ‘perimeter security’ of defence establishments and 
installations, including offshore establishments. The Sunjuwan attack underscores the need for 
speedy measures, which go beyond ‘inquiries’ and ‘policy announcements’, so as to overhaul 
the security system. The implementation needs to be broad -based, and go beyond ‘ad -hoc 
measures’. It must be borne in mind that a successful attack does not necessarily mean that 
the soldier on the ground is lax in performing his duties. Many bases along the border are 
located in tough terrain, and are in close proximity to civilian dwellings. This demands care 
from the soldier for  avoiding civilian casualties in the event of a cross fire. For a country that 
takes pride in its modern, technologically advanced military, India continues to rely heavily on 
putting more ‘soldiers on the ground’. 
 In this backdrop, the Committee observe that Defence mechanisms have to be modified 
in accordance with the changing dynamics of threat perception. Equipping our soldiers with 
state-of-the-art weapons for retaliating any attack is a necessity. Over and above this, it is 
inevitable to equip our De fence establishments with latest global technologies of surveillance 
and tracking systems. Promptness in monitoring and precision in detection of potential threat 
elements using software -based intelligence inputs will help in tracking the insurgent element s 
well in advance. In this manner, the trouble can be identified and nipped in the bud before it 
actually causes any damage. For this purpose, the Ministry of Defence needs to take 
measures for introducing the latest and best available surveillance technol ogies. In the current 
scenario, mere dependence on manual surveillance will definitely not suffice. Therefore, along 
with the installation of the requisite equipments, commensurate emphasis should be laid upon 
intellectual inputs and technology driven soft ware based detection practices. Preventing 
terrorists from scoring a strike being the best line of Defence, it is time the Defence Ministry 
adopts a holistic approach, by making sure that the soldier is fully backed by technology and 
calibrated security drills. 
Reply of the Government 
 Indian Army has constructed an Anti Infiltration Obstacle System (AIOS) along the Line 
of Control (LC) and International Border (IB) in Jammu & Kashmir, under its operational 
control. Radars, Sensors, Thermal Imagers etc. along with surveillance have been 
incorporated on this fence to detect and intercept infiltration by terrorists. AIOS is further 
strengthened by deployment of troops and construction of defence works based on threat 
perception for an effective multi -tiered counter infiltration grid. Government is taking measures 
to ensure modernization of Indian Defence Forces to keep them in a state of readiness to meet 
operational and security challenges. This is being achieved by inducting new equipment, 
technologically upgrading existing equipment and systems, training etc. 
(For comments of the Committee on paras 1, 2 & 3 please see para 7 of Chapter I of the Report) 
MODERNIZATION 

 
Recommendation (Para Nos.  10 & 11) 
Recommendation No. 10 
 During the course of the deliberations on Demands -for-Grants, the Committee learnt 
that any modern Armed Forces should have one -third of its equipment in the vintage category, 
one-third in the current category and one -third in the state of the art category. However, the 
current po sition in the Indian Army reveals that 68 per cent of  equipment is of vintage 
category, just about 24 per cent of the current category, and only eight per cent of the state -of-
the-art category. To be prepared for the scenario of a two front war, the huge deficiencies and 
obsolescence of weapons, stores and ammunition existing in Indian Army, does not auger 
well. It is, therefore, important to channelize sufficient budget towards modernising the aging 
armoury and filling up the gaps. However, the allocation for modernization in this year's budget 
has a different story to tell. 
The Committee note that allocation of Rs. 21,338 crore for modernisation is insufficient 
even to cater to committed payments to the extent of Rs.29,033 crore, earmarked for 125 on -
going schemes, emergency procurement of armaments and weaponry for 10 days of intense 
war {10(I)} and other Director General Ordnance Factories requirements.   
Further, the Committee have been made to realize that committed liabilities of 2017 will 
also get passed on to 2018, thereby accentuating the situation further. Therefore, liquidation of 
the committed liabilities will hardly leave any funds for new schemes in 2018 -19.The 
Committee feel agonised by the current state of affairs with regard to financial pro visions made 
towards the requirement of modernization of Army and desire that requisite budgetary support 
be given in this regard.   
Recommendation No. 11 
 Furthermore, on this count, the Committee learnt that from the total Budget, 63 per cent 
goes toward s paying salaries of Army personnel. The normal maintenance and operational 
requirements works out to 20 per cent and infrastructure takes around three per cent. Hence, 
the resources available for modernization amount to a mere 14 per cent of the allocatio n, 
which is grossly inadequate. According to the submission made by a representative of the 
Army, the budget for modernization has to be anything between 22 to 25 per cent of the overall 
budget, lest the Army is found to be wanting. With a view to equippin g the Army to meet any 
eventuality, the Committee wish that the requisite budgetary provision is made for the specific 
purpose of modernization. 
Reply of the Government 
 This Ministry had forwarded the projected requirements made by the Services 
amounting to Rs. 1,72,203.30 Crore under Capital Budget for FY 2018 -19 to M/o Finance for 
favourable consideration. The said projected amount included amount of Rs. 1,41,387.66 crore 
for Capital Acquisition (Modernization) of which Army had projected an amount of Rs . 
37,121.54 crore. In response, M/o Finance conveyed ceiling of Rs. 93,982.13 crore under 
Capital Budget which was Rs. 78,221.17 crore less than projected requirement.  The reduced 
allocations were passed on uniformly among all the Services including Army.   Against the 
projected requirement, Army was allocated Rs. 21,338.21 cr. under Capital Acquisition budget.   
 

 
 The requirement of further allocation of funds will be taken up at the time of 
Supplementary/ RE stage with Ministry of Finance. 
  
(For comments of the Committee on paras 10 & 11 please see para 13 of Chapter I of the Report) 
Recommendation (Para No. 27) 
 The Committee, while deliberating on the Demands for Grants 2018-19, have noted that 
the Army is facing shortage of manpower. In case of officers, the sanctioned strength is 49,932 
whereas the held strength is 42,253. With regard to JCOs/ORs the existing s trength is 
11,94,864 against an authorised strength of 12,15,049. Further, the Committee have found 
that the recruitment in the Armed Forces is a continuous process and the Government has 
taken a number of measures to reduce the shortages. These include, s ustained image 
projection, participation in career fairs and exhibitions and publicity campaign to create 
awareness among the youth on the advantages of taking up a challenging and satisfying 
career. Further, Government has taken various steps to make jobs  in armed forces attractive, 
including by way of improvement in promotion prospects. Recruitment of Personnel Below 
Officers Ranks (PBORs) in Army is carried out through Open Rally System being conducted 
regularly throughout the country. Efforts are made t o cover the entire country including remote 
and tribal areas. The Committee wish to be apprised of the outcome achieved on account of 
implementation of various measures as mentioned above.  
Reply to the Government 
 Shortage of Officers: The shortage of Officers and Junior Commissioned 
Officer/Other Ranks in the Indian Army is as under:- 
Sl. 
No. Category Authorised 
Strength 
Held 
Strength Deficiency/Surplus 
1 Officers (excluding AMC, ADC & 
MNS) 
49,933 42,253 (-) 7,680 (15.38%) 
2 Officers (AMC & ADC)   5,972   5,855 (-) 117 (1.96%) 
3 MNS   4,389   3,743 (-) 646 (14.72%) 
Total Officers (including AMC/ADC & 
MNS) 
60,294 51,851 (-) 8,443 
(14%) 
4 JCOs/ORs 12,16,247 11.94,864
* 
(-) 21,383 (1.76%) 
 * Excluding 2198 APS Non Regular Junior Commissioned Officers/Other Ranks 
Certain measures to make up the shortage of officers is as under:- 
(a) Present deficiency in officer cadre of Indian Army stands at approximate 14% and is 
planned to be reduced at the rate of 1% per year. 
(b) Moreover, shortage of officers in Indian Army is mainly due to deficiency in intake of 
support cadre. The intake of support cadre has been lower than allocated vacancies. In 
order to ensure enhanced induction of Support Cadre, the proposal of making Service 
Selection Commission attractive is being considered.  
(c) In addition, the following steps have been taken to make Army as an attractive option:- 
 

 
(i) Image Projection Campaign. A number of Recruiting Campaigns and 
advertisement / hoardings have been launched by the Recuriting Directorate to 
attract youth to join the Army. Process has been intiated to further improve and 
modify the Image Projection Campaign to attract the youth of  today in the changing 
socio-economic environment.  
 
(ii) Enhanced Physical Interaction with Target Audience . Enhanced physical interaction 
with target audience has been undertaken in which officers from Recruiting 
Directorate and teams from Command Headquarter s visit various Universities and 
Colleges. Video films on ‘Army as a Career’ and publicity material have been 
prepared and circulated to various schools and colleges through these teams. In 
addition, NCC units and Recuriting Organisations have been incorpo rated to deliver 
motivation talks in educational institutions.  
 
(iii) Interactive Web Site of Recuriting Directorate . The new website of Recruiting 
Directorate ( www.joinindianarmy.nic.in) has been launched. It gives all the 
information required by a candidate to become an officer. It enables candidate to 
know his/her eligibility based on the age and educational qualifications.  
 
Shortage of Junior Commissioned Officers/Other Ranks. The existing deficiency is nominal 
and will be met by passing out of recruits undergoing training as trained soldiers. 
(For comments of the Committee please see para 16 of Chapter I of the Report) 
Recommendation (Para Nos. 32-35) 
The Committee also note that the major part of the modernisation budget of the Service 
comes from the Capital component. For BE 2018 -19, while the Navy made a projection of  Rs. 
33458.38 crore for the capital segment, the allocation made has been Rs. 20003 .71 crore. 
Furthermore, in the case of committed Liabilities, the projection was Rs. 25106.74 crore 
whereas the allocation is to the extent of  Rs. 15083.00 crore.  This amounts to a huge shortfall 
of almost 40 per cent of the budget projected as required.  
In this regard, the representative of the Navy, while deposing, confided to the 
Committee that this has been the case for the last three financial years. There has always 
been disparity over the last three financial years in the modernization Budget vis -à-vis 
committed liabilities. The Committee have also learnt that the budget is managed through the 
financial year by deferring certain committed liability payments so that a certain amount can be 
earmarked for the purpose of modernization and implementation of new schemes. 
While going through the information submitted by the Ministry, the Committee have also 
noted that the percentage share of capital segment of Naval Budget to the total defence 
budget has declined from 12.81 per cent in the year 2012-13 to 7.46 per cent in the year 2017-
18. This data, by itself is reflective of the unsympathetic attitude towards the modernization 
drive of the Naval Forces. 
The Committee, while taking note of the grossly dismal scenario, cannot also help 
pointing out that thi s may lead to delay in induction of ‘critical capabilities’ and resultant cost 
overruns. A ‘budget deficit’ by nearly 40% will indeed have a cascading impact on the 
operational preparedness and technological upgradation of the Navy. This will also possibly  
impact the progress of infrastructure projects and efforts to mitigate shortage of 

 
accommodation for the naval personnel.  Therefore, it is expected that necessary funds for 
modernization of the Indian Navy are channelized and the Committee informed of th e details 
thereof.  
In this connection, a representative of the Navy also intimated the Committee of the 
possibility of the budgetary hampering the modernization work by confiding that the Naval ship 
building programmes do not run on time, and the stage wi se payments get deferred at times. 
Therefore, on occasions, the committed liabilities get deferred and are carried over to the next 
financial year.  
The Committee feel aghast to note that there appears to be an element of complacency 
with regard to ‘acquis ition projects’, and shortfall, and delays in meeting the payment 
obligations are responsible for the same. All the Departments from the Headquarters to the 
Shipyards appear to be habituated to delays. Also, this has become a regular feature of the 
manufacturing and induction plan. The system, therefore, merits a revisit, and improvisation. 
Thus, a concrete plan of budgeting and expenditure needs to be put in place. In case, the 
Navy has certain commitments of payments for procurement, these should be abide d with 
stringently. Similarly, if companies delay deliveries, these should be taken up with due concern 
so that the Force does not suffer. 
Reply of the Government  
Indian Navy  has optimally utilised the allocation under the Capital Budget. The 
budgetary outgo under Modernisation Heads is closely monitored at IHQ MoD(N). Outgo under 
committed Liabilities is linked to delivery/ achievement of milestone/ stage payment, etc. Due 
to the complex and dynamic nature of shipbuilding, slippages are common. However, t he 
slippages under committed liabilities are more than offset by progress of New Schemes. Indian 
Navy, thus, has a mitigation strategy to cater for any slippage and the Capital Budget is being 
fully utilised so as to ensure that the modernisation plans are on track. 
 
(For comments of the Committee on paras 32-35 please see para 19 of Chapter I of the Report) 
TRAINER AIRCRAFT 
Recommendation No. 58: 
 
 With regard to the number of authorised trainer aircraft/simulators and their existing 
strength, the Committee have been informed that the Trainer Aircraft held by IAF currently 
include Basic Trainer Aircraft (BTA), Intermediate Jet Trainer (IJT) and Advanced Jet Trainer 
(AJT). The existing strength of trainer aircraft is 310 as against the sanctioned str ength of 432. 
Simulators have also been provided for each type of aircraft. The procurement of simulators is 
built into the contracts of all aircraft and the IAF is now undertaking the procurement 
accordingly. 
Reply of the Government 
 Simulators are being supplied as per requirement along with the various Trainer Aircraft. 
Against the recent contract for manufacture and supply of 40 Hawk aircraft to IAF and 17 to 
Navy, one each simulator/training aid comprising of Computer Aided Learning system (CALS), 
Cockpit Procedure Training (CPT), Avionics Part Task Trainer (APTT) and Flight Training 
Device (FTD) have been supplied to IAF and Navy. 
  

 
Recommendation (Para No. 59) 
 As regards the basic trainer, the Committee have been informed by Ministry of Defence 
that IAF has a requirement of 183 Basic Trainer Aircraft (BTA). At present, IAF has 75 PC -7 
Mk-II BTA. Case for procurement of additional 38 PC -7 Mk-II aircraft is being progressed. The 
remaining 70 Basic Training Aircraft are to be manufactured by HAL under 'M ake in India' 
Project. The Committee desire that HAL delivers these basic trainers within the stipulated time 
frame. 
Reply of the Government 
 
 HAL has undertaken the Design and Development of HTT 40 Basic Trainer Aircraft, with 
internal funds to meet the requirement of ab initio trainer for IAF. 
 The prototypeaircraft, PT -1 had its first flight on 31 st May 2016. Presently there are two 
prototypes undergoing flight testing and have togethercompleted around 125 flights. 
 The aircraft has demonstrated compliance to all major PSQR requirements and is gearing 
up for the critical stall and spin trials to commence shortly. 
 The certification of the aircraft is planned in Dec 2018. 
 DAC has approved acquisition of 70 HTT -40 aircraft and series production will commence 
post signing of contract with MoD/IAFand is planned to complete over a period of 5 years. 
 
TRAINER AIRCRAFT 
Recommendation (Para No. 60) 
 With regard to the Intermediate Jet Trainer, the Committee have been apprised that the 
Kiran (IJT) aircraft have already  started retiring and are planned to be replaced by the HAL 
built IJT. However, in view of the imminent retirement of existing trainer aircraft (Kiran) and 
delay in progress of IJT Design & Developmental (D&D) activities, Air HQ has studied the 
feasibility of conducting ‘Two Aircraft Type Flying Training pattern’ instead of the normally 
followed ‘Three Aircraft Type Flying Training pattern’. As per the information furnished the ‘Two 
Aircraft Type Flying Training pattern’ is being implemented successfully. 
Reply of the Government 
 Feasibility of conducting ‘Two Aircraft type flying training pattern’ instead of ‘Three 
Aircraft type flying training pattern’ was a pilot project started by IAF to study its feasibility.  The 
project was planned for three years.  P resently, this has been stopped and the ‘Three Aircraft 
type flying training pattern’ is being followed.  As of now Stage -II (F) training is being 
conducted on Kiran Mk I/IA to ensure maximum utilization of the available Kiran aircraft. 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 61 & 62) 
Recommendation No. 61 
 
 The Committee are perturbed to note that due to non -availability of IJT and failure on 
the part of HAL to deliver the same, despite being in the process since 1999, the Indian Air 
Force has had to modify their traini ng programme from a ‘three level approach’ to two levels. 
This is indicative of an unsavory state of affairs. Training is a very critical component from the 
point of view of capacity building of Air Force. It involves lives of our valuable personnel and 
any lacuna, on this front can possibly result into fatalities. Therefore, any delinquencies in this 

 
regard cannot be acceptable. Modification of the training pattern appears to be an effort to 
conceal the factual position of non-availability of IJTs. 
Recommendation No. 62 
 Even in case of two aircraft type flying pattern, only 75 basic trainers are available as 
against the sanctioned strength of 183 aircraft. On this front, the Committee fail to understand 
as to how, the IAF will manage to continue with the two level training pattern with the scarcity 
of first level trainer aircraft being to the extent of 60 per cent. While taking note of the dismal 
scenario, the Committee desire that the Ministry of Defence undertake earnest efforts towards 
bridging the gaps in availability of trainer aircraft with the IAF. The Committee desire to be kept 
informed of the progress made in this regard. 
Reply of the Government 
1. The D&D project for the IJT aircraft was sanctioned by Government of India in 1999. 
Contract was signed with HAL to supply 12 Limited Series Production (LSP) aircraft (in 2005) 
and 73 Series Production (SP) aircraft (in 2010). However, D&D is yet to be completed due to 
HAL’s inability to resolve the critical design issues related to Spin/ Stall characteristics of IJT. A 
case is being taken up for foreclosure of the program. 
 
2. Additionally, HAL is undertaking Design & Development of Basic Trainer Aircraft HTT -
40, wherein HAL has manufactured two prototypes which have flown a total of 123 
development sort ies. The spin test is yet to begin. The execution of First Flight has been 
delayed by 3 years from the stipulated PDC (February 2013 to May 2016). 
 
3. Further, to meet the trainer requirement , procurement of 38 x PC -7 Mk II Basic Trainer 
Aircraft and 20 x Hawk aircraft are under progress. 
 
4. The pilot project for modification of training pattern to two ac training was undertaken to 
study feasibility of this pattern of training in case such a requirement becomes unavoidable 
due to reduced availability of IJ T.  The method was not undertaken to conceal non -availability 
of IJT ac as stated in Para 61, instead it was a step taken to ensure adequacy of training within 
the available resources. 
(For comments of the Committee on paras 58-62 please see para 22 of Chapter I of the Report) 
TRANSPORT PLANES AND HELICOPTERS 
Recommendation (Para No. 63) 
 The Committee have come to know that presently IAF has 27 Units of Transport aircraft 
and 36 Units of Helicopters as against the sanctioned strength of 29 Units of Transport aircraft 
and 39 Units of Helicopters.  As regards phasing out, the Committee have been given to 
understand that phasing out of all the transport planes and helicopters is undertaken as per 
their stipulated life span.  In some cases, depending on the condition and utilisation of the fleet, 
intensive life extension studies are conducted and the lifespan of the aircraft extended. 
Reply of the Government 
 No further Comments 
 
  

 
TRANSPORT PLANES AND HELICOPTERS 
Recommendation (Para No. 64) 
 On the issue of procurement of light utility helicopters, the Committee have been 
intimated that the case for procurement of 197 Reconnaissance & Surveillance Helicopters 
had been withdrawn in the recent past. The case for procurement has reportedly been 
withdrawn on three different occasions at different stages of owing to various reasons. 
Acceptance of Necessity was accorded by Defence Acquisition Committee on 13 May, 2015 
for procurement of 200 kamov 226T helicopters (60 flyways and 140 to be manufactured in 
India) from Russia through the Inter - government Agreement (IGA) route in accordance with 
the provisions of Para 71 of DPP 2013. An IGA has been signed with Russian government in 
Dec 2015. JV has been registered on 2.5.2017 as M/s Indo Russian Helicopters Li mited. The 
case is presently at Request for Proposal(RFP) Stage. Cheetah/ Chetak fleet is proposed to be 
replaced by these 200xKamov 226T Helicopters from Russia. The Committee desire that the 
above mentioned procurements progress in a time -bound manner and they be informed of the 
developments. 
Reply of the Government 
 Request for proposal (FGP) for capital procurement of 200 Kamov 226T Helicopters has 
been issued to Indo Russian Helicopters Ltd [Joint Venture (JV) between Hindustan 
Aeronautics Ltd (HAL) and Russia Helicopters) on 09 May, 2018. Bids are to  be submitted by 
01.08.2018. 
5. Remedial Measures against Delays .  The following steps have been taken to 
reduce ‘Time and Cost Overruns’ for various projects:- 
 
(a) Continuous monitoring by Apex meeting and CPRM, in addition to regular CWP&A 
review meetings. 
(b) Provisions of Liquidated Damages exist in the contracts. Liquidated Damages would be 
levied on the shipyard in accordance with contractual provisions, as and when 
applicable. 
(For comments of the Committee on paras 63 & 64 please see para 25 of Chapter I of the Report) 
 
 
 
  

 
CHAPTER V 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH GOVERNMENT HAVE 
FURNISHED INTERIM REPLIES  
BUDGET ESTIMATE 2018-19 
Recommendation (Para Nos. 29 & 30) 
Recommendation No. 29 
 The Revenue budget of the Navy consists of two components viz. salary and non -salary 
accounts. While the budgeting for the salary component is made in ‘absolute terms’ in case of 
the non -salary part, while the Navy had projected a requirement of Rs.113 20.39 crore, the 
allocation has only been to the extent of Rs.7985.06 crore. This amounts to 70.54 percent of 
the projected requirement. The Committee in this regard also observe that this amounts to an 
increase of only Rs.220 crore over RE of 2017 -18, which works out to a rise of only 2.84 per 
cent. This increase would not even cater to the inflationary pressure. Matters such as 
maintaining the requisite armament level as well as emergency procurements would indeed 
require more funds. The Committee also no te in this regard that the Budget has also not 
factored in the impact that GST will have on the naval expenditure. 
 Recommendation No. 30 
 The Committee also found that the salary to non -salary ratio of the budget for the FY 
2018-19 is 52:48, while it was 45:55 in the year 2015 -16.The Committee are of opinion that 
this is not a healthy sign as lower allocation of budget would negatively affect the maintenance 
and upkeep of Naval Forces. This will also impact the progress of infrastructure projects and 
efforts to mitigate shortage of accommodation. Procurement of ammunition and spares, 
serviceability of ships, submarines and aircraft, upkeep of ageing infrastructure and even day -
to-day running of the Navy are likely to be affected due to the inadequate allocation.   
India's economic resurgence is intrinsically linked to the Seas as 95 per cent of the 
trade by volume and 68 per cent by value is transacted through the sea route. In addition to 
the economic implications, the Indian Ocean Region, which hosts over one-third of the world’s 
population has multiple security challenges. Also, there is a coexistence of developing as well 
as backward economies in the region. Besides this, the area faces rampant threat of piracy 
and trans-national crimes. Furthermore, the area is also prone to natural disasters in the event 
of which, the Indian Navy plays a benevolent role. The challenges in maritime domain require 
a capable and modern Navy which would require induction of adequate funds. Therefore, the 
Committee desire that the funds that are essential are directed to the Navy at least at the later 
stage of the FY 2018 -19 by way of providing additional grants. The Committee may be kept 
informed about the same. 
Reply of the Government 
 The recommendations of the Committee are noted for compliance. The 
projections/requirements of the Navy for additional funds will be forwarded to Ministry of 
Finance for favourable consideration at supplementary/RE stage.  Efforts will be made to 
ensure that all critical requirements are catered to and no project/scheme is shelved for want 
of funds.  

 
SHARE OF NAVAL BUDGET 
Recommendation (Para No. 31) 
 The Committee note that the share of the Naval Budget to the total Defence Budget is 
witnessing a consistent decline. From 18.12 per cent in the year 2012 -13, it has come down to 
13.11 per cent in the year 2018 -19. This is indeed a matter of concern for the Committee. The 
role and responsibilities of Navy are multi -faceted. There have also been capability voids , as 
brought out in the succeeding paragraphs, which need to be bridged. In the opinion of the 
Committee, such a dismal scenario would lead to a setback in morale and pace of 
modernization of Indian Navy. Therefore, the Committee feel that due impetus has to be given 
to budgetary provisions for Indian Navy so that modernization can be carried out as per 
approved long term plans. 
Reply of the Government 
 Under modernization (Capital Acquisition) budget, this Ministry had projected an amount 
of Rs. 1,41,386.66 crore whereas based on allocations received from Ministry of Finance, only 
an amount of Rs. 74,115.99 crore could be allocated for modernization. The Navy’s share in 
allocated amount is Rs. 19,083.00 crore which is 25.75% of modernization budget. It may also 
be added that against RE 17-18 of 17,593.55 crore, Navy got increase of Rs. 1,489.45 crore in 
BE 2018-19 i.e. 8.47% increase which was %age-wise more than other two services. 
 Additional funds sought by Navy will be projected to Ministry of Finance fo r favourable 
consideration at supplementary/RE stage. 
COASTAL SECURITY 
Recommendation (Para No. 43) 
Along with co -ordination, it is equally important that the Navy should procure latest 
world-class surveillance equipments. Since there are multiple agencies/ stakeholders in the 
maritime domain, it is pertinent that identification of threat perception is accurate and verifiable. 
For this purpose, the most advanced technologies available in the world for monitoring and 
tracking devices/software need to be procured.  This will help in tracking on  the threat targets 
before any trouble is created. 
Reply of the Government  
Indian Navy is conscious of the need to strengthen its surveillance framework for IOR 
and ensure a more comprehensive Maritime Domain A wareness (MDA) for the area. The 
successive paragraphs outline ongoing endeavors to strengthen our capabilities to consolidate 
Maritime Domain Awareness in IOR. 
 
1. Satellite Based Surveillance (SBS) -3.  In view of the vast area (7000 nm x 5000 nm) 
involved, space -based surveillance is the optimum method for maintaining surveillance over 
IOR. In addition to the ongoing SBS -2, Indian Navy requirements have also been incorporated 
in the SBS -3 Programme pr oposal prepared by ISRO and likely to be put up to CCS in May 
2018. This proposal, apart from shared assets that would serve surveillance requirements over 
both land and seas, also includes maritime -specific applications with large coverage, which 
would be of pivotal significance in building MDA and triggering other assets for target tracking.  

 
An Earth Station is also being constructed for SBS2/3 on Naval land at Palayamkottai that 
affords an expansive maritime field -of-view and would facilitate downloadin g of real -time data 
from IOR. 
2. Indo-French Space Cooperation for Maritime Awareness . Under the aegis of the 
National Security Council Secretariat (NSCS) -led Maritime Security Dialogue and an existing 
MoU for Reinforced Cooperation in Space, 2015, with Franc e, ISRO is steering co -
development of a joint Indo -French satellite surveillance system with CNES, France. An 
Implementing Arrangement (IA) has been signed between the two agencies, which was also 
highlighted in the Joint Strategic Vision for Maritime Coop eration in IOR released on the same 
date. IN has been partnering ISRO as the principal end user and lead maritime security 
agency, for this project and is also represented in the ISRO -CNES committee to finalise the 
plans. This programme seeks sharing of data from existing resources in the short term  (one 
year) and operationalization of a maritime -specific constellation (6 -8 satellites) in the medium 
term (2021). Establishment of a maritime Earth Station is also envisaged under this project, for 
which Indian Navy is committed to provide land at Palaya mkottai, in addition to operating this 
hub.  
3. National Maritime Domain Awareness (NMDA) .  Indian Navy  is pursuing establishment 
of a National MDA network in collaboration with all national maritime agencies. Indian Navy  
has already established Information M anagement and Analysis Centre at Gurugram, which 
collates a Common Operational Picture (COP) for IOR, over the NC3I Network, by correlating 
multiple feeds and inputs. This would be further enhanced under the NMDA project. Currently, 
the CCS Note for NMDA is pended with MoD. 
4. P8I Maritime Reconnaissance Aircraft and Sea Guardian UAVs .  Indian Navy is already 
operating eight P8I MR aircraft that have vastly enhanced our surveillance as well as maritime 
strike capability. With planned induction of four more air craft, IN assets would be further 
augmented to maintain surveillance over targets detected by the SBS enhancements, as well 
as other intelligence inputs. Procurement of Sea -Guardian UAVs is also being progressed, 
which would further enhance the IN capability to maintain surveillance over choke points in the 
IOR, as well as track targets of interest for longer periods. 
5. Indian Navy is also progressing cases for procurement of various kinds of helicopters/ 
upgradation of existing helicopter, which are at diffe rent stages presently, which will enhance 
all round surveillance capability.  
6. In addition to patrolling by surface and air assets, electronic surveillance of the maritime 
domain is undertaken using chain of coastal/ offshore radars, National Automatic Iden tification 
System (NAIS) Chain and Long Range Identification and Tracking (LRIT) System. This assists 
in developing MDA.  National Command Control Communication and Intelligence Network 
linking 51 nodes of the IN and ICG has been set up and is functional.  Vessel Traffic 
Management System (VTMS) radars in ports also facilitate surveillance of ports. 
7. The following initiative are also being undertaken to upgrade surveillance systems and 
strengthen maritime security:- 
 
(a) Implementation of Phase II of the Coastal  Surveillance Network (CSN) comprising 38 
radars for near gap-free radar surveillance of coastal areas. 
(b) Satellite bases transponders for tracking of fishing vessels. 
(c) Setting up of Fisheries Monitoring Control and Surveillance Centres (FMCS) by DADF. 
(d) Setting up of National Coastal Vessel Traffic System (NCVTS) for coastal areas. 
  

 
AIR FORCE 
BUDGET 2018-19 
Recommendation (Para Nos. 49-52) 
Recommendation No. 49 
 The Committee have found that for the current year 2018 -19, Air Force has made a 
projection of Rs.1,14,526 crore while the allocation is only to the tune of Rs. 65,891 crore. Out 
of this allocation, the Revenue budget allocation is Rs. 30,121 crore as against a projection of 
Rs. 36,561 crore. This amounts to a shortfall of Rs. 6,440 crore vis-à-vis the projection. In case 
of the Revenue Budget, the allocation is made under two heads of account, one being the 
salary account head, and the other, the non -salary head of account. The allocation for the 
salary part is provided for in entirety on the basis of the projection. The remaining part of the 
Revenue budget caters for non -salary expenditure viz. supporting mandatory sustenance and 
operational requirements of the Service. Hence, the deficit or shortfall of Rs. 6440 crore in the 
Revenue Budget is likel y to impact the operational preparedness, ability to procure spares & 
fuel, apart from leaving gaps in training programs, serviceability of older systems and provision 
of basic amenities to the Air Force personnel. 
Recommendation No. 50 
 In addition to the  shortfall in budget allocation vis -à-vis the projections, the Committee 
note that there would be an additional burden of taxes due to the new taxation laws. On this 
count, the Committee have gathered that in 2016 -17 the customs duty paid was to the tune o f 
Rs. 943.62 crore, which has since hiked up to Rs. 1614.28 crore in 2017 -18.This amount has 
not been reimbursed to the Air Force during the year. The estimated outgo of funds as part of 
custom duties for FY 2018 -19 is Rs. 1726.98 crore. The Committee, the refore, suggest that 
appropriate allocation be made so as to address the issues of taxation in the budget 2018 -19 
and by way of keeping in mind, the additional burden that has been levied on the Air Force due 
to the increase in duties paid during the year, 2017-18.  
Recommendation No. 51 
 The Committee also realize in this regard that the expenditure for meeting Emergency 
requirements and procurements for the purpose of ‘war readiness’ has also to be met from the 
same budgetary allocation. While tendering e vidence, the Vice Chief of Air Staff apprised the 
Committee that deals worth Rs. 20,000 crore have already been entered into for the purpose 
of acquiring war reserve armaments for ‘10 days of intense conflict’. The Committee, note in 
this regard that the B udget Estimate allocation for the IAF is short of their requirements. 
Further, the Committee opine that the budget does not reflect the intent of achieving strategic 
objectives that are desired as part of the Long Term Integrated Plan Period 2012-27. 
Recommendation No. 52 
 In order to achieve the strategic objectives of IAF, which include, deterrence on ‘two 
fronts’, along with an offensive Defence posture, enhanced Air Defence capability, enhanced 
combat force levels, increased surveillance and automation of Air Defence, the Ministry needs 
to be supportive of the budget projections as made by the Air Force. The Air Force also has a 
hard pressed need for continued induction of SU 30 Mki Aircraft, Akash -surface to Air missiles, 

 
latest radar systems, Rafale and Tejas Aircraft, etc. in order to stand at the ‘basic minimum’. In 
order to achieve the planned targets, the Committee are of the view that it is of utmost 
importance that the Air Force is assigned essential funding during the FY 2018-19.    
Reply of the Government 
 This Ministry is in agreement with the recommendations of the Committee.  It is a fact 
that projected requirements of Air Force are not fully met.  The reason behind this is the fact 
that though this Ministry projects the requirements projected  by the Services, including Air 
Force, to Ministry of Finance for favourable consideration, Ministry of Finance provides lesser 
allocations than projected. Under the Capital head, Air Force projected an amount of Rs. 
77,694.74 crore which includes Rs. 72,481.65 crore. for modernization, however due to lesser 
allocation received, an amount of Rs. 35,770.17 crore only could be allocated to Air Force 
under capital budget which included an amount of Rs. 33,099.90 crore for modernization.  This 
amount is, however, Rs. 2,200 crore more than RE 17-18 of Rs. 30899.90 crore. 
 Additional funds sought by Air Force will be projected to Ministry of Finance for 
favourable consideration at supplementary/RE stage. 
BUDGET REVIEW 
Recommendation (Para No. 53) 
 During the course of examination of the Demands for Grants (2018-19) of the Ministry of 
Defence, the Committee have learnt that the percentage share of Air Force budget has 
declined considerably during the last few years. In the year 2012-13, it was to the extent of 
24.93 per cent, and has stooped down to 22.51 per cent in the year 2017 -18. The Committee 
observe that such a downward trend would impinge upon the morale, operationability and 
modernization of Air Force. Moreover, suc h deficiencies would result in asymmetry in 
capabilities vis -à-vis envisaged threat perception. The Committee, therefore, desire that the 
Ministry of Defence take up the planned targets of Air Force with due seriousness. The same 
needs to be resonated by way of adequate allocation in the budgeting.   
Reply of the Government 
 The percentage share may not give a correct picture as gain of percentage in one 
Service’s share may lead to lesser percentage share of other Service.  It may however be 
added that in B E 2018 -19, Air Force’s %age share is 23.13% (Rs. 64,591.44 crore against 
total of Rs. 2,79,305.32 crore).  In the Capital segment Air Force has the largest share of 
38.06% whereas under modernization budget Air Force’s share is even more at 44.66%.    
 Additional funds sought by Air Force will be projected to Ministry of Finance for 
favourable consideration at supplementary/ RE stage. 
MODERNIZATION 
Recommendation (Para No. 54) 
 While going through the information submitted by the Ministry, the Committee found that 
over a period of time, the allocations made under the capital head for the Air Force, which is 
largely accountable for modernization budget of the Service, has consistently plummeted. In 
the year 2007-08, it was to the tune of 17.51 per cent of the total defence budget and has gone 

 
down to 11.96 per cent in the year 2016 -17.Air Force is a capital intensive service as 
acquisitions such as aircraft involve huge amounts/expenditure. In order to meet the 
challenges of a two front war, Air Force has to b e equipped with essential combat capabilities 
and modern ground facilities. With the skinning of the budget under the capital segment, the 
Committee are compelled to point out the that there appears to be a lack of sufficient sincerity 
towards capacity enhancement and modernization of the Air Force. Flight safety also becomes 
a matter of concern due to issues of obsolescence. In this context, the Committee further 
believe that inadequacy of budget allocation would result in deferment of certain procurements, 
thereby, deepening the capability deficit further. Therefore, the Committee express the opinion 
that requisite stress needs to be laid on the modernization programme for which allocating 
sufficient funds would be a necessity.   
Reply of the Government 
 Comparison of Air Force’s share in capital budget with entire budget under Defence 
Services may not give a correct picture.  The entire budget of Defence Services includes 
Revenue and Capital budget of which share of Revenue budget is almost double of Capit al 
budget.  In Revenue budget, largest share is of Army as it being manpower intensive. If we 
calculate Capital budget separately, then Air Force’s share is largest at 38.81 % in BE 2017 -18 
and 38.06% in BE 2018 -19.  It is however agreed that funds could n ot be allocated as per 
projected requirement of Air Force, due to receipt of lesser allocations from Ministry of 
Finance. 
 The Committee may be assured that projections / requirements of the Air Force will be 
forwarded to Ministry of Finance for favourable consideration at RE/ Supplementary Stage. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi;                                                                                                             Kalraj Mishra,  
4 January, 2019                                                            Chairperson,          
14 Pausa, 1940 (Saka)                                                          Standing Committee on Defence 
 
 
 
 
  

 
APPENDIX I 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE 
 
MINUTES OF THE THIRD SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE (2018-19) 
 
 The Committee sat on Friday, the 4 th January, 201 9 from 1500 hrs. to 1645 hrs. in  
Committee Room No. 'C', Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
Shri Kalraj Mishra       - Chairperson 
 
   MEMBERS 
 
     LOK SABHA 
2 Km Shobha Karandlaje 
3 Smt Mala Rajya Laxmi Shah 
4 Shri Dharambir Singh 
5 Smt Pratyusha Rajeshwari Singh 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
6 Dr Ashok Bajpai 
7 Shri Madhusudan Mistry 
8 Shri Soumya R Patnaik 
9 Shri G V L Narasimha Rao 
10 Shri Ram Nath Thakur 
11 Lt. Gen. Dr D P Vats 
SECRETARIAT 
1. Smt. Kalpana Sharma   - Joint Secretary  
2. Shri Srinivasulu Gunda   - Director  
3. Shri Rahul Singh   - Deputy Secretary 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members of the Committee  and informed 
them about the agenda for the Sitting . The Committee then took up the following draft Reports for 
consideration and adoption: 
(i) Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations contained in the 
Fortieth Report (16th Lok Sabha) on ‘Demands for Grants of the Ministry of Defence f or the 
year 2018 -19 on General Defence Budget, Border Roads Organisation, Indian Coast 
Guard, Military Engineer Services, Directorate General Defence Estates, Defence Public 
Sector Undertakings, Welfare of Ex -Servicemen, Defence Pensions, Ex -Servicemen 
Contributory Health Scheme (Demand Nos. 19 and 22);  
(ii) Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations contained in the 
Forty-first Report (16th Lok Sabha) on ‘Demands for Grants of the Ministry of Defence for 
the year 2018-19 on Army, Navy and Air Force (Demand No. 20)’; 

 
(iii) Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/ Recommendations contained in the 
Forty-second Report (16th Lok Sabha) on 'Demands for Grants of the Ministry of Defence 
for the year 2018 -19 on Capital Outlay on Defence Services, Procurement Policy and 
Defence Planning (Demand No. 21)'; and 
(iv) Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/ Recommendations contained in the 
Forty-third Report (16th Lok Sabha) on ‘Demands for Grants of the Ministry of Defence for 
the year 2018-19 pertaining to Revenue Budget of Ordnance Factories, Defence Research 
and Development Organisation, DGQA and NCC (Demand No. 20)’. 
3. After deliberation, the Committee adopted the above Reports and authorized the 
Chairperson to finalize and present the Reports to Parliament on a convenient date alongwith the 
Reports on Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/ Recommendations contained in 
the Thirty-second Report (16 th Lok Sabha) on 'Creation of Non -Lapsable Capital Fund Accoun t, 
instead of the present system' and Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/ 
Recommendations contained in the Thirty -third Report (16 th Lok Sabha) on ' Resettlement of Ex -
Servicemen', which were already adopted by the Committee on 14.11.2018.  
4. ******* 
The Committee then adjourned. 
 
A copy of verbatim record of the proceedings has been kept. 
 
****Does not pertain to the Reports. 
  

 
APPENDIX II 
ANALYSIS OF THE ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE OBSERVATIONS/ 
RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE FORTY-FIRST REPORT OF STANDING 
COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE (SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA) ON `DEMANDS FOR GRANTS OF 
THE MINISTRY OF DEFENCE FOR THE YEAR 2018 -19 ON ARMY, NAVY AND AIR FORCE 
(DEMAND NO. 20)’ 
 
1. Total number of recommendations                71        
         
2. Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted by the Government  (please 
see Chapter II): 
 Para Nos. 4 , 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 20, 21, 22, 23, 24, 25, 26, 28, 36, 37, 
38, 41, 42,  44, 45, 46, 47, 48, 55, 56, 57, 65, 66, 67, 69, 70 and 71 
Total :        38 
                             Percentage:     53.5% 
 
3. Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do not desire to pursue in  view of 
the replies received from the Government (please see Chapter III): 
  Para Nos. 12, 13, 19, 39, 40 and 68 
Total :        06 
Percentage:     8.6% 
4. Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of Government have  not been 
accepted by the Committee which require reiteration and commented  upon  ( please see Chapter 
IV): 
  Para Nos. 1, 2, 3, 10, 11, 27, 32-35, 58-62, 63 and 64 
Total :       17 
Percentage:    23.9% 
 
5. Recommendations/Observations in respect of which Government have furnished  interim 
replies (please see Chapter V): 
  Para Nos. 29, 30, 31, 43, 49-52, 53 and 54 
           Total :         10  
Percentage:   14% 
 
 