ELEVENTH REPORT
STANDING COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE
(2014-2015)
(SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA)
MINISTRY OF DEFENCE
[Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations/observations
contained in the Third Report of the Standing Committee on Defence
(16th Lok Sabha) on ‘Demands for Grants of the Ministry of Defence
for the year 2014-15 on Army (Demand No. 22)’]
Presented to Lok Sabha on 13.08.2015
Laid  in  Rajya Sabha  on  13.08.2015
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
August, 2015/Shravana, 1937 ( Saka)


C.O.D. No. 145
Price : R  84.00
© 2015 B Y L OK SABHA S ECRETARIAT
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct
of Business in Lok Sabha (Fifteenth Edition) and printed by
Anupam Art Printers, New Delhi.

CONTENTS
PAGE
COMPOSITION OF THE C OMMITTEE (2014-15) ................................ (iii)
INTRODUCTION ................................................................. (v)
CHAPTER I Report......................................................... 1
CHAPTER II Recommendations/Observations which have been
accepted by the Government ............................ 32
CHAPTER III Recommendations/Observations which the Committee
do not desire to pursue in view of the replies of the
Government .................................................. 43
CHAPTER IV Recommendations/Observations in respect of which
Replies of the Government have not been accepted
by the Committee and which require reiteration ... 44
C
HAPTER V Recommendations/Observations in respect of which
final replies of the Government are still awaited ..... 59
APPENDICES
I. Minutes of the Nineteenth sitting of the Standing
Committee on Defence (2014-15) held on 10.08.2015 .... 60
II. Analysis of Action Taken by the Government on the
Observations/Recommendations contained in the
Third Report (16th Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee
on Defence (2014-15) .......................................... 62
(i)

COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE
ON DEFENCE (2014-15)
  Maj Gen B C Khanduri, AVSM (Retd) —  Chairperson
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Suresh C Angadi
3. Shri Shrirang Appa Barne
4. Shri Dharambir
5. Shri Thupstan Chhewang
6. Col Sonaram Choudhary (Retd)
7. Shri H D Devegowda
8. Shri Sher Singh Ghubaya
9. Shri G Hari
10. Shri Ramesh Jigajinagi
11. Dr Murli Manohar Joshi
12. Km Shobha Karandlaje
13. Shri Vinod Khanna
14. Dr Mriganka Mahato
15. Shri Tapas Paul
16. Shri Malla Reddy
17. Shri Rajeev Satav
18. Smt Mala Rajya Lakshmi Shah
19. Capt Amarinder Singh (Retd)
20. Shri A P Jithender Reddy
*21. Shri Hemendra Chandra
**22. Shri Rajyavardhan Singh Rathore
$23. Smt Pratyusha Rajeshwari Singh
(iii)
* Sad Demise on 05.09.2014.
** Ceased to be Member of the Committee on 09.11.2014.
$ Nominated w.e.f. 22.12.2014.

(iv)
Rajya Sabha
24. Shri K R Arjunan
#25. Shri Anand Sharma
26. Shri Rajeev Chandrasekhar
27. Shri A U Singh Deo
28. Shri Harivansh
29. Shri Vinay Katiyar
30. Shri Hishey Lachungpa
31. Shri Madhusudan Mistry
32. Smt Ambika Soni
33. Shri Tarun Vijay
@34. Shri Narendra Budania
SECRETARIAT
1. Smt Kalpana Sharma — Joint Secretary
2. Shri D S Malha — Director
3. Shri A K Srivastava — Additional Director
4. Shri Rahul Singh — Under Secretary
# Nominated w.e.f. 08.10.2014.
@ Ceased to be Member of the Committee on 08.10.2014.

(v)
INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairperson of the Standing Committee on Defence (2014-15)
having been authorized by the Committee to present the Report on
their behalf, present this Eleventh Report of the Committee on ‘Action
Taken by the Government on the recommendations/observations
contained in the Third Report of the Standing Committee on Defence
(16th Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants of the Ministry of Defence for
the year 2014-15 on Army (Demand No. 22)’.
2. The Third Report was presented to Lok Sabha and laid in
Rajya Sabha on 22 December 2014. It contained 31 recommendations/
observations. The Ministry of Defence furnished Action Taken Replies on
all the recommendations/observations on 11 June 2015.
3. The Draft Action Taken Report was considered and adopted by
the Committee at their sitting held on 10 August 2015.
4. An analysis of action taken by the Government on the
recommendations/observations contained in the Third Report of the
Standing Committee on Defence (16th Lok Sabha) is given in
Appendix-II.
   N
EW D ELHI; MAJ GEN B C KHANDURI, AVSM (RETD),
10 August, 2015 Chairperson,
18 Shravana, 1937 (Saka) Standing Committee on Defence.

CHAPTER I
REPORT
This report of the Standing Committee on Defence deals with Action
Taken by the Government on the recommendations/observations
contained in the Third Report of the Standing Committee on Defence
(16th Lok Sabha) on ‘Demands for Grants of the Ministry of Defence for
the year 2014-15 on Army (Demand No. 22) ’ which was presented to
Lok Sabha and laid in Rajya Sabha on 22 December, 2014.
2. The Committee ’s Third Report (16th Lok Sabha) contained
31 recommendations/observations on the following aspects:—
Para No./Nos. Subject
1, 2 & 3 Budget
4 Modernisation of Army
5 Wheeled Guns
6 Tanks
7 Missiles
8 & 9 Ammunition
10, 11, 12 & 13 Bullet Proof Jackets
14 Night Vision Devices
15 Shortage of Basic Items for Army
16 Mountain Strike Corps
17, 18 & 19 Force Level of Army
20, 21 & 22 Need for new Rifle for Army (INSAS Rifle Vs.
Assault Rifle)
23 Conditions for treating a Soldier as Martyr
24 &, 25 Ex-Servicemen Contributory Health Scheme
26 & 27 Directorate General Quality Assurance
28, 29, 30 & 31 National Cadet Corps

2
3. Action Taken Replies have been received from the Government
in respect of all the recommendations/observations contained in the
Report. The replies have been examined and the same have been
categorised as follows:—
(i) (a) Observations/Recommendations which have been
accepted by the Government:
Para Nos. 6, 18, 19
(03 Recommendations)
These may be included in Chapter II of the Draft Report.
(b) Observations/Recommendations which have been
accepted by the Government and to be commented upon:
Para Nos. 23, 24, 25, 28, 29, 30, 31
(07 Recommendations)
These may be included in Chapter II of the Draft Report.
(ii) Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not
desire to pursue in view of the replies received from the
Government:
Para Nos. 8, 9, 11, 17
(04 Recommendations)
These may be included in Chapter III of the Draft Report.
(iii) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies
of Government have not been accepted by the Committee
which require reiteration and commented upon:
Para Nos. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 7, 10, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 20, 21, 22,
26, 27
(17 Recommendations)
These may be included in Chapter IV of the Draft Report.
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which
Government have furnished interim replies:
Para No. Nil
(00 Recommendation)
This may be mentioned in Chapter V of the Draft Report.
4. The Committee desire that the Ministry ’s response to their
comments made in Chapter 1 of this Report to be furnished to them
at the earliest and in any case not later than six months of the
presentation of this Report.

3
A. Budget
Recommendation (Para Nos. 1, 2 & 3)
5. The Committee had recommended as under:—
‘The Committee are surprised to see the continuous gap between
the projected requirement of the Army and the allocations made
to it. In the Revenue side, the Committee noted that during the
year 2010-11, the gap between the projected amount and allocated
amount is Rs. 5465.49 crore which has been increased to Rs. 13740.69
crore in 2011-12, whereas, during the year 2012-13, it has been
decreased to Rs. 6534.59 crore but again increased to Rs. 12236.18
crore during the year 2013-14. During the current year also, the
Committee see the gap of Rs. 12993.86 crore between the projected
and allocated amount. In the capital side, it has been noted that
there has been huge gap between the projected and allocated
amount of Rs. 4382.20 crore, Rs. 6400.99 crore, Rs. 8996.80 crore,
Rs. 7644.25 crore and Rs. 15402.55 crore for the years 2010-11,
2011-12, 2012-13, 2013-14 and 2014-15 respectively. ’
6. The Ministry in its Action Taken Reply has stated as under:—
‘The allocations made to the Services are based upon the ceilings
conveyed by the Ministry of Finance. In view of the shortfall in the
allocations made by the Ministry of Finance as compared to the
overall requirements projected by this Ministry, shortfalls are bound
to arise in the allocations made to individual Services.
This observation of the Committee was conveyed to the Ministry of
Finance vide D.O. No. 3(4)/Bud-I/2013/06/Def. Secy./2015 dated
14.01.15.’
7. The Committee had recommended as under:—
‘The Committee are of the view that the Army has projected its
demand after careful consideration of its various ongoing and
proposed schemes. Since the pay and allowances and other obligatory
expenses are of recurring nature, the gap between projected and
allocated amount forced the Army to reduce its requirement of
stores including ordnance stores, transportation, revenue works and
maintenance, etc. affecting the upkeep of equipment, maintenance
of existing infrastructure and bringing deficiencies in overall
preparedness of the forces. ’

4
8. The Ministry in its Action Taken Reply has stated as under:—
‘It may be noted that the Ministry of Defence is bound by the
overall budgetary ceiling provided by the Ministry of Finance. Of
the available limited resources, funds are allocated to the services
depending on their requirements. While allocating funds it is ensured
that all the genuine requirements are met and shortfall of funds
does not come in the way of security of the country, which is the
top-most priority.
This observation of the Committee was conveyed to the Ministry of
Finance vide D.O. No. 3(4)/Bud-I/2013/06/Def. Secy./2015 dated
14.01.15.’
9. The Committee had recommended as under:—
‘The Committee are not able to understand the reduction of
Rs. 15402.55 crore in the capital budget, during the current year
and foresee the difficulties likely to be faced by the Army for its
new projects and infrastructure as most part of the budget would
go for the committed liabilities.
The Committee find the entire scenario very discouraging and do
not find any reason with the Ministry of Defence and the Ministry
of Finance for curtailment in the budget of the Army. The Committee
fully understand that capable, motivated and dedicated force cannot
move and fight without fuel in the vehicles and fire in its weapons.
Therefore, the Committee recommend that the Ministry of Defence
should allocate the amount to the Army as per its projections to
buy new weapon system and creating infrastructure for the Army
so as to keep its fighting spirit high and ready to move in any
eventuality.’
10. The Ministry in its Action Taken Reply has stated as under:—
‘In view of the shortfall in the allocations made by the Ministry of
Finance with reference to the requirements projected, there will
be shortfall in allocations made to individual Services. It would be
unfair to allocate fully to any one Service, as this can only be done
at the cost of other Services. ’
11. The Committee are amazed over the routine reply of the
Ministry of Defence on the lower allocation provided to Army year
after year. It seems that Ministry has not planned the expenditure
of funds before making demands for allocation a certain amount.

5
The Committee are of the view that the Ministry of Defence with
prudent planning can work out a plan for maximum use with available
money and should not set arbitrary targets which cannot be achieved
because of less allocation by Ministry of Finance. The Committee
understand that sometimes the allocated money also being
surrendered by the Army which must be avoided. The Committee
desire that revised amount allocated by the Ministry should be utilised
fully by apposite planning.
12. The Committee are also not happy over the Action Taken
reply of the Ministry of Defence that “it is bound by the overall
budgetary ceiling provided by Ministry of Finance ”. The Committee
want to know the logic behind imposing budgetary ceiling from the
Ministry of Finance at the highest level and Ministry of Defence
accepting this. If the matter has been taken up with the Ministry of
Finance, then details of the same may please be provided.
13. The Committee are constrained to note the term “genuine
requirements” used, which gives an impression that few of other
demands of the Army are not genuine and the budget provided to
the Army can be curtailed as per the wishes of the Ministry of
Finance and the Ministry of Defence.
14. In view of the strong need for modernizaiton of Army, it is
the earnest desire of the Committee that adequate allocation should
be provided to the Army for launching of new projects and
development of infrastructure, as per the operational role assigned
to the Armed Forces.
15. The Committee desire that above facts should be brought to
the notice of Raksha Mantri and, if required, Prime Minister may
also be informed.
B. Modernization of Army
Recommendation (Para No. 4)
16. The Committee had recommended as under:—
‘The Committee note from the reply of the Ministry that the
modernization of the Armed Forces is a continuous process based
on threat perception, operational necessity, technological changes
and available resources and the process is based on a 15 year Long
Term Integrated Perspective Plan (LTIPP), the five year Services
Capital Acquisition Plan (SCAP) and the Annual Acquisition Plan (AAP)

6
and the Armed Forces remain in a state of operational readiness to
meet any eventuality. However, presentation by Army before the
Committee belied the claim of the Ministry that all is well with the
Army, as Army desired to acquire seven most critical procurement
schemes to contribute for enhancement of their combat power in
fast track mode. In this respect, the Committee are constrained to
note that very little amount e.g. Rs. 8,521.10 crore, Rs. 10,176.07
crore, Rs. 13,153.95 crore, Rs. 12,383.36 crore, Rs. 14,252.49 crore,
Rs. 13,724.14 crore and Rs. 13,327.04 crore was allocated to the
Army for modernization during the years 2007-08 till 2013-14
respectively and that too for the last two years it is on the decrease.
On the other hand the information supplied by the Ministry reveals
that the Army could not utilize its modernization budget fully for
the last six years in a row except for the year 2007-08. During the
year 2008-09, it could not spend Rs. 2461.29 crore; in 2009-10,
Rs. 1502.19 crore; in 2010-11, Rs. 666.27 crore; in 2011-12,
Rs. 3386.56 crore; in 2012-13, Rs. 2852.35 crore; and in 2013-14
Rs. 2900.55 crore. Taking into account the above facts, the
Committee are of the view that the Ministry has not planned spending
of the Army properly otherwise surrendering of the funds could
have been avoided. The Committee desires that a thorough review
of LTIPP , SCAP and AAP should be undertaken for optimal utilization
of funds. The Committee also desires that higher allocations should
be provided for modernization of Army so as to make it a force to
reckon with. ’
17. The Ministry in its Action Taken Reply has stated as under:—
‘The Committee has referred to the seven most critical procurements
schemes identified by Army. It is clarified that they are derived
from LTIPP , SCAP and AAP and the Army has flagged them additionally
as priority items. The Budgetary Estimate for Financial Year
2015-16 is Rs. 22054.50 crore. The gaps between Budgetary allocation
and actuals arise due to post contracts issues such as delayed
supplies, supply consignments not being able to clear inspection
and when progress of on-going procurements are affected by reasons
such as insufficient and limited vendor base, non-conformity of the
offers to the Request for Proposal (RFP) conditions, long field trials,
complexities in contract negotiations, stakeholder consultations and
long lead time for indigenization etc.
Recommendation of the Committee for Review of LTIPP , SCAP and
AAP is already being implemented. ’

7
The current LTIPP is for 2012—27 and the next LTIPP (2017—32) is
already under formulation. This exercise ensures that the 15 year
Long Term Plan (2012—27) is reviewed every 3-5 years and the next
LTIPP (2017—32) is prepared incorporating all the operational
necessities.
In respect of SCAP , Review of 12th Five Year Plan (2012—17) has
already been carried out. The Recast 12th Five Year Plan was
approved in July 2014.
Annual Acquisition Plan (AAP) is renewed every year. AAP 2014—16
was approved in May 2014. AAP 2015—17 is already under
formulation.’
18. The Committee had referred to the seven most critical
procurements schemes identified by the Army. The Ministry in its
Action Taken Replies stated that these items are derived from Long
Term Integrated Perspective Plan (LTIPP), the five year Services
Capital Acquisition Plan (SCAP) and the Annual Acquisition Plan (AAP)
and the Army has flagged them additionally as priority items. The
Budgetary Estimate for Financial Year 2015-16 is Rs. 22054.50 crore.
The gaps between Budgetary allocation and actuals arise due to post
contracts issues such as delayed supplies, supply consignments not
being able to clear inspection and when progress of on-going
procurements are affected by reasons such as insufficient and limited
vendor base, non-conformity of the offers to the Request for Proposal
(RFP) conditions, long field trials, complexities in contract
negotiations, stakeholder consultations and long lead time for
indigenization etc. The Committee are surprised why there has been
gaps between budgetary allocation and actuals and desire to know
the reasons behind delayed supplies and non-clearance of inspection
of supplied consignments. The Committee also deplore the planning
process of the Ministry of Defence which led to insufficient and
limited vendor base as well as non-conformity of the offers to the
Request for Proposal. The Committee, therefore, recommend to fix
the responsibility in this regard.
19. The Committee recommend that remedial measures should
be taken to contain the above issues and they may be intimated at
the earliest.
C. Critical shortages with Army-Wheeled Guns.
Recommendation (Para No. 5)
20. The Committee had recommended as under:—
‘The Committee note that as per the Artillery profile, adequate
quantities of wheeled guns are proposed to be procured to make

8
up for the existing void. An inference can easily be drawn from the
existing situation that either there are problems in the course of
procurement or with the planning process. The Committee are of
the view that items of critical importance should be given priority
in planning as well as in procurement so that wheeled guns are
available to the Army in a given time. ’
21. The Ministry in its Action Taken Reply has stated as under:—
‘The procurement planning is based on the Long Term Integrated
Perspective Plan (LTIPP), Services Capital Acquisition Plan (SCAP)
and Annual Acquisition Plan (AAP) and arms and ammunitions are
by and large available in the army in adequate quantity. Mismatches
between requirements and availability can sometimes occur which
are continually addressed by the on-going procurement process. ’
The Army has identified a set of critical items which are to be
given priority. The procurement of wheeled guns is currently under
progress in the Regiment of Artillery as per the Artillery profile
2027.’
22. The Committee are constrained to note that despite having
the Long Term Integrated Perspective Plan (LTIPP), Services Capital
Acquisition Plan (SCAP) and Annual Acquisition Plan (AAP) and
identifying the shortages, there is a mismatch in requirement and
availability. The Committee are taken aback by the revelation of the
Ministry of Defence that arms and ammunitions are by and large
available in the Army in adequate quantity. The Committee fail to
understand what does “by and large ” means. It gives a false hope
that Army has every arm and ammunition as per their profile or
authorised strength, which is not true. The Committee wish while
replying to the recommendations of the Committee, the Ministry
should be more careful and vigilant.
23. The Committee also wish that the Ministry have explained in
detail about the progress made in acquisition of Wheeled Guns in
the Regiment of Artillery as per the Artillery profile 2027. A brief
note on the achievement made till date to realize Artillery profile
2027 may also be provided to the Committee within two months.
24. The Committee recommend that the Ministry should make
all out efforts to procure this item of critical importance to increase
the fire power of the Army at the earliest.

9
D. Critical Shortages with Army: Missiles.
Recommendation (Para No. 7)
25. The Committee had recommended as under:—
‘The Committee note that some of the missile systems with Army
are BrahMos, UBK, Milan and Konkurs Missiles. However , the
Committee find that Army also have some deficiencies in holding of
missiles. The Committee also note that in reply to a question on
the availability of missile carrying vehicles and if any proposal from
private sector to supply the same had been received, it has been
stated that no concrete proposal for supply of these vehicles were
received from the private sector.
This means that some initiative was taken by the private sector to
supply the same but it could not fructify due to some reasons. The
Committee desire that as missiles are very crucial component in
the arsenal of any modern force with a high deterrent value, it
should be made available to the Army in required quantity. Missile
carrying vehicle is an essential integral part of carrying missile
from place of production to the user , therefore, the Committee
recommend that if BEML is not able to supply the requisite quantities
due to various controversies or some other reasons, private sector
should be given an opportunity for presenting their case. ’
26. The Ministry in its Action Taken Reply has stated as under:—
‘Missiles are being procured for the Army through on-going contracts
and procurement cases in progress.
Department of Defence Production (DDP), Ministry of Defence has
permitted M/s BEML to engage with and procure from M/s TATRA
TRUCKS (Czech Republic) the aggregates, components and parts of
TATRA vehicles for procurements which are justified and necessary
on basis of operational urgency, national security and non-availability
of other alternatives. Thus, BEML is in a position to resume supplies
for such critical procurement cases. ’
27. The Committee note that Missiles are being procured for the
Army through on-going contracts and procurement cases in progress,
however, the reply given by the Ministry on Missile carrying Vehicles
is not clear and does not state whether BEML has resumed supplies
of TATRA Trucks or not. By recommending adequate supply of missile
carrying vehicles, the Committee had intended that missiles could

10
be supplied and deployed by the forces at the desired location as
per their perspective plans. The Committee are of the view that the
planning process of Army should not be hampered due to non-
availability of missile carrying vehicles. Therefore, the Committee
desire that possibilities may be explored to procure missile carrying
vehicles within the country also to make the country self-reliant in
this area too.
E. Bullet Proof Jackets
Recommendation (Para Nos. 10, 12 & 13)
28. The Committee had recommended as under:—
‘The Committee note that the Acceptance of Necessity for
procurement of 1,86,138 Bullet Proof Jackets was accorded by the
Defence Acquisition Council (DAC) in Oct. 2009. The Request for
Proposal (RFP) was retracted due to General Staff Qualitative
Requirement (GSQR) related issues in Dec. 2011. The GSQR was
subsequently amended and a fresh RFP was issued in Dec. 2012.
After acceptance of Technical Evaluation Report and validation of
the velocities achieved by the various types of ammunition at
Terminal Ballistic Research Lab (TBRL) Chandigarh, the Trials of the
Bullet Proof Jackets are to commence shortly.
The Committee also note that Bullet Proof Jackets (BPJ) are procured
on the basis of the requirements of the Army and this is an ongoing
process and the current procurement is on the basis of the revised
GSQRs. Although the Ministry has mentioned that BPJs are procured
on the basis of the requirements of the Army yet, the Committee
could easily draw that the requirement must have arisen well before
the approval of Defence Acquisition Council in Oct. 2009. The
Committee believe that the figure of 1,86,138 lakh jackets must
have soared in the last five years due to increase in number of new
recruitees and also wearing down of the old stock.
The Committee are perturbed over the fact that such an important
life saving device has not been purchased by the Ministry jeopardizing
the lives of thousands of soldiers. Therefore, the Committee
recommend that in such cases where lives of soldiers are at stake,
fast track procedures should be adopted to procure the items. They
are not happy over the state of affairs in the Ministry where such
an important purchase could not be materialized even after a lapse
of five years. The Committee also recommend that the present
purchase should be completed in short time-frame after the

11
evaluation trials are over at TBRL Chandigarh and delays, if any are
due to callousness of a person, responsibility should be fixed for
the same.
The Committee also desire that they may be informed whether
BPJs for future procurements other than the present one, are
included in the long or short term plans e.g. LTIPP , SCAP , AAP or
not.’
29. The Ministry in its Action Taken Reply has stated as under:—
‘Total authorisation of BPJs is 3,53,765 as per letter No. B/82241/
29/CCS/BPJ/MGO/EM(GS&C)/124/DO(CPS/D(O-I)/2004 dated
24 March, 2004. Quantity 1,22,624 BPJs are currently held with
Indian Army. Technical Evaluation Committee (TEC) Report on
1,86,138 BPJs was approved by DG Acquisition on 27 January, 2014.
Trial samples have been submitted to Terminal Ballistic Research
Laboratory on 16 February, 2015 and trials have commenced on
09 March, 2015. In addition, the immediate requirement of 50,000
BPJs based on old GSQR is being made through Revenue Procurement.
Technical Evaluation Committee (TEC) Report on 1,86,138 BPJs was
approved by DG Acquisition on 27 January, 2014. Trial samples have
been submitted to Terminal Ballistic Research Laboratory on
16 February, 2015 and trials have commenced on 09 March, 2015.
In addition, the immediate requirement of 50,000 BPJs based on
old GSQR is being made through Revenue Procurement.
The procurement of Bullet Proof Jacket through the Capital Route
is a priority case and accordingly all efforts are being made to
ensure speedy progress of the case. The primary cause of the delay
was due to the requirement of conducting ballistic evaluations of
the ammunition, prior to commencement of trials. The trials have
since commenced from 09 March, 2015 onwards and further progress
would also be expedited.
Based on LTIPP/SCAP/AAP , Capital Procurement of quantity 1,86,138
Bullet Proof Jackets caters for 12th Plan requirement. As and when
the current procurement fructifies, the future requirement based
on deficiencies will be addressed through Revenue Route. ’
30. The Committee had recommended as under:—
‘The Committee are perturbed over the fact that such an important
life saving device has not been purchased by the Ministry jeopardizing
the lives of thousands of soldiers. Therefore, the Committee

12
recommend that in such cases where lives of soldiers are at stake,
fast track procedures should be adopted to procure the items. They
are not happy over the state of affairs in the Ministry where such
an important purchase could not be materialized even after a lapse
of five years. The Committee also recommend that the present
purchase should be completed in short time-frame after the
evaluation trials are over at TBRL Chandigarh and delays, if any are
due to callousness of a person, responsibility should be fixed for
the same. ’
31. The Ministry in its Action Taken Reply has stated as under:—
‘Technical Evaluation Committee (TEC) Report on 1,86,138 BPJs
was approved by DG Acquisition on 27 January, 2014. Trial samples
have been submitted to Terminal Ballistic Research Laboratory on
16 February, 2015 and trials have commenced on 09 March, 2015.
In addition, the immediate requirement of 50,000 BPJs based on
old GSQR is being made through Revenue Procurement.
The procurement of Bullet Proof Jacket through the Capital Route
is a priority case and accordingly all efforts are being made to
ensure speedy progress of the case. The primary cause of the delay
was due to the requirement of conducting ballistic evaluations of
the ammunition, prior to commencement of trials. The trials have
since commenced from 09 March, 2015 onwards and further progress
would also be expedited. ’
32. The Committee had recommended as under:—
‘The Committee also desire that they may be informed whether
BPJs for future procurements other than the present one, are
included in the long or short term plans e.g. LTIPP , SCAP , AAP or
not.’
33. The Ministry in its Action Taken Reply has stated as under:—
‘Based on LTIPP/SCAP/AAP , Capital Procurement of quantity 1,86,138
Bullet Proof Jackets caters for 12th Plan requirement. As and when
the current procurement fructifies, the future requirement based
on deficiencies will be addressed through Revenue Route. ’
34. The Committee find no sense of responsibility and fixing
accountability in the replies submitted by the Ministry over the non-
procurement of Bullet Proof Jackets (BPJs) and are unable to agree
with the views expressed by Ministry of Defence that the Ministry

13
has treated procurement of BPJs as a priority case and all efforts
are being made for speedy progress of the case. The Committee feel
that if it was true, Army might have received the BPJs long ago.
In the present instance, it is surprising to note that although the
authorisation of BPJs is 3,53,765 and current held strength is
1,22,624, but the Ministry of Defence approved procurement of only
1,86,138 BPJs which is 45,003 less than the authorised numbers of
BPJs. The Committee recall that while examining Demands for Grants
2015-16, during the deliberations, the matter regarding shortage of
BPJs came up and Committee were shocked to learn that “shelf life”
of existing Bullet Proof Jackets was going to expire in the succeeding
year. It is inexplicable on the part of the Ministry that all these
years, the Ministry could not find a source to procure BPJs. It also
baffles the Committee that while arriving at the figure of 1,86,138
BPJ, the Ministry has not given thought of the BPJs which are to be
invalidate due to wear, tear and expiry of prescribed time period.
35. The Committee are NOT AT ALL SATISFIED and observe that
it is the duty of the Government to provide proper gear to their
soldiers before sending them to counter insurgency or war-like
situations.
36. It also perturbs the Committee that despite knowing the
importance of such a crucial life saving item and the Committee
pointing its importance earlier also, it has taken MORE THAN SIX
YEARS to arrive at the trial stage after the approval of Defence
Acquisition Council and after approval of DG Acquisition on 27 January
2014, it took the Ministry more than a year to trial evaluate the
BPJs.
37. The Committee recommend that the Ministry should come
out of slumber and make the procurement of BPJs in fast track
accountable mode to make up present and near future shortages so
as to save lives of thousands of soldiers. The Committee may be
apprised of the action taken to procure the BPJs within a period of
two months.
38. The Committee desire that steps should be taken to develop
the industry in the country so that dependence on foreign sources
can be minimized.
39. The Committee also desire that the Ministry should give them
criteria of treating a certain item as priority case.

14
F. Night Vision Devices
Recommendation (Para No. 14)
40. The Committee had recommended as under:—
‘The Committee came to know during deliberations about the
shortage of Night Vision Devices (NVD). The Committee also find
seemingly inconsistency between the satisfaction level of the Ministry
and Army. While the Ministry seems to be satisfied with what forces
have on the other hand, the Army has altogether different view. It
appears that Ministry is not taking Army in confidence while doing
its perspective planning. The Committee feel that to have operational
preparedness for all times to come perspective planning of Army as
well as other forces should be visualized and strengthened. The
Committee feel that delays in procurement may adversely impact
operational preparedness of the services and also result in substantial
cost overruns. ’
41. The Ministry in its Action Taken Reply has stated as under:—
‘In view of shortages in the availability of Night Vision Devices
(NVDs) a road map for Night Enablement of Indian Army being
prepared as per Empowered Committee directions of October 2013.
For this, enhancement of scales of Night Vision devices and weapon
sights is in progress. ’
42. The Committee are perturbed to find that since October
2013, even after the directions of the Empowered Committee, Night
Vision Devices and Weapon Sights had not been procured. The
Committee are distressed to note that the process of preparing road
map for night enablement of Indian Army and enhancement of scales
of Night Vision devices and Weapon Sights is still in progress. The
Committee are unable to understand that what steps have been
taken by the Ministry to purchase them, when it is a known fact that
Night Vision Devices and Weapon Sights are essential for a modernised
Army specially while operating during the night. The Committee,
therefore, desire that to keep the Army in the state of readiness,
Night Vision Devices & Weapon Sights should be expeditiously
procured.
G. Shortage of Basic Items for Army
Recommendation (Para No. 15)
43. The Committee had recommended as under:—
‘The Committee note that the Empowered Committee which looks
into the procurement of 55 types of Special Clothing and

15
Mountaineering Equipments (SCME) authorized to troops deployed
in Super High Altitude Areas including Siachen has already been
constituted in August 2007 as per the direction of the Raksha Mantri.
The Committee also note from the initial reply that there are no
significant deficiencies for these equipment, however, to make these
items available in adequate quantities, contracts have already been
awarded to firms. A total of approximately Rs. 500 crore has already
been earmarked for the procurement of Ex-import SCME items from
the current year budget. From the reply to the supplementary
question, the Committee conclude that the Ministry first tried to
avoid the matter altogether and informed them that there were no
significant deficiencies for these equipment, however, later on
revealed that these exists shortfall of 2,17,388 number of High
Ankle Boots, 13,09,092 Canvas brown rubber sole shoes with laces,
4,47,000 Cap Balclava, 65,978 Durrie IT OG and 1,26,270 number
of Net Mosquito. The Committee are surprised over that fact that
such deficiencies of basic items of regular use where no high-end
technology is warranted, was allowed to exist. Therefore, the
Committee desire that perspective planning should be done to
foresee such deficiencies and pre-emptive action must be taken. ’
44. The Ministry in its Action Taken Reply has stated as under:—
‘Action is at hand to ensure that the requirements of high altitude
clothing and equipment will be met by the procurement underway.
A detailed plan has been worked to ensure that troops are inducted
into the High Altitude Area only with the necessary clothing and
equipment.’
45. The Committee find the reply of the Ministry of Defence
vague and casual. The Committee are not happy over the attention
given to the procurement of even basic items for the Army and
desire that specific provisions be added in the procurement
procedures so that the items which are essential for the survival of
the forces like high altitude clothing and equipment are procured
hassle free and without any delay. The Ministry has not supplied any
specific information on the coping up with the huge shortfall of
2,17,388 number of High Ankle Boots, 13,09,092 Canvas brown rubber
sole shoes with laces, 4,47,000 Cap Balclava, 65,978 Durrie IT OG
and 1,26,270 number of Net Mosquito and only stated that
requirement will be met by the procurement underway. The
Committee desire that time schedule so drawn to procure these
items be shared with the Committee so the difficulties faced by the
Ministry, if any, be mitigated. The Committee may be apprised of the
action taken to procure these items within a period of two months.

16
H. Mountain Strike Corps
Recommendation (Para No. 16)
46. The Committee had recommended as under:—
‘The Committee note that Mountain Strike Corps which is needed
to counter advances of neighbouring countries at high altitude areas
has been sanctioned keeping in view the 15 year perspective plan.
However , the Committee are surprised to note that for raising of
this Corps, no separate allocation has been made in this year ’s
budget. As informed, an amount of Rs. 5000.00 crore has been
earmarked for it but it is not over and above the actual budget
allocated and the Army has been asked to raise this Corps out of
its own budget. The Committee also came to know that for raising
this Corps only war wastage reserve are being utilised. It seems
very impractical and incongruous that a new Corps is being raised
with war wastage reserves. The Committee feel that the Ministry
should do away with its proclivity of  ad-hoc planning and provide
adequate budgetary support commensurate with the requirement
of Mountain Strike Corps. ’
47. The Ministry in its Action Taken Reply has stated as under:—
‘The proposal regarding ‘Capability Development Plan along the
Northern Borders’ referred as ‘Mountain Strike Corps’ was approved
by the CCS in Sept. 2013 and the sanction order was issued in
October, 2013. Since less time was left after the approval during
the financial year 2013-14, no additional funds were provided during
2013-14. During the current financial year (2014-15), an amount of
Rs. 1,44,481.00 crore was projected as overall budget which included
Rs. 8118.00 crore (Capital + Revenue) for Mountain Strike Corps.
Later a separate allocation of Rs. 3934.00 crore for Capital
Acquisition was indicated for the scheme. In order to enable
immediate capability enhancement for the Northern Borders, the
raising of Mountain Strike Corps was commenced utilising existing
manpower and weapons and stores from existing reserve stocks
(WWR). Plans for replenishment of the WWR stocks already issued
to the new units and formations raised as part of Mountain Strike
Corps, have been formulated and are under implementation as per
availability of budget. ’
48. The Committee are constrained to note that the raising of
‘Mountain Strike Corps ’ was commenced utilizing War Wastage
Reserves (WWR), which are war reserves and not to be touched

17
otherwise. Keeping in mind the importance of ‘Mountain Strike Corps’
to counter advance of neighbouring countries at high altitude area,
the Committee had desired the Ministry to do away with its proclivity
of ad-hoc planning and provide adequate budgetary support
commensurate with requirement of ‘Mountain Strike Corps ’ but the
Action Taken Replies convey that Mountain Strike Corps is being
raised only as per availability of budget.
49. The Committee contemplated over the whole scenario
including the raising of Mountain Strike Corps from WWR and take a
very serious view on the milking of existing resources. As there are,
already, serious shortages in the current WWR, which does not even
cater fully to the existing demand, how could it can be further
“milked” to create new assets like Mountain Strike Corps. The
Committee have been repeatedly pointing out the ‘serious’ shortages
in various “operational” areas, however, it appears that the matter
is not being given due consideration that it deserve.
50. The Committee deplore the casual approach of the Ministry
in treating their recommendations. The Committee, therefore,
reiterate their earlier recommendation to provide separate allocation
as well as separate set of modernized weapons for raising of ‘Mountain
Strike Corps ’, which is essential for protecting our borders at high
altitude areas.
I. Need for new Rifle for Army - INSAS Rifle Vs Assault Rifle
Recommendation (Para Nos. 20, 21 & 22)
51. The Committee had recommended as under:—
‘The Committee note that INSAS Rifle was designed and developed
by DRDO based on Qualitative Requirements (QRs) set in 1982 and
met all QR parameters and inducted into Service in 1996. The Rifle
has been fully exploited since then including OP Vijay in 1999.
Subsequent to OP Vijay, the problems started occurring e.g loosening
of flash eliminator , loosening of Piece guide, etc. The requirement
was also felt for Upper Hand Guard, additional safety in firing
mechanism, Grenade sight requirement, Improved Lever Locking
Gas Cylinder. The Committee also note that DRDO and Ordnance
Factory Board (OFB) jointly took up product improvement programme
based on this feedback and introduced the Improved Rifle as Rifle
Mark 1B1 in 2001. Later on, plastic magazine cracking problem was
reported. Earlier, the magazines were procured ex-trade but now
production has been established at Ordnance Factory Dum Dum and
problems have been resolved.

18
From the information furnished, the Committee are dismayed to
learn that DRDO started working on INSAS Rifle way back in 1982
but surprisingly it took 14 years in its development and could able
to deliver the Rifle only in 1996. But just after 3 years, the quality
of rifle tested in Operation Vijay revealed that product was not up
to the mark and many improvements were needed. The Committee
find it shocking that even years of expertise has not evolved DRDO
to develop a world class basic product like rifle. ’
52. The Ministry in its Action Taken Reply has stated as under:—
“Armament Research & Development Establishment (ARDE), Pune
started working on Indian National Small Arms System (INSAS) project
in March, 1982 with Probable Date of Completion (PDC) of 4 years.
The scope of the project was to offer prototypes for User evaluation.
These prototypes were Rifle, LMG, Carbine, their ammunition along
with sighting system and accessories. After development, prototypes
were offered for User trials in November , 1987. The User trials
were concluded in April, 1988. Thereafter , additional requirements
in Qualitative Requirements (QRs) were stated by the Army in August,
1988, March, 1990 and July, 1990. All these additional requirements
led to additional R&D work and conduct of technical, re-user trials
and evaluation. This took considerable time of 2 to 3 years. Further,
Ordnance Factory Board (OFB) was sanctioned a project for setting
up of a new plant for mass manufacture of INSAS in 1992. After
commissioning of plant, production started in 1996.
Development of INSAS took 5 years (1982-1987) followed by User
trials, implementation of additional requirements, trial and
evaluation which took another 5 years (1987-1992) and further
establishing mass manufacturing at OFs took 4 years (1992-1996).
Based on suggestions made by users, DRDO, OFB & DGQA took
initiatives to improve the weapon and Rifle 1B1 was introduced in
2001.
Post 1992, ARDE improved Rifle 5.56x45 mm as Mark 1B1. Further,
to enhance fire power of INSAS and AK47 Rifles held by Indian
Army, ARDE developed Under Barrel Grenade Launcher (UBGL). UBGL
is inducted into Services. DRDO carried out study to develop state-
of-the-art Rifle for future infantry soldier and prepared a roadmap
for ‘soldier as a platform ’. A project proposal to that effect was
submitted in February, 2007. However, no headway was made. ”
53. The Committee had recommended as under:—
‘The Committee also note that at present Army uses in-service
INSAS and AK-47 rifles in various situations, however, Indian Army
is in the process of procuring Assault Rifles through a global tender

19
with Transfer of Technology to Ordnance Factory Board. Considering
the track record of DRDO, the Committee recommend that a world
class production after satisfying the requirement of user i.e. Army
may be purchased out rightly for immediate use after trials are
over and services of DRDO may be utilized to get Transfer of
Technology to produce this item in the country. ’
54. The Ministry in its Action Taken Reply has stated as under:—
“The recommendation of the Committee is already being
implemented through a ‘Buy and Make ’ case for Assault Rifle with
transfer of technology to Ordinance Factories Board (OFB). DRDO
can support the OFB in the ToT process. ”
55. The Committee had recommended as under:—
‘After contemplating over the various issues involved in INSAS and
Assault Rifles, the Committee feel that either Long Term Integrated
Perspective Plan(LTIPP) and the five year Services Capital Acquisition
Plan (SCAP) is not properly designed or there is some fault with the
procurement procedures, otherwise, the problems of INSAS Rifle
which were surfaced in 1996, almost 18 years ago, a Request for
Proposal for new Rifle could be issued more than a decade later. ’
56. The Ministry in its Action Taken Reply has stated as under:—
‘The INSAS Rifle introduced in 1996 under went a number of upgrades
viz. INSAS Rifle 1A, 1A1,1 Band 1 B1. The Request for Proposal (RfP)
for the procurement of new Assault Rifle was issued as the indigenous
modifications did not cater to the user aspiration. Thus, the timing
of the RfP was due to upgrades and not planning or procurement
procedure issues. ’
57. The Committee note that Ordnance Factory Board (OFB) was
sanctioned a project for setting up of a new plant for mass
manufacture of INSAS in 1992. After commissioning of plant,
production started in 1996 and based on suggestions made by users,
DRDO, OFB & DGQA took initiatives to improve the weapon and Rifle
1B1 was introduced in 2001. The Committee also note that post
1992, ARDE improved Rifle 5.56x45 mm as Mark 1B1. Further, to
enhance fire power of INSAS and AK47 Rifles held by Indian Army,
ARDE developed Under Barrel Grenade Launcher (UBGL) and it is
inducted into Services. DRDO carried out study to develop state-of-
the-art Rifle for future infantry soldier and prepared a roadmap for
‘soldier as a platform’. A project proposal to that effect was submitted

20
in February, 2007. However, no headway was made. The Committee
desire that the reasons for not making any headway in developing
‘soldier as a platform ’ should be conveyed to them at the earliest.
58. The Committee appreciate that their recommendation with
regard to purchase of Assault Rifle with transfer of technology to
Ordnance Factory Board (OFB) is being implemented. The Committee
desire that action in this regard should be completed at the earliest.
59. From the reply submitted by the Ministry, the Committee
understand that presently indigenous modifications did not cater to
the user aspirations. Therefore, the Committee reiterate that their
recommendation to procure a new rifle should be implemented at
the earliest.
J. Conditions for Treating a Soldier as Martyr
Recommendation (Para No. 23)
60. The Committee had recommended as under:—
‘The Committee note that 54 missing defence personnel of 1965
and 1971 wars are believed to be in custody in Pakistan and the
Government has repeatedly been taking up the matter with the
Pakistan Government. The Government of Pakistan does not
acknowledge the presence of any such personnel in its custody.
A delegation of 14 relatives of missing defence personnel also visited
10 jails in Pakistan during 1st June, 2007 - 14th June, 2007. The
delegation, however, could not conclusively confirm the physical
presence of any missing defence personnel.
The Committee also note that the families of the missing defence
personnel (MDP) had been provided liberalized pensionary/
rehabilitation benefits as per extant rules. Subsequently, the
Government accepted the judgement dated 23.12.2011 passed by
the Hon ’ble High Court of Gujarat for payment of services and
retirement benefits to the next of kin (NoK) of the MDP believed
to be in the custody in Pakistan, as if they had retired on
superannuation. Necessary orders in this regard have been issued.
However , as the reports are reaching to the Committee through
various sources about non receipt of benefits, therefore, the
Committee recommend that the Ministry should look into the matter
afresh and issue orders for all the benefits in respect of these 54
missing defence personnel. The Committee also desire that the
Ministry should show respect to defence personnel who without

21
worrying for their lives made or slated to make supreme sacrifice
for the nation, and take suo-motu decision for providing benefits
to them and their family members without waiting for the orders
of a Court of Law. It is not desirable where a soldier or his family
members has to approach a court of law for the service benefits.
61. The Ministry in its Action Taken Reply has stated as under:—
Government accepted the order dated 23.12.2011 passed by the
Hon’ble High Court of Gujarat for payment of services and retirement
benefits to the next of kin (NoK) of 54 missing defence personnel
(MDP) believed to be in custody in Pakistan, as if they had retired
on superannuation and accordingly necessary Government letter
was issued on 29.06.2012 towards compliance of the ibid order
dated 23.12.2011.
The status of implementation in respect of three Services viz. Army,
Navy, Air Force and Border Security Force (BSF), MHA, is as under:
Army
(a) Out of 24 MDP in respect of Army, dues have been paid to
NoK of 16 MDP .
(b) In case of 08 MDP , dues have been deposited in the High
Court of Gujarat due to non-availability of NoK/legal heirs.
Navy
(a) Out of 02 cases pertaining to Navy, dues have been paid to
NoK in respect of 01 MDP .
(b) In the second case, dues have been deposited with the High
Court of Gujarat pending verification of legal heirship of
claimant (brother).
Air Force
(a) Out of 24 MDP pertaining to Air Force, dues have been paid
to NoK/legal heir in respect of 20 MDP .
(b) In case of remaining 04 MDP , dues have been deposited with
the High Court of Gujarat due to non availability of NoK/
legal heirs.
Border Security Force (BSF), Ministry of Home Affairs (MHA)
In one case of MDP belonging to BSF , it has been informed by BSF
that the NoK are yet to submit the requisite heirship documents.
They have further informed that all efforts are being made by them
to get the financial benefits released to the NoK.

22
Details not known
Details of 03 MDPs (namely Captain Vashist Nath, Gunner Shyam
Singh Sepoy Gian Chand) with respect to Service number , Unit and
NoK are not known. High Court of Gujarat has already been apprised
through an affidavit in August, 2012 regarding non-identification of
these 03 MDPs.
62. The Committee appreciate the immediate measures taken by
the Ministry after the Orders of the Hon ’ble High Court of Gujarat
for payment of services and retirement benefits to the Next of Kin
(NoK) of all but three missing defence personnel. However, the
Committee desire that the Ministry should not always depend on the
Court of Law to guide it, and in such cases responsibilities of erring
officers should be fixed. The Committee also desire that the Ministry
should take all the possible measures before hand so that situation
like this do not recur in future.
K. Ex-Servicemen Contributory Health Scheme (ECHS)
Recommendation (Para Nos. 24 & 25)
63. The Committee had recommended as under:—
‘The Committee note that the Ex-Servicemen Contributory Health
Scheme (ECHS) was launched with effect from 01 April, 2003, which
provides Ex-Servicemen pensioners and their dependents treatment
in specifically empanelled civil/private hospitals besides service
hospitals. The scheme is financed by the Government of India. The
Committee analysed the budget provided to ECHS for the last five
years and found that in Revenue outlay from the year 2010-11; to
2014-15, the allocation got dwindled by Rs. 278.96 crore, Rs. 608.86
crore, Rs. 460 crore, Rs. 606.49 crore and Rs. 1068.63 crore
respectively. The position in Capital Budget is no better, wherein
ECHS is short of Rs. 30 crore this year.
The Committee were further enlightened by the Secretary,
Ex-Servicemen Welfare during the oral evidence that low BE raises
the issue of pending bills and the department get into arrears with
the hospitals resulting in refusal by the hospitals to treat the
patients. This issue was echoed by the Managing Director of ECHS
also. The Committee are dismayed over the cut in the allocation
and feel that is an instance of greatly misplaced priorities. The
Committee are of the view that it is the responsibility of grateful
nation to look after their veterans who have given best years of
their lives to it. Therefore, the Committee recommend that the
Ministry should take immediate necessary modification in their

23
planning processes so that ECHS get what it has projected for and
our veterans and their family members do not suffer due to fault
of others. ’
64. The Ministry in its Action Taken Reply has stated as under:—
‘(i) Stage-wise budgetary allocation for the FY 2014-15 upto RE
stage is as given below:
(Rs. in crore)
Heads Projection BE Amended BE RE
Salary 170.00 170.00 170.00 170.00
Medicines 621.00 320.00 370.00 510.00
Medical 1600.00 854.58 1254.58 1714.58
Treatment
Others 98.21 76.00 76.00 76.00
Total 2489.21 1420.58 1870.58 2470.58
(ii) Projection for the next FY 2015-16 is:
(Rs. in crore)
Heads Projection
Salary 200.00
Medicines 670.00
Medical Treatment 2544.12
Others 118.00
Total 3532.12
(iii) If financial allocation is granted at the BE stage as projected
during the deliberation, financial planning can be undertaken
more deliberately and financial liabilities can be avoided. ’
65. The Committee had recommended as under:—
‘The Committee note that the sanction for going on-line for all 28
polyclinics is available since 1st April, 2014, however , he admitted
a glitch in terms of the agreement to be done with them in terms
of the bugs in the software. However , out of those 28 polyclinics,

24
18 were not on-line and the specialists in hospitals have stopped
accepting the patients. The Committee feel that software updates
and making hospital billing on-line is not highly technical affair now
a days, therefore, it should be done in a time-bound manner and
the Committee may be informed accordingly. The Committee also
desire that the effective steps should be taken to stop malpractices
prevailing in ECHS.
Keeping in view wide spread population of veterans, the Committee
recommend that ECHS should increase its reach in far flung areas
so that aged veteran may not travel long distances to get medical
facilities.’
66. The Ministry in its Action Taken Reply has stated as under:—
‘On-line billing came into effect in April, 2012 in five Regional
Centres. On receiving a positive response from environment and
ESM fraternity the process was further extended to five more
Regional Centre in April, 2013 and making it to a total of 10 ‘On-
line’ Regional Centres. Government formal clearance to go on-line
for all Regional Centres was received vide GOI MoD letter No.
22A(10)/2010/US(WE)/D(Res)/Vol-VIII dt 14 February, 2014. Presently
a total of 24 Regional Centres out of 28 have gone ‘on-line’. The
balance four (04) are likely to be on-line by 31 March, 2015. The
complete scheme will have ‘on-line billing ’ w.e.f. 01 April, 2015.
Consolidation and expansion of the scheme is under progress. ’
67. The Committee agree to the views expressed by the Ministry
that if financial allocation is granted at the BE Stage as projected
during the deliberation, financial planning can be undertaken more
deliberately and financial liabilities can be avoided. Therefore, the
Committee desire that full allocation should be provided to ECHS as
projected at BE stage to make the lives of veterans and their family
members comfortable.
68. In the Action Taken Reply, the Ministry has stated that
presently a total of 24 Regional Centres out of 28 have gone ‘on-
line’. The balance four (04) are likely to be on-line by 31 March,
2015. The complete scheme will have ‘on-line billing ’ w.e.f.
01 April, 2015 and the consolidation and expansion of the scheme
is under progress. However, the reply from the Ministry was received
on 11 June, 2015, wherein the Ministry has not mentioned whether
the balance Regional Centres have become online or not. The
Committee, therefore, desire that they should be updated on the
consolidation, expansion and online billing aspect at the earliest.

25
69. The Committee also reiterate their earlier recommendation
keeping in view wide spread population of veterans, ECHS should
increase its reach in far flung areas so that aged veteran may not
have to travel long distances to get medical facilities.
L. Directorate General Quality Assurance (DGQA)
Recommendation (Para Nos. 26 & 27)
70. The Committee had recommended as under:—
‘After contemplating over the various issues involved in INSAS and
Assault Rifles, the Committee feel that either Long Term Integrated
Perspective Plan(LTIPP) and the five year Services Capital Acquisition
Plan (SCAP) is not properly designed or there is some fault with the
procurement procedures, otherwise, the problems of INSAS Rifle
which were surfaced in 1996, almost 18 years ago, a Request for
Proposal for new Rifle could be issued more than a decade later. ’
71. The Ministry in its Action Taken Reply has stated as under:—
‘The INSAS Rifle introduced in 1996 underwent a number of upgrades
viz. INSAS Rifle 1A, 1A1,1 Band 1 B1. The Request for Proposal
(RFP) for the procurement of new Assault Rifle was issued as the
indigenous modifications did not cater to the user aspiration. Thus,
the timing of the RFP was due to upgrades and not planning or
procurement procedure issues. ’
72. The Committee had recommended as under:-
‘The Committee also desire that DGQA should be more vigilant in
inspections carried out by it so army personnel are sure of what
they are getting. Moreover , the DGQA is there to instill confidence
in the forces and not to scare them. The improvement in procedure
so done may be informed to the Committee at the earliest. ’
73. The Ministry in its Action Taken Reply has stated as under:—
‘The steps initiated by DGQA to improve the quality of stores supplied
by OFB are enumerated below:—
(a) To ensure consistency in the quality of equipment/stores
manufactured and supplied to the Defence Forces by the
OFB, regular feedback from the Users is being taken. Based
on the defects noticed during the production, Final Acceptance
Inspection and defects noticed during the exploitation by the

26
Users, the processes and the products to be addressed are
identified. These processes and products are audited by team
of officers, specialized in the field. The aim of these audits
is to initiate corrective action/improvement in the processes
to ensure consistency/improvement in the quality of products
manufactured by the OFB. The recommendations of these
audits are conveyed to the Ordnance Factories for
implementation to improve the process/products.
(b) In order to ensure the quality, ammunition store is subjected
to stringent static and dynamic tests. Series of test firings at
DGQA and DRDO Firing Ranges are carried out.
(c) The laboratories of DGQA are being continuously upgraded
with the latest test equipment. The test equipment is well
maintained and calibrated for getting accurate results.
39 laboratories of DGQA have been accredited by National
Accreditation Board of Labs (NABL).
(d) The specifications, product drawings, Quality Assurance
Instructions are continuously revised in line with the latest
standards for these products, in order to improve the testing
methods for ensuring quality. ’
74. The Committee find the reply is routine in nature and it
does not speak of the results it has achieved to supply flawless
products to the Army. Instead DGQA mentioned only steps it follows
while performing its duties. As mentioned by DGQA that it is a
second party inspecting organization, the Committee feel that even
if it is true but it has failed to do justice to its mandate and
substandard products are reaching to the Forces. The Ministry of
Defence has not given reply to review of procedures in vogue and
only specified what existing procedures are. The Committee are of
the view that in the current scenario where a small fault gets a
widespread coverage, DGQA should be careful about its role or
handover its responsibilities to third party private sector firms who
have capabilities to test and inspect stores.
M. National Cadet Corps
Recommendation (Para Nos. 28, 29, 30 & 31)
75. The Committee had recommended as under:—
‘The Committee note that NCC aims at creating a pool of organized
trained and motivated youth with leadership qualities in all walks

27
of life, who will serve the Nation regardless of which career they
choose. It also provides an environment conducive to motivate
young Indian to join the armed forces.
The Committee also note that during the year 2010-11 NCC was
allocated Rs. 970.37 crore, however , the actuals were Rs. 707.67
crore, during the year 2011-12 NCC were allocated Rs. 984.01 crore,
however, the actuals were Rs. 713.81 crore, during the year
2012-13 NCC were allocated Rs. 1128.80 crore, however, the actuals
were Rs. 791.87 crore, during the year 2013-14 NCC was allocated
Rs. 887.12 crore, however, the actuals were Rs. 874.03 crore. During
the year 2014-15 NCC has been allocated Rs. 1025.17 crore, however,
till Jul 2014 it has spent just Rs. 362.44 crore. It can be analyzed
from the data that even after the Revised Estimates, there has
been under spending every year. The Committee desire that NCC
Directorate must be guided by the Finance Division of the Ministry
of Defence in the financial planning process to avoid this under
spending.’
76. The Ministry in its Action Taken Reply has stated as under:—
‘The underutilization of funds allotted to the NCC has been mainly
in the Sub Heads relating to Stores, Training, Information Technology,
Revenue/Capital Works and procurement of Microlites. The reasons
attributable to the said under utilization are:—
(a) Stores Due to failure of rate contract and resultant
non-materialization of supply orders in
respect of procurement of uniforms, ban on
procurement of vehicles as part of the
economy measures, delay in delivery of 0.22
Rifles and ammunition by Rifle Factory and
Ammunition Depot respectively.
(b) Training Lesser number of camps were conducted in
North Eastern Region, Andhra Pradesh,
Uttarakhand and J&K because of inclement
weather conditions and local disturbances.
Due to these reasons some of the Treks also
had to be cancelled.
(c) Information Lesser expenditure incurred by 17 State NCC
Technology Directorates under Local Purchase.
(d) Revenue Works/ Slow progress of sanctioned Works and non-
Capital Works submission of final bills by MES.
(New/Carry over)

28
(e) Procurement of P rocurement of Microlites by Indian Air Force
Microlites did not materia lize which led to non-
utilization of budgetary provision of
Rs. 19.39 crore during 2010-11, Rs. 20 crore
during 2011-12 and Rs. 39 crore during
2012-13. No budgetary provision was made
during 2013-14 and 2014-15. Procurement
of Microlites by Indian Air Force is being
expedited.
2. As regards current financial year i.e. 2014-15, as compared to
the expenditure of Rs. 362.44 crore till July 2014, the expenditure
till December 2014 has increased to Rs. 849.05 crore which is
82.82% of the budgetary allocation. Procurement of stores, based
on Annual Provision Review, are done in accordance with laid down
procedures. Department of Defence (Finance) is always a part of
the procurement process. Further , a proposal for delegation of
financial powers to NCC is under consideration in consultation with
Department of Defence (Finance). ’
77. The Committee had recommended as under:—
The Committee further note that total sanctioned strength of NCC
cadets is 15 lakh. At present the actual strength of NCC cadets is
11,73,029. Out of it, the Girl cadets are 3, 04,661, consisting of
26%. The NCC has covered 10,174 Schools 5,548 Colleges and
670 Districts. However, it has 4790 Schools and 2549 Colleges in the
waiting list. However , NCC is taking initiative for expansion in five
phases. In addition, the Government has recently approved a self-
financing scheme in which the Government does not have to pay,
but the institution, if it wants to join, can join after paying
approximately Rs. 6,500 per cadet per year and 153 minor units
which will be upgraded may take care of the major part of the
waiting list.
The Committee recommends that to have wider reach of NCC in
schools and colleges, the Ministry of Defence should look into the
possibility of coordinating with the Ministry of Human Resource
Development. The Committee also desire the Ministry of Human
Resource Development to make NCC as a part of the education
policy so as to create organized, trained, disciplined, selfless and
motivated future generation. The steps should be taken to encourage
girls to join NCC to correct ratio of Girl vs Boy Cadets.

29
78. The Ministry in its Action Taken Reply has stated as under:—
2 Group Head Quarters and 24 units have been raised in the 1st and
2nd phases of the 2 lakh Additional Cadet Strength Implementation
Process. The proposal for raising 1 Group Head Quarters and
14 units in the 3rd Phase is under progress. A tentative Plan for
raising 2 Group Head Quarters and 23 NCC Units in the 4th & 5th
Phases of the 2 lakh Additional Cadet Strength Implementation
Process has been formulated. A study Group has been constituted
to draw up a Comprehensive Plan considering aspects of up-
gradation, amalgamation/merger, relocation and concentration of
waitlisted institutions in totality, as also keeping in view the priority
areas, including coastal, border areas and Left Wing Extremism
affected regions.
Ministry of Human Resource Development has been requested to
issue advisory to the various Educational Boards, Central Board of
Secondary Education, Kendriya Vidyalaya Sangathan and Navodaya
Vidyalaya Sangathan for implementation of the Central Advisory
Committee proposal of including the best practices of NCC in school
curriculum.
There is a plan to increase girls ’ representation in NCC to 33% in
the coming years @ 1.5% per training year for which necessary
directions have been issued.
79. The Committee had recommended as under:—
‘As the information is not available in public domain regarding a
provision, wherein an individual from any school, whether that is
enrolled or not can apply to be trained as an NCC cadet, the
Committee desire that this information should be made available
on public domain for larger benefit to the aspiring NCC cadets. ’
80. The Ministry in its Action Taken Reply has stated as under:—
‘Policy guidelines on relevant subjects that would be of interest to
individuals/institutions have been hosted in the NCC Website. Details
of enrolment in NCC, even for students of educational institutions
not enrolled for NCC training, has been uploaded on the NCC Website
under “Cadets Corner ”.’
81. The Committee had recommended as under:—
‘The Committee further note that NCC is having Youth Exchange
Programme with 10 countries e.g. Russia, Singapore, Kazakhstan,
Vietnam, Turkmenistan, Sri Lanka, Maldives, Bangladesh, Nepal and

30
Bhutan. The Committee desire that youth exchange programme
should be spread to other countries also where similar organizations
exist.
The NCC cadets are given training in Mountaineering Courses,
Mountaineering Expeditions (Boys and Girls), Para Basic Courses,
Para Sailing, Snow Skiing, Trekking, White Water Rafting, Sailing
Expeditions, Yachting Regatta and Desert Camel Safari. The
Committee recommend that NCC cadets should also be encouraged
and facilitated to participate in international adventure sports also.’
82. The Ministry in its Action Taken Reply has stated as under:—
‘Seven Commonwealth of Independent States countries with whom
Youth Exchange Programme does not exist were contacted for giving
their views with respect to starting the programme. The response
is awaited from the following seven countries:—
(i) Armenia
(ii) Azerbaijan
(iii) Belarus
(iv) Kyrgyzstan
(v) Moldova
(vi) Tajikistan
(vii) Uzbekistan
Indian Defence attaches of the countries with whom Youth Exchange
Programme exists have been contacted to see the feasibility of
adventure activity during the visit to these countries. The present
status is:—
(i) Nepal has agreed to the proposal.
(ii) Sri Lanka adventure activities are conducted during CAC camp
in which 1 Officer and 6 cadets (3 Senior Division & 3 Senior
Wing) participated.
(iii) Confirmation from other countries is still awaited.
83. The Committee note that a tentative Plan for raising 2 Group
Head Quarters and 23 NCC Units in the 4th and 5th Phases of the
2 lakh Additional Cadet Strength Implementation Process has been
formulated and also a Study Group has been constituted to draw up

31
a Comprehensive Plan considering aspects of up-gradation,
amalgamation/merger, relocation and concentration of waitlisted
institutions in totality, as also keeping in view the priority areas,
including coastal, border areas and Left Wing Extremism affected
regions. The Committee desire that the Committee should be apprised
of the Additional Cadet Strength Implementation Process and
Comprehensive Plan considering aspects of up-gradation,
amalgamation/merger, relocation outcome at the earliest.

CHAPTER II
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS, WHICH HAVE BEEN
ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT
Critical Shortage with Army Tanks
Recommendation (Para No. 6)
The Committee had recommended as under:—
The Committee analysed from the information supplied to them
that availability of tank is very low and requirement of tank is also
being filed with the MBT Arjun. The Committee note that improved
MBT Arjun Mk II has been offered by DRDO. The information regarding
the performance and satisfaction level of MBT Arjun with Army was not
supplied by the Ministry. As various categories of tanks are available
with friendly countries, world market and Ordnance Factories, it is in
the fitness of things that Army should be given a free hand in choosing
class of tank as per their requirement and nothing should be forced on
them. The Committee desire that the Ministry should make all out
efforts to match authorized and held strength at the earliest and for
the purpose additional amount should be provided to them.
The Ministry in its Action Taken Reply has stated as under:—
While giving replies to the points for Examination of Demand for
Grants for the year 2014-15, it was inter-alia informed to the Parliament
Standing Committee that the availability of tanks with the Army is
about 85% of the tank authorized. Subsequently, the supplementary
information about various characteristics of tanks was provided to the
Chairperson of Parliament Standing Committee in a sealed cover as the
information was secret in nature.
The Capital Acquisition of defence equipment is based on Services
Qualitative Requirements (SQRs) which express the user ’s requirements
in terms of capability desired with minimum required verifiable functional
characteristics. The SQRs are drafted by the User Directorate at Service
Headquarter following a consultative process provided in the Defence
Procurement Procedure (DPP).
The Tank fleet is being supplemented through Ordnance Factory
Board (OFB).
32

33
Force Level of Army
Recommendation (Para Nos. 18 & 19)
The Committee had recommended as under:—
The Committee note from the manpower part that held strength of
Officers in Army is 39,585, while the authorised strength is 47,574,
therefore, shortage of Officers in Army is 7989, which is about 17 per
cent of the authorised strength of the Officers. In the Other Ranks, the
position is somewhat satisfactory where authorised strength is 11,50,463,
while the held strength is 11,33,866 leaving a gap of 16,597, which is
approximately 1.5 per cent of the authorised strength.
The Committee note that the Government has taken a number of
measures to encourage the youth to join the Armed Forces, including
conduct of recruitment rallies, media campaign, implementation of the
recommendation of the VI Central Pay Commission with improved pay
structure, additional family accommodation through Married
Accommodation Project and improvement in promotion prospects in
the Armed Forces. The Committee appreciate the steps so taken by the
Ministry to attract the youth but they also desire that the Ministry
should find out the reasons as to why today ’s youth is not considering
armed forces as a fit profession and what more it can do to make it
more attractive. In this task, the Ministry can take the help of Defence
Institute of Psychological Research (DIPR) of Defence Research and
Development Organisation (DRDO). Besides, the Ministry should make
all out efforts to bridge the gap in both the categories.
The Ministry in its Action Taken Reply has stated as under:—
The updated position relating to authorized strength, held strength
and shortage in respect of Officers and Other Ranks (excluding Army
Medical Corps, Army Dental Corps and Military Nursing Service), as on
01.01.2015 is as under:—
Authorized Held Shortage/
strength strength deficiency
Officers 49737 40095 9642*
Other Ranks 11,69,854 11,45,498 24,356**
* Increase in the figure of shortage is due to increase in authorized strength owing to
12th Plan Accretions.
** There is no problem of shortage in Other Ranks in Army as 66,502 recruits are under
training against this deficiency.

34
Defence Institute of Psychological Research (DIPR) under Defence
Research and Development Organisation (DRDO) have carried out a
study to identify the job trajectory of Indian youth, their propensity to
join Armed Forces and to explore the perceived appeals and
apprehensions in joining Armed Forces. In their findings, DIPR have
inter alia, observed that the inherent problems perceived by the students
include separation from family, frequent transfers, transfer to remote
areas, less holidays, hard training/physical labour etc. It has also been
noticed that today ’s students are not inclined to the traditional jobs,
they see beyond the boundaries, work hard to get the best opportunities
and prefer well-paid jobs followed by respect/status and facilities
attached to those jobs.
In the study, DIPR have made several suggestions to attract the
talented youth to join the Armed Forces which include giving wide
publicity through print and electronic media and other sources about
the career opportunities in the Armed Forces alongwith the real picture
of all military related general duties, conducting seminar/lectures in
schools and colleges to spread awareness about the military jobs, to
give wide publicity in a realistic manner about the pay package and
other facilities in the Armed Forces, regular military camps for the
students to get first hand information about the military, improvisations
in the Service Selection Board (SSB) process, providing National Cadet
Corps (NCC) training etc.
In this connection, it is stated that Armed Forces have been making
continuous efforts and have taken a number of measures including
giving wide publicity to the attractive careers in Army to attract talented
youth to join the force. The above measures have resulted in gradual
reduction of shortage in officers in Indian Army as evident from the
following table showing the details of shortage of officers in Army
(excluding AMC, ADC and MNS) during the last three years and the
current year are as under:—
Year (as on 01 Authorized Held Shortage
January every strength strength
year)
2012 47762 37662 10100
2013 47762 38172 9590
2014 47574 39119 8455
2015 49737 40095 9642*
*Increase in the figure of shortage is due to increase in authorized strength owing to 12th
Plan Accretions.

35
Condition for treating a soldier as martyr
Recommendation (Para No. 23)
The Committee had recommended as under:—
The Committee note that 54 missing defence personnel of 1965 and
1971 wars are believed to be in custody in Pakistan and the Government
has repeatedly been taking up the matter with the Pakistan Government.
The Government of Pakistan does not acknowledge the presence of any
such personnel in its custody. A delegation of 14 relatives of missing
defence personnel also visited 10 jails in Pakistan during 1st June, 2007
- 14th June, 2007. The delegation, however , could not conclusively
confirm the physical presence of any missing defence personnel.
The Committee also note that the families of the Missing Defence
Personnel (MDP) had been provided liberalized pensionary/rehabilitation
benefits as per extant rules. Subsequently, the Government accepted
the judgement dated 23.12.2011 passed by the Hon ’ble High Court of
Gujarat for payment of services and retirement benefits to the Next of
Kin (NoK) of the MDP believed to be in the custody in Pakistan, as if
they had retired on superannuation. Necessary orders in this regard
have been issued. However , as the reports are reaching to the Committee
through various sources about non receipt of benefits, therefore, the
Committee recommend that the Ministry should look into the matter
afresh and issue orders for all the benefits in respect of these 54
missing defence personnel. The Committee also desire that the Ministry
should show respect to defence personnel who without worrying for
their lives made or slated to make supreme sacrifice for the nation,
and take suo moto decision for providing benefits to them and their
family members without waiting for the orders of a Court of Law. It is
not desirable where a soldier or his family members has to approach
a Court of Law for the service benefits.
The Ministry in its Action Taken Reply has stated as under:—
Government accepted the order dated 23.12.2011 passed by the
Hon’ble High Court of Gujarat for payment of services and retirement
benefits to the Next of Kin (NoK) of 54 Missing Defence Personnel (MDP)
believed to be in custody in Pakistan, as if they had retired on
superannuation and accordingly necessary Government letter was issued
on 29.06.2012 towards compliance of the ibid order dated 23.12.2011.

36
The status of implementation in respect of three Services viz. Army,
Navy, Air Force and Border Security Force (BSF), MHA, is as under:—
Army
(a) Out of 24 MDP in respect of Army, dues have been paid to
NoK of 16 MDP .
(b) In case of 08 MDP , dues have been deposited in the
High Court of Gujarat due to non-availability of NoK/legal
heirs.
Navy
(a) Out of 02 cases pertaining to Navy, dues have been paid to
NoK in respect of 01 MDP .
(b) In the second case, dues have been deposited with the High
Court of Gujarat pending verification of legal heirship of
claimant (brother).
Air Force
(a) Out of 24 MDP pertaining to Air Force, dues have been paid
to NoK/legal heir in respect of 20 MDP .
(b) In case of remaining 04 MDP , dues have been deposited with
the High Court of Gujarat due to non-availability of NoK/
legal heirs.
Border Security Force (BSF), Ministry of Home Affairs (MHA)
In one case of MDP belonging to BSF , it has been informed by BSF
that the NoK are yet to submit the requisite heirship documents. They
have further informed that all efforts are being made by them to get
the financial benefits released to the NoK.
Details not known
Details of 03 MDPs (namely Captain Vashist Nath, Gunner Shyam
Singh SepoyGian Chand) with respect to Service number , Unit and NoK
are not known. High Court of Gujarat has already been apprised through
an affidavit in August, 2012 regarding non-identification of these 03
MDPs.
Ex-Servicemen Contributory Health Scheme
Recommendation (Para No. 24)
The Committee had recommended as under:—
The Committee note that the Ex-Servicemen Contributory Health
Scheme (ECHS) was launched with effect from 01 April 2003, which
provides Ex-Servicemen pensioners and their dependents treatment in
specifically empanelled civil/private hospitals besides service hospitals.

37
The scheme is financed by the Government of India. The Committee
analysed the budget provided to ECHS for the last five years and found
that in Revenue outlay from the year 2010-11 to 2014-15, the allocation
got dwindled by Rs. 278.96 crore, Rs. 608.86 crore, Rs. 460 crore,
Rs. 606.49 crore and Rs. 1068.63 crore respectively. The position in
Capital Budget is no better , wherein ECHS is short of Rs. 30 crore this
year.
The Committee were further enlightened by the Secretary,
Ex-Servicemen Welfare during the oral evidence that low BE raises the
issue of pending bills and the department get into arrears with the
hospitals resulting in refusal by the hospitals to treat the patients. This
issue was echoed by the Managing Director of ECHS also. The Committee
are dismayed over the cut in the allocation and feel that is an instance
of greatly misplaced priorities. The Committee are of the view that it
is the responsibility of grateful nation to look after their veterans who
have given best years of their lives to it. Therefore, the Committee
recommend that the Ministry should take immediate necessary
modification in their planning processes so that ECHS get what it has
projected for and our veterans and their family members do not suffer
due to fault of others.
The Ministry in its Action Taken Reply has stated as under:—
(i) Stage-wise budgetary allocation for the FY 2014-15 upto RE
stage is as given below:—
Heads Projection BE Amended BE RE
(Rs. in cr.) (Rs. in cr.) (Rs. in cr.) (Rs. in cr.)
Salary 170.00 170.00 170.00 170.00
Medicines 621.00 320.00 370.00 510.00
Medical Treatment 1600.00 854.58 1254.58 1714.58
Others 98.21 76.00 76.00 76.00
Total 2489.21 1420.58 1870.58 2470.58
(ii) Projection for the next FY 2015-16 is
Heads Projection (in cr.)
Salary 200.00
Medicines 670.00
Medical Treatment 2544.12
Others 118.00
Total 3532.12

38
(iii) If financial allocation is granted at the BE stage as projected
during the deliberation, financial planning can be undertaken more
deliberately and financial liabilities can be avoided.
Recommendation (Para No. 25)
The Committee had recommended as under:—
The Committee note that the sanction for going on-line for all
28 polyclinics is available since 1st April, 2014, however, he admitted
a glitch in terms of the agreement to be done with them in terms of
the bugs in the software. However , out of those 28 polyclinics, 18 were
not on-line and the specialists in hospitals have stopped accepting the
patients. The Committee feel that software updates and making hospital
billing on-line is not highly technical affair now a days, therefore, it
should be done in a timebound manner and the Committee may be
informed accordingly. The Committee also desire that the effective
steps should be taken to stop malpractices prevailing in ECHS.
Keeping in view wide spread population of veterans, the Committee
recommend that ECHS should increase its reach in far flung areas so
that aged veteran may not travel long distances to get medical facilities.
The Ministry in its Action Taken Reply has stated as under:—
On-line billing came into effect in Apr. 2012 in five Regional Centres.
On receiving a positive response from environment and ESM fraternity
the process was further extended to five more Regional Centre in
Apr. 2013 and making it to a total of 10 ‘On-line’ Regional Centres.
Government formal clearance to go on-line for all Regional Centres was
received vide GoI MoD letter No. 22A(10)/2010/US(WE)/D(Res.)/
Vol.-VIII dt. 14 Feb 2014. Presently a total of 24 Regional Centres out
of 28 have gone ‘on-line’. The balance four (04) are likely to be on-line
by 31 Mar. 2015. The complete scheme will have ‘on-line billing’ w.e.f.
01 Apr. 2015. Consolidation and expansion of the scheme is under
progress.
National Cadet Corps
Recommendation (Para No. 28)
The Committee had recommended as under:—
The Committee note that NCC aims at creating a pool of organized
trained and motivated youth with leadership qualities in all walks of
life, who will serve the Nation regardless of which career they choose.
It also provides an environment conducive to motivate young Indian to
join the armed forces.

39
The Committee also note that during the year 2010-11 NCC was
allocated Rs. 970.37 crore, however, the actuals were Rs. 707.67 crore,
during the year 2011-12 NCC were allocated Rs. 984.01 crore, however,
the actuals were Rs. 713.81 crore, during the year 2012-13 NCC were
allocated Rs. 1128.80 crore, however, the actuals were Rs. 791.87
crore, during the year 2013-14 NCC was allocated Rs. 887.12 crore,
however, the actuals were Rs. 874.03 crore. During the year 2014-15
NCC has been allocated Rs. 1025.17 crore, however, till July 2014 it has
spent just Rs. 362.44 crore. It can be analyzed from the data that even
after the Revised Estimates, there has been under spending every year.
The Committee desire that NCC Directorate must be guided by the
Finance Division of the Ministry of Defence in the financial planning
process to avoid this under spending.
The Ministry in its Action Taken Reply has stated as under:—
The underutilization of funds allotted to the NCC has been mainly
in the Sub-Heads relating to Stores, Training, Information Technology,
Revenue/Capital Works and procurement of Microlites. The reasons
attributable to the said under utilization are:—
(a) Stores Due to failure of rate contract and resultant
non-materialization of supply orders in respect
of procurement of uniforms, ban on procurement
of vehicles as part of the economy measures,
delay in delivery of 0.22 Rifles and ammunition
by Rifle Factory and Ammunition Depot
respectively.
(b) Training Lesser number of camps were conducted in
North-Eastern Region, Andhra Pradesh,
Uttarakhand and J&K because of inclement
weather conditions and local disturbances. Due
to these reasons some of the Treks also had to
be cancelled.
(c) Information Lesser expenditure incurred by 17 State NCC
Technology Directorates under Local Purchase.
(d) Revenue Works/ Slow progress of sanctioned Works and non-
Capital Works submission of final bills by MES.
(New/Carry over)
(e) Procurement of Procurement of Microlites by Indian Air Force
Microlites did not materialize which led to non-utilization
of budgetary provision of Rs. 19.39 crores during
2010-11, Rs. 20 crores during 2011-12 and
Rs. 39 crores during 2012-13. No budgetary
provision was made during 2013-14 and
2014-15. Procurement of Microlites by Indian
Air Force is being expedited.

40
2. As regards current financial year i.e. 2014-15, as compared to
the expenditure of Rs. 362.44 crores till July 2014, the expenditure till
December 2014 has increased to Rs. 849.05 crores which is 82.82% of
the budgetary allocation. Procurement of stores, based on Annual
Provision Review, are done in accordance with laid down procedures.
Department of Defence (Finance) is always a part of the procurement
process. Further , a proposal for delegation of financial powers to NCC
is under consideration in consultation with Department of Defence
(Finance).
Recommendation (Para No. 29)
The Committee had recommended as under:—
The Committee further note that total sanctioned strength of NCC
cadets is 15 lakh. At present the actual strength of NCC cadets is
11,73,029. Out of it, the Girl cadets are 3, 04,661, consisting of 26%.
The NCC has covered 10,174 Schools 5,548 Colleges and 670 Districts.
However , it has 4790 Schools and 2549 Colleges in the waiting list.
However, NCC is taking initiative for expansion in five phases. In addition,
the Government has recently approved a self-financing scheme in which
the Government does not have to pay, but the institution, if it wants
to join, can join after paying approximately Rs. 6,500 per cadet per
year and 153 minor units which will be upgraded may take care of the
major part of the waiting list.
The Committee recommends that to have wider reach of NCC in
schools and colleges, the Ministry of Defence should look into the
possibility of coordinating with the Ministry of Human Resource
Development. The Committee also desire the Ministry of Human Resource
Development to make NCC as a part of the education policy so as to
create organized, trained, disciplined, selfless and motivated future
generation. The steps should be taken to encourage girls to join NCC
to correct ratio of Girl vs Boy Cadets.
The Ministry in its Action Taken Reply has stated as under:—
2 Group Head Quarters and 24 units have been raised in the 1st and
2nd phases of the 2 lakh Additional Cadet Strength Implementation
Process. The proposal for raising 1 Group Head Quarter and 14 units in
the 3rd Phase is under progress. A tentative Plan for raising 2 Group
Head Quarters and 23 NCC Units in the 4th & 5th Phases of the 2 lakh
Additional Cadet Strength Implementation Process has been formulated.
A study Group has been constituted to draw up a Comprehensive Plan
considering aspects of up-gradation, amalgamation/merger, relocation

41
and concentration of waitlisted institutions in totality, as also keeping
in view the priority areas, including coastal border areas and Left Wing
Extremism affected regions.
Ministry of Human Resource Development has been requested to
issue advisory to the various Educational Boards, Central Board of
Secondary Education, Kendriya Vidyalaya Sangathan and Navodaya
Vidyalaya Sangathan for implementation of the Central Advisory
Committee proposal of including the best practices of NCC in school
curriculum.
There is a plan to increase girls ’ representation in NCC to 33% in
the coming years @ 1.5% per training year for which necessary directions
have been issued.
Recommendation (Para No. 30)
The Committee had recommended as under:—
As the information is not available in public domain regarding a
provision, wherein an individual from any school, whether that is enrolled
or not can apply to be trained as an NCC cadet, the Committee desire
that this information should be made available on public domain for
larger benefit to the aspiring NCC cadets.
The Ministry in its Action Taken Reply has stated as under:—
Policy guidelines on relevant subjects that would be of interest to
individuals/institutions have been hosted in the NCC Website. Details of
enrolment in NCC, even for students of educational institutions not
enrolled for NCC training, has been uploaded on the NCC Website under
“Cadets Corner ”.
Recommendation (Para No. 31)
The Committee had recommended as under:—
The Committee further note that NCC is having Youth Exchange
Programme with 10 countries e.g. Russia, Singapore, Kazakhstan,
Vietnam, Turkmenistan, Sri Lanka, Maldives, Bangladesh, Nepal and
Bhutan. The Committee desire that youth exchange programme should
be spread to other countries also where similar organizations exist.
The NCC cadets are given training in Mountaineering Courses,
Mountaineering Expeditions (Boys and Girls), Para Basic Courses, Para
Sailing, Snow Skiing, Trekking, White Water Rafting, Sailing Expeditions,

42
Yachting Regatta and Desert Camel Safari. The Committee recommend
that NCC cadets should also be encouraged and facilitated to participate
in international adventure sports also.
The Ministry in its Action Taken Reply has stated as under:—
Seven Commonwealth of Independent States countries with whom
Youth Exchange Programme does not exist were contacted for giving
their views with respect to starting the programme. The response is
awaited from the following seven Countries:—
(i) Armenia
(ii) Azerbaijan
(iii) Belarus
(iv) Kyrgyzstan
(v) Moldova
(vi) Tajikistan
(vii) Uzbekistan
Indian Defence attaches of the countries with whom Youth Exchange
Programme exists have been contacted to see the feasibility of adventure
activity during the visit to these countries. The present status is:—
(i) Nepal has agreed to the proposal.
(ii) Sri Lanka adventure activities are conducted during CAC camp
in which 1 Officer and 6 cadets (3 Senior Division & 3 Senior
Wing) participated.
(iii) Confirmation from other countries is still awaited.

CHAPTER III
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS, WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT
Para No. 8, 9, 11 & 17
The Ministry has stated that the replies to above paras are classified
in nature, hence the same have been directly sent to the Chairperson,
Standing Committee on Defence.
43

CHAPTER IV
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF
THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE
AND WHICH REQUIRE REITERATION
Budget
Recommendation (Para No. 1)
The Committee had recommended as under:—
The Committee are surprised to see the continuous gap between
the projected requirement of the Army and the allocations made to it.
In the Revenue side, the Committee noted that during the year
2010-11, the gap between the projected amount and allocated amount
is Rs. 5465.49 crore which has been increased to Rs. 13740.69 crore in
2011-12, whereas, during the year 2012-13, it has been decreased to
Rs. 6534.59 crore but again increased to Rs. 12236.18 crore during the
year 2013-14. During the current year also, the Committee see the gap
of Rs. 12993.86 crore between the projected and allocated amount. In
the capital side, it has been noted that there has been huge gap
between the projected and allocated amount of Rs. 4382.20 crore,
Rs. 6400.99 crore, Rs. 8996.80 crore, Rs. 7644.25 crore and Rs. 15402.55
crore for the years 2010-11, 2011-12, 2012-13, 2013-14 and 2014-15
respectively.
The Ministry in its Action Taken Reply has stated as under:—
The allocations made to the Services are based upon the ceilings
conveyed by the Ministry of Finance. In view of the shortfall in the
allocations made by the Ministry of Finance as compared to the overall
requirements projected by this Ministry, shortfalls are bound to arise in
the allocations made to individual Services.
This observation of the Committee was conveyed to the Ministry of
Finance vide D.O. No. 3(4)/Bud.-I/2013/06/DefSecy/2015 dated 14.01.15.
(Please see Para Nos. 11 to 15 of Chapter 1 of the Report)
Recommendation (Para No. 2)
The Committee had recommended as under:—
The Committee are of the view that the Army has projected its
demand after careful consideration of its various ongoing and proposed
schemes. Since the pay and allowances and other obligatory expenses
44

45
are of recurring nature, the gap between projected and allocated amount
forced the Army to reduce its requirement of stores including ordnance
stores, transportation, revenue works and maintenance, etc. affecting
the upkeep of equipment, maintenance of existing infrastructure and
bringing deficiencies in overall preparedness of the forces.
The Ministry in its Action Taken Reply has stated as under:—
It may be noted that the Ministry of Defence is bound by the overall
budgetary ceiling provided by the Ministry of Finance. Of the available
limited resources, funds are allocated to the services depending on
their requirements. While allocating funds it is ensured that all the
genuine requirements are met and shortfall of funds does not come in
the way of security of the country, which is the top-most priority.
This observation of the Committee was conveyed to the Ministry of
Finance vide D.O. No. 3(4)/Bud-I/2013/06/Def. Secy./2015 dated
14.01.15.
(Please see Para Nos. 11 to 15 of Chapter 1 of the Report)
Recommendation (Para No. 3)
The Committee had recommended as under:—
The Committee are not able to understand the reduction of
Rs. 15402.55 crore in the capital budget, during the current year and
foresee the difficulties likely to be faced by the Army for its new
projects and infrastructure as most part of the budget would go for the
committed liabilities.
The Committee find the entire scenario very discouraging and do
not find any reason with the Ministry of Defence and the Ministry of
Finance for curtailment in the budget of the Army. The Committee fully
understand that capable, motivated and dedicated force cannot move
and fight without fuel in the vehicles and fire in its weapons. Therefore,
the Committee recommend that the Ministry of Defence should allocate
the amount to the Army as per its projections to buy new weapon
system and creating infrastructure for the Army so as to keep its fighting
spirit high and ready to move in any eventuality.
The Ministry in its Action Taken Reply has stated as under:—
In view of the shortfall in the allocations made by the Ministry of
Finance with reference to the requirements projected, there will be
shortfall in allocations made to individual Services. It would be unfair

46
to allocate fully to any one Service, as this can only be done at the cost
of other Services.
(Please see Para Nos. 11 to 15 of Chapter 1 of the Report)
Modernization of Army
Recommendation (Para No. 4)
The Committee had recommended as under:—
The Committee note from the reply of the Ministry that the
modernization of the Armed Forces is a continuous process based on
threat perception, operational necessity, technological changes and
available resources and the process is based on a 15 year Long Term
Integrated Perspective Plan (LTIPP), the five year Services Capital
Acquisition Plan (SCAP) and the Annual Acquisition Plan (AAP) and the
Armed Forces remain in a state of operational readiness to meet any
eventuality. However , presentation by Army before the Committee belied
the claim of the Ministry that all is well with the Army, as Army desired
to acquire seven most critical procurement schemes to contribute for
enhancement of their combat power in fast track mode. In this respect,
the Committee are constrained to note that very little amount e.g.
Rs. 8,521.10 crore, Rs. 10,176.07 crore, Rs. 13,153.95 crore,
Rs. 12,383.36 crore, Rs. 14,252.49 crore, Rs. 13,724.14 crore and
Rs. 13,327.04 crore was allocated to the Army for modernization during
the years 2007-08 till 2013-14 respectively and that too for the last two
years it is on the decrease. On the other hand the information supplied
by the Ministry reveals that the Army could not utilize its modernization
budget fully for the last six years in a row except for the year 2007-
08. During the year 2008-09, it could not spend Rs. 2461.29 crore; in
2009-10, Rs. 1502.19 crore; in 2010-11, Rs. 666.27 crore; in 2011-12,
Rs. 3386.56 crore; in 2012-13, Rs. 2852.35 crore; and in 2013-14
Rs. 2900.55 crore. Taking into account the above facts, the Committee
are of the view that the Ministry has not planned spending of the Army
properly otherwise surrendering of the funds could have been avoided.
The Committee desires that a thorough review of LTIPP , SCAP and AAP
should be undertaken for optimal utilization of funds. The Committee
also desires that higher allocations should be provided for modernization
of Army so as to make it a force to reckon with.
The Ministry in its Action Taken Reply has stated as under:—
The Committee has referred to the seven most critical procurements
schemes identified by army. It is clarified that they are derived from

47
LTIPP , SCAP and AAP and the Army has flagged them additionally as
priority items. The Budgetary Estimate for Financial Year 2015-16 is
Rs. 22054.50 crore. The gaps between Budgetary allocation and actuals
arise due to post contracts issues such as delayed supplies, supply
consignments not being able to clear inspection and when progress of
on-going procurements are affected by reasons such as insufficient and
limited vendor base, non-conformity of the offers to the Request of
Proposal (RFP) conditions, long field trials, complexities in contract
negotiations, stakeholder consultations and long lead time for
indigenization etc.
Recommendation of the Committee for Review of LTIPP , SCAP and
AAP is already being implemented.
The current LTIPP is for 2012-27 and the next LTIPP (2017-32) is
already under formulation. This exercise ensures that the 15 year Long
Term Plan (2012-27) is reviewed every 3-5 years and the next LTIPP
(2017-32) is prepared incorporating all the operational necessities.
In respect of SCAP , Review of 12th Five Year Plan (2012-17) has
already been carried out. The Recast 12th Five Year Plan was approved
in July 2014.
Annual Acquisition Plan(AAP) is renewed every year. AAP 2014-16
was approved in May 2014. AAP 2015-17 is already under formulation.
(Please see Para Nos. 18 & 19 of Chapter 1 of the Report)
Wheeled Guns
Recommendation (Para No. 5)
The Committee had recommended as under:—
The Committee note that as per the Artillery profile, adequate
quantities of wheeled guns are proposed to be procured to make up for
the existing void. An inference can easily be drawn from the existing
situation that either there are problems in the course of procurement
or with the planning process. The Committee are of the view that items
of critical importance should be given priority in planning as well as in
procurement so that wheeled guns are available to the Army in a given
time.
The Ministry in its Action Taken Reply has stated as under:—
The procurement planning is based on the Long Term Integrated
Perspective Plan (LTIPP), Services Capital Acquisition Plan (SCAP) and
Annual Acquisition Plan (AAP) and arms and ammunitions are by and

48
large available in the army in adequate quantity. Mismatches between
requirements and availability can sometimes occur which are continually
addressed by the on-going procurement process.
The Army has identified a set of critical items which are to be
given priority. The procurement of wheeled guns is currently under
progress in the Regiment of Artillery as per the Artillery profile 2027.
(Please see Para Nos. 22 to 24 of Chapter 1 of the Report)
Critical Shortages with Army: Missiles
Recommendation (Para No. 7)
The Committee had recommended as under:—
The Committee note that some of the missile systems with Army
are BrahMos, UBK, Milan and Konkurs Missiles. However , the Committee
find that Army also have some deficiencies in holding of missiles. The
Committee also note that in reply to a question on the availability of
missile carrying vehicles and if any proposal from private sector to
supply the same had been received, it has been stated that no concrete
proposal for supply of these vehicles were received from the private
sector. This means that some initiative was taken by the private sector
to supply the same but it could not fructify due to some reasons. The
Committee desire that as missiles are very crucial component in the
arsenal of any modern force with a high deterrent value, it should be
made available to the Army in required quantity. Missile carrying vehicle
is an essential integral part of carrying missile from place of production
to the user , therefore, the Committee recommends that if BEML is not
able to supply the requisite quantities due to various controversies or
some other reason, private sector should be given an opportunity for
presenting their case.
The Ministry in its Action Taken Reply has stated as under:—
Missiles are being procured for the Army through on-going contracts
and procurement cases in progress.
Department of Defence Production (DDP), Ministry of Defence has
permitted M/s BEML to engage with and procure from M/s TATRA TRUCKS
(Czech Republic) the aggregates, components & parts of TATRA vehicles
for procurements which are justified and necessary on basis of
operational urgency, national security and non-availability of other
alternatives. Thus, BEML is in a position to resume supplies for such
critical procurement cases.
(Please see Para No. 27 of Chapter 1 of the Report)

49
Bullet Proof Jackets
Recommendation (Para No. 10)
The Committee had recommended as under:—
The Committee note that the Acceptance of Necessity for
procurement of 1,86,138 Bullet Proof Jackets was accorded by the
Defence Acquisition Council (DAC) in Oct. 2009. The Request for Proposal
(RFP) was retracted due to General Staff Qualitative Requirement (GSQR)
related issues in Dec. 2011. The GSQR was subsequently amended and
a fresh RFP was issued in Dec. 2012. After acceptance of Technical
Evaluation Report and validation of the velocities achieved by the various
types of ammunition at Terminal Ballistic Research Lab (TBRL)
Chandigarh, the Trials of the Bullet Proof Jackets are to commence
shortly.
The Committee also note that Bullet Proof Jackets (BPJ) are procured
on the basis of the requirements of the Army and this is an ongoing
process and the current procurement is on the basis of the revised
GSQRs. Although the Ministry has mentioned that BPJs are procured on
the basis of the requirements of the Army yet, the Committee could
easily draw that the requirement must have arisen well before the
approval of Defence Acquisition Council in Oct. 2009. The Committee
believe that the figure of 1,86,138 lakh jackets must have soared in the
last five years due to increase in number of new recruitees and also
wearing down of the old stock.
The Ministry in its Action Taken Reply has stated as under:—
Total authorisation of BPJs is 3,53,765 as per letter No B/82241/29/
CCS/BPJ/MGO/EM(GS&C)/124/DO(CPS/D(O-I)/2004 dated 24 Mar. 2004.
Quantity 1,22,624 BPJs are currently held with Indian Army. Technical
Evaluation Committee (TEC) Report on 1,86,138 BPJs was approved by
DG Acquisition on 27 Jan. 2014. Trial samples have been submitted to
Terminal Ballistic Research Laboratory on 16 Feb. 2015 and trials have
commenced on 09 Mar. 2015. In addition, the immediate requirement
of 50,000 BPJs based on old GSQR is being made through Revenue
Procurement.
(Please see Para Nos. 34 to 39 of Chapter 1 of the Report)
Bullet Proof Jackets
Recommendation (Para No. 12)
The Committee had recommended as under:—
The Committee are perturbed over the fact that such an important
life saving device has not been purchased by the Ministry jeopardizing

50
the lives of thousands of soldiers. Therefore, the Committee recommend
that in such cases where lives of soldiers are at stake, fast track
procedures should be adopted to procure the items. They are not
happy over the state of affairs in the Ministry where such an important
purchase could not be materialized even after a lapse of five years.
The Committee also recommend that the present purchase should be
completed in short time frame after the evaluation trials are over at
TBRL Chandigarh and delays, if any are due to callousness of a person,
responsibility should be fixed for the same
The Ministry in its Action Taken Reply has stated as under:—
Technical Evaluation Committee (TEC) Report on 1,86,138 BPJs was
approved by DG Acquisition on 27 Jan. 2014. Trial samples have been
submitted to Terminal Ballistic Research Laboratory on 16 Feb. 2015
and trials have commenced on 09 Mar. 2015. In addition, the immediate
requirement of 50,000 BPJs based on old GSQR is being made through
Revenue Procurement.
The procurement of Bullet Proof Jacket through the Capital Route
is a priority case and accordingly all efforts are being made to ensure
speedy progress of the case. The primary cause of the delay was due
to the requirement of conducting ballistic evaluations of the ammunition,
prior to commencement of trails. The trials have since commenced
from 09 Mar. 15 onwards and further progress would also be expedited.
(Please see Para Nos. 34 to 39 of Chapter 1 of the Report)
Bullet Proof Jackets
Recommendation (Para No. 13)
The Committee had recommended as under:—
The Committee also desire that they may be informed whether
BPJs for future procurements other than the present one, are included
in the long or short term plans e.g. LTIPP , SCAP , AAP or not.
The Ministry in its Action Taken Reply has stated as under:—
Based on LTIPP/SCAP/AAP , Capital Procurement of quantity 1,86,138
Bullet Proof Jackets caters for 12th Plan requirement. As and when the
current procurement fructifies, the future requirement based on
deficiencies will be addressed through Revenue Route.
(Please see Paras Nos. 34 to 39 of Chapter 1 of the Report)

51
Night Vision Devices
Recommendation (Para No. 14)
The Committee had recommended as under:—
The Committee came to know during deliberations about the
shortage of Night Vision Devices (NVDs). The Committee also find
seemingly inconsistency between the satisfaction level of the Ministry
and Army. While the Ministry seems to be satisfied with what forces
have on the other hand, the Army has altogether different view. It
appears that Ministry is not taking Army in confidence while doing its
perspective planning. The Committee feel that to have operational
preparedness for all times to come perspective planning of Army as
well as other forces should be visualized and strengthened. The
Committee feel that delays in procurement may adversely impact
operational preparedness of the services and also result in substantial
cost overruns.
The Ministry in its Action Taken Reply has stated as under:—
In view of shortages in the availability of Night Vision Devices
(NVDs) a road map for Night Enablement of Indian Army being prepared
as per Empowered Committee directions of Oct. 2013. For this,
enhancement of scales of Night Vision devices and weapon sights is in
progress.
(Please see Para No. 42 of Chapter 1 of the Report)
Shortage of Basic Items for Army
Recommendation (Para No. 15)
The Committee had recommended as under:—
The Committee note that the Empowered Committee which looks
into the procurement of 55 types of Special Clothing and Mountaineering
Equipments (SCMEs) authorized to troops deployed in Super High Altitude
Areas including Siachen has already been constituted in August 2007 as
per the direction of the Raksha Mantri. The Committee also note from
the initial reply that there are no significant deficiencies for these
equipment, however, to make these items available in adequate
quantities, contracts have already been awarded to firms. A total of
approximately Rs. 500 crore has already been earmarked for the
procurement of Ex-import SCME items from the current year budget.

52
From the reply to the supplementary question, the Committee conclude
that the Ministry first tried to avoid the matter altogether and informed
them that there were no significant deficiencies for these equipment,
however, later on revealed that these exists shortfall of 2,17,388 number
of High Ankle Boots, 13,09,092 Canvas brown rubber sole shoes with
laces, 4,47,000 Cap Balclava, 65,978 Durrie IT OG and 1,26,270 number
of Net Mosquito. The Committee are surprised over that fact that such
deficiencies of basic items of regular use where no high-end technology
is warranted, was allowed to exist. Therefore, the Committee desire
that perspective planning should be done to foresee such deficiencies
and pre-emptive action must be taken.
The Ministry in its Action Taken Reply has stated as under:—
Action is at hand to ensure that the requirements of high altitude
clothing and equipment will be met by the procurement underway. A
detailed plan has been worked to ensure that troops are inducted into
the High Altitude Area only with the necessary clothing and equipment.
(Please see Para No. 45 of Chapter 1 of the Report)
Mountain Strike Corps
Recommendation (Para No. 16)
The Committee had recommended as under:—
The Committee note that Mountain Strike Corps which is needed to
counter advances of neighbouring countries at high altitude areas has
been sanctioned keeping in view the 15 year perspective plan. However,
the Committee are surprised to note that for raising of this Corps, no
separate allocation has been made in this year ’s budget. As informed,
an amount of Rs. 5000.00 crore has been earmarked for it but it is not
over and above the actual budget allocated and the Army has been
asked to raise this Corps out of its own budget. The Committee also
came to know that for raising this Corps only war wastage reserve are
being utilised. It seems very impractical and incongrous that a new
Corps is being raised with war wastage reserves. The Committee feel
that the Ministry should do away with its proclivity of ad-hoc planning
and provide adequate budgetary support commensurate with the
requirement of Mountain Strike Corps.
The Ministry in its Action Taken Reply has stated as under:—
The proposal regarding ‘Capability Development Plan along the
Northern Borders’ referred as ‘Mountain Strike Corps ’ was approved by
the CCS in Sept. 2013 and the sanction order was issued in Oct., 2013.

53
Since less time was left after the approval during the financial year
2013-14, no additional funds were provided during 2013-14. During the
current financial year (2014-15), an amount of Rs. 1,44,481.00 crore
was projected as overall budget which included Rs. 8118.00 crore (Capital
+ Revenue) for Mountain Strike Corps. Later a separate allocation of
Rs. 3934.00 crore for Capital Acquisition was indicated for the scheme.
In order to enable immediate capability enhancement for the Northern
Borders, the raising of Mountain Strike Corps was commenced utilising
existing manpower and weapons and stores from existing reserve stocks
(WWR). Plans for replenishment of the WWR stocks already issued to
the new units and formations raised as part of Mountain Strike Corps,
have been formulated and are under implementation as per availability
of budget.
(Please see Para Nos. 48 to 50 of Chapter 1 of the Report)
Need for new Rifle for Army
INSAS Rifle Vs Assault Rifle
Recommendation (Para No. 20)
The Committee had recommended as under:—
The Committee note that INSAS Rifle was designed and developed
by DRDO based on Qualitative Requirements (QRs) set in 1982 and met
all QR parameters and inducted into Service in 1996. The Rifle has been
fully exploited since then including OP Vijay in 1999. Subsequent to OP
Vijay, the problems started occurring e.g. loosening of flash eliminator,
loosening of Piece guide, etc. The requirement was also felt for Upper
Hand Guard, additional safety in firing mechanism, Grenade sight
requirement, Improved Lever Locking Gas Cylinder. The Committee also
note that DRDO and Ordnance Factory Board (OFB) jointly took up
product improvement programme based on this feedback and introduced
the Improved Rifle as Rifle Mark 1B1 in 2001. Later on, plastic magazine
cracking problem was reported. Earlier, the magazines were procured
ex-trade but now production has been established at Ordnance Factory
Dum Dum and problems have been resolved.
From the information furnished, the Committee are dismayed to
learn that DRDO started working on INSAS Rifle way back in 1982 but
surprisingly it took 14 years in its development and could able to
deliver the Rifle only in 1996. But just after 3 years, the quality of rifle
tested in Operation Vijay revealed that product was not up to the mark
and many improvements were needed. The Committee find it shocking

54
that even years of expertise has not evolved DRDO to develop a world
class basic product like rifle.
The Ministry in its Action Taken Reply has stated as under:—
Armament Research & Development Establishment (ARDE), Pune
started working on Indian National Small Arms System (INSAS) project
in March 1982 with Probable Date of Completion (PDC) of 4 years. The
scope of the project was to offer prototypes for User evaluation. These
prototypes were Rifle, LMG, Carbine, their ammunition along with
sighting system and accessories. After development, prototypes were
offered for User trials in November 1987. The User trials were concluded
in April 1988. Thereafter, additional requirements in Qualitative
Requirements (QRs) were stated by the Army in August 1988, March
1990 and July 1990. All these additional requirements led to additional
R&D work and conduct of technical, re-user trials and evaluation. This
took considerable time of 2 to 3 years. Further , Ordnance Factory
Board (OFB) was sanctioned a project for setting up of a new plant for
mass manufacture of INSAS in 1992. After commissioning of plant,
production started in 1996.
Development of INSAS took 5 years (1982-1987) followed by User
trials, implementation of additional requirements, trial and evaluation
which took another 5 years (1987-1992) and further establishing mass
manufacturing at OFs took 4 years (1992-1996). Based on suggestions
made by users, DRDO, OFB & DGQA took initiatives to improve the
weapon and Rifle 1B1 was introduced in 2001.
Post 1992, ARDE improved Rifle 5.56x45 mm as Mark 1B1. Further,
to enhance fire power of INSAS and AK-47 Rifles held by Indian Army,
ARDE developed Under Barrel Grenade Launcher (UBGL). UBGL is
inducted into Services. DRDO carried out study to develop state-of-the-
art Rifle for future infantry soldier and prepared a roadmap for ‘soldier
as a platform ’. A project proposal to that effect was submitted in
Feb. 2007. However , no headway was made.
(Please see Para Nos. 57 to 59 of Chapter 1 of the Report)
Shortage of basic items for Army
Recommendation (Para No. 21)
The Committee had recommended as under:—
The Committee also note that at present Army uses in-service INSAS
and AK-47 rifles in various situations, however , Indian Army is in the
process of procuring Assault Rifles through a global tender with Transfer
of Technology to Ordnance Factory Board.

55
Considering the track record of DRDO, the Committee recommends
that a world class production after satisfying the requirement of user
i.e. Army may be purchased out rightly for immediate use after trials
are over and services of DRDO may be utilized to get Transfer of
Technology to produce this item in the country.
The Ministry in its Action Taken Reply has stated as under:—
The recommendation of the Committee is already being implemented
through a ‘Buy and Make ’ case for Assault Rifle with transfer of
technology to Ordinance Factories (OFB). DRDO can support the OFB in
the ToT process.
(Please see Para Nos. 57 to 59 of Chapter 1 of the Report)
Recommendation (Para No. 22)
The Committee had recommended as under:—
After contemplating over the various issues involved in INSAS and
Assault Rifles, the Committee feel that either Long Term Integrated
Perspective Plan(LTIPP) and the five year Services Capital Acquisition
Plan (SCAP) is not properly designed or there is some fault with the
procurement procedures, otherwise, the problems of INSAS Rifle which
were surfaced in 1996, almost 18 years ago, a Request for Proposal for
new Rifle could be issued more than a decade later.
The Ministry in its Action Taken Reply has stated as under:—
The INSAS Rifle introduced in 1996 underwent a number of upgrades
viz. INSAS Rifle 1A, 1A1,1 Band 1 B1. The Request for Proposal (RFP)
for the procurement of new Assault Rifle was issued as the indigenous
modifications did not cater to the user aspiration. Thus, the timing of
the RFP was due to upgrades and not planning or procurement procedure
issues.
(Please see Para Nos. 57 to 59 of Chapter 1 of the Report)
Directorate General Quality Assurance
Recommendation (Para No. 26)
The Committee had recommended as under:—
The Committee note that Directorate General Quality Assurance
(DGQA) is responsible for Quality Assurance of Defence Stores produced

56
by Ordnance Factories, public, private sectors and ex-import and it
takes all the actions necessary to ensure that the Defence forces of the
country get the entire range of arms, ammunition, equipment and
stores of the desired quality that will enhance the combat efficiency
and effectiveness of the fighting forces and they are able to easily
maintain and fully exploit the equipment and stores.
During oral evidence, the committee was informed by the Director
General DGQA that it provides quality assurance to all the stores which
are supplied by the Ordinance factories, Defence PSUs and trade firms.
The Committee note the establishments of DGQA are co-located with
the ordnance factories and they provide intimate quality assurance
cover to the products which are being manufactured by the ordnance
factories.
The Committee also note the elaborate system of inspection by
DGQA before inducting a weapon system into the force has essential
features like Formulation of General Staff Qualitative Requirement
(GSQR), Technical Evaluation Committee (TEC), User Trials, DGQA
Technical Trials and Environmental Testing, Finalization of Specification
out and Pre Dispatch Inspection (PDI)
However, during deliberations many issues have raised about quality
problems including long fuse of grenades, barrel bursts of guns, poor
quality ammunition reaching the forces etc. The Committee are indeed
surprised over the fact that despite having seemingly elaborate and
foolproof procedures to examine the stores as mentioned by DGQA,
why and how such incidents are taking place. The committee fail to
understand that if DGQA is inspecting the stores in the Ordnance
Factories itself, how defective stores are reaching the forces. The
Committee are of the view that something very serious has plagued the
organization otherwise accidents do not recur, therefore, the Committee
recommend that thorough review of procedures already in vogue should
be undertaken to make it infallible.
The Ministry in its Action Taken Reply has stated as under:—
DGQA is providing second party Quality Assurance cover on behalf
of defence services for products manufactured by the Ordnance
factories/DPSUs/Trade firms. To fulfil this role, Quality Audit &
Surveillance and Final Acceptance Inspection is carried out by DGQA.
The manufacturer is responsible for the quality control as well as the
first party Quality Assurance of the product during the manufacturing
stage. The steps initiated by DGQA to improve the quality of stores
supplied by OFB are enumerated below:—
(a) To ensure consistency in the quality of equipment/stores
manufactured and supplied to the Defence Forces by the

57
OFB, regular feedback from the Users is being taken. Based
on the defects noticed during the production, Final Acceptance
Inspection and defects noticed during the exploitation by the
Users, the processes and the products to be addressed are
identified. These processes and products are audited by team
of officers, specialised in the field. The aim of these audits
is to initiate corrective action/improvement in the processes
to ensure consistency/improvement in the quality of products
manufactured by the OFB. The recommendations of these
audits are conveyed to the Ordnance Factories for
implementation to improve the process/products.
(b) In order to ensure the quality, ammunition store is subjected
to stringent static and dynamic tests. Series of test firings at
DGQA and DRDO Firing Ranges are carried out.
(c) The laboratories of DGQA are being continuously upgraded
with the latest test equipment. The test equipment is well
maintained and calibrated for getting accurate results. 39
laboratories of DGQA have been accredited by National
Accreditation Board of Labs(NABL).
(d) The specifications, product drawings, Quality Assurance
Instructions are continuously revised in line with the latest
standards for these products, in order to improve the testing
methods for ensuring quality.
(Please see Para No. 74 of Chapter 1 of the Report)
Recommendation (Para No. 27)
The Committee had recommended as under:—
The Committee also desire that DGQA should be more vigilant in
inspections carried out by it so army personnel are sure of what they
are getting. Moreover, the DGQA is there to instill confidence in the
forces and not to scare them. The improvement in procedure so done
may be informed to the Committee at the earliest.
The Ministry in its Action Taken Reply has stated as under:—
The steps initiated by DGQA to improve the quality of stores supplied
by OFB are enumerated below:—
(a) To ensure consistency in the quality of equipment/stores
manufactured and supplied to the Defence Forces by the
OFB, regular feedback from the Users is being taken. Based

58
on the defects noticed during the production, Final Acceptance
Inspection, and defects noticed during the exploitation by
the Users, the processes and the products to be addressed
are identified. These processes and products are audited by
team of officers, specialised in the field. The aim of these
audits is to initiate corrective action/improvement in the
processes to ensure consistency/improvement in the quality
of products manufactured by the OFB. The recommendations
of these audits are conveyed to the Ordnance Factories for
implementation to improve the process/products.
(b) In order to ensure the quality, ammunition store is subjected
to stringent static and dynamic tests. Series of test firings at
DGQA and DRDO Firing Ranges are carried out.
(c) The laboratories of DGQA are being continuously upgraded
with the latest test equipment. The test equipment is well
maintained and calibrated for getting accurate results.
39 laboratories of DGQA have been accredited by National
Accreditation Board of Labs. (NABL).
(d) The specifications, product drawings, Quality Assurance
Instructions are continuously revised in line with the latest
standards for these products, in order to improve the testing
methods for ensuring quality.
(Please see Para No. 74 of Chapter I of the Report)

CHAPTER V
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL
REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED
-Nil-
   N EW D ELHI; MAJ GEN B C KHANDURI, AVSM (RETD),
10 August, 2015 Chairperson,
19 Shravana, 1937 (Saka) Standing Committee on Defence.
59

APPENDIX I
MINUTES OF THE NINETEENTH SITTING OF THE STANDING
COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE (2014-15)
The Committee sat on Monday, the 10th August, 2015 from 1000
hrs. to 1045 hrs. in Room No. ‘62’, Parliament House, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Maj Gen B C Khanduri AVSM (Retd)— Chairperson
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Suresh C Angadi
3. Shri Dharambir
4. Shri Thupstan Chhewang
5. Col Sonaram Choudhary (Retd)
6. Smt Pratyusha Rajeshwari Singh
7. Shri G Hari
8. Km Shobha Karandlaje
9. Shri Tapas Paul
10. Shri Malla Reddy
11. Smt Mala Rajya Laxmi Shah
12. Shri A P Jithender Reddy
Rajya Sabha
13. Shri K R Arjunan
14. Shri Rajeev Chandrasekhar
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Smt Kalpana Sharma — Joint Secretary
2. Shri D S Malha — Director
3. Shri A K Srivastava — Additional Director
4. Shri Rahul Singh — Under Secretary
60

61
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the members to the
sitting of the Committee and briefed about the reports.
3. The Committee then took up for consideration and adoption of
the draft Report on ‘Action Taken by the Government on the
recommendations/observations contained in the T wenty-Second Report
(15th Lok Sabha) on Threat Perception and preparedness of the Forces
including incursion on borders, coordination mechanism with the Central
Armed Police Forces and Border connectivity through Road, Air and
Rail’.
4. Thereafter, the Committee took up for consideration and adoption
of the draft Report on ‘Action taken by the Government on the
recommendations/observations contained in the Third Report of the
Standing Committee on Defence (16th Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants
of the Ministry of Defence for the year 2014-15 on Army (Demand
No. 22) ’.
5. The Committee, then, adopted the above Reports and authorized
the Chairperson to finalize the Reports in the light of the suggestions
received from the Members.
The Committee then adjourned.

APPENDIX II
ANALYSIS OF THE ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE THIRD REPORT
OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE (16TH LOK SABHA) ON
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS OF THE MINISTRY OF DEFENCE FOR THE YEAR
2014-15 ON ARMY (DEMAND NO. 22) ’
(i) Total number of recommendations: 31
(ii) Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the
Government:
Para Nos. 6, 18, 19, 23, 24, 25, 28, 29, 30, and 31
Total : 10
Percentage : 32%
(iii) Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire
to pursue in view of the Government ’s replies:
Para Nos. 8, 9, 11 and 17
Total : 04
Percentage : 13%
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of
Government have not been accepted by the Committee:
Para Nos. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 7, 10, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 20, 21, 22, 26
and 27
Total : 17
Percentage : 55%
(v) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which final replies
of the Government are still awaited:
Para No. Nil
Total : Nil
Percentage : 0
62