44
STANDING COMMITTEE
ON DEFENCE
(2018-2019)
SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA
MINISTRY OF DEFENCE
[Action taken by the Government on the Observations/
Recommendations contained in thirty-second report of
Standing Committee on Defence (16th Lok Sabha) on
‘Creation of non-lapsable capital fund account,
instead of the present system ’]
FORTY-FOURTH REPORT
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
December, 2018/ Agrahayana, 1940 ( Saka)


FORTY-FOURTH REPORT
STANDING COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE
(2018-2019)
(SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA)
MINISTRY OF DEFENCE
[Action taken by the Government on the Observations/
Recommendations contained in thirty-second report of
Standing Committee on Defence (16th Lok Sabha) on
‘Creation of non-lapsable capital fund account,
instead of the present system ’]
Presented to Lok Sabha on ........
Laid in Rajya Sabha on ........
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
December, 2018/ Agrahayana, 1940 ( Saka)


C.O.D. No. 202
Price : ` 38.00
© 2018 B Y L OK S ABHA S ECRETARIAT
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct
of Business in Lok Sabha (Fifteenth Edition) and printed by
Jainco Art India, New Delhi-110 005

CONTENTS
PAGE
COMPOSITION OF THE C OMMITTEE (2018-19) ............................... (iii)
INTRODUCTION ................................................................. (v)
CHAPTER I Report ...................................................... 1
CHAPTER II Observations/Recommendations which have been
accepted by the Government ........................ 11
CHAPTER III Observations/Recommendations  which the
Committee do not desire to pursue in view of the
replies received from of the Government ......... 13
C
HAPTER IV Observations/Recommendations in respect of which
Replies of the Government have not been accepted
by the Committee and which require reiteration.... 14
C
HAPTER V Observations/Recommendations in respect of which
Government have furnished interim replies....... 19
APPENDICES
I. Minutes of the Second Sitting of the Standing Committee
on Defence (2018-19) held on 14.11.2018 .................. 20
II. Analysis of Action Taken by the Government on the
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Thirty-
Second Report (16th Lok Sabha) on Creation of Non-Lapsable
Capital Fund Account, instead of the present system ... 22
(i)

COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE
ON DEFENCE (2018-19)
  Shri Kalraj Mishra —  Chairperson
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Deepak Adhikari (Dev)
3. Shri Suresh Chanabasappa Angadi
4. Shri Shrirang Appa Barne
5. Col. Sona Ram Chaudhary VSM (Retd.)
6. Shri Thupstan Chhewang
7. Shri H.D. Devegowda
8. Shri Jayadev Galla
9. Shri Sher Singh Ghubaya
10. Shri Gaurav Gogoi
11. Dr. Murli Manohar Joshi
12. Km. Shobha Karandlaje
13. Dr. Mriganka Mahato
14. Shri Rodmal Nagar
15. Shri Partha Pratim Ray
16. Shri A.P . Jithender Reddy
17. Shri B. Senguttuvan
18. Smt. Mala Rajya Lakshmi Shah
19. Shri Dharambir Singh
20. Smt. Pratyusha Rajeshwari Singh
21. Shri Rakesh Singh
Rajya Sabha
22. Shri K.R. Arjunan
23. Dr. Ashok Bajpai
24. Shri Joginipally Santosh Kumar
25. Shri Madhusudan Mistry
(iii)

(iv)
26. Shri Soumya R. Patnaik
27. Shri G.V.L. Narasimha Rao
28. Shri Sanjay Raut
29. Smt. Ambika Soni
30. Shri Ram Nath Thakur
31. Dr. D.P . Vats
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Smt. Kalpana Sharma — Joint Secretary
2. Shri Srinivasulu Gunda — Director
3. Smt. Jyochnamayi Sinha — Additional Director
4. Shri Rahul Singh — Under Secretary
5. Smt. Preeti Negi — Executive Assistant

(v)
INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairperson of the Standing Committee on Defence
(2018-19), having been authorised by the Committee, present this
Forty-fourth report on  Action Taken by the Government on the
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Thirty-Second Report
(Sixteenth Lok Sabha) on ‘Creation of Non-Lapsable Capital Fund
Account, instead of the present system ’.
2. The Thirty-second Report was presented to Lok Sabha on
10 August, 2017 and laid in Rajya Sabha on 9 August, 2017. It contained
eight Observations/Recommendations. The Ministry of Defence
furnished Action Taken Replies on all the Observations/
Recommendations in February, 2018.
3. The Report was considered and adopted by the Committee at
their Sitting held on 14 November, 2018.
4. For facility of reference and convenience, Observations/
Recommendations of the Committee have been printed in bold letters
in the Report.
5. An analysis of action taken by the Government on the
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Thirty-second Report
of the Standing Committee on Defence (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) is given
in Appendix II.
   N
EW D ELHI; KALRAJ MISHRA,
27 November, 2018 Chairperson,
06 Agrahayana, 1940 ( Saka) Standing Committee on Defence.

CHAPTER I
REPORT
This report of the Standing Committee on Defence deals with
action taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations
contained in the Thirty-Second Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) on
‘Creation of Non-Lapsable Capital Fund Account, instead of the present
system’ which was presented to Lok Sabha on 10 August, 2017 and laid
in Rajya Sabha on 9 August, 2017.
2. The Committee ’s Thirty-Second Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha)
contained 8 Observations/Recommendations.
3. Action Taken Replies have been received from the Government
in respect of all the Observations/Recommendations contained in the
Report. The replies have been examined and have been categorised
as follows:—
(i) (a) Observations/Recommendations which have been
accepted by the Government:
Nil—may be shown in Chapter II (A) of the Draft Report
(00 Recommendation)
(b) Observations/Recommendations which have been
accepted by the Government and to be commented upon:
Nil—may be shown in Chapter II (B) of the Draft Report
(00 Recommendation)
(ii) Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not
desire to pursue in view of the replies received by the
Government:
Nil—may be shown in Chapter III of the Draft Report
(00 Recommendation)
(iii) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies
of Government have not been accepted by the Committee
and which require reiteration and to be commented upon:
Para Nos. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7 and 8
 (08 Recommendations)
These may be included in Chapter IV of the Draft Report.

2
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which
Government have furnished interim replies:
Nil—may be shown in Chapter V of the Draft Report
(00 Recommendation)
4. The Committee desire that the Ministry ’s response to the
comments made in Chapter I of this Report be furnished to them
at the earliest and in any case not later than three months of the
presentation of this Report.
Recommendation (Para Nos. 1-8)
5. The Committee in their Thirty-second Report had recommended
as under:—
‘The Committee, in their Reports presented on earlier occasions,
have recommended making the Capital allocations for Defence
acquisition as ‘Roll on’ and ‘Non-Lapsable’ following the ending of
the financial year. In the information furnished to the Committee
on the subject matter in the past, the Ministry of Defence had,
in general, not favoured the proposal for constituting a Non-
lapsable Defence Capital Fund Account. The reasons cited by the
Ministry for not favouring the proposal for having a non-lapsable
fund include (a) limitations of the utility of such a proposal as
Parliamentary approval would be required for appropriating any
sum from the Fund; (b) guidelines of Ministry of Finance (MoF)
which stipulate that, Reserve Funds can be created when
Government has surplus funds to spare on specific objects of
expenditure and the fiscal situation was not suitable for setting
up such a Fund; (c) assurance of the Ministry of Finance that
additional funds for the modernization of Services would be made
available, and (d) there being no occasion in the last few years
where any substantial amounts were available as surplus for rolling
over to the subsequent years. While deposing before the Committee
(2016-17), the Defence Secretary highlighted the complexities
involved in Defence acquisition and budgeting. The aspect of likely
adverse affect of lack of financial resources on defence
preparedness has been brought to light in specific terms.
Consequently, as a follow up, the Ministry has now reviewed its
stated position and has admitted that the utility of creation of a
non-lapsable, roll over fund for Capital cannot be completely
negated as the same would help in eliminating the prevailing
uncertainty in providing adequate funds for various defence
capability development and infrastructure projects.

3
A proposal for obtaining ‘in-principle’ approval of the Ministry of
Finance on creating a Nonlapsable Capital Fund Account has been
sent on 9 February, 2017 by the Ministry of Defence with the
approval of the then Hon ’ble Raksha Mantri.
…… As per the Ministry of Finance, the perceived advantage in
creating a dedicated reserve/corpus fund i.e. ‘Non-lapsable Defence
Capital Fund Account in the Public Account ’ is the non-lapsability
of balances that would be available in the corpus at the close of
the financial year. However , the balance available in the corpus/
reserve fund at the commencement of the new financial year
would not be available automatically for being expended by any
Ministry/Department on the intended schemes. For spending the
balance available in any reserve/corpus fund, approval of the
Parliament through valid appropriation would be necessary. The
Ministry of Finance has also been opposing the proposal for creation
of a reserve/corpus fund in the Public Account without matching
receipts either in the form of tax receipts, cess receipts or any
form of levy etc. It has also been stated that it may not be
advantageous to create a reserve/corpus fund in the Public Account
and the requirements of the Ministry of Defence for meeting its
Capital Modernisation and acquisition plans could be addressed
through the normal budgetary mechanism.
.... the allocations for the Ministry of Defence under the ‘Capital’
head have inevitably been lesser than the projection, not only at
the Budget Estimates stage but also at Revised Estimates stage.
To illustrate, against a projection of Rs. 1,46,155.54 crore for
Capital Budget in 2017-18, only Rs. 86,528.65 crore have been
allocated at the BE 2017-18 for the Defence Services (Army, Navy,
Joint Staff, Air Force, DGOF , R&D and DGQA). Inadequacy of the
allocation for Capital acquisition vis-a-vis the projections, affects
several procurement proposals and contracts relating inter alia to
Land, Aircraft and Aeroengines, Heavy and Medium Vehicles,
Equipments, Military Farms, Procurement of Rolling Stock, Ex-
Servicemen Contributory Health Scheme, Rashtriya Rifles, National
Cadet Corps, Construction Work Ground. Defence procurement
and acquisition is a complicated process involving long gestation
periods and funds allocated for capital acquisition in a particular
financial year are not necessarily consumed in that year and
ultimately have to be surrendered by the Ministry of Defence. The
intention of the Committee in recommending having a non-lapsable
Defence Capital Fund Account for Defence modernization is
primarily for ensuring that the money allocated for a particular

4
item is spent on the specified item only, not necessarily in the
same Financial year. Further , the Defence Secretary himself has
been candid in submitting before the Committee that lack of
finance definitely affects our operational preparedness.
.... creation of a Non-lapsable Defence Capital Fund Account is an
imperative need for enhancement and heightened operational
preparedness of our Defence Forces. .... even if certain financial
rules and regulations have to be amended for creation of a ‘Non-
lapsable Defence Capital Fund Account ’ to meet the requirements
of our Defence forces, it can and should be done in the interest
of the nation. The Ministry of Finance should not have any rigid
view in this regard. Moreover , creation of such a fund would also
ensure that procurement of equipments, arms and ammunition for
our Defence Forces which are in the pipeline and in the stage of
fructification is not delayed because of lack of money due to
technicalities of rules and regulations. Accordingly, the Committee
recommended that the Ministry of Finance to work out the
modalities for creation of a ‘Non-lapsable Defence Capital Fund
Account’ in consultation with the Ministry of Defence and apprise
the Committee of the progress made in this direction at the
earliest, and not later than three months of the presentation of
this Report to Parliament.
The Committee found it pertinent to mention in this context that
in the Union Budget 1998-99, the Non-lapsable Central Pool of
Resources for the North Eastern region was constituted with the
approval of Parliament. The broad objective of the Non-lapsable
Central Pool of Resources scheme is to ensure speedy development
of infrastructure in the North Eastern Region by increasing the
flow of budgetary financing for new infrastructure projects/schemes
in the Region. Both physical and social infrastructure sectors such
as Irrigation and Flood Control, Power, Roads and Bridges, Education,
Health, Water Supply and Sanitation — are considered for providing
support under the Central Pool, with projects in physical
infrastructure sector receiving priority. Funds from the Central
Pool can be released for State sector as well as Central sector
projects/schemes. However , the funds available under the Central
Pool are not meant to supplement the normal Plan programmes
either of the State Governments or Union Ministries/ Departments/
Agencies.
The Committee to administer the Non-Lapsable Central Pool of
Resources is headed by Secretary, Ministry of Development of

5
North Eastern Region and has representation from Ministries of
Finance, Home Affairs and Planning Commission. Financial Advisor
to the Ministry of Development of North Eastern Region has been
included as a member. Representatives of the Union Ministry/
Departments concerned, whose proposals are to be considered in
a particular sitting for funding under Non-Lapsable Central Pool of
Resources (NLCPR), are also invited. For identification of projects
under NLCPR, States are asked to submit, before the beginning of
the financial year, a prioritized list of projects with a short write
up on each project. In examining the priority, the Committee is,
inter alia, guided by considerations such as economic infrastructure,
drinking water supply and other health and sanitation projects
etc. Past performance of a State in implementing projects in the
particular sectors to which the projects belong is also considered.
The overall utilisation and absorption of funds by a particular
State in the past years also guide the overall quantum of projects
to be undertaken for that State in a year Detailed Project Report(s)
for such retained projects are then prepared by the State
concerned. These project proposals are thereafter examined in
consultation with the concerned Central Ministry/Department. The
recommendations/views, thus received are placed before the
Committee to administer the Non-Lapsable Central Pool, which
considers the proposal and accords approval. After approval of the
Committee, funds are sanctioned and released by the Ministry of
Development of North Eastern Region on submission of an
implementation schedule. Subsequent releases are made only after
receipt of Utilisation Certificate of earlier releases.
....The Ministry of Defence, in consultation with the Ministry of
Finance, and by taking inspiration from the ‘Non-lapsable Central
Pool of Resources for the North Eastern region ’, should institute
streamlined arrangements for administering the ‘Non-Lapsable’
and ‘Roll on ’ Capital Budget for defence acquisitions. ’
6. The Ministry in its Action Taken Reply has stated as under:—
‘In accordance with observations/recommendations made by
Standing Committee on Defence (SCoD) in its 32nd Report, Ministry
of Finance (MoF) was requested to furnish a suitable response on
matter relating to ‘Creation of Non-Lapsable Capital Fund Account,
instead of the present System’. Ministry of Finance in their response
dated 16th February, 2018, stated that the proposal of Ministry of
Defence for establishing a Non-Lapsable Reserve fund in the Public
Account with the nomenclature ‘Defence Modernisation Fund ’,

6
based on the recommendations contained in 32nd Report
(16th Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on Defence has been
examined again in the Ministry. Ministry of Finance, further,
reiterated the views conveyed by them vide their O.M. dated
03.07.2017 (Annexure) and also stated that the proposal is not
agreed to. ’
7. The Committee are disappointed to note that despite their
repeated recommendations for making the Capital allocations for
the Services on ‘Roll on ’ and ‘Non-Lapsable’ basis by constituting
‘Non- lapsable Defence Capital Fund Account ’ the same was not
agreed to by the Ministry of Finance due to the following reasons:—
(i) Adequate budget provision is made available to Ministry
of Defence to finance the capital requirements of
Defence Services;
(ii) Balances available in the non-lapsable funds will not be
available to Ministry of Defence automatically. It requires
Parliament’s sanction through Demands for Grants of
Ministry of Defence for being spent on Defence Capital
Expenditure. Hence, mere creation of non-lapsable funds
yields no additional advantage to Ministry of Defence
and could rather induce complacency in incurring
expenditure;
(iii) Funds in the Public Account are generally created with
dedicated receipts for being financed. In this case, there
are no such dedicated receipts for financing the corpus
of the reserve fund proposed to be created in the Public
Account;
(iv) Creating a corpus out of general revenues could lead to
unnecessary parking of funds and make them unavailable
for other essential expenditure. Thus, non-lapsable funds
result in sub-optimal utilization. Standing Committee on
Finance (16th Lok Sabha), in their 2nd Report on
Demands for Grants of Ministry of Finance for the year
2014-15, recommended that the unutilized funds/funds
kept idle for more than two years may be transferred to
Consolidated Fund of India so that these funds could be
utilized for other prioritized schemes; and
(v) Moving general revenues out of Consolidated Fund and
parking in corpus fund is against the spirit behind Article
266(1) of the Constitution. Giving go ahead in one case
could raise competing demands from other Ministries.

7
8. With regard to adequate availability of funds to Ministry of
Defence for financing capital acquisitions, the Committee, during
examination of Demands for Grants of the Ministry of Defence for
the year 2018-19, found that against a projection of Rs. 1,60,199.81
crore for Capital Budget for the year 2018-19, only Rs. 83,434.04
crore i.e. approximately 50% less than projections, had been
allocated in the BE 2018-19 for the Defence Services (Army, Navy,
Joint Staff and Air Force). Similarly, in the past also, the allocations
for the Ministry of Defence under the ‘Capital’ head had been
lower than the projected amounts. Hence, the lower budgetary
allocations vis-à-vis the projected amounts appear to be a norm
rather than an exception, probably affecting adversely capital
equipment acquisition plans by the Ministry of Defence. This is
evident in the candid submission of the representatives of Ministry
of Defence before the Committee in 2016-17 to the affect that
utility of creation of a non-lapsable, roll over fund for Capital
cannot be completely negated as the same would help in eliminating
the prevailing uncertainty in providing adequate funds for various
defence capability development and infrastructure projects. The
Committee, therefore, feel that the contention of the Ministry of
Finance at point no. (i) as mentioned in Para 8 above that adequate
budget provision is made available to the Ministry of Defence to
finance the capital requirements of Defence Services is not tenable.
9. The Committee strongly feel that since the Defence
procurement and acquisition is a complicated process involving
long gestation periods and funds allocated for capital acquisition in
a particular financial year are not necessarily consumed in that
year itself for variety of reasons and ultimately have to be
surrendered by the Ministry of Defence. Therefore, the intention
of the Committee in recommending a Non-Lapsable Capital fund
account for Defence modernization is to ensure that funds allocated
for capital acquisitions which are unspent/ under spent are not
surrendered but are transferred to the non lapsable fund. Monies
lying in such a fund can be utilized for the stated purpose whenever
the need arises. Such an arrangement, the Committee believe will
go a long way in imparting much needed certainty for acquiring
capital equipment.
10. Another reason adduced by the Ministry of Finance for not
agreeing to the proposal for creation of ‘Non-lapsable Defence
Capital Fund Account’ is that balances available in the non-lapsable
fund will not be available to Ministry of Defence automatically as
it requires Parliaments sanction through Demands for Grants of
Ministry of Defence for being spent on Defence Capital Expenditure.

8
Further, moving the general revenues out of the Consolidated Fund
and parking in a ‘corpus fund ’ is against the spirit of Article 266(1)
of the Constitution. The Committee, in this regard, would like to
emphasize that even if certain financial rules and regulations have
to be amended for creation of a ‘Non-lapsable Defence Capital
Fund Account ’ to meet the requirements of our Defence forces,
the same may be done in the interest of the Nation, irrespective
of complicated financial discourse. Moreover, creation of this fund
would also ensure that procurement of equipments, arms and
ammunition for our Defence Forces which are in the pipeline and
in the stage of fructification is not delayed because of lack of
money and due to technicalities of rules and regulations.
11. It is pertinent to mention here that the Ministry of Defence,
though after a long time, eventually realised significance of creation
of ‘Non-Lapsable Defence Capital Modernization Fund ’. Contrary to
the stance taken in the past, the Ministry of Defence, in its brief
submitted to the Committee on 22 December, 2016, had favoured
creation of ‘Non-Lapsable Defence Capital Modernization Fund ’.
When the Standing Committee time and again raised the issue of
setting up of a non-lapsable Defence Capital (Modernization) Fund,
the MoD considered this issue in consultation with the Services and
after taking into account the views of various think tanks.
Thereafter, as mentioned elsewhere in the report , the MoD felt
that the utility of creation of a non-lapsable, roll over fund for
Capital could not be completely negated as the same would help in
eliminating the prevailing uncertainty in providing adequate funds
for various defence capability development and infrastructure
projects. The Ministry, therefore, reviewed its stated position taken
so far and proposed to take up the case for setting up of a capital
non-lapsable, roll—on fund afresh with Ministry of Finance
immediately. The Committee, hence, would like the Ministry of
Finance to discard their apprehension regarding creation of a ‘Non-
lapsable Defence Capital Fund Account ’ on the lines similar to
theme ‘Non Lapsable Central Pool of Resources (NLCPR) ’ for the
North Eastern Region and come up with a solution in consultation
with the Ministry of Defence and apprise the Committee in due
course.

No.F .7(1)-B(AC)/2017
Ministry of Finance
Department of Economic Affairs
(Budget Division)
New Delhi
3rd July, 2017
OFFICE MEMORANDUM
Subject: Creation of ‘Non-Lapsable Capital Fund Account ’ in Public
Account for ‘Defence Modernisation ’.
The undersigned is directed to refer to Defence Secretary ’s D.O.
letter No.3(10)/Bud-I/2016(Pt.)/70/Def.Secy.2017 dated 91.06.2017 on
the subject cited above and to state that the proposal of Ministry of
Defence for creation of non-lapsable Defence Modernisation Fund has
been examined in this Ministry.
2. Considering the following facts against creation of a corpus
fund in Public Account, the proposal of Ministry of Defence on ‘Defence
Modernisation Fund ’ in Public Account is not agreed to:
(i) Adequate budget provision is made available to Ministry of
Defence to finance the capital requirements of Defence
Services;
(ii) Balances available in the non-lapsable funds will not be
available to Ministry of Defence automatically. It requires
Parliament sanction through Demands for Grants of Ministry
of Defence for being spent on Defence capital expenditure.
Hence, mere creation of non-lapsable fund yields no
additional advantage to Ministry of Defence and could
rather induce complacency in incurring expenditure;
(iii) Funds in the Public Account are generally created with
dedicated receipts for being financed. In this case, there
is no such dedicated receipts for financing the corpus of
the reserve fund proposed to be created in the Public
Account;
(iv) Creating a corpus out of general revenues could lead to
unnecessary parking of funds and make them unavailable
for other essential expenditure. Thus, non-lapsable funds
9

10
result in sub-optimal utilisation. Standing Committee on
Finance (16th Lok Sabha), in its 2nd Report on Demands
for Grants of Ministry of Finance for the year 2014-15,
recommended that the unutilized funds/funds kept idle
for more than two years may be transferred to Consolidated
Fund of India so that these funds could be utilised for
other prioritized schemes; and
(v) Moving general revenues out of Consolidated Fund and
parking in corpus fund is against the spirit behind Article
266(1) of the Constitution. Giving go ahead in one case
could raise competing demand from other Ministries.
3. This has the approval of Finance Minister.
Sd/-
(T . Uthaya Kumar)
Additional Budget Officer
The Secretary
(Shri Sanjay Mitra)
Ministry of Defence
South Block
New Delhi.

CHAPTER II
(A) OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS, WHICH HAVE BEEN
ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT
-NIL-
11

(B) OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED
BY THE GOVERNMENT AND TO BE COMMENTED UPON
-NIL-
12

CHAPTER III
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE
DO NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE REPLIES
RECEIVED FROM THE GOVERNMENT
-NIL-
13

CHAPTER IV
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES
OF GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE
COMMITTEE AND WHICH REQUIRE REITERATION
AND TO BE COMMENTED UPON:
Recommendation (Para Nos. 1 to 8)
4.1 The Committee, in their Reports presented on earlier occasions,
have recommended making the Capital allocations for Defence
acquisition as ‘Roll on’ and ‘Non-Lapsable’ following the ending of the
financial year. In the information furnished to the Committee on the
subject matter in the past, the Ministry of Defence had, in general,
not favoured the proposal for constituting a Non-lapsable Defence
Capital Fund Account.
The reasons cited by the Ministry for not favouring the proposal
for having a non-lapsable fund include (a) limitations of the utility of
such a proposal as Parliamentary approval would be required for
appropriating any sum from the Fund; (b) guidelines of Ministry of
Finance (MoF) which stipulate that, Reserve Funds can be created
when Government has surplus funds to spare on specific objects of
expenditure and the fiscal situation was not suitable for setting up
such a Fund; (c) assurance of the Ministry of Finance that additional
funds for the modernization of Services would be made available, and
(d) there being no occasion in the last few years where any substantial
amounts were available as surplus for rolling over to the subsequent
years.
While deposing before the Committee (2016-17), the Defence
Secretary highlighted the complexities involved in Defence acquisition
and budgeting. The aspect of likely adverse affect of lack of financial
resources on defence preparedness has been brought to light in specific
terms. Consequently, as a follow up, the Ministry has now reviewed
its stated position and has admitted that the utility of creation of a
non-lapsable, roll over fund for Capital cannot be completely negated
as the same would help in eliminating the prevailing uncertainty in
providing adequate funds for various defence capability development
and infrastructure projects.
4.2 A proposal for obtaining ‘in-principle’ approval of the Ministry
of Finance on creating a Non-lapsable Capital Fund Account has been
14

15
sent on 9 February, 2017 by the Ministry of Defence with the approval
of the then Hon ’ble Raksha Mantri.
4.3 The Committee are despondent to note that the Ministry of
Finance has not been in favour of creating a ‘Non-lapsable Defence
Capital Fund Account ’. As per the Ministry of Finance, the perceived
advantage in creating a dedicated reserve/corpus fund in the Public
Account is the non-lapsability of balances that would be available in
the corpus at the close of the financial year. However, the balance
available in the corpus/reserve fund at the commencement of the
new financial year would not be available automatically for being
expended by any Ministry/Department on the intended schemes. For
spending the balance available in any reserve/corpus fund, approval
of the Parliament through valid appropriation would be necessary. The
Ministry of Finance has also been opposing the proposal for creation
of a reserve/corpus fund in the Public Account without matching
receipts either in the form of tax receipts, cess receipts or any form
of levy etc. It has also been stated that it may not be advantageous
to create a reserve/corpus fund in the Public Account and the
requirements of the Ministry of Defence for meeting its Capital
Modernisation and acquisition plans could be addressed through the
normal budgetary mechanism.
4.4 The Committee would in this regard, draw the attention of
the Ministry of Finance to the fact that in last few years, the allocations
for the Ministry of Defence under the ‘Capital’ head have inevitably
been lesser than the projection, not only at the Budget Estimates
stage but also at Revised Estimates stage. To illustrate, against a
projection of Rs. 1,46,155.54 crore for Capital Budget in 2017-18,
only Rs. 86,528.65 crore have been allocated at the BE 2017-18 for
the Defence Services (Army, Navy, Joint Staff, Air Force, DGOF , R&D
and DGQA). Inadequacy of the allocation for Capital acquisition vis-
à-vis the projections, affects several procurement proposals and
contracts relating inter alia to Land, Aircraft and Aeroengines, Heavy
and Medium Vehicles, Equipments, Military Farms, Procurement of
Rolling Stock, Ex-Servicemen Contributory Health Scheme, Rashtriya
Rifles, National Cadet Corps, Construction Works, National Defence
Academy, Married Accommodation Project, North Eastern Projects and
Special Projects, etc. which are stated to be finalised in 2017-18.
Therefore, the contention of the Ministry of Finance that the
desired objectives of Ministry of Defence towards meeting its
contractual liabilities, acquisitions and defence mordernisation can
be achieved through normal budgetary mechanism does not hold much

16
ground. Defence procurement and acquisition is a complicated process
involving long gestation periods and funds allocated for capital
acquisition in a particular financial year are not necessarily consumed
in that year and ultimately have to be surrendered by the Ministry of
Defence. The intention of the Committee in recommending having a
Non-Lapsable Capital fund account for Defence modernization is
primarily for ensuring that the money allocated for a particular item
is spent on the specified item only, not necessarily in the same Financial
year. Further, the Defence Secretary himself has been candid in
submitting before the Committee that lack of finance definitely affects
our operational preparedness.
4.5 The Committee are of the opinion that creation of a Non-
lapsable Defence Capital Fund Account is an imperative need for
enhancement and heightened operational preparedness of our Defence
Forces. They feel that even if certain financial rules and regulations
have to be amended for creation of a ‘Non-lapsable Defence Capital
Fund Account’ to meet the requirements of our Defence forces, it can
and should be done in the interest of the nation. Therefore, the
Committee are of the view that the Ministry of Finance should not
have any rigid view in this regard. Moreover, creation of such a fund
would also ensure that procurement of equipments, arms and
ammunition for our Defence Forces which are in the pipeline and in
the stage of fructification is not delayed because of lack of money
due to technicalities of rules and regulations. Hence, the Committee
would like the Ministry of Finance to work out the modalities for
creation of a ‘Non-lapsable Defence Capital Fund Account ’ in
consultation with the Ministry of Defence and apprise the Committee
of the progress made in this direction at the earliest, and not later
than three months of the presentation of this Report to Parliament.
4.6 The Committee find it pertinent to mention in this context
that in the Union Budget 1998-99, the Non-lapsable Central Pool of
Resources for the North Eastern region was constituted with the
approval of Parliament. The broad objective of the Non-lapsable Central
Pool of Resources scheme is to ensure speedy development of
infrastructure in the North Eastern Region by increasing the flow of
budgetary financing for new infrastructure projects/schemes in the
Region. Both physical and social infrastructure sectors such as Irrigation
and Flood Control, Power , Roads and Bridges, Education, Health, Water
Supply and Sanitation - are considered for providing support under the
Central Pool, with projects in physical infrastructure sector receiving
priority. Funds from the Central Pool can be released for State sector
as well as Central sector projects/schemes. However the funds available

17
under the Central Pool are not meant to supplement the normal Plan
programmes either of the State Governments or Union Ministries/
Departments/Agencies.
4.7 The Committee to administer the Non-Lapsable Central Pool
of Resources is headed by Secretary, Ministry of Development of North
Eastern Region and has representation from Ministries of Finance,
Home Affairs and Planning Commission. Financial Advisor to the Ministry
of Development of North Eastern Region has been included as a member.
Representatives of the Union Ministry/Departments concerned, whose
proposals are to be considered in a particular sitting for funding under
Non-Lapsable Central Pool of Resources (NLCPR), are also invited. For
identification of projects under NLCPR, States are asked to submit,
before the beginning of the financial year, a prioritized list of projects
with a short write up on each project. In examining the priority, the
Committee is,  inter-alia, guided by considerations such as economic
infrastructure, drinking water supply and other health and sanitation
projects etc. Past performance of a State in implementing projects in
the particular sectors to which the projects belong is also considered.
The overall utilisation and absorption of funds by a particular State
in the past years also guide the overall quantum of projects to be
undertaken for that State in a year. Detailed Project Report(s) for
such retained projects are then prepared by the State concerned.
These project proposals are thereafter examined in consultation with
the concerned Central Ministry/Department. The recommendations/
views, thus received are placed before the Committee to administer
the Non-Lapsable Central Pool, which considers the proposal and accords
approval. After approval of the Committee, funds are sanctioned and
released by the Ministry of Development of North Eastern Region on
submission of an implementation schedule. Subsequent releases are
made only after receipt of Utilisation Certificate of earlier releases.
4.8 The Committee recommend that the Ministry of Defence, in
consultation with the Ministry of Finance, and by taking inspiration
from the ‘Non-lapsable Central Pool of Resources for the North Eastern
region’, should institute streamlined arrangements for administering
the ‘Non-Lapsable’ and ‘Roll on’ Capital Budget for defence acquisitions.
Reply of the Government
4.9 ‘In accordance with observations/recommendations made by
Standing Committee on Defence (SCoD) in its 32nd Report, Ministry of
Finance (MoF) was requested to furnish a suitable response on matter
relating to ‘Creation of Non-Lapsable Capital Fund Account, instead of
the present System ’. Ministry of Finance in their response dated

18
16th February, 2018, stated that the proposal of Ministry of Defence
for establishing a Non-Lapsable Reserve fund in the Public Account
with the nomenclature ‘Defence Modernisation Fund ’, based on the
recommendations contained in 32nd Report (16th Lok Sabha) of the
Standing Committee on Defence has been examined again in the
Ministry. Ministry of Finance, further , reiterated the views conveyed
by them vide their O.M. dated 03.07.2017 and also stated that the
proposal is not agreed to. ’
(For comments of the Committee, please refer to Para Nos. 7, 8,
9, 10 and 11 of Chapter-I of the Report)

CHAPTER V
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH
GOVERNMENT HAVE FURNISHED INTERIM REPLIES
-NIL-
   N EW D ELHI; KALRAJ MISHRA,
14 November, 2018 Chairperson,
23 Kartika, 1940 ( Saka) Standing Committee on Defence.
19

APPENDIX I
STANDING COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE
MINUTES OF THE SECOND SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE
ON DEFENCE (2018-19)
The Committee sat on Wednesday, the 14th November, 2018 from
1500 hrs. to 1640 hrs. in Committee Room No. 139, Parliament House
Annexe, New Delhi.
PRESENT
  Shri Kalraj Mishra —  Chairperson
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Col. Sonaram Choudhary, VSM (Retd)
3. Shri Thupstan Chhewang
4. Shri H.D. Devegowda
5. Shri Sher Singh Ghubaya
6. Km. Shobha Karandlaje
7. Shri Dharambir Singh
Rajya Sabha
8. Dr. Ashok Bajpai
9. Shri Madhusudan Mistry
10. Shri G.V.L. Narasimha Rao
11. Shri Sanjay Raut
12. Smt. Ambika Soni
13. Shri Ram Nath Thakur
14. Lt. Gen. Dr. D.P . Vats
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Smt. Kalpana Sharma — Joint Secretary
2. Shri Srinivasulu Gunda — Director
3. Smt. Jyochnamayi Sinha — Additional Director
4. Shri Rahul Singh — Under Secretary
20

21
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members of the
Committee. The Committee then paid homage to late Shri Ananth
Kumar , Union Minister for Chemicals & Fertilizers and Parliamentary
Affairs. The Committee then took up the following draft Reports for
consideration and adoption:
(i) Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/
Recommendations contained in the Thirty-second Report
(Sixteenth Lok Sabha) on ‘Creation of Non-Lapsable Capital
Fund Account, instead of the present system ’; and
(ii) Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/
Recommendations contained in the Thirty-third Report
(Sixteenth Lok Sabha) on ‘Resettlement of Ex-Servicemen ’.
3. After deliberation, the Committee adopted the above Reports
and authorized the Chairperson to finalize the Reports.
4. *********
The Committee then adjourned.
A copy of verbatim record of the proceedings has been kept.
*******The matter does not pertain to this Report.

APPENDIX II
ANALYSIS OF THE ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE THIRTY-
SECOND REPORT (16TH LOK SABHA) ON ‘CREATION OF NON-
LAPSABLE CAPITAL FUND ACCOUNT , INSTEAD OF THE
PRESENT SYSTEM ’
1. Total number of recommendations 08
2. Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by
the Government (please see Chapter IIA):
NIL
Total : 00
Percentage : 0%
3. Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by
the Government and commented upon (please see Chapter IIB):
NIL
Total : 00
Percentage : 0%
4. Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not
desire to pursue in view of the replies received from the
Government (please see Chapter III):
NIL
Total : 00
Percentage : 0%
5. Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of
Government have not been accepted by the Committee and
which require reiteration and to be commented upon (please
see Chapter IV):
Recommendation Nos. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7 and 8
Total : 08
Percentage : 100%
6. Observations/Recommendations in respect of which Government
have furnished interim replies/replies awaited (please see
Chapter V):
NIL
Total : 00
Percentage: 0%
22