 
31 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE
ASSESSMENT OF WELFARE MEASURES 
AVAILABLE TO WAR WIDOWS/ FAMILIES IN 
December, 2022 / 
 
1 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE 
(2022-23) 
 
(SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
MINISTRY OF DEFENCE 
 
 
ASSESSMENT OF WELFARE MEASURES 
AVAILABLE TO WAR WIDOWS/ FAMILIES IN 
ARMED FORCES 
 
THIRTY-FIRST REPORT 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
December, 2022 / Agrahayana 1944 (Saka) 
  
ASSESSMENT OF WELFARE MEASURES 
AVAILABLE TO WAR WIDOWS/ FAMILIES IN 
 

 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE
ASSESSMENT OF WELFARE MEASURES 
AVAILABLE TO WAR WIDOWS/ FAMILIES IN 
 
Presented
 
December, 2022 / 
 
2 
 
THIRTY-FIRST REPORT 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE 
(2022-23) 
 
(SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
MINISTRY OF DEFENCE 
 
ASSESSMENT OF WELFARE MEASURES 
AVAILABLE TO WAR WIDOWS/ FAMILIES IN 
ARMED FORCES 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 15.12.2022 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 15.12.2022 
 
 
 
  
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
December, 2022 / Agrahayana 1944 (Saka) 
 
 
  
ASSESSMENT OF WELFARE MEASURES 
AVAILABLE TO WAR WIDOWS/ FAMILIES IN 
 

3 
 
CONTENTS 
 Page No. 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (2021-22)…………………………  4 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (2022-23)…………………………  5 
INTRODUCTION ……………………………………………………………… 7  
 
REPORT 
 
PART I 
 
INTRODUCTORY …………………………………………………………  8 
Chapter I Policy and Structure   9 
Chapter II  Delivery Mechanism for Welfare Measures  14 
Chapter III  Employment/Resettlement  17 
Chapter IV Medical and Educational Facilities  20 
Chapter V Pensions  23 
Chapter VI Awareness Generation and Grievance Redressal  24 
Chapter VII Recognition of Martyrs and Their Families  25 
 
PART II  
Observations/Recommendations.......................................    26 
 
 
               ANNEXURE 
 
Entitlements to the NoKs of the Battle Casualties 
 
 
 
 
 39  
 
 
APPENDICES 
 
Minutes of the Sittings of the Standing Committee on Defence held on 
27.05.2022 and 14.11.2022 
 
   42  
 
 
  

4 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE (2021-22)  
SHRI JUAL ORAM  -  CHAIRPERSON 
 
Lok Sabha 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
_______________ 
* 1 seat vacant in Lok Sabha. 
 ** Shri V. Lakshmikantha Rao ceased to be Member, Rajya Sabha due to retirement on 
21/06/2022. 
  
2. Kunwar Danish Ali 
3. Shri Nitesh Ganga Deb 
4. Shri Rahul Gandhi 
5. Shri D.V. Sadananda Gowda 
6. Shri Annasaheb Shankar Jolle  
7. Choudhary Mehboob Ali Kaiser 
8. Shri Rattan Lal Kataria 
9. Dr. Ram Shankar Katheria  
10. Shri Sridhar Kotagiri 
11. Smt. Rajashree Mallick  
12. Shri Uttam Kumar Reddy Nalamada 
13. Dr. T.R. Paarivendhar  
14. Shri Anumula Revanth Reddy  
15. Shri Jugal Kishore Sharma  
16. Dr. Shrikant Eknath Shinde  
17. Shri Prathap Simha  
18. Shri Brijendra Singh  
19. Shri Mahabali Singh  
20. Shri Durga Das (D.D.) Uikey 
21. Vacant* 
 
Rajya Sabha 
 
22. Dr. Ashok Bajpai 
23. Shri N. R. Elango 
24. Shri Prem Chand Gupta  
25. Shri Venkataramana Rao Mopidevi 
26. Shri Sharad Pawar  
27. Shri Kamakhya Prasad Tasa  
28. Dr. Sudhanshu Trivedi  
29. Lt. Gen. (Dr.) D. P. Vats (Retd.) 
30. Shri K.C. Venugopal 
31. Vacant** 

5 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE (2022-23)  
 
SHRI JUAL ORAM  -  CHAIRPERSON 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
@ Nominated w.e.f 08.12.2022. 
 Nominated w.e.f 16.11.2022. 
 
___________________ 
Dr. T.R. Paarivendhar and Shri Kotagiri Sridhar, MPs, Lok Sabha ceased to be Members of 
the Standing Committee on Defence w.e.f 16.11.2022  
Lok Sabha 
2. Shri Nitesh Ganga Deb 
3. Shri Rahul Gandhi 
4. Shri Devaragunda Venkappa Sadananda Gowda 
5. Shri Annasaheb Shankar Jolle  
6. Choudhary Mehboob Ali Kaiser 
7. Shri Suresh Kumar Kashyap 
8. Shri Rattan Lal Kataria 
9. Prof. (Dr.) Ram Shankar Katheria   
10.@ Shri Durai Murugan Kathir Anand 
11. Kunwar Danish Ali 
12. Dr. Rajashree Mallick  
13. Shri Reddeppa Nallakonda Gari 
14. Shri Uttam Kumar Nalamada Reddy 
15. Shri Anumula Revanth Reddy   
16. Shri Jugal Kishore Sharma  
17. Dr. Shrikant Eknath Shinde  
18. Shri Prathap Simha  
19. Shri Brijendra Singh  
20. Shri Mahabali Singh  
21. Shri Durga Das Uikey 
Rajya Sabha 
 
22. Dr. Ashok Bajpai 
23. Shri Prem Chand Gupta  
24. Shri Sushil Kumar Gupta 
25. Shri Venkataramana Rao Mopidevi 
26. Shri Kamakhya Prasad Tasa  
27. Dr. Sudhanshu Trivedi  
28. Smt. P.T. Usha 
29. Shri G.K. Vasan 
30. Lt. Gen. (Dr.) D. P. Vats (Retd.) 
31. Shri K.C. Venugopal 

6 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Smt. Suman Arora  - Joint Secretary  
2. Dr. Sanjeev Sharma  - Director 
3. Shri Rahul Singh  - Deputy Secretary  
4. Smt. Rekha Sinha  - Executive Officer (till date 12.08.2022) 
  

7 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 I, the Chairperson of the Standing Committee on Defence (2022-23), having 
been authorised by the Committee, present this Thirty-first Report (17th Lok Sabha) on 
the subject ‘Assessment of Welfare Measures Available to War Widows/ Families in 
Armed Forces.’  
 
2.  The subject ‘Assessment of Welfare Measures Available to War Widows/ 
Families in Armed Forces’ was selected for the examination during the year 2021-22 
and 2022-23.  The Committee took evidence of the representatives of the Ministry of 
Defence on 27th May 2022.  The draft Report was considered and adopted by the 
Committee at their Sitting held on 14th November, 2022. 
3. The Committee wish to express their thanks to the officers of the Ministry of 
Defence for appearing before the Committee and furnishing the material and 
information which the Committee desired in connection with examination of the subject.  
4. For facility of reference and convenience, Observations/Recommendations of the 
Committee have been printed in bold letters in Part II of the Report.  
 
 
 
New Delhi; JUAL ORAM 
13 December, 2022 Chairperson 
22 Agrahayana, 1944 (Saka)  Standing Committee on Defence 
 
 
 
 
 
  

8 
 
Report 
 
PART- I 
 
Introductory 
 
 According to the Ministry of Defence, war-widows or ‘Veer-Naris’ are the women 
who have lost their husbands in war/military operation. There are several women who 
had lost their husbands in World War-II, Indo-Pak, Indo-China war and kargil/ Military 
operations at a very young age. As most women hail from rural areas and are unaware 
of their rights and entitlements, the department has a vision to make them aware and 
give necessary facilities not only to Martyred soldiers family but also of all Ex-
Servicemen (ESM) and their dependents. However, the jurisdiction of this Report is 
limited to assessment of welfare measures to family of martyred soldiers and examine 
the provisions that have been so made to ensure a dignified life to the dependents of 
those who have sacrificed their lives in the line of duty. The Family of martyred soldier 
has been addressed as ‘veer-nari/Next of Kins (NoKs)’ in this Report. 
 
2. The Committee have been given to understand that as per regulation 107 of the 
Pensions Regulations for Army, Part-I (2008), for the purpose, Family shall consist of 
the following: - 
 
(i) Husband/wife lawfully married before or after retirement. 
(ii) A judicially separated wife or husband, such separation not being granted on 
the ground of adultery and the person surviving was not held guilty of 
committing adultery. 
(iii) Unmarried son/unmarried daughter actual and legitimate including 
posthumous/ widowed /divorced daughter. 
(iv) Father 
(v) Mother  
(vi) Unmarried brother 
(vii)  Unmarried sister 
 
 The above provisions are applicable to three wings of Armed Forces i.e. Indian 
Army, Indian Navy and Indian Air Force.  
  

9 
 
Chapter – I 
 
Policy and Structure 
 
 The Committee have learnt that there exists a well structured institutional 
framework in the form of Department of Ex-Servicemen Welfare (DESW), and the 
specialized attached offices of DESW and three Services Headquarters. The 
Department was established in 2007 and it has nearly 15000 veer-naris.  All the welfare 
services and support required are adequately covered through these dedicated 
institutions which together implement and administer wide array of schemes and 
interventions which are required.  
 
1.2. The Department of Ex-servicemen Welfare formulates various policies and 
programmes for the welfare and resettlement of Ex-Servicemen (ESM) in the country 
which are implemented through its three attached offices namely, Kendriya Sainik 
Board (KSB), Directorate General (Resettlement) (DGR) and Central Organization, Ex-
servicemen Contributory Health Scheme (ECHS). The KSB is responsible for 
formulating the policy and guidelines for the welfare of Ex-Servicemen and their 
dependents and also for the administration of welfare funds. The office of Directorate 
General of Resettlement implements various Policies / Schemes / Programmes on pre 
and post retirement training, re-employment and self-employment etc. ECHS takes care 
of the healthcare and medical needs of Ex-servicemen and their dependents. 
 
1.3. In addition to above, all the three Service headquarters  have their own 
specialized directorates viz Directorate of Army veterans (DIAV) of Indian Army, 
Directorate of Air Veterans, and Directorate of Ex-servicemen Affairs (DESA) of Indian 
Navy, which endeavour towards ensuring a decent life to retired personnel and their 
dependents, through their schemes/programmes. 
 
1.4. The Committee were apprised by the Ministry that there is no need for a 
dedicated department to look exclusively after needs of veer-naris/NoKs.  With regard 
to total number of veer-naris in the country, the Committee were informed that the total 
number of war widows in the country is 15021. However, State/UT wise break-up data 
was not available.  A data about NoKs is shall also be maintained. 
 

10 
 
1.5. The Committee came to learn that the circumstances in which a soldier has died 
determine the differences in benefits accrued to their family members. In this 
connection, the Ministry of Defence had submitted a detailed note as under: 
 
 “For grant of pensionary awards to families of Armed Forces 
Personnel, the circumstances of death of the Armed Forces personnel 
has been categorized as under: 
 
Category A 
 Death or disability due to natural causes neither attributable to nor 
aggravated by military service as determined by the competent medical 
authorities. Examples would be ailments of nature of constitutional 
diseases as assessed by medical authorities, chronic ailments like heart 
and renal diseases, prolonged illness, accidents while not on duty.  
 
Explanation: 
 The cases of death due to natural causes falling under Category A 
entitles ordinary family pension (50% of reckonable emoluments at 
enhanced rate and 30% of reckonable emoluments at normal rate). 
 
Category B 
 Death or disability due to causes which are accepted as 
attributable to or aggravated by military service as determined by the 
competent medical authorities. Disease contracted because of continued 
exposure to hostile work environments subject to extreme weather 
conditions or occupational hazards resulting in death or disability would be 
examples. 
 
Category C 
 Death or disability due to accidents in the performance of duties 
such as: 
(i)  Accidents while travelling on duty in Government vehicles or 
public/private transport. 
(ii)  Accidents during air journeys. 
(iii)  Mishaps at sea while on duty. 
(iv)  Electrocution while on duty etc. 
(v)  Accidents during participation in organised sports events/adventure 
 activities/ expeditions or training. 
 
Explanation: 
 In case of death of Armed Forces personnel falling under Category 
B and Category C special family pension (@60% of the reckonable 
emoluments) may be granted to the eligible member of the family of the 
deceased personnel. 
 

11 
 
 
Category D 
 Death or disability due to acts of violence /attack by terrorists, anti-
social elements etc. whether on duty other than operational duty or even 
when not on duty. Bomb blasts in public places or transport, indiscriminate 
shooting incidents in public etc. would be covered under this category, 
besides death/disability occurring while employed in aid of civil power and 
also while dealing with natural calamities. Unintentional killing by own 
troops during the course of duty in an operational area. 
Electrocutions/attacks by wild animals and snake bite/drowning during 
course of action in counter insurgency/war. Accidental death/injury 
sustained due to natural calamities such as flood, avalanches, landslides, 
cyclone, fire and lightening or drowning in river while performing 
operational duties/movement in action against enemy forces and armed 
hostilities in operational area to include deployment on international 
border or line of control. 
 
Category E 
 Death or disability arising as a result of: - 
(i) Enemy action in international war 
(ii) Action during deployment with a peace keeping mission abroad 
(iii) Border skirmishes 
(iv)  During laying or clearance of mines including enemy mines as also 
mine sweeping operations.  
(v)  On account of accidental explosions of mines while laying 
operationally  oriented mine field or lifting or negotiating mine field 
laid by the enemy or own forces in operational areas near 
international borders or the line of control. 
(vi)  War like situations, including cases which are attributable 
to/aggravated by:- 
(1) extremist acts, exploding mines etc, while on way to an 
operational  area. 
(2) battle inoculation training exercises or demonstration with 
live ammunition. 
(3) Kidnapping by extremists while on operational duty 
 
(vii)  An act of violence/attack by extremists, anti social elements etc. 
while on operational duty. 
(viii)  Action against extremists, antisocial elements etc. death/disability 
while  employed in the aid of civil power in quelling agitation, riots 
or revolt by demonstrators shall be covered under this category. 
(ix)  Operations specially notified by the Government from time to time 
 
Explanation: 
In case of death of Armed Forces personnel falling under Category D and 
Category E liberalized family pension equal to reckonable emoluments 

12 
 
may be granted to the eligible member of the family of the deceased 
personnel. 
The details of Central Ex-Gratia Amount paid. 
Ex-Gratia Lump Sum Compensation of Death. The compensation is 
granted is granted at the following latest rates:- 
 
Ser 
No. 
Circumstances Rates  
(in Rs.) 
(i) Death occurring due to accidents in course of 
performance of duties. 
25 Lakhs. 
(ii) Death in course of performance of duties 
attributed to acts of violence by terrorists, 
anti-social elements etc. 
25 Lakhs. 
(iii) Death occurring in border skirmishes and 
action against militants, terrorists, extremists, 
sea pirates. 
35 Lakhs. 
(iv) Death occurring while on duty in the specified 
high altitude, inaccessible border posts, on 
account of natural disasters, extreme weather 
conditions. 
35 Lakhs. 
(v) Death occurring during enemy action in war 
or such was like engagements, which are 
specially notified by Ministry of Defence and 
death occurring during evacuation of Indian 
Nationals from a war-torn zone in foreign 
country. 
45 Lakhs. 
 
1.6 The Committee were also informed by representatives of Ministry of Defence as 
under: 
  “ इसक े अलावा कु छ एनजीओज भी ह§, जैसे आमê वाइÓस वेलफे यर एसोिसएशन। 
वह भी करीब 30 हजार Łपये देता है। एजी āांच म¤ एक फं ड गिठत िकया गया है, जो तीनŌ 
सिवªिसज के िलए है। यह Armed Forces Battle Casualties Welfare 
Fund है। यह नॉन-पिÊलक फं ड है। इसम¤ िविभÆन इंडीिवजुअÐस और कं पनीज Ĭारा 
कॉिÆůÊयूशंस के माÅयम से रािश जमा कì जाती है। िपछले साल ही माननीय र±ा मंýी महोदय, 
®ी राजनाथ िसंह जी ने इसम¤ बढ़ो°री करके इसे आठ लाख का कर िदया है। बाकì छोटे-छोटे 
डेथ कम िलं³ड इंÔयोरेस ÖकìÌज ह§। पसªनल ए³सीड¤ट इंÔयोर¤स भी है, िजसका सैलरी 
अकाउंट्स नेशनलाइºड ब§³स के साथ एमओयू, सभी सिवªिसज होती ह§, उसम¤ भी करीब 50 
लाख का िमलता है। यह सारा िमलाकर ऑिफससª को 1.83 करोड़ Łपये और 
जेसीओज/ओआरस को 1.33 करोड़ Łपये का भुगतान होता है।” 

13 
 
 
1.7 Further it was added by representatives of Ministry of Defence as under: 
 “ एक लाख Łपए तक मैåरज úांट िमलती है, जो डॉटसª  और िवडोज रीमैåरज 
के िलए होती है और ऑरफन सन के िलए भी  होती  है। वोके शनल ůेिनंग úांट भी करीब-
करीब 20 हजार Łपये तक होती है, जो हवलदार र§क तक के िलए होती है। 
Concessions up to 75 per cent on railway tickets to 
widows and complementary card passes to Chakra 
awardees and their widows कì भी सुिवधा है। हालांिक, आजकल मोबाइल का 
जमाना है, लेिकन िफर भी 50 per cent concessions in rental charges 
to Chakra awardees and war widows को टेिलफोन कनसेशन के łप म¤ 
िमलता है। Also, financial assistance to 100 per cent disabled 
children of ESM, मतलब कोई िडसेबÐड िचÐűन भी हो तो उसको भी फाइन¤िशयल 
अिसÖट¤स िमलता है। पहले एक हज़ार Łपये था, हाल ही म¤ उसको तीन हज़ार Łपये िकए ह§। 
अंत म¤ यह िजø करना चाह रहे थे िक ÿाइम िमिनÖटर Öकॉलरिशप 5500 तमाम सीएपीएफ 
को भी है और रेलवे ÿोटे³शन फोसª को भी है और हमारा ºयादा कोटा है, हमारा आÌडª फोस¥ज़ 
का। उसम¤ िपछले तीन साल म¤ 43 वॉर िवडोज़ को करीब-करीब 12-13 लाख Łपये िमले 
ह§।इसका 2500 Łपेय ÿित माह लड़कŌ के िलए है और 3000 Łपये ÿित महीने लड़िकयŌ के 
िलए है। सर, लाÖट Öलाइड म¤ आÌडª फोस¥ज़ बैटल कै ज़ुएिलटीज़ वैलफे यर फं ड का िजø करना 
चाह रहे ह§। यह अराउंड 1098 बैटल कु ज़ुएिलटीज़ और उनके िकन को करीब-करीब 32 
करोड़ Łपये िडिÖůÊयूट िकया गया है। यह उसका ईयरवाइज़ āेक-अप है।’’ 
 

14 
 
Chapter – II 
 
Delivery Mechanism for Welfare Measures 
 
 The Committee were informed that the data of number of beneficiaries and the 
amount of grant given against each scheme is analysed on regular basis to measure 
the impact of all the schemes run by the Ministry of Defence, Department of                
Ex-Servicemen Welfare (DESW), various Service Headquarters and its attached 
offices. Several modifications in the existing schemes are carried out at regular intervals 
to ensure the desired impact. New schemes are also added depending on the 
requirement.  The quantum of the benefits have been modified from time to time 
through the existing administrative channels. A detailed list of financial assistance and 
other concessions given to the NoK (Next of Kin)/dependents and Veer-Naris of the 
Battle Casualties is annexed at Annexure. 
 
2.2.  Further, the Committee were given to understand that the data of number of 
beneficiaries and the amount of grant given against each scheme is analysed on 
regular basis to measure the impact of all the schemes run by the MoD, DESW, various 
Service Headquarters and its attached offices. Several modifications in the existing 
schemes are carried out at regular intervals to ensure the desired impact. New 
schemes are also added depending on the requirement.  The quantum of the benefits 
have been modified from time to time through the existing administrative channels.  
 
 
Welfare Measures Delivery at the State/District level 
 
 
2.3. The Ministry of Defence has informed the Committee that Kendriya Sainik Board 
is headed by Hon’ble Raksha Mantri and the Chief Ministers, Administrators of Union 
Territories are its member. It is a high level board specially created to look after the 
issues of ESM/dependents. There are 33 Rajya Sainik Boards (RSBs) and 403 Zila 
Sainik Board (ZSBs) to look after the well beings of ESM/Dependents. As per the 
existing composition of the ZSB, the President of each ZSB is the concerned District 
Magistrate/District Collector. The Secretary of ZSB is the Zila Sainik Welfare Officer 
who is appointed by the State Government in consultation with RSB/KSB. All the 
necessary help to the ESM/ BCs (Battle Casualty)/ NoK are being rendered by them. 

15 
 
 
2.4. Further, it was added by MoD that In the last 10 years, number of ZSBs have 
increased from 220 to 403. This is primarily based on number of ESM and families of 
serving/deceased service personnel in that area. A new ZSB can be set up by 
concerned state govt themselves if the population of ESM and families of serving 
/deceased service personnel is above 7500.  In case if the population of ESM is less 
than 7500 in a district,   where no other ZSB is in vicinity, the   prior approval of Central 
Govt is required for setting of new ZSB.  Recently four new ZSBs have been sanctioned 
in Delhi. 
 
  
2.5. The Committee had desired to be apprised about the accessibility of ZSB to 
beneficiaries residing in its area of jurisdiction. In response, the Ministry has stated that 
pro-active measures have been taken by the ZSBs by various means to ensure that all 
ESM fraternity is aware of the latest facilities and welfare measures which have been 
slated by the Central and the State Governments. Some of the procedures adopted are 
publishing booklets, radio and TV board casts in local dialects, using print and 
electronic media, Notice Boards/ hoardings displaying in prominent places frequented 
by ESM. Regular visits, rallies, meetings and interaction organized by the ZSB offices/  
Welfare Organizer  in remote localities which has facilitated large number of ESM and 
widows having applied for various facilities and welfare schemes.  In addition RSB/ZSB 
meetings are held every year to review the progress on various welfare 
measures/schemes. RSB in the State are chaired by Governor/Chief Minister. In the 
last six months Rajya Sainik Board (RSB) and State Managing Committee (SMC) 
meetings were held at Rajasthan, Assam, Mizoram and Chandigarh (UT) have taken 
place. Similar regular meetings are also held at ZSB level. 
 
2.6. During deliberations on the subject, the Committee learnt that in addition to ex-
gratia given by Central / individual service, ex-gratia payment to veer-nari/NoKs are 
also being paid by respective State/UT Governments.  Being a federal structure in the 
country, the amount varies from State to State.  In this context, the Committee were 
informed that issue regarding uniformity in payments of ex-gratia amount to the 
dependents of Martyrs has already been raised and discussed in several meetings at 
various fora. In this connection it was further informed that, various States have recently 
increased the Ex-Gratia amount for ex Himachal Pradesh has increased to Rs 20 lakh 
and Odisha has increased to Rs 10 lakh. 

16 
 
  
2.7. The Committee were apprised about the methodologies devised for timely 
delivery of services/schemes channelized for the welfare of veer-nari/next to kins. The 
Ministry of Defence through a written reply furnished as under: 
 
  “System for payments of welfare schemes of Armed Forces Flag Day 
Fund  (AFFDF) to beneficiaries Veer-Nari/ Next of kins have been implemented 
through Direct Benefit Transfer (DBT). The payment /welfare grants are made 
from AFDDF which is a corpus financed by volunteer contribution from the 
citizenry and funded by Govt. The updated payment status is being uploaded on 
the KSB Portal on regular basis.” 
  
  

17 
 
Chapter – III 
 
Employment/Resettlement 
 
 With regard to compassionate appointments, the Committee were informed that 
the appointments are being made by concerned Service Headquarters of Army, Navy 
and Air Force to widows / families of defence personnel.  The Ministry had furnished the 
following details indicating various relaxations etc being given to veer-nari/NoKs:- 
  
“(a) Officer Selection 
 
(i) Widow of Defence Personnel, who have died in harness will be 
eligible to apply for Short Service Commission (Non- Tech) and 
(Tech). They are eligible even if they children but should only have 
not re-married. A total of 5% vacancies will be earmarked for widows 
both for SSC (Tech) women and SSC (Non-Tech) women entry. The 
upper age limit is upto 35 years of age at the time of commencement 
of training at OTA, Chennai. 
 
(ii) For SSCW (Non- Tech) entry where UPSC exam is applicable, the 
requirement for undergoing UPSC is waived for such widows. They 
are selected through SSB. 
 
(iii) 10% vacancies are available to Wards (Sons and daughters 
including legally adopted children) of Battle Casualty for grant of 
Short Service Commission (SSC) out of fixed vacancies released per 
course to ‘C’ Certificate holders of NCC. There is no relaxation in 
eligibility criteria except that condition of holding of NCC ‘C’ 
Certificate is not mandatory for these vacancies. 
 
(b) JCO/ORs Enrolment. 
Instant Enrolment is provided into the Army through UHQ enrolment by 
 respective Regiment/Corps Training Centers as per policy att. Extract of 
 policy on ‘Instant Enrolment’ is as under:- 
 
(i) One son of fatal battle casualty/ Battle Casualty boarded out. In case 
underage, he may be enrolled when he attains the age required. 
(ii) When Deceased was unmarried-One real brother of a Battle 
Casualty. 
(iii)  When Deceased’s Widow is Issueless or has no Male Child- One 
real brother of a Battle Casualty provided the real brother gets 
married to the deceased widow. 
(iv) When Deceased’s Widow has a Male Child who has not Attained 
age for enrolment-One real brother of Battle Casualty provided the 
real brother gets married to the deceased’s widow. In this case the 

18 
 
male child on attaining the enrolment ate will not be entitled for 
instant Enrolment. However, he will get the concession/relaxations 
for enrolment as applicable to sons of Servicemen/Ex-servicemen. 
(v) When the Battle Casualty has been invalidated out of Service on 
Medical Grounds-One real son on attaining the age required for 
enrolment.” 
  
3.2. With regard to the policy on reservation of seats exclusively for veer- nari or their 
children in State or Central Government services, the Ministry had furnished the 
following information: 
 
 “Central and State Government - The Central/State Govts have provided a 
number of concessions to promote employment of Ex-Servicemen, widows/ 
dependents of service personnel killed in action in the civil jobs. The details are 
as follows :- 
 
(a) There are reservations in Govt. Departments, PSUs Nationalised Banks 
and Para Military Forces as follows: -   
                                                                                Group 'C'            Group 'D' 
          (i) Central Ministries/Deptts.             10%                      20% 
          (ii) CPSUs/Nationalised Banks          14.5%                  24.5 %   
 (iii) For the purpose of appointment in Group 'C' and 'D' posts under 
the Central Govt the following priority is accorded: 
 (iv)      Disabled Ex-servicemen whose disability is attributable to military 
services are accorded Priority-I.  
 (v) Upto 2 dependents of Armed forces personnel killed in                                                           
action or severely disabled (with 50 percent and above disability 
and who have become unfit for employment but disability is 
attributable to military service) are accorded Priority-II, which 
included the widow of the deceased solider also.   
 (vi) Most of the State Governments also provide reservations to Ex-
Servicemen & the dependents (including widow) in State 
Government/  State PSU jobs. 
 
(b)   CPSUs/Nationalised Banks 14.5% vacancies in Group ‘C’ and 24.5% 
vacancies in Group ‘D’ are reserved for ESM in Nationalized Banks  and 
CPSUs. This includes 4.5% reservation for disabled ex-servicemen  and 
dependents of servicemen killed in action. 
 
(c)     Widow/son/daughter of Armed Forces Personnel died while in service 
(death not attributable to military service) are also eligible for 
compassionate appointment for Group 'C' or 'D' post.” 
  

19 
 
 
3.3. Further the Committee found that following number of Compassionate 
Appointments have been given to widows/families of defence personnel : 
 
 “Air Force : 30  (since 2016) 
 Navy :  35 (since 2014) 
 Army :   The requisite details are not readily available as compassionate 
 appointment are made by concerned Line Directorates.”  
 
 
3.4. As regards other employment settlement avenues, the Committee were informed 
that Resettlement of veer-nari/families is limited to the following schemes:- 
 (a) Oil Product Agency Distributorship.  
 (b) Coal Tipper Allotment Scheme for Widows.  
 
 
3.5. It was further added that Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas (MoPNG) has 
reserved a quota of 8% for distributorship of Oil Product Agency i.e. LPG distributorship 
and Retail Outlets (Petrol/Diesel).  No exclusive reservation for milk booths/kiosks exist 
for veer-nari or children/parents of martyred soldiers.  
  
3.6. The Committee also desired to find out whether Ministry has formulated any 
special incentive schemes to develop skills among veer-nari/ NoKs.  In this regard, it 
was informed that Directorate General Resettlement (DGR), an attached office of MoD 
(Under Department of Ex-Servicemen Welfare) is entrusted with the conduct of 
Resettlement Training Courses for retiring/retired personnel of Armed Forces.   The 
duration of these courses is between one month to nine month, these courses are 
conducted in multifarious fields such as Management, Security, Retail, Healthcare, 
Yoga & Fitness and IT Sector etc. These courses are conducted at Central/State 
Government Institute/Institute run by Government Regulatory Bodies/ Institutes. There 
are 3% seats reserved for widows /one ward in these courses (in case widow refuses to 
undergo course).  
 
 
 
 
 

20 
 
Chapter – IV 
 
Medical and Educational Facilities 
 
Medical Facilities 
 
 The Committee have been informed that ECHS takes care of the healthcare and 
medical needs of Ex-servicemen and their dependents. War Widows are exempted 
from paying the one time contribution  amount for ECHS membership and can avail 
cashless and capless medical benefits alongwith their eligible dependents through 
ECHS.  
 
4.2. The Committee were concerned to find how veer-nari/NoKs are accorded due 
respect and care at polyclinics. It was informed that veer-nari are being accorded due 
respect and care in the ECHS Polyclinics. Senior Executive Medical Officers (SEMOs) 
are being constantly advised to ensure timely procurement of medicines for ECHS 
Polyclinics to ensure optimal availability. The Formation Headquarters are also being 
requested to monitor the procurement process through respective medical branches. 
 
4.3. With respect to treatment at private hospitals, the Committee came to know that 
veer-nari and eligible dependents are entitled to avail medical services of civil 
Empanelled Health Care Organisations as ECHS beneficiaries. 
  
Educational Facilities 
4.4. The Committee sought details of benefits, i.e. exemption in tuition fees, 
admission in technical or professional college etc., given to the children of veer-nari and 
children of martyred soldier. The details as furnished to the Committee are as under: 
 
Sl. No.  Monetary Grant/Scheme  Amount  
(a) Educational Concession 
children of Armed Forces 
Officers/JCOs/ORs  missing/ 
disabled/killed in action (w.e.f. 
01.07.2017)  
Full reimbursement of tuition fee 
and bus/actual fare.  
 
Full reimbursement of Hostel 
Charges for those studying in 
boarding schools and colleges. 
  
Books/Stationary : upto Rs 2000/-
per annum  

21 
 
 
Uniform cost where compulsory: 
upto Rs 2000/-  per annum  
 
Clothing : upto Rs 700 per annum 
per student  
 
(b) Higher Education  to Widows:-  
   
(a)  Graduation  
(b)  Post Graduation  
(c)  Professional Courses  
   
   
Rs. 20,000/-  
Rs. 25,000/-  
Rs. 50,000/-  
   
(c) One time Computer Grant 
(Applicable after 1st degree 
course/Graduation & above)  
Rs. 35,000/-  
 
 
4.5. The Committee enquired whether there is any scheme for facilitating oversees 
education to meritorious veer-nari or their children. In this connection, it was informed 
that presently no such scheme is existing. 
  
4.6. With regard to initiatives for facilitating admission of veer-nari or the children of 
martyred soldier in various deemed/private universities, Ministry of Defence informed 
that the inter–se priority for admission for professional /non-professional courses in 
various education institutions/ universities is as per MoD/DESW letter No 
6(I)/2017/D(Res-II) dated 21 May 2018,  wherein the top most priority (i.e. Priority-I) is 
given to wards/ widow of serving personnel killed in action. 
 
4.7. Specifically with regard to reservation of seats in MBBS course of various 
universities for veer nari/NoKs, the Ministry informed that a total of 35 MBBS seats 
approx and 3 seats in BDS courses are allotted by Ministry of Health Family Welfare to 
KSB for wards of defence personnel as a Government of India nominee. Details of 
MBBS seats allotted to dependent of personnel killed in action during the period 2019 
to 2022 are as under:-  
  
Academic Year  No of seats allotted to dependent of war widow  
2019-20  11 MBBS Seats  
2020-21  15 MBBS Seats  
2021-22  05 MBBS Seats  

22 
 
 
 
 There are provisions of Reservation of Seats in Medical/Dental/Professional/ 
Non professional Courses by States/UTs/Central/State Universities/Autonomous 
Institutions for wards/widows of ESMs as per the priority laid down by MoD with top 
most priority towards/widows of personnel killed in action.   
  

23 
 
Chapter – V 
 
Pensions 
 
 
 The Committee had been informed that some delays have taken place in 
disbursement of pension due to non-submission of life certificate on time. In this 
connection, the Ministry further submitted that SPARSH- Web portal has made 
provisions to issue SMS alerts wherever annual identification is due. Similarly, DPDOs 
also issues notices wherever a pensioner remains unidentified after a 12 months cycle. 
However, at present there is no provision to approach Veer-nari or parent of a martyred 
soldier personally. Further, the Committee also found that full pension is given to 
orphan children of martyred soldier or parents of unmarried martyred soldier. One Rank 
One Pension (OROP) scheme is also applicable to Veer-Naris. With reference to 
mechanism of arriving at rate, it is submitted that as a basic principle after 2006, 50% of 
last pay drawn is pension.  Whereas LFP is last pay drawn. Based on this principle LFP 
rates under OROP have been arrived by doubling the service pension rates for a 
particular qualifying service under OROP. 
  
Central Data Base 
  
5.2. An Annual Census is done in the month of April by PCDA (P) Praygaraj to 
ascertain total number of defence pensioners.  This exercise is done by collecting data 
from Pension Disbursement Agencies (PDAs). Some percentages of payments are also 
audited by PCDA (P) Prayagraj to verify quantum of benefits. It was informed that 
PCDA (P) Prayagraj maintains data base of pensioners. However, as informed to the 
Committee separate data base of Veer-Nari are not maintained by them. 
 
5.3. An Annual Census is done in the month April by PCDA (P) Praygaraj to ascertain 
total number of defence pensioners.  This exercise is done by collecting data from 
Pension Disbursement Agencies (PDAs). Some percentages of payments are also 
audited by PCDA (P) Prayagraj to verify quantum of benefits. 
 
  

24 
 
Chapter - VI 
Awareness Generation and Grievance Redressal 
 
 The Committee have been apprised that grievance redressal mechanism with 
references to educational, medical or any other services in respect of veer-nari have 
been adopted at ZSB/RSB and KSB level.  ZSBs are also being included in Centralised 
Public Grievance Redress and Monitoring System (CPGRAMS) Ver 7.0. The 
grievances of veer-nari are received at various levels i.e. KSB, RSB, ZSBs and some 
forwarded by other organisations of Central/State.  Endeavour is to resolve the 
grievances at the earliest whereas land and other family disputes take longer times. 
The data in CPGRAMS does not maintain in particular record like veer-nari. Further, it 
was added that respective ZSB/RSB maintains a record of the complaints/ grievances 
received from war widows and their grievances are resolved at the earliest.   
 
6.2. With regard to awareness generation among veer-nari/NoKs about the welfare 
schemes, the Committee had been informed that all welfare schemes /policies /benefits 
pertaining to war widows and their families are displayed at the notice 
boards/premises/offices/ campus of all RSB/ZSBs to facilitate wide publicity and 
awareness amongst ESM community. Instructions on the above have been issued by 
KSB Secretariat to all RSB/ZSBs to check this aspect during annual inspection of 
RSB/ZSB by KSB.  In addition, all policies, welfare schemes, procedures etc are also 
available on KSB website. 
 
6.3. Zila Sainik Welfare officer (ZSWOs)/ Welfare Organizer of concerned state 
regularly visit/ approach war-widows and their families for needful/ assistance.  In 
addition, records are maintained and updated at all ZSWOs. All the information related 
to pension, benefits and schemes are displayed/ uploaded on the website of the 
Service headquarters and the Department of Ex-Servicemen Welfare. 
  

25 
 
Chapter - VII 
 
Recognition of Martyrs and Their Families 
 
 The Committee have been apprised that the families of Battle 
casualties/NoK/Veer-Nari are invited to National War memorial, New Delhi. Consequent 
to the National War Memorial being dedicated to the Nation by Honourable Prime 
Minister on February 25, 2019, to honour the martyrs, whose names are inscribed at 
the ‘Tyag Chakra’ of the Memorial, a Homage ceremony is conducted by tri Services on 
different days of every month, in which the NoKs of the battle casualties are invited to 
lay the wreath at the ‘Tyag Chakra’.  NoKs are also honoured and invited to various 
functions from time to time. 
  
7.2. Further, veer-nari /families are invited as special guests at functions/ ceremonies 
as and when organized at district and State level.  In this regard, specially a welfare 
organizer from respective ZSB/RSB has been detailed to coordinate the same.  Veer-
nari and their dependents are provided class I accommodation during Veterans Day 
function held on 14 January every year at New Delhi.  Besides these, all Command 
Headquarters and Local units invite veer-nari and NoKs for functions and ceremonies 
organized by them. Every ZSB/RSB  have their own standing orders for provisioning 
with regard to allotment of accommodation  free of cost and send invitation cards and 
vehicle provided to inviting  veer-naris/families during functions/ceremonies as and 
when organized.  In addition, hot meals are also provided during the visits.  
 
 
 
  

26 
 
PART- II 
 
Observations/Recommendations 
 
Structural Reforms 
1. The Committee take note that various schemes/services meant for the 
welfare of veer-nari and NoKs are presently administered and come under the 
jurisdiction of Department of Ex-Servicemen Welfare and its attached offices 
namely Kendriya Sainik Board, Directorate General Resettlement (DGR), Central 
Organisation and Ex-Servicemen Contributory Health Scheme (ECHS) and there 
is no exclusively dedicated department/Office or Designated Officers  in the  
Ministry to look after and intervene for the welfare measures of the families of 
martyred soldiers.  The Committee are of the opinion that a separate Department 
within MoD exclusively responsible for the welfare of Veer Naris/NoKs may be 
created so that the various issues pertaining to them could be closely examined 
in a more focussed manner.  Such an arrangement would enable efficient delivery 
of welfare benefits for veer-nari and NoKs.  
 
Maintenance of database 
 
2. The Committee note that statistical data on number of veer-naris and Next 
of Kins (NoKs) and the amount of grant been given to them under various 
schemes is analysed on regular basis to assess the impact of all the schemes 
run by the MoD, DESW, various Service Headquarters and its attached offices.  
However, the Committee find that State/UT wise break-up data for veer-nari was 
not available with Ministry of Defence, although, a figure of 15021 representing 
total number of veer-nari in the country was furnished to them. The Committee 

27 
 
are of the opinion that accurate estimation of number of beneficiaries and regular 
updation of database would facilitate proper implementation of schemes and the 
attainment of desired objectives. For instance, if a member ceases to be eligible 
for grant/benefit the name should be removed from the list. The Committee 
recommend that a comprehensive state-wise data for veer-nari and also NoKs 
should be maintained.  It goes without saying that the technologies/tools 
available in the Government Organisation can be used for maintaining and 
updating the data without any discrepancies.  
 
Ex-gratia Fund 
 
3. The Committee were informed by the Ministry that the circumstances in 
which the soldier dies determines the differences in benefits accrued to their 
family members. Further, for grant of pensionary awards to families of Armed 
Forces Personnel, the circumstances of death of the Armed Forces personnel 
has been categorized under different categories.  Out of these, Category B and C 
include  death or disability due to causes which are accepted as attributable to or 
aggravated by military service as determined by the competent medical 
authorities.  It also covers various type of accidents during performance of 
duties.  In such cases of death of Armed Forces personnel falling under Category 
B and C, special family pension @60% of the reckonable emoluments is granted 
to the eligible member of the family of the deceased personnel.  While taking note 
of the specifics stated above, the Committee are cognizant of the fact that death 
under category B and C do not fit for liberalized family pension. However, they 
observe that since the death or disability is attributable to difficult working 
conditions of the defence personnel, they therefore, recommend that the family 

28 
 
pension may be enhanced to 75 per cent of the reckonable emoluments from the 
existing 60 per cent. The Committee would like to be apprised of the action taken 
in this regard at the time of furnishing Action Taken Notes.  
 
4. The Committee note that ex-gratia lump sum compensation of Death is 
paid to eligible family member of martyred soldier.  The Committee were informed 
by a representative of Ministry of Defence that this amount varies for different 
categories of death of the soldier.  Compensation of Rs. 25 lac  is granted in case 
of death occurring due to accidents or acts of violence by terrorists, anti-social 
elements while performing duties and a compensation of Rs. 35 lac is paid in 
case of death occurring in border skirmishes and action against militants, 
terrorists, extremists, sea pirates etc.  Besides, an amount of Rs. 45 lac is 
granted as compensation in case of death occurring during enemy action in war.  
The Committee are of the considered view that though loss of life of soldier 
cannot be evaluated in monetary terms, yet financial grant is helpful in providing 
a reasonable and respectful life to family members of the soldier. Further, it also 
acts as an incentive and encouragement for the youth to join the Armed Forces.  
In view of this notion and considering increase in the rate of inflation, the 
Committee recommend that Government should seriously consider increasing 
the ex-gratia fund by Rs. 10 Lakh in each of the above category.  The minimum 
amount under any category will be Rs. 35 lakhs and maximum Rs. 55 lakhs.  
 
Uniformity in ex-gratia funds among States 
  
5. The Committee note that in addition to ex-Gratia given by Central / 
individual service to next of Kins/family members, the same is also given by 

29 
 
respective State/UT Governments to NoK/family members of martyrs. However, 
the Committee note that there is wide variation in ex-gratia benefits extended to 
veer-nari/NoKs by different States which has led to disparities amongst the 
beneficiaries of the martyrs. For instance, ex-Gratia amount for Himachal 
Pradesh has been increased to Rs 20 lakhs and Odisha has increased it to Rs 10 
lakhs. In this connection, the Committee were apprised that being a federal 
structure in the country the amount varies from State to State.  Since the soldier 
has laid down his life in the service to nation, the Committee desire that there has 
to be uniformity to the extent possible in payment of ex-gratia fund by state 
Governments also and the argument of federal structure should not come in the 
way. The Committee are not oblivious of the fact that the issue regarding 
uniformity in payments of ex-gratia amount to the dependents of Martyrs has 
been raised and discussed in several meetings of the Committee without any 
positive outcome. Therefore, the Committee, in no unequivocal terms 
recommend that requisite measures be initiated  and should be put in  place for 
sensitizing state Governments to bring in more uniformity in granting ex-gratia 
fund for families of martyred soldiers. 
 
Welfare Measures Delivery at the State/District level 
 
6. The Committee note that Kendriya Sainik Board is headed by Hon’ble 
Raksha Mantri and comprising of the Chief Ministers, Administrators of Union 
Territories as its members, is a high level board specially created to look into the 
issues of ESM/dependents. Presently there are 33 Rajya Sainik Boards (RSBs) 
and 403 Zila Sainik Board (ZSBs) to look after the well beings of 
ESM/Dependents.  Further, the Committee note that during last 10 years, number 

30 
 
of ZSBs have increased from 220 to 403. This was primarily based on number of 
ESM and families of serving/deceased service personnel in that area. The 
Committee were apprised that a new ZSB can be set up by concerned State 
Government themselves if the population of ESM and families of serving/ 
deceased service personnel is above 7500.  The Committee are of considered 
opinion that role of Central Government in welfare of NoKs and veer-naris has to 
be pivotal and it cannot be left to the state machinery.  Therefore, meetings of all 
central boards should be held frequently and at regular intervals so as to have 
effective monitoring of functioning of state/district Boards.  
 
7. The Committee observe that besides setting up a ZSB, it is also very 
important that ZSB is accessible to beneficiaries coming under its jurisdiction. 
Specifically with regard to veer nari and NoKs, as their details are available, 
RSB/ZSB should be pro-actively involved in overseeing proper implementation of 
welfare schemes for them.  The meetings of these Boards shall be held on 
regular basis so as to ensure visibility of their working in the zone. It may be 
ensured that benefits of various schemes are personally delivered to Veer 
Nari/NOK and they be apprised of the schemes available for them. 
 
Employment/Re-settlement 
 
8. The Committee note that compassionate appointments are being made by 
concerned Service Headquarters of Army, Navy and Air Force to widows / 
families of defence personnel, whereby widows of Defence Personnel, who lose 
their lives while performing the duties are eligible for applying for Short Service 
Commission (Non- Tech) and (Tech). They are eligible even if they have children 

31 
 
but should not have been re-married. A total of 5% vacancies are earmarked for 
widows both for SSC (Tech) women and SSC (Non-Tech) women entry. The 
Committee desire that the criteria of veer-nari being unmarried for employment 
eligibility should be re-looked into. Further, it has come to notice of Committee 
that in some cases of compassionate appointments, candidates have to face 
inordinate delays for getting appointments. Evidently in certain cases, the 
widows cross their age-limit whilst waiting for announcement of vacancies. The 
Committee recommend that a suitable mechanism should be formulated so as to 
ensure that at least eligible and willing veer-nari or NoK be given either 
employment or a resettlement option in the shortest time period possible.  
 
9. On the issue of resettlement of veer-nari/NoKs, the Committee were 
informed that various relaxations are being given to veer-nari/NoKs, one such 
measure is being ten per cent vacancies made available to Wards (Sons and 
daughters including legally adopted children) of Battle Casualty for grant of Short 
Service Commission (SSC) out of fixed vacancies released per course to ‘C’ 
Certificate holders of NCC.  The Committee are surprised to note that instead of 
having separate pool of vacancies reserved for Veer Narees/NOKs there is no 
relaxation in eligibility criteria except that condition of holding of NCC ‘C’ 
Certificate is not mandatory for these vacancies. The Committee therefore 
recommend that some fixed percentage of reservation should be made 
exclusively for wards of martyred soldiers out of general quota.  
 
10. With regard to enrolment as JCO/Other Ranks, the Committee were 
informed that instant enrolment is done in the Army through Unit Head Quarter 
enrolment by respective Regiment/Corps Training Centers as per policy.  On 

32 
 
gleaning through the  extract of policy on ‘Instant Enrolment’ furnished to the 
Committee, it  was found that for the said purpose, one son of fatal battle 
casualty/ Battle Casualty boarded out is given consideration and in case of being 
under aged the person may be enrolled when he attains the age required. When 
deceased was unmarried, one real brother of a Battle Casualty is considered for 
employment and in case of deceased’s widow is issueless or has no male child 
or has underaged male child,  one real brother of a battle casualty, provided the 
real brother gets married to the deceased widow is considered for service. The 
Committee feel that eligibility criteria or the policy for the employment has not 
been revisited since a long time as eligibility criteria is fixed for the male child 
only.  The Committee, therefore, recommend that the extant policies should be 
revisited with a view to have gender equality and real sister and female child 
should also be made eligible/.entitled for service after fulfilment of requisite 
eligibility criteria for instant employment.   
 
11. With regard to the compassionate appointments of veer-nari/families, the 
Committee found that presently 30 personnel in Air Force  (since 2016) and 35 in 
Navy  (since 2014)  were given employment.  Surprisingly, Army which is the 
biggest target of all the forces has not maintained the requisite data, and it is 
maintained by the Directorate.  The Committee desire that data with regard 
compassionate appointments to NoK or veer-nari families should be properly 
maintained by Army and brought to the knowledge of the Committee. The 
Committee take note of the number of compassionate appointments in Air Force 
and Navy and find it lesser than expected. However, a comprehensive analysis be 
made only when total number of NoKs available in the country as well as data in 
respect of Army is furnished to the Committee.  

33 
 
 
12. As regards other re-settlement avenues, the Committee note that                  
re-settlement of veer-nari/families is limited to the schemes of Oil Product 
Agency Distributorship and Coal Tipper Allotment Scheme for Widows. The 
Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas (MoPNG) has reserved a quota of 8 per 
cent for distributorship of oil product agency i.e. LPG Distributorship and retail 
outlets (P/D). The Committee wish that the total number of allotments made for 
veer-nari and NoKs vis-à-vis total allotments be furnished to them along at the 
time of furnishing Action Taken Replies. The Committee desire that 8 per cent 
reservation of distributorship of oil products should be adhered to strictly both in 
letter and spirit. 
 
13. The Committee note that at present there is no provision of reservation for 
milk booths/kiosks etc for veer-nari or eligible family members of martyred 
soldiers.  The Committee recommend that Ministry of Defence should take up the 
issue with concerned Ministry/agency for earmarking a fixed percentage of 
allotment of milk booths and other kiosks which are certainly easy to operate as 
means of livelihood in comparsion to other centres for veer-nari or NoKs.    
 
14. With respect to special incentive schemes to develop skills among veer-
nari/ NoK, the Committee were informed that DGR, an attached office of MoD 
(under Department of Ex-Servicemen Welfare) is entrusted with conducting 
Resettlement Training Courses for retiring/retired personnel of Armed Forces.   
The duration of these courses is between one month to nine months and they are 
conducted in multifarious fields such as Management, Security, Retail, 
Healthcare, Yoga & Fitness and IT Sector etc. Three per cent seats reserved for 

34 
 
widows /one ward in these courses (in case widow refuses to undergo course). In 
this respect, the Committee recommend that instead of limiting the reservation of 
seats to three per cent, these training/skilling courses should be made available 
to all willing veer-nari and eligible NoKs provided they fulfill basic eligibility 
criteria for the same.  
 
Medical and Educational Facilities 
 
15. The Committee note that Ex-servicemen Contributory Health Scheme 
(ECHS) takes care of the healthcare and medical needs of Ex-servicemen and 
their dependents.  The Ministry have informed the Committee that Veer-nari are 
exempted from paying one time contribution of amount for ECHS membership 
and can avail cashless and capless medical benefits alongwith their eligible 
dependents through ECHS.  It has also been informed that veer-nari and eligible 
dependents are also entitled to avail medical services of civil Empanelled Health 
Care Organisations as ECHS beneficiaries. The Committee observe that at times 
some facilities are not available at empanelled hospitals and also their location is 
very far and not in near vicinity of the place of residence of veer-nari/NoKs. 
Since, providing healthcare facilities to family members of martyred soldier is 
nation is responsibility, the Committee feel that Government should issue 
advisory to all ECHS empanelled private hospitals across the country to provide 
healthcare facilities to veer-nari and eligible NoKs on priority basis. 
  
16. The Committee note that at present Rs. 700 per student per annum as 
clothing charges is being given to children of veer-naris studying in colleges 
which is a very meagre amount in current economic scenario.  They therefore 

35 
 
recommend that it should suitably increased.  Likewise, Rs. 50000 for 
professional course is also a meagre amount when compared to the cost of fee 
for prevailing professional courses in various colleges.  Therefore, the 
Committee recommend that Ministry should take up the issue of for suitably 
increasing the same. The Committee also note that at present computer grant of 
Rs. 35,000 is provided to students after degree course.  Keeping in view the 
importance of computers in learning the Committee recommend that it should be 
granted at level of 10th standard itself. 
 
17. In course of examination of the subject, the Committee were desirous to 
know about the scheme/ policy for providing overseas education of meritorious 
veer-nari and eligible NoKs.  The representatives of Ministry of Defence were 
candid to state that at present there is no such scheme. The Committee 
recommend that to tap the hidden talent of bright students the Government 
should contemplate formulating a scheme/policy for funding and facilitating 
overseas education of   meritorious and eligible NoKs of martyred soldiers.  
 
18. With regard to initiatives for facilitating admission of veer-nari or the 
children of martyred soldier in various deemed/private universities, the 
Committee were informed that inter–se priority for admission into professional 
/non professional courses in various education institutions/ universities is given 
to wards/ widow of serving personnel killed in action. The Committee whilst 
expressing their satisfaction over the endeavors of the Ministry, desire that 
whenever a case for admission of wards/spouse of personnel killed in action 
come to notice of Ministry of Defence, efforts should be made at highest level to 
accord priorities for securing admission in educational institutions.  In this 

36 
 
regard guidelines with regard to procedure for securing admission in the private 
college/universities etc. may be formulated in consultation with the Ministry of 
Education. 
 
19. The Committee also note that there are provisions of reservation of seats 
in medical/dental/ courses by States/UTs/Central universities /autonomous 
institutions for wards/widows of ESMs as per the priority laid down by MoD with 
top most priority towards /widows to personnel killed in action.  With regard to 
reservation of seats in MBBS course of various universities for veer nari/ noks, 
the Ministry informed the Committee that a total of 35 MBBS seats and 3 seats in 
BDS are allotted by Ministry of Health Family Welfare to KSB for wards of defence 
personnel as a Government of India nominee. It was also informed that 11, 15 and 
05 no of MBBS seats were allotted to dependents of war widows during the years 
2019-20, 2020-21 and 2021-22 respectively. The Committee would like to know the 
reasons for reduction in the number of MBBS seats allotted for wards of war 
widows in the year 2021-22.  Since the number of MBBS seats are being 
increased by Government in various medical colleges/institutions across the 
country the Committee recommend that correspondingly number of seats 
earmarked for veer-nari/NoKs should also be increased.  
 
Pensions 
 
20. The Committee learn that there were delays in disbursement of pension 
due to non-submission of life certificate on time. The representatives of Ministry 
of Defence have stated that under the SPARSH- Web portal there is a provision to 
issue SMS alerts wherever annual identification is pending. However, the 
Committee find that presently there is no practice of personally approaching 
veer-nari/NoKs for submission of life-certificate. Further, the Committee note that 

37 
 
though PCDA (P) Prayagraj maintains data base of pensioners, no separate data 
base of veer-naris is being maintained by them. The Committee recommend that 
in cases where Veer Naris/NoKs are unable to submit their life certificate suo-
moto, they should be personally approached to enable submission of the same.  
In this regard if required assistance of concerned district level officer may be 
solicited.  They also recommend that a separate data base for veer-narees and 
NoKs should also be maintained by the Department. 
 
Awareness Generation and Grievance redressal 
 
21. The Committee were given to understand that grievance redressal 
mechanism with reference to educational, medical or any other services in 
respect of veer-nari or NoKs has been set up at ZSB/RSB and KSB level.  ZSBs 
are also being included in Centralised Public Grievance Redress and Monitoring 
System (CPGRAMS) Ver 7.0. which is an online platform available to the citizens 
24x7 to lodge their grievances. The Committee were also apprised by the Ministry 
that they endeavour to resolve the grievances at the earliest, although land and 
other family disputes take longer time.  It has also been informed that Respective 
ZSB/RSB maintains a record of the complaints/ grievances received from veer-
nari or NoKs. However, while replying to a related query the Ministry has stated 
that the record, particularly for war widows is not maintained. The committee are 
surprised to find two contradictory replies for the similar query.  Not going 
further into these details, the Committee, at this stage can only recommend that 
data regarding Veer Naris and NoKs should be maintained at ZSB/RSB and KSB 
levels with proper monitoring at Central level.  For this purpose, if need be the 
Ministry can consider modifying the existing CPGRAMS ver. 7.0 by adding a 
separate tab/window for the Veer Nari/NoKs.   

38 
 
Recognition of Martyrs and their families 
 
22. During the course of examination of the subject, the Committee desired 
that awareness among beneficiaries about the schemes / policies meant for 
welfare of veer-nari/ NoKs should be created.  In this respect, the Ministry of 
Defence informed that all welfare schemes/policies /benefits pertaining to war 
widows and their families are displayed at the notice boards/premises/offices/ 
campus of all RSB/ZSBs to facilitate wide publicity and awareness amongst ESM 
community. Instructions on the above have been issued by KSB Secretariat to all 
RSB/ZSBs to check this aspect during annual inspection of RSB/ZSB by KSB.  In 
addition, all policies, welfare schemes, procedures etc are also available on KSB 
website.  The Committee have been intimated that ZSWOs/ Welfare Organizer of 
concerned state regularly visit/approach veer-nari and their families for needful/ 
assistance.  In addition, records are maintained and updated by all ZSWOs and 
all the information related to pension, benefits and schemes are displayed/ 
uploaded on the website of the Service headquarters and the Department of Ex-
Servicemen Welfare.  While taking note of the extant mechanism put in place, the 
Committee would like to recommend that ZSWOs/Welfare Organizer should be 
held responsible for optimum service delivery to all veer-nari/NoKs.  The Ministry 
of Defence must also ensure that any sort of exploitation/malpractices which may 
surface should be dealt firmly within the prescribed Rules/Laws, and those found 
guilty should be penalized. 
 
 
New Delhi; JUAL ORAM 
13 December, 2022 Chairperson 
22 Agrahayana, 1944 (Saka)  Standing Committee on Defence  
  

39 
 
Annexure 
 
 
ENTITLEMENTS TO THE NOKs OF THE BATTLE CASUALTIES 
Ser  
No.  
Monetary Grant/Scheme  Amount  
a  Ex-Gratia (Central)  Rs 25.00 lacs to Rs 45.00 lacs  
b  Army Group Insurance (AGI) benefits  Rs. 1.00 crore (Officers)  
Rs. 50.00 lacs (JCO/ORs)  
c  AGI maturity  As per contribution 
accumulated along with 
compound interest.  
d  Pension  Liberalized /Special Family 
Pension  
100%/ 60% of last RE (Basic 
Pay + MSP)  
e  Death-cum-Retirement Gratuity (DCRG)  Based on length of service and 
emoluments last drawn by the 
deceased individual.  
f  Final Settlement of. Accounts (FSAs).  
(Including Leave encashment & Defence 
Services Officers Provident (DSOP)/ Armed 
Forces Personnel Provident (AFPP) Fund  
As applicable. As per 
contribution accumulated along 
with compound interest  
g  Army Wives Welfare Association (AWWA) 
Grant.    
Rs. 30,000/-   ex-gratia grant to 
NoKs of deceased soldiers.  
h  Armed Forces Battle Casualty Welfare Fund 
(AFBCWF)    
Rs. 8.00 lacs  Addln ex-gratia 
grant to NoKs of deceased 
soldiers. 
j  Ex Gratia (Domicile State Government)  As applicable  
k  Death link Insurance Scheme 
DLIS(JCO/ORs)  
Rs.60,000/-  
l  Personal Accident Insurance (Defence Salary 
Package Account) by Major Public/Private 
Sector Banks.  
Rs. 50.00 lacs  
   Total Entitlement (approx.)  Rs 1.8 cr (Officers)  and Rs 
1.3 cr (JCO/ORs)  

40 
 
OTHER BENEFITS/ CONCESSIONS   
Ser 
No.  
Monetary Grant/Scheme  Amount  
a  Educational Concession children of 
Armed Forces Officers/JCOs/ORs 
missing/disabled/killed in action 
(w.e.f. 01.07.2017)  
Full reimbursement of tuition fee and 
bus/actual fare.   
  
Full reimbursement of Hostel Charges 
for those studying in boarding schools 
and colleges. 
  
Books/Stationary : upto Rs 2000/-per 
annum  
 
Uniform cost where compulsory: upto 
Rs 2000/-  per annum  
 
Clothing : upto Rs 700 per annum per 
student  
b  Higher Education  to Widows:-  
     (a)  Graduation  
     (b)  Post Graduation  
     (c)  Professional Courses  
     
Rs. 20,000/-  
Rs. 25,000/-  
Rs. 50,000/-    
c One time Computer Grant 
(Applicable after 1st degree 
course/Graduation & above)  
Rs. 35,000/-  
d  Medical Facilities to the 
dependents/Noks  
ECHS (Ex-Servicemen Contributory 
Health Scheme) provides cashless 
health care to war-widows/war disabled 
defence personnel and their NoKs. War 
Widows are not required to pay the 
membership fee.  
e  Marriage Grant  A  grant of Rs 1,00,000/- is given for 
marriage of daughters, widow re-
marriage and orphan son’s marriage of 
battle casualties (fatal), physical 
casualties (fatal).  
f  Vocational Training Grant  Rs 20,000/- (One time) for Widows 
Pensioner/ Non-Pen up to Hav.Rank)  
g Railway Travel Concession  Ministry of Railways provides 
concessions (upto 75%) on tickets to 
widows of martyrs and Complementary 
Card Passes to Chakra awardees and 
their widows.  

41 
 
 
***** 
  
Ser 
No.  
Monetary Grant/Scheme  Amount  
h Telephone  Concession  Department of Telecommunication 
provides full and 50% concessions in 
rental charges to Chakra awardees and 
war widows respectively.    
i  Government accommodation 
Retention  
Retention of Govt married 
accommodation for two years from the 
death of the Individual extended by one 
and a half year with the approval of the 
Competent Authority.    
j  Reservation/Priority Defence Housing 
Schemes  
   
Reservation (upto 3%) / Priority in Army 
Welfare Housing Organisation (AWHO) 
and Air Force Naval Housing Board 
(AFNHB dwelling units for widow/ 
Parents of Battle Casualties/ Fatal 
Casualties.  
k  Reservation in Jobs  4.5% reservation for disabled ESM/ 
dependents of Servicemen killed in 
action already in central public sector 
enterprises and nationalised banks.  
l  Resettlement Schemes  There are lot of schemes for 
resettlement schemes run by 
Directorate General Resettlement 
(DGR) like allotment of petrol pumps 
etc. to ensure proper resettlement of 
war widows/dependents.  
m.  Priority / Reservation in Professional 
/Higher Educational Institutes.  
Central Government and various State 
Govts have provision of reservation of 
seats in higher educational institutions 
for children of ESM. Wards/widows of 
Servicemen killed/ disabled in action 
are placed in Priority I and II 
respectively. (top categories)  
   
About 38 seats are reserved as 
nominee candidates by KSB under 
MoHFW quota for ESM in admission to 
Medical / Dental Colleges.  

42 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE (2021-22) 
 
MINUTES OF THE EIGHTH SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
DEFENCE (2021-22) 
 
  
The Committee sat on Friday, the 27th May, 2022 from 1430 hrs. to 1545 hrs. in 
Committee Room No. ‘D’, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
 
PRESENT 
 
SHRI JUAL ORAM    -   CHAIRPERSON 
 
    MEMBERS 
 
Lok Sabha 
 
 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Dr. Sanjeev Sharma - Director 
2. Shri Rahul Singh - Deputy Secretary  
 
  
2. Kunwar Danish Ali 
3. Shri D.V. Sadananda Gowda  
4. Shri Rattan Lal Kataria 
5. Prof. (Dr.) Ram Shankar Katheria 
6. Dr. T. R. Paarivendhar  
7. Shir Jugal Kishore Sharma 
8. Shri  Brijendra Singh  
9. Shri  Durga Das Uikey   
 
 
  Rajya Sabha 
 
10. Dr. Ashok Bajpai 
11. Shri Prem Chand Gupta  
12. Lt. Gen. (Dr.) D.P. Vats (Retd.) 
13. Shri  K.C. Venugopal 
  

43 
 
LIST OF WITNESSES 
 
MINISTRY OF DEFENCE 
 
S. No. Name  Designation 
1 Shri B. Anand Secretary, ESW 
2 Dr. Pudi Hari Prasad JS (ESW) 
3 Shri Sanjay Kumar Addl. FA & JS 
4 Dr. PP Sharma OSD 
5 Lt Gen C Bansi Ponnappa AVSM, VSM, AG Army Hqrs 
6 Lt Gen PS Shekhawat SM DG (DC & W) 
7 Air Mshl K Anantharaman VSM, AOA, Air Hqrs 
8 Air Mshl RK Anand DG (Administration) 
9 Vice Admiral Suraj Berry Controller of Personnel Services 
10 AVM Ashok Saini ACAS (Accts & AV) 
11 Maj Gen N R Indurkar SM, MD ECHS 
12 Maj Gen Sharad Kapoor DG (Resettlement) 
13 Cmde H P Singh Secy, KSB 
14 Cmde Pankaj Sharma CMD, ESM Affairs 
15 Shri Rajnish Kumar CGDA 
16 Shri Praveen Kumar Addl CGDA 
17 Dr. Jeyaraj Naik Jt CGDA 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members to the Sitting of the 
Committee convened in connection with examination of the Subject, ‘Assessment of the 
Welfare Measures available to War Widows/Families in Armed Forces’. Thereafter, the 
Chairperson welcomed the representatives of the Ministry of Defence and drew their 
attention to Directions 55(1) and 58 of the Directions by the Speaker, Lok Sabha 
regarding confidentiality of the proceedings of the Committee.  
 
3. The witnesses through a Power Point Presentation, briefed the Committee on 
the Subject. Thereafter, the Chairperson and Members of the Committee raised several 
issues/points, as indicated below and sought clarifications/information from the 
representatives of the Ministry of Defence thereon: 
 
i. Provision of educational facilities for war widows/veer-nari and their 
children which included oversees study, admission in MBBS and technical 
courses etc.; 
 
ii. Allotment of resettlement facilities like petrol pump, gas agencies, milk 
booths, etc. for veer-nari, their children and parents of martyred soldiers;  
 
iii. Ex-gratia appointment in services on compassionate ground; 
 
iv. Reserving vacancies and relaxing qualification criteria for employment of 
veer-nari and their children; 
 
v. Recommending state governments for bringing uniformity in provision of 
 ex-gratia benefits and employment opportunities; 

44 
 
  
vi. Amelioration of hardships being faced in availing medical facilities in  
 ECHS by veer-nari, their children and parents of martyred soldiers; 
 
vii. Resolution to delay in pension disbursement due to technical issues; and 
 
viii. Curbing malpractices/pilferages in authorities with regard to 
allotment/issuing of licences for facilities/benefits targeted for welfare of 
veer-nari and their children or parents of martyred soldiers. 
 
ix. Reservation of Children of veer-naris in Sainik Schools. 
 
 4. The representatives of the Ministry of the Defence responded to the queries 
raised by the Members.  The Chairperson directed the representatives of the Ministry to 
furnish written replies/information on the points raised by the Members which were not 
readily available at an early date, which was assured by the representatives. 
 
 
The witnesses then withdrew 
 
5. A copy of verbatim record of the proceedings has been kept. 
 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
 
 
 
 
 
  

45 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE (2022-23) 
 
MINUTES OF THE SECOND SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
DEFENCE (2022-23) 
 
The Committee sat on Monday, the 14 November, 2022 from 1100 hrs. to 1245 
hrs. in Committee Room No. ‘C’, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
 
PRESENT 
 
SHRI JUAL ORAM    -   CHAIRPERSON 
 
    MEMBERS 
 
 LOK SABHA  
 
 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Smt. Suman Arora - Joint Secretary  
2. Dr. Sanjeev Sharma - Director 
3. Shri Rahul Singh - Deputy Secretary  
 
 
 
  
2. Shri Devaragunda Venkappa Sadananda Gowda 
3. Shri  Annasaheb Shankar Jolle  
4. Shri Suresh Kumar Kashyap 
5. Shri  Rattan Lal Kataria 
6. Dr. Rajashree Mallick 
7. Shri Anumula Revanth Reddy 
8. Shri Jugal Kishore Sharma 
9. Shri Brijendra Singh 
10. Shri  Mahabali Singh 
 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
11. Dr. Ashok Bajpai 
12. Shri Prem Chand Gupta 
13. Smt. P.T. Usha 
14. Shri G.K. Vasan 
15. Lt. Gen. (Dr.) D. P. Vats (Retd.) 
16. Shri K.C. Venugopal 

46 
 
 
LIST OF WITNESSES 
MINISTRY OF DEFENCE 
S.No. Name & Designation 
1.  Dr. Samir Venkatpati Kamat, Secretary, DDR&D & Chairman, DRDO  
2.  Shri K.S. Varaprasad, DS & DG(HR)  
3.  Shri Hari Babu Srivastava, OS & DG  
4.  Dr. UK Singh, OS & DG(R&M)  
5.  Dr. Chandrika Kaushik, OS, BDG(PC&SI) 
6. Shri Purusottam Bej, OS & Director  
7.  Shri Vedveer Arya, Addl FA & JS  
8.  Dr. Ravindra Singh, Scientist ‘G’ & Director, DPARO&M  
9.  Dr. Sumit Goswami, Scientist ‘F'& Director, DP&C 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members and informed them about 
the agenda of the Sitting i.e. to consider and adopt the Draft Report on the subject 
‘Assessment of Welfare Measures available to War Widows/Families in Armed Forces’ 
and briefing by the representatives of the Ministry of Defence on the subject ‘A review 
of the working of the Defence Research and Development Organisation (DRDO)’.  
3. The Committee first took up the draft Report for consideration. After some 
deliberations, the Committee adopted the Report without any changes/modifications.  
The Committee authorized the Chairperson to finalise the above draft Report and 
present the same to the House on a date convenient to him. 
 
4. **** Does not pertain to the Report. 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
 
 