 
 
39 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE
THE INTER
(COMMAND, CONTROL AND DISCIPLINE) 
July, 2023 / 
i 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE 
(2022-23) 
 
(SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
MINISTRY OF DEFENCE 
 
INTER-SERVICES ORGANISATIONS 
(COMMAND, CONTROL AND DISCIPLINE) 
BILL, 2023 
 
 
 
THIRTY-NINTH REPORT 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
July, 2023 / Ashadha, 1945 (Saka) 
SERVICES ORGANISATIONS  (COMMAND, CONTROL AND DISCIPLINE)  
  

 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE
THE INTER
(COMMAND, CONTROL AND DISCIPLINE) 
Presented
July, 2023 / 
ii 
THIRTY-NINTH REPORT 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE 
(2022-23) 
 
(SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
MINISTRY OF DEFENCE 
 
INTER-SERVICES ORGANISATIONS 
(COMMAND, CONTROL AND DISCIPLINE) 
BILL, 2023 
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 21.07.2023 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 21.07.2023 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
July, 2023 / Ashadha, 1945 (Saka) 
SERVICES ORGANISATIONS  (COMMAND, CONTROL AND DISCIPLINE)  
  

iii 
 
CONTENTS  Pages 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (2022-23)……………………………….  iv 
 
INTRODUCTION ……………………………………………………………………. vi 
 
REPORT 
 
 
PART I 
 
INTRODUCTORY ………………………………………………………………….              1 
CHAPTER I PRELIMINARY....................................................................        
 
3 
CHAPTER II 
 
SPECIAL PPROVISION FOR CERTAIN FORCES                      
 
9 
CHAPTER III CONSTITUTION OF INTER-SERVICES ORGANISATION       
AND ITS OFFICERS 
 
11 
CHAPTER IV MISCELLANEOUS                         16 
  
 
 
 PART II 
 
 
Observations/Recommendations....................................................................... 18 
 
  
 
APPENDICES 
 
Minutes of the Sittings of the Standing Committee on Defence (2022-23) 
held on 29.05.2023 and 20.07.2023 
 
            
23 
 
 
 
 
  

iv 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE (2022-23)  
 
SHRI JUAL ORAM  -  CHAIRPERSON 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NOTE:-  Two seats vacant in Lok Sabha. 
  @ Nominated w.e.f  08.12.2022. 
     Nominated w.e.f 16.11.2022. 
$ Shri Rahul Gandhi ceased to be a Member of the Committee consequent upon his  
disqualification from Membership of Lok Sabha vide LSS Notification 
No.21/4(3)/2023/TO(B) dated 24/03/2023; and 
^ Sad demise of Shri Rattan Lal Kataria on 18/05/2023 notified vide Lok Sabha 
Secretariat Notification No. 21/4(7)/2023/TO (B) dated 22 May, 2023.  
Lok Sabha 
2. Shri Nitesh Ganga Deb 
3. Shri Devaragunda Venkappa Sadananda Gowda 
4. Shri Annasaheb Shankar Jolle  
5. Choudhary Mehboob Ali Kaiser 
6. Shri Suresh Kumar Kashyap 
7. Prof. (Dr.) Ram Shankar Katheria  
8. Shri Durai Murugan Kathir Anand@ 
9. Kunwar Danish Ali 
10. Dr. Rajashree Mallick  
11. Shri Reddeppa Nallakonda Gari* 
12. Shri Uttam Kumar Reddy Nalamada 
13. Shri Anumula Revanth Reddy  
14. Shri Jugal Kishore Sharma  
15. Dr. Shrikant Eknath Shinde  
16. Shri Prathap Simha  
17. Shri Brijendra Singh  
18. Shri Mahabali Singh  
19. Shri Durga Das Uikey 
 Vacant$ 
 Vacant^ 
Rajya Sabha 
20. Dr. Ashok Bajpai 
21. Shri Prem Chand Gupta  
22. Shri Sushil Kumar Gupta 
23. Shri Venkataramana Rao Mopidevi 
24. Shri Kamakhya Prasad Tasa  
25. Dr. Sudhanshu Trivedi  
26. Smt. P.T. Usha 
27. Shri G.K. Vasan 
28. Lt. Gen. (Dr.) D. P. Vats (Retd.) 
29. Shri K.C. Venugopal 

v 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Smt. Suman Arora  - Joint Secretary* 
2. Dr. Sanjeev Sharma  - Joint Secretary   
3. Shri Tirthankar Das  - Director 
4. Shri Rahul Singh  - Deputy Secretary 
5. Smt. Preeti Negi  -  Executive Officer 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
* Smt. Suman Arora, Joint Secretary served in the Committee till 11.7.2023 
 

vi 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
 I, the Chairperson of the Standing Committee on Defence (2022-23), having 
been authorised by the Committee to submit the Report on their behalf, present this 
Thirty-ninth Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) on “The Inter-Services Organisations 
(Command, Control and Discipline) Bill, 2023”.  
2.  The Standing Committee on Defence (2022-23) was constituted on 13th 
September, 2022.  One of the functions of the Standing Committee as laid down in Rule 
331E of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in Lok Sabha is to examine 
such Bills pertaining to the concerned Ministry/Department as are referred to the 
Committee by the Chairperson Rajya Sabha or the Speaker, as the case may be, and 
make Report thereon. 
3. The Inter-Services Organisation (Command, Control and Discipline) Bill, 2023 
was introduced in Lok Sabha on 15th March, 2023 and was referred to the Standing 
Committee on Defence by the Hon’ble Speaker on 24th April, 2023 for examination and 
Report. 
4. The Committee had the oral evidence of the representatives of the Ministry of 
Defence on the Bill on 29th May, 2023.  
5. The draft report was considered and adopted by the Standing Committee on 
Defence at their Sitting held on 20th July, 2023. 
6. The Committee wish to express their thanks to the representatives of the Ministry 
of Defence for appearing before the Committee for evidence and for furnishing the 
valuable material and information in a very short span of time which the Committee 
desired in connection with the examination of the Bill. 
7. For facility of reference and convenience, the Observations/Recommendations of 
the Committee have been printed in bold type in the body of the report. 
 
 
New Delhi; JUAL ORAM 
19 July, 2023 Chairperson 
28 Ashadha, 1945 (Saka) Standing Committee on Defence 
 
  

1 
 
 
REPORT 
PART – I 
 
INTRODUCTORY 
  
INTER-SERVICES ORGANISATIONS (COMMAND, CONTROL & DISCIPLINE)  
BILL, 2023 
  
  
 The Committee understand that currently, personnel of the Indian Army, Navy 
and Air Force are governed in accordance with the provisions contained in their specific 
governing/regulatory Service Acts, namely; Army Act 1950, Navy Act 1957 and  Air 
Force Act 1950. At the time of enactment of these respective Acts, most of the service 
organisations were largely comprised of personnel from a single service i.e. either 
Army, Navy or Air Force. However, now there are numerous Inter-Services 
Organisations such as Andaman & Nicobar Command, Strategic Forces Command, 
Defence Space Agency etc. and joint training establishments like the National Defence 
Academy, and National Defence College, where personnel of the Armed Forces and 
other forces serve together. 
 
2. The Committee also understand that presently, the Commander-in-Chief or 
Officer-in- Command of the Inter-Services Organisations is not empowered to exercise 
disciplinary/administrative powers over the personnel belonging to other services. Only 
officers of the respective Services are empowered to exercise disciplinary powers over 
the service personnel under their respective Service Acts. Accordingly, the Officers 
serving in these Organisations need to be reverted to their respective parent Service 
units for exercising any disciplinary or administrative action. 
 
3. In view of the above, the Ministry of Defence has proposed to enact a new 
legislation i.e. the Inter-Services Organisations (Command, Control & Discipline) Bill, 
2023. The Bill seeks to empower  the Commander-in-Chief and Officer-in-Command of 
Inter-Services Organisations with all disciplinary and administrative powers in respect of 
personnel serving in or attached to such organizations/establishments. The Inter-
Services Organisations (Command, Control & Discipline) Bill, 2023 was introduced in 
Lok Sabha on 15th March, 2023 and was referred to the Standing Committee on 
Defence by the Hon’ble Speaker, Lok Sabha on 24th April, 2023 for examination and 
report.  The Committee have been mandated to present their Report to the Parliament 
by the last day of the first week of the ensuing Monsoon Session of 2023. 
 
4. Gleaning through the Bill, the Committee find that as per the Objects and 
Reasons of the Bill, the proposed Bill will essentially be an enabling legislation, which 
will empower the Heads of the Inter-services Organisations to exercise effective 
command, control and discipline on all personnel of regular Air Force, Army and Navy 
and to persons of other forces as notified by the Central Government, who are serving 
in or attached to an Inter-services Organisation, without amending the respective Acts. 
Service personnel when serving in or attached to an Inter-Services Organisation will 
continue to be governed by their respective Service Acts. 
 
 
 

2 
 
5. The examination of the Committee is based on the background brief provided by 
the Ministry of Defence, oral examination of the representatives of the Ministry held on 
29th May, 2023 and post evidence replies sought by the Committee.   
 
6. When the Committee wanted to be apprised of the salient features of the 
proposed Inter-Services Organisation (Command, Control & Discipline) Bill, 2023 the 
Ministry through a written note informed as under:- 
 
o The ‘ISO Bill – 2023’ shall be applicable to all personnel of regular Army, 
Navy, and Air Force, and to persons of other forces as notified by the 
Central Government, who are serving in or attached to an Inter-Services 
organisation. 
 
o This Bill empowers the Commander-in-Chief, Officer-in-Command or any 
other officer specially empowered on this behalf by the Central 
Government with all the disciplinary and administrative powers in respect 
of personnel serving in or attached to their Inter-Services Organisations 
for the maintenance of discipline and proper discharge of their duties, 
irrespective of the service to which they belong.  
 
o The Commander-in-Chief or the Officer-in-Command means General 
Officer/Flag Officer/Air Officer who has been appointed as Commander-
in-Chief of Officer-in-Command an Inter-Services Organisation.  
 
o To maintain Command and Control in the absence of the Commander-in-
Chief (C-in-C) or the Officer-in-Command (Oi/C), the officiating 
incumbent or the officer on whom the command devolves in the absence 
of a C-in-C or Oi/C, will also be empowered to initiate all disciplinary or 
administrative actions over the service personnel, appointed, deputed, 
posted or attached to an Inter-Services organisation. 
 
o The Bill also empowers the Commanding Officer of an Inter-Services 
Organisation to initiate all disciplinary or administrative actions over the 
personnel appointed, deputed, posted or attached to that Inter-Services 
Organisation.  For the purpose of this Act, Commanding Officer means 
the officer in actual command of the unit, ship or establishment. 
 
o The Bill empowers the Central Government to constitute an Inter-
Services Organisation. 
  
7. During their examination, the Committee point that the Inter-Services 
Organisations (Command, Control & Discipline) Bill, 2023 contains 5 Chapters and 15 
clauses. The Chapter-wise examination of the Bill by the Committee is brought out in 
the succeeding chapters of the Report. 
  
  
  
  
  

3 
 
  
CHAPTER – I 
  
Preliminary 
  
8. The Preamble of the Bill as referred to the Committee reflects its rationale and 
purpose and reads as under: 
  
“to empower the Commander-in-Chief or the Officer-in-Command of Inter-
services Organisations in respect of service personnel who are subject to the 
Air Force Act, 1950, the Army Act, 1950 and the Navy Act, 1957, who are 
serving under or attached to his command, for the maintenance of discipline 
and proper discharge of their duties, and for matters connected therewith or 
incidental thereto.” 
  
9. In the opinion of the Committee, the bill intends to devolve disciplinary and 
administrative powers to the head of Inter-Services Organisations (ISO). In this 
regard,   during evidence, a representative of the Ministry of Defence threw light on the 
definition of an ISO by stating: 
  
“एक बात और है ͩक what is ISO? हम क ै से ͫडफाइन करɅगे। यहां हम कहते हɇ ͩक एक यूǓनट 
बनाते हɇ, िजसमɅ तीन सͪव[सेज क े एक-एक लोग post हɇ। Can this be an Inter-Service 
organisation? नहȣं, Èयɉͩक उनक े Head क े पास ना तो पया[Üत  पॉवस[ हɇ और ना हȣ 
wherewithal है।  ऐसी यूǓनɪस छोटȣ होती है। ISO have to be constituted based on the 
capability of the organisation to execute requisite disciplinary powers. जैसे कोट[ 
माश[ल है। यǑद एक छोटȣ unit पर अपना हȣ मैनडेट नहȣं है और उसे ͩकसी और जगह से एडम 
सपोट[ ͧमलता है, तो वह इन पॉवस[ को कर  हȣ नहȣं पाएगा। इसͧलए हमने Ĥोͪवजन Ǒदया है ͩक 
Government of India by notification will constitute an इंटर सͪव[सेज आगȶनाइजेशन । 
जैसे अंडमान Ǔनकोबार है, we call it an integrated command or a joint command. अभी 
तक वह कमांड हमने कहȣं नोटȣफाई नहȣं कȧ है ͩक it is an Inter-Service Organisation.  इस 
ǒबल मɅ हमने Ĥोͪवजन ͩकया है ͩक जैसे यह ǒबल पास होकर एÈट बनाता है, उसके बाद Central 
Government will see which all units or organisations have the wherewithal to 
execute the mandate, and accordingly constitute an ISO. इसका एक उदाहरण मɇ दूंगा 
ͩक हमने integration क े ͧलए Ïवांइट लोिजिèटक नोड बनाये है मुàबई मɅ, पोट[ Þलेयर मɅ और 
Guwahati.  हम देखɅगे ͩक मैनडेट मɅ उसका जो हैड है, वह कन[ल लैवल क े आͩफसर हɇ। उसमɅ 
तीनɉ सͪव[सेज क े आͩफसस[ हɇ लेͩकन वह यूǓनट इतनी छोटȣ है ͩक उसकȧ सपोट[ क े ͧलए वह ͩकसी 
दूसरȣ यूǓनट पर ͫडपɅडɅट है। ऐसी यूǓनɪस को हम ISO ͫडÈलेयर नहȣं करɅगे। इन units मɅ कोई 
क े स होता है तो the joint logistics node sends that case to the base depot 
ship/support organisation.  The base depot ship executes the punishment or 
disciplinary action. उसक े पास न कोई expertise है, न कोई लोग हɇ जो उÛहɅ एडवाइज कर 
सकते हɇ।” 
  

4 
 
  
10. The Committee sought further clarification regarding the criteria of an 
Organisation/unit being notified as an ISO. In response, a representative of the Ministry 
of Defence submitted as under: 
  
“Sir, it will be defined in the rules. You cannot define the precise criteria 
because in certain places, size may be very large but the operational mandate 
may be of different nature. In certain cases, the functionality itself would 
demand that it should have these kinds of powers. यह सब Ǿãस मɅ आ जाएगा।” 
 
11. When asked whether the geographical location will be a criterion for defining an 
Inter-Services Organisation, a representative of the Ministry submitted as under: 
  
“िजयोĒाफȧकल लोक े शन से Ïयादा मɇडेट मɅ, रोल मɅ Èया चीजɅ हɇ, उसकȧ क ै पेǒबͧलटȣज़ मɅ उसे 
देखकर आईएसओ ऑगȶनाइजेशन ͫडफाइन होगी। आपने सहȣ कहा -The primary role of this 
Bill is to give disciplinary powers. जहां ऑगȶनाइजेशन मɅ ͫडͧसÜलेन मɅ ढȣल हो गई तो 
एͩफͧशएंसी नीचे चलȣ जाती है। इसक े साथ कुछ एडͧमǓनèĚेǑटव एÈशन हɇ। आज क े Ǒदन भी 
ͩकसी भी जगह पर सीएनसी जाते हɇ, अफसर इन कमांड जाते हɇ, उनको सटȶन एडͧमǓनèĚेǑटव 
पावस[ दȣ जाती हɇ। अब वह पावस[ इनको दȣ जाएंगी। मɇ उदाहरण  देता हूं, जैसे Power to issue 
censure, deduction from pay and allowances of personnel, recovery of pay and 
allowances, grant of maintenance under Army Act, 1950 etc. जीओसी क े पास ये 
पावस[ हɇ, लेͩकन अब ये Heads of ISO को भी दȣ जाएंगी। Moreover, there is power to 
convene and approve Board of Inquiry.  ये एडͧमǓनèĚेǑटव एÈशÛस हɇ।  इस bill का मेन 
रोल ͫडͧसÜलेनरȣ और साथ मɅ associated एडͧमǓनèĚेǑटव पावस[ देना है, to improve 
efficiency and discipline.” 
 
12. The Ministry, through a written reply to the Committee, elaborated on the process 
of drafting and finalization of the Bill:  
 
“…views of the stakeholders were taken while drafting the Bill for 
enactment.  The team of experts comprising of Judge Advocate Generals from 
the three Armed Forces after extensive deliberations have recommended 
enactment of the ISO (CCD) Bill-23. The Bill has been inter-alia examined by 
the Principal Personnel Officers Committee (PPOC) and the Chiefs of Staff 
Committee (COSC). HQ ANC has also strongly recommended enactment of the 
Bill.” 
  
13. During deliberations, the Committee enquired whether the opinions of all the 
stakeholders were taken while framing the Bill and whether any objections/suggestions 
were received in this regard. In response, a representative of the Ministry of Defence 
submitted as under:  
 
“सर, जैसा हमने बताया ͩक वष[ 2014 से तीनɉ सͪव[सेज क े जज एडवोक े ट जनरãस को साथ 
लेकर इÛहɉने जो ĥे मवक[ तैयार ͩकया, उसमɅ हर सͪव[सेज क े कमांडर-इन-चीफ क े साथ ͫडèकशंस 

5 
 
कȧ गई है । इसमɅ Èया सहȣ है और Èया आएगा। वह सब ͫडबेट करने क े बाद पहले चरण मɅ हमने 
इसका फèट[ कट बनाया। उसक े बाद इसमɅ कई और ͫडèकशंस ͧमǓनèĚȣज क े साथ हुɃ। लॉ एÖड 
जिèटस ͧमǓनèĚȣ क े साथ हुई । हमारे साथ जो मेन èटेकहोãडस[ हɇ, उनकȧ जो सजेशÛस थीं, 
उनको इनकॉपȾरेट ͩकया। खासकर, ͧमǓनèĚȣ ऑफ लॉ एÖड जिèटस कȧ बात है तो most of the 
language which you see here, it is their language only. फौज तो ͧसàपल ऑड[र देती 
है। हमारे सुझावɉ को लेकर उÛहɉने इसे और मजबूत ͩकया। 
Yes, all the stakeholders have been consulted, not once but many times. We 
have also consulted with certain eminent advocates working in the Armed 
Forces Tribunal, Supreme Court etc., for their professional views, as also 
whether this will withstand the legal scrutiny. सबकȧ advice लेने क े बाद ͩफर हमने 
सीसीएस का एĤूवल लेकर यह Bill, Parliament मɅ introduce ͩकया गया है।” 
 
14. When asked whether the Bill has come ahead of the impending move to 
establish integrated or joint commands, the representative of the Ministry submitted as 
under: 
  
“When we created the Andaman and Nicobar Command, at that point of time we 
did not envisage that we will have these kinds of challenges. The command 
came into being and we saw these kinds of challenges coming over a period of 
time.  After learning lessons, it was decided that yes we need to empower the C-
in-C. The Andaman and Nicobar Command is an important Command. If the C-
in-C is not empowered, tomorrow he will not be able to exercise his command 
which may lead to dilution in Command & Control, which will create a problem. 
That is why in 2014 work on this Bill started. We have been looking at different 
ways of doing it. One is to do it through the issuance of Statutory Rules & Orders 
(SROs) which we promulgate and table in the Parliament. Now, SRO cannot 
override the Act. SRO only amplifies or uses or defines the provisions available 
in the Act for further clarification or implementation.  In this case, certain 
provisions which are given in the Service Acts are so strong that the SROs 
cannot withstand legal scrutiny. I will give you an example. In the Navy Act, if you 
go to Chapter III, Section VII of the Act, the wordings are very clear. Nothing in 
Sub-section (1) shall be deemed to authorise the exercise of powers of 
punishment by members of the regular Army or the Air Force over the members 
of the Indian Navy or the Indian Naval Reserve Force except as provided in 
clause (e) of sub-section (3) of Section 93. Now, the sub-section (e) of Section 
93 only permits limited actions to be exercised on the sailors, not the Naval 
officers. Initially, we thought हम इस पर एसआरओ इæयू कर दɅगे । Then we realised 
that the SRO cannot override the Act. Act is by the Parliament. That is why it was 
decided to take up the ISO Bill. Once we get this Bill passed, all these issues will 
get resolved. That is the first point. That is why we have come with this Bill.” 
 
15. Elaborating further on this issue it was stated as under: 
  
“…it is not targeted towards the Theatre Command. अगर ͬथएटर कमांड ने बनना है 
तो वह ǒबल नहȣं बना सकता। When the South-Western Army Command or the 

6 
 
Andaman and Nicobar Command was set up, this Bill was not there ….. ͩĐएशन 
का Ĥोसीजर ǒबãकु ल अलग है, वह इस ǒबल मɅ नहȣं है। जब कमांड बनेगी उसक े बाद देखा जाएगा 
ͩक Èया ये चीजɅ उस पर एÜलाई हɉगी, तब गैजेट नोǑटͩफक े शन होगा ͩक ISO Constitute ͩकया 
जाए । इस ǒबल मɅ पावस[ क े वल उसे आईएसओ ऑगȶनाइजेशन constitute करने कȧ है, लेͩकन 
ͩĐएशन कȧ पावर नहȣं है। ͩĐएशन कȧ पावस[ … ͧमǓनèĚȣ ऑफ फाइनɅस कȧ गाइडलाइÛस क े 
मुताǒबक हȣ होगा। इस ǒबल मɅ कोई भी ऐसा Ĥावधान नहȣं है ͩक कोई organisation को create 
ͩकया जाए । जैसे कमांड पहले बनती आई हɇ, वैसे हȣ बनɅगी।“ 
  
 16. The Committee learnt that Chapter I of the Bill pertains to the title and 
commencement of the Bill and contains various definitions. Clauses 1, 2 and 3 of the 
Bill read as under: 
  
“1. (1) This Act may be called the Inter-services Organisations (Command, 
Control and Discipline) Act, 2023. 
 (2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, 
by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint. 
  
2. The provisions of this Act shall apply to all persons who are subject to the 
Air Force Act, 1950, the Army Act, 1950 and the Navy Act, 1957, and to 
persons of such other forces as the Central Government may specify, by 
notification, under section 4, who are serving in or attached to an Inter-services 
Organisation. 
  
3.  (1)  in this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,— 
 
(a) "Air Officer" means any officer of the Air Force above the rank of group 
captain; 
 
(b) "Chief of Defence Staff" means an officer of the regular Army, or the 
Indian Navy, or the Air Force, as the case may be, appointed as such 
by the Central Government; 
 
(c) "Commander-in-Chief" means a General Officer of the regular Army, 
or a Flag Officer of the Indian Navy, or an Air Officer of the Air Force, 
appointed as Commander-in-Chief of a Joint Services Command, and 
in his absence, the officer on whom the command devolves; 
 
(d) "Commanding Officer" means the officer in actual command of the 
unit, ship or establishment and includes an officer appointed as such 
by the Commander-in-Chief or the Officer-in-Command, as the case 
may be, of an Inter-services Organisation; 
 
(e) "Flag Officer" means an officer of the rank of Admiral of the Fleet, 
Admiral, Vice-Admiral or Rear-Admiral; 
 
(f) "General Officer" means an officer of the regular Army above the rank 
of Brigadier; 
 

7 
 
(g) "Inter-services Organisation" means a body of troops including a Joint 
Services Command consisting of persons, subject to the Air Force Act, 
1950, the Army Act, 1950 and the Navy Act, 1957 or any two of the 
said Acts; 
 
(h) "notification" means a notification published in the Official Gazette; 
 
(i) "officer", in relation to an Inter-services Organisation, means an officer 
as defined in clause (xxiii) of section 4 of the Air Force Act, 1950, or 
clause (xviii) of section 3 of the Army Act, 1950, or clause (16) of 
section 3 of the Navy Act, 1957, as the case may be; 
 
(j) "Officer-in-Command" of an Inter-services Organisation means either 
a General Officer of the regular Army, or a Flag Officer of the Indian 
Navy, or an Air Officer of the Air Force, appointed as the Officer-in-
Command of an Inter-services Organisation, other than Joint Services 
Command, and in his absence, the officer on whom the command 
devolves; 
 
(k) "regulations" means the regulations made under the respective 
Service Acts; 
 
(l) "rules" means the rules made under this Act and under the respective 
Service Acts, as the case may be; 
 
(m) "Service Acts" means the Air Force Act, 1950, or the Army Act, 1950, 
or the Navy Act, 1957 or any two of the said Acts or all the said Acts; 
and 
 
(n) "service personnel" means persons who are subject to any of the 
Service Acts. 
 
(2) Words and expressions used herein and not defined but defined in the 
Air Force Act, 1950, or the Army Act, 1950, or the Navy Act, 1957 shall 
have the meanings, respectively, assigned to them under the said Acts.” 
  
17. While elaborating on the definitions provided in Chapter I of the Bill, a 
representative of the Ministry stated: 
  
“यह बड़ा ͧसàपल ǒबल है। चैÜटर-1 मɅ इसको पहले इंĚोɬयूस ͩकया गया है और बोला गया है ͩक 
कब यह एÛफोस[मɅट मɅ आएगा। उसक े बाद इसमɅ डेͩफǓनशन दȣ हुई है। जो डेͩफǓनशन हमारे 
सͪव[सेज एÈट मɅ दȣ हुई हɇ, वे हȣ इसमɅ दȣ हुई हɇ। एक-दो एÈèĚा हɇ, जैसे अब चीफ ऑफ ͫडफɅस 
èटाफ आ गए हɇ तो उनको include ͩकया है। अगर आप इसमɅ देखɅगे डेͩफǓनशन ͩकस Ĥकार से दȣ 
गयी है। जैसे ऑͩफसर कȧ डेͩफǓनशन तीनɉ एÈɪस मɅ ऑलरेडी हɇ, तो इसमɅ ͧलखा है – officer in 
relation to an inter services organisation means an officer defined in Clause 23 
of Section 4 of Air Force Act, 1950. इसका मतलब ͩक हम यहां इसको ͫडफाइÛड नहȣं कर 
रहे हɇ। हम बोल रहे हɇ ͩक जैसे यह Acts मɅ Ǒदया हुआ है, वैसे हȣ ISO Bill मɅ incorporate ͩकया 

8 
 
है। What I am trying to highlight here is that we do not want to amend anything of 
the Acts. उसी डेͩफǓनशन को हमने कàपाइल करके इसमɅ रख Ǒदया है, ताͩक वे जो एÈɪस हɇ, 
उनमɅ जो भी ͫडफाइÛड हɇ, वे पावस[ हेड of ISO क े पास आ जाएंगी। Then, you cannot say 
that as an officer of the Navy, I cannot be tried by any other officer other than 
the Navy. Èयɉͩक उन डेͩफǓनशÛस को हमने इसमɅ क ैÜचर करके डाल Ǒदया है। 
 
कई चीजɅ हमने ͫडफाइÛड कȧ हɇ, जैसे Officer in Command, Regulations, Rules, Service 
Acts, Service personnel etc. उसक े बाद इसमɅ एक और मह×वपूण[ चीज इसमɅ Ǒदया है ͩक 
words and expression used herein and not defined but defined in the Air Force 
Act, 1950 or the Army Act 1950 or the Navy Act, 1957, shall have the meanings 
respectively assigned to them under the said Acts. इसका मतलब ͩक हम एÈɪस को 
चɅज नहȣं कर रहे हɇ, पर उन पावस[ को Head of ISO को एनेबल करने क े ͧलए दे रहे हɇ।” 
  
  

9 
 
CHAPTER – II 
  
SPECIAL PROVISION FOR CERTAIN FORCES 
             
18. The Committee have found that Chapter II of the Bill pertains to special 
provisions for certain forces under Central Government. Clause 4 of the Bill on ‘Special 
provision for certain forces under Central Government’ reads as under: 
 
“4. (1) The Central Government may, by notification, specify any force or any 
part thereof, raised and maintained in India under the authority of the said 
Government, to which all or any of the provisions of this Act shall, with or 
without modifications, apply and accordingly all the officers referred to in clause 
(i) of sub-section (1) of section 3 shall be deemed to be officers within the 
meaning of the respective Acts relating to the said forces. 
 
(2) Upon issuance of a notification under sub-section (1), the authority to 
exercise all the disciplinary and administrative powers under the respective Acts 
governing such force or any part thereof including the powers conferred by 
warrants or commissions issued under such Acts governing that force or any 
part thereof, shall vest in the Commander-in-Chief or the Officer-in-Command, 
as the case may be, of the Inter-services Organisation. 
 
(3) Where any of the provisions of this Act applies to a force or any part thereof 
as referred to in sub-section (2), the Central Government may, by notification, 
direct that by what authority or which officer, the jurisdiction, powers or duties 
incidental to the operation of the provisions of this Act shall be exercised or 
performed in respect of that force or any part thereof.” 
  
19. During evidence, a representative of the Ministry elaborated on clause 4 of the 
Bill as under: 
  
“सर, चैÜटर-2 मɅ ͪवशेष Ĥावधान हɇ। The Central Government may notify any force or 
part thereof, under the authority of the Government to which all or any of the 
provisions of the Act shall, with or without modifications, apply. It is nothing 
new. यह आमȸ Act क े चैÜटर-2 क े सेÈशन-4 मɅ है। हमने उसको यहां एÊजैÈɪलȣ एÜलाई ͩकया 
है। हम इसमɅ कोई नया पावर नहȣं दे रहे हɇ। इसका मतलब यह होता है ͩक वॉर टाइम मɅ या 
precautionary ͧसचुएशÛस मɅ there are other forces which are working with the 
Armed Forces. जैसे अभी हमारȣ आईटȣबीपी है, बॉड[र पर बीएसएफ है। If the Central 
Government feels that you need to have a unified approach at that point of time, 
it by a notification, will decide that which organisation को ͩकतने टाइम क े ͧलए to be 
brought under this particular Act. आमȸ एÈट मɅ ऑलरेडी यह Ĥावधान है।  Notification 
यह भी ͫडफाइÛड करɅगे ͩक ͩकस चीज क े ͧलए उस organisation को Act मɅ लाया जा रहा है। It is 
not across the board that ͩक सब कुछ उनके ऊपर एÜलाई होगा, पर उÛहɅ यह बोला जाएगा 
ͩक इन पर Èया Ĥावधान एÜलाई होगा।” 
  

10 
 
20. The Committee desired to know that apart from the personnel of the Armed 
Forces serving in or attached to an Inter-Service Organisation, whether personnel of 
other Forces or agencies such as Coast Guard, ITBP, BSF, Assam Rifles, SSB etc. 
serving in or attached to an Inter-Service Organisation would fall within the ambit of the 
Bill. In this regard, the Ministry through a written note submitted as under: 
  
“Currently, personnel from the three Services serving in or attached to an Inter-
Service Organisation will fall under the ambit of the Bill.  However, Clause 4 of 
the Bill is an enabling provision, which empowers the Central Government to 
make applicable provision of this Bill, either partially or wholly, to any other 
force raised and maintained by Central Government by way of a 
Notification.  This is with an aim to meet any Military exigencies that may arise, 
where there is a requirement of placing other Forces for operation along with 
Army, Navy or Air Force.  Similar provision already exists in the Section IV, 
Chapter II of the Army Act 1950. The provision states that “The Central 
Government may, by notification, apply, with or without modifications, all or any 
of the provisions of this Act to any force raised and maintained in India under 
the authority of that Government and may by notification direct by what 
authority any jurisdiction, powers or duties incident to the operation to these 
provisions shall be exercised or performed in respect of the said force”. Thus, in 
the normal course, the provisions of the Bill will not apply to personnel of Forces 
other than three Services.” 
 
  
  
  

11 
 
CHAPTER III 
 
 CONSTITUTION OF INTER-SERVICES ORGANISATION AND ITS OFFICERS 
 
21. The Committee have learnt that Chapter III of the Bill contains provisions for the 
constitution of the Inter-Services Organisation(ISO) or Joint Services Command, the 
continuation of existing ISO and the Commander-in-Chief(C-in-C) or Officer-in- 
Command (Oi/C). Further, it defines the powers and duties of C-in-C or O-i-C of an ISO, 
superintendence of Central Government and power of the Central government to 
declare persons to be on active service. 
  
22. Clause 5 of the Bill reads as under: 
 
“(1) The Central Government may, by notification, constitute an Inter-services 
Organisation, which may include a Joint Services Command, comprising of 
units or service personnel who are subject to any of the Service Acts, as may 
be placed under the command of the Commander-in-Chief or, as the case may 
be, the Officer-in-Command. 
 
(2) The Central Government may, by an order published in the Official Gazette, 
direct that any power exercisable by the Commander-in-Chief or, as the case 
may be, the Officer-in-Command may also be exercisable by any other officer 
specially empowered in this behalf by the said Government.” 
 
23. While elaborating this clause, a representative of the Ministry of Defence 
submitted as under: 
 
“सर, मɇने क ंèटȣɪयूट क े बारे मɅ बता Ǒदया। The Bill provides the power to the 
Government to ‘constitute’ any establishment as ISO. जैसा मɇने पहले बताया ͩक बड़ी 
या छोटȣ ऑगȶनाइजेशÛस कȧ ¢मता को देखना पड़ेगा। This Bill is applicable to all the 
personnel either when appointed or deputed, posted or attached. हम टेàपोरैरȣ 
ɬयूटȣ मɅ कई बार जाते हɇ, उस समय पर भी यह एÜलाई होगा जब आप ISO क े कमांड एÖड 
क ंĚोल मɅ हɇ।” 
 
  
24. On being enquired whether the above clause empowered the Central 
Government to form a new ISO or joint service command, the representative of the 
Ministry submitted as under: 
 
“As you see, Sir, this Bill started in 2014 when we already had the existing 
commands.  Why this word ‘joint services command’ has come in here is 
because at that point of time the maximum issues which were raised of this 
nature were from the Andaman and Nicobar Command.  Secondly, in the 
Government of India, there is a very clear demarcation with respect to creation 
and Constitution.  As per the Ministry of Finance Office Memorandum, creation 
of any organisation or post is the mandate of the Ministry of Finance at certain 
level Cabinet; in case of Defence, it is the Cabinet Committee on 
Security.  There is no power vested with anybody else.  Creation is for bringing 

12 
 
into existence something new, whereas constitution is based on already existing 
organisation where they can empower or constitute powers.  Sir, this word has 
been incorporated by the MoLJ.  We had put a very simple word but from the 
legal point they thought that this is a more appropriate word.  But your concern 
is covered by the Office Memorandum of the Ministry of Finance which says 
that for creation of any post, the mandate rests with the Ministry of 
Finance.  Any post which comes up above the rank of two-star, that is the Joint 
Secretary and above, it again goes to Cabinet or the CCS.  What is given in the 
Bill is that whenever an organisation comes, we must define whether it is an 
ISO or not.  You are aware, Sir, there are so many organisations where we 
attach people from other services but these cannot be constituted as an 
ISO.  Like you have small wireless units.  These units generally have all three 
service components but it does not have the administrative heft to exercise all 
the disciplinary powers.  So, we cannot declare these as an ISO organisation. 
Because if you are calling it an ISO organisation it will not have adequate 
number of officers to sit in the Court Martial. Moreover, they will not have the 
knowledge to execute this kind of complex proceedings.  So, that is why, it was 
decided that we must define what is an ISO.  As of now, formally an ISO has 
not been defined anywhere.  This is the first time we are proposing to empower 
Central Government to, define it for the purpose of this Bill.” 
 
25. When asked whether the constitution of the Court Martial will be from respective 
services or a joint formation, the representative of the Ministry replied as under: 
 
“Sir, it will continue to single service. Today, when the Court Martial sits down, it 
has Judge Advocates who advise them.  The Judge Advocates are the ones 
from the three services, who will be advising the Court Martial on the provisions 
of the respective Service Acts.  The Judge Advocates will be the ones who will 
define and brief Members on what actions are to be taken as per the individual 
Service Act. “ 
  
26. The Committee enquired about the definition of ‘any other officer’ especially 
empowered by the Government as brought out in Clause 5(2) of the Bill. In this regard, 
the representative of the Ministry submitted as under: 
 
“Sir, in certain cases the Service Headquarter appoint a person to go in the 
Command of a particular ship or an organization.  In some cases, the C-in-C 
can appoint or give additional charge of a particular organization to a 
Commanding Officer.  This provision has been given for that. This provision 
also caters for the officiating Head on the power devolves in case of an 
eventuality. The control to empower an officer will vest with the Central 
Government.” 
 
  
  

13 
 
27. To a specific query whether an ISO can be headed by an officer apart from that 
of the three Services, the representative of the Ministry submitted as under: 
 
“Sir, as of now, the Inter-Service Organisation is defined as a body of troops 
who are governed either by the Army Act, 1950, Navy Act, 1957 or the Air Force 
Act, 1950. So, as of now, the command-and-control vests with them. As regards 
others, when they come in, it is only by the notification of the Government in 
certain specific conditions, which will be notified by the Central Government.” 
  
28. Clause 6 of the Bill on provision for continuation of existing ISO and C-in-C or O-
i-C reads as under: 
 
“(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act,— 
 
(a) the Inter-services Organisations constituted by the Central Government 
and functioning as such immediately before the date of commencement of 
this Act, shall be deemed to have been constituted under the provisions of 
this Act; and 
 
(b) the Commander-in-Chief or, as the case may be, the Officer-in-
Command of an Inter services Organisation, who has been appointed and 
functioning as such immediately before the date of commencement of this 
Act, shall be deemed to have been appointed under the provisions of this 
Act. 
 
(2) Nothing contained in this Act shall render invalid any action taken or acts 
performed, immediately before the commencement of this Act, by the Inter-
services Organisation, or by the Commander-in-Chief or by the Officer-in-
Command, as the case may be, of an Inter-services Organisation, while 
functioning as such under any law applicable at that time.” 
  
29. Clause 7 of the Bill on the Powers of Commander-in-Chief or Officer-in-
Command reads as under: 
 
 “(1) The Commander-in-Chief or, as the case may be, Officer-in-Command of 
an Inter-services Organisation, shall be the head of such Inter-services 
Organisation and shall exercise command and control over the personnel 
serving in or attached to that Inter-services Organisation, for the purpose of 
maintenance of discipline and proper discharge of their duties. 
 
(2) For the purposes of sub-section (1), the Commander-in-Chief or, as the case 
may be, the Officer-in-Command of an Inter-services Organisation shall be 
competent to exercise all the disciplinary and administrative powers vested in 
and exercised by— 
 
(a) the General Officer Commanding the Army; 
(b) the Flag Officer Commanding-in-Chief of a Naval Command; 
(c) the Air Officer Commanding-in-Chief of an Air Command; 
(d) any other officer or authority specified in the Service Acts or in the rules 
and regulations made there under, including the powers conferred by 

14 
 
warrants or commissions issued under the provisions of such Service 
Acts; and 
(e) any other officer or authority as may be specified in the notification 
issued under section 4.” 
  
30. Clause 8 of the Bill on Commanding Officer reads as under: 
  
“The Commanding Officer of an Inter-services Organisation shall, in addition to 
having command over any unit, ship or establishment, also perform such duties 
as may be assigned to him in respect of such Inter-services Organisation by its 
Commander-in-Chief or, as the case may be, the Officer-in-Command and shall 
be empowered to initiate all disciplinary or administrative actions over the 
personnel appointed, deputed, posted or attached to that Inter-services 
Organisation.” 
  
31. When enquired about the rank of the C-in-C in an ISO, a representative of the 
Ministry submitted during evidence as under: 
 
“कमांडर इन चीफ जैसे जीओसीएनसी होते हɇ, Ġी èटार होते हɇ। They are of the rank of 
Secretary.  अफसर इन कमांड टू èटार भी हो सकते हɇ, जैसे जीओसी होता है, Fleet कमांडर 
होते हɇ। It is important because at sea, if an incident happens or there is a war 
situation, the Fleet Commander has the powers to exercise suitable disciplinary 
action.” 
  
32. The Committee, through a written submission of the Ministry submitted, have 
learnt that the Commander-in-Chief and Officer-in-Command of Inter-Services 
Organisations will function under the administrative authority as provided in the Service 
Acts, rule/regulation to which such officer is subject to. 
 
33. When queried about the confirming authorities of the punishment meted out to 
ISO personnel, the representative of the Ministry replied as under: 
 
“Sir, that has been defined in this Bill.  These powers will be vested with the 
Head of the ISO.  Like in the case of other three services, C-in-C (Commander 
in Chief) has the powers to convene or approve the proceedings.  Those 
powers will also be vested with the C-in-C of the ISO.” 
 
34. To a specific query regarding average time for conclusion of the proceedings 
against any personnel, the representative of the Ministry replied as under: 
 
“…we cannot give a fix time for a particular action. It depends on the intensity of 
the offence or the number of people involved or so on. It is like any legal 
proceeding.  Even now for a single service some Court Martial finish early; and 
some take a longer time. In some cases, summary punishments are given, 
which are much faster. In law, full procedure has to be followed.” 
 
35. The Committee desired to know whether enactment of the Bill will ensure that 
duration of finalization of disciplinary proceedings against a personnel serving or 

15 
 
attached in Inter-Services Organisations is significantly reduced. In this regard through 
a written reply, the Ministry submitted as under: 
 
“Presently as and when a disciplinary action is directed against a service 
person, serving in an Inter-Services Organisation, he/she is attached /reverted 
back to the parent service for further disciplinary proceedings. This entails move 
of the delinquent persons, as well as the witnesses in the case.  The entire 
process requires authorization / action by different service HQs, which entails 
time penalty leading to delay in finalization of the case.  Therefore, the Bill will 
go a long way in not only saving time but also reducing the expenditure from the 
government exchequer, as expenditure needs to be undertaken to move these 
personnel and documents.  Further the accused and witnesses would not be 
available at their parent unit to perform their duties, causing loss of precious 
man hours. The instant Bill overcomes these shortcomings/challenges.” 
 
36. When asked about the position of the officer against whom the administrative or 
disciplinary proceedings have been initiated under the Bill, the representative of the 
MoD submitted as under: 
 
“आपने बोला ͩक - will he remain attached, The answer is Yes. This is the most 
important thing. Otherwise, आज हम इस जगह पर हɇ। तीन अलग सͪव[सेज क े लोग हɇ, जो 
तीन अलग-अलग जगहɉ पर जाएंगे। तीन अलग-अलग कोɪ[स मɅ उनको adjudicate ͩकया 
जाएगा। हो सकता है ͩक उनकȧ finding or punishment भी ͫडफरɅट हो। सेम ऑफɅस क े ͧलए 
आपने तीन अलग लोगɉ को तीन अलग तरह कȧ पǓनशमɅट भी दȣ जा सकती है । इस Bill क े बाद 
वह वहȣं अटैच रहेगा। So, only one body will carry out all the proceedings.” 
 
 37. The Committee further found that Clause 9 pertains to superintendence of 
Central Government.  It states: 
 
 “The superintendence of the Inter-services Organisation shall vest in the 
Central Government, which shall have the power to issue directions to each of 
such organisations, on any matters concerning national security or general 
administration, if it considers necessary and expedient so to do in the public 
interest”.  
 
38. The Clause 10 of the Bill relates to the power to declare persons to be on active 
service and reads as under: 
 
“10. Notwithstanding anything contained in the Service Acts, the Central 
Government may, by notification, declare that any service personnel or class of 
service personnel to whom the Service Acts apply shall, with reference to any 
Inter-services Organisation in which he or they may be serving in or attached to 
or with reference to any provision of this Act, be deemed to be on active service 
within the meaning of this Act and the Service Acts.” 
  
  

16 
 
CHAPTER – IV 
 
MISCELLANEOUS 
 
39. Chapter IV of the Bill pertains to provisions regarding the power of the Central 
Government to make rules, the overriding effect of the Act, protection of action taken in 
good faith, the power of the Central Government to remove difficulties in giving effect to 
the Act and laying of rules before Parliament. 
  
40. Clause 11 of the Bill states: 
 
“The Central Government may make rules for the purposes of carrying out the 
provisions of this Act”. 
  
41. Clause 12 of the Bill reads as under: 
 
 “The provisions of this Act shall have effect notwithstanding anything 
inconsistent therewith contained in any other law for the time being in force or in 
any instrument having effect by virtue of any law other than this Act.” 
 
42.    During deliberations, a representative of the Ministry clarified the overriding effect 
of the Bill as under: 
 
“सर, नए िजतने भी ǒबल हɇ, जैसे आàड[ फोसȶज ǑĚÞयूनल एÈट आया है, RTI एÈट आया है, 
these all have an overriding effect over anything inconsistent which the content of 
any other law. सर, इसमɅ हमने कोͧशश कȧ है ͩक एÈट क े जो सɅͧसǑटव इæयूज हɇ, उसे हम इसमɅ 
क ैÜचर कर लɅ, पर कई चीजɅ अगर रह जाती हɇ, they can be challenged in the court of law. 
They may not be able to withstand the scrutiny of law. That is why, we have 
made this provision of overriding so that this Bill, even if there is a difference, will 
override over other Acts. We are not diluting the Acts, but the idea is that we must 
strengthen an ISO. इसͧलए यह Ĥोͪवजन Ǒदया है। आजकल यह Ĥावधान सभी एÈट मɅ है, 
आरटȣआई एÈट मɅ है, आàड[ फोसȶज ǑĚÞयूनल एÈट मɅ भी हɇ।” 
 
43.    When asked about the impact the Bill would have on the officers who wish to 
approach the Armed Forces Tribunal subsequent to the disciplinary/administrative 
action having been pronounced by the Commander-in-Chief and Officer-in-Command of 
Inter-Services Organisation, the Ministry submitted that the Bill will not in any way 
adversely impact the rights of Armed Forces personnel to approach Armed Forces 
Tribunal. 
  
44. Clause 13 which is reproduced below reads as under: 
 
“13. No suit, prosecution or any other legal proceeding shall lie against any 
person for anything which is in good faith done or intended to be done under 
this Act. 
 
45. Clause 14 is in regard to power to remove difficulties in giving effect to the 
provisions of this Act and states:  

17 
 
 
“14. (1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the 
Central Government may, by order published in the Official Gazette, make such 
provisions not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, as may appear to be 
necessary for removing the difficulty: 
 
Provided that no such order shall be made under this section after the expiry of 
a period of three years from the commencement of this Act. 
 
(2) Every order made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after it 
is made, before each House of Parliament.” 
 
46. Clause 15 of the Bill reads as under: 
 
 “Every rule made by the Central Government under this Act shall be laid, as 
soon as may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in 
session, for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session 
or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session 
immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both 
Houses agree in making any modification in such rule or both Houses agree 
that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in 
such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that 
any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of 
anything previously done under that rule.” 
  
47. On the question of laying of rules before the Parliament, a representative of the 
Ministry submitted: 
 
“In Part II, there is a provision which says that the Central Government has the 
power of making rules. However, these rules have to be tabled in the 
Parliament, as soon as possible, when the Parliament is in Session, for total 
period of 30 days.” 
  
48.    When queried on the role of Judge Advocate General in implementing the new 
legislation, the Ministry in a written submission provided as under:  
 
“The Judge Advocate General of each service will continue to perform their role 
as prescribed in the respective Service Acts. The Officers of Judge Advocate 
General Branch shall continue to render their advice to Commander-in-Chief or 
the Officer-in-Command of such Inter-services Organisations. The cases 
wherein disciplinary and administrative action has been initiated/finalized 
against a person will be processed subject to their respective Service Act.” 
 
  
  
  

18 
 
PART II 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS 
 
        The Committee note that currently, personnel of the Indian Army, Navy and 
Air Force are governed in accordance with the provisions contained in their 
specific Service Acts, namely; the Army Act 1950, Navy Act 1957, Air Force Act 
1950. The Committee also note that when these Acts were enacted, most of the 
service organisations were largely comprised of personnel from a single service 
i.e. either Army, Navy or Air Force.  
 
However, presently there exists several Inter-Services Organisations such 
as Andaman & Nicobar Command, Strategic Forces Command, Defence Space 
Agency etc. and joint training establishments like the National Defence Academy, 
and National Defence College, where personnel of the Armed Forces and other 
forces serve together. Nevertheless, inspite of the fact that several inter services 
organizations are fully operational,  the Commander-in-Chief or Officer-in-
Command of the Inter-Services Organisations are hitherto not empowered to 
exercise disciplinary/administrative powers over the personnel belonging to other 
services. The fact remains that the officers of the respective services are 
empowered to exercise disciplinary powers over the service personnel under the 
respective Service Acts only. Hence, the personnel serving in these 
Organisations need to be reverted to their parent Service units for undergoing 
any disciplinary or administrative action. 
 
  

19 
 
2. The Committee have been given to understand that certain challenges 
pertaining to disciplinary and administrative actions on service personnel posted 
in Inter-services organizations /establishments are being encountered by the 
Ministry of Defence. These challenges emerge from the fact that the personnel 
serving in such Organisations need to be reverted to their parent Service units for 
any disciplinary or administrative action instituted against them. This entails the 
movement of the delinquent persons, as well as the witnesses in the case to their 
respective Commands/Headquarters.  The entire process requires authorization/ 
action by different Service Headquarters, leading to delay in the finalization of the 
case, thereby affecting the speedy dispensation of justice and administering of 
discipline.  Further, the accused would stand detached from their regular duties 
which would result in causing loss of precious man hours.  
 
3. The Committee further learn that different methods of meeting the 
challenges in expeditious disposal of disciplinary and administrative cases and 
maintaining the strict standards of discipline in Inter-services organizations/ 
establishments were explored by the Ministry of Defence. One such method 
devised was through the issuance of Statutory Rules & Orders (SROs). However, 
as admitted by the representative of the Ministry of Defence during oral evidence, 
SROs could not withstand legal scrutiny. Therefore, the Ministry went ahead with 
the idea of bringing the Inter-services Organisations (Command, Control & 
Discipline) Bill. The process of drafting the bill was initiated as early as in 2014 
which included a team of experts comprising Judge Advocate Generals from the 
three Armed Forces and other stakeholders. During oral evidence of the 
representatives of the Ministry of Defence on the Bill, it was submitted that 
certain eminent advocates working in the Armed Forces Tribunal and Supreme 

20 
 
Court were also consulted in the process. The language of the bill has been 
drafted mostly by the Ministry of Law & Justice based on the recommendations of 
the Ministry of Defence. 
 
4. Keeping in view the above chronology of the events resulting in the 
proposal of the Bill and its rationale, the Committee appreciate the larger 
objective and the spirit of the proposed legislation; which is, chiefly, to empower 
the Heads of the Inter-services Organisations to exercise effective command, 
control and discipline on all personnel of Air Force, Army and Navy and to 
persons of other forces as notified by the Central Government, who are serving in 
or attached to an Inter-services Organisation, without amending the respective 
Acts. The Committee further note that apart from disciplinary powers, the Bill also 
has provisions for granting administrative powers to heads of ISOs to improve 
efficiency in the organisations. These administrative powers include the power to 
issue censure, deduction from pay and allowances of personnel, recovery of pay 
and allowances, grant of maintenance under the Army Act, 1950 etc. The 
Committee have every reason to believe that enactment of the Bill will have 
various tangible benefits such as maintenance of effective discipline and 
efficiency in Inter-services establishments by the Heads of Inter-Services 
Organisations, abolition of the system of reverting personnel under disciplinary 
proceedings to their parent Service units, expeditious disposal of cases of 
misdemeanor or indiscipline, saving of Government expenses and time by 
avoiding multiple proceedings. The Committee, therefore, in no uncertain words 
acquiesce with the proposed legislation in totality. 
 
5. The Committee learn that for the purpose of the Bill, an ISO will have to be 
‘constituted’/notified/declared based on the capability of the organization to 

21 
 
execute requisite disciplinary powers. For instance, the Andaman and Nicobar 
Command, the Tri-Services Theatre command of the Indian Armed Forces, is still 
not ‘constituted’/notified as an ISO for the purpose of the Bill. The Central 
Government, after enactment of the Bill, has the power to ‘constitute’ an 
organization/unit/establishment as ISO depending on the wherewithal of the 
organization/unit/establishment to execute the mandate of the Bill. In this regard, 
the Committee are of the considered view that enactment of the Bill will herald 
greater integration and joint manship in Inter-services Organisations/ 
establishments.  
  
6. The Committee find that the Bill in Clause 4 provides that the Central 
Government may notify any force or part thereof, under the authority of the 
Government to which all or any of the provisions of the Act shall, with or without 
modifications, apply. The Committee understand that this provision has been 
given in the Bill with an aim to meet any military exigencies that may arise, where 
there is a requirement of placing other Forces for operation along with the Army, 
Navy or Air Force; as in the normal course, the provisions of the Bill will not 
apply to personnel of Forces, other than three Services, serving in or attached to 
an ISO. In this regard, the Committee recommend that consequent to the 
enactment of this Act, the requisite notification may be issued by the Government 
at the earliest.   
7. On a related matter and on a specific query regarding the time taken for 
conclusion of the proceedings in any case, the Committee were informed that a 
fixed time cannot be indicated and the  time consumed depends on intensity of 
the offence and the number of people involved etc.  The Committee in this regard, 
unequivocally recommend that consequent to the passing of this Bill, ways and 

22 
 
means be devised for the expeditious completion of the proceedings in all the  
cases coming before the Heads of the ISO,  then only the intent of the provisions 
of the Bill would pragmatically be achieved.   
 
8. In summation, the Committee, while agreeing with the provisions of the 
Bill, in no uncertain words recommend that the Bill without any amendments be 
passed, enacted as a statute and the Committee’s observations/recommendation 
be considered.   
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
New Delhi; JUAL ORAM 
20 July, 2023 Chairperson 
29 Ashadha, 1945 (Saka) Standing Committee on Defence 
 
  

23 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE (2022-23) 
 
MINUTES OF THE NINTH SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE  
(2022-23) 
 
The Committee sat on Monday, the 29th May, 2023 from 1500 hrs to 1630 hrs in 
Committee Room ‘B’, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
SHRI JUAL ORAM    -   CHAIRPERSON 
    MEMBERS 
 LOK SABHA  
 
1. Smt. Suman Arora - Joint Secretary  
2. Dr. Sanjeev Sharma - Director 
3. Shri Rahul Singh - Deputy Secretary  
 
  
2. Shri  Annasaheb Shankar Jolle  
3. Shri Durai Murugan Kathir Anand 
4. Kunwar Danish Ali 
5. Shri Reddeppa Nallakonda Gari 
6. Shri Uttam Kumar Reddy Nalamada 
7. Dr. Shrikant Eknath Shinde 
8. Shri Brijendra Singh 
9. Shri  Mahabali Singh 
10. Shri Durga Das Uikey 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
11. Dr. Ashok Bajpai 
12. Shri Prem Chand Gupta  
13. Shri Sushil Kumar Gupta 
14. Dr. Sudhanshu Trivedi 
15. Smt. P.T. Usha 
16. Shri G.K. Vasan 
17. Lt. Gen. (Dr.) D. P. Vats (Retd.) 
18. Shri K.C. Venugopal 
SECRETARIAT 

24 
 
 
LIST OF WITNESS 
MINISTRY OF DEFENCE  
S. No.        Name & Designation 
1.  Lt. Gen. J.P. Mathew, Chief of Integrated Defence Staff to the Chairman, 
Chiefs of Staff Committee (CISC) 
2.   Rear Admiral Kapil Mohan Dhir, Senior Advisor 
3.   Maj Gen. Vijay Kumar, Judge Advocate General {JAG (Army)} 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members to the sitting of the Committee 
convened to have briefing by the representatives of the Ministry of Defence on ‘The Inter-
Services Organisations (Command, Control and Discipline) Bill, 2023’, which was introduced in 
Lok Sabha on 15th March, 2023 and referred to the Committee on 24th April, 2023 for 
examination and report by the last day of the first week of the next session. The Committee also 
expressed their deep sense of grief at the sad demise of Shri Rattan Lal Kataria, a Member of 
Lok Sabha and a member of the Committee. They placed on record their sincere appreciation of 
the valuable contribution of Shri Rattan Lal Kataria in the multitude of responsibilities borne by 
him towards the Committee and the Country. 
3. The Chairperson, before the commencement of the Sitting, with the indulgence of the 
Committee directed that the briefing may be treated as oral evidence of the representatives of 
the Ministry of Defence keeping in view that preparation and presentation of the Report on the 
aforesaid Bill is a time-bound exercise, precisely by the last day of the first week of the next 
session . If required, further oral evidence(s) would be held consequent to examination of the 
written replies furnished by the Ministry of Defence. 
4. Thereafter, the Chairperson welcomed the representatives of the Ministry of Defence 
and drew their attention to Directions 55(1) and 58 of the Directions by the Speaker, Lok Sabha 
regarding confidentiality of the proceedings of the Committee. 
5. The representatives of the Ministry of Defence, through a Power Point Presentation, 
briefed the Committee on the Subject. Thereafter, the Chairperson and Members of the 
Committee raised several issues/points, as indicated below and sought clarifications 
/information from the representatives of the Ministry of Defence thereon: 
i. Seeking views/opinions/suggestions of the stakeholders regarding the Bill; 
 
ii. Statement of Objects and Reasons of the Bill; 
 
iii. Feasibility of implementing Uniform Military Code for the Armed Forces; 
 
iv. Criteria of an Organisation/Unit for qualifying as an Inter-services 
Organisation (ISO);  
 
v. Clause in the Statement of Objects and Reasons regarding empowerment of ‘the 
Commander-in-Chief, Officer-in-Command or any other officer, specially 
empowered in this behalf by the Central Government, with all the disciplinary and 
administrative powers in respect of personnel serving in or attached to their Inter-

25 
 
services Organisations, irrespective of the Service to which they belong, for the 
maintenance of discipline and proper discharge of their duties’ ;  
 
vi. Rank of the Commander-in-Chief in an ISO;  
 
vii. Clause in the Statement of Objects and Reasons regarding empowering the 
Central Government to constitute ISO by notification, which may include a Joint 
Services Command; and  
 
viii. Average time for conclusion of disciplinary/administrative proceedings against an 
officer in ISO and posting/attachment of the Officer while undergoing the 
proceedings. 
 
6. The representatives of the Ministry of the Defence responded to the queries raised by 
the Members. The Chairperson directed the representatives of the Ministry to furnish written 
replies/information on the points raised by the Members which were not readily available at the 
earliest. 
7. The Chairperson also asked the Members to provide their 
inputs/suggestions/recommendations regarding the bill under examination to the Secretariat, in 
writing or through mail, within three days. 
 
The witnesses then withdrew. 
The Committee then adjourned. 
 
8.  A copy of verbatim record of the proceedings has been kept. 
  

26 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE (2022-23) 
 
MINUTES OF THE TENTH SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE 
(2022-23) 
 
The Committee sat on Thursday, the 20th July, 2023 from 930 hrs to 1015 hrs in 
Committee Room ‘B’, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
 
PRESENT 
 
SHRI JUAL ORAM    -   CHAIRPERSON 
    MEMBERS 
 
 LOK SABHA  
 
 SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Dr. Sanjeev Sharma - Joint Secretary  
2. Shri Tirthankar Das - Director 
3. Shri Rahul Singh - Deputy Secretary  
2. Shri  Annasaheb Shankar Jolle 
3. Shri Suresh Kumar Kashyap 
4. Prof. (Dr.) Ram Shankar Katheria  
5. Shri Durai Murugan Kathir Anand  
6. Kunwar Danish Ali  
7. Dr. (Smt.) Rajashree Mallick  
8. Shri Uttam Kumar Reddy Nalamada  
9. Shri Jugal Kishore Sharma 
10. Dr. Shrikant Eknath Shinde  
11. Shri Prathap Simha  
12. Shri Durga Das Uikey  
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
13. Dr. Ashok Bajpai  
14. Shri Sushil Kumar Gupta 
15. Shri Kamakhya Prasad Tasa  
16. Dr. Sudhanshu Trivedi 
17. Smt. P.T. Usha 
18. Shri G.K. Vasan 
19. Lt. Gen. (Dr.) D. P. Vats (Retd.) 

27 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members to the sitting of the Committee 
convened to have consideration and adoption of the draft Report of the Committee on the ‘Inter-
Services Organisations (Command, Control & Discipline) Bill, 2023’.  
 
3. The Committee then took up for consideration the draft Report on the ‘Inter-Services 
Organisations (Command, Control & Discipline) Bill, 2023’. A suggestion was given regarding a 
recommendation pertaining to Tri-Service/Theater Commands. After deliberations, the 
Committee adopted the Report without any modifications.  The Committee authorized the 
Chairperson to finalise the above draft Report and present the same to the House. 
 
4. ****Does not pertain to the Report***** 
 
5. ****Does not pertain to the Report***** 
 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
 

28 
 
 
  


29 
 
 
 
  

30 
 
 
 
  

31 
 
 
 
  

32 
 
 
 
  

33 
 
 
 
  

34 
 
 
 
  

35 
 
 
 
  

36 
 
 
 
  

37 
 
 
 
 