 
41 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE
 
[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations 
contained in the Thirty
on Defence  on the subject ‘Assessment of Welfare Measures available to war 
widows/Families in Armed Forces’
 
August, 2023 / Sravana 1945 (Saka)
 
i 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE
(2022-23) 
 
 
(SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
MINISTRY OF DEFENCE 
 
 
Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations 
contained in the Thirty-first Report (17th Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee 
on the subject ‘Assessment of Welfare Measures available to war 
widows/Families in Armed Forces’] 
 
FORTY-FIRST REPORT 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
 
August, 2023 / Sravana 1945 (Saka) 
 
  
STANDING COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on the subject ‘Assessment of Welfare Measures available to war 

 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE
 
 
 
[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations 
contained in the Thirty
on Defence  on the subject ‘Assessment of Welfare Measures available to war 
widows/Families in Armed Forces
 
 
Presented
 
August, 2023 / Sravana 1945 (Saka)
 
ii 
FORTY-FIRST REPORT 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE 
(2022-23) 
(SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
MINISTRY OF DEFENCE 
Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations 
contained in the Thirty-first Report (17th Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee 
on the subject ‘Assessment of Welfare Measures available to war 
widows/Families in Armed Forces’] 
Presented to Lok Sabha on  10.08.2023 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 10.08.2023 
 
 
 
  
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
August, 2023 / Sravana 1945 (Saka) 
 
  
Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on the subject ‘Assessment of Welfare Measures available to war 

iii 
 
CONTENTS 
            
Page No. 
 
Chapter I Report  
 
1 
Chapter II  Observations/ Recommendations which have been accepted 
by the Government 
 
8 
Chapter III Observations/ Recommendations which the Committee do 
not desire to pursue in view of the Government’s replies 
 
23 
Chapter IV Observations/ Recommendations in respect of which replies 
of Government have not been accepted by the Committee 
and which require reiteration and to be commented upon 
 
25 
Chapter V Observations/Recommendations in respect of which 
Government have furnished interim replies/replies awaited 
 
26 
 
APPENDICES 
 
 
I MINUTES OF THE SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE 
ON DEFENCE (2022-23) HELD ON 09.08.2023. 
 
27 
II ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT  ON 
THE OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED  IN 
THE THIRTY-FIRST REPORT (17TH LOK SABHA) OF THE  
STANDING COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE  ON THE SUBJECT  
‘ASSESSMENT OF WELFARE MEASURES AVAILABLE TO  
WAR WIDOWS/FAMILIES IN ARMED FORCES’ 
 
29 
III ANNEXURE- I AND II OF THE RECOMMENDATION NO. 4 
 
30 
 
  

iv 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE (2022-23)  
 
SHRI JUAL ORAM  -  CHAIRPERSON 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NOTE:-  Two seats vacant in Lok Sabha. 
  @ Nominated w.e.f  08.12.2022. 
     Nominated w.e.f 16.11.2022. 
$ Shri Rahul Gandhi ceased to be a Member of the Committee consequent upon his  
disqualification from Membership of Lok Sabha vide LSS Notification 
No.21/4(3)/2023/TO(B) dated 24/03/2023; and disqualification ceased to be operate 
vide Lok Sabha Secretariat Notification No. 21/4(9/2023/TO(B), dated 7 August, 2023. 
^ Sad demise of Shri Rattan Lal Kataria on 18/05/2023 notified vide Lok Sabha Secretariat 
Notification No. 21/4(7)/2023/TO (B) dated 22 May, 2023.  
Lok Sabha 
2. Shri Nitesh Ganga Deb 
3. Shri Devaragunda Venkappa Sadananda Gowda 
4. Shri Annasaheb Shankar Jolle  
5. Choudhary Mehboob Ali Kaiser 
6. Shri Suresh Kumar Kashyap 
7. Prof. (Dr.) Ram Shankar Katheria  
8. Shri Durai Murugan Kathir Anand@ 
9. Kunwar Danish Ali 
10. Dr. Rajashree Mallick  
11. Shri Reddeppa Nallakonda Gari* 
12. Shri Uttam Kumar Reddy Nalamada 
13. Shri Anumula Revanth Reddy  
14. Shri Jugal Kishore Sharma  
15. Dr. Shrikant Eknath Shinde  
16. Shri Prathap Simha  
17. Shri Brijendra Singh  
18. Shri Mahabali Singh  
19. Shri Durga Das Uikey 
 Vacant$ 
 Vacant^ 
Rajya Sabha 
20. Dr. Ashok Bajpai 
21. Shri Prem Chand Gupta  
22. Shri Sushil Kumar Gupta 
23. Shri Venkataramana Rao Mopidevi 
24. Shri Kamakhya Prasad Tasa  
25. Dr. Sudhanshu Trivedi  
26. Smt. P.T. Usha 
27. Shri G.K. Vasan 
28. Lt. Gen. (Dr.) D. P. Vats (Retd.) 
29. Shri K.C. Venugopal 

v 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Dr. Sanjeev Sharma  - Joint Secretary  
2. Shri Tirthankar Das  - Director 
3. Shri Rahul Singh  - Deputy Secretary  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  

vi 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
I, the Chairperson of the Standing Committee on Defence (2022-23), having 
been authorized by the Committee, present this Forty-first Report of the Committee on 
Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations contained in 
the Thirty-first Report (17th Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on Defence  on the 
subject ‘Assessment of Welfare Measures available to war widows/Families in Armed 
Forces’.  
2.  The Thirty-first Report (17th Lok Sabha) was presented to the Lok Sabha and laid 
in Rajya Sabha on 15 December, 2022. The Report contained 22 Observations/ 
Recommendations. The Ministry of Defence furnished Action Taken Replies on all the 
Observations/Recommendations in March 2023. 
3.  The Report was adopted at the Sitting held on 09 August 2023. 
4.  For facility of reference and convenience, Observations/Recommendations of the 
Committee have been printed in bold letters in the Report.  
5. An analysis of Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/ 
Recommendations contained in the Thirty-first Report (17th Lok Sabha) of the Standing 
Committee on Defence is given in Appendix II. 
 
 
 
New Delhi; JUAL ORAM 
…. August, 2023 Chairperson 
…  Sravana, 1945 (Saka)   Standing Committee on Defence 
 
 

1 
 
REPORT 
 
CHAPTER I 
This Report of the Standing Committee on Defence deals with Action Taken by 
the Government on the observations/recommendations contained in the Thirty-First 
Report (17th Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on Defence  on the subject 
‘Assessment of Welfare Measures available to war widows/Families in Armed Forces’, 
which was presented to Lok Sabha and laid in Rajya Sabha on 15.12.2022 
 
 2.        The Thirty-First Report (17th Lok Sabha) of the Committee contained 22 
observations/ recommendations on the following aspects:- 
 Para No. Subject 
1  Structural Reforms 
2 Maintenance of database 
3-4 Ex-gratia Fund 
5 Uniformity in ex-gratia funds among States 
6-7 Welfare Measures Delivery at the State/District level 
8-14 Employment/Re-settlement 
15-19 Medical and Educational Facilities 
20 Pension 
21 Awareness Generation and Grievance redressal 
22 Recognition of Martyrs and their families 
 
 3.        Action Taken Replies have been received from the Government in respect of all 
the 22 observations/recommendations contained in the Report on Thirty-First Report 
(17th Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on Defence  on the subject ‘Assessment of 
Welfare Measures available to war widows/Families in Armed Forces’. The replies have 
been examined and categorized as follows:- 
(i)        Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the 
Government (Chapter II): 
                      Para Nos.     1,2,3,4,5,6,7,8,9,10,12,13,14,15,18,19,20,21 and 22 
              (Total - 19) 
(ii)        Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to 
pursue in view of the replies received from the Government (Chapter III): 
                        Para Nos. 11,16,17 
(Total - 03) 

2 
 
 (iii)      Observations/Recommendations in respect of which reply of Government 
has not been accepted by the Committee (Chapter IV): 
 Para Nos.    -Nil- 
(Total - 00) 
(iv)      Observations/recommendations in respect of which final replies of the 
Government are still awaited (Chapter V) 
Para Nos.    -Nil- 
                                                      (Total - Nil) 
4.        The Committee desire that final Action Taken Notes in respect of comments 
contained in Chapter I should be furnished to them at the earliest and in any case, not 
later than six months of the presentation of this Report. 
 
5.        The Committee will now deal with the action taken by the Government on some 
of the observations/recommendations made in the Thirty-First Report of the Committee 
in the succeeding Paragraphs.  
 A.       Maintenance of database 
Recommendation (Para No. 2) 
6.        The Committee had recommended as under: 
“The Committee note that statistical data on number of veer-naris and Next of 
Kins (NoKs) and the amount of grant been given to them under various schemes 
is analysed on regular basis to assess the impact of all the schemes run by the 
MoD, DESW, various Service Headquarters and its attached offices.  However, 
the Committee find that State/UT wise break-up data for veer-nari was not 
available with Ministry of Defence, although, a figure of 15021 representing total 
number if veer-nari in the country was furnished to them.  The Committee are of 
the opinion that accurate estimation of number of beneficiaries and regular 
updation of database would facilitate proper implementation of schemes and the 
attainment of desired objectives.  For instance, if a member ceases to be eligible 
for grant/benefit the name should be removed from the list.  The committee 
recommend that a comprehensive state-wise data for veer-nari and also NoKs 
should be maintained. It goes without saying that the technologies/ tools 
available in the Govt Organisation can be used for maintaining and updating the 
data without any discrepancies.” 
  
7.        The Ministry in its action taken reply has stated as under: 

3 
 
“The process of preparing a comprehensive data State/UT wise regarding details 
of war widows/ Battle Causalities in coordination with the service headquarters 
and Rajya Sainik Boards/Zila Sainik Boards is being done by Kendriya Sainik 
Board.  CGDA is also being directed to maintain required information for all 
pensioners including Veer Naris & NoK.  The  database of Veer Naris/ NoKs is 
shared with ZSBs so that it could provide necessary support/ benefits to the Veer 
Naris/ NoKs. The State wise breakup of details of 11,471 Veer Naris as available 
is attached at Appendix ‘A’.”  
 
8.        The Committee are happy to note that the process of preparing a 
comprehensive data State/UT wise regarding details of war widows/ Battle 
Causalities in coordination with the service headquarters and Rajya Sainik 
Boards/Zila Sainik Boards is being done by Kendriya Sainik Board in consonance 
with the recommendation of the Committee. In this regard, the Committee desire 
that Controller General of Defence Accounts (CGDA), which has been entrusted 
with the task of maintaining required information for all pensioners including 
Veer Naris & NoK (Next of Kin), should work in coordination with all the above-
mentioned entities for the updation of their records so that Veer Naris/ NoKs are 
identified  and help in availing all Central and State Schemes including Grants 
made by the Ministry of Defence. The Committee also desire that the existing 
State-wise data (prepared as on 30-06-2022) to be updated at the earliest and the 
Committee be informed of the same within one month of the presentation of this 
report. 
B.  Welfare Measures Delivery at the State/District level 
(Recommendation Nos. 6 and & 7) 
  
9.        The Committee had recommended as under: 
  
            “The Committee note that Kendriya Sainik Board is headed by Hon’ble 
Raksha Mantri and comprising of the Chief Ministers, Administrators of Union 
Territories as its members, is a high level board specially created to look into the 
issue of ESM/dependents.  Presently there are 33 Rajya Sainik Boards (RSBs) 
and 403 Zila Sainik Board (ZSBs) to look after the well beings of 
ESM/Dependents.  Further, the Committee note that during last 10 years, 
number of ZSBs have increased from 220 to 403.  This was primarily based on 
number of ESM and families of serving/deceased service personnel in that 

4 
 
area.  The Committee were apprised that a new ZSB can be set up by concerned 
State Government themselves if the population of ESM and families of serving/ 
deceased service personnel is above 7500. The Committee are of considered 
opinion that role of Central Govt in welfare of NoKs and veer-naris has to be 
pivotal and it cannot be left to the State machinery. Therefore, meetings of all 
central boards should be held frequently and at regular intervals so as to have 
effective monitoring of functioning of state/district Boards.” 
  
10.      The Ministry in its action taken reply has stated as under: 
             
“The next  meeting of the Kendriya Sainik Board (KSB)  is scheduled to be 
held  on 11th April, 2023 at Vigyan Bhawan, New Delhi. In future also, efforts will 
be made for regular KSB meeting.” 
11.      The Committee had recommended as under: 
  
            “The Committee observe that besides setting up a ZSB, it is also very 
important that ZSB is accessible to beneficiaries coming under its 
jurisdiction.  Specifically with regard to veer nari and NoKs, as their details are 
available, RSB/ZSB should be pro-actively involved in overseeing proper 
implementation of welfare schemes for them.  The meetings of these Boards 
shall be held on regular basis so as to ensure visibility of their working in the 
zone.  It may be ensured that benefits of various schemes are personally 
delivered to Veer Nari/NOK and they be apprised of the schemes available for 
them.” 
  
12.      The Ministry in its action taken reply has stated as under: 
             
            “The point has been noted and the following measures are being taken: - 
  
(a)      Various policy letters/welfare schemes of Ex-Servicemen are displayed in 
the premises/Notice Boards of RSB/ZSBs. 
  
(b)      All ESM including Veer Naris are encouraged to share email Ids and 
register on KSB/ RSB website for regular updates. The benefits of the amounts 
paid is also shared here. Individuals are also encouraged for timely updation of 
their records (address, mobile number, Aadhar number etc) with all concerned 
departments viz. DGR, ECHS, KSB and RSBs/ ZSBs. 
  
(c)        The welfare issues are also announced through social media and Radio 
programmes from time to time. 

5 
 
  
(d)      Zila Sainik Welfare Officers (ZSWOs) are regularly interacting and 
providing necessary support and guidance to the Veer Naris and NoKs(Next of 
Kin) located in far flung areas/ Border States. 
  
(e)      In addition, each Service has their proper chain of command at various 
levels to interact with Veer Naris/ NOKs in consultation with ZSBs.” 
  
 13.    The Committee, in their original report, had emphasized on the need for 
frequent meetings of all Central Boards for effective monitoring of functioning of 
the State/District Boards. The Committee are happy to note that after the 
presentation of their report in December,2022, the meeting of the Kendriya Sainik 
Board (KSB) was held on 11th April,2023 and the Ministry also assured that in 
future also, efforts would be made for regular KSB meetings. In this regard, the 
Committee desire that a yearly schedule of meetings should be drawn at the 
commencement of every calendar year and organizations concerned should be 
intimated in advance so that meetings can be held as per the time lines without 
any hindrance for effective monitoring of the functioning of state/district Boards. 
The Committee would like to be informed of the steps initiated and the  progress 
made in this regard. 
 
14.       The Committee are happy to note that for the purpose of ensuring that the 
benefits of various schemes are personally delivered to Veer naris/NOKs, the 
Ministry has taken several initiatives/measures i.e. displaying policy 
letters/welfare schemes of Ex-Servicemen in the premises/Notice Boards of 
RSB/ZSBs, encouraging ESM and Veer Naris to register on KSB/ RSB website for 
regular updates, timely updation of records (address, mobile number, Aadhar 
number etc)  and announcement of welfare issues through social media and 
Radio programmes from time to time, regular support and guidance being 
provided to them by the Zila Sainik Welfare Officers (ZSWOs) etc. The Committee 
are of the view that  the  measures taken by the Ministry are in the right direction 
and  would definitely go a long way in ensuring that the benefits of various 
schemes are delivered to Veer Naris/ NOKs. The Committee, at this stage,  would 
like to impress upon the Ministry to  establish a Central Monitoring Unit for 

6 
 
overseeing the measures undertaken so that the intention to create awareness 
and to ensure that the timely and effective delivery of benefits.  
 
 C.  Employment/Resettlement  
(Recommendation No. 13) 
15.      The Committee had recommended as under: 
            “The Committee note that at present there is no provision of reservation 
for milk booths/ kiosks etc for veer-nari or eligible family members of martyred 
soldiers.  The Committee recommend that Ministry of Defence should take up the 
issue with concerned Ministry/ agency for earmarking a fixed percentage of 
allotment of milk booths and other kiosks which are certainly easy to operate as 
means of livelihood in comparison to other centres for veer-nari or NoKs.” 
  
16.      The Ministry in its action taken reply has stated as under:      
            “Directorate General Resettlement (DGR), Ministry of Defence has an 
ongoing MoU with Mother Dairy Pvt Ltd under which ready built and fully 
equipped Milk Booth are provided to Ex-Servicemen.  Milk booths are provided to 
Retired Junior Commissioned Officers/ Other Ranks below 50 years of age at the 
time of registration against a security deposit of Rs.1 lakh to be made by Ex-
Servicemen for the scheme. 
  
 A proposal is being taken up with Mother Dairy Pvt Ltd for their 
concurrence for inclusion of Veer-Naris & other eligible family members for 
allotment of Milk Booths/ Kiosks under the existing scheme.”  
  
17.         From the Action Taken Reply submitted by the Ministry, the Committee 
find  that the Directorate General Resettlement (DGR) of the Ministry of Defence 
has an ongoing MoU with Mother Dairy Pvt Ltd under which ready-built and fully 
equipped Milk Booths are provided to Ex-Servicemen.  Milk booths are provided 
to Retired Junior Commissioned Officers/ Other Ranks below 50 years of age at 
the time of registration against a security deposit of Rs.1 lakh to be made by Ex-
Servicemen for the scheme.  The Committee are happy to note that in 
consonance with  the recommendation made by the Committee in their original 
report, a proposal is being taken up with Mother Dairy Pvt Ltd for their 
concurrence for the inclusion of Veer-Naris & other eligible family members for 
allotment of Milk Booths/ Kiosks under the existing scheme. While appreciating 
the proposal, the Committee desire that the outcome of the proposed scheme 
should be conveyed to them within three months of the presentation of this 
Report. 

7 
 
                          Appendix ‘A’ 
STATE/UT  WISEDETAILS OF VEER NARIS  
 Ser State/UTs Number of Veer Naris 
1. ANDHRA PRADESH 145 
2. ARUNACHAL PRADESH - 
3. ASSAM 19 
4. BIHAR  95 
5. CHHATTISGARH             19 
6. DELHI           76 
7. GOA 02 
8. GUJARAT 59 
9. HARYANA 1419 
10. HIMACHAL PRADESH 1159 
11. JAMMU AND KASHMIR 609 
12. JHARKHAND 110 
13. KARNATAKA 365 
14. KERALA 608 
15. MADHYA PRADESH 198 
16. MAHARASHTRA 1325 
17. MANIPUR                             94 
18. MEGHALAYA           12 
19. MIZORAM 09 
20. NAGALAND 23 
21. ODISHA 62 
22. PUNJAB 567 
23. RAJASTHAN 1726 
24. SIKKIM  05 
25. TAMIL NADU 470 
26. TRIPURA 09 
27. TELANGANA 77 
28. UTTRAKHAND 1267 
29. UTTAR PRADESH 820 
30. WEST BENGAL 79 
31. ANDAMAN & NICOBAR (UT) -  
32. CHANDIGARH (UT)  29 
33. PUDUCHERRY (UT) - 
34. LADAKH (UT) 14 
Total 11,471 
Source: Data as on 30.06.2022 available with RSBs. 

8 
 
CHAPTER II 
 
Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the Government  
 
Recommendation (Para No. 1) 
 
 The Committee take note that various schemes/services meant for the welfare of 
veer-nari and NoKs are presently administered and come under the jurisdiction of 
Department of Ex-Servicemen Welfare and its attached offices namely Kendriya Sainik 
Board, Directorate General Resettlement (DGR), Central Organisation and Ex-
Servicemen Contributory Health Scheme (ECHS) and there is no exclusively dedicated 
department/Office or Designated Officers in the Ministry to look after and intervene for 
the welfare measures of the families of martyred soldiers.  The Committee are of the 
opinion that a separate Department within MoD exclusively responsible for the welfare 
of Veer Naris/NoKs may be created so that the various issues pertaining to them could 
be closely examined in a more focussed manner.  Such an arrangement would enable 
efficient delivery of welfare benefits for veer-nari and NoKs. 
 
Reply of the Government  
 
 A well structured institutional framework in the form of  Department of Ex-
Servicemen Welfare, MoD,  Various Service Hqs. and its specialised attached offices 
i.e, KSB (for welfare related matters through its all India network of 34 RSBs 
(RajyaSainik Boards)/409 ZSBs(ZilaSainik Boards)), DGR (for Resettlement and 
training), ECHS (Health Care and Medical facilities)  already exists within the 
Government  to attend to various matters relating to the welfare of  Ex-Servicemen 
including  Veer Naris/Noks. Additionally, Service HQs also have separate veterans cell 
like Directorate of Indian Army Veterans (DIAV) for Army, Directorate of Air Veterans 
(DAV) for Air Force and Directorate for Ex-Serviceman Affairs (DESA) for Navy which 
pay specialised attention to the welfare needs  of Veer Naris/NoKs. 
 
 As can be seen from the above, there already exists an elaborate mechanism for 
closely examining the various issues pertaining to the Veernaris/Noks, hence the 
Ministry is of the view that  creating a  separate department for Veer naris/NoKs may  
not be  feasible. 
 
 
 
 

9 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 2) 
 
 The Committee note that statistical data on number of veer-naris and Next of 
Kins (NoKs) and the amount of grant been given to them under various schemes is 
analysed on regular basis to assess the impact of all the schemes run by the MoD, 
DESW, various Service Headquarters and its attached offices.  However, the 
Committee find that State/UT wise break-up data for veer-nari was not available with 
Ministry of Defence, although, a figure of 15021 representing total number if veer-nari in 
the country was furnished to them.  The Committee are of the opinion that accurate 
estimation of number of beneficiaries and regular updation of database would facilitate 
proper implementation of schemes and the attainment of desired objectives.  For 
instance, if a member ceases to be eligible for grant/benefit the name should be 
removed from the list.  The committee recommend that a comprehensive state-wise 
data for veer-nari and also NoKs should be maintained. It goes without saying that the 
technologies/ tools available in the Govt Organisation can be used for maintaining and 
updating the data without any discrepancies. 
 
Reply of the Government  
  
 The process of preparing a comprehensive data State/UT wise regarding details 
of war widows/ Battle Causalities in coordination with the service headquarters and 
RajyaSainik Boards/ZilaSainik Boards is being done by KendriyaSainik Board.  CGDA is 
also being directed to maintain required information for all pensioners including Veer 
Naris &NoK.   The   database of Veer Naris/ NoKs is shared with ZSBs so that it could 
provide necessary support/ benefits to the Veer Naris/ NoKs. The State wise breakup of 
details of 11,471 Veer Naris as available is attached at Appendix ‘A’. 
Appendix ‘A’ 
STATE/UT  WISEDETAILS OF VEER NARIS  
 
Ser State/UTs Number of Veer Naris 
1. ANDHRA PRADESH 145 
2. ARUNACHAL PRADESH - 
3. ASSAM 19 
4. BIHAR  95 
5. CHHATTISGARH  19 
6. DELHI  76 
7. GOA 02 
8. GUJARAT 59 
9. HARYANA 1419 
10. HIMACHAL PRADESH 1159 
11. JAMMU AND KASHMIR 609 

10 
 
             Source: Data as on 30.06.2022 available with RSBs.  
 
Recommendation (Para No. 3) 
 
 The Committee were informed by the Ministry that the circumstances in which 
the soldier dies determines the differences in benefits accrued to their family members.  
Further, for grant of pensionary awards to families of Armed Forces Personnel, the 
circumstances of death of the Armed Forces personnel has been categorized under 
different categories.  Out of these, Category B and C include death or disability due to 
causes which are accepted as attributable to or aggravated by military service as 
determined by the competent medical authorities.  It also covers various type of 
accidents during performance of duties.  In such cases of death of Armed Forces 
personnel falling under Category B and C, special family pension @ 60% of the 
reckonable emoluments is granted to the eligible member of the family of the deceased 
personnel.  While taking note of the specifics stated above, the Committee are 
cognizant of the fact that death under category B and C do not fit for liberalized family 
12. JHARKHAND 110 
13. KARNATAKA 365 
14. KERALA 608 
15. MADHYA PRADESH 198 
16. MAHARASHTRA 1325 
17. MANIPUR  94 
18. MEGHALAYA  12 
19. MIZORAM 09 
20. NAGALAND 23 
21. ODISHA 62 
22. PUNJAB 567 
23. RAJASTHAN 1726 
24. SIKKIM  05 
25. TAMIL NADU 470 
26. TRIPURA 09 
27. TELANGANA 77 
28. UTTRAKHAND 1267 
29. UTTAR PRADESH 820 
30. WEST BENGAL 79 
31. ANDAMAN & NICOBAR (UT) - 
32. CHANDIGARH (UT)  29 
33. PUDUCHERRY (UT) - 
34. LADAKH (UT) 14 
Total 11,471 

11 
 
pension. However, they observe that since the death or disability is attributable to 
difficult working conditions of the defence personnel, they therefore, recommend that 
the family pension may be enhanced to 75 percent of the reckonable emoluments from 
the existing 60 percent.  The Committee would like to be apprised of the action taken in 
this regard at the time of furnishing Action Taken Notes.  
 
Reply of the Government  
  
 As per existing provision in case of death of an Armed Forces Personnel under 
Category B & C, the eligible member of the family is entitled to Special Family Pension 
@60% of the reckonable emoluments.  This provision is similar for Armed Forces 
Personnel and Civilian Personnel.  Any deviation in the existing policy would require 
consultation with DoP&PW, being the nodal Department on pensionary awards, and 
Department of Expenditure, Ministry of Finance.  The recommendations of the Standing 
Committee on Defence has been noted and will be examined in consultation with all 
stakeholders and final outcome will be intimated in due course.  
 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 4) 
 
 The Committee note that ex-gratia lump sum compensation of Death is paid to 
eligible family member of martyred soldier.  The Committee were informed by 
representative of Ministry of Defence that this amount varies for different categories of 
death of the soldier. Compensation of Rs.25 lac is granted in case of death occurring 
due to accidents or acts of violence by terrorists, anti-social elements while performing 
duties and a compensation of Rs.35 lac is paid in case of death occurring in border 
skirmishes and action against militants, terrorists, extremists, sea pirates etc. Besides, 
an amount of Rs.45 lac is granted as compensation in case of death occurring during 
enemy action in war.  The Committee are of the considered view that though loss of life 
of soldier cannot be evaluated in monetary terms, yet financial grant is helpful in 
providing a reasonable and respectful life to family members of the soldier.  Further, it 
also acts an incentive and encouragement for the youth to join the Armed Forces.  In 
view of this notion and considering increase in the rate of inflation, the Committee 
recommend that Government should seriously consider increasing the ex-gratia fund by 
Rs. 10 Lakh in each of the above category.  The minimum amount under any category 
will be Rs.35 Lakhs and maximum Rs.55 lahks. 
Reply of the Government 
1. After considering the ex-gratia amount granted in the 6th CPC regime and the 
demand made before the Commission, the 7th CPC recommended uniform and 
enhanced rates of ex-gratia lump sum compensation granted to the Next of Kins (NoKs) 
of the civil and defence personnel who die in harness in their Bonafide official duties.  

12 
 
The Government accepted the recommendations of 7th CPC and accordingly 
Department of Pension and Pensioners’ Welfare being the nodal department in the 
subject matter issues Resolution and OM, both dated 04.08.2016 (Annexure-1).  On the 
basis of these orders, the provisions of Ex-gratia lump sum compensation were 
extended to Armed Forces personnel separately by MoD letter dated 02.11.2016 
(Annexure-2). 
 
2. A comparative table consisting the amounts of Ex-gratia lump sum compensation 
granted to the NoKs of the Armed Forces personnel in 5th, 6th and 7th CPC regime is as 
follows: 
Sl. 
No. 
Circumstances Rates (in Rs.) (Lakhs) 
5th CPC 6th CPC 7 th CPC 
(a) Death occurring due to accidents in course of 
performance of duties. 
5 10 25 
(b) Death in the course of performance of duties 
attribute to acts of violence by terrorists, anti-social 
elements etc. 
5 10 25 
(c) Death occurring in border skirmishes and action 
against militants, terrorists, extremists, sea pirates 
7.5 15 35 
(d) Death occurring while on duty in the specified high 
altitude, inaccessible border posts, on account of 
natural disasters, extreme weather conditions 
NIL 15 35 
(e) Death occurring during enemy action in war or such 
war like engagements, which are specifically notified 
by Ministry of Defence and death occurring during 
evacuation of Indian Nationals from a war-torn zone 
in foreign country. 
10 20 45 
 
3. It may be seen from the table above that the Central Pay Commissions are 
revising the amount of the ex-gratia compensation in a manner that the new amount is 
either double or more than the double of the previous amount of the ex-gratia. 
4. In view of the above, new demand for higher rates of ex-gratia lump sum 
compensation alongwith various demands of Ministry of Defence in respect of Armed 
Forces personnel will be submitted to Ministry of Finance for considering the same while 
referring the demands to the next Central Pay Commission, as and when it is created. 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 5) 
 
 The Committee note that in addition to ex-Gratia given by Central/ individual 
service to next of Kins/family members, the same is also given by respective State/UT 
Governments to NoK/family members of martyrs.  However, the Committee note that 
there is wide variation in ex-gratia benefits extended to veer-nari/NoKs by different 
States which has led to disparities amongst the beneficiaries of the martyrs.  For 
instance, ex-Gratia amount for Himachal Pradesh has been increased to Rs 20 lakhs 

13 
 
and Odisha has increased it to Rs 10 lakhs.  In this connection, the Committee were 
apprised that being a federal structure in the country the amount varies from State to 
State.  Since the soldier has laid down his life in the service to nation, the Committee 
desire that there has to be uniformity to the extent possible in payment of ex-gratia fund 
by state Governments also and the argument of federal structure should not come in the 
way.  The Committee are not oblivious of the fact that the issue regarding uniformity in 
payments of ex-gratia amount to the dependents of Martyrs has been raised and 
discussed in several meetings of the Committee without any positive outcome.  
Therefore, the Committee, in no unequivocal terms recommend that requisite measures 
be initiated and should be put in place for sensitizing state Governments to bring in 
more uniformity in granting ex-gratia fund for families of martyred soldiers. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 Various State Govt and RSBs are being sensitized for raising the Ex-Gratia Fund 
in case their support is lower than the most prevalent   level of support. 
Recommendation (Para No. 6) 
 
 The Committee note that Kendriya Sainik Board is headed by Hon’ble Raksha 
Mantri and comprising of the Chief Ministers, Administrators of Union Territories as its 
members, is a high level board specially created to look into the issue of 
ESM/dependents.  Presently there are 33 RajyaSainik Boards (RSBs) and 403 
ZilaSainik Board (ZSBs) to look after the well beings of ESM/Dependents.  Further, the 
Committee note that during last 10 years, number of ZSBs have increased from 220 to 
403.  This was primarily based on number of ESM and families of serving/deceased 
service personnel in that area.  The Committee were apprised that a new ZSB can be 
set up by concerned State Government themselves if the population of ESM and 
families of serving/ deceased service personnel is above 7500. The Committee are of 
considered opinion that role of Central Govt in welfare of NoKs and veer-naris has to be 
pivotal and it cannot be left to the State machinery. Therefore, meetings of all central 
boards should be held frequently and at regular intervals so as to have effective 
monitoring of functioning of state/district Boards. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 The next  meeting of the KendriyaSainik Board (KSB)  is scheduled to be held  
on 11th April, 2023 at Vigyan Bhawan, New Delhi. In future also, efforts will be made for 
regular KSB meeting. 
 
 

14 
 
 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 7) 
 
 The Committee observe that besides setting up a ZSB, it is also very important 
that ZSB is accessible to beneficiaries coming under its jurisdiction.  Specifically with 
regard to veer nari and NoKs, as their details are available, RSB/ZSB should be pro-
actively involved in overseeing proper implementation of welfare schemes for them.  
The meetings of these Boards shall be held on regular basis so as to ensure visibility of 
their working in the zone.  It may be ensured that benefits of various schemes are 
personally delivered to Veer Nari/NOK and they be apprised of the schemes available 
for them. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 The point has been noted and the following measures are being taken: - 
  
(a) Various policy letters/welfare schemes of Ex-Servicemen are displayed in 
the premises/Notice Boards of RSB/ZSBs. 
  
(b) All ESM including Veer Naris are encouraged to share email Ids and 
register on KSB/ RSB website for regular updates. The benefits of the amounts 
paid is also shared here. Individuals are also encouraged for timely updation of 
their records (address, mobile number, Aadhar number etc) with all concerned 
departments viz. DGR, ECHS, KSB and RSBs/ ZSBs. 
  
(c) The welfare issues are also announced through social media and Radio 
programmes from time to time. 
  
(d) Zila Sainik Welfare Officers (ZSWOs) are regularly interacting and 
providing necessary support and guidance to the Veer Naris and NoKs located in 
far flung areas/ Border States. 
(e) In addition, each Service has their proper chain of command at various 
levels to interact with Veer Naris/ NOKs in consultation with ZSBs. 
 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 08) 
 
 The Committee notes that compassionate appointments are being made by 
concerned Service Headquarters of Army, Navy and Air Force to widows/ families of 
defence personnel, whereby widows of Defence Personnel, who lose their lives while 
performing the duties are eligible for applying for short Service Commission (Non-
Technical) and (Technical). They are eligible even if they have children but should not 

15 
 
have been re-married. A total of 5% vacancies are earmarked for widows both for SSC 
(Technical) Women and SSC (Non-Technical) Women Entry. The Committee desires 
that the criteria of veernari being unmarried for employment eligibility should be re-
looked into. Further, it has come to the notice of Committee that in some cases of 
compassionate appointment, candidates have to face inordinate delays for getting 
appointment. Evidently in certain cases, the widows cross their age-limit whilst waiting 
for announcement of vacancies. The Committee recommend that a suitable mechanism 
should be formulated so as to ensure that at least eligible and willing veer nari of NoK 
be given either employment or a resettlement option in the shortest time period 
possible. 
 
Reply of the Government 
   
1. Five percent vacancies are provided to widow of defence personnel as welfare 
measure as per Government of India letter Number B/32313/PC/AG/PS-2(a)/921/D(AG) 
dated 20 July 2006 They are given preference for SSC (Technical) and SSC(Non-
Technical) Women Entry. 
 
2. Relaxation upto the age 35 years is provided to the Veer Naris. Veer Naris who 
are re-married are not given relaxation as they are not under financial hardship and 
support system exists for them. 
 
3. There is no delay in officers’ recruitment cycle in Indian army. There is a well 
established procedure with fixed timeline and all applicants including Veer Naris are 
treated at par in the recruitment process.  
 
4. Veer Naris /Widow applying for SSC (Non- Technical) Entry are exempted from 
Union Public Service Commission (UPSC) written examination. They are directly 
detailed for service for Service Selection Board (SSB) on meeting the other eligibility 
criteria.  
 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 09) 
 
  
  On the issue of resettlement of Veer Naris/ NoKs, the Committee was informed 
that various relaxations are being given to Veer Naris/ NoKs one such measure being 
ten percent vacancies made available to Wards (Sons and daughters including legally 
adopted children) of Battle Casualty for grant of Short Service Commission (SSC) out of 
fixed vacancies released per course to ‘C’ Certificate holders of NCC. The Committee is 
surprised to note that instead of having separate pool of vacancies reserved for Veer 
Narees/NOK’s there is no relaxation in eligibility criteria except that condition of holding 
of NCC ‘C’ Certificate is not mandatory for these vacancies. The Committee therefore 
recommends that some fixed percentage of reservation should be made exclusively for 
wards of martyred soldiers out of general quota. 

16 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 As per Government of India letter Number 08202/Misc/MP-2/3177/05/D(AG) 
dated 13 December 2005, reservation is being provided to wards of Battle Casualties. A 
total of 450 vacancies are released every year for SSC (Non-Technical). 100 vacancies 
are released for NCC ‘C’ Certificate holder and 10 (10 Percent of NCC vacancies) are 
reserved for wards of Battle Casualties. The reason of providing reservation from NCC 
vacancies is that there is no requirement to give entrance test. Otherwise, written test is 
mandatory in SSC (Non- technical). The reserved vacancies if not utilized go back to 
NCC candidates, Thus, these vacancies are exclusive with added advantage of 
exemption from written exam. 
 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 10) 
 
 With regard to enrolment as JCO/Other Ranks, the Committee were informed 
that instant enrolment is done in the Army through Unit Headquarter enrolment by 
respective Regiment/Corps Training Centres as per policy.  On gleaning through the 
extract of policy on ‘Instant Enrolment’ furnished to the Committee, it was found that for 
the said purpose, one son of Fatal Battle Casualty/Battle Casualty Boarded Out, is 
given consideration and in case of being under aged the person may be enrolled when 
he attains the age required.  When deceased was unmarried, one real brother of a 
Battle Casualty is considered for employment and in case deceased’s widow is 
issueless or has no male child or has underaged male child, one real brother of Battle 
Casualty, provided the real brother gets married to the deceased widow is considered 
has not been revisited since a long time as eligibility criteria is fixed for the male child 
only.  The Committee, therefore, recommend that the extant policies should be revisited 
with a view to have gender equality and real sister and female child should also be 
made eligible/entitled for service after fulfilment of requisite eligibility criteria for instant 
employment. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 The recommendation of 31st Report (17th Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee 
on Defence (SCoD) 2022-23 on the subject ‘Assessment of Welfare Measures available 
to War Widows/Families in Armed Forces’ are agreed to.  The policy on the instant 
enrolment is being reviewed to ensure gender neutrality. 
 
 
 
 

17 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 12) 
 
 As regards other re-settlement avenues, the Committee note that re-settlement 
of veer-nari/families is limited to the schemes of Oil Product Agency Distributorship and 
Coal Tipper Allotment Scheme for Widows.  The Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas 
(MoPNG) has reserved a quota of 8 percent for distributorship of oil product agency i.e. 
LPG Distributorship and retail outlets (P/D).  The Committee wish that the total number 
of allotments made for veer-nari and NoKs vis-à-vis total allotments be furnished to 
them along at the time of furnishing Action Taken Replies.  The Committee desire that 8 
percent reservation of distributorship of oil products should be adhered to strictly both in 
letter and spirit. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 Eligibility Certificate for allotment of Petrol Pumps/LPG Distributorship for 
allotment of Petrol Pumps/LPG Distributorship in the last 5 years is as under:- 
 
Category 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 
Veer Naris & NOK 44 39 3 1 Nil 
ESM 136 103 4 7 1 
Total 180 142 7 8 1 
 
 Implementation of 8% reservation of distributorship of oil product agencies is 
being done in letter and spirit for ESM/ NoK.Ministry of PNG has kept 8% for all 
compassionate allotment which includes ESM, Veer Nari’s&NoK.  Directorate General 
Resettlement (DGR), Ministry of Defence  is responsible for verification of Documents of 
Defence personnel only & Issue of Eligibility Certificate to the eligible ESM/NoK. The 
final allotment under the above mentioned Category is done by Oil Marketing 
Companies (OMCs) based on parameters set by them. 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 13) 
 
 The Committee note that at present there is no provision of reservation for milk 
booths/ kiosks etc for veer-nari or eligible family members of martyred soldiers. The 
Committee recommend that Ministry of Defence should take up the issue with 
concerned Ministry/ agency for earmarking a fixed percentage of allotment of milk 
booths and other kiosks which are certainly easy to operate as means of livelihood in 
comparison to other centres for veer-nari or NoKs.  
 
 
 

18 
 
Reply of the Government 
 Directorate General Resettlement (DGR), Ministry of Defence has an ongoing 
MoU with Mother Dairy Pvt Ltd under which ready built and fully equipped Milk Booth 
are provided to Ex-Servicemen.  Milk booths are provided to Retired Junior 
Commissioned Officers/ Other Ranks below 50 years of age at the time of registration 
against a security deposit of Rs.1 lakh to be made by Ex-Servicemen for the scheme. 
 
 A proposal is being taken up with Mother Dairy Pvt Ltd for their concurrence for 
inclusion of Veer-Naris & other eligible family members for allotment of Milk Booths/ 
Kiosks under the existing scheme. 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 14) 
 
 With respect to special incentive schemes to develop skills among veer-nari/ 
NoK, the Committee were informed that DGR, an attached office of MoD (under 
Department of Ex-Servicemen Welfare) is entrusted with conducting Resettlement 
Training Courses for retiring/ retired personnel of Armed Forces.  The duration of these 
courses is between one month to nine months and they are conducted in multifarious 
fields such as Management, Security, Retail, Healthcare, Yoga & Fitness and IT Sector 
etc. Three percent seats reserved for widows/ one ward in these courses (in case 
widow refuses to undergo course).  In this respect, the Committee recommend that 
instead of limiting the reservation of seats to three per cent, these training/ skilling 
courses should be made available to all willing veer-nari and eligible NoKs provided 
they fulfil basic eligibility criteria for the same.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 The 3% reservation for vacancies in DGR sponsored resettlement courses is as 
per MoD guidelines of 2009.  The recommendation to remove the 3% cap is a positive 
recommendation and they will be included in the category of ESM for being nominated 
for resettlement courses.  However, this will require to merge ESM, veer-Naris and 
eligible dependents to be in one category for which necessary steps are being taken. 
 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 15) 
 
 The Committee note that Ex-servicemen Contributory Health Scheme (ECHS) 
takes care of the healthcare and medical needs of Ex-servicemen and their dependents.  
The Ministry have informed the Committee that Veer-nari are exempted from paying 
one time contribution of amount for ECHS membership and can avail cashless and 
capless medical benefits alongwith their eligible dependents through ECHS.  It has also 

19 
 
been informed that veer-nari and eligible dependents are also entitled to avail medical 
services of civil Empanelled Health Care Organisations as ECHS beneficiaries.  The 
Committee observe that at times some facilities are not available at empanelled 
hospitals and also their location is very far and not in near vicinity of the place of 
residence of veer-nari/NoKs.  Since, providing healthcare facilities to family members of 
martyred soldier is nation is responsibility, the Committee feel that Government should 
issue advisory to all ECHS empanelled private hospitals across the country to provide 
healthcare facilities to veer-nari and eligible NoKs on priority basis.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 Necessary advisory is being issued to all ECHS empanelled private hospitals 
across the country through respective Regional Centres to provide quality healthcare 
facilities to the Veer-Naries and their eligible NoKs. 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 18) 
 
 With regard to initiatives for facilitating admission of veer-nari or the children of 
martyred soldier in various deemed/private universities, the Committee were informed 
that inter-se priority for admission into professional/non professional courses in various 
education institutions/universities is given to wards/ widow of serving personnel killed in 
action. The Committee whilst expressing their satisfaction over the endeavours of the 
Ministry, desire that whenever a case for admission of wards/spouse of personnel killed 
in action come to notice of Ministry of Defence, efforts should be made at highest level 
to accord priorities for securing admission in educational institutions.  In this regard 
guidelines with regard to procedure for securing admission in the private 
college/universities etc. may be formulated in consultation with the Ministry of 
Education. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 Scholarships are available under Prime Minister Scholarship Schemes in such 
cases whenever the NOK is able to get admission in professional degree courses and 
two professional PG courses namely MBA & MCA. With regards to guidelines for 
securing admission in the private college/universities etc. the same will be formulated in 
consultation with the Ministry of Education. 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 19) 
 
 The Committee also note that there are provisions of reservation of seats in 
medical/dental/ courses by States/UTs/Central universities/autonomous institutions for 

20 
 
wards/widows of ESMs as per the priority laid down by MoD with top most priority 
towards/ widows to personnel killed in action.  With regard to reservation of seats in 
MBBS course of various universities for veer nari/noks, the Ministry informed the 
Committee that a total of 35 MBBS seats and 3 seats in BDS are allotted by Ministry of 
Health Family Welfare to KSB for wards of defence personnel as a Government of India 
nominee.  It was also informed that 11,15 and 05 no of MBBS seats were allotted to 
dependents of war widows during the years 2019-20, 2020-21, and 2021-22 
respectively. The Committee would like to know the reasons for reduction in the number 
of MBBS seats allotted for wards of war widows in the year 2021-22.  Since the number 
of MBBS seats are being increased by Government in various medical 
colleges/institutions across the country the Committee recommend that correspondingly 
number of seats earmarked for veer-nari/NoKs should also be increased. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 The seats are allotted to the individual who qualify NEET as per inter-se-priorities 
with top most priority (Priority 1) to the “wards/ widows of defence personnel killed in 
action”. In the year 2021-22, a total of 11 candidates applied in Priority I, of which 02 
were ineligible due to less NEET score and 04 candidates did not turn up for the 
allocation. Finally, all the remaining 05 eligible candidates were allotted the MBBS 
seats. It is prudent to mention that in the recent past, all the eligible NOKs of Veer Naris 
(Priority I) appearing in the seat allocation process have been allotted the MBBS seats. 
 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 20) 
 
 The Committee learn that there were delays in disbursement of pension due to 
non-submission of life certificate on time.  The representatives of Ministry of Defence 
have stated that under the SPARSH-Web portal there is a provision to issue SMS alerts 
wherever annual identification is pending.  However, the Committee find that presently 
there is no practice of personally approaching veer-nari/NoKs for submission of life-
certificate.  Further, the Committee note that though PCDA(P) Prayagraj maintains data 
base of pensioners, no separate data base of veer-naris is being maintained by them.  
The Committee recommend that in cases where Veer Naris/NoKs are unable to submit 
their life certificate suo-moto, they should be personally approached to enable 
submission of the same.  In this regard if required assistance of concerned district level 
officer may be solicited.  They also recommend that a separate data base for veer-
narees and NoKs should also be maintained by the Department.    
 
 
 
 

21 
 
Reply of the Government 
 The office of CGDA/PCDA(P) has been directed to provide the necessary 
assistance to Veer Naaris and NoK in case they are not able to submit Life-Certificate 
on time through the assistance of Service HQ or any other means available. 
 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 21) 
 
 The Committee were given to understand that grievance redressal mechanism 
with reference to educational, medical or any other services in respect of veer-nari or 
NoKs has been set up at ZSB/RSB and KSB level.  ZSBs are also being included in 
Centralised Public Grievance Redress and Monitoring System (CPGRAMS) Ver 7.0. 
which is an online platform available to the citizens 24x7 to lodge their grievances.  The 
Committee were also apprised by the Ministry that they endeavour to resolve the 
grievances at the earliest, although land and other family disputes take longer time.  It 
has also been informed that Respective ZSB/RSB maintains a record of the 
complaints/grievances received from veer-nari or NoKs.  However, while replying to a 
related query the Ministry has stated that the record, particularly for war widows is not 
maintained.  The committee are surprised to find two contradictory replies for the similar 
query.  Not going further into these details, the Committee, at this stage can only 
recommend that data regarding Veer Naris and NoKs should be maintained at 
ZSB/RSB and KSB levels with proper monitoring at Central level.  For this purpose, if 
need be the Ministry can consider modifying the existing CPGRAMS ver. 7.0 by adding 
a separate tab/window for the Veer Nari/NoKs. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 Data of Veer Naris is maintained by the respective Services and is shared with 
the RSBs/ZSBs for necessary assistance. Due attention is paid in monitoring the 
grievances of the Veer Naris. All the RSBs are regularly requested to resolve these 
matters on priority and forward status of pending cases along with monthly Pragati 
report. Further, modification in the CPGRAM ver 7.0 have also been made for inclusion 
of all ZSBs for faster dissemination of the grievances undertaken.  CGDA has been 
directed to maintain all relevant information which may be used by RSB and ZSB also. 
 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 22) 
 
 During the course of examination of the subject, the Committee desired that 
awareness among beneficiaries about the schemes/ policies meant for welfare of veer-
nari/ NoKs should be created.  In this respect, the Ministry of Defence informed that all 
welfare schemes/policies/ benefits pertaining to  war widows and their families are 

22 
 
displayed at the notice boards/ premises/ offices/ campus of all RSB/ZSBs to facilitate 
wide publicity and awareness  amongst ESM community.  Instructions on the above 
have been issued by KSB Secretariat to all RSB/ZSBs to check this aspect during 
annual inspection of RSB/ZSB by KSB.  In addition, all policies, welfare schemes, 
procedures etc are also available on KSB website.  The Committee have been intimated 
that ZSWOs/Welfare Organizer of concerned state regularly visit/ approach veer-nari 
and their families for needful/ assistance.  In addition, records are maintained and 
updated by all ZSWOs and all the information related to pension, benefits and schemes 
are displayed/ uploaded on the website of the Service headquarters and the and the 
Department of Ex-Servicemen Welfare, While taking note of the extant mechanism put 
in place, the Committee would like to recommend that ZSWOs/Welfare Organizer 
should be held responsible for optimum service delivery to all veer-nari/NoKs. The 
Ministry of Defence must also ensure that any sort of exploitation/malpractices which 
may surface should be dealt firmly within the prescribed Rules/Laws, and those found 
guilty should be penalized. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 Zila Sainik Board has been sensitized on this to improve their services to ESM & 
specially Veer Naari’s & NoK.  ZilaSainik Welfare Officers (ZSWOs) are regularly 
interacting and providing necessary support and guidance to the Veer Naris and NoKs 
located in far flung areas/ Border States. Any case of exploitation/ malpractices which 
will be reported will be dealt firmly within the prescribed Rules/Laws, and those found 
guilty would be penalized. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

23 
 
CHAPTER III 
 
Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to pursue in 
view of the replies received from the Government  
 
Recommendation (Para No. 11) 
 
 With regard to the compassionate appointments of Veer Nari/families, the 
Committee found that presently 30 personnel in Air Force (since 2016) and 35 Navy 
(since 2014) were given employment.  Surprisingly, Army which is the biggest target of 
all the forces has not maintained the requisite data, and it is maintained by the 
Directorate.  The Committee desire that data with regard compassionate appointments 
to Next of Kin (NoK) or Veer Nari/families should be properly maintained by Army and 
brought to the knowledge of the Committee.  The Committee take note of the number of 
compassionate appointments in Air Force and Navy and find it lesser than expected.  
However, a comprehensive analysis be made only when total number of NoKs available 
in the country as well as data in respect of Army is furnished to the Committee. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 A total of 83 NoKs of personnel who have died in harness from year 2016 to 
2021 have been granted compassionate appointments.  The details are as under:- 
Sl. 
No. 
Year Number of Compassionate Appointments 
Granted 
(a) 2016 10 
(b) 2017 25 
(c) 2018 16 
(d) 2019 14 
(e) 2020 08 
(f) 2021 10 
             Total 83 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 16) 
 
 The committee note that at present Rs. 700 per student per annum as clothing 
charges is being given to children of veer-naris studying in colleges which is a very 
meagre amount in current economic scenario. They therefore recommend that it should 
suitably increased.  Likewise, Rs. 50000 for professional course is also a meagre 
amount when compared to the cost of fee for prevailing professional courses in various 
colleges.  Therefore, the Committee recommend that Ministry should take up the issue 

24 
 
of for suitably increasing the same.  The Committee also note that at present computer 
grant of Rs. 35,000 is provided to students after degree curse.  Keeping in view the 
importance of computers in learning the Committee recommend that it should be 
granted at level of 10th standard itself. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 Clothing allowance is a part of recommendation of 7thpay commission, accepted 
by government which is revised in each pay commission.  DESW has issued guidelines 
dated 13.09.2017 and 1st Feb, 2018.  As per the guidelines, currently Educational 
Concession to the Children of Armed Forces Officers/Personnel Below Officer Ranks 
(PBORs) missing/disabled/killed in action is as follows : - 
 Tuition Fees   - Full Reimbursement  
Hostel Charges  - Full Reimbursement     
Cost of Books/Stationary - Rs2000/-pa                                  
Cost of Uniform  - Rs 2000/-pa                                
Clothing   - Rs 700/-pa   
 
 However, it is informed that there is already a provision in para 6 of DESW 
above-mentioned guidelines dated 13th September, 2017 that allowance shall go up by 
25 percent each time DA rise by 50 percent. 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 17) 
 
 In course of examination of the subject, the Committee were desirous to know 
about the scheme/policy for providing overseas education of meritorious veer-nari and 
eligible NoKs.  The representatives of Ministry of Defence were candid to state that at 
present there is no such scheme. The Committee recommend that to tap the hidden 
talent of bright students the Govt should contemplate formulating a scheme/policy for 
funding and facilitating overseas education of meritorious and eligible NoKs of martyred 
soldiers. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 The three Services are providing full reimbursement of tuition fees, transport 
charges and hostel charges less mess charges up to & inclusive of the first degree for 
wards of battle causalities. With the reservation under Priority I for Battle Casualty 
NoK’s for Indian instituting provide education facilities which are preferred by the NoK’s.  
Exclusive overseas education grant of NoK’s may not be necessary in view of existing 
GOI Policy. 

25 
 
 
CHAPTER IV 
 
Observations/Recommendations in respect of which reply of Government has not 
been accepted by the Committee  
 
 
-NIL- 
 
  

26 
 
 CHAPTER V 
 
Observations/recommendations in respect of which final replies of the 
Government are still awaited  
 
 
-NIL- 
 

27 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE (2022-23)  
MINUTES OF THE ELEVENTH SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
DEFENCE (2022-23) 
 
The Committee sat on Wednesday, the 9th August, 2023 from 930 hrs. to 1000 
hrs. in Committee Room ‘D’, Parliament House Annexe , New Delhi. 
 
PRESENT 
 
Shri Jual Oram  - Chairperson  
 
    MEMBERS 
 
 
 
 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Dr. Sanjeev Sharma - Joint Secretary 
2. Shri Tirthankar Das - Director 
3. Shri Rahul Singh - Deputy Secretary 
 
 Lok Sabha 
2. Shri Annasaheb Shankar Jolle  
3. Shri Suresh Kumar Kashyap 
4. Prof. (Dr.) Ram Shankar Katheria  
5. Shri Durai Murugan Kathir Anand 
6. Kunwar Danish Ali 
7. Dr. Rajashree Mallick  
8. Shri Reddeppa Nallakonda Gari 
9. Shri Jugal Kishore Sharma  
10. Dr. Shrikant Eknath Shinde  
11. Shri Prathap Simha  
12. Shri Brijendra Singh  
13. Shri Durga Das Uikey 
 Rajya Sabha 
14. Dr. Ashok Bajpai 
15. Shri Kamakhya Prasad Tasa  
16. Dr. Sudhanshu Trivedi  
17. Smt. P.T. Usha 
18. Shri G.K. Vasan 
19. Lt. Gen. (Dr.) D. P. Vats (Retd.) 
 
    
   
  

28 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members of the Committee and 
informed them about the agenda for the Sitting. The Committee then took up for 
consideration the following draft Action Taken Reports:- 
i. Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations 
contained in the Twenty-sixth Report (17th Lok Sabha) of Standing 
Committee on Defence on Demands for Grants of the Ministry of Defence 
for the year 2022-23 on ‘General Defence Budget, Border Roads 
Organisation, Indian Coast Guard, Defence Estates Organisation, Defence 
Public Sector Undertakings, Canteen Stores Department, Welfare of Ex-
Servicemen and Defence Pension (Demand Nos. 19 and 22)’; and 
ii. Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations 
contained in the Thirty-first Report (17th Lok Sabha) of the Standing 
Committee on Defence  on the subject ‘Assessment of Welfare Measures 
available to War Widows/Families in Armed Forces’. 
 
3. After some deliberations, the Committee adopted the above reports without any 
modifications. The Committee, then, authorized the Chairperson to finalise the above 
draft Reports and present the same to the House on a date convenient to him.  
 
4. *****Does not pertain to the Report****** 
 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
******** 
 
  

29 
 
 
APPENDIX II 
 
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE THIRTY-FIRST 
REPORT (17TH LOK SABHA) OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE  ON 
THE SUBJECT ‘ASSESSMENT OF WELFARE MEASURES AVAILABLE TO WAR 
WIDOWS/FAMILIES IN ARMED FORCES’. 
 
1. Total No. of Recommendations             22 
2. Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the 
 Government (Chapter II): 
 Recommendation Para Nos.     1,2,3,4,5,6,7,8,9,10,12,13,14,15,18,19,20,21  
      and 22 
   Total  : 19 
 
Percentage:86% 
 
3. Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to 
 pursue in view of the replies received from the Government (Chapter III): 
           Recommendation Para Nos. 11,16,17 
 
Total : 03 
Percentage:14% 
4. Observations/Recommendations in respect of which reply of Government 
 has not been accepted by the Committee (Chapter IV): 
     
 -Nil- Total : 0 
Percentage:0% 
5. Observations/recommendations in respect of which final replies of the 
 Government are still awaited (Chapter V): 
             
  -Nil-  
                                                      Total : 0 
Percentage:0% 

30 
 
 

 
31 


 
32 
 


33 
 
 

34 
 
 

35 
 
 
 

36 
 
 

37 
 
 

38 
 
 
 

39 
 
 
 
 

40 
 
 
 

41 
 
 

42 
 
 