 
 
 
16 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE
(SEVEN
[Action taken by the Government on the Observations 
Eighth Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) 
the year 2020-21 on ‘Ordnance Factories, Defence Research and Development Organisation, 
Directorate General of Quality Assurance and National Cadet Corps (Demand Nos. 19 and 20)
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
February
1 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE 
(2020-21) 
 
SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
MINISTRY OF DEFENCE 
 
 
[Action taken by the Government on the Observations / Recommendations
Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants of the Ministry of Defence for 
21 on ‘Ordnance Factories, Defence Research and Development Organisation, 
Directorate General of Quality Assurance and National Cadet Corps (Demand Nos. 19 and 20)
 
SIXTEENTH REPORT 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
------ 
 
February, 2021/ Magha, 1942 (Saka) 
 
Recommendations contained in the 
Ministry of Defence for 
21 on ‘Ordnance Factories, Defence Research and Development Organisation, 
Directorate General of Quality Assurance and National Cadet Corps (Demand Nos. 19 and 20)]'. 

 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE
 
(SEVEN
 
[Action taken by the Government on the Observations 
Eighth Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) 
the year 2020-21 on ‘Ordnance Factories, Defence Research and Development Organisation, 
Directorate General of Quality Assurance and National Cadet Corps (Demand Nos. 19 a
Presented
Laid
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
February
2 
SIXTEENTH  REPORT 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE 
(2020-21) 
  
SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
MINISTRY OF DEFENCE 
 
[Action taken by the Government on the Observations / Recommendations
Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants of the Ministry of Defence for 
21 on ‘Ordnance Factories, Defence Research and Development Organisation, 
Directorate General of Quality Assurance and National Cadet Corps (Demand Nos. 19 a
Presented to Lok Sabha on   12.02.2021 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on    12.02.2021 
 
 
 
  
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
--------- 
 
 
 
February, 2021/ Magha, 1942 (Saka) 
  
Recommendations contained in the 
on Demands for Grants of the Ministry of Defence for 
21 on ‘Ordnance Factories, Defence Research and Development Organisation, 
Directorate General of Quality Assurance and National Cadet Corps (Demand Nos. 19 and 20)'.  

3 
 
CONTENTS 
     PAGE 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (2020-21).……………………….....….....................4       
INTRODUCTION..…………………………………………………….….…...............................6       
 
CHAPTER I Report…………………………………………………………………..................7            
       
 
CHAPTER II a) Recommendations/Observations which have been  
  accepted by the Government ……………………………………..........  23         
 
 b) Recommendations/Observations which have been  
  accepted by the Government and commented upon........................... 41         
 
CHAPTER III Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do not 
 desire to pursue in view of the replies received from the Government …… 52      
 
CHAPTER IV Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies  
 of Government have not been accepted by the Committee  
 which require reiteration and commented upon ………………….…..............53        
 
CHAPTER V Recommendations/Observations in respect of which  
 Government have furnished interim replies/replies 
 awaited………………………..........................................................................54           
 
 
APPENDICES 
 
  I      Minutes of the Third sitting of the Standing Committee on 
                  Defence (2020-21) held on 09.02.2021……………………………….....55 
 
  II     Analysis of Action Taken by the Government on the  
         Observations/Recommendations contained in the Eighth 
   Report (17 th Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on  
   Defence (2020-21)............................................................................... 58 
   
 
 
 
  

4 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE  
(2020-21)  
  Shri Jual Oram (BJP)  -  Chairperson 
 
Lok Sabha 
 
 2. Shri Deepak (Dev) Adhikari  
3. Kunwar Danish Ali 
4. Shri Ajay Bhatt 
5. Shri Devusinh Jesingbhai Chauhan 
6. Shri Nitesh Ganga Deb 
7. Shri Rahul Gandhi 
8. Shri Annasaheb Shankar Jolle  
9. Choudhary Mehboob Ali Kaiser 
10. Prof. (Dr.) Ram Shankar Katheria  
11. Smt. (Dr.) Rajashree Mallick  
12. Dr. T.R. Paarivendhar  
13. Shri Kapil Moreshwar Patil  
14. Shri Anumula Revanth Reddy  
15. Shri Jugal Kishore Sharma  
16. Dr. Shrikant Eknath Shinde  
17. Shri Prathap Simha  
18. Shri Brijendra Singh  
19. Shri Mahabali Singh  
20. Shri Kotagiri Sridhar  
21. Shri Durga Das Uikey 
 
  Rajya Sabha 
 
22. Dr. Ashok Bajpai 
23. Shri Prem Chand Gupta  
24. Shri Sharad Pawar  
25. Shri V. Lakshmikantha Rao 
26. Shri Sanjay Raut 
27. Shri Rajeev Satav  
28. Dr. Abhishek Manu Singhvi  
29. Shri Kamakhya Prasad Tasa  
30. Dr. Sudhanshu Trivedi  
31. Lt. Gen. Dr. D. P. Vats (Retd.) 

5 
 
 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Smt Kalpana Sharma  - Additional Secretary 
2. Dr. Sanjeev Sharma  - Director 
3.        Shri Rahul Singh   - Deputy Secretary 
4.  Shri Rajesh Kumar   - Assistant Executive Officer  

6 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
I, the Chairperson of the Standing Committee on Defence (2020-21), having been 
authorized by the Committee, present this Sixteenth Report of the Committee on 'Action Taken 
by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations contained in the Eighth Report 
(Seventeenth Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants of the Ministry of Defence for the year 2020-
21 on ‘Ordnance Factories, Defence Research and Development Organisation, Directorate 
General of Quality Assurance and National Cadet Corps (Demand Nos. 19 and 20)'.  
2.  The Eighth Report was presented to Lok Sabha and laid in Rajya Sabha on 13 March, 
2020. The Report contained 54 Observations/Recommendations. The Ministry of Defence 
furnished Action Taken Replies on all the Observations/Recommendations in July 2020. 
3.  The Report was considered and adopted by the Committee at their Sitting held on 
09.02.2021. 
 
4.  For facility of reference and convenience, Observations/Recommendations of the 
Committee have been printed in bold letters in the Report.  
5. An analysis of Action taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations 
contained in the Eighth Report (17th Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on Defence is given 
in Appendix II. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi                  Jual Oram 
09 February, 2021       Chairperson, 
20 Magha, 1942 (Saka)      Standing Committee on Defence 
  

7 
 
CHAPTER I 
REPORT 
This report of the Standing Committee on Defence deals with Action Taken by the 
Government on the observations/recommendations contained in the Eighth  Report of Standing 
Committee on Defence (17th Lok Sabha) on ‘Demands for Grants of the Ministry of Defence for 
the year 2020-21 on Ordnance Factories, Defence Research and Development Organisation, 
Directorate General of Quality Assurance (DGQA) and National Cadet Corps (NCC) (Demand 
No. 20)' which was presented to Lok Sabha and laid in Rajya Sabha on 13 March, 2020.  
 
2. The Committee's Eighth Report (17th Lok Sabha) contained 54 observations/ 
recommendations on the following aspects:- 
Para No. Subject 
 
ORDNANCE FACTORIES 
 
1 Budgetary Provisions 
2 to 4 Order Book position 
5 to 7 Manpower 
8 to 10 Budget for modernization 
11 to 13  Delay in projects and supply to Armed Forces 
14 Quality Issues 
15 & 16 Export of Ordnance Factories Products 
18 & 19 Expenditure on Research & Development: 
 
DEFENCE RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT ORGANISATION 
 
20 to 22 Budgetary Provisions 
23 & 24 Development of New Technologies 
25 Manpower 
26 Role of DRDO in Selection Process of Officers 
27 & 28 Coordination in Research and Development with Private 
Sector 
29 to 31  Basic Research in Academia 
32 & 33 Products developed by DRDO (Coordination between DRDO 
and Service Users) 
34 & 35 Skill Development Training 
36 & 37 Closed Projects 
 
DIRECTORATE GENERAL QUALITY ASSURANCE 
 
38-40 Budget 
41 & 42 Manpower and training 

8 
 
43 & 44 Quality Check 
 
NATIONAL CADET CORPS 
 
45 & 46 Budget 
47 & 48 Expansion of NCC and self-financing scheme 
49 CSR Policy for NCC  Programmes 
50 to 54  Skill Development and Employability of Cadets 
 
3. Action Taken Replies have been received from the Government in respect of all the 
observations/recommendations contained in the Report. The replies have been examined and 
categorized as follows:- 
 
 (i) (a)  Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the 
Government: 
   
  Para Nos.  1,2,3,4,13,14,15,16,17,18,19,23,24,26,29,32,33,34,35, 
    36,37,38,39,40,43,44,45,46,47,48,49,53,54 
 
 (33 Recommendations) 
  These are included in Chapter II of the Draft Report. 
 
(b) Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by The 
Government and are commented upon: 
 
Para Nos.  5,6,7,8,9,10,11,12,20,21,22,25,27,28,30,31,41,42,50,51,52 
 
(21 Recommendations) 
  These are included in Chapter II of the Draft Report. 
 
(ii)   Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to 
pursue in view of the replies received from the Government: 
  
Para No.    -Nil- 
(00 Recommendations) 
 
These are mentioned in Chapter III of the Draft Report.  
 
(iii) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of Government 
have not been accepted by the Committee which require reiteration and to 
be commented upon: 
 
Para No.    -Nil- 
 
(00 Recommendations) 
           These are included in Chapter IV of the Draft Report. 
  

9 
 
 
(iv)   Observations/recommendations in respect of which Government have 
furnished interim replies: 
  
Para No.    -Nil- 
           (00 Recommendations) 
 
           These are included in Chapter V of the Draft Report. 
 
4.  The Committee desire that the Ministry’s response to their comments made in 
Chapter I should be furnished to them at the earliest and in any case not later than six 
months of the presentation of this Report. 
ORDNANCE FACTORIES 
A Manpower 
 
Recommendation (Para Nos. No. 5 to 7) 
 
5. The Committee had recommended as under: 
‘From the information provided to the Committee, they find that, the Sanctioned strength 
of Ordnance Factories is 1,45,503 while the held strength has been declining and in 
January 2020, it come down to 80,524. Out of this, the Technical strength is 67,321 
against a sanctioning of 1,23,142 while Non-Technical strength is 13,203 against 
sanctioned post of 22,361. 
 The Committee observe that the existing strength is almost only half of the 
sanctioned strength. They were apprised that Ordnance Factory Board had recently 
concluded recruitment of 2668 Industrial employees. Moreover, recruitment of 378 'Non-
industrial employees and 692 Charge-man is under process. In this respect, the 
Committee were further apprised that considering decline of orders from Army owing to 
declaration of non-core items, very limited recruitment is in  
 In light of the facts stated here, the Committee recommend that a revision of 
sanctioned strength must be conducted in Ordnance Factories reflecting a realistic 
scenario of requirement of manpower in various factories and offices of Ordnance 
Factory Board(OFB). Based on the outcome of such revision and keeping in view the 
issue of future exports, which is discussed in the succeeding paragraph, optimal 
manpower strength should be determined and inducted consequently. Besides, the 
trained existing manpower of Ordnance Factory Board(OFB) must be fully and optimally 
utilized in various activities of Ordnance Factories(OFs) to ensure that they achieve self-
reliance model at the earliest’. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
6. The Ministry in its action taken reply has stated as under:- 
 
‘In the year 2015, an exercise for rationalization of manpower was carried out by a 
committee constituted for the purpose. Based on its recommendation, the overall 

10 
 
sanctioned strength of the OFB organization has been reduced from 1,63,103 to 1,45,503 
along with a direction that operational strength of OFB will not exceed 1,10,000.    
Further, with the introduction of Core & Non-core items, there is a fundamental change in 
the policy as orders for non-core items will not be given to Ordnance Factories on 
nomination basis.  This has affected the load position in certain Ordnance Factories 
engaged in manufacturing of clothing items. To realign with these policy changes, 
Ordnance Factories have taken up a program of re-skilling its manpower especially in the 
factories under Ordnance Equipment Factories (OEF) group, which are basically 
manufacturing the clothing items with the help of the Tailors’.   
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
7. Considering the fact that Ordnance Factories were working on almost half of the 
sanctioned manpower strength, the Committee had recommended for revision of 
sanctioned strength reflecting a realistic scenario of requirement of manpower in various 
factories and offices of Ordnance Factory Board (OFB).  In the reply, it has been stated 
by the Ministry that a manpower rationalization exercise was conducted in 2015.  It has 
also been stated that in view of the introduction of core & non-core items, there is a 
fundamental change in the policy as orders for non-core items will not be given to 
Ordnance Factories on nomination basis, therefore a programme of re-skilling of 
manpower is being undertaken which is appreciable. 
The Committee desire that especially in view of a fundamental shift in the policy as 
pointed out by the Ministry, a fresh rationalization exercise for optimization of manpower 
may be taken up for a realistic assessment of manpower requirement as there has been a 
considerable time gap since 2015 when the exercise was last taken up by the Ministry.  
The Committee also opine that the re-skilling of existing manpower in Ordnance 
Equipment Factories (OEF) group should be further taken up more proactively in a time-
bound manner to ensure optimal and qualitative utilization of manpower in the Ordnance 
Factories under intimation to the Committee. 
 
B Budget for Modernization 
 
Recommendations (Para Nos. 8 to 10) 
 
8. The Committee had recommended as under: 
 ‘ The Committee were given to understand that modernization of OFs is a 
continuous process. The outlay provided in respect of modernization is divided into three 
parts viz. Machine & equipment, Renewal and Replacement (RR) of Plant & Machinery 
(P&M) which are beyond economical repairs, Acquisition of P&M under capacity 
creation/Augmentation under New Capital and Development of Civil Works infrastructure. 
 The Committee note that allocation during last five years was Rs. 1913.19 crore 
while actual allocation was Rs. 1947.86 crore. The Committee also find that in case of 
works the allocation was Rs.1607.63 crore while expenditure Rs. 1582.66 crore. There 
was an under spending of Rs. 24.97 crore. In case of R&R the allocation was Rs. 
2210.00 crore and expenditure Rs. 2100.50 crore. The Committee note when the Capital 

11 
 
allocation for 2020-21 is to the tune of Rs. 1268 crore, a surrender of Rs. 109.50 crore is 
not a negligible amount over a period of five years. 
 In this respect, the Committee recommend that necessary corrections are to be 
carried out and expenditure on modernization by Ordnance Factory Board(OFB) should 
exhibit seriousness’. 
Reply of the Government 
 
9. The Ministry in its action taken reply has stated as under:- 
 
Expenditure during last 5 years is shown below: 
(Rs. in crore) 
Budget Head  2014-
15 
2015-
16 
2016-
17 
2017-
18 
2018-
19 
Total Shortfall 
Renewal and 
Replacement 
(RR) 
Allotment 450.00 425.00 450.00 460.00 400.00 2185.00 84.50 
Expenditure 441.87 385.73 451.77 422.80 398.33 2100.50 
New Capital 
(NC) 
Allotment 489.00 305.00 364.61 486.58 332.00 1977.19 29.00 
Expenditure 485.75 312.30 368.62 488.92 292.27 1947.86 
Civil Works 
(CW) 
Allotment 315.00 343.00 339.67 317.00 293.00 1607.67 25.38 
Expenditure 300.66 339.45 337.84 314.54 289.80 1582.29 
 
Net allotment in last 05 years was Rs. 5770 Crore and Rs. 109.50 Crore was surrendered 
(approximately 1.9%). Out of this Rs. 109.50 Crore, Rs. 84.50 Crore comes under the 
category of Renewal and Replacement (RR) which is a self-generated fund accumulated 
by the depreciation value of existing Plant & Machineries and is carried forward for 
subsequent year. Therefore, actual fund that could not be utilized and got surrendered 
was Rs. 54.38 Crore (approximately. 0.9%) spread over a period of five years. 
  
Comments of the Committee 
 
10. The Committee had expressed their concern on the under spending of allocated 
funds towards modernization of Ordnance Factories and had desired that given the 
pivotal importance of modernization measures more seriousness needs to be exhibited 
in this respect.  In their reply, the Ministry has stated that the actual unutilized fund which 
was surrendered stands at Rs.54.38 crore spread over a period of five years. 
Here, the Committee would like to reiterate that modernization is an extremely vital 
area which requires adequate allocation and optimal utilization of available funds.  
Stating the fact that even the total allocated funds under most of the heads as seen from 
the statement provided by the Ministry could not be spent fully is not acceptable and the 
Committee therefore, desire that corrective measures must be taken for proper 
assessment of requirement and optimal utilization of funds allocated for modernization 
to ensure maximum efficacy in this area. 
  

12 
 
 
C Delay of Projects 
 
Recommendations (Para No. 11-12) 
 
11. The Committee had recommended as under: 
 
‘The Committee were informed in the written replies about the various reasons for delay 
at the tendering, supply and erection and commissioning stages. They were further 
informed that when Detailed Project Report is prepared, a realistic timeline for the 
completion of the project is taken, taking all these aspects into consideration. Also regular 
review meetings are held to monitor progress. The Committee while recognizing that a 
few of these factors are beyond the control of the Ordnance Factories, observe that 
delays have been quite a part & parcel of Ordnance Factories projects which has also 
affected their pace of production. The Committee can infer that there is lot of slippage in 
the supply by Ordnance Factories to the Army, their main client, which have put extra 
burden on the exchequer also. The inordinate delays also adversely impact not only 
Indian supply but the export potential. 
The Committee note with concern that only 49 per cent of the Budget Estimates that was 
predicted for the current financial year have been booked by the Ordnance Factories. 
The Committee recommend that this shortfall may be taken up at the highest level to take 
it to 100 percent and a time frame for achieving the same fixed under intimation to the 
Committee. The Committee is deeply concerned about the decreasing supply of products 
to the Army and the inability of the Ordnance Factories to meet their demands’. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
12. The Ministry in its action taken reply has stated as under:- 
 
‘Indian Armed Forces are always the paramount priority for OFB and all efforts are made 
to ensure that there is least effect on the supplies to user in requisite quantity. Also, OFB 
is making all endeavors to continue the uninterrupted pace of production and supply the 
important armament stores timely to Indian Army.  
OFB supplies items to the Armed Forces based on consultation by mutually agreed 
targets fixed on yearly basis. Further, efforts are being made to avoid/reduce delays 
through better planning, periodic reviews of progress, and enhanced interaction with 
Indian Armed Forces to facilitate addressing their concerns during the production 
process. 
 
Also, regular review is being done in the Ministry with MGO and DGQA to resolve quality 
issues of OFB. Interaction of OFB officers with the Depot Heads for the purpose of 
getting first hand feedback has resulted in addressing the deficiencies in supply of quality 
ammunition immediately.  
 
OFB has the VOP (Value of Production) for the FY 2019-20 as Rs. 9,213 Crore with 
respect to the Modified Appropriation (MA) sanctioned of Rs. 11,166 Crore (MA) i.e. 
82.5%. This is excluding items worth Rs. 1,313 Crore which were under proof/inspection 

13 
 
and could not be issued due to country-wide lockdown on account of Covid-19 Pandemic, 
(All figures are excluding GST). If these stores could have been proved and issued 
before 31st March 2020, the issue figure would have been around 94% with respect to 
MA. 
Prior to Lockdown due to Covid-19 pandemic, which unfortunately occurred in the month 
of March; (usually the month of final dispatches and maximum VOI), some other factors 
also led to lower the issue figures: 
(i) The foremost item-wise target was available only in February, 2019 in the form 
of Letter of Intent (LOI) targets, even that did not include the Targets for 
Capital Items and Repair Components e.g. Pinaka Rockets, ERA Panels for T-
72, though it is a high value item.   
 
(ii) The item-wise targets for all items including Capital Items like Pinaka etc. were 
finally received in September, 2019. (This list was having total value as same 
as to the Budgeted amount catered for in LOI Target).  
 
(iii) Ideally, item wise targets should be received at least 9 months before start of 
financial year, considering the procurement lead time for input materials of 
around 6 months and the out turn time (Manufacturing/proof/inspection time) of 
around 3 months for OFB’s products in general. In case of imported input 
materials, the lead time may be even higher. Delayed receipt of item wise 
target in September, 2019, especially for Ammunition items, which require 
passed proof components, has adversely affected the production plan of  
2019-20’. 
Comments of the Committee 
13. The Committee had expressed their concern at the high rate of slippages in the 
supply by Ordnance Factories to the Army which adversely impacted the Indian supply 
as also the export potential.  In its action taken reply, the Ministry has stated about the 
various mechanisms and measures being taken for ensuring uninterrupted pace of 
production and timely supply to the Indian Army. 
The Committee while appreciating the robust consultation and review process 
being implemented to avoid delay in projects by ensuring uninterrupted supplies by the 
Ordnance Factory Board,  also express their concern over the lack of real-time results 
undertaking these measures.  The Committee desire that a review on the effectiveness of 
the current processes may be done at appropriate level and a time-bound action plan 
may be worked upon to bring down the slippages. 
The Committee had expressed their concern over the lower percentage of the 
Budget Estimates being booked by the Ordnance Factories.  The Committee recognise 
the country-wide lockdown on account of Covid-19 as one of the unavoidable 
impediments in the process as pointed out by the Ministry in its reply. The Committee, 
however, express their concern over other factors like delay in receipt of item-wise 
targets on various accounts for the shortfall and note that no clear justification or 
reasons have been stated for the same.  The Committee desire that information on 
detailed reasons for the delays other than lockdown as well as corrective measures taken 

14 
 
to avoid such situation in future by the Ministry may be communicated invariably to  
them while furnishing further Action Taken Statements. 
 
DEFENCE RESEARCH DEVELOMENT ORGANISATION 
 
D Budget of DRDO 
 
                Recommendation (Para Nos. 20 to 22) 
 
14. The Committee had recommended as under: 
 
‘The Committee find that during the financial year 2020-21, the proposed BE allocation of 
DRDO was Rs. 23,457.40 Cr and the approved allocation is Rs. 19327.35 Cr. There is a 
shortfall of Rs. 4130.00 Cr. With regard to the budgetary requirements, the DRDO stated 
that keeping aside mandatory expenses for strategic schemes & pay & allowances, the 
amount left for R&D activities is meager. However, the Department manages within 
allocations by prioritizing project activities. 
During the course of examination of Demands for Grants 2020-21, the Committee found 
that in 2019-20, the approved BE allocation for DRDO was Rs. 19,021.02 Cr, while the 
approved RE allocation was Rs. 17,730.78 Cr. The Committee note that the RE 
allocation is even lesser than the BE allocation by Rs. 1,280.22 Cr. 
Further, in respect of the Budgetary grants, the Committee on glancing through the 
papers submitted by the Ministry of Defence, found that DRDO expenditure as 
percentage of total GDP has also plummeted over past years. In 2015-16, it was 0.098% 
which came down to 0.086% in 2020-21. 
After taking into account the details stated above, the Committee observe that Defence 
R&D is imminent component of progress in country’s Defence & also boost indigenisation 
efforts of the Government. In addition, it also enhances export potential of the Country. 
Therefore, adequate funding for R&D is essential, which is not being reflected in the 
status of budgetary grants as highlighted in above paras. More importantly, deduction in 
RE grant after allocating an amount in BE grant is not a healthy budgeting phenomena as 
it would lead to certain last minute prioritization and ad-hocism. It is a known fact that 
advanced countries spend substantial amount on Research and Development, therefore, 
the Committee are of the view that the percentage of defence R&D spending to total GDP 
shall, if not, at par with other leading countries of the world, be at least adequate for our 
future needs. The Committee, therefore, recommend that in light of the case presented 
here, Government should ensure provision of adequate funds to DRDO in 
additional/supplementary grants stages’. 
 
  

15 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
15. The Ministry in its action taken reply has stated as under:- 
 
“DRDO owes thanks to the Committee for its recommendation in regards to Funds. The 
details of FBE, Budget Allocations for the Deptt of Defence R&D at different Budgetary 
stages and actual expenditure w.e.f FY 2017-18 is mentioned in Table 1.  
Table 1 
(Rs in crore) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The comparison of Defence Expenditure and DDR&D expenditure w.e.f FY 2017-18 is 
enumerated in Table 2. 
Table 2 
 (Rs. in crore) 
 
Year Defence 
Expenditure 
BE 
Proposed 
by DR&D 
Budget 
allocated 
to R&D at 
BE stage 
%age of 
Defence 
Expenditure 
2017-18 (BE) 274114.00 19935.60 14818.74 5.41 
2018-19 (BE) 295511.41 22203.74 17861.19 6.04 
2019-20 (BE) 318931.22 22953.95 19021.02 5.96 
2020-21 (BE) 337553.00 23457.40 19327.35 5.73 
 
It may be noted that against the projection of Rs. 23457.40 Cr at BE stage during the 
FY2020-21, an amount of Rs 19327.35 Cr. has been allocated. However, it is a fact that 
budgetary allocations are much less than the projections made by the Department of 
Defence Research & Development (R&D) but the Department is managing within the 
allocations by re-prioritizing the project activities. Further, additional funds would be 
required to support various projects to be undertaken in futuristic areas. 
Yes, it is a fact that BE approved for Department of Defence Research and Development  
DD(R&D) during the FY 2019-20 was Rs. 19021.02 Cr and the same was reduced to Rs 
17730.78 Cr at RE stage. Thus there has been an overall reduction of Rs 1290.24 Cr. 
A reduction of Rs 1760.65 Cr was imposed under Capital Head based on the expenditure 
trend during the FY 2019-20. However, an additional amount of Rs 470.41 Cr was also 
provided under Revenue Head during the FY at RE stage. 
Year BE 
Proposed 
BE 
Approved 
RE 
Approved 
MA 
Approved 
2017-18 19935.60 14818.74 15463.25 15399.25 
2018-19 22203.74 17861.19 17610.38 17121.99 
2019-20 22953.95 19021.02 17730.78 17730.78 
2020-21 23457.40 19327.35   

16 
 
Defence (R&D) Expenditure as percentage of GDP w.e.f 2015-16 is given in Table 3. 
Table 3 
 (Rs. in crore) 
 
Year TOTAL GDP DD R&D Exp DD R&D Exp as % 
of TOTAL GDP 
2015-16 13682035.00 13540.11 0.098 
2016-17 15183709.00 13501.00 0.088 
2017-18 16847455.00 15399.25 0.091 
2018-19 18840731.00 17121.99 0.090 
2019-20(AE) 20442233.00 17730.78 0.086 
 
Comments of the Committee 
16. The Committee had stressed on the need for the adequate funding for Research & 
Development activities of DRDO especially in view of its being an imminent component 
of progress in country’s defence, boost indigenisation efforts of the Government as also 
enhancing the export potential of the country.  The Committee, therefore, would like to 
reiterate their earlier recommendation that all efforts may be made by the Ministry to 
ensure that provision of adequate funds to DRDO is made in additional/supplementary 
grants stage. 
 
E Manpower 
 
Recommendations (Para No. 25) 
 
17. The Committee had recommended as under: 
‘Presently authorized strength of scientists in DRDO is 7,353 while existing strength is 
7,068. The percentage of scientist in DRDO is 30% of total strength of DRDO. Further, 
the Committee were apprised that since 2001, DRDO has been managing with same 
authorization inspite of more than 6 fold increase in outlay from IX to XIII plan. The 
Committee note that the current manpower is grossly insufficient for committed R&D 
projects. In 2010, Manpower Planning Board (MPB) had recommended for increasing 
manpower by 4966. Ministry of Finance (MoF) recommended 1316 posts. However, the 
case is pending with Cabinet Committee on Security (CCS).  After a lapse of 10years 
since MPB recommended sanctioning of posts in 2010, there had been no addition in 
sanctioned strength, therefore, the Committee urge that Ministry of Defence shall make 
efforts to cadre review and revision of sanctioning of strength of scientists in DRDO, 
commensurate with increased number of projects/work. Also, the case of 436 posts 
already approved by Ministry of Finance (MoF) in phase-I and pending with CCS shall be 
expedited. The initiation done in this regard along with the probable date of induction be 
communicated to the Committee at the earliest’. 
 
  

17 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
18. The Ministry in its action taken reply has stated as under:- 
 
‘The said case was expedited with the Department of Expenditure (DoE) and 
subsequently approval has been accorded for augmentation of manpower in DRDO by 
436 posts (below JS level) on 24 Apr 2020. 
MoF has also advised to take up a fresh case for approval of CCS for creation of two 
posts (above JS level) viz. Chief Executive and Chief Construction Engineer’. 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
19. The Committee in their recommendation had pointed out the delay in increasing 
the manpower in DRDO adequately as well as the low percentage of scientists in relation 
to the total strength in the organization.  The Committee are happy to note that approval 
of 436 posts have been accorded as well as creation of two posts viz. Chief Executive 
and Chief Construction Engineer are in the pipeline. 
However, the Committee have not been clearly apprised of the progress made in 
the recommendation of Ministry of Finance for increasing manpower as well as the 
reasons for such a low percentage of scientists vis-a-vis the total strength of DRDO.   
The issue of augmentation of manpower especially of scientists in DRDO is of vital 
importance given that DRDO has been managing with same authorization inspite of more 
than 6 fold increase in outlay from IX to XIII plan.  The Committee desire that more 
effective measures may be taken by the Ministry for augmentation of manpower in DRDO 
under intimation to the Committee. 
F Coordination in Research and Development with Private Sector 
 
Recommendations (Para Nos. 27 & 28) 
 
20. The Committee had recommended as under: 
‘The Committee note that DRDO has made rapid progress with the infusion of private 
sector involvement in the research related activities of DRDO. The Committee appreciate 
the large number of steps taken in this direction like opening of world class test facilities, 
MoUs with leading industry chambers, help rendered to the private industry by Transfer 
to Technology, providing patent to the Private Industry free of cost and launching of 
Technology Development Fund(TDF). The Committee are of the considered view that 
active private sector participation is the way forward and can act as a major impetus for 
the improvement in research related activities. 
The Committee recommend that efforts may be intensified to ensure better collaboration 
between the public and private sector for improved results and given the sensitive nature 
of this work, due monitoring mechanism need to be developed to ensure that no leakage 
of data takes place regarding products being developed. The Committee also 
recommend that a regular impact assessment mechanism should be developed to 

18 
 
assess the overall impact of the enhanced involvement of private sector in the research 
related activities of DRDO’. 
Reply of the Government 
 
21. The Ministry in its action taken reply has stated as under:- 
 
“DRDO is grateful to the Committee for appreciation of its efforts to facilitate and 
encourage industries through TDF, providing test facilities, engaging Industry Chambers, 
free of cost access to DRDO patents and funding under TDF. 
It is to be mentioned that during development phase of product Life Cycle, necessary 
confidentiality measures are taken during signing of contract as per guidelines of 
Purchase Manual -2016(PM-2016). At the time of Transfer of Technology (ToT), all 
necessary confidentiality clauses are signed in Licensing Agreement for ToT (LAToT) 
with the industries’. 
Comments of the Committee 
 
22. The Committee in their report had pointed out about the need for a proper 
monitoring mechanism and also recommended for a regular impact assessment 
mechanism to assess the overall impact of the enhanced involvement of private sector in 
the research related activities of DRDO.  The Ministry in its reply has stated that progress 
has been made and necessary confidentiality measures are being taken in this regard but 
it has not been mentioned in the reply about the action taken on the recommendation 
relating to the monitoring and impact assessment mechanism of the Committee. 
The Committee would like to re-emphasize especially owing to the extremely 
sensitive nature of this work, the introduction of a monitoring and regular impact 
assessment mechanism for a proper assessment of the involvement of private sector in 
the research related activities of DRDO.  The action taken in this regard may be intimated 
to the Committee. 
G Basic Research in Academia 
 
Recommendations (Para Nos. 30 & 31) 
 
23. The Committee had recommended as under: 
 ‘The Committee are pleased to note that DRDO has established eight Centres of 
Excellence in advanced areas wherein professors and students from academic institutes 
like IIT Delhi, IIT Mumbai, IIT Chennai etc. are working in unison. It is also appreciable 
that DRDO has started scholarship schemes, financial support to organize 
conferences/seminars/ workshops in niche areas of technology of interest to DRDO at 
various academic institutions. 
The Committee while putting on record its admiration for these initiatives by DRDO, 
recommend that DRDO should endeavor to open more such Centers of Excellence in 
various parts of the country as well as increase the number of financial assistance 
schemes which can play a major role in attracting the best talent for recruitment in DRDO 
to the benefit of the country’. 

19 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
24. The Ministry in its action taken reply has stated as under:- 
 
‘DRDO acknowledges the Committee’s admiration for having established Centres of 
Excellence/ Advanced Technology Centres in academic institutes of the country for 
development of defence related technologies. 
DRDO has established the Centres of Excellence/ Advanced Technology Centres in the 
research institute based on the identified technology gaps and research faculty strength 
for development of defence technologies. This endeavor will continue as per the new 
emerging areas and needs of DRDO and accordingly financial assistance scheme would 
increase. DRDO acknowledges the Committee’s admiration and will continue to expand 
the researcher engagement by establishment of more Centres of Excellence/ Advanced 
Technology Centres’. 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
25. The Committee while appreciating the work being done by the eight Centres of 
Excellence in advanced areas had also recommended the opening up of more such 
Centres of Excellence in various other parts of the country.   
 The Committee observe that these eight Centres of Excellence have been 
established quite a long time back and reiterate their recommendation for proactive 
measures by DRDO to establish more such Centres of Excellence in other parts of the 
country as well as they would evidently play a major role in attracting the best talent for 
recruitment in DRDO to the benefit of the country.  The action taken in this regard may 
also be intimated to the Committee. 
 
DIRECTORATE OF GENERAL QUALITY ASSURANCE 
 
H Manpower and Training (DGQA) 
 
Recommendations (Para Nos. 41-42) 
 
26. The Committee had recommended as under: 
‘The committee, during examination Demands for Grants 2020-21 found that around 
4448 number of technical personnel are involved in Quality Assurance activity for 
defence stores manufactured by Ordnance Factory Board / Defence Public Sector 
Undertakings, private Industry or import. Further, the committee also comes to know that 
around 19,000 quality check inspections are undertaken by the officials of DGQA in 
month time, which comes to approximately 5 inspections per technical person in one day.   
The Committee are happy to learn that regular training is provided by DGQA to its 
technical manpower, which is essential to achieve fool proof mechanism of inspection. 
While noting this fact, the Committee would like to know whether these numbers are 
sufficient for operations of DGQA or they need extra manpower especially keeping in 
view the growing future role of Defence manufacturing sector in times yet to come. In the 

20 
 
opinion of the Committee, the “Make in India Policy” and manufacturing under “Defence 
Corridors” would definitely add to the responsibilities of DGQA. These policies are 
brought out in other parts of the Report pertaining to procurements’. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
27. The Ministry in its action taken reply has stated as under:- 
 
(a) ‘It is submitted that over the years DGQA’s role and responsibility has been 
dynamic with the change in technology and Govts initiative of ‘Make in India’ 
policy. With the aim to boost Foreign Direct Investment in the Defence Sector and 
impetus given for ease of doing business, as per Govt of India policies, number of 
schemes such as assessment and award of Green Channel Status, Self 
certification, Defence Export Promotion, allocation and coordination of proof 
ranges,   registration, validation and monitoring of Third Party Inspectors have 
been launched by the MoD(DP) for which the responsibility to implement has been 
entrusted  to DGQA . In addition, Defence Corridors have been proposed to give 
boost to defence manufacturing.  Thus, overall DGQA role and involvement is 
progressively increasing in a diverse manner to meet the intended objectives.  
(b)     In addition to this, Indian Army is also modernizing its artillery and armament to 
meet their operational requirement. Induction of large caliber Artillery Guns of 155 
mm such as ‘M777 Ultra light Howitzer’, ‘155/52mm K9 Vaja’ and ‘155/45mm 
Dhanush’ and ‘Sharang’ have already commenced. Induction and production of 
other state of the art artillery gun systems and armament such as 155/52mm 
Towed Gun System, indigenous 155/52mm ATAGAS, six more regiments of 
Pinaka Weapon System, Assault Rifle AK-203 and other Small Arm weapons are 
also planned. Consequent to these activities related to conduct of dynamic proof of 
weapon and ammunition at respective Proof Ranges is gradually increasing. In 
order to meet the futuristic increasing requirement for conduct of dynamic proof 
firing, DGQA is in the process of initiating a proposal for commissioning of New 
Proof Firing Range at Pokhran Field Firing Range (PFFR). Creation of additional 
facilities would entail allocation of additional technical manpower and resources.  
(c) Moreover a large number of Private Industries have also shown keen interest in 
development of various guns & small arms systems, different kinds of 
ammunitions and their components, in India with the collaboration of established 
and well known arms and ammunition manufacturers of the world. Therefore, in 
order to provide close and fool proof mechanism of inspection and quality 
assurance for the various phases of conceptualization, development, production 
and exploitation, a large number of DGQA work force would be required. 
(d)    An increase of 20% technical manpower with respect to  presently held strength 
would be required  to meet the requirement of the future challenges as brought 
about by Hon’ble Committee Members in para 44 of subject report’. 
  

21 
 
Comments of the Committee 
28. The Committee had pointed out that the emphasis on “Make in India Policy” as 
well as manufacturing under “Defence Corridors” would add-to-the responsibilities of 
DGQA.  In this regard, the Committee had raised a query regarding the need for extra 
manpower in view of the growing future role of Defence manufacturing sector in times to 
come. In the action taken reply, the Ministry while endorsing the views of the Committee 
had opined about an increase of 20% technical manpower which would be required with 
respect to the presently held strength to meet the requirement of future challenges.   
In this regard, the Committee would like to recommend that the process of 
augmentation of manpower in DGQA should be taken up pro-actively in order to ensure 
that the future programmes and assigned responsibilities of DGQA do not get hampered 
in any manner.  The action taken in this regard may be intimated to the Committee. 
 
NATIONAL CADET CORPS 
 
I. Skill Development and Employability of Cadets 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 50-52) 
 
29. The Committee had recommended as under: 
 
‘The Committee note that every year about 5000 to 6000 cadets get selected in other 
ranks and about 8 to 10 percent as direct entry as Officers in Armed Forces. 
The Committee appreciate the initiatives taken by the Ministry and introduction of 
certificate courses in adventure & sports – mountaineering, sailing, riding & scuba diving 
etc., training through National Disaster Response Force (NDRF), Red Cross, NCC 
Exchange Participants Association of India(EXPA) etc., increased focus on personality 
development, leadership, communication skills, training/coaching for Service Selection 
Board(SSB) through experts, Certification Course for Yoga through Ministry of Ayush, 
enhanced attachment with services units & Military Hospitals, Central Armed Police 
Forces(CAPFs), Aviation, Shipping, Railways and Forest like Defence Services and 
training of cadets through Skill India initiatives. 
The Committee are happy that the potential of these cadets is being recognized and 
there is a favourable consideration to give them the same incentives as in any other 
security related service. However, the Committee recommend that efforts should be 
made to provide jobs to all the trained NCC candidates and to increase employability. 
Further, Non Governmental Organizations like EXPA which are giving training to the NCC 
cadets should be suitably rewarded monetarily’. 
Reply of the Government 
 
30. The Ministry in its action taken reply has stated as under:- 
  
‘Enabling the NCC cadets for selection in Armed Forces has been the key focus of NCC 
training.  Concerted efforts have been taken to ensure full utilization of the allotted 

22 
 
vacancies to NCC.  Through the concerted efforts, the selection percentage for the year 
2019 has gone up to approximately 70%. Induction of cadets into armed forces continue 
to be a focus area of NCC. 
Observations of the Committee are noted.  Further, generation of employment avenues 
for the NCC Cadets other than armed forces has been taken up in a big way.  Also 
Ministry of Home Affairs, Ministry of Railways, Ministry of Surface Transport and Ministry 
of Civil Aviation have been requested to introduce incentives for NCC Cadets in security 
related jobs, CAPFs and State Police, similar to the incentives existing in armed forces. 
Ministry of Defence has taken up with Ministry of Home Affairs, Ministry of Railways, 
Ministry of Surface Transport and Ministry of Civil Aviation the matter of introduction of 
incentives for NCC Cadets in security related jobs, CAPFs and State Police, 
Also, Skill Development and Personality Development has been taken up in a big way by 
NCC to enhance the employability of the NCC cadets.  Services of NCC Exchange 
Participants Association of India (EXPA) has been suitably integrated in training of the 
Cadets.  NCC is working as facilitator to facilitate NCC cadets to optimise the Skill 
Development training imparted by State Skill development agencies.  Efforts are also 
being made through the state government to facilitate skill development of the cadets 
through Government scheme like Pradhan Mantri Kaushal Vikas Yojana (PMKVY), etc. 
These measures are expected to help increasing employment avenues for NCC cadets in 
future’. 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
31. The Committee appreciate the measures taken by the Ministry which has resulted 
in the selection percentage of NCC in the Armed Forces to go up to 70%.  However, the 
Committee feel that more stringent measures i.e. training to NCC cadets to face SSB etc. 
may be taken to ensure 100% induction of NCC Cadets in the Armed Forces under 
intimation to the Committee. 
The Committee appreciate the measures being taken by the Ministry to enhance 
the employment avenues of NCC Cadets in future by taking up the matter with various 
Ministries and also introducing various Skill Development and Personality Development 
programmes.  However, the Ministry has not given any comments on the 
recommendation of the Committee that favourable conditions may be created for giving 
same incentives to the cadets in any other security related service. 
  

23 
 
CHAPTER II 
 
(A)  OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE 
GOVERNMENT 
 
BUDGETARY PROVISIONS 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 1) 
 
 The budgetary projection for Ordnance Factories in BE 2020-21 was Rs.15,687 crores 
and the allocation is Rs.15,477.53 crore. After deduction of net receipts, the remaining Revenue 
budget of Ordnance Factory Board (OFB) is Rs.686.60 crore. The Capital Allocation is 
Rs.756.50 crore. Thus gross allocation including Revenue and Capital is Rs.1443.10 crore. The 
Revenue allocation is short of projections by Rs.210.47 crore. The Committee are happy to note 
that in case of Capital segment, there is no shortfall and the projection is fully provided. 
 
Reply of the Government: 
 
The observation made by the Committee is a matter of fact, hence no comments are 
offered.  
 
 
Recommendation(Para Nos. 2 to 4) 
 
 The Committee, during deliberations on Demands for Grants 2020-21, found that Order 
Book position of Ordnance Factory Board (OFB) as on 31.12.2019 was Rs.58,165 crores for 
supply of ammunition, weapons, troops etc. This position is in form of Five Years Roll on indent 
mainly from Army and the order is subject to annual renewal depending upon availability of 
funds with the Service. 
 The Committee are of the view that Ordnance Factories are designed and dedicated for 
special purpose of fulfilling requirements of Indian Defence Forces, especially Army. On 
receiving of indent, the process of procurement of raw material and manufacturing procedures 
are commenced. However, after annual renewal, if there is withdrawal of order, the position of 
the Ordnance Factories become miserable. Therefore, the Committee desire that the Ministry of 
Defence should look for all alternative options so that reconciliation between Army and 
Ordnance Factories is established intending for mutual benefit of both the organizations which is 
also in the defence interests of the country per se. 
The Committee also understand that the need of Ordnance Factories is of paramount 
importance during war-time scenario. It is for this reason Ordnance Factories have historically 
been keeping a surplus in terms of manpower and infrastructure. Hence, they recommend that 
sufficient orders are assured from time to time so that the manufacturing skills of OFs are 
retained and their capacity is fully utilized. The Committee also feel that Ministry of Defence is 
now in a gainful situation than before due to establishment of the new Department and new 
Chief of the Defence Staff. If all-out synchronized efforts are undertaken, then Ordnance 
Factories would continue to contribute to the defence needs of the country. 
 

24 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Order Book position of OFB as on 31-03-2020 was Rs. 52,303 crore. 
 
OFB receives Order in the form of Five Years Roll-on Indent from Army for some 
Ammunition items to meet their war wastages as well as annual training requirement. In case of 
Armoured Vehicles, Artillery Guns and its spares fixed quantity Indents are received from time to 
time.  
 
However, year wise targets are finalized by the Services during annual target fixation 
meetings based on availability of budget with Services, priority of the requirements and capacity 
of OFB.  All the equipment including Ammunitions are supplied to Army as per mutually agreed 
annual targets. Institutionalized mechanisms exist for interaction between OFB and Indian 
Armed Forces.  
Recommendation(Para No. 13) 
 
 
 The Committee desire that instead of giving reasons for delays, Ordnance Factories 
should strive to adhere to realistic time frame and timely delivery of products. The Ordnance 
Factory Board(OFB) need to function more professionally in this new competitive atmosphere 
and develop a target oriented approach. The Committee also recommend enhanced regular 
interactions between the Armed Forces and Ordnance Factories to resolve all issues amicably 
amongst themselves. The Committee would like to be apprised of the steps initiated and 
implemented in this regard at the time of furnishing of the Action Taken Replies to them. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
OFB has institutionalized interaction mechanism with Indian Armed Forces. At apex level, 
MGO is permanent invitee to the board meetings of OFB. There is structured interaction system 
at various levels. OFB also has annual target fixation meetings with Armed Forces.  In these 
meetings and interactions, ascertainment of realistic time frames for manufacture of various 
products is discussed. MGO, being a permanent invitee for attending Board meetings of OFB, 
issues related to supplies, priorities and constraints are discussed at highest level. Further, to 
improve the feedback from the User i.e. Army, a direct communication terminal (OFB intranet 
i.e. Comnet portal of OFB) has been established at MGO Branch in Sena Bhawan. 
 
QUALITY ISSUES 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 14) 
 
 In course of deliberations on Demands for Grants 2020-21, the Committee found that 
there have been certain issues with regard to cost and quality of the products developed by 
Ordnance Factories. The Committee wish that Ordnance Factory Board(OFB) shall endeavor to 
instill cost-effective measures in production processes and strive for developing products with 
100% consumer satisfaction. The measures taken in this direction shall be brought to the 
knowledge of the Committee. 

25 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
OFB is making sincere efforts to comprehend the need of Armed Forces and transform 
their needs into internal rearrangements to provide the desired satisfaction to customers. OFB 
has launched online Customer Complaint Monitoring System (CCMS) to create a bridge 
between Indian Army and OFB. OFB has focused on data management of quality data through 
a digital system NQDBMS (Network Quality Data Based Management System) and enhance the 
transparency and traceability of data. Efforts are also being made for automation in processes to 
ensure the consistency in quality.  
 
Quality conscious human resource is one of the most important ingredients to deliver 
quality output and therefor OFB has started specific training courses on quality by top institutes 
like ISI, IIT etc. apart from regular training courses. 
 
OFB is supplying all items to Armed Forces on cost basis. Ordnance Factories do not 
charge any profit/surplus on these items. Cost reduction is a continuous process and OFB is 
consistently making efforts for the same. With these efforts, Ordnance Factories are able to 
successfully ward off effect of inflation to a considerable extent.  
 
EXPORT OF ORDNANCE FACTORIES PRODUCTS 
 
Recommendation (Para Nos. 15 & 16) 
 During the examination of the General Defence Budget, the Committee were intimated 
that earlier the policy of the Government was to manufacture and import the arms but would not 
export them because they were thought to be weapons of destruction. However, the policy has 
since changed and the emphasis is now on the export promotion and the targets for the next 
three years are high. Various initiatives taken by the Government and as discussed in other 
Chapters, especially on Procurement Policy, are of paramount importance for Ordnance 
Factories. The Committee are not oblivious of the fact that Ministry are also contemplating to 
convert OFs as PSUs. Whatever legal title is given to them, it would be in the best interests for 
the OFs to explore export markets and develop their capabilities correspondingly. 
 The Committee are happy to note that Ordnance Factories have exported goods worth 
Rs. 330 crores in the financial year 2019-20. They see it as a humble beginning but would like to 
see a surge in this figure in the coming years. It is very pertinent to mention here that the value 
of products stood at Rs.10540.32 crore in the year 2018-19 and in comparison to that value, the 
figures of exports are not very encouraging. With as many as 52 factories operating under the 
purview of Ordnance Factory Board (OFB), there lies enormous export potential. The 
Committee recommend that ample steps are taken toward exploring markets for export of 
products manufactured by Ordnance Factory Board (OFB). At the same time, every measure 
shall be taken to ensure quality of goods and customer satisfaction. The Committee also desire 
that import percentage of Ordnance Factory products should also come down from present 10 
percent. 
  

26 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
OFB is a captive manufacturing organization dedicated for manufacturing Arms, 
Ammunitions, Artillery Guns, Tanks, Combat Vehicles, Troop Comfort items and other 
equipment for the Armed Forces. Now OFB is diversifying its product portfolio and expanding its 
base in the international market as well as domestic civil sector. OFB is making efforts to make 
an entry on the global platform. In last few years a greater thrust has been accorded to export 
and many steps are taken by OFB towards exploring export markets for export of products. 
These steps are listed below: 
 OFB is participating in various international exhibitions to promote its products in foreign 
countries. 
 
 Nodal Officers have been nominated at factory level for improving export performance 
and identifying potential products which can be offered from the respective unit as per the 
market requirement.  
 
 OFB has also started engagements with channel partners in foreign countries for 
boosting its exports. 
 
 Indian Defence Attaché posted abroad and Defence Attaché of various countries posted 
in India are being contacted for assistance in boosting export. 
 
 For targeted countries, OFB has also started preparing Bilingual product catalogues in 
English & country’s local language.  
 
 OFB has also started customization of products as per user requirements 
 
 OFB has also invited various delegations from OEM and foreign countries for technical 
discussions to explore export potential.  
 
Also, Ordnance Factories have received repeat orders for some ammunition and explosives, 
which is very encouraging and confirms faith of international customers on quality and price 
competitiveness of these products. OFB has targeted the following products & regions to boost 
the export realization in next few years:  
 
 Large caliber ammunitions to Middle East, South East Asia & other countries. 
 
 Medium & small caliber ammunitions to African, Middle East, South East Asia & other 
countries. 
 
 Armored vehicle to Middle East, South East Asia & other countries. 
 
 Troop comforts and other items to African, South East Asia, Central Asia & other 
countries.  
 
 Propellant, Chemicals & Explosives to Africa, America, South East Asia & other countries 
 

27 
 
 
Recommendation(Para No. 17) 
 
 
 The Committee in this entire context desire and recommend that they be apprised of the 
initiation taken by OFs and the benefits accrued to them from Ministry’s Export Promotion Cell, 
Defence Investor Cell and ‘Make in India’ initiative of the Government. They can foresee that 
based on the principles of self-sufficiency, transparency, competitiveness and self-dependence 
a time may come where OFs might have to compete in an open-market situation. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
OFB has taken various steps for improving exports and have been benefitting from the 
initiatives taken by the Ministry: 
 
 A separate post of Member/Export & Marketing has been created at OFB to review and 
monitor export activities. 
 
 Nodal Officers have been nominated at Factory level for improving export performance 
and identifying potential products which can be offered from the respective unit as per the 
market requirement.  
 
 OFB has been delegated adequate authority to quote prices for exports.  
 
 OFB is making offers as per the Standard Operating Procedure on export to Foreign 
Friendly Countries against Line of Credit with an objective of gainfully utilizing the 
opportunity. 
 
 OFB receives export leads forwarded by EPC (Export Promotion Cell) from various 
countries through online portal. EPC facilitate OFB's participation in various exhibitions.  
 
 OFB is working on the guidelines issued by DIC from time to time for export promotion. 
 
 OFB is modernizing its production technology and is using its spare capacities, where 
ever available, to meet the export requirements. Cost of production is being reviewed on 
regular basis with induction of latest manufacturing technology. Sincere efforts are done 
to achieve cost competitiveness in OFBs products with in-built quality. 
 
To facilitate greater participation of Industry in the ‘Make in India’ process, continuous 
efforts are being made by Ordnance Factories to develop indigenous sources for imported 
stores. By this, OFB has achieved an indigenization level of approximately 90% of their Value of 
Issues. Also, OFB is making efforts to increase the level of indigenization through “Make-II 
Procedure” and “Long Term Orders (LTOs)” apart from existing system in vogue through in-
house efforts and source development open tenders. 
 
OFB procures various input materials from Indian private industries. These input materials 
include raw material, component, sub-systems etc. Approximately 39% of total domestic 

28 
 
procurement made by OFB is from MSEs. In this regard, OFB has a comprehensive SOP for 
Vendor Registration. OFB does away ex-ante capacity verification. Capability of firm should be 
judged/ decided based on the documentary evidence. Capacity Verification by physical 
verification has been restricted to 84 direct items only. 
Some of the major steps taken by OFB in this direction are enumerated below: 
 
(i) The vendor registration process has been made centralized. A particular vendor has 
got single Vendor Registration Code across the OFB Organization. 
 
(ii) Greater reliance on Self-declaration of capability by vendors for Vendor Registration. 
 
(iii) Elimination of system of physical assessment by OFB team in majority of the cases. 
 
(iv) System Integrator has been added to the category of the vendor to be considered for 
registration. 
 
(v) Time frame for completing the process of Vendor Registration introduced. 
 
(vi) Stricter norm of penalty for misrepresentation of facts by the vendor. 
 
(vii) Auto renewal of registration of vendors unless cancelled on account of administrative 
reason. 
 
(viii) Vendor Development Cell has been formed at each Ordnance Factory with Nodal 
Officer. Name of Nodal Officer and contact number has been displayed on OFB 
website. 
 
(ix) Representative Officers from factories concerned as well as OFB are participating in 
various Vendor Meets organized by CII, FICCI, MSME, various State Govt etc. to 
interact with vendors and encourage them to participate in source development Open 
Tender enquiries. 
 
 
EXPENDITURE ON RESEARCH & DEVELOPMENT 
 
Recommendation (Para Nos. 18 & 19) 
 
 The Committee learn that approximately 24.57% of output value of Ordnance Factory 
Board is developed through in-house Research & Development (R&D) by Ordnance Factory 
Board (OFB), R&D under Foreign Transfer of Technology (ToT) and Research & Development 
(R&D) with DRDO. Also, there had been a consistent increase in Research & Development 
(R&D) expenditure by Ordnance Factory Board during last year. In 2014-15 Rs. 55.32 crore 
were spent on Research and Development (R&D) which increased to Rs. 90.81 crore in 2018-
19. The Committee applaud the initiatives taken by Ordnance Factory Board towards Research 
and Development (R&D) and almost doubling the expenditure in last five years. The Committee 
also found that Ordnance Factories had, been taking up collaboration with Government 
Academic Institutions for design & prototype development which is a positive initiative and would 
help in long run in development of new products. 

29 
 
 The Committee recommend that efforts should also be made toward ensuring patent 
rights for the designs and prototype developed internally by Ordnance Factories. This will be 
beneficial in enhancing value of Ordnance Factory Board(OFB) and also boost the revenue 
generation. 
Reply of the Government 
 
OFB is encouraged by the observations of Hon’ble Committee. OFB is giving more and 
more emphasis on R&D activities to develop futuristic defence equipment/ weapon/ platform. 
OFB has entered into an agreement with Council of Scientific & Industrial Research (CSIR), a 
premier R&D organization of the country. As per this agreement, Ordnance Factories can 
collaborate with CSIR laboratories for taking particular project. OFB is also seeking project 
specific research assistance from academia like IITs, IISc., NITs and Government laboratories. 
These actions have been initiated by OFB to boost in-house R&D activities, which have resulted 
in development of 124 items so far. Out of these, 67 through in-house research in OFB, 26 
based on DRDO technology and 31 by Indigenization of foreign ToT. OFB has also created a 
Centre of Excellence for Ammunition at IIT Chennai. The expenditure on R&D in the year 2014-
15 was Rs. 55.82 crore which has increased to Rs. 90.81 core in 2018-19 which has further 
gone up to Rs. 92.68 crore in 2019-20.  
 
In line with MRGS (Mission Raksha Gyan Shakti) action plan of Ministry of Defence, OFB 
has filed 267 Intellectual Property (IP) applications. 10 IP rights are under different categories 
(Design: 6, Trademark: 3, Copyright: 1) and one patent on Design (e.g. High Strength Low Alloy 
Steel) has been granted so far. 
 
Development of New Technologies 
 
Recommendation (Para Nos. 23 & 24) 
 
 
The Committee are happy to note that DRDO is making all possible efforts towards R&D 
activities in three crucial technologies i.e. Propulsion, Material & Chip design and fabrication. 
The Committee also note that as stated during the oral evidence, in several areas like missiles, 
radar, torpedo, guns, ballistic missiles etc. technological excellence has been achieved, which is 
at par with other countries and efforts are also being made to achieve high standards in many 
new areas i.e. artificial intelligence, quantum technologies, asymmetric warfare, laser 
technology and 5.5 generation Aircraft which is appreciable. 
The Committee seek to emphasize the importance of attaining self-reliance in the three 
crucial technologies where a lot of work still needs to be done and recommend that all out 
efforts are initiated in this regard. The Committee would like to be apprised of the R&D activities 
being undertaken towards this end. 
Reply of the Government 
 
DRDO is grateful to the Committee for its appreciation towards efforts made in R&D 
activities in three crucial technologies i.e. Propulsion, Material & Chip design and fabrication and 

30 
 
also technological excellence achieved in several critical areas like missiles, radar, torpedo, 
guns, ballistic missiles etc. 
 
The R&D activities being carried out in three Crucial technologies viz propulsion, material & chip 
to gain self-reliance are as under: 
 
 
R&D activities in Propulsion: 
 
 Dry Kaveri derivative engine development of IUCAV-UHF20 with associated technologies 
has been taken up at a cost of Rs.1068.69 crore. 
 
 Small Turbo Fan Engine for Missile application is under progress at a cost of Rs.72 crore. 
 
 Turbo-charger for Main Battle Tank is under development at a cost of Rs.15.2 crore. 
 
 R&D activities in this area are being pursued with academic institutes also. 
 
 
R&D activities in Materials: 
 
 DRDO laboratories are carrying out Research & Development activities on materials as well 
as indigenisation of existing materials required for defence applications. 
 
 These materials include metallic alloys, ceramics, polymers, composite materials, semi-
conductors, high energy materials, nano-materials and smart materials.  The application of 
these materials are in missiles, aero-structures and aero-engines, armour and armaments, 
ship and submarine hulls, NBC defence, stealth as well as sensors and actuators. 
 
 The research on materials in DRDO laboratories is actively supported by academia through 
projects funded via ARDB, NRB, ARB and ER&IPR. 
 
 The projects worth over 1000 Cr are currently underway for development of materials. 
 
 
R&D activities in Chip design and fabrication 
 
DRDO is developing various chips for applications in crucial Defence Technologies and also to 
make country self-reliance in this critical area. The following R&D activities are being pursued: 
 
 Wafer fabrication, design and development of microelectronic chips for High frequency 
Transmitter/Receiver (T/R) modules, Infrared Imaging sensors, Laser Diodes, Tera Hertz 
sensors, System on Chip (SoC) etc. 
 
 The research on chip design is also supported by academia through ER&IPR projects to 
various academic institutes like IISc, IITs & Universities. 
 
 The fund allocated for the above R&D efforts in progress is worth over Rs 250 Cr (approx). 

31 
 
 
 
Role of DRDO in Selection Process of Officers 
 
Recommendation(Para No. 26) 
 
 
From the oral evidence, the Committee note that the Armed Forces were short of 10,000 
officers and the Ministry still relied on old selection procedure for recruitment of officers despite 
the changes taking place in warfare strategies. The Committee, in this regard, recommend that 
recruitment process should be revamped in consonance with the changing requirements and it 
should be ensured that the entire exercise is completed within a fixed time frame under 
intimation to the Committee. The Committee also feel that any change in the recruitment 
procedure should also protect the interests of the existing officers in the Armed Forces. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
DRDO develops the selection system for recruitment of Officers and Other Ranks(ORs) 
as per the needs of the Armed Forces (AF).AF use this selection system for selecting the 
candidates with various personality traits. The fixing of standard level lies with Armed Forces. 
 
In 2018-19, a Tri-Services Committee conducted a comprehensive review of the entire 
officers’ Selection System and it has been found that the system is robust and fully adequate to 
select the best of the officers.  
Basic Research in Academia 
 
Recommendation(Para No. 29) 
 
The Committee took note of various collaboration efforts that DRDO is making with 
academic institutions at various levels and its role in encouraging younger generation towards 
R&D. The Committee recommend that these measures and activities shall be supported by 
appropriate incentivsation so as to ensure continued interest of the fresh talent. Necessary 
budgetary support in this regard shall be provided by government for the purpose. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
DRDO is mandated to effectively manage collaborative efforts with academic institutions 
at various levels to pursue the targets set under “Directed Research” in identified “Thrust Areas”. 
Towards this end, Grants-in-Aid projects are being sanctioned to various academic institutions. 
In addition Eight Centers of Excellence have also been established, which function from the 
campuses of the reputed institutions. In order to promote and encourage younger talent, e.g. A 
Defence Young Scientist Laboratory (DYSL) working on Quantum technologies has been made 
functional at IIT Mumbai. 
 

32 
 
Products Developed by DRDO (Coordination between DRDO and Service Users) 
 
Recommendation(Para No. 32) 
 
The Committee observe from the written replies that DRDO has a robust mechanism of 
consultation with service users starting from the project conception till completion of the project. 
The Committee feel that coordination with service users is a very important area and 
recommend that the involvement of service users need to be further enhanced which can act as 
a deterrent to the early closure and failure of these projects and ensure quality check of the 
product at every stage of its development. The Committee also recommend that the 
coordination with service users at various levels should be in consonance with their technical 
competence and knowledge in that particular area and due care may be taken in this regard. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
It has been rightly observed by the Committee that DRDO has a robust mechanism of 
consultation with Service Users starting from the project conception till completion of the project. 
This is a very important area. Involvement of users in these projects is being further enhanced. 
All projects undertaken for development based on Services’ requirement, a service officer with 
requisite domain knowledge is being requested to be posted with the project team. 
 
Recommendation(Para No. 33) 
 
The Committee also recommend that a multi-level quality control mechanism, involving 
the end-user need to be developed to be implemented at every stage of the project which can 
lead to fixation of accountability in case of the user not suggesting corrective measures as also 
the product not being developed as per the General Staff Qualitative Requirement (GSQR) 
stipulations leading to wastage of money and human resources. However, they also desire that 
users should not change their GSQRs frequently and once they are finalized, there should no 
change be allowed and GSQRs should be freezed. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The recommendation given by the Committee is very valid and appreciated. In 
implementing this suggestion, it is informed that every Lab has its own Internal Quality 
Assurance Group which looks into the aspects of quality and reliability of the product being 
designed and developed right throughout its development and product life cycle. Besides the 
personnel from the HQ DRDO who are quality and reliability trained also associate during 
developmental trials. The End User is part of the project ab-initio and provides necessary inputs 
in all multi level developmental stages with the aim of suggesting corrective actions and freezing 
the GSQRs of the product. 
 
  

33 
 
Skill Development Training 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 34) 
 
The Committee during oral evidence were apprised about the move of the Government to 
establish two Defence industrial corridors to serve as an engine of economic development and 
growth of Defence industrial base in the country. They span across Chennai, Hosur, 
Coimbatore, Salem and Tiruchirappalli in Tamil Nadu and spanning across Aligarh, Agra, 
Jhansi, Kanpur, Chitrakoot and Lucknow in Uttar Pradesh (UP). 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
DRDO has signed the MoU for support to develop industrial corridor with TIDEL Park in 
Tamil Nadu and with Uttar Pradesh Expressways Industrial Development Authority (UPEIDA) in 
Uttar Pradesh respectively. DRDO is pursuing the work on both areas. 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 35) 
 
The Committee recommend that skill development training should be imparted to local 
youths to increase their employability in the above corridors. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
In accordance with the recommendations of the Committee, the following steps have 
been taken by DRDO: 
 
Activities undertaken by DRDO for Skill Development 
 
 
(a) Internships to BTech Students: 
 
Students pursuing graduate and post graduate courses from various institutions come to 
DRDO for their internship programmes.  DRDO has over 52 laboratories where these students 
are provided the summer/winter internship programmes.  During last three years the total interns 
intake in DRDO has been 2363 in 2016, 3065 in 2017, 3103 in 2018 and 2665 in 2019.  
Therefore, average annual intern intake for DRDO comes out to be 3000.  By year 2024, DRDO 
would train 4x3000 = 12000 interns. 
 
(b) Junior/ Senior Research Fellows: 
 
The JRF/SRF scheme of DRDO has 1000 vacancies distributed to various labs.  The 
scholars hired against these vacancies conduct their research work for a minimum tenure of two 
years which is further extendible two years and three years for PhD students. 
 
At any point of time DRDO holds 1000 JRF/SRFs, whereby by year 2024 a minimum of 
2000 and more 4000 JRF/SRF will be skilled. 
 

34 
 
(c) Apprentices under Apprenticeship Act 1961:  
 
The apprenticeship is governed by Apprentices Act 1961 and Apprentices Rules 1992 
and subsequent amendments.  The Act is a statutory requirement and obligatory in specified 
industries to engage apprentices in designated trades to impart apprentice training on the job in 
the industry. 
 
DRDO with such training infrastructure in its 27 labs has been providing training 
apprentices in various trades. The annual turnout is about 2000 trained apprentices. 
 
(d) Others: 
 
In addition, DRDO annually sponsors various projects in academic institutions, conducts 
extramural research, has opened centers of excellence in various institutions, thereby imparting 
and promulgating skill development. 
 
 
Closed Projects 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 36) 
 
The Committee noted with concern that during the last three years, 113 projects at a total 
cost of Rs 13468.25 Cr were closed. DRDO have also given some reasons for the closing of 
these projects which depicts the possibility of closure of such projects in light of the research 
activity being an open-ended programme. However, the Committee feel that these closing of 
projects on which a huge expenditure have been incurred is a colossal waste of public funds 
and need to be severely discouraged but for exceptional circumstances. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The expenditure incurred on the execution of the projects cannot be termed waste of 
public funds as closure of a project in DRDO indicates a stage, where all the objectives have 
been achieved. All the projects in DRDO are taken up to achieve pre-defined objectives within 
the sanctioned time and cost. Each of the project is a stand-alone set of activities. The 
objectives of the projects are to develop scientific knowledge, technologies, components, 
processes and systems for Defence applications. 
 
Completion of activities and meeting the objectives is the culmination of a particular 
project. The output of a project is typical in terms of a component, product, process or system. 
The first three i.e. component, product and process feed into a system and the systems are 
taken up for induction with Services. In addition, the knowledge and expertise gained during any 
project is a Capital asset and is useful in many other projects & activities. DRDO projects after 
successfully achieving the desired objectives set-in are taken up for closure; Closure of a project 
is an administrative step as all these projects are initiated for pre-defined objectives to be 
completed within the approved timeline and cost. 
 

35 
 
In all of the above 113 projects, the desired objectives achieved within the timeline were 
satisfactorily demonstrated. All these projects were also reviewed periodically and finally after 
achieving all objectives were considered successfully completed. Accordingly, the projects were 
closed for administrative purposes. 
 
The reply of the recommendation may please be seen in light of the above mentioned 
facts. 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 37) 
 
The Committee recommend that the projects should be stringently evaluated in regard to 
their feasibility at the very inception to prevent such wasteful expenditure. All mandatory and 
precautionary scientific, technical and concurrent audit of every ongoing project preferably by an 
independent agency need to be meticulously planned out in the beginning of the project itself. 
DRDO need to exercise great caution and care in undertaking research oriented programmes 
and no project should be closed without a well-laid out re-evaluation procedure involving domain 
experts. The Committee recommend to be apprised on the steps taken by DRDO on this very 
important issue. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
DRDO agrees to the recommendation of the Committee for re-evaluation by external 
experts prior to closure of a project and proposing changes in its project guideline document, 
“Procedure for Project Formulation & Management (PPFM-2020) wherein an external committee 
will be evaluating the outcomes of the project with respect to its objectives and scope as in 
sanction letter and the reasons for not achieving them. 
 
 
Recommendation(Para Nos. 38-40) 
 
After gleaning through all the information submitted to the Committee in regard to 
Directorate General of Quality Assurance, the Committee found that though the Budgetary 
allocation of DGQA is relatively meagre in comparison to the entire Defence Budget which 
stands at Rs. 4,71,378.00 crore, yet it has been assigned with very arduous task of ensuring the 
quality of the products manufactured/imported and supplied to the Forces.  It is also a matter of 
satisfaction for the Committee to note that the estimates of DGQA under revenue segment 
remains more or less constant during the last five years which is not the case for other Heads of 
the Defence Budget, which has already been brought out in the First Report on General 
Defence Budget 2020-21.   
 
The Committee find that in BE 2020-21, a total budgetary projection made by DGQA was 
Rs. 1,317.70 crore whereas the allocation was Rs. 1,266.70 crore for both Revenue & Capital 
Heads. The projection under Revenue Head was Rs. 1,297.70 crore and the allocation Rs. 
1,254.63 crore. In case of Capital Head, the allocation is Rs. 12.06 crore against a projection of 
Rs. 20.00 crore.  Since the allocation for the Capital Head is short by almost Rs. 8 crore, the 
Committee would like to know the reasons for the same and also whether at the stage of 

36 
 
Revised Estimates, the same would be adjusted in order to enable DGQA to undertake works of 
capital nature.  Such capital works build the backbone of the organization to support it in 
dispensing its functions effectively in the long run.  
 
The Capital allocation is only about 60 per cent of the projection. The Capital allocation 
reflects inclination towards modernisation and upgradation of assets for carrying out inspection. 
The Committee observe that being a technical service, constant upgradation of technological 
advancements taking place globally has to be regularly included in the training curriculum of 
DGQA also. The role of DGQA is also expanding as it has been assigned with enhancing 
Intellectual Property Rights(IPR) cases in defence production and Green Channel Policy. The 
Committee desire that adequate allocations to DGQA shall be made keeping in mind the huge 
responsibility it has for inspections of stores where criticality it holds for performance of all 
defence contributors/stakeholders depend.   
 
Reply of the Government 
 
In RE 2019-20, Rs 15.96 Crore has been allocated to DGQA under Capital Head i.e. an increase of 
Rs. 5 Crore over BE 2019-20. Under Revenue Head, DGQA has been allocated Rs. 1,286.70 Crore 
(Gross) in RE 2019-20 which is an increase of Rs. 84Crore over BE 2019-20. 
 
2. In BE 2020-21, Rs. 1,266.69 Crore (Gross) (i.e. Rs. 1,254.63 Crore [Gross] under Revenue Head 
and Rs. 12.06 Crore under Capital Head) has been allocated to DGQA. 
 
3. Additional funds to DGQA at Supplementary/RE stage will be projected to Ministry of Finance 
based on pace of expenditure and further requirement. 
 
Quality Check  
Recommendation (Para Nos. 43 & 44) 
 
 
The Committee note that DGQA is responsible for quality assurance of all defence 
equipments and weapon systems such as arms, ammunition, clothing etc. In this regard, the 
Committee recommend that while carrying out inspection at various stages of production it 
should be ensured that inventory which reaches in hands of user should be zero defect so they 
can believe in the armament being used. The DGQA should also consolidate its role in ensuring 
zero-defect on the environment. The methodologies involved in production stages and 
transportations shall be scrutinized ensuring minimal affect on the environment. It shall also 
ensure that the industries / manufacturing units adopt best available practices / guidelines for 
production activities and waste disposal by putting in place state-of-art waste disposal system. It 
is needless to say that old methodologies should be replaced with the new ones in due course 
of time.  
The Committee learn that although no vendor has been black-listed due to the issues 
relating to quality, yet they would like to be apprised in no uncertain words of the nature of 
defects noted and raised by DGQA during each of the last three years and consequently 
rectified by the manufacturers. They would also like to know about the cases, if any, whether 

37 
 
after such rectification, the loss still occurred to the Forces due to non-performance or failure of 
the assets during actual use.  
Reply of the Government 
 
 
(a) DGQA Organisation is entrusted the responsibility of ‘Defect Investigation’ of defence 
stores. It is ensured by DGQA that defects noticed at manufacture’s premises are rectified & 
replaced before the “Final Acceptance Inspection of Equipment” (FAI) by DGQA. The cause of 
defects is addressed in the manufacturing/ assembly by manufacturer to arrest recurrence. The 
defects noticed in the field by users are investigated, root cause analysis of the same is carried 
out and remedial measures are suggested by DGQA, which are implemented.  
 
(b) The nature of defects noticed, which are rectifiable by manufacturers are:- 
(i) Inherent Design inadequacies.  The latent design flaws if any in an 
equipment, sometimes do not surface during technical evaluation. The same is 
revealed in field conditions and during extensive usage by user. Though there 
are very few such design flaws but they are corrected / rectified by 
manufacturer on recommendation of DGQA and implemented in assembly/ 
manufacturing line. 
 
(ii) Defects Related to Manufacturing. These are operational defects noticed by 
users, which are rectifiable in field. These are usually loosing of bolts, loss of 
signals/commands, unwanted noises& squeaks etc. Such defects are rectified 
in-situ by manufacturers under warranty provisions.  
 
(iii) Defects related toMaintenance and exploitation of equipment. These 
defects are attributed to user related issues while carrying out routine 
maintenance and also due to exploitation of equipment without adhering to laid 
down procedure.   
 
(c) The defective components / parts noticed during field defect investigations are replaced / 
rectified free of cost by manufacturers if it is established as manufacturing flaw.  
 
(d) It is submitted that no loss to the state is reported by user due to non-implementation of 
remedial measures. 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 45) 
 
 The Committee take note of the fact that, in Budget Estimate 2020-21, the total projection 
is Rs. 2023.20 crore against which there is an allocation of Rs. 1688.60 crore thereby 
registering a shortfall of Rs. 334.60 crore.  Out of the total budget projection Revenue budget 
was Rs. 1968.20 crore and allocation Rs. 1661.50 crore, whereas in case of Capital budget, the 
projection was Rs. 55.00 crore and allocation Rs. 27.10 crore.  There is a deficit of Rs. 306.70 
crore and Rs. 27.90 crore in Revenue and Capital budgets respectively.  The Committee are of 

38 
 
the view that no Revenue Expenditure includes pay and allowances of Personnel and Capital 
Expenditure for the procurement of durable assets, any cut in the Budget would slow down the 
activities of NCC.  Also keeping in mind the vast network of NCC across the length & breadth of 
the Country, the Committee urge that Ministry of Defence should lays down appropriate financial 
provisions for NCC in future allocations, especially at the Supplementary stage. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 No compromises have been made during last five financial years as the expenditure was 
within allocated budget.  The current Financial Year allocations of Rs. 1661.50 crore under 
Revenue head and Rs. 27.10 crore under Capital head implies an increase of Rs. 54.22 crore 
and Rs. 2.46 crore respectively over B.E. 2019-20 allocations.  Additional requirement of funds 
will be projected at appropriate stage.  
 
 As regards recommendation of the Committee regarding laying down appropriate 
financial provisions in future allocations, especially at supplementary; same has been noted. 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 46) 
 
 While recommending for additional allocations for NCC, the Committee would also like to 
highlight that during the year 2019, the actual expenditure of NCC was lower than the revised 
allocations. The Committee would like to know the reasons for the same and also in unequivocal 
terms state that in this current fiscal, NCC should leave no stone unturned to utilize the final 
allocations made for them with an equal pace of expenditure throughout the year. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 As per NCC, the expenditure status as on 28 February, 2020 is Rs 1525.39 crore vis-a-
vis RE 2019-20 amounting to Rs 1667.92 crore resulting in a balance amount of Rs. 142.53 
crore.  The expenditure was lower than anticipated because of less expenditure occurred in Sub 
heads - Pay & Allowances (Service Personnel), Stores and Works. 
  
Further, out of balance amount of Rs. 142.53 crore, only Rs 36.54 crore was 
surrendered, keeping the balance towards anticipated booking of the last month of F.Y. 2019-
20, i.e., March, 2020.  
 
For the FY 2020-21, the directions of the Committee have been noted and will be 
adhered to. 
 
 
Expansion of NCC and Fully Self Financing System (FSFS) 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 47) 
 
The Committee note that at present 5862 schools & 3040 colleges are there in the 
waiting list and the Government has introduced Fully Self Financing System (FSFS) under 
which an Educational institution willing to bear the cost of running NCC training under the 

39 
 
guidance of nearest NCC unit can apply for NCC under this Scheme. The Committee also 
understand that about one lakh vacancies have been approved for Senior Division/Senior Wing 
cadets by Ministry of Defence for allotment to private colleges under FSFS. During the Oral 
Evidence, the hiring of Ex-servicemen as instructors by private schools also figured. In this 
regard, the Committee desire that while granting the permission to do so, quality of training be 
strictly maintained and proper monitoring mechanism to oversee the training process should be 
done by the nearest NCC Unit. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The implementation instructions issued have already considered this aspect and 
Commanding Officer of the Battalions have been assigned the role of supervising the training so 
that training standards are not diluted and the institutes are fully committed towards provisioning 
of requisite infrastructure and follow the guideline issued by HQ DGNCC. 
 
The orientation training of the ex-servicemen prior to conduct of the training of the cadets 
is planned by the State Directorate under the supervision of NCC staff and an effective 
monitoring mechanism is being followed. 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 48) 
 
For this initiative, the Committee will like to put on record their appreciation and believe 
that this programme can help in minimizing the waiting period in schools and colleges and 
provide a disciplined youth to the Nation. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Observations of the Committee are noted.  Further, the vacancies have been sub-allotted 
to the Dtes and enrolment of cadets in Private Schools under this scheme will start once the 
new education session commences. The scheme has been disseminated to the lowest level to 
make it successful. 
 
CSR Policy for NCC Programmes 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 49) 
 
During the deliberations before that Committee, the issue of taking advantage of CSR 
policy of PSUs for NCC for its sustainability and expansion came up and it came to the notice of 
the Committee that the said policy is under examination. The Committee desire that CSR policy 
for NCC programmes including participation of NCC cadets in international games should be 
expedited and the steps initiated/taken in this regard be intimated to the Committee within three 
months of the presentation of this Report. 
  

40 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The CSR Policy for NCC programme is under examination.  The suggestion/directions of 
the Committee are noted for compliance. 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 53) 
 
The Committee also note that NCC has initiated pilot courses/capsules towards skill 
development in two State Departments, namely, Bihar & Jharkhand Departments. While 
appreciating this initiative by NCC, the Committee desire that such innovative courses towards 
skill development may also be undertaken in other State Departments. In this regard, State NCC 
departments may also explore all avenues of training of Cadets in Skill Development Centres. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
All State Directorates have been pursuing with various Skill Development Centres and 
organizations within States to hone the skill of the cadets in diverse fields which will open 
employment avenues for the Cadets. 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 54) 
 
 The Committee learnt that two Defence corridors have been started by the Government 
in Uttar Pradesh and Tamil Nadu.  The Defence Production Sector have seen growth in interest 
from the private industries including multinational companies and investors helped by the 
ambitious ‘Make in India’ project of the Government opening up possibilities for India to be a 
leading country in Defence Production.  This in turn will create the need for suitable trained and 
skilled manpower.  The Committee feel that this opens up a great opportunity for the NCC 
Cadets, especially those Cadets failing to make it to the armed forces, who can be imparted 
suitable technical training towards this end to serve the Defence Production Sector both in 
public and private defence production organizations. The Committee recommend that all efforts 
may be made to provide suitable technical training to NCC Cadets in the field of Defence 
Production Sector which can open up possibilities for their gainful employment in this sector.  In 
this way, more students will be attracted to join NCC in future. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The recommendations of the Committee are noted. 
 
 
 
  

41 
 
(B) OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE 
GOVERNMENT AND ARE COMMENTED UPON 
 
MANPOWER 
 
Recommendation (Para Nos. 5 to 7) 
 
 From the information provided to the Committee, they find that, the Sanctioned strength 
of Ordnance Factories is 1,45,503 while the held strength has been declining and in January 
2020, it come down to 80,524. Out of this, the Technical strength is 67,321 against a 
sanctioning of 1,23,142 while Non-Technical strength is 13,203 against sanctioned post of 
22,361. 
 The Committee observe that the existing strength is almost only half of the sanctioned 
strength. They were apprised that Ordnance Factory Board had recently concluded recruitment 
of 2668 Industrial employees. Moreover, recruitment of 378 'Non-industrial employees and 692 
Charge-man is under process. In this respect, the Committee were further apprised that 
considering decline of orders from Army owing to declaration of non-core items, very limited 
recruitment is in process. 
 In light of the facts stated here, the Committee recommend that a revision of sanctioned 
strength must be conducted in Ordnance Factories reflecting a realistic scenario of requirement 
of manpower in various factories and offices of Ordnance Factory Board(OFB). Based on the 
outcome of such revision and keeping in view the issue of future exports, which is discussed in 
the succeeding paragraph, optimal manpower strength should be determined and inducted 
consequently. Besides, the trained existing manpower of Ordnance Factory Board(OFB) must 
be fully and optimally utilized in various activities of Ordnance Factories(OFs) to ensure that 
they achieve self-reliance model at the earliest. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
In the year 2015, an exercise for rationalization of manpower was carried out by a 
committee constituted for the purpose. Based on its recommendation, the overall sanctioned 
strength of the OFB organization has been reduced from 1,63,103 to 1,45,503 along with a 
direction that operational strength of OFB will not exceed 1,10,000.    
 
Further, with the introduction of Core & Non-core items, there is a fundamental change in 
the policy as orders for non-core items will not be given to Ordnance Factories on nomination 
basis.  This has affected the load position in certain Ordnance Factories engaged in 
manufacturing of clothing items. To realign with these policy changes, Ordnance Factories have 
taken up a program of re-skilling its manpower especially in the factories under Ordnance 
Equipment Factories (OEF) group, which are basically manufacturing the clothing items with the 
help of the Tailors.   
 
  

42 
 
BUDGET FOR MODERNIZATION 
 
Recommendation (Para Nos. 8 to 10) 
 
 The Committee were given to understand that modernization of OFs is a continuous 
process. The outlay provided in respect of modernization is divided into three parts viz. Machine 
& equipment, Renewal and Replacement (RR) of Plant & Machinery (P&M) which are beyond 
economical repairs, Acquisition of P&M under capacity creation/Augmentation under New 
Capital and Development of Civil Works infrastructure. 
 The Committee note that allocation during last five years was Rs. 1913.19 crore while 
actual allocation was Rs. 1947.86 crore. The Committee also find that in case of works the 
allocation was Rs.1607.63 crore while expenditure Rs. 1582.66 crore. There was an under 
spending of Rs. 24.97 crore. In case of R&R the allocation was Rs. 2210.00 crore and 
expenditure Rs. 2100.50 crore. The Committee note when the Capital allocation for 2020-21 is 
to the tune of Rs. 1268 crore, a surrender of Rs. 109.50 crore is not a negligible amount over a 
period of five years. 
 In this respect, the Committee recommend that necessary corrections are to be carried 
out and expenditure on modernization by Ordnance Factory Board(OFB) should exhibit 
seriousness. 
Reply of the Government 
 
Expenditure during last 5 years is shown below: 
(Rs. in crore) 
Budget Head  2014-
15 
2015-
16 
2016-
17 
2017-
18 
2018-
19 
Total Shortfall 
Renewal and 
Replacement 
(RR) 
Allotment 450.00 425.00 450.00 460.00 400.00 2185.00 84.50 
Expenditure 441.87 385.73 451.77 422.80 398.33 2100.50 
New Capital 
(NC) 
Allotment 489.00 305.00 364.61 486.58 332.00 1977.19 29.00 
Expenditure 485.75 312.30 368.62 488.92 292.27 1947.86 
Civil Works 
(CW) 
Allotment 315.00 343.00 339.67 317.00 293.00 1607.67 25.38 
Expenditure 300.66 339.45 337.84 314.54 289.80 1582.29 
 
Net allotment in last 05 years was Rs. 5770 crore and Rs. 109.50 crore was surrendered 
(approximately 1.9%). Out of this Rs. 109.50 crore, Rs. 84.50 crore comes under the category of 
Renewal and Replacement (RR) which is a self-generated fund accumulated by the 
depreciation value of existing Plant & Machineries and is carried forward for subsequent year. 
Therefore, actual fund that could not be utilized and got surrendered was Rs. 54.38 crore 
(approximately. 0.9%) spread over a period of five years.  
 
  

43 
 
DELAY IN PROJECTS 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 11) 
 
 The Committee were informed in the written replies about the various reasons for delay 
at the tendering, supply and erection and commissioning stages. They were further informed 
that when Detailed Project Report is prepared, a realistic timeline for the completion of the 
project is taken, taking all these aspects into consideration. Also regular review meetings are 
held to monitor progress. The Committee while recognizing that a few of these factors are 
beyond the control of the Ordnance Factories, observe that delays have been quite a part & 
parcel of Ordnance Factories projects which has also affected their pace of production. The 
Committee can infer that there is lot of slippage in the supply by Ordnance Factories to the 
Army, their main client, which have put extra burden on the exchequer also. The inordinate 
delays also adversely impact not only Indian supply but the export potential. 
Reply of the Government 
 
Indian Armed Forces are always the paramount priority for OFB and all efforts are made 
to ensure that there is least effect on the supplies to user in requisite quantity. Also, OFB is 
making all endeavors to continue the uninterrupted pace of production and supply the important 
armament stores timely to Indian Army.  
 
OFB supplies items to the Armed Forces based on consultation by mutually agreed 
targets fixed on yearly basis. Further, efforts are being made to avoid/reduce delays through 
better planning, periodic reviews of progress, and enhanced interaction with Indian Armed 
Forces to facilitate addressing their concerns during the production process. 
 
Also, regular review is being done in the Ministry with MGO and DGQA to resolve quality 
issues of OFB. Interaction of OFB officers with the Depot Heads for the purpose of getting first 
hand feedback has resulted in addressing the deficiencies in supply of quality ammunition 
immediately.  
 
Recommendation (Para No. 12) 
 
 The Committee note with concern that only 49 per cent of the Budget Estimates that was 
predicted for the current financial year have been booked by the Ordnance Factories. The 
Committee recommend that this shortfall may be taken up at the highest level to take it to 100 
percent and a time frame for achieving the same fixed under intimation to the Committee. The 
Committee is deeply concerned about the decreasing supply of products to the Army and the 
inability of the Ordnance Factories to meet their demands. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
OFB has the VOP (Value of Production) for the FY 2019-20 as Rs. 9,213 crore with 
respect to the Modified Appropriation (MA) sanctioned of Rs. 11,166 crore (MA) i.e. 82.5%. This 
is excluding items worth Rs. 1,313 crore which were under proof/inspection and could not be 
issued due to country-wide lockdown on account of Covid-19 Pandemic, (All figures are 

44 
 
excluding GST). If these stores could have been proved and issued before 31st March 2020, the 
issue figure would have been around 94% with respect to MA. 
 
Prior to Lockdown due to Covid-19 pandemic, which unfortunately occurred in the month of 
March; (usually the month of final dispatches and maximum VOI), some other factors also led to 
lower the issue figures: 
 
(i) The foremost item-wise target was available only in February, 2019 in the form of 
Letter of Intent (LOI) targets, even that did not include the Targets for Capital 
Items and Repair Components e.g. Pinaka Rockets, ERA Panels for T-72, though 
it is a high value item.   
 
(ii) The item-wise targets for all items including Capital Items like Pinaka etc. were 
finally received in September, 2019. (This list was having total value as same as to 
the Budgeted amount catered for in LOI Target).  
 
(iii) Ideally, item wise targets should be received at least 9 months before start of 
financial year, considering the procurement lead time for input materials of around 
6 months and the out turn time (Manufacturing/proof/inspection time) of around 3 
months for OFB’s products in general. In case of imported input materials, the lead 
time may be even higher. Delayed receipt of item wise target in September, 2019, 
especially for Ammunition items, which require passed proof components, has 
adversely affected the production plan of 2019-20. 
 
 
DEFENCE RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT ORGANISATION 
 
Budget 
 
Recommendation (Para Nos. 20 to 22) 
 
The Committee find that during the financial year 2020-21, the proposed BE allocation of 
DRDO was Rs. 23,457.40 Cr and the approved allocation is Rs. 19327.35 Cr. There is a 
shortfall of Rs. 4130.00 Cr. With regard to the budgetary requirements, the DRDO stated that 
keeping aside mandatory expenses for strategic schemes & pay & allowances, the amount left 
for R&D activities is meager. However, the Department manages within allocations by 
prioritizing project activities. 
 
During the course of examination of Demands for Grants 2020-21, the Committee found 
that in 2019-20, the approved BE allocation for DRDO was Rs. 19,021.02 Cr, while the 
approved RE allocation was Rs. 17,730.78 Cr. The Committee note that the RE allocation is 
even lesser than the BE allocation by Rs. 1,280.22 Cr. 
 
Further, in respect of the Budgetary grants, the Committee on glancing through the 
papers submitted by the Ministry of Defence, found that DRDO expenditure as percentage of 

45 
 
total GDP has also plummeted over past years. In 2015-16, it was 0.098% which came down to 
0.086% in 2020-21. 
 
After taking into account the details stated above, the Committee observe that Defence 
R&D is imminent component of progress in country’s Defence & also boost indigenisation efforts 
of the Government. In addition, it also enhances export potential of the Country. Therefore, 
adequate funding for R&D is essential, which is not being reflected in the status of budgetary 
grants as highlighted in above paras. More importantly, deduction in RE grant after allocating an 
amount in BE grant is not a healthy budgeting phenomena as it would lead to certain last minute 
prioritization and ad-hocism. It is a known fact that advanced countries spend substantial 
amount on Research and Development, therefore, the Committee are of the view that the 
percentage of defence R&D spending to total GDP shall, if not, at par with other leading 
countries of the world, be at least adequate for our future needs. The Committee, therefore, 
recommend that in light of the case presented here, Government should ensure provision of 
adequate funds to DRDO in additional/supplementary grants stages. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
DRDO owes thanks to the Committee for its recommendation in regards to Funds. The 
details of FBE, Budget Allocations for the Deptt of Defence R&D at different Budgetary stages 
and actual expenditure w.e.f FY 2017-18 is mentioned in Table 1.  
 
Table 1 
 (Rs in crore) 
Year BE 
Proposed 
BE 
Approved 
RE 
Approved 
MA 
Approved 
2017-18 19935.60 14818.74 15463.25 15399.25 
2018-19 22203.74 17861.19 17610.38 17121.99 
2019-20 22953.95 19021.02 17730.78 17730.78 
2020-21 23457.40 19327.35   
 
 
The comparison of Defence Expenditure and DDR&D expenditure w.e.f FY 2017-18 is 
enumerated in Table 2. 
 
Table 2 
 (Rs in crore) 
Year Defence 
Expenditure 
BE 
Proposed by 
DR&D 
Budget 
allocated to 
R&D at BE 
stage 
%age of 
Defence 
Expenditure 
2017-18 (BE) 274114.00 19935.60 14818.74 5.41 
2018-19 (BE) 295511.41 22203.74 17861.19 6.04 
2019-20 (BE) 318931.22 22953.95 19021.02 5.96 
2020-21 (BE) 337553.00 23457.40 19327.35 5.73 
 

46 
 
It may be noted that against the projection of Rs. 23457.40 Cr at BE stage during the F.Y. 
2020-21, an amount of Rs 19327.35 Cr. has been allocated. However, it is a fact that budgetary 
allocations are much less than the projections made by the Department of Defence Research & 
Development (R&D) but the Department is managing within the allocations by re-prioritizing the 
project activities. Further, additional funds would be required to support various projects to be 
undertaken in futuristic areas. 
 
Yes, it is a fact that BE approved for Department of Defence Research and Development  
DD(R&D) during the FY 2019-20 was Rs. 19021.02 Cr and the same was reduced to Rs 
17730.78 Cr at RE stage. Thus there has been an overall reduction of Rs 1290.24 Cr. 
 
A reduction of Rs 1760.65 Cr was imposed under Capital Head based on the expenditure trend 
during the FY 2019-20. However, an additional amount of Rs 470.41 Cr was also provided 
under Revenue Head during the FY at RE stage. 
 
Defence (R&D) Expenditure as percentage of GDP w.e.f 2015-16 is given in Table 3. 
 
Table 3 
 (Rs. in crore) 
 
Year TOTAL GDP DD R&D Exp DD R&D Exp as % 
of TOTAL GDP 
2015-16 13682035.00 13540.11 0.098 
2016-17 15183709.00 13501.00 0.088 
2017-18 16847455.00 15399.25 0.091 
2018-19 18840731.00 17121.99 0.090 
2019-20(AE) 20442233.00 17730.78 0.086 
 
Manpower 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 25) 
  
Presently authorized strength of scientists in DRDO is 7,353 while existing strength is 
7,068. The percentage of scientist in DRDO is 30% of total strength of DRDO. Further, the 
Committee were apprised that since 2001, DRDO has been managing with same authorization 
inspite of more than 6 fold increase in outlay from IX to XIII plan. The Committee note that the 
current manpower is grossly insufficient for committed R&D projects. In 2010, Manpower 
Planning Board (MPB) had recommended for increasing manpower by 4966. Ministry of Finance 
(MoF) recommended 1316 posts. However, the case is pending with Cabinet Committee on 
Security (CCS).  After a lapse of 10years since MPB recommended sanctioning of posts in 
2010, there had been no addition in sanctioned strength, therefore, the Committee urge that 
Ministry of Defence shall make efforts to cadre review and revision of sanctioning of strength of 
scientists in DRDO, commensurate with increased number of projects/work. Also, the case of 
436 posts already approved by Ministry of Finance (MoF) in phase-I and pending with CCS shall 
be expedited. The initiation done in this regard along with the probable date of induction be 
communicated to the Committee at the earliest. 

47 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The said case was expedited with the Department of Expenditure (DoE) and 
subsequently approval has been accorded for augmentation of manpower in DRDO by 436 
posts (below JS level) on 24 Apr 2020. 
 
MoF has also advised to take up a fresh case for approval of CCS for creation of two 
posts (above JS level) viz. Chief Executive and Chief Construction Engineer. 
 
 
Coordination in Research and Development with Private Sector 
 
Recommendation (Para Nos. 27 & 28) 
 
 
The Committee note that DRDO has made rapid progress with the infusion of private 
sector involvement in the research related activities of DRDO. The Committee appreciate the 
large number of steps taken in this direction like opening of world class test facilities, MoUs with 
leading industry chambers, help rendered to the private industry by Transfer to Technology, 
providing patent to the Private Industry free of cost and launching of Technology Development 
Fund(TDF). The Committee are of the considered view that active private sector participation is 
the way forward and can act as a major impetus for the improvement in research related 
activities. 
 
The Committee recommend that efforts may be intensified to ensure better collaboration 
between the public and private sector for improved results and given the sensitive nature of this 
work, due monitoring mechanism need to be developed to ensure that no leakage of data takes 
place regarding products being developed. The Committee also recommend that a regular 
impact assessment mechanism should be developed to assess the overall impact of the 
enhanced involvement of private sector in the research related activities of DRDO. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
DRDO is grateful to the Committee for appreciation of its efforts to facilitate and 
encourage industries through TDF, providing test facilities, engaging Industry Chambers, free of 
cost access to DRDO patents and funding under TDF. 
 
It is to be mentioned that during development phase of product Life Cycle, necessary 
confidentiality measures are taken during signing of contract as per guidelines of Purchase 
Manual -2016(PM-2016). At the time of Transfer of Technology (ToT), all necessary 
confidentiality clauses are signed in Licensing Agreement for ToT (LAToT) with the industries. 
 
  

48 
 
Recommendation (Para Nos. 30 & 31) 
 
 
The Committee are pleased to note that DRDO has established eight Centres of 
Excellence in advanced areas wherein professors and students from academic institutes like IIT 
Delhi, IIT Mumbai, IIT Chennai etc. are working in unison. It is also appreciable that DRDO has 
started scholarship schemes, financial support to organize conferences/seminars/ workshops in 
niche areas of technology of interest to DRDO at various academic institutions. 
 
The Committee while putting on record its admiration for these initiatives by DRDO, 
recommend that DRDO should endeavor to open more such Centers of Excellence in various 
parts of the country as well as increase the number of financial assistance schemes which can 
play a major role in attracting the best talent for recruitment in DRDO to the benefit of the 
country. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
DRDO acknowledges the Committee’s admiration for having established Centres of 
Excellence/ Advanced Technology Centres in academic institutes of the country for 
development of defence related technologies. 
 
DRDO has established the Centres of Excellence/ Advanced Technology Centres in the 
research institute based on the identified technology gaps and research faculty strength for 
development of defence technologies. This endeavor will continue as per the new emerging 
areas and needs of DRDO and accordingly financial assistance scheme would increase. DRDO 
acknowledges the Committee’s admiration and will continue to expand the researcher 
engagement by establishment of more Centres of Excellence/ Advanced Technology Centres. 
Manpower and Training 
 
Recommendation (Para Nos. 41 & 42) 
 
 
The committee, during examination Demands for Grants 2020-21 found that around 4448 
number of technical personnel are involved in Quality Assurance activity for defence stores 
manufactured by Ordnance Factory Board / Defence Public Sector Undertakings, private 
Industry or import. Further, the committee also comes to know that around 19,000 quality check 
inspections are undertaken by the officials of DGQA in month time, which comes to 
approximately 5 inspections per technical person in one day.   
The Committee are happy to learn that regular training is provided by DGQA to its 
technical manpower, which is essential to achieve fool proof mechanism of inspection. While 
noting this fact, the Committee would like to know whether these numbers are sufficient for 
operations of DGQA or they need extra manpower especially keeping in view the growing future 
role of Defence manufacturing sector in times yet to come. In the opinion of the Committee, the 
“Make in India Policy” and manufacturing under “Defence Corridors” would definitely add to the 
responsibilities of DGQA. These policies are brought out in other parts of the Report pertaining 
to procurements. 

49 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Manpower and Training 
   
(a) It is submitted that over the years DGQA’s role and responsibility has been dynamic with 
the change in technology and Governments initiative of ‘Make in India’ policy. With the aim to 
boost Foreign Direct Investment in the Defence Sector and impetus given for ease of doing 
business, as per Government of India policies, number of schemes such as assessment and 
award of Green Channel Status, Self certification, Defence Export Promotion, allocation and 
coordination of proof ranges,   registration, validation and monitoring of Third Party Inspectors 
have been launched by the MoD(DP) for which the responsibility to implement has been 
entrusted  to DGQA . In addition, Defence Corridors have been proposed to give boost to 
defence manufacturing.  Thus, overall DGQA role and involvement is progressively increasing in 
a diverse manner to meet the intended objectives.  
 
(b)    In addition to this, Indian Army is also modernizing its artillery and armament to meet their 
operational requirement. Induction of large caliber Artillery Guns of 155 mm such as ‘M777 Ultra 
light Howitzer’, ‘155/52mm K9 Vaja’ and ‘155/45mm Dhanush’ and ‘Sharang’ have already 
commenced. Induction and production of other state of the art artillery gun systems and 
armament such as 155/52mm Towed Gun System, indigenous 155/52mm ATAGAS, six more 
regiments of Pinaka Weapon System, Assault Rifle AK-203 and other Small Arm weapons are 
also planned. Consequent to these activities related to conduct of dynamic proof of weapon and 
ammunition at respective Proof Ranges is gradually increasing. In order to meet the futuristic 
increasing requirement for conduct of dynamic proof firing, DGQA is in the process of initiating a 
proposal for commissioning of New Proof Firing Range at Pokhran Field Firing Range (PFFR). 
Creation of additional facilities would entail allocation of additional technical manpower and 
resources.  
 
(c)    Moreover a large number of Private Industries have also shown keen interest in 
development of various guns & small arms systems, different kinds of ammunitions and their 
components, in India with the collaboration of established and well known arms and ammunition 
manufacturers of the world. Therefore, in order to provide close and fool proof mechanism of 
inspection and quality assurance for the various phases of conceptualization, development, 
production and exploitation, a large number of DGQA work force would be required. 
 
(d)   An increase of 20% technical manpower with respect to  presently held strength would be 
required  to meet the requirement of the future challenges as brought about by Hon’ble 
Committee members in para 44 of subject report. 
  

50 
 
 
 
Skill Development and Employability of Cadets 
 
Recommendation(Para No. 50) 
 
The Committee note that every year about 5000 to 6000 cadets get selected in other 
ranks and about 8 to 10 percent as direct entry as Officers in Armed Forces. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Enabling the NCC cadets for selection in Armed Forces has been the key focus of NCC 
training.  Concerted efforts have been taken to ensure full utilization of the allotted vacancies to 
NCC.  Through the concerted efforts, the selection percentage for the year 2019 has gone up to 
approximately 70%. Induction of cadets into armed forces continue to be a focus area of NCC. 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 51) 
 
The Committee appreciate the initiatives taken by the Ministry and introduction of 
certificate courses in adventure & sports – mountaineering, sailing, riding & scuba diving etc., 
training through National Disaster Response Force (NDRF), Red Cross, NCC Exchange 
Participants Association of India(EXPA) etc., increased focus on personality development, 
leadership, communication skills, training/coaching for Service Selection Board(SSB) through 
experts, Certification Course for Yoga through Ministry of Ayush, enhanced attachment with 
services units & Military Hospitals, Central Armed Police Forces(CAPFs), Aviation, Shipping, 
Railways and Forest like Defence Services and training of cadets through Skill India initiatives. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Observations of the Committee are noted.  Further, generation of employment avenues 
for the NCC Cadets other than armed forces has been taken up in a big way.  Also Ministry of 
Home Affairs, Ministry of Railways, Ministry of Surface Transport and Ministry of Civil Aviation 
have been requested to introduce incentives for NCC Cadets in security related jobs, CAPFs 
and State Police, similar to the incentives existing in armed forces. 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 52) 
 
The Committee are happy that the potential of these cadets is being recognized and 
there is a favourable consideration to give them the same incentives as in any other security 
related service. However, the Committee recommend that efforts should be made to provide 
jobs to all the trained NCC candidates and to increase employability. Further, Non 
Governmental Organizations like EXPA which are giving training to the NCC cadets should be 
suitably rewarded monetarily. 
 

51 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Ministry of Defence has taken up with Ministry of Home Affairs, Ministry of Railways, 
Ministry of Surface Transport and Ministry of Civil Aviation the matter of introduction of 
incentives for NCC Cadets in security related jobs, CAPFs and State Police, 
 
Also, Skill Development and Personality Development has been taken up in a big way by 
NCC to enhance the employability of the NCC cadets.  Services of NCC Exchange Participants 
Association of India (EXPA) has been suitably integrated in training of the Cadets.  NCC is 
working as facilitator to facilitate NCC cadets to optimise the Skill Development training imparted 
by State Skill development agencies.  Efforts are also being made through the state government 
to facilitate skill development of the cadets through Government scheme like Pradhan Mantri 
Kaushal Vikas Yojana (PMKVY), etc. 
 
These measures are expected to help increasing employment avenues for NCC cadets in 
future. 
 
 
  

52 
 
 
CHAPTER III 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT DESIRE TO 
PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE REPLIES RECEIVED FROM THE GOVERNMENT 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
-NIL- 
  

53 
 
CHAPTER IV 
 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF 
GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE WHICH 
REQUIRE REITERATION AND TO BE COMMENTED UPON 
 
 
 
 
-NIL- 
  

54 
 
CHAPTER V 
 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH GOVERNMENT HAVE 
FURNISHED INTERIM REPLIES: 
  
-NIL- 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi                 Jual Oram 
09 February, 2021      Chairperson, 
20 Magha, 1942 (Saka)     Standing Committee on Defence 
 
 
 
  

55 
 
APPENDIX I 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE (2020-21)  
MINUTES OF THE THIRD SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
DEFENCE (2020-21) 
 
The Committee sat on Tuesday, the 9th February, 2021 from 1530 hrs. to 1600 hrs. in 
Committee Room No. 2, Block A, Extension to Parliament House Annexe (EPHA), New Delhi. 
 
PRESENT 
 
 
Shri Jual Oram  - Chairperson  
 
    MEMBERS 
 
Lok Sabha 
 
 
 2. Kunwar Danish Ali 
3. Shri Ajay Bhatt 
4. Shri Nitesh Ganga Deb 
5. Shri Annasaheb Shankar Jolle 
6. Choudhary Mehboob Ali Kaiser 
7. Smt. (Dr.) Rajashree Mallick 
8. Dr. T.R. Paarivendhar 
9. Shri Kapil Moreshwar Patil 
10 Shri Jugal Kishore Sharma 
11. Shri Prathap Simha 
12. Shri Brijendra Singh  
13. Shri Durga Das Uikey 
  
Rajya Sabha 
 
14. Dr. Ashok Bajpai 
15. Shri V. Lakshmikantha Rao 
16. Shri Sanjay Raut 
17. Shri Kamakhya Prasad Tasa 
18. Dr. Sudhanshu Trivedi 
19. Lt. Gen. Dr. D. P. Vats (Retd.) 

56 
 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Smt. Kalpana Sharma - Additional Secretary  
2. Dr. Sanjeev Sharma - Director 
3. Shri Rahul Singh  - Deputy Secretary  
 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members of the Committee and informed 
them about the agenda for the Sitting. The Committee then took up for consideration the 
following draft Action Taken Reports:- 
i. Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations 
contained in the Twenty-third Report (16th Lok Sabha) of the Standing 
Committee on Defence on the subject 'Proxy and Postal Voting by Defence 
Services Personnel in General Elections an Evaluation'; 
ii. Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations 
contained in the Fiftieth Report (16th Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on 
Defence on the subject ‘Provision of all weather road connectivity under Border 
Roads Organisation (BRO) and other agencies up to International Borders as 
well as the strategic areas including approach roads-an appraisal’; 
iii. Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/ Recommendations 
contained in the First Report (17th Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants of the 
Ministry of Defence for the year 2019-20 on ‘General Defence Budget, Border 
Roads Organisation, Indian Coast Guard, Military Engineer Services, Directorate 
General Defence Estates, Defence Public Sector Undertakings, Canteen Stores 
Department, Welfare of Ex-Servicemen, Ex-Servicemen Contributory Health 
Scheme, Defence Pensions, Sainik Schools (Demand Nos. 18 and 21)’; 
iv. Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations 
contained in the Second Report (17th Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants of the 
Ministry of Defence for the year 2019-20 on ‘Army, Navy, Air Force and Joint 
Staff (Demand Nos. 19 and 20)'; 
v. Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations 
contained in the Fourth Report (17th Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants of the 
Ministry of Defence for the year 2019-20 on ‘Ordnance Factories, Defence 
Research and Development Organisation, Directorate General of Quality 
Assurance and National Cadet Corps (Demand No. 19 and 20)’; 
vi. Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations 
contained in the Fifth Report (17th Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants of the 
Ministry of Defence for the year 2020-21 on ‘General Defence Budget, Border 
Roads Organisation, Indian Coast Guard, Military Engineer Services, Directorate 
General Defence Estates, Defence Public Sector Undertakings, Canteen Stores 

57 
 
Department, Welfare of Ex-Servicemen, Ex-Servicemen Contributory Health 
Scheme, Defence Pensions, Sainik Schools (Demand Nos. 18, 19, 20 and 21)’; 
vii. Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations 
contained in the Sixth Report (17th Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants of the 
Ministry of Defence for the year 2020-21 on ‘Army, Navy, Air Force and Joint 
Staff (Demand Nos. 19 and 20)’; and  
viii. Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations 
contained in the Eighth Report (17th Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants of the 
Ministry of Defence for the year 2020-21 on ‘Ordnance Factories, Defence 
Research and Development Organisation, Directorate General of Quality 
Assurance and National Cadet Corps (Demand Nos. 19 and 20)’. 
 
3. After some deliberations, the Committee adopted the above reports without any 
modifications. 
 
4. The Committee, then, authorized the Chairperson to finalise the above draft Reports and 
present the same to the House on a date convenient to him. 
5. ******Does not pertain to the Reports****** 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
******** 
  

58 
 
 
APPENDIX II 
 
ANALYSIS OF THE ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE OBSERVATIONS/ 
RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE EIGHTH REPORT OF STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
DEFENCE (17TH LOK SABHA) ON ‘DEMANDS FOR GRANTS OF THE MINISTRY OF DEFENCE 
FOR THE YEAR 2020-21 ON ORDNANCE FACTORIES, DEFENCE RESEARCH AND 
DEVELOPMENT ORGANISATION, DIRECTORATE GENERAL OF QUALITY ASSURANCE 
(DGQA) AND NATIONAL CADET CORPS (NCC) (DEMAND NO. 20)' 
1. Total number of recommendations                         54 
2. Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by 
the Government (please see Chapter II A): 
 
 Recommendation Nos. 1,2,3,4,13,14,15,16,17,18,19,23,24,26,29,32,33,34,35, 
    36,37,41,42,43,44,45,46,47,48,49,53,54 
 
Total :      33 
Percentage:  61%    
 
3 Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by 
the Government and are commented upon (please see Chapter II B): 
  
Recommendation Nos.  ,6,7,8,9,10,11,12,20,21,22,25,27,28,30,31,41,42,50,51,52 
Total :      21 
Percentage:   39% 
 
4. Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to pursue in view 
of the replies received from the Government(please see Chapter III): 
 Recommendation No. –Nil- 
Total :        00 
Percentage:  00 
 
5. Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of Government have not 
been accepted by the Committee which require reiteration and to be commented upon 
(please see Chapter IV): 
 
Recommendation Nos.  –Nil- 
Total :        00 
Percentage:  00 
 
6. Observations / recommendations in respect of which Government have furnished 
interim replies (please see Chapter V): 
 
 Recommendation Nos.  –Nil- 
Total :        00 
Percentage:  00 