 
12 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE
(SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA)
[Action taken by the Government on the Observations / Recommendations contained in 
the Second Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) on 'Demands for Grants of the Ministr
Defence for the year 2019-20
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
February
STANDING COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE 
(2020-21) 
 
(SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
MINISTRY OF DEFENCE 
 
 
[Action taken by the Government on the Observations / Recommendations contained in 
the Second Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) on 'Demands for Grants of the Ministr
20 on 'Army, Navy, Air Force and Joint Staff (Demand Nos. 
19 and 20)']. 
TWELFTH REPORT 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
February, 2021 /Magha, 1942 (Saka) 
 
 
[Action taken by the Government on the Observations / Recommendations contained in 
the Second Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) on 'Demands for Grants of the Ministry of 
(Demand Nos. 

 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE
 
(SEVEN
 
[Action taken by the Government on the Observations / Recommendations contained in 
the Second Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) on 'Demands for Grants of the Ministry of 
Defence for the year 2019-20 
19 and 20)'].  
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on  
Laid in Rajya Sabha on   
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
February
ii 
 
TWELFTH REPORT 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE 
(2020-21) 
  
(SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
MINISTRY OF DEFENCE 
[Action taken by the Government on the Observations / Recommendations contained in 
the Second Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) on 'Demands for Grants of the Ministry of 
20 on Army, Navy, Air Force and Joint Staff (Demand Nos. 
Presented to Lok Sabha on  12.02.2021  
Laid in Rajya Sabha on   12.02.2021  
 
 
 
  
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
February, 2021 /Magha, 1942 (Saka) 
[Action taken by the Government on the Observations / Recommendations contained in 
the Second Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) on 'Demands for Grants of the Ministry of 
orce and Joint Staff (Demand Nos. 

iii 
 
CONTENTS 
          PAGE 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (2020-21).……………………….....…... (iii) 
INTRODUCTION..…………………………………………………….….…..............   (v)    
 
CHAPTER I Report………………………………………………………………..       1   
       
 
CHAPTER II a) Recommendations/Observations which have been  
  accepted by the Government ……………………………….    19     
 
 b) Recommendations/Observations which have been  
  accepted by the Government and commented upon..........     51 
 
CHAPTER III Recommendations/Observations which the Committee  
 do not desire to pursue in view of the replies received  
 from the Government      ………………………………………………66 
 
CHAPTER IV Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies  
 of Government have not been accepted by the Committee  
 which require reiteration and commented upon ……………………..67 
 
CHAPTER V Recommendations/Observations in respect of which  
 Government have furnished interim  
 replies/replies awaited……………………….................................       68  
 
 
APPENDICES 
 
  I      Minutes of the third sitting of the Standing Committee on 
                  Defence (2020-21) held on 09.02.2021………………..............69 
 
  II     Analysis of Action Taken by the Government on the  
         Observations/Recommendations contained in the Second 
   Report (17 th Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on  
   Defence (2019-20).....................................................................72 
   
 
 

iv 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE (2020-21)  
  SHRI JUAL ORAM  -  CHAIRPERSON 
 
Lok Sabha 
 
 
2. Shri Deepak (Dev) Adhikari  
3. Kunwar Danish Ali 
4. Shri Ajay Bhatt 
5. Shri Devusinh Jesingbhai Chauhan 
6. Shri Nitesh Ganga Deb 
7. Shri Rahul Gandhi 
8. Shri Annasaheb Shankar Jolle  
9. Choudhary Mehboob Ali Kaiser 
10. Prof. (Dr.) Ram Shankar Katheria  
11. Smt. (Dr.) Rajashree Mallick  
12. Dr. T.R. Paarivendhar  
13. Shri Kapil Moreshwar Patil  
14. Shri Anumula Revanth Reddy  
15. Shri Jugal Kishore Sharma  
16. Dr. Shrikant Eknath Shinde  
17. Shri Prathap Simha  
18. Shri Brijendra Singh  
19. Shri Mahabali Singh  
20. Shri Kotagiri Sridhar  
21. Shri Durga Das Uikey 
 
  Rajya Sabha 
 
22. Dr. Ashok Bajpai 
23. Shri Prem Chand Gupta  
24. Shri Sharad Pawar  
25. Shri V. Lakshmikantha Rao 
26. Shri Sanjay Raut 
27. Shri Rajeev Satav  
28. Dr. Abhishek Manu Singhvi  
29. Shri Kamakhya Prasad Tasa  
30. Dr. Sudhanshu Trivedi  
31. Lt. Gen. Dr. D. P. Vats (Retd.) 

v 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Smt Kalpana Sharma  - Additional Secretary 
2. Dr. Sanjeev Sharma  - Director 
3. Shri Rahul Singh   - Deputy Secretary 
4. Smt Rekha Sinha   - Assistant Executive Officer 
   

vi 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
I, the Chairperson of the Standing Committee on Defence (2020-21), having 
been authorized by the Committee, present this Twelfth Report of the Committee on 
'Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations contained in 
the Second Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants of the Ministry of 
Defence for the year 2019-20 on Army, Navy, Air Force and Joint Staff (Demand Nos. 
19 and 20)'.  
2.  The Second Report was presented to Hon’ble Speaker, Lok Sabha on 
20.12.2019, presented to Lok Sabha on 31.01.2020 and laid in Rajya Sabha on 
13.12.2019. The Report contained 69 Observations/Recommendations. The Ministry of 
Defence furnished Action Taken Replies on all the Observations/Recommendations in 
the Action Taken Replies in July, 2020. 
3.  The Report was considered and adopted by the Committee at their Sitting held 
on 9 February 2021. 
 
4.  For facility of reference and convenience, Observations/Recommendations of the 
Committee have been printed in bold letters in the Report.  
5. An analysis of Action taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Second Report (17th Lok Sabha) of 
the Standing Committee on Defence is given in Appendix II. 
 
 
New Delhi;                                  Jual Oram,  
9 February, 2021                              Chairperson, 
20 Magha,1942 (Saka)        Standing Committee on Defence 
 

1 
 
REPORT 
CHAPTER – I 
This report of the Standing Committee on Defence deals with action taken by the 
Government on the observations/ recommendations contained in the Second Report 
(17th Lok Sabha) on ‘Demands for Grants of the Ministry of Defence for the year    
2019-20 on Army, Navy, Air Force and Joint Staff (Demand Nos. 19&20)’, which was 
presented to Hon’ble Speaker, Lok Sabha on 20.12.2019, presented to Lok Sabha on 
31.01.2020 and laid in Rajya Sabha on 13.12.2019.  
2. The Committee's Second Report (17th Lok Sabha) contained 69 observations/ 
recommendations on the following aspects:- 
Para No./Nos. Subject 
 
                                 ARMY 
 
1-2 Budget 2019-20 
3 Revenue Budget - Non Salary 
4-5 Budget Review 
6 Percentage share of Army Budget  
7-11 Modernization Budget 
12 Surveillance in Border Areas 
13 Allowances in difficult terrains 
14-17 Bullet Proof Jackets(BPJs) 
18-19 Force Level 
20-21 Manpower 
                                
 AIR FORCE 
22-26 Budgetary Provisions 2019-20 
27 Budget modernization  
28 Make in India  
29 Fighter Aircraft 
30-31 Aircraft shelter 
32-34 Trainer Aircraft  
35 Transport Planes and Helicopters  
36-37 Modernization of Military Airfields  
38-39 Accidents 
40-41 Manpower 
42-43 Training 
  

2 
 
NAVY 
 
44 Budgetary Provisions for the Year 2019-20 
45 Percentage share of Navy’s Budget  
46-47 Revenue Budget 
48-51 Capital Budget 
52-53 Budget Modernization 
54-55 Indigenisation 
56 Naval Airfields 
57-59 Force Level 
60 Coastal Security 
61-62 Safety of fishermen 
63-64 Manpower 
65 International Cooperation 
  
 JOINT STAFF 
66-67 Budget 
68 Defence University 
69 Defence Museum 
  
3.    Action Taken Replies have been received from the Government in respect of all the 
recommendations/observations contained in the Report. However, 13 number of replies 
stated as “classified” have been forwarded to Hon’ble Chairperson’s office in sealed 
cover which include para Nos. 15-19, 31, 56 & 59-64. These replies have been placed 
under ‘accepted’ category. However, categorization of these paras may be done again 
consequently after receipt of the replies/direction from Hon'ble Chairperson. The 
remaining replies have been examined and the same have been categorised as 
follows:- 
(i)  (a)  Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted by the 
 Government (please see Chapter II A) : 
 
ParaNos.1,2,3,4,5,6,7,8,9,10,11,14,15,16,17,18,19,20,21,22,23,24,25,26,27,28, 
29,30,31,33,36,37,38,39,44,45,46,47,48,49,50,51,52,53,54,55,56,59, 
60,61,62,63,64,65,66 & 67       
                                                           (56 Recommendations) 
 
 
 

3 
 
(b) Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted by the 
 Government  and commented upon (please see Chapter II B): 
 Para Nos.  12,13,32,34,35,40,41,42,43,57,58,68 & 69   
        (13 recommendations) 
 
(ii) Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do not desire to pursue 
 in view of the replies received from the Government (please see Chapter III): 
 Para Nos. Nil 
           (00 Recommendation) 
 
(iii) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of Government 
 have not been accepted by the Committee which require reiteration and 
 commented upon (please see Chapter IV): 
 Para Nos. Nil 
         (00 Recommendation) 
                           
(iv) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which Government have furnished 
interim replies (please see Chapter V): 
   
 Para No.  Nil                 
                                        (00 Recommendation) 
4. The Committee desire that the Ministry's response to the comments made 
in Chapter I  should be furnished to them at the earliest and in any case not later 
than six months of the presentation of this Report.  
A Surveillance in border areas 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 12) 
 
5. The Committee had recommended as under:- 
 
‘During the recent study visit of the Standing Committee on Defence to Eastern 
Sector from 4 to 9 November, 2019, they came across a request for high-tech 
state-of-the-art cameras for surveillance purposes. The Committee were 
intimated that fifteen to sixteen such cameras were required for the posts over 
there. During oral evidence, the Committee were apprised by the representatives 

4 
 
of Ministry of Defence that they have received request for surveillance 
equipment. It was also found that the said requirement is not only at Eastern 
Command but all across the northern borders. The request is being undertaken 
in two ways. One is a central procurement which takes a little longer but meets 
the overall requirement. To meet the immediate operational requirement, there is 
Army Commanders’ Special Financial Powers Fund under which the Army 
Commanders are empowered by such operationally necessary equipment to fill 
in the gap till such time that the central procurement materializes. The Committee 
note that despite special powers bestowed upon Army Commanders, 
surveillance equipments are not installed at the required places. It is desired that 
the immediate requirement for surveillance equipment at Eastern Command and 
northern borders including Nathu la Post must be fulfilled at the earliest. Also, 
complete requirement of the surveillance equipment must be attended to through 
central procurement as the border areas are sensitive in nature. The Committee 
emphasize that no stones shall be left unturned in order to develop a fool proof 
border line.’  
6. The Ministry in its Action Taken Reply has stated as under:- 
‘Proposals to augment/address voids in surveillance grid along the Line of 
Actual Control / International Boundary as per appreciated operational necessity 
are projected by forward deployed field formations and these are holistically 
reviewed at Theatre Level.  
2. While operational requirement is the primary driver to determine 
procurement, it is highlighted that proposals from forward deployed formations 
are analysed considering the terrain and geography, cost benefit analysis, 
availability of existing inventory of equipment and proposals being pursued by 
other stake holders to avoid duplicity, and obviate future challenges to equipment 
inventory management, are amongst the other factors analysed before 
procurement of equipment is undertaken. Accordingly, the different types of 
equipment that are capable of carrying out surveillance including Unmanned 
Aerial Vehicles(UAVs), satellite imageries unmanned sensors, radars and other 
equipment with capabilities of thermal imaging as well as infra-red systems, so 
as to provide all weather surveillance, are procured.  
3. Post operational endorsement of requirement, technical parameters and 
desired operational capabilities of devices are evolved through a Board of 
Officers to meet the identified operational voids.  Specific items and quantities 
are then taken up for procurement through funds like Army Commander’s Special 
Financial Power (ACSFP). 
4. Currently, the following proposals for procurement of surveillance devices 
are in the General Staff Qualitative Requirements (GSQR) evolution stage under 
Army Commanders Special Financial Powers (ACSFP) in Financial Year 
2019-20:- 
Equipment Endorsed Projects 
Spotter Scope With Integrated Camera  77 
Long Distance Day/Night PTZ Camera  75 

5 
 
5. The projected requirement of a ‘Fog Camera’ by the Formation during the 
subjects visit has capability which is similar to a Long Range Reconnaissance 
and Observation System (LORROS).  Further, with a projected cost of 
approximately Rs. 23,72,500/- per item and with indigenous systems also under 
production by DRDO and private industry, who have also displayed potential to 
manufacture such equipment, the proposed requirement is withheld for the time 
being, because of other means of surveillance equipment, presently available 
with forward deployed formations. In order to supplement the human resources, 
effort is on to develop all weather, day and night capability, which will meet the 
future requirements, with latest technology. The same will hence be considered 
after integration of equipment proposals currently under progress and fresh 
review of operational requirement thereon.’ 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
7. The Committee take note of the efforts being made by Government towards 
procurement of the required surveillance equipments.  In this connection, the 
Committee would like to be updated on the status of procurement of 77 Spotter 
Scope with Integrated Camera and 75  Long Distance Day/Night PTZ Cameras in 
Final Action Taken Notes. Further, the Committee hope that the development of 
substitutes of fog cameras and of all weather, day and night capability 
surveillance systems that are presently undergoing indigenous development are 
progressed within stipulated time frame so as to ensure all weather surveillance 
at strategic locations. The Committee are also of the view that potential needs of 
the Army on strategic locations should be taken into consideration with constant 
dialogue with field formations and procurements of desired equipment be given 
priority.  Since the proposals for procurement are in the evolution stage, they 
recommend to be apprised about the timelines of development of the 
aforementioned devices in final Action Taken Notes.  
B. Allowances in difficult terrains 
Recommendation (Para No 13) 
8. The Committee had recommended as under:- 
  ‘In course of the above mentioned study visit of the Committee, they were 
updated about discrepancies in the allowances paid to the personnel of Central 
and state Governments, such as the local police in the Gangtok region. The 
alleged discrepancy ranged up to the level of four or five times in the allowances. 
The Committee took serious note of the matter. During oral evidence, the 
representatives of Army deposed before the Committee that various anomalies in 
allowances have been taken up and the endeavour is to deliver due allowances 
to all jawans facing hardship. Parity is tried to be maintained between troops 

6 
 
which are deployed at similar areas. In this regard, the Committee were further 
assured that the matter will be looked into in consultation with Ministry of 
Defence and the exact figures on the allowances would be furnished. However, 
the Committee were not furnished the exact figures on the allowances till the time 
of drafting of this Report. The Committee recommend that Ministry and Army 
shall resolve the matter at the earliest and befitting allowances shall be paid to 
the soldiers in parity with other departments so that the morale of the deployed 
personnel is not dented.’ 
9. The Ministry in its Action Taken Reply has stated as under:- 
 
‘As per Seventh Central Pay Commission(CPC) recommendations, 
allowances related to risk and hardship have been subsumed in different cells of 
Risk and Hardship Matrix. The matrix is divided into 9 cells, based on Low, 
Medium and High risk juxtaposed with Low, Medium and High hardship. One 
extra cell, has been added to the top: RH Max to include Siachen Allowance. The 
aforementioned recommendations of the 7th CPC were accepted by the 
Government with some modifications vide Ministry of Finance Resolution dated 
06.07.2017. Subsequently, MoD order dated 18.09.2017 was issued to 
implement aforementioned decision of the Government. Allowances to Uniform 
services are based on their conditions of services. Some of these are at par with 
the allowances given to Central Armed Police Forces, Border Security Force, etc. 
Further, the seventh CPC has recommended that a joint committee of Ministry of 
Home Affairs and Ministry of Defence should revisit the present classification of 
places, and future categorizations should also be done as a joint exercise for 
places where CAPFs are posted. Subsequently the Government decided that 
classification of Field areas for Defence forces shall be examined by Ministry of 
Defence and for CAPFs by Ministry of Home Affairs. In pursuance of the 
aforementioned decision of the Government, a Committee has been constituted 
in Ministry of Defence vide order dated 22.03.2019 to review classification of field 
areas for Risk and Hardship Allowance to Defence Service Personnel. The first 
meeting of the said Committee was held on 9.4.2019.It is pertinent to mention 
here that Defence Forces are a distinct and unique class in its own and that they 
are different from other Uniform Services in the sense that the terms & conditions 
of service, the scheme of selection and appointment, the policy of promotions 
and Ranks, etc. are different from other Services.’ 
Comments of the Committee 
10. The Committee take note of constitution of a joint committee of Ministry of 
Home Affairs and Ministry of Defence to revisit the present classification of 
places, and future categorizations aimed towards resolving pay and allowance 
discrepancies between personnel of different organizations with deployment at a 
similar place. The constitution of the said committee falls in line with the 

7 
 
recommendation of the Committee in their original report. However, in this 
connection, it is pertinent to mention here that Committee, in the first instance 
should be apprised of broad terms for Reference/Mandate of this Committee and 
also the targeted date of completion of its inquiry as well as submission of Report 
relating thereto. It is important for the Committee to know that considerable time 
has elapsed since the first meeting was held on 9.4.2019. Therefore, the 
Committee recommend that the aforesaid committee shall progress their work in 
a time-bound manner and come out with timely resolution so that this issue could 
be taken to a logical conclusion.    Further, it goes without saying that utmost 
care shall be taken into consideration for pronouncement of allowances for 
similar duties and working conditions.  The Committee emphasize that 
allowances of the Defence Forces should not be less than that of CAPFs as they 
are different from other Uniform Services in the sense that the terms & conditions 
of service, the scheme of selection and appointment, the policy of promotions 
and Ranks, etc. are different from other Services. 
C. Trainer Aircraft 
Recommendation (Para No. 32 & 34) 
 
11. The Committee had recommended as under:- 
‘With regard to the trainer Aircraft held by IAF, the Committee were 
intimated that the existing strength of trainer aircraft is 260 as against the 
sanctioned strength of 388. Out of 260, 42 Kiran Mk II are not in use anymore. 
So they are left with only 218 trainer aircraft. Currently the trainer aircraft held in 
kitty of Air Force include Basic Trainer Aircraft (BTA), Intermediate Jet Trainer 
(IJT), Advanced Jet Trainer (AJT). Simulators have also been acquired for the 
Basic Trainer Aircraft and Advance Jet Trainer aircraft. Presently, IAF has two Fixed 
Base Full mission Simulators (FBFMS), three Cockpit Procedure Trainers (CPTs) and 
one Avionics Part Task Trainer (APTT) along with associated equipment and 
infrastructure for the BTA. Similarly for AJT, three CPTs, three APTTs and two FTDs 
(Flight Training Display) are installed for providing simulator training. The procurement of 
simulators is built into the contracts of all aircraft that the Indian Air Force is now 
procuring. The Committee are further updated on the plan to reduce the paucity in 
number of trainer aircraft. Case for procurement of 38 additional Basic Trainer Aircraft 76 
under the ‘Option Clause’ was being processed. However, the same has been deferred 
for one year. A case for procurement of 20 additional Advanced Jet Trainer aircraft from 
Hindustan Aeronautics Limited is currently at the Contract Negotiation Stage. 
Design and Development (D&D) of HTT-40 aircraft is under progress at HAL, 
Bangalore. HAL has indicated that the development of HTT-40 is expected to be 

8 
 
completed by Dec 2019. The procurement of HTT-40 will be initiated after 
successful development of aircraft. 
The Committee observe that trainer aircraft is extremely critical from the 
point of view of safety of Indian Air Force pilots. Therefore, there should be no 
tolerance of any compromise in training module and unavailability of trainer 77 
aircraft must be taken seriously. The Government should work towards filling the 
requirement of trainer aircraft at the earliest.’ 
 
12. The Ministry in its Action Taken Reply has stated as under :- 
 
‘Based on the Detailed Project Report (DPR) for design & development of 
a basic Turbo prop trainer (HTT 40), HAL Board in 2013 approved the design 
and development of HTT-40 with its own internal funds. The full scale 
development involving detail design and procurement could be started only after 
Board sanction. The two developed prototypes have so far made about 400 
sorties consisting of flights for systems certification, performance evaluation and 
handling including stall/spins. Hot weather and sea level trials were also carried 
out for systems certification. All the ground tests required during design and 
development and fatigue tests of landings gears are also completed. The aircraft 
meets all the specified system and performance requirements as per the 
requirement of Indian Air Force. HTT-40 also demonstrated additional capability 
like running change over (Flight crew change without switching off the engine) 
and hot refueling (refueling without switching off engine), features that are 
generally not available in contemporary trainers. 
Stall/Spin: The aircraft’s stall characteristics were assessed and are termed 
classical and fit for service induction. The aircraft has also demonstrated its 
ability to enter, sustain 6 turn spins and recover using conventional controls. 
Close to 200 spins were carried out between the two prototype aircraft thereby 
proving the consistency and repeatability of its spin characteristics. Flight trials 
for full spin qualification are under progress. 
In order to reduce the effort required during User Evaluation Trials (UET), a team 
of test pilots from Aircraft System Testing Establishment (ASTE) are deputed for 
UATT (User Assisted Technical Trials). ASTE pilots have flown sorties for 
assessing cockpit ergonomics, performance and handling including stall. Top 
officials of IAF have also undertaken sorties on HTT-40 and have given positive 
feedbacks. HTT-40 is undergoing final spin refinements to cover all the possible 
phases of spin inputs including control mishandling etc for the final certification of  
  

9 
 
the aircraft. It may be noted that the aircraft has to be certified against the Air 
Staff Requirement (ASR) to be issued by Air HQ post accord of Acceptance of 
Necessity (AoN). With that aircraft will be offered for User Evaluation Trials (UET) 
as per the Defence Procurement Procedure (DPP) 2016 guidelines. The initial 
date for UET was given as June 2020. However, this has now been shifted to 
15th Sep 2020 due to the lock down impact during which there was no flying 
undertaken for around 2 months. 
 
 The IAF had sought extensive details of Rough Order of Magnitude (ROM) 
costs of series production aircraft (Order quantity 70) along with simulators, 
training aids and ground support/handling equipments and the same have been 
provided in order to process the AoN approval. 
No compromise is being made in imparting quality training. IAF has 
adopted certain changes in flying training syllabus to make training more 
effective. The learning curve has also been made steeper to weed out weaker 
pilots before they are posted to operational units. Simulators are being utilised 
effectively to make trainees more confident in handling modern aircraft. Seventy 
five Basic Trainer Aircraft have already been procured. A case for procurement of 
indigenous Basic Trainer Aircraft from HAL has been initiated.’  
 
Comments of the Committee 
13. The Committee infer that basic trainer aircraft are vital for training of pilots 
in Indian Air Force. In view of this, the induction of indigenously developed 
trainer aircraft HTT 40 becomes a significant milestone in enhancing training 
capabilities of Indian Air Force. Therefore, every effort shall be made to ensure 
early procurement of indigenous basic trainer aircraft. The Committee are hopeful 
that the User Evaluation Trials (UET) which was scheduled for 15 September 2020 
must have been carried out on intended target date. They wish to be updated on 
the outcome of User Evaluation Trials (UET) in final action taken notes and 
consequent developments in accomplishing this target. 
 
 
 
  

10 
 
D. Transport Planes and Helicopters 
Recommendation (Para No. 35) 
 
14. The Committee had recommended as under:- 
 
‘With regard to Transport Planes and Helicopters, it was brought to the 
knowledge of the Committee that presently, there are some shortages. In some 
cases, depending on the condition and utilisation of the fleet, intensive life 
extension studies are conducted and the life span of the air craft extended. No 
aircraft which has completed its operational life is in use with the IAF. The 
Committee note that there is no remarkable dearth of transport planes and 
helicopters as per the sanctioned strength. The Ministry shall endeavour to fill the 
small gaps that exist. The Committee also desire that a periodic revision of 
sanctioned strength should be taken up in pursuance with the ever-increasing 
role and responsibilities of Air Force.’ 
15. The Ministry in its Action Taken Reply has stated as under:- 
 
‘The modernisation of the armed forces is an ongoing process and is 
executed in consonance with the roadmap laid down in the Long Term Integrated 
Perspective Plan (LTIPP). The IAF undertakes its Capital procurement following 
Defence Procurement Procedure as per the capabilities defined in the LTIPP. 
The LTIPP is further sub divided into Services Capital Acquisition Plan (SCAP) 
and Annual Acquisition Plan (AAP). A periodic revision of sanctioned strength  of 
transport aircraft and helicopters is regularly taken up in pursuance with the ever-
increasing role and responsibilities of Air Force with the endeavour to fill the 
small existing gaps. Procurement of C-295 Aircraft (56 nos) is in progress.’ 
Comments of the Committee 
16. After gleaning through  the reply of the Ministry of Defence, the Committee 
observe that Government is endeavoring to bridge the gap in availability of 
transport planes and helicopters. With regard thereto, the Committee note that 
procurement of 56 number of C-295 aircraft is in progress. Further in this 
connection, the Committee would like to mention that transport planes and 
helicopters play significant role in ensuring all time preparedness at all locations 
of Indian Defence Forces. Therefore, they recommend that the above mentioned 
procurement is   carried out in a time bound manner and they be informed about 
the progress made with regard to in final Action Taken Statements. 

11 
 
 
E. Manpower & Training 
 
Recommendation (Para Nos. 40-43) 
 
17. The Committee had recommended as under:- 
 
‘The Committee were informed that the Government sanctioned 
Establishment and Strength of officers and airmen (except Medical & Dental 
branch) in Indian Air Force, as on 01 October 2019. In case of officers, the 
sanctioning is for 12,628 while the held strength is 12,159. There is a shortage of 
469 officers. The Ministry of Defence intimated that shortage of 469 officers is a 
variable figure which keeps fluctuating depending on 79 Commissioning cycle, 
premature separation of officers etc. The induction plans have been revamped so 
as to gradually bring the strength at par with the sanctioned establishment. In 
addition, due to robust cadre management planning and implementation, there is 
likely to be no shortage of officers in the Indian Air Force in due course. The 
Committee are happy to note the efforts being made to mitigate the deficiency in 
officer cadre of Air force and wish that the shortfall is minimised to the maximum 
extent in near future. The Committee may be apprised about the progress made 
in this regard. 
 
 41. In respect of Airmen, the sanctioning is for 142917 posts while the 
existing strength is 129447, hence a shortfall of 13474. In this connection, the 
Committee were apprised that 12,739 trainees are undergoing training at various 
training institutes. In case of airmen, manpower review is undertaken on annual 
basis. To reduce the deficiency, improvements in training infrastructure have 
been carried out to accommodate increased number of trainees and available 
resources (infrastructure and manpower) are being utilised efficiently to support 
enhanced induction. Induction in airmen cadre was 5000 per annum till 2015. 
This has been gradually increased to 6,800 from January 2018. The induction 
has been further increased to 7,600 airmen each year from July 2019 onwards. 
In view of this, it is expected that Indian Air Force will be able to bring up the 
strength at par with the authorized establishment in about 5-6 years. Shortages 
are being addressed in a staggered manner to ensure a favourable HR 
environment in the long run and to streamline wastages on account of discharge/ 
superannuation. The Committee take note of various measures being taken by 
Air Force and desire that induction is carried out in a time bound manner under 
intimation to them.  
 
42. With regard to training of pilots the Committee found that Air force had 
been following three aircraft type training pattern. However, due to non-induction 
of intermediate jet trainer which was being developed by HAL, the two aircraft 
training pattern started with effect from July 2015 as a pilot project. The Ministry 
of Defence apprised that the performance of trainees who have undergone this 

12 
 
training pattern has been good. The same is planned to be implemented after the 
phasing out of Kiran aircraft which is the Intermediate Jet Trainer (IJT) available 
with Air Force. The Committee opines that adequate training of the manpower is 
inevitable need. This becomes even more crucial in view of the safety of lives of 
pilots and aircrew in involved. There should be no compromise in training of our 
pilots so that a healthy pilot cockpit ratio is maintained by Indian Air Force. 43. 
The Committee were keen to be apprised on timeline of the training programme 
of first batch of Officers and technicians which is underway with the French Air 
Force on Rafale. It was brought their knowledge that advanced training of IAF 
personnel was conducted by the French Air Force (FAF) and commenced from 
Sep 2018 for one IAF pilot, one Aeronautical Engineer (AE) officer and six 
technicians. Two additional pilots joined the advanced training in France from 
March19. This team has completed the advanced training phase and 
commenced training on Indian Rafale aircraft from 30 September 2019. The 
Committee congratulate the Indian Air force for achieving this feat and desire that 
all the training and induction programme of Rafale progresses as per stipulated 
timelines. The Committee hopes to soon witness Rafale flying in Indian skies by 
Indian Air Force.’ 
18. The Ministry in its Action Taken Reply has stated as under :- 
 
‘The Government sanctioned Establishment and Strength of officers 
(except Medical & Dental branch) in the IAF, as on 01 Jan 2020, is as follows:- 
 
   
Difference of 425 is a variable figure which keeps fluctuating depending on 
commissioning cycle, premature separation of officers etc. The inductions are 
planned so as to gradually bring the strength at par with the sanctioned 
establishment.’   
As on 01 Jan 2020, strength of airmen in IAF is 1,32,558 against an 
establishment of 1,42,917 leading to a deficiency of 10,359. Additionally, 12,627 
trainees are undergoing training at various training Institutes. Review of 
requirement of manpower is undertaken on annual basis.  To reduce the 
deficiency, improvements in training infrastructure have been carried out to 
accommodate increased number of trainees. Further, available resources 
(infrastructure and manpower) are being utilised efficiently to support enhanced 
induction. Till 2015, Induction in airmen cadre was 5000 per annum which has 
been gradually increased to 6800 from Jan 2018. The induction has been 
increased to 7600 airmen each year from July, 2019 onwards.  In view of this, it 
is expected that IAF will be able to bring up the strength at par with the 
authorized establishment in about 5-6 years. Shortages are being addressed in a 
Establishment Strength 
12657 12232 

13 
 
staggered manner to ensure a favourable HR environment in the long run and to 
streamline wastages on account of discharge/superannuation. 
 
Induction of Airmen into Indian Air Force is through Scheduled Tests and 
Recruitment Rallies. Enrollment process of selected candidates are conducted 
twice in a year (Jan & July each year).No vacancy remains vacant for more than 
two years since induction is an ongoing as well as time bound process and is 
being carried out strictly as per the timelines specified. 
  
No compromise is being made in imparting quality training. IAF has 
adopted certain changes in flying training syllabus to make training more 
effective. The learning curve has also been made steeper to weed out weaker 
pilots before they are posted to operational units. Simulators are being utilised 
effectively to make trainees more confident in handling modern aircraft. 
Presently shortage of Kiran aircraft, Intermediate Jet Trainer (IJT) is due to 
obsolescence and ageing issues. These aircraft are planned to be phased out by 
2025-26. HAL made IJT, HTT-36 D&D aircraft project to replace Kiran aircraft is 
running behind schedule. The procurement of HAL HJT-36 has been delinked 
and IAF has initiated the process to acquire a new trainer aircraft to replace the 
Kiran Aircraft. 
An Inter-Governmental Agreement was signed between the Government 
of India and the Government of France on 23 Sep 16 for the procurement of 36 
Rafale aircraft. Air Force Station Ambala and Air Force Station Hasimara are 
designated as two Rafale Main Operating Bases (MOBs). The first aircraft has 
been handed over on 19 Sep 19 in France with the formal induction ceremony on 
08 Oct 19 (87th Air Force Day) in France. Total four Rafale aircraft have been 
accepted by Indian Air Force and are being utilised for training of IAF Pilots and 
Ground crew at OEM premises in France. The induction of all 36 aircraft is 
planned to be completed by April, 2022.’  
 
Comments of the Committee 
19. The Committee are happy to note that   IAF will be able to bring up 
the strength at par with the authorized establishment in about 5-6 years and  
shortages are being addressed in a staggered manner to ensure a favourable HR 
environment in the long run and to streamline wastages on account of 
discharge/superannuation. The Committee hope that by taking  these measures,  
IAF will overcome its  manpower shortage to the minimum in recent future, 

14 
 
however, they would like to be apprised about the impact of the measures taken 
at the time of furnishing of Action Taken Statements. 
 The Committee take note of repeated delays in completion of the 
trainer aircraft, viz. HTT40 and Intermediate Jet Trainer. The Committee further 
observe that such delays would hamper the training module of pilots in Air Force. 
Therefore, necessary emphasis has to be laid on timely induction of basic and 
intermediate trainer aircraft in Air Force. The progress made in this regard may be 
brought to the knowledge of the Committee in final action taken statements.  
F. Force Level 
Recommendation (Para No. 57&58) 
 
20. The Committee had recommended as under :- 
 
‘The Committee are apprised that Indian Navy acquisitions are planned in 
accordance with the Maritime Capability Perspective Plan (MCPP 2012-27). 
Further, this has been subsumed in the Long Term Integrated Perspective Plan 
(LTIPP 2012-27) of the Services and the XIIth Plan. Acquisition of defence 
equipment is undertaken in accordance with the Defence Procurement 
Procedure (DPP). Shortfalls are there in Aircraft Carriers, Mine Counter Measure 
Vessels (MCMVs), Landing Platform Docks (LPDs), Fleet Support Ships (FSSs), 
submarines, aircraft and helicopters. Cases for induction are being progressed to 
meet capability shortfall. Currently, Acceptance of Necessity is given for 41 ships 
and six submarines, the cases for which are at various stages of acquisition. 
There is a need to accord impetus for replacement of ageing ships submarines, 
planes and helicopters. This is being done by induction of modern surface ships 
like Indigenous aircraft carrier, four Destroyers of Project 15B and seven Frigates 
of Project 17A. There is a severe capability gap of Mine Counter Measure 
Vessels, Landing Platform Docks (LPDs) for expeditionary operations, survey 
ships and Diving Support Vessels. Induction of 12 new Mine Counter Measure 
Vessels, four Landing Platform Docks, four survey vessels and two Diving 
support ships are being progressed to meet these capability shortfalls. The 
Committee would like to have a detailed updation note on the progress made in 
acquisition of ships, submarines, planes and helicopters in the Action Taken 
Replies.’ 
21. The Ministry in its Action Taken Reply has stated as under :- 

15 
 
 
Shipbuilding projects i.e Project 28, Project 15B, Project 71, Project 17A 
and Survey Vessels (Large) at various Indian Shipyards are at various stages of 
implementation. 
Project 75.  Induction of two conventional submarines taken place viz. 
INS Kalvari (delivered to IN on 21st Sep 2017 and commissioned on 14th Dec 
2017) and INS Khanderi (delivered to IN on 19th Sep 2019 and Commissioned on              
28th Sep 2019). The other submarines are at various stages of construction. 
Diving Support Vessels.  Ordering of steel for both the ships has been 
completed and keel laying for the first vessel was held on 28th Dec 2019. Block 
Construction is in progress inside M/s HSL premises. Ordering of critical 
equipment required for launching of the ship (Main Engine, Propellers, Das, 
Thrusters etc) is being progressed by the shipyard on fast track. 
Aircraft. Deliveries of Dornier, Chetak and ALH are scheduled 
between January 2019 to November, 2021. 
Recommendation (Para No. 58) 
 
It was also found that certain delays had been witnessed in key acquisitions such 
as vessels and aircraft. Various reasons including delays in Research & Development 
projects, slippages by Ordnance Factories and vigilance ban on defence companies 
were cited for the said delays. The Committee urge the Ministry of Defence to look into 
such slippages and ensure highest level of transparency and probity, whilst achieving 
timely induction of planned capability. Time and cost overruns deprive Navy from 
achieving critical capabilities. This also puts extra burden on the exchequer. 
Reply of the Government 
 Reason for slippages/ delays in acquisition of major warships are multifarious. 
Some of them are mentioned below:-  
 
(a)  Warship Complexities.  Warships are complex, weapon-intensive 
platforms that are built in small numbers and cannot be prototyped for 
construction like cars, tanks and aircraft. A weapon-intensive warship is an 
amalgamation of diverse technologies including Indigenous, Western,  Russian 
and Israeli origin. The need to cater for obsolescence management, i.e. the need 
to be contemporary at the time of induction of platform demands fitment of 

16 
 
developmental systems/ technology leading to telescopic design & construction 
with the likelihood of project delays.  
 
(b) Construction Methodology.    The design is usually undertaken in 
parallel with construction for platform-level integration of new technologies to 
mitigate constantly evolving threat scenario in war-fighting. This has inherent 
challenges with consequent uncertainties. Therefore, because of inherent 
complexities and uncertainties in shipbuilding, there are special provisions in 
Defence Procurement Procedures (DPP) with a chapter dedicated to 
shipbuilding.  
 
(c) Dependence on Foreign OEMs.  Dependence on foreign OEMs for 
cutting edge technologies, export regulations, long lead time for IGA conclusion 
and global sanctions invoked on certain countries are additional factors that 
could lead to slippages.  
 
(d)  Indigenisation.  All-round emphasis is being placed on indigenisation 
of equipment manufacture and shipbuilding. While indigenisation is critical to 
ensure self-reliance and avoid technology/ equipment/ spares support denial in 
times of hostility, the process can itself cause undue delay in the project 
schedule. Indigenisation often leads to protracted negotiations with the Transfer 
of Technology (ToT) firm and teething delays in first time manufacture at Indian 
firms. 
Comments of the Committee 
22. The Committee take note of the repeated delays in completion of various 
projects of Naval inductions.  In this connection, the Committee reiterate their 
recommendation to put necessary steps in place in order to avoid delays. The 
targeted projections at different stage must be more streamlined and realistic. In 
the final Action Taken Notes, the Committee would like to be apprised in detail 
specifically about the progress made with regard to induction of P75 submarines, 
and status of deliveries of aircraft including dornier, chetak and Advance Landing 
Helicopters. 

17 
 
G. Budget Review  
 
Recommendation (Para No. 68) 
 
23. The Committee had recommended as under:- 
 
‘The Committee found that the project for defence university is under 
consideration. With regard to the physical progress, it was updated by the 
representatives of Ministry of Defence that the land had been identified and 
boundary wall erected. The approval of the Indian Defence University is under 
consideration at highest level and after its approval the integration process will be 
started. The Committee appreciate the efforts in this regard and wish to be 
updated on the progress in Action Taken Replies.’ 
24. The Ministry in its Action Taken Reply has stated as under :- 
‘Post inter-ministerial consultation, advance copies of Cabinet Note on 
IDU Bill, 2017 has been forwarded to Cabinet Secretariat. The IDU Bill 2017 is 
pending for approval by Cabinet.’ 
Comments of the Committee 
25 The Committee find that Indian Defence University Bill 2017 is pending with 
Cabinet for approval. They would also like to be apprised about the steps being 
taken to pursue the said bill and bring the same into knowledge of the Committee 
in final action taken statements.  
H. War Museum  
 
Recommendation (Para Nos. 69) 
 
26. The Committee had recommended as under:- 
  ‘Subsequent to successful implementation of the project for war memorial, 
the Committee desired to be updated on the status of defence museum.  In this 
regard, representatives of joint staff intimated the Committee that the plan for 
defence museum is in progress.  The Committee hail the idea of defence museum 
and wish that it soon sees the light of the day.’ 
27. The Ministry in its Action Taken Reply has stated as under:- 
 
‘The Cabinet approved construction of National War Museum in Oct 2015.  
MoHUA allotted 14.173 acres of land at Princes Park for construction of National War 

18 
 
Museum in Dec 2016.  Govt. Sanction Letter (GSL) for the project was issued on 18 
Dec 2015.  An Empowered Apex Steering Committee (EASC) and a Project 
Management Team (PMT) were constituted by the Cabinet with mandate to take all key 
decisions and oversee execution from conception stage to completion.’ 
 
 CPWD has been entrusted to identify a suitable architectural design and execute 
the work for construction of the National War Museum. In this connection, it has been 
directed to initiate and complete the construction of the National War Museum by 
December 2022. 
Comments of the Committee 
28. The land for construction of National War Museum was sanctioned in 
December 2016. The reply of the Ministry of Defence states that CPWD has been 
directed to initiate and complete the construction of the National War Museum by 
December 2022. The Committee desire that the work is progressed in a time-
bound manner and all scheduled milestones are achieved as per projections 
under intimation to the Committee. 
  

19 
 
CHAPTER II A 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS, WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE 
GOVERNMENT 
Recommendation (Para Nos. 1-2) 
 
In  the budget estimates of 2019-20, the total projections made  by Army  was 
Rs. 1,98,964 crore while the allocation was Rs.1,68,277 crore. The shortfall amounted 
to Rs.  30,687 crore. Further, sixty-two per cent of total allocated budget, i.e. Rs. 
1,04,564 crore being dedicated for salary expenses. The remaining thirty-eight per cent 
only i.e. Rs. 63,713 crore was available for modernisation, infrastructure, operations and 
maintenance. The role and responsibilities of Indian Army are enormous which include 
maintaining territorial integrity along the borders, constantly reviewing its operational 
preparedness/postures to meet the perceived security challenges, defending the 
country from external and internal threat, and also providing aid and succour to the 
affected people in times of disaster/natural calamities. It is also expected that the Army 
is prepared at all times for any conflict on the northern and western borders. In order to 
achieve the above mentioned assignments it is indeed essential to continuously train 
the manpower so as to maintain high levels of readiness. In addition to all this, 
complementing foreign policy through defence diplomacy by participating in joint training 
and United Nation peace keeping missions is also one of the mandates of Indian Army. 
The Committee have been apprised by the Ministry that the policies of the Ministry of 
Defence are inconsonance with the needs of Army.   
 
In order to meet the above expectations, Army has to maintain a strong 
motivated and trained force duly equipped to meet the present day challenging security 
scenario.  At the same time they have to regularly upgrade and replace armament along 
with retaining adequate war reserves. Continued development of infrastructure in peace 
stations is another vital work at the hands of Indian Army.  While keeping in mind the 
huge mandate and the massive workforce that Army has to sustain, the Committee 
opine that provision of adequate budgetary support to them is an utmost necessity. 
Therefore, the shortfalls in budgetary allocation at Budget Estimates stage must be 
looked into at the Revised Estimates stage. A detailed examination of budgetary 
provisions to Army along with the requirements is discussed in the succeeding 
paragraphs.  
 
 
 
 
 

20 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Based on ceilings received from Ministry of Finance in RE 2019-20, an amount of 
Rs. 1,72,440.73 Crore has been allocated to Army[Revenue(Net)+Capital],which is an 
increase of Rs. 2,530.99 Crore over BE 2019-20 allocation of Rs. 1,69,909.74 Crore. 
However, the Committee is assured that the allocated funds will be optimally and 
fully utilized towards operational activities. If required, the schemes will be reprioritized 
to ensure that urgent and critical capabilities are acquired without any compromise to 
operational preparedness of the Army. 
Recommendation (Para No. 3) 
 
As already mentioned in the above paragraph, a major portion of revenue 
allocation goes to salary component which amounts to Rs. 1,04,564 crore for the year 
2019-20, leaving a meager amount for other Revenue expenses. In the BE 2019-20, the 
projection for Non-salary Revenue budget was Rs. 45,843 crore whereas the allocation 
Rs. 34,227 crore. The shortfall summed to Rs. 11,626 crore which accounts to nearly 
twenty-five per cent of the projection. The Committee came to know that the Non-salary 
revenue budget was necessary for operations and maintenance. Some of the 
mandatory outgo against this Head includes ration, livery items, transportation, store, 
compensation, field defences, building maintenance and other miscellaneous expenses. 
Infrastructure development in peace stations also constitutes part of this outlay. The 
Committee wish to note that in a situation where our country is facing two front conflict 
challenges, all time operational preparedness of Army is a binding requisite. Therefore, 
the Committee recommend that at RE stage, the essential demands of Army under 
Revenue head which is channelized towards operation and maintenance work shall be 
given in consonance with the perceived threat to the nation.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Army was allocated Rs. 37,080.12 crore (Gross) in BE 2019-20 under Non-Salary 
segment of Revenue Head.  Based on ceilings received from Ministry of Finance in RE 
2019-20, an amount of Rs. 38,605.20 has been allocated to Army.  This allocation 
under Non-Salary segment (Gross) in RE 2019-20 implies an increase of Rs. 1,525.08 
crore over BE 2019-20 allocations of Army.  The Committee is, however, assured that 
all efforts will be made to ensure that adequate funds are available to meet the critical 
requirements. 
 
 
 

21 
 
 
Recommendation (Para Nos. 4-5) 
 
While going through the detailed information on the projections and allocations in 
respect of Army during the previous years, the Committee found that the expenditure 
incurred by Army had usually exceeded the allocation. In case of the Revenue segment, 
in the year 2017-18, the Revised Estimates allocation was Rs. 1,21,451.80 crore while 
the expenditure incurred was Rs. 1,27,507.48 crore. In the year 2018-19, the 
expenditure amounted to Rs. 1,34,241.38crore while the Revised Estimates allocation 
for the same year was Rs. 1,29,812.34 crore. This depicts that the Army had been able 
to completely spend the amount allocated to them under revenue head during the past 
years.  
 
In respect of capital segment of Army budget, the amount of allocation and 
expenditure for the year 2016-17 was Rs. 25,205.71 crore and Rs. 27,148.26 crore 
respectively. In the year 2018-19, the allocation was Rs. 26,815.71 crore while the 
expenditure Rs. 27,438.66 crore. This again showcases that the allocations were 
completely exhausted without any surrender during a fiscal. During the examination of 
demands for grants 2019-20, the Committee were apprised that while allocating funds, 
Ministry of Finance analyses past absorption capacity of the Services and the pace of 
expenditure in the current Financial Year. Hence, the Ministry of Defence allocate funds 
to the Services on the basis of expenditure pattern. In this perspective, while noting 
Army’s trend of increased spending, the Committee desire to allocate justified provision 
for Army during the financial year 2019-20 both against Revenue and Capital Heads.   
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 Based on ceilings received from Ministry of Finance in RE 2019-20, an amount of 
Rs. 1,42,773.83 Crore under Revenue Head was allocated which implies an increase of 
Rs. 2,3,75.34 Crore over BE 2019-20 allocations.  Under Capital Head an amount of            
Rs. 29,666.90 Crore was allocated (which is an increase of Rs. 155.65 Crore over BE 
2019-20 allocations) keeping in view pace of expenditure. 
 
The Committee, is however assured that all efforts will be made to ensure that 
adequate funds are available to meet the critical requirements. 
 
Recommendation (Para No.  6) 
 
During the examination of the Demands for Grants (2019-20), the Committee 
found that the percentage share of Army to total Defence budget, in Revenue segment 

22 
 
during the Eleventh Plan Period was 37.87 per cent. This increased to 41.57 per cent 
during the Twelfth Plan Period. Meanwhile, the share of Capital budget to total defence 
budget which was 12.13 per cent plummeted to 10.51 per cent during the Twelfth Plan 
Period. Further, since 2013-14 to 2019-20, the ratio of Capital budget for Army 
remained constantly between sixteen to twenty per cent. The Committee are in full 
agreement with the Ministry that boots on ground is an absolute requirement for 
maintaining high degree of security all along the border. At the same time, they desire 
that thrust should also be given to modernization aspect of Indian Army. The Committee 
are apprised by the Ministry that currently certain studies are in the process to 
rationalize the manpower. Therefore, they, further desire the Ministry to complete the 
examination expeditiously in order to ensure that the revenue expenditure is reduced to 
the absolute essential. Capital budget caters mainly for modernization expenses which 
include capital acquisitions such as guns, tanks, radars and Infantry weapons. It also 
provides for replacement of in-service armament and equipment, upgradation of 
obsolete equipment as well as major repairs and overhauls. In order to fight a modern 
day war, it is pertinent for Army to maintain a duly equipped motivated and trained force. 
A decline in the percentage share of capital budget showcases unwholesome approach 
towards modernization of Army. In this regard, the Committee recommend for 
maintaining a qualified balance between revenue and capital allocations displaying 
dedication for modernization drive for a well-equipped and robust Indian Army.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 The higher growth in the revenue expenditure is mainly attributable to the fact 
that Army is manpower intensive with a large portion of its expenditure devoted to 
Salaries. This skews the Revenue-Capital ratio in favour of revenue expenditure in 
overall sense for Army. For Air Force and Navy, the ratio of Revenue to Capital is 47:53 
and 40:60 respectively in RE 2020-21. 
 
In RE 2019-20, Rs. 29,666.90 Crore has been allocated to Army under Capital 
Head (i.e. an increase of Rs. 155.65 Crore over BE 2019-20).Further, under Capital 
Acquisition (Modernization) Head, an amount of Rs.23,517.31 Crore(i.e. an increase of 
Rs. 516.68 Crore over BE 2019-20)has been allocated to Army in RE 2019-20.  In the 
next financial year i.e. 2020-21, an amount of Rs. 32,462.38 Crore has been allocated 
in BE to Army under Capital Head (i.e. an increase of Rs. 2,951.13 Crore over BE 2019-
20). Further, under Capital Acquisition (Modernization) Head, an amount of 
Rs.26,068.61 Crore (i.e. an increase of Rs. 3067.98 Crore over BE 2019-20) has been 
allocated to Army in BE 2020-21. 
 
 

23 
 
Recommendation (Para Nos. 7-11) 
 
It has already been stated above that modernization must be given due attention 
and impetus during budgeting processes of the Ministry of Defence. However, the same 
spirit is not inclined in the budgetary provisions. During the year 2018-19, Budget 
Estimates allocation against modernization was Rs. 21,338.21 crore, Revised Estimates 
projection was Rs. 34,738.29 crore.  Though the amount allocated in Revised Estimates 
was Rs. 21,168.21 crore. From the above information it can be figured that Rs. 
13,400.08 crore was additionally projected in Revised Estimates over Budget Estimates 
allocation. Conversely, the allocations made at Revised Estimates were even less than 
the Budget Estimates allocation made to Army under Modernisation (Capital 
Acquisition) Head (which includes Committed Liabilities and New Schemes). 
Furthermore, the Committee found that against these allocations, an expenditure of Rs. 
21,879.80 crore had been incurred in FY 2018-19. In regard thereto, the Committee 
were apprised that under Modernisation (Capital Acquisition) Head, Army had sought 
additional allocation of Rs. 16,293.19 crore and Rs. 13,400.08 crore at first and second 
supplementary stages respectively, although the Ministry did not receive any additional 
allocations at the Supplementary stages. The Committee were further informed that 
when required, the schemes are reprioritized to ensure that urgent and critical 
capabilities were acquired without any compromise to operational preparedness of the 
Army.  
 
On going through the documents furnished by the Ministry of Defence, it was 
found that during each year of Eleventh and Twelfth Plan Periods, the allocations made 
at Revised Estimates stage were even lesser from that of Budget Estimates stage let go 
the actual projections made by Army.  The data is as given here under:  
  (Rs. in crore)  
Year BE  
Allocation 
RE 
Projection 
Additional 
Projection 
RE 
Allocation 
XI Plan     
2007-08 6,937.20 6,365.20 -572.00 6,224.20 
2008-09 7,607.67 7,655.67 48.00 5,740.03 
2009-10 9,821.07 9,821.16 0.09 6,254.35 
2010-11 8,876.88 8,876.89 0.01 7,433.23 
2011-12 10,740.02 8,982.91 -1,757.11 4,950.02 
XII Plan     
2012-13 13,724.14 13,515.90 -208.24 11568.76 
2013-14 13,327.04 13,922.00 594.96 10801.46 
2014-15 20,935.41 18,585.48 -2,349.93 16927.35 
2015-16 22,054.50 20,466.79 -1,587.71 17997.59 

24 
 
2016-17 21,535.26 27,476.22 5,940.96 17,966.46 
 
The Committee regret the budgeting trend towards modernization of Army.  The 
Ministry of defence apprised that they propose requirements projected by Services to 
Ministry of Finance for favourable consideration.  In the opinion of the Committee, 
modernization and technological advancement of Army is an imperative area. 
Uniqueness of Army lies in life threatening/hostile situations faced by soldiers on the 
borders and in counter insurgency/counter terrorist operations on a daily basis. This 
also involves varying terrain profile and variety in equipment profiling of units. In light of 
all this, the Committee observe that the Government of the day demonstrates absolute 
attention towards modernization expenditure which was evidently lacking in the previous 
time so that the already cropped up deficiencies and scarcities in Army’s arsenal is 
plugged. This again must be reflected in the budget distribution pattern. 
 
In the Budget Estimates 2019-20, against a projection of Rs. 35,581 crore, an 
amount of Rs. 23,001 crore was allocated to Army for capital acquisitions. It has already 
been established in the preceding stanza of the report that capital inductions for Army 
merit due attention. Therefore, it is desirable that the Ministry channelizes the requisite 
money to Army in Revised Estimates grant.   
 
Another area of capital budget comprises of non-induction Capital budget. This 
amount goes for Rohtang tunnel and China Study Group (CSG) roads, northern borders 
development, land and construction works, security related works and Married 
Accommodation Project. In this regard, the allocations at Budget Estimates were Rs. 
6,486 crore against a projection of Rs. 8,525 crore. The Committee again desire for 
allocation of necessary funds to Army at Revised Estimates allocations under intimation 
to this Committee.   
 
Reply of the Government 
 
This Ministry had forwarded projections made by Army under Capital Head in RE 
2019-20 to Ministry of Finance.  Since the ceilings received from Ministry of Finance 
were less than the projections, an amount of Rs.23,517.31 Crore (i.e. an increase of Rs. 
516.68 Crore over BE 2019-20)has been allocated to Army under Capital Acquisition 
(Modernization) Head. In BE 2020-21, an amount of Rs.26,068.61 Crore (i.e. an 
increase of Rs. 3,067.98 Crore over BE 2019-20) has been allocated to Army under 
Capital Acquisition (Modernization). 
 
The Committee is, however, assured that all efforts will be made to ensure that 
adequate funds are available to meet the critical requirements. 

25 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 14) 
 
In their earlier report the Committee had categorically observed that considering 
new threats, highest priority should be given to procurement of Bullet Proof Jackets in 
order to ensure better survivability of the soldier against enemy and terrorist.  It was 
informed by the representatives of Ministry of Defence that procurement of 50,000 
Bullet Proof Jackets based upon earlier General Staff Qualitative Requirement (GSQR) 
(GSQR 878) had already been done through revenue route.  Afterwards, the contract 
for procurement of 1,86,138 Bullet Proof Jackets as per revised GSQR No. 1438 had 
been concluded in April, 2018 and a quantity of 40,000 of those had already been 
delivered.  While appreciating the efforts made by the Government in this regard, the 
Committee desire that rest of the Bullet Proof Jackets may also be procured within the 
stipulated timeframe. 
 
Reply to the Government 
So far 60,000 Bullet Proof Jackets have been delivered out of the total contracted 
quantity of 1,86,138. 
Recommendations (Para Nos. 20 & 21) 
 
The authorised strength of Officers in Army excluding Army Medical Corps 
(AMC), Army Dental Corps (ADC) & Military Nursing Service (MNS) of the Indian Army 
as on 01 Jan 2019 is 50,312 while the held strength is 42,913. With regard to manpower 
it was further apprized that Shortage of Officers in the Indian Army is mainly in the 
Support Cadre consisting of Officers inducted through Short Service Commission in In-
service entries. However, due to consistent efforts, there has been a continuous 
decrease in deficiency of Officers. As on 01 January 2019, deficiency in the Officers 
cadre has reduced from twenty six per cent (in 2010) to approximately fourteen per 
cent. In order to enhance intake through the Short Service Commission Entry (SSC), a 
proposal to make Short Service Commission Entry more attractive is under 
consideration. A Young Leaders Training Wing has also been commissioned at the 
Officers’ Training Academy (OTA), Chennai to prepare prospective in-service 
candidates for becoming Officers through the Army Cadet College (ACC) Entry. A 
proposal of restructuring Permanent Commission (Special List) [PC(SL)] entry is also 
under examination. In view of the above, it is envisaged that the existing shortage would 
be mitigated at a faster rate. While appreciating the measures being undertaken by the 
Government, the Committee urge them to expedite the process so that the gap is 
bridged at a faster rate.  

26 
 
 
The authorised strength of Junior Commissioned Officers/Other Rank of Indian 
Army as on 01 Jan 2019 is 12,23,381 personnel and the held strength is 11,85,146 
personnel. This excludes 1,718 Army Postal Service (APS) Non-Regular Junior 
Commissioned Officers/Other Rank. The Committee were given to understand that the 
deficiency of Junior Commissioned Officers/Other Rank is normal and the same will be 
met by recruits under training. In this regard, the Committee wish to urge the 
Government to take concerted efforts to mitigate the deficiency in manpower so that the 
soldiers are not faced with additional burden.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The authorised strength of the Indian Army Officer cadre was 50,312 as on 01 
Jan 2019 whereas the held strength was 42,913. The prevailing shortage in the Officers 
cadre is primarily due to reduced intake in the support cadre. The same 
notwithstanding, sustained efforts have resulted in progressive mitigation of the 
deficiency from a high of 26% in 2010 to approximately 15% in 2019. Simultaneously, a 
proposal to enhance the intake through Short Service Commission by making it more 
attractive is at an advanced stage of consideration at the Tri-Service level. With regard 
to the In-service entries, a proposal for restructuring of the Permanent Commission 
(Special List) Cadre is under active consideration. 
 
Further, a Young Leaders Training Wing has been established at Officers 
Training Academy, Chennai in September, 2019. The aim is to groom prospective 
service candidates for selection through In-service entries viz. Army Cadet College 
(ACC), Special Commission Officers (SCO) and Permanent Commission (Special List) 
{PC (SL)}. It is anticipated that the cumulative effect of the above stated measures 
would expedite the process so that the gap is bridged at a faster rate. There is no 
dearth of candidates applying for joining the services, but the selection procedure often 
renders very large numbers, being declared unsuitable. There is a proposal to review 
the existing evaluation system at the Services Selection Board, particularly psychology 
evaluation to ensure that candidates are not rejected because of errors in evaluation.  
A total of 88,207 vacancies of Junior Commissioned Officers (JCOs) and Other 
Ranks (ORs) have been released for recruitment during the recruiting year 2019-20. 
The recruitment is currently under progress. Further, as on date, a total of 58,836 
recruits are under training. Hence the existing deficiency in JCOs/ORs will automatically 
get made up on passing out of the recruits, post completion of training.  
 

27 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 22) 
 
 During the year 2019-20, the projection of Air Force was Rs.1,22,984 crore. 
Against this, the allocation is only Rs. 69,949 crore accounting to a shortfall of   Rs. 
53,035 crore which is a considerable amount.  The Committee note that contrary to the 
expenditure trend of the years 2014-15 & 2015-16, the Indian Air Force’s expenditure 
capabilities has been increasing since 2016-17 onwards.  In the opinion of the 
Committee, quantum of deficit budgeting of this extent would certainly hamper the 
modernization and operational preparedness of Air force. The Indian Air Force is 
pursuing a focussed modernization plan to transform into a strategic aerospace power 
with full spectrum capability. Continuous upgradation of the existing equipment and 
induction of new weapon platforms and systems is needed. Then there are future 
inductions of Rafale aircraft, SU30 MK1, indigenous Light Combat Aircraft (LCA), Attack 
helicopters, heavy lift helicopters, combat support elements, surface-to air guided 
weapon and air defence radars required to bolster operational capability and capacity. 
The representatives of Air Force state that the Procurement of LCA MK1A, Request for 
Proposal for more 110 fighter aircraft will be subject to availability of resources.  
Adequacies in budgetary provisions are quintessential to ensure that Indian Air Force 
continues to progress on the desired trajectory of modernisation.  Keeping in view the 
absorption capacity of IAF to spend the money and induction plan of many squadrons 
as mentioned above, the Committee wish to emphasize upon availability of adequate 
budgetary allocations lest the present and future plan to enhance the capabilities of IAF 
will be jeopardised.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 In RE 2019-20, an amount of Rs. 29,951.69 Crore under Revenue Head (i.e. an 
increase of Rs. 350 Crore over BE 2019-20) and Rs. 44,947.19 Crore under Capital 
Head (i.e. an increase of Rs. 5,600 Crore over BE 2019-20)has been allocated to Air 
Force.  Overall there was increase of Rs. 5,950 Crore in Air Force’s allocations in RE 
2019-20 over BE 2019-20. 
 
The Committee is however, assured that all efforts will be made to ensure that 
adequate funds are available to meet the critical requirements. 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 23) 
 
 The budget has two components viz. Revenue and Capital. The Revenue budget 
caters mainly for salary expenses. During the year 2019-20, the total projection under 
revenue head made by Air Force was Rs.  41,682crore whilst the allocation Rs. 30,602 

28 
 
crore creating a shortfall of Rs. 11,080 crore. Air Force had sought Rs.18,172 crore for 
salary expenses against which Rs.17,116 crore was allocated. Besides salary 
expenditure, the Revenue budget also comprises of Non-salary revenue expenditure 
which goes for operational and maintenance work. In this segment Rs. 23,510 crore 
was projected and Rs. 13,486 crore actually allocated accounting to a shortfall of Rs. 
10,024 crore. The representatives of Air Force candidly submitted before the Committee 
that the impact of shortfall in Revenue Budget can be felt in aircraft maintenance, 
serviceability and training. It was also cited that the older systems require more 
maintenance.  Providing support to civil administration and humanitarian assistance 
during disasters is also a vital task that Air Force takes up time and again.  Taking note 
of the demand made by Air Force, the Committee recommend for allocating adequate 
budgetary provision in non-salary revenue budget. The Committee may be apprised of 
the steps taken in this regard. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Based on ceilings received from Ministry of Finance in RE 2019-20, an amount of 
Rs. 13,885.66 crore was allocated to Air Force under Non-Salary head.  This amounts 
to increase of Rs. 400 crore over BE 2019-20 allocations. Though the allocations 
received in RE 2019-20 are less than the projected requirements, the Committee is 
assured that the allocated funds will be optimally and fully utilized towards operational 
activities. If required, the schemes will be reprioritized to ensure that urgent and critical 
capabilities are acquired without any compromise to operational preparedness of the Air 
Force. 
 
Recommendation (Para Nos. 24-25) 
 
 In case of the Capital segment, the Budget projection during the year 2019-20 
was Rs. 81,302 crore, however the allocation is a mere Rs. 39,347 crore. There is a 
deficit of Rs. 41,955 crore. The Capital budget is required for acquisitions and also 10(i) 
which is a special power to Vice-Chief.  For the purpose of acquisition and 10 (i), Rs. 
76,413 crore was sought, whereas the allocation was Rs. 36,410 crore.  The shortfall of   
Rs. 40,003 crore is more than 50 per cent of the requirement.  According to the 
presentation demonstrated by representatives of Air Force enormous shortfall in Capital 
budget would hit pace of modernization and new schemes become a challenge.   
 
 At the time of evidence, the Committee learnt that the allocations are made to 
Services on the basis of their past record of consumption levels. Air Force had been 
able to expend the funds allocated to them both under Revenue and Capital heads 
during the previous years. In 2018-19, the allocation under revenue head at Revised 

29 
 
Estimates stage was Rs. 28,105.43 crore while the eventual expenditure incurred was 
Rs. 28,291.25 crore. Under capital head the allocation at RE stage was Rs. 35,770.17 
crore and the final expenditure incurred by Air Force was Rs. 36,451.74 crore. The 
Committee were assured by the representatives of Air Force that the allocated funds 
were optimally utilized to ensure operational preparedness.  Based on the available 
budgetary resources, IAF prioritize their expenditure.  From this, one can clearly 
conclude that lack of adequate budget resources affect the pace of modernisation and 
the capabilities of IAF are being compromised.  Therefore, the Committee opine that Air 
Force certainly needs adequate budgetary support to retain current operational 
capability and maintain credible deterrence along with continuing advancements on the 
modernization trajectory. Induction of fighter aircraft and other aviation capabilities are 
capital intensive areas.  These are critical requirements of Air force required to fill the 
massive paucity in authorization and availability of platforms which has resulted from 
ignorance during many past decades.  The Committee do appreciate the recent efforts 
of the Government made towards bridging gaps in depleting squadron strength of Indian 
Air force.  The spirited intentions has to be supported with adequate funding.  Therefore, 
the Committee desire the Ministry of Defence to judiciously enhance the budgetary 
allocation at RE stage and in their future budget too.   
 
Reply of the Government 
 
In RE 2019-20, Air Force has been allocated Rs. 44,947.19  Crore under Capital 
Head, which is an increase of Rs. 5,600 Crore over BE 2019-20 allocations.  Of the total 
additional allocations received under Capital Head in RE 2019-20, Air Force has got 
maximum share i.e. 80%.  In BE 2020-21, Air Force’s share in Capital Head is Rs. 
43,281.91 Crore which is 38% of Capital Head allocation in Defence Services 
Estimates.  In the event of requirement of additional funds during the course of next 
financial year, additional allocations will be sought at supplementary/RE stage. 
 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 26) 
 
 The percentage share of Air Force budget to total defence budget has also 
plummeted from 11th Plan period to 12th Plan period. The percentage of capital share 
during 11th plan period was 17.06 percent which declined to 14.88 per cent in the 12th 
plan period. The percentage share of revenue budget was 10.15 per cent and 9.20 per 
cent in 11th and 12th plan periods respectively. The Committee are perplexed at the 
state of affairs concerning the budgetary provisions to Air Force. The role and 
responsibility of Air Force is enormous even during peace time. Instances like 
movement of Central Armed Police Force post Pulwama and airlifting of mortal remains 

30 
 
of Central Armed Police Force on 15 February 2019 are some of the examples where 
Air Force has to extend their responsibility. The kitty of Air force is depleting as most of 
the currently held aircraft including transport and trainer are surviving on extensions 
such as ‘Kiran’ Intermediate Jet Trainer. In such a scenario, reduction in budget share 
of Air force to total defence budget is indicative of passable approach of Ministry of 
Defence. The Committee reiterate their recommendation for adequate and judicial 
budget grant to Air force enabling them to accomplish their assignments professionally.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
In BE 2019-20, Air Force’s allocation under both, Revenue and Capital Head, 
amount to Rs. 68,948.88 Crore. This amount is Rs.73,244.57 Crore  in BE 2020-21 i.e. 
an increase of Rs.4,295.69 Crore. It is further submitted that based on progress of 
expenditure during the course of the financial year, additional funds will be sought at 
supplementary/RE stage. 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 27) 
 
 Gleaning through the documents furnished by the Ministry of Defence, the 
Committee explored that in the year 2011-12 which was the last year of 11th plan period, 
the final allocation for modernization as a modified appropriation was Rs. 26,640.53 
crore.  Further, at the end of the 12th plan period in the year 2016-17, the final 
appropriation for modernization was Rs. 26,895.15 crore. The Committee are baffled to 
find the same. During examination of Demands for Grants 2019-20, the Committee 
were educated that the Indian Air Force is pursuing a focussed modernization plan to 
transform into a strategic aerospace power with full spectrum capability. However, the 
growth in modernization budget is negligible from the end of the 11th plan towards the 
end of the 12th plan. This budgetary allocation should be surmised taking into 
consideration the rate of inflation also.  The Committee observe that modernization 
budget must be in consonance with the envisaged strength of Indian Air Force so that 
the vision does not remain mere ink on paper.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
In BE 2019-20, an amount of Rs. 36,409.89 Crore was allocated to Air Force under 
Capital Acquisition (Modernization).  Based on progress of expenditure and additional 
requirement of committed liabilities, this amount was increased by Rs. 5,390 Crore in 
RE 2019-20 to Rs. 41,799.89 Crore. 
 
 

31 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 28) 
 
The Committee were educated on the initiation of process for providing the 
desired impetus to the domestic defence manufacturing industry through ‘Make in India’. 
Indian Airforce had identified 06 potential ‘Make’ Projects as per Chapter III of Defence 
Procurement Procedure 2016. These projects are envisaged for execution through 
private industries of the country. In an effort to strengthen the indigenous defence 
production base, as part of indigenisation and drive to obtain key technologies, the 
Ministry of Defence has been striving to include the private sector in production of 
defence equipment. However, further it was intimated by the representatives of Air 
Force that considering the high end technology involved and the long gestation periods 
of defence projects, the tangible changes on ground will take some time. The 
Committee are pleased with the above developments and wish to soon witness 
progress in technologies which are critical for self sufficiency in national defence such 
as aero-engine etc. 
 
Reply of the Government 
  
1. The Make-II procedure provides for indigenous development of defence items where 
there is no Government funding for prototype development, however, there is an assurance of 
orders after successful prototype development. Separate procedure for ‘Make-II’ sub-category 
has been notified in DPP wherein a number of industry friendly provisions have been 
introduced.  This effort of the Government to promote industry participation in indigenous 
development of defence items has yielded extremely encouraging response. Since the 
notification of the Make-II Procedure, 44 projects relating to Army, Navy & Air Force, have been 
accorded ‘Approval in Principle’, out of which 9 projects have been issued Project Sanction 
Order. 
 
2. HAL has been contributing to ‘Make in India’ since its inception by way of 
manufacturing aircraft/helicopter, aero engines, systems and accessories within the 
country both from in-house R&D efforts and under licence from OEMs. Over the years, 
HAL has produced 17 platforms out of indigenous design and development efforts and 
another 14 types under license from foreign OEMs. Every year, HAL indigenizes more 
than 1500 items comprising of critical LRUs, sub-assemblies and parts in the effort to 
provide continued support for sustenance of the fleets and avoid production/ repair 
overhaul hold ups. Few major systems indigenised recently include Automatic Flight 
Control System (AFCS), Integrated Avionics and Display System (IADS), Real Time 

32 
 
Operating System (RTOS), Mission Computer, Solid State Flight Data Recorder 
(SSFDR), Tactical Air Navigation (TACAN) etc. being fitted on various platforms, all of 
which act as effective import substitutes. These efforts of HAL have been instrumental 
in bringing self-sufficiency in critical technology segments in defence manufacturing. Yet 
another instance is the design and development of 25 kN turbofan engine (HTSE-25) 
and the 1200 kW turbo shaft engine HTSE-1200 under progress at HAL as attempts 
towards building self-sufficiency in aero engine technology. 
 
3. To align with national priorities and ensure inclusive growth, HAL has been 
encouraging Indian private sector participation in the indigenization/ Make in India 
efforts to undertake various high value systems/equipment of foreign origin fitted on 
HAL platforms so as to reduce dependence on imports and manage obsolescence, thus 
fostering self-reliance. HAL has been supporting the private industries, with more than 
2000 registered sub-contractors, by extending technical support and close hand 
holding, which includes several MSMEs also. These capability development 
spearheaded by HAL has rendered many Indian suppliers to be rightly part of global 
aerospace supply chain. LCA manufacturing at HAL and prior to that, Su-30MKI 
production under ToT are solid examples of this manufacturing ecosystem development 
in the country. 
 
4. HAL has also identified and hosted more than 1000 items of HAL manufactured / 
supported fleet in its website which can be taken up by the Indian Private Industry under 
Make-II. 
Recommendation (Para No. 29) 
 
 The Committee found that presently the Indian Air Force (IAF) should be well 
equipped to face any security challenges. For this, they should have adequate number 
of squadron strength and the Government should examine all suitable options in this 
direction. It was submitted by the representatives of Air Force during oral evidence that 
the said induction were obviously subject to available budgetary resources. The 
Committee in the preceding stanzas have already pointed out the inadequacies in 
budget for modernization. It is needless to state that the Air Force must get their dues to 
keep themselves equipped with latest state-of-the-art fighter aircraft and modern day 
weaponry to meet any eventualities. Accordingly, necessary funds must be channelized 
for the same.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Allocation of Air Force under Capital Acquisition (Modernization) was increased by 
Rs. 5,390 Crore in RE 2019-20 (Rs. 41,799.89 Crore) from BE 2019-20  allocation of 

33 
 
Rs. 36,409.89 Crore. It is further added that Air Force’s allocation for modernization is 
highest (46.53 %) among all the Services under Capital Acquisition allocation in RE 
2019-20. 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 30) 
 
 The Committee took note of the requirement of adequate number of aircraft 
shelters in Air Force.  The aircraft are damaged by various means which include birds, 
dust etc.  The deposition of waste in adjacent areas of aircraft parking results into 
hovering of scavengers which also harm the parked fleet.  The Committee recommend 
for appropriate waste management in close proximity so that parked planes are not 
subject to such destruction. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
1. Appropriate waste management system has been ensured in all IAF bases and 
formations so as to preclude any deposition and scope of manual scavenging.  Effective 
implementation of conservancy services has aided clearance of garbage from the IAF 
camps and has minimized damage to aircraft from avian.  Towards effective waste 
management and appropriate disposal in adjacent civil localities of flying bases, periodic 
awareness drive has been ensured to spread the message of flight safety as well as the 
objectives of cleanliness drive stipulated in ‘Swachh Bharat’ campaign.  Besides, Solid 
Waste Management system as per SWM Rules 2016 has also been instituted at major 
flying bases to ensure adherence to ‘Green’ norms laid down by GoI. 
 
2. IAF has taken various other steps for waste management and to control the bird 
activity around airfields. The details are placed as Annexure-I. 
Annexure I 
 
STEPS BY IAF TO ADDRESS THE ISSUE OF BIRD STRIKES 
 
1. Management of Solid Waste Management (SWM)  Plants.  The issue 
pertaining to management of Solid Waste Management Plants was taken up with 
Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs and Ministry of Drinking Water and Sanitation 
vide D.O. No. 2(2)/2019/D(Air-II)/20/Def Sec dated 18 Feb 2019.  Meanwhile, 
Command HQ are maintaining close liaisoning with Chief Secretaries of concerned 
states to tag the issue and to seek specific directions for implementation of Solid Waste 
Management Projects expeditiously. 
 

34 
 
2. Bird Hazard Combat Team (BHCT).  There is a dedicated team of 630 airmen 
posted at various airfields to watch, report and scare birds from the bird sanitisation 
zone. In addition, additional personnel are augmented as required. IAF has one Admin 
Safety and Inspection Officer posted in each of its base to oversee the functioning of 
BHCT. 
 
3. Ornithology Cell.  IAF has set up a scientific body of Ornithology to continuously 
study the bird hazard, to train officers and men on Bird Hazard management. This is 
functional at Dte of Aerospace Safety at Air HQ (RKP). 
 
4. Scaring Equipment.   Many bird scaring/ deterrence devices such as 12 Bore 
guns, Gas cannons, six shot launchers, Distress call generators and custom made 
crackers are used extensively in IAF bases to avoid birds. 
 
5. DNA Bar-Coding Technology.  IAF uses DNA bar-coding technology to identify 
the species involved in BS and uses the data to design species specific modules for 
various bases.  
 
6. Bird Detection and Monitoring Radar (BDMR).  IAF is in the final stages of 
getting the BDMR systems scaled. The procurement process will start thereafter. 
 
7. Vegetation Management.  The vegetation of the IAF bases is kept under control 
through huge mechanical and manual force effort. 
 
8. Entomological Studies.  To understand the problem of bird activity, studies are 
being conducted on the insect activity over airfields with the help of Entomologists. 
Considerable amount of insecticides are used to check the insect population.  
 
9. Development of New techniques.  IAF has developed new techniques such as 
Dog walking module, restriction on operations on full moon nights and Drum beating 
module after experimentation and data analysis. The height of the grass to be 
maintained has been fine-tuned. 
 
10. Exchange of Best Practices.   IAF interacts regularly with civil airports and 
exchanges best practices on the Airport Operators’ Safety Group (AOSG) platform.  
 
11. Pigeon Menace Control.   Liaison is being maintained with local population to 
reduce Pigeon rearing. 
 

35 
 
12. Awareness.   IAF has taken steps to increase awareness about the BS Hazard 
and unauthorised construction near the IAF airfields.  
 
Recommendation (Para No.  32) 
 
With regard to the trainer Aircraft held by IAF, the Committee were intimated that the 
existing strength of trainer aircraft is 260 as against the sanctioned strength of 388. Out of 260, 
42 Kiran Mk II are not in use anymore. So they are left with only 218 trainer aircraft. Currently 
the trainer aircraft held in kitty of Air Force include Basic Trainer Aircraft (BTA), Intermediate Jet 
Trainer (IJT), Advanced Jet Trainer (AJT). Simulators have also been acquired for the Basic 
Trainer Aircraft and Advance Jet Trainer aircraft. Presently, IAF has two Fixed Base Full mission 
Simulators (FBFMS), three Cockpit Procedure Trainers (CPTs) and one Avionics Part Task 
Trainer (APTT) along with associated equipment and infrastructure for the BTA. Similarly for 
AJT, three CPTs, three APTTs and two FTDs (Flight Training Display) are installed for providing 
simulator training. The procurement of simulators is built into the contracts of all aircraft that the 
Indian Air Force is now procuring. The Committee are further updated on the plan to reduce the 
paucity in number of trainer aircraft. Case for procurement of 38 additional Basic Trainer Aircraft 
under the ‘Option Clause’ was being processed. However, the same has been deferred for one 
year. A case for procurement of 20 additional Advanced Jet Trainer aircraft from Hindustan 
Aeronautics Limited is currently at the Contract Negotiation Stage. Design and Development 
(D&D) of HTT-40 aircraft is under progress at HAL, Bangalore. HAL has indicated that the 
development of HTT-40 is expected to be completed by Dec 2019. The procurement of HTT- 40 
will be initiated after successful development of aircraft. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Based on the Detailed Project Report (DPR) for design & development of a basic Turbo 
prop trainer (HTT 40), HAL Board in 2013 approved the design and development of HTT-40 with 
its own internal funds. The full scale development involving detail design and procurement could 
be started only after Board sanction.  
 
The two developed prototypes have so far made about 400 sorties consisting of flights for 
systems certification, performance evaluation and handling including stall/spins. Hot weather 
and sea level trials were also carried out for systems certification. All the ground tests required 
during design and development and fatigue tests of landings gears are also completed. The 
aircraft meets all the specified system and performance requirements as per the requirement of 
Indian Air Force.  
 

36 
 
HTT-40 also demonstrated additional capability like running change over (Flight crew change 
without switching off the engine) and hot refueling (refueling without switching off engine), 
features that are generally not available in contemporary trainers. 
 
Stall/Spin: The aircraft’s stall characteristics were assessed and are termed classical and fit for 
service induction. The aircraft has also demonstrated its ability to enter, sustain 6 turn spins and 
recover using conventional controls. Close to 200 spins were carried out between the two 
prototype aircraft thereby proving the consistency and repeatability of its spin characteristics. 
Flight trials for full spin qualification are under progress. 
 
In order to reduce the effort required during User Evaluation Trials (UET), a team of test pilots 
from Aircraft System Testing Establishment (ASTE) are deputed for UATT (User Assisted 
Technical Trials). ASTE pilots have flown sorties for assessing cockpit ergonomics, 
performance and handling including stall.  
 
Top officials of IAF have also undertaken sorties on HTT-40 and have given positive feedbacks. 
 
HTT-40 is undergoing final spin refinements to cover all the possible phases of spin inputs 
including control mishandling etc for the final certification of the aircraft. It may be noted that the 
aircraft has to be certified against the Air Staff Requirement (ASR) to be issued by Air HQ post 
accord of Acceptance of Necessity (AoN). With that aircraft will be offered for User Evaluation 
Trials (UET) as per the Defence Procurement Procedure (DPP) 2016 guidelines. The initial date 
for UET was given as June 2020. However, this has now been shifted to 15th Sep 2020 due to 
the lock down impact during which there was no flying undertaken for around 2 months. 
 
The IAF had sought extensive details of Rough Order of Magnitude (ROM) costs of series 
production aircraft (Order quantity 70) along with simulators, training aids and ground 
support/handling equipments and the same have been provided in order to process the AoN 
approval.  
 
 
 
 
 

37 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 36) 
 
 The IAF is in the process of upgrading the navigational facilities at all its airfields 
under the Modernisation of Air Field Infrastructure (MAFI) project to improve the 
operational environment and enhance aerospace safety in two phases. Contract for 
Phase-I of turnkey was signed with M/s TATA Power on 16 March 2011 for 
modernisation of 30 airfields in five batches of six airfields each. The contract 
deliverables are expected to be completed by December 2019. The implementation of 
MAFI Phase-II that involves 37 airfields of IAF, Navy and Ministry of Home Affairs has 
also been approved under Option Clause. Contract Negotiation Committee (CNC) has 
already submitted its recommendations. The case is at Committee on Financial 
Approval stage. The Committee recommend for expediting the approval process so the 
work is initiated. 
Reply of the Government 
 
Project Modernisation of Airfield Infrastructure (MAFI) Phase-I covering 30 IAF 
airfields was signed on 16th March 2011. Modern navigational aids (ILS, DVOR/DME, 
TACAN, RVR, ATMS and Air Field Lightening System) have been installed at all the 30 
bases. MAFI Project Phase-I was completed on 15th Dec 2019. Approval of Competent 
Authority for MAFI Phase-II covering 37 airfields of IAF, Navy and Coast Guard has 
been obtained in April 2020.  
 
Recommendation (Para No. 37) 
 
The Committee also take note of the quantum jump in expenditure under MAFI-I 
from 2016-17 to 2017-18 onwards where the expended amount hiked from Rs. 
13925.55 crore to Rs. 61452.83 crore. The completion of all the contractual obligation is 
scheduled for December 2019. The Committee desire that the stipulated contract 
targets are attained within the scheduled timeline. 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 

38 
 
 The contracted amount for MAFI Phase–I is Rs. 1215.35 Cr. Supply and 
Commissioning of MAGI deliverables as part of MAFI Phase-I has been completed by 
the M/s Tata Power (SED) on 15th Dec 2019. Payment amounting to Rs. 1181.29 Crore 
have already been made to vendor till 01st Jan 2020. The last milestone payment is 
being processed.  
Recommendation (Para No. 38) 
 
 Accident of aircraft is a matter of concern for the Committee.  Although there has 
been some reduction in occurrence of accidents owing to various measures taken over 
years, yet the Committee desire that none of pilot or aircraft is lost in any accident.  The 
number of accidents has reduced from an average of 13 accidents per year in 11th plan 
to an average of 08 accidents per year in 12th plan.  During the study visit of the 
Committee from 4 to 9 November, 2019, to North-eastern Command, it was brought to 
their notice that majority of the aircraft available with Indian Air Force are getting old.  
This also leads to accidents and pilots are lost.  The Committee observes that proper 
training to aircrew is utmost necessary. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 Indian Air Force has a mix of both modern and old aircraft. The training imparted 
to the trainees at flying training establishments prepares them adequately to fly all type 
of aircraft. There are adequate checks and balances to ensure that every pilot is 
adequately trained to fly the type of aircraft he is assigned. Training of pilots continues 
in the Squadrons and continuity training is imparted regularly to ensure proper 
standards are maintained. 
 
 
 
 
  

39 
 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 39) 
 
 During examination of Demands for Grants of Indian Air Force, the Committee 
found that the court of inquiry team has completed investigation in AN-32 aircraft crash 
on 03 Jun 2019.  The accident had lead to loss of many lives.  The reasons for the said 
accident were cited as Aircraft entering in the wrong valley due to Navigational Error in 
bad weather and the crew was unable to fly the aircraft safely out of the blind valley due 
to poor visibility and clouding.  The Committee recommend that weather updates shall 
be taken into due consideration before flying an aircraft. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
  It is a routine practice in IAF to take detailed Meteorological briefing regarding 
destination and enroute weather before any sortie. Weather updates are regularly given 
to the pilots till the sortie is completed. However, in North East areas and in hills, the 
weather changes are rapid and difficult to predict adequately / accurately.  The IAF has 
instituted various measures to reduce accidents, especially due to navigational errors 
due to bad weather.  The following measures are in vogue for all transport sqns/units 
involved in valley flying operations: - 
(a) The weather of the Advance Landing Grounds (ALG), Dropping Zone (DZ) 
and the valleys are monitored every half hourly / hourly basis and a sortie is 
launched after assessment of the weather and with experienced crew. 
(b) Considering rapidly changing weather in hilly terrain, weather updates are 
passed to the aircraft by the Air Traffic Control (ATC) or relayed through other 
aircraft flying in sector or in radio contact. 
Recommendation (Para No.  44) 
 
The Committee note that Indian Navy is prime element of India’s maritime power. It 
plays pivotal role in shaping maritime domain and safeguarding national maritime 
interests. The sea frontiers are turning out to be a preferred spot for operation by 
terrorists. Ocean region is also submerged with importunate danger from pirates.  The 
ever-growing maritime challenges complicate the task at hand of Indian Navy which 
include serving national interest not only from security point of view but also on trade 
angle.   
 

40 
 
On this account, Navy was allocated Rs. 41,259 crore against the projection of Rs. 
64,307.27 crore in Budget Estimates 2019-20. This accounts to a shortfall of Rs. 13,048 
crore. The Committee view the huge shortage in the allocation to Navy seriously.  The 
Committee strongly feel that the deterrence capabilities of Indian Navy has to be 
strengthened further to establish a strong control in Maritime Domain. Therefore, the 
Committee wish to emphasize that the ministry should take concerted efforts to impress 
upon the Ministry of Finance to enhance the allocation as per the needs of Navy to 
augment the modernization efforts at the earliest to address the critical capabilities void. 
The Committee may be apprised of the steps taken in this regard. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
In BE 2019-20, Navy’s allocation under both Revenue and Capital head was Rs. 
41,258.73 Crore.  This amount is Rs.44,744.01Crore in RE 2019-20 i.e. an increase of 
Rs.3,485.28 Crore. Further, BE 2020-21 allocation of Navy is Rs. 45,161.59 Crore i.e. 
Rs. 3,902.86 Crore more than BE 2019-20 allocations.  It is further submitted that based 
on progress of expenditure during the course of next financial year, additional funds will 
be sought at supplementary/ RE stage. 
Recommendation (Para No.  45) 
 
The Committee also note that the percentage share of naval budget to total defence 
budget has also witnessed downfall during the current decade. In 2012-13 the share 
was 18.12 per cent and In the year 2014-15, it was 16.51 per cent which plummeted to 
14.47 per cent in the year 2018-19. The reduction is prominent in capital segment which 
declined from 10.41 percent in 2014-15 to 7.46 per cent in 2018-19. In BE 2019-20 this 
has been reduced further to 13.66 per cent. As stated earlier, capital budget defines 
seriousness of Government with regard to modernization of Navy, though the lower 
allocations reflect otherwise. The Committee were intimated that the allocated funds 
were optimally and fully utilized toward operational activities.  The Committee wish that 
the Ministry of Defence take measure to ensure that urgent and critical capabilities are 
acquired without any compromise to operational preparedness of the Indian Navy. The 
allocations to the Indian Navy as percentage share of the defence budget needs 
attention as the share in the defence budget has seen a steady decline from 18 % in 
Financial Year 12-13  to 13 % in Current Financial Year. The Committee opine that 
there is a need to enhance the share of Indian Navy Budget keeping in view the 
increasing operational commitments.   

41 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
A comparative chart of Navy’s BE allocation vis-à-vis Defence Services Estimates for 
the last few years is tabulated below: 
 
(Rs in Crore) 
Year Defence Service 
Estimates (Net) 
Navy * 
[Revenue (Net) + Capital] 
%age share 
2015-16 2,46,727.00 40,528.88 16.43 
2016-17 2,49,099.00 39,424.88 15.83 
2017-18 2,59,261.90 37,841.98 14.60 
2018-19 2,79,305.32 40,419.53 14.47 
2019-20 3,05,296.07 45,368.14 14.86 
2020-21 3,23,053.00 49,623.03 15.36 
      (* including Joint Staff) 
 
It may be seen in the above table that percentage (%) share of Navy’s allocations vis-à-
vis Defence Services Estimates is approx. 15-16%. Further, there is consistent increase 
in allocations in absolute terms as well as Percentage-wise from 2018-19 onwards.  In 
fact in 2020-21, Navy’s share is 15.36% of the total allocations under Defence Services 
Estimates.  It may also be relevant to mention that the funds are allocated to Services 
keeping in view various factors e.g. ceilings conveyed by Ministry of Finance; pending 
Committed liabilities; trend of expenditure; absorption capacity etc.  Keeping a certain 
percentage of Defence budget for a particular Service may not be appropriate as it may 
be disadvantageous to requirements of other Services. 
Recommendation (Para No. 46) 
 

42 
 
The Navy’s Budget has two components viz. Revenue and Capital. In Budget Estimates 
2019-20, the Revenue allocation is Rs. 19032.47 crore and the Capital allocation is Rs. 
22227.53 crore.  A major portion of the revenue budget is dedicated to Salary 
expenditure which is a mandatory outgo and the remaining for Non-salary revenue 
expenditure which include other operational and maintenance needs.  The Revenue 
projection of Navy under the head Non-salary was Rs. 13550.34 crore and the 
allocation Rs. 9871.20 crore. The shortfall amount is Rs. 3679.14 crore.  The allocation 
is only 72 per cent of the projections. The obligatory expense from the non-salary 
revenue budget includes ration, livery items, transportation, store, compensation, field 
defences, building maintenance and other miscellaneous expenses. According to the 
representatives of Navy, even maintenance and serviceability of ships, submarines, 
aircraft and upkeep of ageing infrastructure becomes difficult. The Committee noted that 
additional burden of 10 (i), emergency procurements, customs duties, Goods Services 
Tax(GST), fuel prices and inflationary pressures have not been factored. Therefore, 
there is a requirement of additional funds under non-salary segment to progress 
operations, maintenance and training activities. The Committee recommend that 
requisite funds are provided to Navy under non-salary revenue head so as to ensure all 
time operational preparedness as national security is paramount and no compromise 
shall be made in this regard. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Based on ceilings received from Ministry of Finance in RE 2019-20, an amount of Rs. 
10,171.20crore was allocated to Navy under Non-Salary head.  This amounts to 
increase of Rs. 300 crore over BE 2019-20 allocations. Though the allocations received 
in RE 2019-20 are less than the projected requirements, the Committee is assured that 
the allocated funds will be optimally and fully utilized towards operational activities. If 
required, the schemes will be reprioritized to ensure that urgent and critical capabilities 
are acquired without any compromise to operational preparedness of the Navy. 
 
Recommendation (Para No.  47) 
 
As regards the budget for ten days intensive war is concerned, the representatives of 
Navy explained that all the Forces have to keep themselves prepared. Under this 
directive given by the honourable Raksha Mantri additional financial powers were given 

43 
 
to vice-chief to plug the gap that was required for 10 days of intensive battle. The 
Committee opine that the arms, ammunition and other equipments need continuous 
replacement and up gradation.  Therefore, the budget provided against 10(i) must be 
exclusive. The Committee opine that any concession in this regard will dilute the intent 
of the directive.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
This Ministry is in agreement with the recommendation of the Committee. All efforts will 
be made to ensure that sufficient funds are available to meet expenditure on account of 
critical requirements including 10(i). If required, the schemes will be reprioritized to 
ensure that urgent and critical capabilities are acquired without any compromise to 
operational preparedness. 
 
Recommendation (Para Nos. 48-49) 
 
The Capital budget includes budget for modernization, land and works. The Committee 
found that in the year 2014-15 the capital expenditure was Rs.22269.66 crore. This 
amount declined in the year 2018-19 to Rs. 21509.60 crore Total projection for capita 
budget of Navy was Rs. 35713.84 crore whereas the allocation Rs. 22227.53 crore. 
Against land and works, the allocation is Rs. 1050.53  crore against the projection Rs.  
3470.47  crore. In case of modernization, the projection in BE 2019-20 of Navy was Rs. 
32243.37 crore and allocation is Rs. 21177.00 crore. There are two components to this 
head viz. committed liabilities and new schemes. The projected requirement in 
committed liabilities is Rs. 25461.64 crore and the allocation Rs. 18177.00 crore. The 
Committee are perplexed at the fact that committed liabilities are obligatory payments 
for acquisitions etc. and how a shortage of Rs. 7284.64 crore will be adjusted. The 
Committee were given to understand that likely default of payment is liable to 
consequent action by vendors.  
 
The projection of budget for new schemes is Rs. 6781.73 crore while the allocation Rs. 
3000.00 crore. This is not even 50 per cent of the requirement projected. The 
Committee are apprised that the capital budget is likely to be utilized by the end of 
December 2019. To add on to owe of Indian Navy, adequate allocations is required for 

44 
 
maintenance and serviceability of ships, submarines, aircraft and upkeep of ageing 
infrastructure.  The Committee are distressed at the state of affairs with regard to 
budget being provided to Naval modernization schemes. Therefore, the Committee 
strongly recommend that allocation of additional funds under Capital Budget should be 
provided to mitigate critical capability gaps and sustain pace of modernization.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Under the Capital Acquisition (Modernization) head, an amount of Rs. 24,226.00 Crore   
is allocated to Navy in RE 2019-20 i.e. an increase of Rs.3,049 Crore from BE 2019-20 
allocations. 
 
 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 50) 
 
The Committee were apprised by the representatives of Navy that the Capital budget is 
likely to be fully utilised by end of December 2019. The Committee take note of 
conspicuous shortfalls and recommend adequate budgetary provisions to Navy 
enabling continuation on the modernization trajectory.   The Committee acknowledge 
that efforts are underway to modernise and develop maritime capabilities as per long 
term perspective plans approved by the Government. There is, therefore, a need for 
early approvals of key capability and infrastructure cases. Further, sustained budgetary 
support under Capital and Revenue head should be provided. Keeping in view the 
declining trend of navy’s budget over the years and growth of responsibilities the 
Committee strongly desire that the Navy’s budget share should be enhanced to 18% of 
the overall defence budget, as it was during the First year of XIIth Plan.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The requirements projected by Navy are forwarded to Ministry of Finance for favourable 
consideration, however, the allocation received from Ministry of Finance falls short of 

45 
 
projected requirements. Though Navy’s allocations appear to be decreasing %age wise 
vis-à-vis Defence Services Estimates, it is consistently increasing in both Revenue and 
Capital heads, as can be seen from information furnished below: 
 
(Rs. in Crore) 
Year BE 
(Defence 
Service 
Estimates) 
Navy 
(Revenu
e) 
%age 
shar
e 
Navy 
(Capital) 
%age 
shar
e 
Navy 
(Revenu
e + 
Capital) 
%age 
share 
2014-15 2,29,000.00 13975.79 6.10 23832.67 10.41 37808.46 16.51 
2015-16 2,46,727.00 15525.64 6.29 25003.24 10.13 40528.88 16.43 
2016-17 2,49,099.00 17424.79 7.00 22000.09 8.83 39424.88 15.83 
2017-18 2,59,261.90 18493.82 7.13 19348.16 7.46 37841.98 14.60 
2018-19 2,79,305.32 19571.37 7.01 20848.16 7.46 40419.53 14.47 
2019-20 3,05,296.07 22211.71 7.28 23156.43 7.58 45368.14 14.86 
2020-21 3,23,053.00 22934.75 7.10 26688.28 8.26 49623.03 15.36 
(Figures for Navy include Jt. Staff) 
 
It may be further added that the funds are allocated to Services keeping in view various 
factors e.g. ceilings conveyed by Ministry of Finance; pending committed liabilities; 
trend of expenditure; absorption capacity etc.  Keeping a certain percentage of Defence 
budget for a particular Service may not be appropriate as it may be disadvantageous to 
requirements of other Services. 
Recommendation (Para No. 51) 
 
The Committee were concerned to know about the adequacy of the budget for the 
Sagar Mala project wherein  the Government of India has sanctioned 300 plus projects 
for the Sagar Mala project for the minor and major ports to be set up across the coast of 
India spanning about 7,000 odd Kilometre. The Committee were apprised that with 
Sagar Mala kicking in along with ports’ capacity to handle more traffic obviously the 
number of ships calling on Indian ports is bound to increase. That would automatically 
enhance security concerns as well. The Committee were assured that the Maritime 

46 
 
Capability Perspective Plan, which forms the part of the Long-Term Integrated 
Perspective Plan (LTIPP), which is approved by the Ministry, caters for the capability 
required in order to address all such threats. It was further added that there is an urgent 
need to hike Naval Budget.  The Committee opine that certainly Navy needs more 
money, both for capital segment for asset induction and to pay up committed liabilities 
and also in the revenue segment because every capital acquisition has got a revenue 
effect as well. In light of above facts, the Committee recommend that the allocations for 
Navy should be suitably enhanced to meet the above requirements. The Committee 
may be apprised about the steps taken in this direction. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
In BE 2019-20, Navy’s allocation under Capital head was Rs. 23,156.43 Crore.  This 
amount is Rs. 26,156.43 Crore in RE 2019-20 i.e. an increase of Rs.3,000 Crore. 
Further, BE 2020-21 allocation of Navy is Rs. 26,688.28 Crore i.e. Rs. 3,531.85 Crore 
more than BE 2019-20 allocations.  It is further submitted that based on progress of 
expenditure during the course of next financial year, additional funds will be sought at 
supplementary/ RE stage. 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 52) 
The Committee were given to understand that the Modernisation of Indian Navy(IN) is 
an ongoing process, which is undertaken in accordance with the Maritime Capability 
Perspective Plan (MCPP) and Long Term Integrated Perspective Plan (LTTIP). LTTIP 
was approved by Defence Acquisition Council on 02 April 2012. To ensure that Indian 
Navy units are ready to meet any emergent operational requirement. Review is 
undertaken regularly to equip forces with the latest weapons, sensors and equipment. 
These inductions are at various stages of procurement. After gleaning through the 
papers submitted by the Ministry, the Committee found that in 2011-12 which was last 
year of 11th plan the actual expenditure incurred by Navy including Joint Staff for 
modernization was Rs. 18251.87 crore. In the year 2016-17, at the end of the Twelfth 
Plan the Rs. 18737.01 crore was actually expended for modernization needs of Navy. 
The Committee take note of the marginal increase in modernization spending after five 
years which become negligible considering inflationary effect. The Shortfall of funds 
sometimes also lead to systemic delay in acquisition of critical capabilities. The 
Committee would like to comment that modernisation and technology up gradation is a 
continuous process for which adequate budgetary allocation should be made. The 
Committee may be apprised of the steps taken in this regard. 
 

47 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 53) 
Committee also took note of the corrective steps taken to ensure that modernisation 
process is not hampered. These include approvals of capital acquisition cases being 
progressed through collegiate bodies such as Services Capital Acquisition Plan 
Categorisation Committee (SCAPCC)/ Services Capital Acquisition Plan Categorisation 
Higher Committee (SCAPCHC)/ Defence Procurement Board (DPB) /Defence 
Acquisition Council(DAC) to achieve transparency & faster decision making in 
procurement process. It was further informed that an indigenous Defence industry 
would aid in the modernisation of the Defence Forces. Towards this, the Government 
has taken a number of steps to encourage creating indigenous defence manufacturing 
infrastructure. While appreciating the efforts being made in speeding up the 
modernization processes, the Committee wish to state that adequate attention should 
be given for infusion of requisite funds by the Ministry of Defence and also efficient 
disposal of budget by Naval Headquarters. 
 
Reply of the Government 
Indian Navy(IN) undertakes prioritization of capital acquisition plan in line with the 
available fiscal resources. This is done to ensure that the resources allotted to the IN 
are utilized judiciously through prioritization, close monitoring of ongoing projects, and 
periodic reviews. IN schemes are prioritised in a way so that the most critical capability 
gaps are addressed in the short term whilst cases with long gestation period are also 
initiated to prevent degradation of IN’s Force levels and the ability to provide Maritime 
Security to the country. 
 
2. Budget Utilisation. With regard to the Committee’s comment on efficient disposal of 
budget by Naval Headquarters, it is submitted that IN has fully utilized the allocations 
under Capital Budget in the last two FYs as well as the allocations at BE stage in CFY 
also has been fully utilized as on 31st Dec 2019. The details are tabulated below:- 
          (Rs in Crore) 
Financial Year Budget Actuals   
2017-18 17937.10 18153.07 
2018-19 19083.00 19777.37 
2019-20 21177.00 21645.38 

48 
 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 54) 
The Committee were enlightened that warship building has matured in the country and 
Indian Navy has transformed from a ‘Buyers Navy’ into a ‘Builders Navy’, with 
indigenous aircraft carrier, destroyers, stealth frigates, corvettes, submarines and other 
minor war vessels being produced in the country. The equipment and machinery fitted 
onboard ships in the three categories of Float, Move and Fight has been indigenised to 
the extent of ninety per cent, sixty per cent and fifty per cent respectively. The 
Committee are delighted to find that the Government has taken several measures to 
make the country self-reliant and promote indigenous development of modern defence 
hardware. Subsequent to the announcement of ‘Make in India’ initiative by the 
Government of India in September 2014 a policy framework was evolved to align the 
Defence Procurement Procedure with ‘Make in India’. It focuses on institutionalising, 
streamlining and simplifying procedure to give a boost to ‘Make in India’ initiative of 
Government of India through indigenous design, development and manufacturing of 
defence equipment, platforms and systems. Accordingly, a new category of 
procurement viz. ‘Buy {Indian – Indigenous Design, Development and Manufacturing 
(IDDM)}, has been included which is given the highest priority in procurements. The 
Committee took note of the fact that the number of cases of buying from Indian vendors 
has reduced from thirty-four in 2007-08 to thirteen in 2016-17. Although, the cost 
expended for the same has grown up. During Eleventh Plan Period a sum of Rs. 
43296.94 crore was expended on indeginisation and in the Twelfth Plan Period it was 
Rs. 54,540.93 crore. Further the Committee were updated that seventy per cent of the 
Modernisation Budget utilised for procurements from indigenous sources in last four 
years and till now more than 3000 items have been indigenized. 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 55) 
The Committee also realized that some cases of naval procurements had been delayed 
due to limited indigenous capacity and defence industrial base in the country and also 
limited capability of private shipyards. The Committee while commending the effort 
being made towards indigenization, wish to urge upon the Ministry of Defence to look 
into such matter and resolve the hurdles in indigenisation process as this benefits the 
country in many ways. It generates employment in the country, and check outflow of 
national resources and also significantly enhances skill base within the country. 
 
  

49 
 
Reply of the Government 
Indian Navy(IN), has constantly strived towards achieving ‘ Self-Reliance through 
Indigenization’ and has synchronized the efforts with various flagship schemes of Govt. 
of India, viz., ‘Make in India’, ‘Technology Development Fund’ and ‘Innovation for 
Defence Excellence’, in addition to procurement under the ‘Revenue’ route. IN has 
engaged actively with industries ranging from Major to MSMEs including Start-ups; to 
encourage their active participation in Indigenization Programmes. In last two years 
indigenous development cases for Equipment and Systems have been contracted 
under various schemes amounting to AoN value of Rs. 531 Crore. 
Recommendation (Para No. 65) 
The Committee expressed concern for the increasing challenges in neighbouring 
waters and desired to be updated on the efforts being made by Indian side to tackle 
this. Taking note of the progress of exercise like ‘quad’ which include Navies of USA, 
Japan and India and Australia, the Committee recommend for more such collaborations 
and foreign cooperation as the country have considerable investments in the region. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
India’s Foreign Cooperation initiatives aim to position India as a dependable partner for 
the IOR littoral nations and emerge as the ‘First Port of Call’ to meet their maritime 
security needs.  Efforts being undertaken by the Ministry of Defence are enumerated in 
succeeding paragraphs. 
 
2. Agreements/MoUs.   A number of agreements/ MoUs have been signed by the 
Friendly Foreign Countries (FFCs) in the region to institutionalize our defence 
engagements.  White shipping  information exchange agreement has been signed with 
22 countries and is being  pursued with 14 more countries. Costal Surveillance Rader 
Systems (CSRS) have been set-up in Mauritius, Seychelles, Sri Lanka, Maldives and 
proposal to install the same have been signed with Myanmar and Bangladesh. The  
option to set-up CSRS is being progressed with 12 other countries in the region. MoUs 
on Hydrography has also been concluded with Mauritius, Tanzania, Seychelles, 
Maldives, Mozambique and proposals are in progress with Kenya, Nigeria, Sri Lanka, 
Myanmar and Vietnam. 
 

50 
 
3. Staff Talks.   Staff Talks/Executive steering  group meetings with countries in the 
region which include Australia, Bangladesh, France, Japan, Malaysia, Maldives, 
Myanmar, Singapore, South Korea,  Sri Lanka, Thailand, UK, USA, Vietnam, Oman, 
Russia, Indonesia, Israel,  South Africa and UAE are also held at the Service levels. 
 
4. Exercises.  Bilateral Exercises and coordinated patrols are being pursued with 
many nations in the region to improve interoperability which include France(Varuna), 
Myanmar (IMNEX), Russia (INDRA), Singapore (SIMBEX), Sri Lanka (SLINEX), UK 
(Konkan), Vietnam, USA (Malabar), Japal (JIMEX), Bangladesh, Malaysia (Samudra 
Lakshmana), Australia (AUSINDEX), Indonesia (Samudra Shakti), UAE, Oman 
(Naseem-Al-Bahr), Saudi(IN-KSAN) and Qatar (Zair Al Badr). Multilateral/ Trilateral 
exercises are also held which include the ADMM Plus, IBSAMAR (Brazil, South Africa), 
SITMEX (India, Singapore & Thailand), KAKADU, Cutlass Express, RIMPAC and  
MILAN. Coordinated patrols are also being conducted with Bangladesh, Indonesia, 
Myanmar and Thailand apart from other countries in the region. 
 
5. Capacity Building/Capacity Enhancement.   A range of cooperative constructs 
to facilitate capability and capacity building have been initiated for the countries in the 
region.  Naval assets have been gifted to countries such as Seychelles, Sri Lanka, 
Maldives and Mauritius.  Professional and quality training is imparted by all the three 
Services and Coast Guard to a very large number of foreign countries every year which 
has been the cornerstone of foreign cooperation with IOR littorals.  Enhancing training 
and skill development of personnel from Friendly Foreign Countries through regular 
programmes in India as well as deputing training teams, including setting up suitable 
institutions in select countries is accruing significant benefits. 
 
6. IONS/IORA  IN is steering the Indian Ocean Navel Symposium construct to 
reinvigorate cooperation in the Indian Ocean Region.  Presently, IONS has 24 member 
countries (Bangladesh, India, Maldives, Pakistan, Seychelles, Sri Lanka, UK, Iran, 
Oman, Saudi Arabia, UAE, France, Kenya, Mauritius, Mozambique, South Africa, 
Tanzania, Australia, Indonesia, Malaysia, Myanmar, Singapore, Thailand, Timor-Leste) 
and 08 observer countries (China, Japan, Germany, Italy, Madagascar, Netherland, 
Russia, Spain).  IN is also actively involed in pursuing India’s interest in IORA viz. 
conducting activity under the Maritime Security and Disaster Risk Management Cluster 
group, formulation of IORA HADR guidelines and MoU  between IFC-IOR and IORA 
secretariat.  Cooperation by the Indian Coast Guard in the field of Pollution Control, Anti 
– Piracy and Human Trafficking has also been initiated with a number of FFCs.  

51 
 
Recommendation (Para Nos.  66 & 67) 
 
Considering the enhancement in role and responsibilities of Joint Staff which 
include Cyber security and Electromagnetic spectrum management, Defence museum 
and memorial as well as ever increasing domain of military intelligence, the Committee 
opine that Joint Staff shall be provided the requisite funds for carrying out their 
operational responsibilities. Even during the oral evidence, the Defence Secretary 
concurred on the additional requirement of funds for Joint Staff. The Committee found 
that lower allocations would adversely impact the operational as well as administrative 
functioning of Joint Staff. The Operational impact of lower allocations would affect the 
Repairs and Refit of ships at Acquisition Negotiations Committee and   Procurement of 
Stores by material Organisation at Port Blair. Annual Maintenance Contract Payment of 
equipment will be affected and also the upgradation/creation of operational 
Infrastructure will be hampered. Maintenance of other Military Equipment will also be 
impaired. Administrative Impact includes maintenance & Repair Works, Tariffs, Military 
Roads, Furniture’s, Special Repairs.  This would in turn obstruct training activities of 
Training Establishments. Also, in future Financial Years Carryover Liabilities would 
increase. In addition to all this, the modernization activities will also get derailed as 
funds deficit would certainly delay the impending projects/ Works and raisings of newly 
Raised Organisations.   
  The Committee observe that Joint Staff is a growing organisation and its role is 
critical, particularly from the point of view of intelligence gathering and dissemination. 
Therefore, it is recommended that necessary funds are provided to them at the stage of 
supplementary grants. 
 
Reply of the Government 
This Ministry is in agreement with the recommendation of the Committee. All efforts 
will be made to provide adequate funds to meet expenditure and if required, additional 
funds will be sought at Supplementary/ RE stages in FY 2020-21. 
 
 
 
  

52 
 
CHAPTER II B 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS, WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE 
GOVERNMENT AND COMMENTED UPON 
Recommendation (Para No.12) 
 
During the recent study visit of the Standing Committee on Defence to Eastern 
Sector from 04 to 09 November, 2019, they came across a request for high-tech state –
of-the-art cameras for surveillance purposes.  The Committee were intimated that fifteen 
to sixteen such cameras were required for the posts over there.  During oral evidence, 
the Committee were apprised by the representatives of Ministry of Defence that they 
have received request for surveillance equipment.  It was also found that the said 
requirement is not only at Eastern Command but all across the northern borders.  The 
request is being undertaken in two ways.  One is a central procurement which takes a 
little longer but meets the overall requirement.  To meet the immediate operational 
requirement, there is Army Commanders Special Financial Powers Fund under which 
the Army Commanders are empowered by such operationally necessary equipment to 
fill in the gap till such time that the central procurement materializes.  The Committee 
note that despite special powers bestowed upon Army Commanders, surveillance 
equipments are not installed at the required places.  It is desired that the immediate 
requirement for surveillance equipment at Eastern Command and northern borders 
including Nathu La Post must be fulfilled at the earliest.  Also, complete requirement of 
the surveillance equipment must be attended to through central procurement as the 
borders areas are sensitive in nature.  The Committee emphasize that no stones shall 
be left unturned in order to develop a fool proof border line. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Proposals to augment/address voids in surveillance grid along the LAC/IB as per 
appreciated operational necessity are projected by forward deployed field formations 
and these are holistically reviewed at Theatre Level.  
 
2. While operational requirement is the primary driver to determine procurement, it 
is highlighted that proposals from forward deployed formations are analysed considering 
the terrain and geography, cost benefit analysis, availability of existing inventory of 
equipment and proposals being pursued by other stake holders to avoid duplicity, and 
obviate future challenges to equipment inventory management, are amongst the other 
factors analysed before procurement of equipment is undertaken.  
 

53 
 
 Accordingly, the different types of equipment that are capable of carrying out 
surveillance including UAVs, satellite imageries unmanned sensors, radars and other 
equipment with capabilities of thermal imaging as well as infra-red systems, so as to 
provide all weather surveillance, are procured.  
 
3. Post operational endorsement of requirement, technical parameters and desired 
operational capabilities of devices (GSQR) are evolved though a Board of Officers to 
meet the identified operational voids.  Specific items and quantities are then taken up 
for procurement through funds like Army Commander’s Special Financial Power 
(ACSFP). 
 
4. Currently, the following proposals for procurement of surveillance devices are in 
the GSQR evolution stage under ACSFP in Financial Year 2019-20:- 
 
Equipment Endorsed Projects 
Spotter Scope With Integrated Camera  77 
Long Distance Day/Night PTZ Camera  75 
 
5. The projected requirement of a ‘Fog Camera’ by the Formation during the 
subjects visit has capability which is similar to a LORROS.  Further, with a projected 
cost of approximately Rs. 23,72,500/- per item and with indigenous systems also under 
production by DRDO and private industry, who have also displayed potential to 
manufacture such equipment, the proposed requirement is withheld for the time being, 
because of other means of surveillance equipment, presently available with forward 
deployed formations. In order to supplement the human resources, effort is on to 
develop all weather, day and night capability, which will meet the future requirements, 
with latest technology. The same will hence be considered after integration of 
equipment proposals currently under progress and fresh review of operational 
requirement thereon.  
(For comments please see para no. 7 of the chapter-I of the Report) 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 13) 
 
In course of the above mentioned study visit of the Committee, they were 
updated about discrepancies in the allowances paid to the personnel of Central and 
state Governments, such as the local police in the Gangtok region. The alleged 
discrepancy ranged up to the level of four or five times in the allowances. The 
Committee took serious note of the matter. During oral evidence, the representatives of 

54 
 
Army deposed before the Committee that various anomalies in allowances have been 
taken up and the endeavour is to deliver due allowances to all jawans facing hardship. 
Parity is tried to be 
maintained between troops which are deployed at similar areas. In this regard, further 
the Committee were assured that the matter will be looked into in consultation with 
Ministry of Defence and the exact figures on the allowances would be furnished. 
However, the Committee were not furnished the exact figures on the allowances till the 
time of drafting of this Report. The Committee recommend that Ministry and Army shall 
resolve the matter at the earliest and befitting allowances shall be paid to the soldiers in 
parity with other departments so that the morale of the deployed personnel is not 
dented. 
 
Reply to the Government 
 
 As per Seventh Central Pay Commission(CPC) recommendations, allowances 
related to risk and hardship have been subsumed in different cells of Risk and Hardship 
Matrix. The matrix is divided into 9 cells, based on Low, Medium and High risk 
juxtaposed with Low, Medium and High hardship. One extra cell, has been added to the 
top: RH Max to include Siachen Allowance. The aforementioned recommendations of 
the 7th CPC were accepted by the Government with some modifications vide Ministry of 
Finance Resolution dated 06.07.2017. Subsequently, MoD order dated 18.09.2017 was 
issued to implement aforementioned decision of the Government. Allowances to 
Uniform services are based on their conditions of services. Some of these are at par 
with the allowances given to Central Armed Police Forces, Border Security Force, etc. 
 
Further, the seventh CPC has recommended that a joint committee of Ministry of 
Home Affairs and Ministry of Defence should revisit the present classification of places, 
and future categorizations should also be done as a joint exercise for places where 
CAPFs are posted. Subsequently the Government decided that classification of Field 
areas for Defence forces shall be examined by Ministry of Defence and for CAPFs by 
Ministry of Home Affairs. 
 
In pursuance of the aforementioned decision of the Government, a Committee 
has been constituted in Ministry of Defence vide order dated 22.03.2019 to review 

55 
 
classification of field areas for Risk and Hardship Allowance to Defence Service 
Personnel. The first meeting of the said Committee was held on 9.4.2019. 
 
It is pertinent to mention here that Defence Forces are a distinct and unique class 
in its own and that they are different from other Uniform Services in the sense that the 
terms & conditions of service, the scheme of selection and appointment, the policy of 
promotions and Ranks, etc. are different from other Services. 
(For comments please see para no. 10 of the chapter-I of the Report) 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 32) 
 
With regard to the trainer Aircraft held by IAF, the Committee were intimated that 
the existing strength of trainer aircraft is 260 as against the sanctioned strength of 388. 
Out of 260, 42 Kiran Mk II are not in use anymore. So they are left with only 218 trainer 
aircraft. Currently the trainer aircraft held in kitty of Air Force include Basic Trainer 
Aircraft (BTA), Intermediate Jet Trainer (IJT), Advanced Jet Trainer (AJT). Simulators 
have also been acquired for the Basic Trainer Aircraft and Advance Jet Trainer aircraft. 
Presently, IAF has two Fixed Base Full mission Simulators (FBFMS), three Cockpit 
Procedure Trainers (CPTs) and one Avionics Part Task Trainer (APTT) along with 
associated equipment and infrastructure for the BTA. Similarly for AJT, three CPTs, 
three APTTs and two FTDs (Flight Training Display) are installed for providing simulator 
training. The procurement of simulators is built into the contracts of all aircraft that the 
Indian Air Force is now procuring. The Committee are further updated on the plan to 
reduce the paucity in number of trainer aircraft. Case for procurement of 38 additional 
Basic Trainer Aircraft under the ‘Option Clause’ was being processed. However, the 
same has been deferred for one year. A case for procurement of 20 additional 
Advanced Jet Trainer aircraft from Hindustan Aeronautics Limited is currently at the 
Contract Negotiation Stage. Design and Development (D&D) of HTT-40 aircraft is under 
progress at HAL, Bangalore. HAL has indicated that the development of HTT-40 is 
expected to be completed by Dec 2019. The procurement of HTT- 40 will be initiated 
after successful development of aircraft. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Based on the Detailed Project Report (DPR) for design & development of a basic 
Turbo prop trainer (HTT 40), HAL Board in 2013 approved the design and development 

56 
 
of HTT-40 with its own internal funds. The full scale development involving detail design 
and procurement could be started only after Board sanction.  
 
The two developed prototypes have so far made about 400 sorties consisting of flights 
for systems certification, performance evaluation and handling including stall/spins. Hot 
weather and sea level trials were also carried out for systems certification. All the 
ground tests required during design and development and fatigue tests of landings 
gears are also completed. The aircraft meets all the specified system and performance 
requirements as per the requirement of Indian Air Force.  
 
HTT-40 also demonstrated additional capability like running change over (Flight crew 
change without switching off the engine) and hot refueling (refueling without switching 
off engine), features that are generally not available in contemporary trainers. 
 
Stall/Spin: The aircraft’s stall characteristics were assessed and are termed classical 
and fit for service induction. The aircraft has also demonstrated its ability to enter, 
sustain 6 turn spins and recover using conventional controls. Close to 200 spins were 
carried out between the two prototype aircraft thereby proving the consistency and 
repeatability of its spin characteristics. Flight trials for full spin qualification are under 
progress. 
 
In order to reduce the effort required during User Evaluation Trials (UET), a team of test 
pilots from Aircraft System Testing Establishment (ASTE) are deputed for UATT (User 
Assisted Technical Trials). ASTE pilots have flown sorties for assessing cockpit 
ergonomics, performance and handling including stall.  
 
Top officials of IAF have also undertaken sorties on HTT-40 and have given positive 
feedbacks. 
 
HTT-40 is undergoing final spin refinements to cover all the possible phases of spin 
inputs including control mishandling etc for the final certification of the aircraft. It may be 
noted that the aircraft has to be certified against the Air Staff Requirement (ASR) to be 
issued by Air HQ post accord of Acceptance of Necessity (AoN). With that aircraft will 

57 
 
be offered for User Evaluation Trials (UET) as per the Defence Procurement Procedure 
(DPP) 2016 guidelines. The initial date for UET was given as June 2020. However, this 
has now been shifted to 15th Sep 2020 due to the lock down impact during which there 
was no flying undertaken for around 2 months. 
 
The IAF had sought extensive details of Rough Order of Magnitude (ROM) costs of 
series production aircraft (Order quantity 70) along with simulators, training aids and 
ground support/handling equipments and the same have been provided in order to 
process the AoN approval.  
Recommendation (Para No.  34) 
 
The Committee observe that trainer aircraft is extremely critical from the point of 
view of safety of Indian Air Force pilots. Therefore, there should be no tolerance of any 
compromise in training module and unavailability of trainer aircraft must be taken 
seriously. The Government should work towards filling the requirement of trainer aircraft 
at the earliest. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
No compromise is being made in imparting quality training. IAF has adopted 
certain changes in flying training syllabus to make training more effective. The learning 
curve has also been made steeper to weed out weaker pilots before they are posted to 
operational units. Simulators are being utilised effectively to make trainees more 
confident in handling modern aircraft. Seventy five Basic Trainer Aircraft have already 
been procured. A case for procurement of indigenous Basic Trainer Aircraft from HAL 
has been initiated.  
(For comments on recommendations contained in para nos. 32&34 please see para no. 
13 of chapter-I of the Report) 
 
Recommendation (Para No.  35) 
 
With regard to Transport Planes and Helicopters, it was brought to the 
knowledge of the Committee that presently, there are some shortages. In some cases, 
depending on the condition and utilisation of the fleet, intensive life extension studies 
are conducted and the life span of the air craft extended. No aircraft which has 

58 
 
completed its operational life is in use with the IAF. The Committee note that there is no 
remarkable dearth of transport planes and helicopters as per the sanctioned strength. 
The Ministry shall endeavour to fill the small gaps that exist. The Committee also desire 
that a periodic revision of sanctioned strength should be taken up in pursuance with the 
ever-increasing role and responsibilities of Air Force. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 The modernisation of the armed forces is an ongoing process and is executed in 
consonance with the roadmap laid down in the Long Term Integrated Perspective Plan 
(LTIPP). The IAF undertakes its Capital procurement following Defence Procurement 
Procedure as per the capabilities defined in the LTIPP. The LTIPP is further sub divided 
into Services Capital Acquisition Plan (SCAP) and Annual Acquisition Plan (AAP). A 
periodic revision of sanctioned strength  of transport aircraft and helicopters is regularly 
taken up in pursuance with the ever-increasing role and responsibilities of Air Force with 
the endeavour to fill the small existing gaps. Procurement of C-295 Aircraft (56 nos) is in 
progress.  
(For comments please see para no. 16 of the chapter-I of the Report) 
 
Recommendation (Para Nos. 40-43) 
 
17. The Committee had recommended as under:- 
 
‘The Committee were informed that the Government sanctioned 
Establishment and Strength of officers and airmen (except Medical & Dental 
branch) in Indian Air Force, as on 01 October 2019. In case of officers, the 
sanctioning is for 12,628 while the held strength is 12,159. There is a shortage of 
469 officers. The Ministry of Defence intimated that shortage of 469 officers is a 
variable figure which keeps fluctuating depending on 79 Commissioning cycle, 
premature separation of officers etc. The induction plans have been revamped so 
as to gradually bring the strength at par with the sanctioned establishment. In 
addition, due to robust cadre management planning and implementation, there is 
likely to be no shortage of officers in the Indian Air Force in due course. The 
Committee are happy to note the efforts being made to mitigate the deficiency in 
officer cadre of Air force and wish that the shortfall is minimised to the maximum 
extent in near future. The Committee may be apprised about the progress made 
in this regard. 
 
 41. In respect of Airmen, the sanctioning is for 142917 posts while the 
existing strength is 129447, hence a shortfall of 13474. In this connection, the 

59 
 
Committee were apprised that 12,739 trainees are undergoing training at various 
training institutes. In case of airmen, manpower review is undertaken on annual 
basis. To reduce the deficiency, improvements in training infrastructure have 
been carried out to accommodate increased number of trainees and available 
resources (infrastructure and manpower) are being utilised efficiently to support 
enhanced induction. Induction in airmen cadre was 5000 per annum till 2015. 
This has been gradually increased to 6,800 from January 2018. The induction 
has been further increased to 7,600 airmen each year from July 2019 onwards. 
In view of this, it is expected that Indian Air Force will be able to bring up the 
strength at par with the authorized establishment in about 5-6 years. Shortages 
are being addressed in a staggered manner to ensure a favourable HR 
environment in the long run and to streamline wastages on account of discharge/ 
superannuation. The Committee take note of various measures being taken by 
Air Force and desire that induction is carried out in a time bound manner under 
intimation to them.  
 
42. With regard to training of pilots the Committee found that Air force had 
been following three aircraft type training pattern. However, due to non-induction 
of intermediate jet trainer which was being developed by HAL, the two aircraft 
training pattern started with effect from July 2015 as a pilot project. The Ministry 
of Defence apprised that the performance of trainees who have undergone this 
training pattern has been good. The same is planned to be implemented after the 
phasing out of Kiran aircraft which is the Intermediate Jet Trainer (IJT) available 
with Air Force. The Committee opines that adequate training of the manpower is 
inevitable need. This becomes even more crucial in view of the safety of lives of 
pilots and aircrew in involved. There should be no compromise in training of our 
pilots so that a healthy pilot cockpit ratio is maintained by Indian Air Force. 43. 
The Committee were keen to be apprised on timeline of the training programme 
of first batch of Officers and technicians which is underway with the French Air 
Force on Rafale. It was brought their knowledge that advanced training of IAF 
personnel was conducted by the French Air Force (FAF) and commenced from 
Sep 2018 for one IAF pilot, one Aeronautical Engineer (AE) officer and six 
technicians. Two additional pilots joined the advanced training in France from 
March19. This team has completed the advanced training phase and 
commenced training on Indian Rafale aircraft from 30 September 2019. The 
Committee congratulate the Indian Air force for achieving this feat and desire that 
all the training and induction programme of Rafale progresses as per stipulated 
timelines. The Committee hopes to soon witness Rafale flying in Indian skies by 
Indian Air Force.’ 
18. The Ministry in its Action Taken Reply has stated as under :- 
 
‘The Government sanctioned Establishment and Strength of officers 
(except Medical & Dental branch) in the IAF, as on 01 Jan 2020, is as follows:- 
 Establishment Strength 
12657 12232 

60 
 
   
Difference of 425 is a variable figure which keeps fluctuating depending on 
commissioning cycle, premature separation of officers etc. The inductions are 
planned so as to gradually bring the strength at par with the sanctioned 
establishment.’   
As on 01 Jan 2020, strength of airmen in IAF is 1,32,558 against an 
establishment of 1,42,917 leading to a deficiency of 10,359. Additionally, 12,627 
trainees are undergoing training at various training Institutes. Review of 
requirement of manpower is undertaken on annual basis.  To reduce the 
deficiency, improvements in training infrastructure have been carried out to 
accommodate increased number of trainees. Further, available resources 
(infrastructure and manpower) are being utilised efficiently to support enhanced 
induction. Till 2015, Induction in airmen cadre was 5000 per annum which has 
been gradually increased to 6800 from Jan 2018. The induction has been 
increased to 7600 airmen each year from July, 2019 onwards.  In view of this, it 
is expected that IAF will be able to bring up the strength at par with the 
authorized establishment in about 5-6 years. Shortages are being addressed in a 
staggered manner to ensure a favourable HR environment in the long run and to 
streamline wastages on account of discharge/superannuation. 
 
Induction of Airmen into Indian Air Force is through Scheduled Tests and 
Recruitment Rallies. Enrollment process of selected candidates are conducted 
twice in a year (Jan & July each year).No vacancy remains vacant for more than 
two years since induction is an ongoing as well as time bound process and is 
being carried out strictly as per the timelines specified. 
  
No compromise is being made in imparting quality training. IAF has 
adopted certain changes in flying training syllabus to make training more 
effective. The learning curve has also been made steeper to weed out weaker 
pilots before they are posted to operational units. Simulators are being utilised 
effectively to make trainees more confident in handling modern aircraft. 
Presently shortage of Kiran aircraft, Intermediate Jet Trainer (IJT) is due to 
obsolescence and ageing issues. These aircraft are planned to be phased out by 
2025-26. HAL made IJT, HTT-36 D&D aircraft project to replace Kiran aircraft is 
running behind schedule. The procurement of HAL HJT-36 has been delinked 
and IAF has initiated the process to acquire a new trainer aircraft to replace the 
Kiran Aircraft. 
An Inter-Governmental Agreement was signed between the Government 
of India and the Government of France on 23 Sep 16 for the procurement of 36 

61 
 
Rafale aircraft. Air Force Station Ambala and Air Force Station Hasimara are 
designated as two Rafale Main Operating Bases (MOBs). The first aircraft has 
been handed over on 19 Sep 19 in France with the formal induction ceremony on 
08 Oct 19 (87th Air Force Day) in France. Total four Rafale aircraft have been 
accepted by Indian Air Force and are being utilised for training of IAF Pilots and 
Ground crew at OEM premises in France. The induction of all 36 aircraft is 
planned to be completed by April, 2022.’  
 
(For comments on recommendations contained in para nos. 40-43, please see para no. 
19 of the chapter-I of the Report) 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 57) 
 
The Committee are apprised that Indian Navy acquisitions are planned in 
accordance with the Maritime Capability Perspective Plan (MCPP 2012-27). Further, 
this has been subsumed in the Long Term Integrated Perspective Plan (LTIPP 2012-27) 
of the Services and the XIIth Plan. Acquisition of defence equipment is undertaken in 
accordance with the Defence Procurement Procedure (DPP). Shortfalls are there in 
Aircraft Carriers, Mine Counter Measure Vessels (MCMVs), Landing Platform Docks 
(LPDs), Fleet Support Ships (FSSs), submarines, aircraft and helicopters. Cases for 
induction are being progressed to meet capability shortfall. Currently, Acceptance of 
Necessity is given for 41 ships and six submarines, the cases for which are at various 
stages of acquisition. There is a need to accord impetus for replacement of ageing ships 
submarines, planes and helicopters. This is being done by induction of modern surface 
ships like Indigenous aircraft carrier, four Destroyers of Project 15B and seven Frigates 
of Project 17A. There is a severe capability gap of Mine Counter Measure Vessels, 
Landing Platform Docks (LPDs) for expeditionary operations, survey ships and Diving 
Support Vessels. Induction of 12 new Mine Counter Measure Vessels, four Landing 
Platform Docks, four survey vessels and two Diving support ships are being progressed 
to meet these capability shortfalls. The Committee would like to have a detailed 
updation note on the progress made in acquisition of ships, submarines, planes and 
helicopters in the Action Taken Replies. 
 
 
 
 

62 
 
Reply of the Government 
Shipbuilding projects i.e Project 28, Project 15B, Project 71, Project 17A and 
Survey Vessels (Large) at various Indian Shipyards are at various stages of 
implementation. 
 
Project 75.  Induction of two conventional submarines taken place viz. INS Kalvari 
(delivered to IN on 21st Sep 2017 and commissioned on 14th Dec 2017) and INS 
Khanderi (delivered to IN on 19th Sep 2019 and Commissioned on              28th Sep 
2019). The other submarines are at various stages of construction. 
 
Diving Support Vessels.  Ordering of steel for both the ships has been completed and 
keel laying for the first vessel was held on 28th Dec 2019. Block Construction is in 
progress inside M/s HSL premises. Ordering of critical equipment required for launching 
of the ship (Main Engine, Propellers, Das, Thrusters etc) is being progressed by the 
shipyard on fast track. 
 
Aircraft. Deliveries of Dornier, Chetak and ALH are scheduled between January 
2019 to November, 2021. 
Recommendation (Para No. 58) 
 
It was also found that certain delays had been witnessed in key acquisitions such 
as vessels and aircraft. Various reasons including delays in Research & Development 
projects, slippages by Ordnance Factories and vigilance ban on defence companies 
were cited for the said delays. The Committee urge the Ministry of Defence to look into 
such slippages and ensure highest level of transparency and probity, whilst achieving 
timely induction of planned capability. Time and cost overruns deprive Navy from 
achieving critical capabilities. This also puts extra burden on the exchequer. 
Reply of the Government 
 Reason for slippages/ delays in acquisition of major warships are multifarious. 
Some of them are mentioned below:-  
 

63 
 
(a)  Warship Complexities.  Warships are complex, weapon-intensive 
platforms that are built in small numbers and cannot be prototyped for 
construction like cars, tanks and aircraft. A weapon-intensive warship is an 
amalgamation of diverse technologies including Indigenous, Western,  Russian 
and Israeli origin. The need to cater for obsolescence management, i.e. the need 
to be contemporary at the time of induction of platform demands fitment of 
developmental systems/ technology leading to telescopic design & construction 
with the likelihood of project delays.  
 
(b) Construction Methodology.    The design is usually undertaken in 
parallel with construction for platform-level integration of new technologies to 
mitigate constantly evolving threat scenario in war-fighting. This has inherent 
challenges with consequent uncertainties. Therefore, because of inherent 
complexities and uncertainties in shipbuilding, there are special provisions in 
Defence Procurement Procedures (DPP) with a chapter dedicated to 
shipbuilding.  
 
(c) Dependence on Foreign OEMs.  Dependence on foreign OEMs for 
cutting edge technologies, export regulations, long lead time for IGA conclusion 
and global sanctions invoked on certain countries are additional factors that 
could lead to slippages.  
 
(d)  Indigenisation.  All-round emphasis is being placed on indigenisation 
of equipment manufacture and shipbuilding. While indigenisation is critical to 
ensure self-reliance and avoid technology/ equipment/ spares support denial in 
times of hostility, the process can itself cause undue delay in the project 
schedule. Indigenisation often leads to protracted negotiations with the Transfer 
of Technology (ToT) firm and teething delays in first time manufacture at Indian 
firms. 
(For comments on the recommendations contained in para nos. 57&58 please see para 
no. 22 of the chapter-I of the Report) 
 
 
 

64 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 68) 
 
The Committee found that the project for Defence University is under 
consideration. With regard to the physical progress, it was updated by the 
representatives of Ministry of Defence that the land had been identified and boundary 
wall erected. The approval of the Indian Defence University is under consideration at 
highest level and after its approval the integration process will be started. The 
Committee appreciate the efforts in this regard and wish to be updated on the progress 
in Action Taken Replies. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 Post inter-ministerial consultation, advance copies of Cabinet Note on IDU Bill, 
2017 has been forwarded to Cabinet Secretariat. The IDU Bill 2017 is pending for 
approval by Cabinet. 
 
(For comments please see para no. 25 of the chapter-I of the Report) 
Recommendation (Para No. 69)        
 
 “Subsequent to successful implementation of the project for war memorial, the 
Committee desired to be updated on the status of defence museum.  In this regard, 
representatives of joint staff intimated the Committee that the plan for defence museum 
is in progress.  The Committee hail the idea of defence museum and wish that it soon 
sees the light of the day.” 
 
Reply of the government 
 
The Cabinet approved construction of National War Museum in Oct 2015.  
MoHUA allotted 14.173 acres of land at Princes Park for construction of National War 
Museum in Dec 2016.  Govt. Sanction Letter (GSL) for the project was issued on 18 
Dec 2015.  An Empowered Apex Steering Committee (EASC) and a Project 

65 
 
Management Team (PMT) were constituted by the Cabinet with mandate to take all key 
decisions and oversee execution from conception stage to completion. 
 
 CPWD has been entrusted to identify a suitable architectural design and execute 
the work for construction of the National War Museum. In this connection, it has been 
directed to initiate and complete the construction of the National War Museum by 
December 2022.   
(For comments please see para no. 28 of the chapter-I of the Report) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

66 
 
CHAPTER III 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS, WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT DESIRE TO 
PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE REPLIES RECEIVED FROM THE GOVERNMENT 
-Nil- 
 
  

67 
 
CHAPTER  IV 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS, IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE 
GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE AND WHICH 
REQUIRE REITERATION 
 
 - Nil- 
  

68 
 
CHAPTER V 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS, IN RESPECT OF WHICH GOVERNMENT 
HAVE FURNISHED INTERIM REPLIES 
 
 
-Nil- 
 
 
 
New Delhi;                       Jual Oram,  
 9 February, 2021                      Chairperson, 
20 Magha,1942 (Saka)           Standing Committee on Defence 
  

69 
 
APPENDIX I 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE (2020-21)  
MINUTES OF THE THIRD SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
DEFENCE (2020-21) 
 
The Committee sat on Tuesday, the 9th February, 2021 from 1530 hrs. to 1600 
hrs. in Committee Room No. 2, Block A, Extension to Parliament House Annexe 
(EPHA), New Delhi. 
 
PRESENT 
 
 
Shri Jual Oram  - Chairperson  
 
    MEMBERS 
 
Lok Sabha 
 
 
 
SECRETARIAT 
2. Kunwar Danish Ali 
3. Shri Ajay Bhatt 
4. Shri Nitesh Ganga Deb 
5. Shri Annasaheb Shankar Jolle 
6. Choudhary Mehboob Ali Kaiser 
7. Smt. (Dr.) Rajashree Mallick 
8. Dr. T.R. Paarivendhar 
9. Shri Kapil Moreshwar Patil 
10 Shri Jugal Kishore Sharma 
11. Shri Prathap Simha 
12. Shri Brijendra Singh  
13. Shri Durga Das Uikey 
  
Rajya Sabha 
 
14. Dr. Ashok Bajpai 
15. Shri V. Lakshmikantha Rao 
16. Shri Sanjay Raut 
17. Shri Kamakhya Prasad Tasa 
18. Dr. Sudhanshu Trivedi 
19. Lt. Gen. Dr. D. P. Vats (Retd.) 

70 
 
 
1. Smt. Kalpana Sharma - Additional Secretary  
2. Dr. Sanjeev Sharma - Director 
3. Shri Rahul Singh  - Deputy Secretary  
 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members of the Committee and 
informed them about the agenda for the Sitting. The Committee then took up for 
consideration the following draft Action Taken Reports:- 
i. Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations 
contained in the Twenty-third Report (16th Lok Sabha) of the Standing 
Committee on Defence on the subject 'Proxy and Postal Voting by 
Defence Services Personnel in General Elections an Evaluation'; 
ii. Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations 
contained in the Fiftieth Report (16th Lok Sabha) of the Standing 
Committee on Defence on the subject ‘Provision of all weather road 
connectivity under Border Roads Organisation (BRO) and other agencies 
up to International Borders as well as the strategic areas including 
approach roads-an appraisal’; 
iii. Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/ 
Recommendations contained in the First Report (17th Lok Sabha) on 
Demands for Grants of the Ministry of Defence for the year 2019-20 on 
‘General Defence Budget, Border Roads Organisation, Indian Coast 
Guard, Military Engineer Services, Directorate General Defence Estates, 
Defence Public Sector Undertakings, Canteen Stores Department, 
Welfare of Ex-Servicemen, Ex-Servicemen Contributory Health Scheme, 
Defence Pensions, Sainik Schools (Demand Nos. 18 and 21)’; 
iv. Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations 
contained in the Second Report (17th Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants 
of the Ministry of Defence for the year 2019-20 on ‘Army, Navy, Air Force 
and Joint Staff (Demand Nos. 19 and 20)'; 
v. Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations 
contained in the Fourth Report (17th Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants 
of the Ministry of Defence for the year 2019-20 on ‘Ordnance Factories, 
Defence Research and Development Organisation, Directorate General of 
Quality Assurance and National Cadet Corps (Demand No. 19 and 20)’; 
vi. Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations 
contained in the Fifth Report (17th Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants of 

71 
 
the Ministry of Defence for the year 2020-21 on ‘General Defence Budget, 
Border Roads Organisation, Indian Coast Guard, Military Engineer 
Services, Directorate General Defence Estates, Defence Public Sector 
Undertakings, Canteen Stores Department, Welfare of Ex-Servicemen, 
Ex-Servicemen Contributory Health Scheme, Defence Pensions, Sainik 
Schools (Demand Nos. 18, 19, 20 and 21)’; 
vii. Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations 
contained in the Sixth Report (17th Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants of 
the Ministry of Defence for the year 2020-21 on ‘Army, Navy, Air Force 
and Joint Staff (Demand Nos. 19 and 20)’; and  
viii. Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations 
contained in the Eighth Report (17th Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants 
of the Ministry of Defence for the year 2020-21 on ‘Ordnance Factories, 
Defence Research and Development Organisation, Directorate General of 
Quality Assurance and National Cadet Corps (Demand Nos. 19 and 20)’. 
 
3. After some deliberations, the Committee adopted the above reports without any 
modifications. 
 
4. The Committee, then, authorized the Chairperson to finalise the above draft 
Reports and present the same to the House on a date convenient to him. 
5. ******Does not pertain to the Reports****** 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
******** 
 
  

72 
 
APPENDIX II 
ANALYSIS OF THE ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE 
OBSERVATIONS/ RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE SECOND REPORT 
OF STANDING COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE (SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA) ON 
`DEMANDS FOR GRANTS OF THE MINISTRY OF DEFENCE FOR THE YEAR    
2018-19 ON ARMY, NAVY, AIR FORCE AND JOINT STAFF(DEMAND NO. 20)’ 
1.Total number of recommendations                                                                              69 
2. Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted by the Government 
(please see   Chapter II): 
Para Nos. 1-69 
      Total : 69 
  Percentage:100 % 
3. Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do not desire to pursue in 
view of the replies received from the Government (please see Chapter III): 
     Total : 00 
    Percentage:   - 
4.Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of Government have not 
been accepted by the Committee which require reiteration and commented upon  
( please see Chapter IV): 
      Total : 00 
 Percentage:      - 
5.Recommendations/Observations in respect of which Government have furnished 
interim replies (please see Chapter V): 
      Total : 00  
    Percentage:      - 