 
14 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE
[Action taken by the Government on the Observations 
(Seventeenth Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants of the Ministry of D
‘General Defence Budget, Border Roads Organisation, Indian Coast Guard, Military Engineer Services, 
Directorate General Defence Estates, Defence Public
Welfare of Ex-Servicemen, Ex-Servicemen Contributory Health Scheme, Defence Pensions, Sainik 
Schools (Demand Nos. 18, 19, 20  and  21
 
February, 20
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE 
(2020-21) 
 
(SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
MINISTRY OF DEFENCE 
 
 
[Action taken by the Government on the Observations / Recommendations contained
(Seventeenth Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants of the Ministry of Defence for the year 2020
General Defence Budget, Border Roads Organisation, Indian Coast Guard, Military Engineer Services, 
Directorate General Defence Estates, Defence Public Sector Undertakings, Canteen Stores Department, 
Servicemen Contributory Health Scheme, Defence Pensions, Sainik 
18, 19, 20  and  21)'] 
 
FOURTEENTH REPORT 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
February, 2021/ Magha, 1942 (Saka) 
contained in the Fifth Report 
efence for the year 2020-21 on 
General Defence Budget, Border Roads Organisation, Indian Coast Guard, Military Engineer Services, 
Sector Undertakings, Canteen Stores Department, 
Servicemen Contributory Health Scheme, Defence Pensions, Sainik 

STANDING COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE
 
 
[Action taken by the Government on the Observations 
(Seventeenth Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants of the Ministry of D
‘General Defence Budget, Border Roads Organisation, Indian Coast Guard, Military Engineer Services, 
Directorate General Defence Estates, Defence Public
Welfare of Ex-Servicemen, Ex-Servicemen Contributory Health Scheme, Defence Pensions, Sainik 
Schools (Demand Nos. 18, 19, 20  and  21
 
Presented
Laid
 
 
February, 2021/ Magha, 1942 (Saka)
  
 
 
FOURTEENTH REPORT 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE 
(2020-21) 
  
(SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
MINISTRY OF DEFENCE 
 
[Action taken by the Government on the Observations / Recommendations contained
(Seventeenth Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants of the Ministry of Defence for the year 2020
General Defence Budget, Border Roads Organisation, Indian Coast Guard, Military Engineer Services, 
Directorate General Defence Estates, Defence Public Sector Undertakings, Canteen Stores Department, 
Servicemen Contributory Health Scheme, Defence Pensions, Sainik 
18, 19, 20  and  21)'] 
Presented to Lok Sabha on   12.2.2021 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on    12.2.2021 
 
 
 
 
 
  
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
February, 2021/ Magha, 1942 (Saka) 
contained in the Fifth Report 
efence for the year 2020-21 on 
General Defence Budget, Border Roads Organisation, Indian Coast Guard, Military Engineer Services, 
Sector Undertakings, Canteen Stores Department, 
Servicemen Contributory Health Scheme, Defence Pensions, Sainik 

 
 
CONTENTS 
            
PAGE 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (2020-21).……………………….....…...........            (iii) 
INTRODUCTION..…………………………………………………….….…..................                (v) 
 
CHAPTER I Report………………………………………………………………….......              1 
       
 
CHAPTER II (a) Observations/Recommendations which have been  
  accepted by the Government ……………………………………...              27       
 
 (b) Observations/Recommendations which have been  
  accepted by the Government and commented upon....................          120 
 
CHAPTER III Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not 
 desire to pursue in view of the replies received from the Government ..         140 
 
CHAPTER IV Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies  
 of Government have not been accepted by the Committee  
 which require reiteration and commented upon ………………….…......           141 
 
CHAPTER V Observations/Recommendations in respect of which  
 Government have furnished interim replies/replies 
 awaited………………………...............................................................              142  
 
 
APPENDICES 
 
  I      Minutes of the Third sitting of the Standing Committee on 
                  Defence (2020-21) held on 9.2.2021.……………….................               143 
 
  II     Analysis of Action Taken by the Government on the  
         Observations/Recommendations contained in the Fifth 
   Report (17 th Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on  
   Defence...................................................................................                146 
   
 
 
 

 
 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE  
(2020-21)  
 
  Shri Jual Oram   -        Chairperson 
 
Lok Sabha 
 
 
 
 
2. Shri Deepak (Dev) Adhikari  
3. Kunwar Danish Ali 
4. Shri Ajay Bhatt 
5. Shri Devusinh Jesingbhai Chauhan 
6. Shri Nitesh Ganga Deb 
7. Shri Rahul Gandhi 
8. Shri Annasaheb Shankar Jolle  
9. Choudhary Mehboob Ali Kaiser 
10. Prof. (Dr.) Ram Shankar Katheria  
11. Smt. (Dr.) Rajashree Mallick  
12. Dr. T.R. Paarivendhar  
13. Shri Kapil Moreshwar Patil  
14. Shri Anumula Revanth Reddy  
15. Shri Jugal Kishore Sharma  
16. Dr. Shrikant Eknath Shinde  
17. Shri Prathap Simha  
18. Shri Brijendra Singh  
19. Shri Mahabali Singh  
20. Shri Kotagiri Sridhar  
21. Shri Durga Das Uikey 
 
 Rajya Sabha 
 
22. Dr. Ashok Bajpai 
23. Shri Prem Chand Gupta  
24. Shri Sharad Pawar  
25. Shri V. Lakshmikantha Rao 
26. Shri Sanjay Raut 
27. Shri Rajeev Satav  
28. Dr. Abhishek Manu Singhvi  
29. Shri Kamakhya Prasad Tasa  
30. Dr. Sudhanshu Trivedi  
31. Lt. Gen. Dr. D. P. Vats (Retd.) 

 
 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Smt. Kalpana Sharma  - Additional Secretary 
2.        Dr. Sanjeev Sharma  - Director 
3. Smt. Preeti Negi   - Assistant Committee Officer 
 

 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
I, the Chairperson of the Standing Committee on Defence (2020-21), having been 
authorized by the Committee, present this Fourteenth Report of the Committee on Action Taken 
by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations contained in the Fifth Report 
(Seventeenth Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants of the Ministry of Defence for the year 2020-
21 on ‘General Defence Budget, Border Roads Organisation, Indian Coast Guard, Military 
Engineer Services, Directorate General Defence Estates, Defence Public Sector Undertakings, 
Canteen Stores Department, Welfare of Ex-Servicemen, Ex-Servicemen Contributory Health 
Scheme, Defence Pensions, Sainik Schools (Demand Nos. 18, 19, 20  and  21)'.  
 
2.  The Fifth Report was presented to Lok Sabha and laid in Rajya Sabha on 13.3.20. The 
Report contained 85 Observations/Recommendations. The Ministry of Defence furnished Action 
Taken Replies on all the Observations/Recommendations in July, 2020. 
 
3.  The Report was considered and adopted by the Committee at their Sitting held on 
9.2.2021. 
 
4.  For facility of reference and convenience, Observations/Recommendations of the 
Committee have been printed in bold letters in the Report.  
 
5. An analysis of Action taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations 
contained in the Fifth Report (17th Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on Defence is given 
in Appendix II. 
 
 
 
New Delhi;                                                                           Jual Oram 
9 February, 2021                                                   Chairperson 
20 Magha, 1942 (Saka)                                             Standing Committee on Defence 
                                           
 

 
1 
REPORT 
CHAPTER I 
  
This report of the Standing Committee on Defence deals with Action Taken by the 
Government on the Observations/Recommendations contained in the Fifth Report (Seventeenth 
Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants of the Ministry of Defence for the year 2020-21 on `General 
Defence Budget, Border Roads Organisation, Indian Coast Guard, Military Engineer Services, 
Directorate General Defence Estates, Defence Public Sector Undertakings, Canteen Stores 
Department, Welfare of Ex-Servicemen, Ex-Servicemen Contributory Health Scheme, Defence 
Pensions, Sainik Schools (Demand Nos. 18, 19, 20 and 21)', which was presented to Lok 
Sabha and laid in Rajya Sabha on 13.3.2020. 
2. The Committee's Fifth Report (17th Lok Sabha) contained 85 Observations/ 
Recommendations on the following aspects: - 
Para No. Subject 
1-2 Ministry of Defence Budget and Demands for Grants 2020-21: A bird’s eye 
view  
3 Defence Budget 2020-21 and 2019-20  
4 Growth of Defence Budget vis-à-vis rate of inflation  
5-7 Projections made by the three Services  
8-10 Chief of Defence Staff (CDS) 
11-13 Defence Budget: Challenges and Reforms  
14-15 Other issues 
16-17 Budgetary Allocation to Border Roads Organisation (BRO) 
18 Required and existing number of equipment with BRO  
19-20 Construction of Roads by BRO  
21-26 Challenges faced in execution of projects and maintenance of roads  
27 Manpower strength  
28-30 Budget 2020-21 and Force Level in Indian Coast Guard 
31 Required and existing manpower  
32 Indian Coast Guard Academy  
33 MILITARY ENGINEER SERVICES: Budgetary Provisions and challenges 
34 Initiatives regarding MES  
35 DIRECTORATE GENERAL DEFENCE ESTATES: Budgetary provision  
36-37 Encroachment of Defence Lands  
38-39 Expert Committee on Working of Cantonment Boards  
40-41 Implementation of Central Government Schemes in Cantonment Boards  
42-43 Leased properties in Cantonment areas  
44-45 Commercial use of non-sensitive Defence lands  
46-47 Interests of the Civil Population in Cantonment Areas  
48 Ammunition Dumps  

 
2 
              
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3. Action Taken Replies have been received from the Government in respect of all the 
observations/recommendations contained in the Report. However, the reply on 
Recommendation No. 10 has been termed as “classified” by the Ministry and has been 
forwarded to Hon’ble Chairperson in a sealed cover. This reply has been placed under 
‘accepted’ category. The remaining replies have been examined and categorised as follows:- 
  
49-50 DEFENCE PUBLIC SECTOR UNDERTAKINGS (DPSUS): Time slippages 
in delivery of products  
51-53 Order Book Challenges and production in Defence Public Sector 
Undertakings (DPSUs)  
54 Defence Exports  
55-57 Reforms for indigenization and import substitution of products 
58 Level playing field for players participating in Defence production 
59 Corporate Social Responsibility (CSR) funding to Sainik Schools 
60 CANTEEN STORES DEPARTMENT (CSD): Budgetary Allocations  
61 Online presence of CSD 
62 Manpower strength 
63 Qualitative requirements for opening Unit run Canteens in an area 
64 Use of technology 
65 WELFARE OF EX-SERVICEMEN: Resettlement Opportunities  
66-67 Budgetary provisions 
68-69 Re-settlement of Ex-Servicemen 
70 Payment of ex-gratia amount to the dependents of martyrs 
71-72 Other welfare issues 
73 EX-SERVICEMEN CONTRIBUTORY HEALTH SCHEME (ECHS): 
Budgetary provisions and  Medical bills pending with ECHS 
74 Authorized and actual manpower for ECHS Polyclinics 
75 Merger of Military hospitals with existing ECHS Polyclinics 
76 Expansion of ECHS 
77 DEFENCE PENSION: Budgetary Provisions 
78 Tax Exemption on disability Pension 
79-81 One Rank One Pension (OROP) 
82 SAINIK SCHOOLS: Budgetary provisions and challenges 
83 Admission of Girl Students in Sainik Schools  
84 Intake of Sainik School Students into National Defence Academy (NDA) 
85 Expansion of  Sainik Schools 

 
3 
(i) (a)  Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the 
Government: 
   
Para Nos. 1, 2, 3, 4, 8, 9,10,11, 12, 14, 15, 16, 18, 19, 21, 22, 23, 24, 25, 26, 27, 28, 29 , 
30, 31, 32, 33, 34, 36, 37, 38, 39, 40, 41, 42, 43, 46, 47, 48, 49, 50, 54, 55, 56, 57, 58, 
60, 61, 62, 63, 64, 65, 66, 67, 68, 69, 70, 71, 72, 73, 74, 75, 76, 77, 78, 79, 80, 81, 82, 
83, 84 and 85 
 (72 Recommendations) 
 These are included in Chapter II A of the Report. 
 
 
(b) Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the 
Government and are commented upon: 
 
Para Nos. 5, 6, 7, 13, 20, 35, 44, 45, 51, 52, 53 and 59           
(12 Recommendations) 
 These are included in Chapter II B of the Report. 
 
 
(ii)   Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to pursue in 
view of the replies received from the Government: 
  
Para No.  17 
                (1 Recommendation)  
These are included in Chapter III of the Report.  
 
 
(iii) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of Government have 
not been accepted by the Committee, which require reiteration and to be 
commented upon: 
   
Para No. - Nil 
(0 Recommendations) 
           These are included in Chapter IV of the Report. 
 
 
(iv)   Observations/Recommendations in respect of which Government have furnished 
interim replies: 
 
Para No. - Nil 
                       (0 Recommendation) 
           These are included in Chapter V of the Report. 
 
 
4.  The Committee desire that the Ministry’s response to their comments made in 
Chapter I of this Report should be furnished to them at the earliest and in any case not 
later than six months of the presentation of this Report. 
  

 
4 
A. PROJECTIONS MADE BY THE THREE SERVICES 
Recommendation Para Nos. 5, 6 and 7 
5. The Committee had recommended as under: 
“The Committee, after careful examination of the Budgetary figures submitted by the 
Ministry, infer that the allocations to the Services are not commensurate with the 
projections at both Budget Estimates (BE) and Revised Estimates (RE) stage 
consequently. Moreover, the Committee note with glee that the Services have been more 
or less able to spend the amounts allocated at the stage of RE in the last fiscal year. For 
the previous financial year i.e. 2019-20, at the stage of RE, Army projected a 
requirement of ₹ 1,98,456.82 crore for both Revenue and Capital expenditure, but was 
allocated ₹ 1,72,440.73 crore. In the case of Navy, the projected amount was ₹ 
68,860.27 crore for both Revenue and Capital in RE 2019-20, however, only ₹ 48,943.14 
crore were provided. Similarly, while the Air Force projected a requirement of ₹ 
1,21,684.39 crore in RE 2019-20, only ₹ 74,898.88 crore was allocated. The Committee 
reiterate that they are pleased to note that for the past few years, the Forces have been 
able to completely utilize the budgetary allocation at RE stage. 
 
Further, the Committee find that for the Budget Estimates 2020-21, the Army projected 
an amount of ₹ 1,65,228.28  crore under the Revenue Head, but has been allocated only 
₹ 1,45,785.88 crore. Under the Capital Head, the projected amount is ₹ 50,373.60 crore 
but only ₹ 32,462.38 crore has been allocated, which amounts to 64 percent of the 
projected requirement. Again, for the current year 2020-21, while the Navy projected a 
requirement of ₹ 32,237.96 crore, the allocated amount has been ₹ 22,934.75 crore 
under the Revenue Head. Under the Capital Head, while the Navy projected an amount 
of ₹ 45,268.31 crore, the allocated amount is only ₹ 26,688.28 crore, which amounts to 
approximately 59 percent of the projected requirement. While an amount of ₹ 43,904.17 
crore has been projected as the requirement under the Revenue Head by Air Force, ₹ 
29,962.66 crore has been provided. Under the Capital Head, while the Air Force 
projected a requirement of ₹ 66,207.29 crore, the allocation has been only ₹ 43,281.91 
crore, which amounts to approximately 65 percent of the projected requirement. 
 
The Ministry of Defence in their written submissions to the Committee stated that the 
requirements projected by Services are proposed to the Ministry of Finance for 
favourable consideration. While allocating funds, the Ministry of Finance analyses past 
absorption capacity of the Services and the pace of expenditure in the current Financial 
Year. In addition to this, based on the overall ceilings conveyed by the Ministry of 
Finance, the Ministry of Defence distributes funds among the Services and Organizations 
under the Ministry, based on Inter-Services priorities and allocations for critical projects. 
Again, the Committee would like to highlight here, that taking into consideration this 
portentous achievement of the Forces where they have been able to completely utilize 
their funds for past few years as allocated to them at Revised Estimates stage, the 
Committee perceive that there is no reason that the projected amounts by the Services 
should not be allocated by the Ministry of Finance. Therefore, the Committee 
recommend that keeping in view not only their contribution in a war-like scenario but also 
their role of reconnoitering of national borders during peace time, the Ministry of 
Defence, armed with reasoning of healthy trend of expenditure of the allocated amount 
and critical requirements of operational preparedness of the Forces, should vigorously 
pursue for additional allocation of funds at Revised Estimates stage”. 
  

 
5 
 
6. The Ministry in its action taken reply has stated as under:- 
 
“In BE 2019-20, an amount of Rs. 3,05,296.07 crore was allocated to M/o Defence under 
Defence Services Estimates (DSE). This Ministry had projected an additional 
requirement of Rs. 1,06,792.35 crore under DSE in RE 2019-20.  Ministry of Finance 
allocated Rs. 3,16,296.07 crore (i.e. an increase of Rs. 11,000 crore over BE 2019-20 
allocations)  to M/o Defence under DSE. It may be relevant to mention that earlier there 
was a trend of reduction in BE allocations at RE stage under DSE. This trend was 
reversed in 2017-18 and no cut was imposed in RE 2017-18 as well as in RE 2018-19. 
Additional allocation was provided in RE 2019-20.  Further, it may also be relevant to 
mention that the Ministry has been able to spend the entire budget allocated at RE stage 
during the last 5 years. 
2. The recommendation of the Committee has been noted and projections / 
requirements of the Services will be forwarded to Ministry of Finance for favourable 
consideration at Supplementary/ RE stage.” 
 
 
 
7. The Committee in their recommendation contained in the Fifth Report 
(Seventeenth Lok Sabha) had recommended that keeping in view the contribution of the 
Forces in a war-like scenario and their role of reconnoitering of national borders during 
peace time, the Ministry of Defence, armed with reasoning of healthy trend of 
expenditure of the allocated amount and critical requirements of operational 
preparedness of the Forces, should vigorously pursue for additional allocation of funds 
at Revised Estimates stage. The Ministry has submitted that recommendation of the 
Committee has been noted and projections / requirements of the Services will be 
forwarded to Ministry of Finance for favourable consideration at Supplementary/ Revised 
Estimates stage. The Committee sincerely hope that the budgetary allocations of the 
Ministry of Defence at the Revised Estimates stage are commensurate with the 
projections and the plans for modernization and operational preparedness of the Forces 
continue to be on the right trajectory. The Committee may be apprised of the allocation 
for 2020-21 at the Revised Estimates stage. In the opinion of the Committee, the 
truncated fund flow has a bearing on defence preparedness of the country. 

 
6 
 
B. DEFENCE BUDGET: CHALLENGES AND REFORMS 
 
Recommendation Para No. 13 
 
 
8. The Committee had recommended as under: 
“The Committee note that the proposals of creation of Defence Renewal Fund for capital 
acquisitions and border infrastructure, self-financing of Married Accommodation Project 
through National Buildings Construction Corporation Limited (NBCC) in next eight years 
and exchange of land with the State Governments/Central Ministries in lieu of land 
required by Defence are currently under consideration in the Ministry of Defence for 
mobilizing extra budgetary resources for Defence. Further, through the creation of post 
of the Chief of Defence Staff, prioritization of procurement to aid synchronized 
modernization of the Services will be taken up. Also, optimum use of manpower of the 
three Services, integration of training establishments of the Services to reduce cost 
involved in infrastructure and logistics will contribute to judicious utilization of Defence 
Budget. The Committee have been further apprised that Committees have been 
constituted for Defence Reforms to review existing delegation of financial powers to the 
Services and reforms in Defence Procurement Manual and Defence Procurement 
Procedure. In addition to this, the Ministry of Defence has requested the Ministry of 
Finance for creation of Non-Lapsable Defence Modernization Fund in order to mobilize 
additional resources. The Committee are satisfied to learn that various measures/ 
steps/proposals being taken for reforms in our Defence sector and fervently urge that all 
the stakeholders i.e. the Ministry of Defence, the Services and allied Organizations go 
the extra mile to ensure optimum utilization of the Defence Budget. They also desire that 
updates on these steps/measures/proposals be apprised to the Committee within three 
months of the presentation of this Report. The reform measures and amendments etc. 
as highlighted to the Committee are linked to different sets of requirements within the 
Forces. The Committee, therefore, recommend that in heading-wise captions of the 
steps initiated, timelines for completion, the progress made till the finalization of the 
Action Taken Notes and the perceived difficulties be intimated to the Committee. In this 
information, the work done by the said Committees also be included.” 
 
9. The Ministry in its action taken reply has stated as under:- 
 
“Review of DPP-2016 is underway in order to further streamline the capital acquisition 
and make it user and business friendly.  For this purpose, a Main Review Committee was 
set up to review & revise the provisions in DPP-2016 to ensure seamless flow from asset 
acquisition to life cycle support.  Various Sub-Committees were setup under this 
Committee on different aspects of capital acquisition to be included in the revised DPP.” 
 
  

 
7 
10. The Committee in their Fifth Report had noted various measures/ steps/proposals 
being taken for reforms in our Defence sector and had fervently urged that all the 
stakeholders i.e. the Ministry of Defence, the Services and allied Organizations go the 
extra mile to ensure optimum utilization of the Defence Budget. They also desired that 
updates on these steps/measures/proposals be apprised to them within three months of 
the presentation of this Report. In its reply, the Ministry has submitted that a Main 
Review Committee was set up to review and revise the provisions in Defence 
Procurement Procedure-2016 to ensure seamless flow from asset acquisition to life cycle 
support.  However, updates on other measures such as proposals of creation of Defence 
Renewal Fund for capital acquisitions and border infrastructure, self-financing of Married 
Accommodation Project through National Buildings Construction Corporation Limited 
(NBCC), exchange of land with the State Governments/Central Ministries in lieu of land 
required by Defence, optimum use of manpower of the three Services and integration of 
training establishments of the Services are not mentioned in the Ministry’s reply. 
Therefore, the Committee reiterate their recommendation that heading-wise captions of 
the steps/reforms initiated, timelines for completion, the progress made till date and the 
perceived difficulties be intimated to them. 
C. CONSTRUCTION OF ROADS BY BRO 
Recommendation Para No. 20 
11.  The Committee had recommended as under: 
“The Committee further note that out of the 273 roads of length 14577.33 km, identified 
by the Army for construction/improvement, 24 roads of length 936.55 Km are in the state 
of Uttarakhand, 61 roads of length 2295.62 Km are in J&K, 44 roads of length 3185.95 
km are in Ladakh and 100 roads of length 5610.43 km are in the North Eastern Region 
(excluding roads in Bhutan. The Committee are satisfied to note that 75 percent of work 
has been completed by BRO with regard to construction of 61 Indo-China Border Roads 
(ICBRs) of length 3323.57 kilometer. The Committee recommend that using state-of-the-
art equipment and skilled manpower, BRO should make concerted efforts to strictly 
adhere to the timelines for construction of excellent quality roads. Necessary and timely 
budgetary support should also be extended to BRO by the Ministry of Defence and other 
Ministries involved.” 
12. The Ministry in its action taken reply has stated as under:- 
 
“Earlier in 2006, the Government had identified 73 roads of length 3707.14 km as Indo 
China Border roads (ICBRs). Out of these BRO has been entrusted with the construction 
of 61 roads of length 3323.57 km. Highest Priority is accorded by BRO to complete these 
roads as per the timelines fixed by the Army. The Agency wise physical progress of 
works (Cumulative progress) up to 31 March, 2020 is as under:- 

 
8 
Agency Length (Km) Length (km) 
Connectivity 
achieved (Km) 
Surfacing (Km) 
General Staff  1932.67  1907.46 1545.70 
China Study Group 1065.67 1036.76 788.90 
Indo-Tibetan Border 
Police 
325.87 299.19 203.30 
Total 3323.57 3243.41 2537.90 
 
Note: There is reduction in length of 33.25 km with respect to the approved length as per 
the ground condition.” 
 
13. The Committee are pleased to learn that out of construction of length of 3323.57 
km of Indo China Border Roads (ICBRs) entrusted to Border Roads Organisation, 
connectivity of 3243.31 km and surfacing of 2537.90 km of roads has been achieved upto 
31st March, 2020. The Committee recommend that concerted efforts be taken to complete 
the remaining work in the stipulated timeframe. They further recommend that 
consequent to the construction of these Indo China Border Roads, maintenance of these 
roads should be accorded highest priority considering strategic and security 
considerations. They also recommend that regular feedback regarding quality and 
condition of these roads by the users i.e. the Forces should be taken by BRO and prompt 
action be taken on the suggestions/complaints as and when received.  
 
D. DIRECTORATE GENERAL DEFENCE ESTATES: BUDGETARY PROVISION 
 
Recommendation Para No. 35 
 
14. The Committee had recommended as under: 
 
“The Committee have been apprised that as against the projected amount of  
₹ 1,61,117.93 lakh under Revenue Head in Budget Estimates 2020-21 for Defence 
Estates Organisation (DEO), ₹ 38,742.00 lakh have been allocated, i.e. a shortfall of  
₹ 1,22,375.93 lakh. Under Capital Head, ₹ 994 lakh have been allocated against the 
projected amount of ₹ 2,425.19 lakh, i.e. a shortfall of ₹ 1,431.19 lakh. The Committee 
note that processing proposals for acquisition of lands, resettlement and rehabilitation of 
displaced persons and for hiring and requisitioning of lands and buildings, besides 
management of defence lands, are some of the responsibilities of Directorate General 
Defence Estates (DGDE). As custodian of defence land records, Defence Estates 
Organisation is involved in updation and maintenance of records alongwith 
implementation of Cantonments Act 2006, Policies, Rules & Regulations and executive 
instructions. Therefore, they recommend that additional funds commensurate with pace 

 
9 
of expenditure and prioritization of critical works should be allocated to the DEO at 
Revised Estimates stage. While recommending for additional funds, the Committee 
would like to know what compromises are likely to be made in case the Supplementary 
funds do not reach to the level as sought in the initial projected figures. During 
deliberations on Cantonment Boards, the Committee took note of the fact that to 
accommodate the changing needs it would be in the fitness of things if the Ministry take 
a serious note and contemplate for amending Cantonment Board Act 2006 with a fresh 
perspective. In such proposed amendment, heed should be paid to increase the 
construction areas of the properties coming under the purview of the Cantonment 
Boards.” 
 
15. The Ministry in its action taken reply has stated as under:- 
 
“The recommendation of the Committee has been noted and additional funds, if any, as 
per requirement will be sought from Ministry of finance at Supplementary/ Revised 
Estimates stages of 2020-21. 
It is intimated that as per the sanctioned budget 2020-21 PE of Cantonments by GOC-in-
C, an amount of Rs. 952 crore was recommended and requested as Grant-in-aid 
(General) for meeting budgetary deficit of Cantonments. Out of this, only an amount of  
Rs. 254 crore has been allocated under 2020-21(BE). It is to intimate that in case the 
supplementary funds, do not reach to the level as sought in the initial projected figures, 
Cantonments would face acute financial crisis. Most of the 62 Cantonment Boards are 
dependent on Grant-in-Aid from Govt. All development and mandatory municipal 
responsibilities would get affected. Many Cantonment Boards would not be in position to 
pay salary/pension liabilities of their employees. The Cantonment boards are also 
undertaking various public infrastructure schemes such as Sewerage Treatment Plants, 
Water augmentation scheme, upgradation of Hospitals and Schools etc. Any decrease in 
allocation of funds would impact such ongoing and proposed projects adversely. 
 
2. As regards acquisition of land, the proposals are based on priority and operational 
requirements of the Services.  
 
3. It is intimated that amendment of Cantonment Act, 2006 with a fresh perspective 
is under consideration. However, it is pertinent to mention here that increasing the 
construction areas of the properties is the subject matter of building bye-laws of the 
respective Boards and would not be a part of the amendments proposed of the 
Cantonment Act. ” 
 
 
 
 

 
10 
16. The Committee in their original Report had recommended that additional funds 
commensurate with pace of expenditure and prioritization of critical works should be 
allocated to the Defence Estates Organisation at Revised Estimates stage. The Ministry 
has submitted that in case the supplementary funds do not reach to the level as sought 
in the initial projected figures, the Cantonments would face acute financial crisis. Most of 
the 62 Cantonment Boards are dependent on Grant-in-Aid from Govt. All development 
and mandatory municipal responsibilities would get affected and many Cantonment 
Boards would not be in position to pay salary/pension liabilities of their employees. 
Taking note of the Ministry’s reply, the Committee recommend that timely intervention of 
the Ministry of Defence is required to support the Cantonment Boards to avert the 
situation of financial distress due to lack of Grant-in-Aid. 
 
E. COMMERCIAL USE OF NON-SENSITIVE DEFENCE LANDS 
Recommendation Para Nos. 44 and 45 
 
17. The Committee had recommended as under: 
“The Committee have been intimated that with regard to the option of commercialization 
of non-sensitive defence lands, such as leasing lands to commercial establishment etc. 
to increase the source of revenue, very limited vacant Class – C defence land is 
available for this purpose with Cantonment Boards. Also funds for establishing such 
capital assets are also not available. Cantonment Boards could consider projects on B-4 
vacant lands for projects which could generate revenue for Cantonment Boards such as 
community halls, office complex etc. This would also involve process of reclassification of 
B-4 lands to C for municipal purpose by the MoD. The proposal, if considered feasible, 
could be considered for sanction under Creation of Capital Assets. The Ministry has 
advised the Cantonment Boards accordingly since this is almost identical demand from 
all the Cantonments.  
The Committee opine that in addition to above mentioned proposals, the Ministry of 
Defence may also look into making the land available with Defence, Cantonment boards 
and Ordnance Factories to the State Governments for construction of helipads or parking 
space as it would lead to substantial revenue generation, which in turn can be used for 
provide better public infrastructure, health and educational facilities etc. in the 
Cantonment areas. The Committee recommend that feasibility of the said proposals may 
be examined at the earliest and they be apprised accordingly.” 
 
 

 
11 
18. The Ministry in its action taken reply has stated as under:- 
“Government policy No.11015/02/2012/D(Lands) dated 02.02.2016, for transfer/ lease/ 
license of defence land to other Central Government Departments, State Governments 
and Organizations controlled by it as also local bodies, for execution of projects related 
to creation/up-gradation of Public infrastructure/ utilities, is already in place. The main 
features of the said policy are: 
i) Defence land is transferred to the Indenting Authority on the basis of exchange of 
‘Equal Value Land’ (EVL) to be provided by Indenting Authority. However, where 
the Indenting Authority neither owns land nor has an arrangement with the State/ 
UT governments for providing land for the project and is therefore unable to 
provide EVL, Land transfer is made on payment of current market value of the 
land.  
(ii) When land is neither required permanently nor its ownership rights are required to 
be transferred, in such cases land is transferred on lease hold basis, on payment 
of an annual rent and one time premium.  
(iii) The policy also provides that when permission to carry out temporary works like 
laying of water pipelines and electricity cables on defence land is required, a 
license may be granted on payment of an annual license fee and a refundable 
security deposit.” 
 
19. The Committee had recommended that the Ministry of Defence may look into the 
possibility of making the land available with Defence, Cantonment boards and Ordnance 
Factories to the State Governments for construction of helipads or parking space as it 
would lead to substantial revenue generation, which in turn can be used for providing 
better public infrastructure, health and educational facilities etc. In its reply, the Ministry 
has submitted that Government Policy No.11015/02/2012/D(Lands) dated 02.02.2016, for 
transfer/ lease/ license of defence land to other Central Government Departments, State 
Governments and Organizations controlled by it as also local bodies, for execution of 
projects related to creation/upgradation of public infrastructure/utilities, is already in 
place. The Committee desire that the details of such projects/proposals for revenue 
generation and creation/upgradation of public infrastructure/utilities currently under 
consideration/examination of the Ministry may be intimated to them while furnishing 
Action Taken Statements. 

 
12 
F. ORDER BOOK CHALLENGES AND PRODUCTION IN DEFENCE PUBLIC SECTOR 
UNDERTAKINGS (DPSUS) 
                                        Recommendation Para Nos. 51, 52 and 53 
 
20. The Committee had recommended as under: 
“After gleaning through the information supplied to the Committee, they note that out of 
the nine DPSUs, Hindustan Aeronautics Limited (HAL), Bharat Dynamics Limited (BDL), 
Garden Reach Shipbuilders and Engineers Limited (GRSE), Goa Shipyard Limited 
(GSL), Hindustan Shipyard Limited (HSL) and Mazagon Dock Shipbuilders Limited 
(MDL) are facing order book challenges and decline in production in the current/coming 
years. Although HAL’s production over last several years has been growing with highest 
turnover recorded in 2018-19, the major part of existing orders for supply of aircraft and 
helicopters will be liquidated shortly with the major manufacturing order of Su-30MKI 
being completed in 2019-20. There is no firm order currently available on the company 
beyond 2021-22. In case of BDL, most of the major products like Akash Weapon system 
will be executed by 2019-20, Invar ATGM and Konkurs-M ATGM will be executed by 
2020-21. There are no firm order executable beyond year 2020-21. In case of Garden 
Reach Shipbuilders and Engineers Ltd. (GRSE), 3 projects of Indian Navy and Coast 
Guard will get completed in next 3 to 4 months leaving the shipyard with 3 No. of projects 
of Indian Navy for construction of 15 ships against capacity of 20 ships construction. Goa 
Shipyard Limited (GSL) is presently executing the 05 Coast Guard Offshore Patrol 
Vessel (CGOPV) project with balance executable order book of ₹ 800 crore which would 
get liquidated by 2020-21. The balance order book value of HSL is ₹ 2772.28 crore as on 
31 December, 2019 and the balance orders are likely to be completed by end of March 
2022. 
The Committee have also been apprised that for HAL, orders for supply of 83 Light 
Combat Aircraft (LCA) Mk1A and 15 Light Combat Helicopter (LCH)are expected for 
which quotations have already been submitted. An additional order for 12 Su-30MKI is 
also expected in the near future. The LCH platform has attained Initial Operational 
Clearance for both Air Force and Army variants and is fully ready for operational 
induction awaiting orders. Similarly, Light Utility Helicopter (LUH) has also completed all 
major tests, including H-V envelope evaluation, towards Basic Operational Clearance of 
LUH. Document towards Initial Operational Clearance (IOC) were submitted to User and 
Regional Centre of Military Airworthiness (RCMA) during Dec 2019 and the IOC has 
been granted by Centre for Military Airworthiness & Certification (CEMILAC) to HAL on 
7th February, 2020 during Defence Expo 2020 at Lucknow. HAL is also expecting 
additional orders for ongoing programs like Advanced Light Helicopter (ALH), LCA, 
Hawk, Do-228 & SU-30 MKI and fresh production orders for new platforms like Do-228 
Civil variant, LCH, HTT 40, LUH and 199 Hawk-i. Goa Shipyard Limited (GSL) is making 
concerted efforts to secure short gestation projects in Domestic, Export and Ship Repair 
segments which will help in minimizing the potential impact due to lean executable 
orders to bridge the gap till the significant Value of Production contribution from Frigates 
and Mine Counter Measure Vessel Projects. The financial restructuring proposal of HSL 
with NIL cash outflow to the Government of India to enable shipyard to achieve positive 

 
13 
net worth is under active consideration of the MoD, which will improve HSL’s credit 
rating. Mazagon Dock Shipbuilders Limited (MDL) has an in-house capacity to undertake 
simultaneous construction of 10 ships and 11 submarines at various build stages. 
Considering the status of ongoing projects, MDL can immediately undertake construction 
of 4 more warships and 7 more submarines.  
Keeping in view the above facts, the Committee are of the considered view that the 
existing infrastructure at DPSUs and skilled manpower would face the challenge of idling 
due to want of confirmed orders. The continuity in production orders from the Forces is 
essential to sustain production growth of the DPSUs. Therefore, they recommend that 
the orders for DPSUs in pipeline need to be expedited for optimum use of their 
construction and building capacities and manpower. They also recommend that the 
Ministry and DPSUs should explore options of venturing into commercialisation of 
various products other than arms and ammunition built by the DPSUs such as alloys by 
Mishra Dhatu Nigam Limited (MIDHANI) for revenue generation and for business 
expansion.” 
 
21. The Ministry in its action taken reply has stated as under:- 
 
 
“Defence PSUs are diversifying their product profile into other areas and has robust 
plans for technology, Research and Development, Infrastructure Development, export 
promotion and focus on indigenization, which will ensure the sustenance of DPSUs and 
improve their order book position in long term.  Further, DPSUs have also adopted 
several new technologies which include Artificial Intelligence (around 50 AI enabled 
products are under development by DPSUs); Cloud Based technology; Robotics; use of 
unmanned vehicles; composite R&D for design and developments of products; 3D 
printing; Integrated construction methodology for warship construction. DPSUs are also 
focusing on Modernization of Infrastructure and technology. The Capital Expenditure 
plan for 2020-21 modernisation of Defence PSUs is around Rs. 2756 Cr.  
 
     The order book volume of Defence PSUs depends on the customers which is 
primarily the Armed Forces and export opportunities in the International market. 
Department of Defence Production is taking many steps to improve the order book 
position of DPSUs as detailed below: 
 
(a) Buy (Indian- Indigenously Designed, Developed and Manufactured) : 
 
 In Defence Procurement Procedure 2016 under Capital Acquisition, preference is 
being given to Buy (Indian- Indigenously Designed, Developed and Manufactured). 
The order of preference/priority in decreasing order under this Procedure is 
categorized as follows:- 
 
(a) Buy (Indian - IDDM) 
(b) Buy (Indian) 
(c) Buy and Make (Indian) 
(d) Buy and Make 
(e) Buy (Global) 
 

 
14 
(b) To Boost-up the Export in Defence Production following steps/initiatives have 
been taken: 
 
 Open General Export Licence (OGEL) System for Promoting Defence Export: As 
part of creating greater ease of doing business for Defence exporters, DDP has 
notified two (02) OGEL for intra company transfer of technology and for export of 
parts and components. Under OGEL the Indian Defence Industries will be permitted 
to export specified items to specified destinations enumerated in the OGEL without 
approaching Department of Defence Production for export authorization requirements 
during the period of validity of the OGEL (i.e. 02 years). The companies will be 
required to have established Inter Compliance Programme (ICP) or Export 
Compliance Programme (ECP) before seeking OGEL.  
 
 Rationalizing the Standard Operating Procedure (SOP) for reducing the time taken 
and cut down red tapism.  
 
 Export Promotion Cell Set up. 
 
 Scheme for funding marketing activities by Defence Attaches for promoting exports. 
 
 Fully automated export portal and electronic sharing of export leads with relevant 
industry. 
 
 Dispensing with the requirement of End User Certificate by Government for exports of 
parts/ components.  
 
 Simplified procedure for tender, exhibitions, testing, etc. 
 
 SOP formulated to facilitate exports of ‘Munitions List’ under category 6 of Special 
Chemicals, Organism, Material, Equipment and Technologies (SCOMET) by DGFT. 
 
 Streamlining export using Line of Credit for items already sold to Indian military. 
 
As a result of these reforms, defence export permissions have increased from Rs. 
1940.64 crores in 2014-15 to Rs. 10,745 cr in 2018-19.  
 
(c) Indigenization:  
 
i. Policy for Indigenization was notified on by Department of Defence Production on 
08 March, 2019, with the objective to create an industry ecosystem. It is 
estimated that Defence PSUs will reduce the import bill through indigenization of 
products and processes. 
 
ii. These Strategies are under implementation and some major achievements are as 
given below: - 
  

 
15 
 
 Development of Indigenization Portal: DPSUs/OFB are uploading the data on 
the link provided. The proposed Indigenization portal will be a centralized one in 
which DPSUs/OFB and other stakeholders will be showcasing their imported 
items to be indigenized. Vendor will become aware of the above items and they 
can in turn, show their interest in those items where they have capability to 
manufacture.  
 
 Study on savings in cost – Institute for Defence Studies and Analysis (IDSA), 
Delhi is studying savings in cost due to indigenization in the last 5 years in 
DPSUs/OFB. Final report submitted in Jan 2020. 
 
 Implementation of Make-II – The Make-II framework (Industry funded prototype 
development) for implementation by DPSUs/OFB was notified on 
11.02.2019.DPSUs/OFB have identified approx. 2500 items under Make-II. These 
items are at various stages of development process. At Department level, 47 
projects have accorded Approval – in- Principal (AIP).  
 
 Long Term Orders -“Framework for placing Long Term Orders by DPSUs” has 
been approved by Hon’ble Raksha Mantri on 04 Nov 2019. Under this Framework, 
the procuring organization may aggregate demand of the item for a long period of 
upto 10 years, in cases where it finds challenges in indigenization. 
 
(d) Other Initiatives 
 
 Testing and Certification - MoD/DDP has issued Government Orders for testing 
of items being indigenized/ priority in testing and certification on 28Aug 2019. It 
covers aspects like use of test facilities for R&D without asking for End User 
Certificate, fixation of insurance cost, transparency in declaration of test results 
and minimizing delays. 
 
 Third Party Testing- Third Party Inspection (TPI) is being implemented by DGQA 
and DGAQA both.   
 
 Testing Infrastructure for Industry- Defence Testing Infrastructure Scheme 
(DTIS) has been prepared. It proposes to setup 6 to 8 new green field Defence 
Testing Infrastructure with total grant-in-aid of Rs 400 crores. 
 
 
Further, the details of project that are under the pipeline of DPSUs are as below:  
 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of 
DPSU 
Major Order/Product details 
1.  HAL Light Combat Aircraft (LCA), Light Combat 
Helicopter (LCH) and Basic Trainer HTT-40 etc. 
2.  BEL Coast Surveillance System, Spares for long range 
surface to air missile (LRSAM) system, Delhi CC TV 
etc. 

 
16 
3.  BEML 8x8 HMVs for PINAKA, HMVs Coastal Surveillance 
System, HMVs ASCON, 8x8 HMVs- AKASH Army, 
8x8 HMVs- AKASH Air Force etc.  
4.  BDL Akash (IAF), Medium range surface to air Missiles 
(MRSAM) (IAF & Navy), Very short range Air 
Defence System, Milan 2T, Counter Measure 
Dispensing System(CDMS) etc. 
5.  MIDHANI Special Steel, Super alloys, breech ring, titanium 
plates etc. 
6.  GRSE Pollution Control Vessels, Air Cushion Vehicles for 
ICG & Indian Army, Next Generation Missile Vessel 
(NGMV), Multi-Purpose Vessels, Survey Training 
Vessel, Self-propelled fuel barge etc. 
7.  GSL Pollution control vessels, fast patrol vessels, 
Advanced Infantry Floating Footbridge, Next 
Generation Missile Vessel, Multi-Purpose Vessel, 
Survey training vessel, Pax all-weather vessel, 12 
ton patrol modified boats etc. 
8.  HSL Fleet support Ships etc.  
 
 
 
Further, Defence PSUs wise reply is as under: 
 
HAL: HAL plays significant role in domestic Aerospace industry in terms of service 
provided to Indian Armed Forces and development of Indian aerospace manufacturing 
eco-system. There is a need to ensure maximum utilization of existing Defence & 
Aerospace facilities in the country, which is of national importance, by providing orders 
for aircraft / helicopters manufactured and developed by HAL under “Make in India”, 
which in turn will boost the manufacturing ecosystem in the country.  
Orders for following platforms are under process.  
 
a) LCA Mk 1A                                 - 83 Nos 
b) Light Combat Helicopter(LCH)   - 15 Nos 
c) HTT-40                                       - 70 + 38Nos  
d) Su-30 MKI                                  - 12 Nos (Additional) 
 
Further, as part of diversification strategy HAL is exploring following options for revenue 
generation and business expansion: 
 
 
 Global supplier of Aero components 
 
HAL has been developing Business Association with various global Defence OEMs, by 
signing NDA/ MoU with following purposes:  
i. To be Tier-1 supplier to Global OEMsfor supply of Aero structures, Avionics 
and Accessories. 
 
ii. To associate with global defence companies for catering to export market 
jointly. 

 
17 
iii. To collaborate with OEMs for Civil Aircraft Development in India and also 
be Tier-1 supplier of Civil Aircraft Components to global supply chain. 
 
iv. To collaborate with OEMs for Development in India and or 
manufacture/supply and maintenance of UAV/RUAV/UCAV for domestic 
and foreign markets 
 
 Civil Segment 
 
Civil Maintenance, Repair and Overhaul (MRO). 
 
HAL has been providing MRO services for the military platforms for over 7 decades. HAL 
has repair and overhaul facilities for airframe, engines as well as accessories at various 
locations across the country. With this, HAL is making all out efforts to explore the 
possibilities of being part of this expanded Civil MRO business avenue. 
 
Also with recent restructuring of Tax structure and Govt. push with policy changes under 
“Atamnirbhar Bharat” “Convergence between defence sector and the civil MROs”, Civil 
MRO business is poised to expand quickly in the country. 
 
Civil Aviation 
 
Dornier Do-228 Civil 
 
HAL has been making its all-out marketing efforts to foray into domestic Civil aviation 
segment and position its Do-228 aircraft for Civil application/ Regional Connectivity. 
Export of Civil Do-228 - HAL has also initiated the process for EASA certification through 
DGCA. Leasing companies are to be encouraged to participate for sale of civil aircraft on 
lease as airline operators are not keen on outright purchase of aircraft.  
 
SARAS MK-II, 19 Seater Aircraft 
 
HAL has entered into MoU with CSIR-NAL for Design, Development and Certification of 
19 seat Light Transport Aircraft – SARAS MKII and subsequent Production, Marketing 
and Lifecycle Maintenance of the aircraft intended to be sold to Indian Defence Services, 
non- Indian Defence Services and Export customers.  
 
The indigenously designed & developed SARAS MKII will meet the requirement of 
launch customer i.e IAF. The aircraft will also meet the ever-growing needs of Regional 
Connectivity Service (RCS) between tier-2 and tier-3 cities. 
 
Civil Helicopters 
 
ALH Dhruv 
 
 ALH is 5.5 ton class certified helicopter for Military & Civil application. ALH 
Mark I is already certified by DGCA and ALH Mk III version is under 
certification by DGCA. 
 Export of ALH Civil - European Aviation Safety Agency (EASA) Certification is 
under process. 
  

 
18 
Light Utility Helicopter (LUH) 
 
 LUH has received the Initial Operational Clearance (IOC) for Defence purpose. 
Civil certification by DGCA & EASA - Process has been initiated. 
 
BEL: Some of the major contracts could not be finalized during the last FY (2019-20). 
For many other major programs, the acquisition is in various stages of procurement 
(trials, Price Negotiation Committee (PNC), contract finalization etc). BEL depends on 
some of these orders for meeting the targets for current financial year and delay will also 
have a bearing on next few financial years. 
 
 BEL is capable of executing future projects in the field of Missile Systems, 
Radars, Electro-Optics, Ammunition Fuzes, Radio/Communication Equipment, 
Sonars/Underwater Systems, Gun Upgrades, C4I systems etc., for Tri services 
requirement to ensure utilization of the installed capacities, design and 
engineering competence of BEL. 
 
BEML: BEML has established dedicated infrastructure including test track facilities for 
manufacture of Main Battle Tanks, High Mobility Vehicles, Recovery vehicles, 
aggregates such as transmissions and engines.However, Equipment orders received in 
the last 5 years is only to the tune of Rs. 413 crore and Orders received in 2019-20 is Rs. 
45 crore.  
 
While BEML has been supplying HMVs and Recovery Vehicles, orders are not placed for 
manufacture of Battle Tanks although BEML has manufactured & supplied two Arjun 
MBT Prototypes during 1990-95. BEML has also in-house designed, developed and 
supplied 2 nos. of Arjun Armored Repair & Recovery Vehicle (ARRV) to Combat Vehicles 
and Research Development Enterprises (CVRDE).  
 
Also, BEML’s dedicated Engine Division which manufactures Air-cooled BEML HMV 
Engines and engines for Engineer Plant Equipment, would soon be taking up 
development of 1500HP engines for Main Battle tanks.  
 
To effectively utilize the established national facilities and skilled manpower, following 
are under process: 
 
A. Contract Amendments: 
a) 204 Nos of ARV WZT-3 (Rs. 1400 crore). 
        Dispensation for ERV, Delivery Extension, etc. taken up with MoD: 
October’2015 
b) 77 nos. Size 4 (BD50) Dozers to E-in-C (Rs. 47 crore) 
 
B. Pending Orders of Rs. 1213 Cr.: 
a) 330 HMVs for PINAKA project (Rs. 715 crore) 
b) 1512 nos. of Track Width Mine Ploughs (Rs. 498 crore)  
 
C. Placement of Orders: 
a) HMVs 8x8 (700 nos.) and 6x6 (1600 nos.), 59 nos. HRV and Trailers (50T & 
70T) thru Revenue route.  
b) Arjun MBT Mk-II 
c) ARRV 

 
19 
Also, Indian Army has published a Request for Information (RFI) on 13th May 
2020, for undertaking the operations of 505 Army Base Workshop for (overhaul of 
High Mobility Vehicles and Armoured Recovery Vehicles) under the GOCO model 
by Indian private sector. BEML being an OEM for supply of High Mobility Vehicles 
& Recovery Vehicles for military applications and being in the process of 
disinvestment, to be made eligible to take part in the Request for Information 
(RFI). 
Further, it may be noted that, BEML is one of the oldest Rail coach manufacturing 
Company in the country and has installed capacity to 720 Rail Coaches per 
annum. 
Till 2013-14, Railway Board was utilizing the national facilities of BEML by placing 
orders for passenger coaches on BEML under its Annual Production programme 
at par with its other production units. However, after 2013-14 onwards, Railway 
Board has taken decision not to procure Rail coaches from BEML under its annual 
production programme, resulting in underutilization of BEML’s national facilities 
and skilled work force. Railways are being impressed upon to review its decision. 
 
BDL: Order Book Position: 
1. Executable Orders for 2020-21 & 2021-22 are less than the established 
production capacity of BDL. 
2. Milan production line is idle from 2 years. 
3. Akash Production capacity utilisation is 10% only from April 2020. 
 
Konkurs-M ATGM order will be completed by 2020-21. Invar ATGM will be completed by 
mid 2021—22 and thereafter, both production lines will be idle for want of workload. 
Following orders are in pipeline - 
1. Akash (IAF) 
2. Akash Primer (3&4 Regiment) 
3. Konkurs-M ATGM 
4. Milan 2T ATGM 
5. VSHORAD 
6. Refurbishment of Missiles 
7. Astra 
8. MR SAM 
9. Invar 
 
MIDHANI: The orders from defence sector have been steadily reducing. In FY 18-19, 
contribution from defence sector has reduced to 10%. This is predominantly due to 
decline in orders. Value of defence orders booked during the period 2015-16 to 2018-19 
is given below.  
                                                                               Defence % Contribution 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Details  2015-
16 
2016-
17 
2017-
18 
2018-
19 
Defence 
Order Booked 
(In Cr.) 
551 225.78 384.7 184.2 
Total Order 
Booked 909 320.27 635.7 1844.1  
Defence % 
Contribution 60.62% 70.50% 60.52% 9.99% 

 
20 
 
MDL:  MDL is readying itself for undertaking more work considering the fact that ongoing 
ship construction projects are expected to be completed in next 5 years. Anticipating 
completion of existing fabrication activities in next one year, MDL’s Fabrication 
Workshops would be ready with spare capacity for new projects. Thus, MDL can 
immediately undertake construction of 4 more warships. 
 
In the field of submarine construction, MDL can immediately undertake construction of 7 
more submarines considering the fact that remaining 04 submarines of P75 are under 
advanced stages of construction/trials and are expected to be delivered by 2022. Also, 
the Pressure Hull Facilities, Structural Fabrication & Outfitting capability, Pipe fabrication 
facilities required for initial phase of submarine construction can be immediately assigned 
to new projects.  
 
In view of above, MDL has undertaken following Strategies/measures to improve the 
order book position: 
 
i. MDL has initiated efforts for export, exploring diversification avenues, 
encouraging private sector participation, etc. MDL is gearing up for it by 
undertaking augmentation and modernization of construction facilities, 
acquisition of adjacent land, forming of JVs, transformation to latest 
technologies, etc. 
 
ii. Nhava Yard, close to the main facility, has been acquired by MDL with an 
intention for developing it into ‘Green Field’ Shipyard with requisite 
infrastructure/facilities for undertaking construction of Commercial vessels, 
Export orders and Repair/ Refit orders without disrupting production activities 
of IN orders in the main facility at Mumbai. 
 
iii. MDL is also in the process of acquisition of approx. 13 acres MbPT land 
adjacent to its existing facility. MbPT’s wet basin is intended to be converted 
into Dry-docks for New builds & Refit/ Repair projects. Existing slipways in 
the said land can be used for construction of small vessels for Indian Navy 
and Coast Guard. 
 
Apart from building frontline warships & conventional submarines, MDL is trying to 
penetrate other markets as well and some of their offerings are as follows- 
 
i.  Refit & Repair of Ships & Submarines 
ii. Construction of Commercial/Merchant ships & offshore platforms like 
Multi-Support Vessels (MSVs), Offshore Supply Vessels (OSVs), Tugs, 
Dredgers, Ferries, Barges, Big Trawlers, Pontoons, Launches, Floating 
dry dock, Flat bottom river boats & fishing trawlers. 
iii. Auxiliary Naval Vessels like Offshore Patrol Vessels (OPVs), Security 
Vessels, Border Outposts, Cadet training ships, Missile Vessels, Vessels 
for Littoral combat & Fast attack crafts. 
iv. Artificial Intelligence enabled Remotely Operated Vehicle (ROV) 
v. Tourist Submarines & Autonomous Underwater Vehicle. 
 

 
21 
Shipbuilding infrastructure developed for construction of warships and submarines is 
specific to these products. The Slipways, dry-docks, wet basins cannot be utilised for 
anything else. 
 
Even the human skill sets are unique and specialized, developed through training 
programs designed for the respective job areas and experience gained over the years on 
the job. It is difficult to apply the same skills to altogether different product. 
 
However, MDL would be impressed upon to look into different areas for revenue 
generation. 
 
 
GRSE: GRSE has recently delivered the fourth and last ship of Anti-Submarine Warfare 
Corvette (ASWC) project. In view of the availability of proven hull form of ASWC and 
expertise gained from construction of 04 ships of this class, GRSE is ready for 
construction of Next Generation Corvettes (NGC) so that the project could be executed 
smoothly with minimal cost & time. 
 
 
GSL: On signing of the Contract for construction of 02 Frigates (Project P1135.6) for the 
Indian Navy on 25 Jan 2019, the order book position of GSL has fairly improved. 
Presently, Project P1135.6 is at design stage and expected to commence production as 
per the timelines. 
 
Early issue of RFP for Mine Counter Measure Vessel (MCMV) project, the major step 
towards contract conclusion, will lead to strengthening of the order book position. GSL 
has emerged L1 for 02 PCVs for the Indian Coast Guard and is expecting the contract 
signing of PCVs by Sep 2020. Contract conclusion for setting up of Damage Control 
Simulator at Port Blair (STE), OPS & training and CAMC for 10 yrs is at advance stage. 
 
On the export front, GSL is awaiting the finalisation of the supply of its in-house designed 
products on Line of Credit (LoC) to countries such as Nigeria (one each of LST and 
Training Ship), Mauritius (one AOPV) and Seychelles (one AOPV). Finalisation of these 
domestic and export orders will enable GSL to improve its order book position. 
 
In order to minimise potential impact due to lean order book position and to bridge the 
gap till 02 Frigates and MCMV projects start in full swing, all out efforts are being made 
by GSL for securing orders by participating in acquisition programs of 
Domestic/Overseas customers, interacting and giving presentations to dignitaries and 
potential clients in various countries, contacting the Indian Embassies/High Commissions 
abroad to facilitate for GSL’s interaction with the appropriate authorities in the respective 
country for exporting products etc. GSL has been aggressively bidding for various 
tenders of IN and ICG and recently emerged as L1 for 02 PCVs for ICG and is expediting 
the contract signing of PCVs by Sep 2020 and commence production during FY 2020-21. 
Additionally, Marketing Representatives of GSL are appointed in various countries to 
identify potential markets outside India and to assist GSL in selling its products and 
services. In addition to its core activity of constructing ships, GSL has also undertaken 
the construction of Training Simulators and Repair & Refit of Defence and Commercial 
Ships on getting the orders through competitive bidding.  
 
GSL has been exploring various options of venturing into commercialisation of various 
products and following actions has been initiated by GSL in this regard: 
 

 
22 
a) Absorption of Construction Technology for Composite Material. Licensing 
Agreement for Transfer of Technology (LAToT) for Resin Film Infusion (RFI) and 
Process Monitoring of Vacuum Assisted Resin Transfer Moulding (VARTM) 
technology was exchanged between GSL and Research  & Development  
Establishment (Engineers), Pune  on 13.11.2019. 
 
b) New Business lines like Inland River Navigation, FRP Boats for export and 
Composite Components /Structures.  
 
c) Auxiliary Commercial Vessels. GSL has won orders through Competitive Bidding 
for Three 2000T LPG cylinder carrier to UTLA/SCI, 20 M Ferry boat to UPRN at 
Varanasi and 03 Tugs for Assam Government.  
 
d) Thrust on Ship Repair and expansion at Karwar, Karnataka. 
 
e) Supply of high value equipment for ships like Stern Gear, Fin stabilizer, Heli Grid 
and Sonar Domes. 
 
f) Export Efforts. GSL is approaching potential clients in friendly countries for GSL 
designed ships for export market. GSL is putting concerted efforts for exporting 
various products (Ship, Simulators and GRP Boats) to friendly countries.  
 
 
HSL:  HSL is a green-field shipyard on the eastern coast, having capability to construct 
and repair all kinds of ships and submarines. However, the order book position of HSL is 
extremely low when compared with other DPSUs resulting in under-utilization of the 
installed capacity of the shipyard. The balance shipbuilding order book position of HSL 
as on 31 Mar 2020 is Rs. 2486.15 Cr and it comprises of the following projects:-  
 
Sl. 
No. Project Balance as on 31 
Mar 2020 (Rs Cr) 
1 VC 11184 1.40 
2 2 Nos Diving Support Vessel for 
Indian Navy (VC 11190-91) 2332.44 
3 4 Nos 50T BP Tugs for Indian 
Navy (VC 11192-95) 142.76 
4 3 Nos Flap Gates for ND (V) (VC 
11196-98) 9.55 
 Total (Rs Cr) 2486.15 
 
The breakeven order book requirement for HSL is around Rs. 5000 crore. The balance 
orders are scheduled to be completed by end of Mar 2022 (as per contractual delivery 
dates). HSL, which has recently turned around and started making profits may find it 
difficult to sustain the growth outlook in the absence of immediate new orders.” 
 
  
22. The Committee in their original Report had noted that certain Defence Public 
Sector Undertakings (DPSUs) were facing order book challenges and decline in 
production in the current/coming years. Keeping this in view, they had recommended 

 
23 
that the Ministry and DPSUs should explore options of venturing into commercialisation 
of various products other than arms and ammunition. In this regard, the Ministry has 
submitted that Defence PSUs are diversifying their product profile into other areas and 
has robust plans for technology, Research and Development, Infrastructure 
Development, export promotion and focus on indigenization, which will ensure the 
sustenance of DPSUs and improve their order book position in long term.  Further, 
DPSUs have also adopted several new technologies which include Artificial Intelligence 
(around 50 AI enabled products are under development by DPSUs), Cloud based 
technology, Robotics, use of unmanned vehicles, composite R&D for design and 
developments of products, 3D printing and integrated construction methodology for 
warship construction. It has been further submitted that the order book volume of 
Defence PSUs depends on the customers which is primarily the Armed Forces and 
export opportunities in the international market and the Department of Defence 
Production is taking many steps to improve the order book position of DPSUs. The 
Committee note the various measures being taken to improve the order book situation of 
the DPSUs and diversification of their products and recommend that concerted efforts 
should be made by the DPSUs, the Ministry and other stakeholders in order to ensure 
the said measures are fructified within a definite timeframe. The progress made till the 
date of presentation of this Report be intimated to the Committee while furnishing the 
Action Taken Statements. 
 
G. CORPORATE SOCIAL RESPONSIBILITY (CSR) FUNDING TO SAINIK SCHOOLS 
Recommendation Para No. 59 
23. The Committee had recommended as under: 
“The Committee recommend that under CSR initiatives, funds should also be provided to 
the Sainik Schools by the DPSUs keeping the national interests as paramount.” 
  
24. The Ministry in its action taken reply has stated as under:- 
  
“HAL:   The matter regarding providing funds to the Sainik Schools by the DPSUs 
keeping the National Interest as paramount has been examined and following is 
submitted: 
a) In terms of HAL’s CSR Policy, the Company has been giving preference to the 
local areas in the vicinity of its Divisions for undertaking Corporate Social 
Responsibility (CSR) Activities. The said policy is in line with Clause 5(1) of 
Section 135 of the Companies Act, 2013 read with the Companies (Corporate 
Social Responsibility) Rules, 2014. Accordingly, as a Policy, HAL has been 

 
24 
undertaking CSR Projects / Programmes in the local areas, within the District or in 
the neighboring Districts of its operations, with a view to improve the quality of life 
of the Socially & Economically backward groups and marginalized & weaker 
sections of the Society.  
 
b) It may also be noted that as per Schedule VII of the Companies Act 2013, (i) 
contribution to the Swachh Bharat Kosh set-up by the Central Government for the 
promotion of sanitation and making available safe drinking water; (ii) contribution 
to the Clean Ganga Fund set- up by the Central Government for rejuvenation of 
River Ganga; (iii) contribution to the Prime Minister’s National Relief Fund or 
Prime Minister’s Citizen Assistance and Relief in Emergency Situation Fund (PM 
CARES Fund) or any other Fund set up by the Central Government for socio-
economic development and relief and welfare of the Scheduled Castes, the 
Scheduled Tribes, other backward classes, minorities and women and (iv) 
contributions or Funds provided to Technology Incubators located within 
Academic Institutions which are approved by the Central Government are only 
considered as valid CSR Activities. Any other contribution is not considered as a 
valid CSR activity.  
Considering the positions indicated above, it may not be feasible to provide 
contributions directly to the Sainik Schools.  
BEL: BEL being a DPSU, has to comply with various Government guidelines directing 
CSR fund distribution, themes for CSR expenditure & areas of operation (Aspirational 
districts) and hence, its role has been limited to selection & implementation of CSR 
Projects in compliance with Govt. Legislations & Guidelines.  
 
Nevertheless, BEL has supported Sainik School, Satara, Maharashtra by creating an “e-
Learning & Knowledge Centre” at a cost of Rs.34.31 Lakhs. The Centre has been 
provided with Computers, associated peripherals like Printer, Modem, Router, Interactive 
boards with projection & audio system, furniture for 40 seating capacity etc.   
  
The facility was fully utilized by the School even during the lockdown period due to 
COVID-19 pandemic. Sainik School, Satara created history by holding parent-teacher 
meeting through video-conferencing and conducting online classes for its students during 
lockdown. 
 
BEML: BEML consistently spends more than 2% of average PAT of last 3 years 
exceeding the target as stipulated in guidelines. The expenditure is primarily on 
Healthcare, Education, Swachh Bharat Mission, etc.  
On education front, BEML runs one Junior College and one Nursery School at Kolar 
Gold Fields. Company also runs a school at Bangalore having classes from Pre-Nursery 
to 12th level. These Institutions, although meant primarily for the children of the 
employees but also caters to a large extent to the local population. BEML also runs a 
Kendriya Vidyalaya at KGF, for the benefit of the employees’ children and also for the 
local population. The Company also provided School building, Furniture, Attender for 
Mid-day meal Programme and Security Personnel for the Government English Model 
Higher Primary School at KGF. 

 
25 
BEML has rendered its support for establishing Akshaya Talent Hostel at Bangalore to 
the Akshaya Patra Foundation. The Talent Hostel will provide vital facilities home away 
from home to enable aspirations of meritorious students coming from families requiring 
economic support. 
BDL: BDL has noted the recommendation. It is submitted that it has not received any 
proposal till date requesting funds to Sainik School. However, BDL has been supporting 
different Government Schools in states of Andhra Pradesh and Telangana by providing 
Dual desks, Digital Class Rooms etc. Supporting Sainik Schools may be considered 
while taking up the future projects. 
MIDHANI: MIDHANI CSR budget for FY 2020-21 is Rs 3.92 Cr. (Prov.) This fund is 
allocated to ongoing projects such as annual maintenance of toilets in government 
schools, initiatives in aspirational district (Kothagudem). Expenditure towards these 
projects spill over to subsequent years. Hence, no fund is available to contribute towards 
Sainik Schools.  
MDL: MDL has been carrying out different projects with regard to Sainik/ Military Schools 
under CSR its initiatives.  
In academic year 2018-19, MDL had commenced a flagship project in the education field 
titled “MDL Super 10”, wherein 10 tribal students from the identified schedule block of 
Shahpur (Thane district) are being selected every year for admission to Bhonsala Military 
School (BMS), Nagpur. The selected students, belonging to economically weaker 
section, are getting an opportunity to study at BMS, Nagpur from Std V to Std XII and the 
entire expenditure towards education of these students at this residential school is being 
borne by MDL for last two years. Till date, 20 children from the Shahpur block have been 
successfully studying at BMS, Nagpur and five more children will also be supported in 
the current academic year. MDL has spent Rs.13.07 lakhs and Rs.28.87 lakhs under this 
project in FY 2018-19 and FY 2019-20, respectively. In FY 2020-21, an amount of Rs.40 
lakhs are expected to be spent under this project. 
Further, in order to support the Aspirational District Transformation Programme (ADTP) 
of Govt. of India, MDL has planned to establish a military training facility at Eklavya 
Model Residential School (EMRS) at Nandurbar, Maharashtra. This facility would help 
tribal students of the district to avail military training while studying in the residential 
school and thereby would help them to be well prepared for jobs in Indian Army/ Navy/ 
Air Force etc. This project is having a budget of Rs.100 lakhs (approx.) and is expected 
to be executed in FY 2020-21. 
In addition to above, MDL is exploring the feasibility of financially supporting tribal 
students from two tribal taluks of the aspirational district of Nandurbar, who may be 
selected to study at the Sainik School. 
GRSE:  GRSE is situated in Metiabruz area of Kolkata which has a large population from 
the lower income bracket. The infrastructure in this locality for healthcare, skill 
development and education is extremely poor and as per Sec. 135 of Companies Act, 
priority is to be given for development of local areas. 
Moreover, during FY 2020-21, as per Notification of Ministry of Corporate Affairs vide 
General Circular No. 05/ 01/ 2019- CSR dated 23 Mar 2020, an amount of Rs. 100 lakh 
has been transferred to PM CARES Relief Fund from CSR Budget 2020-21, due to the 
pandemic outbreak of COVID-19. Further, DPE vide OM No. CSR No. 08/0002/2018-Dir 
(CSR) dated 01 Jun 2020 has notified that the Annual Themes for FY 2020-21 is 
‘Healthcare and Nutrition’ and at least 60% of CSR expenditure has to be incurred on 
these themes. Accordingly, CSR budget has been allocated catering 60% of fund for 

 
26 
projects on Annual Themes. Further, as per MoD, 20% of CSR fund has been allocated 
on Skill Development projects, as being done for past few years. The balance 20% CSR 
fund is being used for continuation of existing projects to improve the quality of life of 
marginalized section of local community. 
Under the aforesaid circumstances, it may not be possible to provide CSR funds to 
Sainik Schools at this juncture. 
GSL:   GSL has a CSR Policy and CSR activities are taken up as per the provisions of 
Schedule VII of the Companies Act, 2013 and guidelines issued by Department of Public 
Enterprises (DPE) from time to time. 
Any proposal/request from Sainik School will be analyzed on the basis of above 
applicable policy/guidelines/laws.  
HSL:    As recommended, necessary CSR initiatives will be undertaken in Sainik School 
during the current financial year 2020-21 based on the CSR budget for the Financial 
Year 2020-21.” 
             
25. The Committee had recommended that under Corporate Social Responsibility 
(CSR) initiatives, funds should also be provided to the Sainik Schools by the Defence 
Public Sector Undertakings (DPSUs) keeping the national interests as paramount. The 
Committee note from the Ministry’s reply that some DPSUs have submitted that 
feasibility of extending financial support to the Sainik Schools would be explored. In this 
regard, the Committee recommend that awareness programmes for extending CSR funds 
to the Sainik Schools may be conducted by the willing DPSUs so that the Schools may 
be able to reach them and are aware of the extant procedures. Further, an online portal 
may be developed by the DPSUs so that all applications for CSR funds may be 
electronically processed. The action taken in this regard may be intimated to the 
Committee at the earliest but not later than three months of presentation of this Report.  

 
27 
CHAPTER II 
(A) OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE 
GOVERNMENT 
 
GENERAL DEFENCE BUDGET 
 
Ministry of Defence Budget and Demands for Grants 2020-21: A bird’s eye view 
Recommendation (Para Nos. 1-4) 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 1) 
One of the paramount functions of the Standing Committees is to consider the Demands 
for Grants of the concerned Ministries/Departments and make Reports on the same and 
present them to the Houses.  To be precise, such Committees play a pivotal role of ensuring 
Executive and Financial accountability. With this mandate, the Standing Committee on Defence 
have examined and finalized four Reports.  The recommendations of the Fifth Report 
(Seventeenth Lok Sabha) on General Defence Budget are brought out in succeeding 
paragraphs.   
 
Recommendation (Para No. 2) 
The Committee find that there are four Demands for Grants pertaining to the Ministry of 
Defence viz. Grant Number 18 – Ministry of Defence (Civil), Grant Number 19–Defence 
Services (Revenue), Grant Number 20 – Capital Outlay on Defence Services and Grant 
Number 21 – Defence (Pension). The Committee also find that the total budget for the Ministry 
of Defence for 2020-21 stands at Rs. 4,71,378.00 crore. Out of this, 68.53 percent, i.e., Rs. 
3,23,053.00 crore has been allocated for Defence Services Estimates (DSE), which is 
conventionally known as India’s Defence Budget. The Defence Services Estimates reflects the 
detailed estimates for the Defence Services and Organizations covered under Grant Number 19 
{Defence Services (Revenue)} and Grant Number 20 (Capital Outlay on Defence Services) of 
the Ministry of Defence. The Services and Organizations covered under DSE are Army 
(including National Cadet Corps, Director General Quality Assurance, Military Farms and Ex-
Servicemen Contributory Health Scheme), Navy (including Joint Staff), Air Force, Defence 
Research and Development Organization (DRDO) and Defence Ordnance Factories.   
The Committee note that Defence Pensions has claimed 28.39 percent of the total 
budget i.e. Rs. 1,33,825.00 crore. Defence Pensions, under Grant number 21, provides for 
Pensionary charges in respect of retired Defence personnel (including Defence civilian 
employees) of the three services viz. Army, Navy and Air Force and also employees of 
Ordnance Factories etc.  It covers payment of Service pension, gratuity, family pension, 
disability pension, commuted value of pension, leave encashment etc. The remaining 3.08 
percent of the total budget i.e. Rs. 14,500 crore have been allocated to Ministry of Defence 
(Civil) {Grant Number 18}. The requirements for the Civil expenditure (both revenue and capital) 

 
28 
of the Ministry of Defence Secretariat, Defence Accounts Department, Canteen Stores 
Department, Defence Estates Organisation, Coast Guard Organisation, Jammu & Kashmir Light 
Infantry (J&K LI), Border Roads Organization,  etc. are covered under Grant Number 18.  
Defence Budget 2020-21 and 2019-20 
Recommendation (Para No. 3) 
 
A detailed examination of the facts and figures provided by the Ministry of Defence on 
expenditure on Ministry of Defence (Civil), Pensions and Defence Services Estimates, reveals 
that allocation under these three Grants has shown an increase of Rs. (-) 361 crore, Rs. 16,015 
crore and Rs. 6,757 crore in 2020-21 Budget Estimates (BE), respectively, when compared to 
that in 2019-20 Revised Estimates (RE). The total Defence Budget for 2020-21 BE is Rs. 
4,71,378.00 crore, an increase of Rs. 22,558 crore in comparison to that of 2019-20 RE. It is a 
matter of concern that as compared to 2019-20 RE, while the total Defence Budget and 
Defence Services Estimates have shown an increase of 5.03 percent and 2.14 percent, 
respectively, Defence Pension has exhibited an increase of 13.6 percent in 2020-21 (BE). This 
aspect has been dealt in succeeding paragraphs of this Report.  
Growth of Defence Budget vis-à-vis rate of inflation: 
Recommendation (Para No. 4) 
The Committee learn that the annual rate of inflation, as per the Economic Survey 2019-
20 based on Consumer Price Index-Combined, increased to 4.1 percent (provisional) in 2019-
20 (April to December, 2019) as compared to 3.7 percent in 2018-19 (April to December, 2018). 
Based on Consumer Price index, the inflation stood at 7.35% (Provisional) in December, 2019 
as compared to 2.11% in December, 2018. The actual increase at the stage of Revised 
Estimates 2019-20 i.e. Rs. 3,16,296.07 crore amounts to 5.84 percent after adjusting inflation. 
The Committee, therefore, aver and recommend that allocations for Budget for the Ministry of 
Defence for 2020-21 at Revised Estimates stage should be increased in proportion to inflation 
so that actual increase in the funds to meet the Capital and Revenue requirements of the 
Forces may not be hindered by the vagaries of inflation.  
Reply of the Government 
In BE 2020-21, an amount of Rs. 3,23,053.00 crore (i.e. an increase of Rs. 17,756.93 Crore 
over BE 2019-20) has been allocated to M/o Defence under Defence Services Estimates which 
is an increase of 5.82% over BE 2019-20 allocations. 
2. Additional funds as required will be sought at Supplementary &Revised Estimate stage to 
meet the requirements under Capital and Revenue Grants. 
Chief of Defence Staff (CDS) 

 
29 
Recommendation (Para No. 8) 
The Committee had, in their earlier reports, recommended creation of the post of Chief of 
Defence Staff (CDS) for enabling better co-ordination among the Services. The Committee 
have learnt that the CDS apart from being the head of the Department of Military Affairs will also 
be the Permanent Chairman of the Chiefs of Staff Committee. He will act as the Principal 
Military Advisor to the Raksha Mantri on all tri-Services matters. The major roles assigned to 
CDS include: - 
 
(a)  CDS will administer tri-Services organisations.  
(b)  Provide integrated inputs of the Services to relevant authorities. Defence Planning 
Committee has been set up to facilitate a comprehensive and integrated defence planning 
exercise. CDS will be member of Defence Acquisition Council chaired by Raksha Mantri 
and Defence Planning Committee chaired by National Security Advisor (NSA). 
(c)  Functions as the Military Adviser to the Nuclear Command Authority. 
(d)  Bring about jointness in operation, logistics, transport, training, support services, 
communications, repairs and maintenance, etc of the three Services, within three years of 
the first CDS assuming office. 
(e)  Ensure optimal utilisation of infrastructure and rationalise it through jointness among the 
Services.  
(f)  Enhance the share of indigenous equipment used by the three Services through 
preparation of roadmap on indigenization of equipment. He will set objective targets for 
indigenization and report achievements on annual basis. 
(g)  Evaluate plans for ‘Out of Area Contingencies’ as well as other contingencies such as 
Humanitarian Assistance and Disaster Relief. 
(h)  Implement Five-Year Defence Capital Acquisition Plan (DCAP), and Two-Year roll-on 
Annual Acquisition Plans (AAP), as a follow up of Integrated Capability Development Plan 
(ICDP). 
(i)  Assign inter-Services prioritization to capital acquisition proposals based on the anticipated 
budget. 
(j)  Integrate and rationalize international cooperation plans of the Services, including foreign 
training, exercises and other exchanges in coordination with the Ministry of External 
Affairs. 
(k)  Prepare strategy papers on military matters for consideration of the competent authority. 
(l)  Bring about reforms in the functioning of three Services aimed at augmenting combat 
capabilities of the armed Forces. 
(m)  Prepare for Raksha Mantri an empirical and objective report on annual achievements in 
jointness during the year in military structures, procurement, operations, logistics and 
training of the Services. 

 
30 
 
The Committee are more than happy to note that the very inception of this idea 
emanated from the deliberations of the previous Committees and now it has attained finality. 
The Committee are of the firm view that with the creation of this post vis a vis the new 
responsibilities assigned to this Department, the Forces would move in the right trajectory for 
which the Committee has no reason to believe would not extend all the assistance in the due 
course, especially in terms of finances. 
 
Reply of the Government 
The Cabinet Committee on Security (CCS), initially on 14.08.2019 and subsequently on 
24.12.2019 approved creation of Department of Military Affairs (DMA) within the Ministry of 
Defence, to be headed by the Chief of Defence Staff (CDS), who will also be the Secretary of 
DMA. Pursuant to this, Cabinet Secretariat vide notification dated 30.12.2019 amended Govt. of 
India, Allocation of Business Rules, 1961 to create a new Department in MoD i.e. Department of 
Military Affairs. The Committee is hereby assured that with creation of the post of CDS vis-a-vis 
new responsibility assigned to this Department, the Forces will now be able to operate with 
jointness amongst the different services under the MoD. 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 9) 
 
The Committee have been further apprised that a demand of Rs. 21.04 crore for 
establishment and maintenance of the Department of Military Affairs (DMA) headed by the 
Chief of Defence Staff has been projected for financial Year 2020-21. The Committee 
recommend that the projected demand for the Department of Military Affairs should be allocated 
at the earliest to aid smooth functioning of this new Department in the Ministry of Defence. They 
also hope that creation of the post of CDS will have significant long-term benefits for our 
Defence sector by adopting a synergized approach to decision making for projects of critical 
and urgent capabilities and creation of joint entities amongst the Services. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Against the demand of Rs. 21.04 crore for establishment and maintenance of the 
Department of Military Affairs (DMA), an allocation of Rs. 17.76 crore has been made for 
Financial Year 2020-21. The funds so allocated will aid in basic functioning of DMA in the 
Ministry of Defence. It is reiterated that creation of the post of CDS will certainly have significant 
long term benefits for the Defence sector of the country. 
Defence Budget: Challenges and Reforms 
Recommendation (Para No. 11) 
 
From examination of the Demands for Grants 2020-21, the Committee observe and infer 
a mismatch between the projected and allocated Defence Budget. They note that as against 

 
31 
projection of Rs. 5,74,314.91crore for 2020-21 (BE), Rs. 4,71,378.00 crore have been allocated 
for total Defence Budget i.e. a shortfall of Rs. 1,02,936.91 crore. In this regard, the Defence 
Secretary submitted that there has been an increase of 9.3 percent in the overall budget and an 
increase of Rs. 4000 crore in Defence Services Estimates in comparison to 2019-20 budget. 
The Secretary (Defence Finance) also added that timely expenditure of funds allocated at BE 
2020-21 would increase the chances of getting additional allocation at Revised Estimates stage 
of 2020-21. In this regard, the Committee recommend the Ministry of Defence to adopt sound 
financial principles to ensure that the allocated funds are spent judiciously and wasteful 
expenditure is avoided in order to convince the Ministry of Finance to allocate additional funds 
at Revised Estimates stage. 
 
Reply of the Government 
The recommendations of the Committee are noted for compliance. Necessary instructions 
are issued from time to time for adherence to financial propriety and avoidance of 
underutilization of funds/wasteful expenditure. 
 
2. The Committee may be assured that all efforts will be made to ensure optimum utilization 
of scarce resources.  Based on progress of expenditure, pending committed liabilities etc., 
additional funds will be sought from Ministry of Finance at appropriate stage(s). 
 
Recommendation (Para No.12) 
 
During deliberations on Demand for Grants 2020-21, the issue of burgeoning Defence 
pension liabilities unanimously emerged as one of the biggest challenges as the pension budget 
has increased approximately 3.5 times since the last decade. The reasons as given to the 
Committee, for increase in pension budget includes increase in longevity of people, increased 
manpower over the years for various new platforms, revision of pension scales from time to 
time, etc. In this regard, the representatives of the Ministry of Defence apprised the Committee 
of the steps being contemplated, which include increasing the retirement age, jointness and 
integration amongst the Services in terms of manpower resources, incorporating technology to 
supplement boots on the ground, closing down the military farms and some workshops in peace 
stations and outsourcing some of the services to the private sector, to contain increasing 
defence pension liabilities, the Ministry is also mulling on the proposal to provide alternate 
sources of employment for the retired personnel and Short Service Commission for Officers. 
Another proposal includes providing college education or one-year study leave to the men 
before they leave the Army so that they can leave thereafter. The Committee are of the view 
that the said measures being taken to address the serious issue should be implemented after 
taking into account the best interests of the retiring personnel and the Committee be apprised 
accordingly. While adopting some kind of alternatives for reducing the burden of pension, the 
Committee would recommend the Ministry to keep in mind that the interest of the youth 
intending to join the Forces in not dampened. In essence, the Committee would like to convey 
that at all existing levels and specialities of the Forces, the youth should remain inveigled to join 
the Forces. All due diligence should be taken in this regard under intimation to the Committee. 
  

 
32 
Reply to the Government 
 
The recommendations of the Committee with regard to the measures being taken to 
reduce the burden of pension have been noted. The points made by the Committee for taking 
into account the best interests of the retiring personnel and encouraging the youth to join forces 
is recognized. Recommendations made by the Committee will also be considered for improving 
prospects of Short Service Commissioned Officers, along side the other measures that are 
under consideration.    
 
Other issues 
Recommendation (Para No. 14) 
 
During deliberations on the DFG 2020-21, issue of jawans being stuck or succumbing to 
the avalanches was brought up. Such a recent case was also highlighted. In this regard, the 
Committee have been apprised that the best efforts have been made to rescue the jawan from 
the avalanche. It seems there are certain limitations faced due to unfavourable weather 
conditions. In this regard, as assured, some kind of formal communication of the latest situation, 
if not already sent, should be forwarded to the family of the jawan and the concerned. The 
Committee further recommend that as a precaution, due care should be taken in the future to 
obviate such instances which have a demoralizing effect on the Forces. Also, steps should be 
taken to develop or procure more such state-of-the art equipments to rescue our jawans 
hit/trapped by inclement weather conditions. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Prompt action is taken in all such cases and a ‘Letter of Condolences and Support’ is 
forwarded to the Next of Kin (NoK) of missing personnel as per extant orders on the subject.  
Accordingly, the family of the concerned individual has also been informed in the instant case. 
 
In addition to above, as per service norms, all units maintain constant touch with the NoK of 
missing soldiers, till rescued, body recovered or declared ‘Missing’, ‘Presumed Dead’. 
 
State of the art avalanche protection and rescue equipment, like Avalanche airbags and 
Avalanche Victim Detectors (AVD) are being provided, as per requirement and authorisation to 
the troops deployed in such areas.  Constant endeavour is also made to induct new 
technology/equipment for use by our troops. 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 15) 
 
 The Committee have been apprised that most of the suicide cases, amongst the Forces, 
have taken place at civil stations and during peace time.  In this regard, the Committee 
recommend that the Forces should strengthen the existing mechanism of identification of 
vulnerable individuals and counselling them at opportune time.  Further, DRDO should research 
and devise innovate methods and research in this aspect to eliminate the trend of suicide cases 

 
33 
among the Forces.  In fact, the Defence Public Sector Undertaking (DPSUs) have also been 
given targets of Research and Development.  The Committee were happy to learn that focus 
has been shifted to promote Indian Industry and priority has also been given to purchase 
defence products in small lots so that all products do not shown up together for maintenance. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
With regard to observation on suicide cases various steps have been taken by the 
Armed Forces. The details are given hereunder: 
Army: 
 Army is sensitive and alive to the incidents of suicide by service personnel and have 
undertaken various studies in collaboration with Defence Institute of Psychological Research 
(DIPR).  The major causes of such incidents identified are as follows: 
 
 
 (a) Domestic & personal problems 
 (b) Marital discord 
 (c) Stress 
 (d) Financial problems 
 
 Based on these findings, Army has taken several steps towards stress amelioration 
amongst troops which include deployment of trained psychological counsellors, improvement in 
the quality of food and clothing, training in stress management, provision of recreational 
facilities, leave concessions, improving approachability of seniors, facilities for movement of 
troops from border areas and establishing grievance redressal mechanism at various levels, 
etc.  Apart from this, numerous advisories/instructions are also being issued periodically to 
arrest this trend.  Organizational efforts towards minimizing occurrence of suicide in the Army 
shall continue and is a continuous process. 
 
Air Force: 
 
 Indian Air Force (IAF) has taken numerous measures to reduce the stress and other 
problems amongst air warriors by strengthening the existing mechanism of identifying 
vulnerable individuals as well as implementing the under mentioned guidelines to enhance the 
existing mechanism:- 
 
(a) A “Psychological Evaluation and Remedial Action Committee” (PERAC) under the 
Chairmanship of Air Officer-in-charge Administration (AOA) with Air Officer-in-charge 
Personnel (AOP)  and Director General Medical Services -DGMS (Air),  as main 
members has been set up for better understanding of the cases of suicides in the IAF.  
The Committee meets twice in a year and reviews all measures in IAF for creating a 
stress free environment and prevention of suicides. 
 
(b)  Professional Psychological Counsellors have been hired at Air Force Stations.  Service 
Psychologists are also available at certain places.  In addition, Periodic Psychological 
Counselling is also done by Section Commanders, Station Medical Officers and Station 
Commanders wherever required. 
 

 
34 
(c) Training of service personnel for eight weeks in Psychological Counselling and stress 
management at Command Hospital Air Force, Bangalore for employment as “Service 
Counselors’. 
 
(d) Training of officers and airmen for four days at Institute of Aerospace `Medicine (IAM) 
for early recognition of psychiatric symptoms. 
 
(e) All personnel found to be having any suspected psychological problem are referred to 
Psychiatrist in nearest service hospital and followed up thereafter. 
 
(f) A documentary film on Suicide Prevention  “Mission Zindagi –Jaan Hai Toh Jahan 
Hai,’’  has been made and distributed to all Air Force units in September 2016. 
 
(g) Mansik Sahayta Helpline, an all India Toll Free Helpline 1800-110-080 is working at Air 
Force Central Medical Establishment, Delhi. 
 
(h)  Study of all cases of suicides and fratricides is carried out to analyse reasons of 
suicides and suggest remedial measures in Psychological Evaluation and Remedial 
Actions Committee (PERAC) meetings organized bi-annually at Air HQ. 
 
(i) Various workshops and lectures on Mental Health and Stress Management are held in 
IAF as Mission Zindagi Campaign, which is conducted quarterly at all Air Force 
Stations. 
 
Navy: 
 
 Steps taken by Indian Navy to strengthen the mechanism for identification of individuals 
who are vulnerable to undertake drastic measures, such as suicide, are appended below: 
 
(a) The facilities available for psychological counselling in the Indian Navy are many and 
target various sections of the Naval Community.  Indian Naval Hospitals Asvini, 
Kalyani and Sanjivani have a full-fledged Department of Psychiatry with Psychiatrists, 
Clinical Psychologists and Counsellors appointed to the Department. 
 
(b) Family counsellors at Family Welfare Centres in Mumbai, Visakhapatnam and Kochi 
also provide Psychological counselling. 
 
(c) As an additional measure, SPRINT (Special Psychiatric Rapid Intervention Team) 
with a Psychiatrist as Officer-in-Charge, functioning under the aegis of Command 
Medical Officer, has also been established at Eastern Naval Command and Western 
Naval Command to mitigate combat stress and to provide mental health first-aid and 
counselling services to serving personnel onboard ships and establishments. 
  

 
35 
DRDO 
 
DIPR, a Delhi based laboratory of DRDO has developed and distributed field manuals 
about self help techniques for self defeating behaviors and management of suicidal behavior. 
The manuals are provided as and when requested by Army HQ or any unit. This Institute has 
also been conducting regular courses on “Training of Service Officers in Counseling” since 
2010 and so far around 500 service officers have been trained. The conduct of courses still 
continues as a regular practice.  
 
 DIPR has carried out a few studies related to Suicidal Behavior among troops of Indian 
Army. Following are the studies that were conducted by this Institute: 
 
 A study on suicide and fratricide among the troops deployed in peace areas of the Indian 
Army (2010) 
 An impact analysis of the study on suicide and fratricide in CI and peace areas of Indian 
Army (2011) 
 Assessment of Antecedents of Suicide Cases in Indian Army by the method of 
Psychological Autopsy (2011) 
 Development of Suicide Risk Assessment Test (2012) 
 Study of Factors causing Distress among Young Officers of Indian Army (2014) 
DPSUs 
With regard to promotion of Indian Industry the following facts are submitted for 
consideration: 
 
HAL:  Aerospace domain is a highly technology intensive domain and R&D is a thrust area at 
HAL. HAL has 11 R&D centers working on different technology segments in the 
Aerospace domain, both for fixed wing and rotary wing platforms. Further, to enhance its 
thrust on R&D, HAL has created a R&D Corpus with contribution of 10% of operating 
profit after tax. 
HAL has to its credit designed and developed 17 state-of-the-art indigenous 
products which include Advance Light Helicopter (ALH), Light Combat Aircraft (LCA), 
Light Combat Helicopter (LCH), Light Utility Helicopter (LUH), Basic Turboprop Trainer 
Aircraft (HTT-40). 
The major Design and Development programs currently progressing at HAL 
include LCA Mk1A, Indian Multirole Helicopter (IMRH), 25kN Turbo-Fan Engine, 
1200KW Turbo-Shaft engine. 
In addition, various other technology development projects have been launched to 
increase self-reliance in critical areas like Engines, Aircraft Display Systems, Mission 
Computers, Aircraft Flight Control Systems for Helicopter etc. HAL has tied up with 
premier academia in the country and has established 6 Chairs at IITs / IISc for 
conducting research and product development activities on niche areas.   

 
36 
HAL believes in inclusive growth and has been instrumental in nurturing a 
competitive aviation eco-system in India by way of collaborating with private industries as 
outsourced partners.  More than 30% of HAL’s man-hours have been outsourced 
including several critical work packages, resulting in enhancing the manufacturing 
capability of Indian private sector including MSMEs. HAL aims to be a lead aerospace 
integrator, primarily through robust private partnership. HAL is also utilizing private 
vendors in design and development of systems, examples include Smart Cockpit Display 
System, Multi-Function Display, Solid State Flight Data Recorder etc., to name a few. 
With probable orders to be received for LCA Mk 1A, Light Combat Helicopter 
(LCH), Light Utility Helicopter (LUH), HTT-40, addl SU-30MKI aircraft, the need to ensure 
maximum utilization of existing Defence & Aerospace facilities in the country under 
“Make in India”, will be fulfilled.  
 
BEL: BEL spends around 8-10% of its annual turnover on R&D. BEL also work on internal 
targets for new product development year-on-year through in-house development, jointly 
with DRDO/National Design Labs/Academia, Collaborative R&D involving Indian Private 
Industry/MSME etc. BEL provides enhanced thrust to promote Indian industry through 
broadening domestic vendor base as part of building strong Industrial Base. 
 
BEML: R&D Expenditure as percentage of Revenue (Last three years): 
 
  
  
  
 
 Major Area of Research and Development : 
BEML has its own world-class composite R&D establishment for Design & 
Development of products. The R&D establishment has CAD Centre, Fluid-power, 
Powerline, Structural Engineering & Material Science laboratories and is continuously 
engaged in New Product Development and Upgradation of existing products to meet 
customer requirements. More than 67% of Company’s Sales Turnover is through in-
house developed R&D products. The R&D expenditure is around 2 ~ 3% of turnover.  
The Company has launched “Make in India” Products 150T & 190T Dump Trucks 
and 180T Electrical Excavator successfully. These biggest electric drive dump trucks 
were designed and manufactured for the first time in India and are major import 
substitution products for the Mining sector. After successful trials, Company have 
received orders for 5 numbers of 180T Electrical Excavators, 7 numbers of 150T and 8 
numbers of 190T high end dumpers.  
Year R&D Expenditure as % of Revenue 
2017-18 3.09 
2018-19 2.04 
2019-20 (Provisional) 3.18 

 
37 
 In-house Designed and Developed Arjun Armoured Repair & Recovery Vehicle is 
presently under trials and further orders are expected which will result in Foreign 
Exchange savings for the country. The Company is also working with industry partners to 
leverage technology for the benefit of customers such as introducing AI features in 
machines. Towards protecting the Intellectual property of the Company, the innovation 
cell has succeeded in filing 70 IPR covering innovations in product design, manufacturing 
and operations. 
 Design & Development of Metro Coach for KMRCL was successfully completed 
and Coaches were delivered to Customer. Catenary Maintenance Vehicle (CMV) was 
developed and supplied to DMRC successfully. 
MIDHANI:  
 
a) MIDHANI R&D efforts are focused in the area of :  
 Alloy / Product Development 
 Process Development / Improvement  
 Technology collaboration  
 
b) R&D Expenditure as percentage of Revenue (last 3 years) 
 
Year R&D Expenditure 
(Rs crore) 
Revenue 
(Rs crore) 
R&D Expenditure as 
% of Revenue 
2017-18 15.46 666.08 2.32 
2018-19 29.97 710.85 4.22 
2019-20 (Prov.) 8.93 715.56 1.55 
 
 
GRSE: GRSE is a DPSU Shipyard primarily engaged in construction of Warships for Indian 
Navy and Indian Coast Guard and manufacturing of Bailey Bridges and Deck 
Machinery items. The Diesel Engine Plant at Ranchi is for the Assembly and Testing of 
Marine Diesel Engines. All R&D activities of this Shipyard are associated with these 
core activities.  
GSL: Research & Development is a major thrust area and at present GSL has a well 
established R&D centre which has been recognized and registered as in-house R&D unit 
by the Department of Scientific and Industrial Research (DSIR), Ministry of Science and 
Technology. GSL is the first shipyard to have this unique distinction of having this 
recognition. The major objective of the R&D facility at GSL is to develop products to 
support the Indian Defence Forces and friendly Indian Ocean Rim countries. In line with 
the above, GSL’s major area of R&D is in developing products in the area of ocean 
surveillance, patrolling and vessels required for the security of the EEZ of Indian and 
Indian Ocean Rim countries. GSL is developing various designs of Offshore Patrol 
Vessels, Fast Patrol Vessels, Interceptor Boats, Survey Vessels and Missile Crafts. The 
design and development of these vessels are the outcome of an intensive R&D activity 

 
38 
over the years. GSL also invests time and manpower into developing designs of futuristic 
vessels, anticipating the needs of the Indian Navy and Indian Coast Guard.  
 
 R&D Expenditure as percentage of Revenue for last three years is as under: 
 
  (Rs. in lakhs) 
 
 
HSL:  There is no exclusive R&D unit in the Shipyard. However, HSL has a well-equipped 
Design & Drawing Office, which in the past has developed in-house design for a number of 
vessels. HSL’s design department has been recognized as in-house R&D unit by Department of 
Scientific & Industrial Research (DSIR), Ministry of Science & Technology.   
 The major R&D projects which were already completed are as below: 
(a) Innovative Installation of Diffraction Fence on OSS   
(b) Innovative Method for Installing HT Cables 
(c) CFD for Air Intake System 
(d) Design of 10 T Bollard Pull Tug for Indian Navy 
(e) Design of Berthing Pontoon for DGNP (V) 
 Detailed design of following projects were undertaken in 2019: 
(a) Four 50 T tugs for Indian Navy  
(b) Three flap gates for Indian Navy 
 
 In-house designs of following ships have been undertaken in the year 2019, for which bid 
designs have been submitted: 
(a) Two Pollution Control Vessels for Indian Coast Guard 
(b) Eight Fast Patrol Vessels for Indian Cost Guard 
(c) One 500 passenger vessel for SCI 
 In addition to the above designs, in-house design capabilities are being enhanced by 
undertaking design of a wide variety of ships such as Multipurpose Cargo Vessels for 
SCI, Offshore Patrol Vessels for Indian Navy etc, so as to progress towards the aim of 
Design department of the Shipyard becoming a ‘Centre of Excellence’. 
 
 The R&D Expenditure as a percentage of Revenue in respect of HSL during the last 
three years is tabulated below:- 
 
 
Name of the DPSU Year R & D  
Expenditure 
(A) 
VoP 
 
(B)  
% of VoP 
 
(C) = (B)/(A)*100 
Goa Shipyard Limited 
2017-18  1009 134267 0.75% 
2018-19 1033 84780 1.22% 
2019-20 
(Provisional) 
733 87000 0.84% 

 
39 
 
Parameter Unit 2017-18  2018-19 2019-20 
(Prov.) 
R&D expenditure Rs Cr 5.57 4.38 4.75 
VoP Rs Cr 644.78 594.91 485.00 
R&D expenditure as % VoP % 0.86 0.73 0.98 
 
Budgetary Allocation to BRO 
Recommendation (Para No. 16) 
 
 The Committee note that budget to BRO is given by various other Ministries such as the 
Ministry of Road Transport and Highways (MoRT&H), Ministry of External Affairs (MEA), 
Ministry of Home Affairs (MHA) and the Ministry of Development of North Eastern Region 
(MDoNER), besides the Ministry of Defence. The Committee learn that against the BE 
projection of Rs 5871.42 Crore, Rs 5609.50 Crore and 7128.00 Crore in 2017-18, 2018-19 and 
2019-20, Rs 4168.20 Crore, Rs 5484.00 Crore and Rs 5234.22 Crore, respectively, were 
allocated to BRO by the Ministry of Defence at BE stage. For 2020-21, Rs 5711.23 Crore have 
been allocated at BE stage against the projection of Rs 8060.00 Crore. 
 
Reply of the Government 
The details of allocation to BRO, made by various Ministries at BE and RE stage and 
expenditure incurred during last three years are given below:- 
 
Year Agency BE 
Allotment (in 
Crs) 
Final 
Allotment 
(in Crs) 
Expenditure           
(in Crs) 
2017-18 GS 4168.20 4180.69 4239.56 
MoRT&H 370.00 320.00 317.90 
MEA 35.08 49.75 49.75 
MHA 101.62 83.15 82.97 
MoD 523.60 726.43 725.67 
NEC 5.00 5.00 5.00 
Other and 
Deposit 
70.94 91.55 36.85 
Total 5274.44 5456.57 5457.70 
2018-19 GS 4426.16 4860.77 5360.82 
MoRT&H 450.00 385.00 362.54 
MEA 34.91 42.33 42.33 
MHA 136.57 183.78 183.92 
MoD 510.35 692.21 691.68 
NEC 5.00 5.00 5.00 
Other and 
Deposit 
19.55 112.72 59.56 
Total 5582.54 6281.81 6705.85 

 
40 
 
2019-20 GS 5234.220 5749.16 5835.01 
MoRT&H 602.502 557.92 548.04 
MEA 26.300 26.82 23.87 
MHA 221.120 191.12 191.12 
MoD 925.852 1003.31 1004.52 
NEC 1.78 1.78 1.78 
Other and 
Deposit 
199.58 202.24 99.57 
Total 7211.354 7732.35 7703.91 
2020-21 GS 5586.23 Not 
applicable 
432.27 
MoRT&H 332.46 47.44 
MEA - - 
MHA 202.00 2.53 
MoD 689.55 15.09 
NEC 3.79 - 
Other and 
Deposit 
125.76 1.08 
Total 6939.79 498.41 
 
Note: Expenditure for FY 2020-21 is upto April, 2020 
 
Required and existing number of equipment with BRO 
Recommendation (Para No. 18) 
 
The Committee have been apprised that based on the requirement of BRO, an Annual 
Procurement Plan (APP) amounting to Rs. 168.90 crore has been approved for FY 2019-20. As 
regards the status of procurement of critical equipment, 90 Dozer II equivalent and 150 Tippers 
have already been procured.  The Committee desired to know about the steps taken to fill the 
gap between required and existing equipment with BRO. In this regard, the Ministry submitted 
that earlier, the approval for procurement of equipment was based on the approved five year 
Long Term Equipment Plan which was not realistic with reference to the allocation of budget to 
BRO. Accordingly, policy guidelines for preparation of Annual Works Plan (AWP) and Annual 
Procurement Plan (APP) with reference to fund allocation to BRO has been issued so that the 
planning of works and the requirement of resources i.e. the size of APP is more realistic. 
Further, in order to induct the latest Vehicles/Equipment/Plants (V/E/P) in BRO and to complete 
the preparatory action for timely procurement, enhanced delegation of powers for procurement 
of both indigenous and foreign construction equipments has been accorded to DGBR.  The 
Committee are satisfied to note these measures and hope that implementation of these 
measures will completely eliminate the gap between the required and existing equipment with 
BRO and help them in effective and timely construction of requisite roads and infrastructure. 

 
41 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The observations of the Committee have been noted. The Committee is hereby informed 
that for FY 2020-21, APP has been approved for Rs 210.03 crore. 
 
Construction of Roads by BRO 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 19) 
 
The Committee during their course of examination learn that in order to concentrate 
simultaneously on the Northern and North-Eastern Borders and for the holistic development of 
roads in border areas, a five year (2018-2023) Long Term Roll on Works Plan (LTRoWP) has 
been approved for the construction/improvement for 265 roads length 14224.12 kilometer, 4 
Ditch cum Bund (DCB) of length 353.22 Km and 4 bridges (Br). The Committee are pleased to 
learn about this development, nevertheless they also note that about two years are already over 
since this LTRoWP came into existence.  As such the Committee recommend that all roads 
strategically important approaching to border and approved in the LTRoWP may be considered 
for construction by BRO.  Also they would, through briefly, like to know at what stages the work 
on each of the three Projects mentioned in this paragraph are pending and what are their dates 
of completion. They would also like to know about the mechanism put in place by BRO, by 
adjusting all unfavorable scenarios as brought out in the immediately succeeding paragraph, 
what efforts have been done to contain time and cost escalations. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
With reference to the observation of the Committee on the LTRoWP the present status of 
the roads in the approved LTRoWP is mentioned below:- 
  (a) Roads completed 
Name of State/UT Nos of roads  Length (in km) 
UT of J&K 03 85.27 
Rajasthan 10 758.33 
UT of Ladakh 4 278.12 
Sikkim 04 46.55 
Arunachal 
Pradesh 
04 317.60 
Uttarakhand 05 96.17 
Nagaland 01 28.36 
Total 31 1610.40 
  
  

 
42 
In addition to the above, 2 roads of length 90.36 km are completed in Bhutan. 
 (b) Roads completed (except bridges & Pmt works) 
Name of State/UT Nos of roads  Length (in km) 
Arunachal 
Pradesh  
07 308.47 
Nagaland 01 161.00 
Mizoram 02 134.16 
Total 10 603.63 
 
In addition to the above, 01 road of length 161.50 km is completed in Bhutan. 
(c) Roads planned to be completed in next three years 
Name of State/UT Nos of roads Length (in km) 
UT of J&K 39 2070.23  
Rajasthan 04 236.65  
Sikkim 09 197.54  
West Bengal 01 13.00  
Arunachal Pradesh 12 677.37  
Himachal Pradesh 02 298.39  
Manipur 02 206.90  
Mizoram 05 409.42  
Nagaland 01 90.25  
Punjab 06 268.95  
Uttarakhand 07 339.70  
Total 88 4808.40  
 
In addition to the above, 02 roads of length 258.90km is planned for completion in Bhutan. 
 
     Further, in order to fast track the induction of modern construction equipments to facilitate 
early completion of roads, the following measures have been taken:- 
 
(a)  The Ministry vide letter dated 11 Aug, 2017 has enhanced the procurement powers of 
DGBR from Rs 7.5 crore to Rs 100 crore both for indigenous and foreign procurement. 
(b)  The Ministry vide letter dated 6 April, 2017 has accorded delegation for premature down 
gradation of construction equipments to DGBR, which has facilitated in downgrading the 
obsolete equipments. 
(c)  Delegation has been accorded vide letter dated 11 Aug, 2017 to DGBR for revision of 
output norms of various construction equipment. DGBR has revised the output norms 
vide letter dated 18 Oct, 2019. 
 
       With the empowerment of the field Officers through enhanced delegation of financial and 
administrative powers there has been significant improvement in faster financial closure of 
works. 

 
43 
Challenges faced in execution of projects and maintenance of roads 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 21) 
 
 Through a written submission to the Committee, they find that the Ministry delineated 
delay in Forest/Wildlife clearance, hard rock stretches, limited working season, difficulties in 
availability of construction material, diversion of resources due to natural disasters, delay in land 
acquisition, poor performance of contractors and non availability of local labour as reasons for 
certain delays in execution of road projects. The Committee are further given to understand that 
adverse and harsh climatic conditions, non availability of sufficient labour, limited working 
season, repeated damages due to landslides, natural calamities i.e. flash floods and cloud 
burst, non allocation of stone/sand quarries by the State Governments, weak geological strata 
especially in North Eastern region causing sinking/formation breaches and insurgency affected 
areas contribute to difficulties faced by BRO in maintenance of existing roads. 
The Committee acquiesce with all these problems brought out by the Ministry yet they 
feel that the maxim ‘there is light at the end of the tunnel’ still pragmatic to support by BRO.  
They recommend the Ministry to dwell upon each of these problems separately, liaise with 
Central/State Governments to obviate as many of this difficulty like clearances, insurgencies, 
shortage of rock/construction material etc.  As a long-term strategy, BRO in unison with all the 
stakeholders chalk out a strategy where dependence on heavy construction state-of-the art 
equipment is increased and the dependence on traditional labour force is reduced. This issue is 
further discussed in the next paragraph. 
Reply of the Government 
 
  The observations of the Committee have been noted.  
 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 22) 
 
During deliberations on Demands for Grants of the Ministry of Defence for the year 2020-
21, a representative of the Ministry of Defence candidly admitted that the delays are mostly 
because of forest clearance and land acquisition and land being a State subject, adds to the 
difficulties.  He further submitted that all the National Green Tribunal (NGT) norms are being 
followed by BRO wherever it is undertaking construction.  The Committee have learnt that 
measures such as establishment of Single window system at District, State and Ministry of 
Environment & Forest (MoEF) levels to fast tract, processing of forest clearance cases, 
adoption of simplified and unified proforma for processing both forest and wild life clearance 
simultaneously and construction of a Working Group by Ministry of Environment & Forest 
(MoEF) under the Chairmanship of Secretary, MoEF to review the forest clearance cases have 
been adopted for quick and time bound disposal of forest clearance cases by Ministry of 
Environment & Forests.  In addition, the MoEF vide letter dated 4th July, 2014 has accorded 
general approval under Section (2) of the Forest (Conservation) Act, 1980 for diversion of forest 
land in the State of Arunachal Pradesh, Himachal Pradesh, Uttarakhand & Sikkim as per details 
given below:- 
 

 
44 
(a) Construction and widening of two lane roads by the BRO and other road construction 
agencies entrusted with the job by the Ministry of Defence, in the area falling within 100 
kilometers aerial distance from the Line of Actual Control; 
     
(b) Widening of road (by the BRO and other road construction agencies) which are identified 
by the Ministry of Defence as link roads between Border Roads in the area within 100 
kilometer aerial distance from the Line of Actual Control and National Highways/State 
Highways/other State Roads, subject to fulfillment of the conditions; and 
 
(c) In addition to above, MoEF vide letter dated 4th July, 2014 has accorded relaxation for 
diversion of forest land, for non forest purpose-special provision for creation of 
compensatory Afforestation, in lieu of forest land diverted for creation of strategic 
defence projects being taken up within 100 Km aerial distance from the Line of Actual 
Control by any user agency identified by the Ministry of Defence. 
 
 It would not be out of place to add and recommend here that if required, more stake 
holders, including that of concerned State Government and private suppliers, be included 
to give effect to the work of BRO.  The Committee would like to know that how many 
meetings have so far been held by the Working Group along with the outcome of such 
meetings. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 The details of meeting held by the Empowered Committee constituted by various State 
Governments are given below:- 
 
State Date of 
constitution 
Details of meeting held 
Sikkim  2014 (a) 2 nd Aug, 2014 
(b) 22 nd Jan, 2016 
(c) 31 st Aug, 2016 
(d) 04 th Feb, 2017 
(e) 26 th April,2017  
(f)        11th Aug, 2017 
(f) 11 th May, 2018 
(g)  05 Aug, 2019 
Uttarakhand  2016 There is no long pending 
issue with the State Govt. 
Himachal Pradesh - (a) 04 Sept, 2018 
(b) 05 Dec, 2018 
(c) 05 Jan, 2019 
(d) 27 Feb, 2019 
(e) 07 June, 2019 
(f) 05 Oct, 2019 
(g) 17 Jan, 2020 
Arunachal Pradesh 2013 (a) 21 May, 2019 
(b) 29 Aug, 2019 
(c) 21 Nov, 2019 
Jammu & Kashmir 
(Now UT of J&K) 
2015  
 

 
45 
Due to the meeting held by the Empowered Committee of the various State 
Governments the following issues have been resolved:-  
 
(i) Land Acquisition: Out of 647 cases, 300 cases have been resolved. However, State-
wise details of pending cases are as under:- 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(ii) Allotment of Quarries: In Arunachal Pradesh out of 128 Stone/Sand Quarries, 60 
Stone/Sand Quarries have been notified by the Government.  
(iii) Forest Clearance: At present no critical road project is affected due to forest clearance. 
(iv) Wildlife Clearance: No wild life clearance is pending. 
(v) Installation HMP/Stone Crusher: Permission has been accorded by the Himachal 
Pradesh State Government for installation of stone crusher and Hot Mix Plant within 
Right of Way (RoW). 
(vi) Extraction of Stone and Sand: Permission has been accorded by the Himachal 
Pradesh State Government for utilization of extracted road side materials (Stone and 
Sand) within Right of Way (RoW). 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 23) 
 
 The Committee note the measures taken or being implemented by the Ministry of 
Defence for quick and time bound disposal of forest clearance cases by the Ministry of 
Environment & Forests and specifically recommend that as this issue is inextricably linked to 
national security, NGT/environmental norms should not be an impediment for 
roads/infrastructure creation and maintenance within 10-15 kilometer of area around the 
borders. 
Reply of the Government 
At present, no critical road project is affected due to forest clearance. Further, BRO is 
exempted from obtaining enviromental clearance. 
  
Srl No State Nos of cases 
a UT of J&K  and Ladakh 200  
b Himachal Pradesh 4  
c Uttarakhand 31  
d Arunachal Pradesh 83  
e Sikkim 5  
f Nagaland/Manipur 2  
g Mizoram 22  
Total 347  

 
46 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 24) 
  
The Committee are pleased to note that new technology such as use of Geo Textiles in 
pavement construction and cementitious base for construction of pavements is being used by 
BRO to reduce the carbon footprint.  They recommend that new steps should be further taken in 
this direction of environment conservation and the Committee be apprised accordingly.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
New technologies are adopted for construction of roads by BRO for optimal utilization of 
quarry material, to reduce the carbon foot prints for environment conservation as mentioned 
below:- 
 
S/No  Technology Name of State Name of Project 
i Geo Cell Himachal Pradesh  
Ladakh 
 Arunachal Pradesh   
Deepak 
Vijayak  
Himank 
Vartak  
 Arunank   
ii Plastic Coated 
Aggregate 
Bhutan 
Sikkim 
Himachal Pradesh 
Uttarakhand 
Arunachal Pradesh  
 Mizoram 
Dantak 
Swastik 
Deepak  
 Shivalik 
 Vartak  
 Pushpak 
iii Autostem Gen-3 
Rock Breaking 
Cartridges  
Bhutan 
Ladakh 
Sikkim 
Arunachal Pradesh 
Uttarakhand 
Vijayak 
Dantak 
Swastik 
Vartak 
Hirak 
iv Soil Stabilization 
through Biological 
Enzyme 
Mizoram Pushpak 
v Cementious base Arunachal Pradesh 
Uttarakhand 
UT of Ladakh 
Himachal Pradesh  
Sikkim 
Vijayak 
Vartak 
Swastik 
Himnak   
Shivalik  
 
 
  

 
47 
Recommendation (Para No. 25) 
 
The Committee have been given to understand that in order to facilitate the maintenance of 
existing roads, Director General Border Roads (DGBR) has been delegated powers to fix/revise 
the rates for maintenance and snow clearance grants for roads entrusted to BRO for 
maintenance and outsource maintenance of roads. The following measures have been taken to 
overcome the various impediments and to expedite the construction of roads in the border 
areas:- 
 
 Guidelines for preparation of Annual Works Plan (AWP) and Annual Procurement Plan 
(APP):  In order to prioritize the Annual Works Plan and to make it more realistic with 
reference to the budget availability, new policy guidelines for preparation of AWP and 
APP have been issued.   
 
 Enhanced Delegation of Administrative and Financial Powers:  The main objective of 
enhanced delegation of powers right upto the level of Chief Engineer and Task Force 
Commander is to bring transformational changes in the organization in order to improve 
the pace of execution of works to meet the requirement of the Armed Forces and to 
avoid delays on account of references between the Chief Engineer and HQ DGBR and 
also between HQ DGBR and MoD. 
 
 Engineering Procurement Construction (EPC) Mode of execution:  In order to enhance 
the capacity of BRO and to ensure the completion of various roads projects in the border 
areas as per the requirement of the Army, guidelines for adoption of EPC mode of 
execution have been issued by the Ministry, so that BRO is able to outsource road 
projects to big companies. 
 
 State Governments of Sikkim, Arunachal Pradesh, J&K, Himachal Pradesh and Tripura 
have constituted the Empowered Committee to resolve the various issues of BRO. 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The impact of the measures mentioned above is given below:- 
 
(A) Delegation of administrative and financial power: The delegation of administrative and 
financial power since August, 2017 have enabled the CE(P) to speed up the works by enabling 
executives at various levels to sanction estimates, sanction of Revised Estimates, acceptance 
of contracts and closure of jobs. The impact of these delegations of powers up to 31 March, 
2020 is summarized below:- 
S/Nos Work aspect Nos Cost (In Crore) 
i Sanction of Estimates 811 6199.37 
ii Sanction of RAE/RDPR 336 7455.08 
iii Acceptance of Contract 530 4413.08 
iv Closure of Jobs 1486 4119.35 

 
48 
(B) Capacity building: In order to enhance BRO’s own capacity, BRO has identified 29 
strategic projects of length 1966 km to be executed through EPC mode of execution. As on date 
Administrative Approval and Expenditure sanction for 04 Projects of length 149 km (including 
tunnel) amounting to Rs 1530 Crs has been accorded by the Ministry. The status of these 
projects is as under:- 
(i) Construction/improvement of BCT road to National Highway Double Lane specification 
through EPC mode from Km 70 to Km 88 amounting to Rs 220.30 Crs. The contract has 
been awarded on 18th September, 2018 and work is in progress. The present progress is 
given below:- 
(a) Physical   = 50.04 % 
(b) Financial = 48.52% 
(ii) Construction and design of twin road tunnels of length 475 m and 1790 m across Sela 
pass through EPC mode amounting to Rs 687.11 Crore. The contract has been awarded 
on 14th Feb, 2019 and work is in progress. The present progress is given below:- 
(a) Physical   = 8.22 % 
(b) Financial = 12.80% 
(iii) 01 Project bids have been received and technical evaluation is under progress. 
(iv) 01 Project the RFP has been uploaded. 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 26) 
 Emphasizing that prime focus of BRO should be on building roads in the difficult areas 
for which it was formed, the Committee sincerely hope that measures, as stated in the 
preceding paragraphs, being taken by the Ministry of Defence to improve the functioning of 
BRO yield results at the earliest. 
Reply of the Government 
 
Earlier, based on the operational requirements of the Army and consequent upon the 
decision taken in the National Security Council meeting, it was decided that BRO may focus on 
core strategic functions on the borders. Towards implementation of these directions, certain 
National Highways and other roads in the hinterland have already been handed over by BRO to 
other agencies i.e. State PWD/NHIDCL etc.  
 
Accordingly, 4886 km of road length was identified for handing over to other agencies, 
out of which 4446 km of road length have been handed over and remaining 440 km of road 
length is in the process of handing over to other implementing agencies so that BRO is able to 
utilize its resources optimally for construction of roads, which are of strategic importance in the 
border areas and will meet the operational requirements of the Army. 
  

 
49 
Manpower strength 
Recommendation (Para No. 27) 
 The Committee observe that against the authorized strength of 2426 Officers and 39174 
subordinates, the existing force level in BRO is 1791 Officers and 31718 subordinates.  They 
have been apprised that due to the change in construction philosophy from departmental 
construction to Engineering Procurement Construction (EPC) mode of execution against the 
authorization of 41600 posts, 9082 posts are required to be rationalized pertaining to 11 non-
core positions in a phased manner.  Further, 1655 vacancies have been advertised and the 
recruitment is under process in phased manner at General Reserve Engineer Force (GREF) 
Centre and demand for 2046 vacancies for different posts to Staff Selection Commission (SSC) 
for the year 2019 have been placed and 118 vacancies against compassionate appointment is 
also under process. The Committee opine that availability of skilled and adequate manpower is 
essential for undertaking construction and maintenance of roads in difficult and rough terrains. 
Therefore, the Committee desire recruitment for 1655 and 2046 vacancies be expedite and they 
be apprised within three months of the presentation of the Report.  They further desire that 
exact details of authorized and existing technical, both Officers and Subordinates, and 
administrative/secretarial manpower in BRO may be intimated at the earliest.  
Reply of the Government 
 
The present status of recruitment is mentioned below:- 
(i) Against 1655 vacancies which were advertised against Advt No. 01/2019, 02/2019 & 
03/2019, the status of recruitment against these vacancies at GREF Centre, Pune is as under:- 
Trade Nos of Vacancies Remarks 
DVRMT (OG) 388 Physical efficiency, practical and 
written test has been conducted. 
Primary medical examination which 
was scheduled on 11 May 2020 has 
been kept on hold due to Covid-19 
Electrician 101  45 candidates inducted before 
Covid-19. Induction of remaining 
candidates is kept on hold due to 
COVID-9. 
MSW (Cook) 197 Recruitment process scheduled from 
02 March 2020 to 05 June 2020 has 
been kept on hold due to COVID-19 
 
Other recruitment activities for these posts have been kept on hold due to Nation wide 
lockdown following COVID-19 pandemic.  
(ii)  Out of 2046 vacancies under recruitment by Staff Selection Commission (SSC), dossier 
from SSC for 760 LDCs has been received by BRO. The Medical Examination of which was 
scheduled from 15 March 2020 has been kept on hold due to COVID-19. 

 
50 
The details of authorized and existing Technical & Administrative/Secretarial manpower 
of BRO in respect of Subordinates is furnished below:- 
S/Nos Cadre Authorization               
(in Nos) 
Existing (in 
Nos) 
i Technical 21599 16693 
ii Administrative/Secretarial 17575 14879 
G/Total 39174 31572 
 
Budget 2020-21 and force level in Indian Coast Guard 
 
Recommendation (Para Nos. 28, 29 & 30) 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 28) 
 
  The Committee note that for the financial year 2020-21, while the Indian Coast Guard 
(ICG) projected a requirement of Rs. 5350.00 Crore, Rs. 2500.00 crore has been allocated 
under the Capital Head i.e. 53.27 percent of the projected amount. Similarly, under the 
Revenue Head, while the Budget Estimates (BE) projection for the year 2020-21 was Rs. 
3246.03 Crore, the allocation has been Rs. 2532.76 Crore. In total, while the ICG projected a 
requirement of Rs. 8596.03 crore, the allocation has been Rs. 5032.76 crore. As on 31 
December, 2019, the Coast Guard has spent Rs. 3632.23 crore out of Rs. 5076.07 crore 
allocated at Revised Estimates 2019-20. The Committee have also been apprised that for 
facilitation of timely materialization of targeted force level in Coast Guard, 25 Ships and 20 
Boats are under construction of various shipyards, 16 Advanced Light Helicopters are 
scheduled for delivery commencing March 2020, procurement of 30 mm 74 naval Surface Guns 
(NSG) is under progress and Acceptance of Necessity (AoN) for 12 Twin Engine Heavy 
Helicopters has been accorded by the Government.  
 
Recommendation (Para No. 29) 
    The Committee, while taking note of the fact that Indian Coast Guard has a peace time 
charter, appreciate the myriad roles and responsibilities undertaken by the Coast Guard which 
include safety and protection of artificial islands and offshore terminals, protection of fishermen 
and provide assistance to them during distress at sea, preservation and protection of marine 
environment, assisting the Customs and other enforcement agencies in anti-smuggling 
operations, safety of life and property from natural or man-made disasters at sea and collection 
of meteorological and oceanographic data for use by the scientific fraternity. Besides, ICG also 
provides coastal security in territorial waters in coordination with central and state agencies and 
it is the Lead Intelligence Agency for coastal and sea borders.    
 
Recommendation (Para No. 30) 
 
     While tendering evidence before the Committee, the Director General, Indian Coast 
Guard submitted that the Coast Guard works for almost 14 Ministries and on an average, 50 
ships are deployed at sea every day. Further, funds are required for maintenance of ships and 

 
51 
aircraft, fuel and related expenses. The Defence Secretary also highlighted the need to 
strengthen the Coast Guard keeping in view expanding area of 'blue economy' i.e. maximum 
exploitation of sea resources. As regard to budget utilisation by the Coast Guard, the 
Committee take note of the deposition of the Secretary (Defence Finance) that the Ministry of 
Finance did not agree to give any additional money to the Coast Guard in the Revised 
Estimates stage because their pace of expenditure was very low. Additionally, a limit of 
spending only 25 percent of the allocated budget in the last quarter of a financial Year has been 
imposed by the Ministry of Finance. Keeping in view the significant multifarious tasks performed 
by the Indian Coast Guard and planned procurement/ construction of ship, aircraft and 
Advanced Light helicopters for achievement of targeted force level, the Committee recommend 
that funds allocated to the Indian Coast Guard should be suitably augmented at Revised 
Estimates or Supplementary Grants stage. The Committee would also recommend that the 
Indian Coast Guard should improve their trend of utilisation of budget according to prescribed 
timelines and manner. They would also like to be apprised of the reasons in sequence as why 
the amount could not be fully utilised by the Coast Guard, at least to know whether this under-
utilisation could be due to some extraneous circumstances also.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
1. Budget status as on 31 December, 2019, was as tabulated below:- 
(Rs. in crore) 
Head Allocation  Expenditure percentage 
prescribed 
percentage achieved by 
ICG 
Revenue 2385.27  2007.3155 67 85.15 
Capital 2500.00  1656.3431 67 66.25 
Total 4885.27  3663.3586 67 74.99 
 
2. It is submitted that ICG has ensured 100% budget utilisation for the last 5 financial years. 
The details are as under:- 
(Rs. in crore) 
Year  Head  BE 
Allocation 
RE 
Allocation 
MA 
Allocation 
Actual 
Exp 
% achieved 
by ICG 
 
2014-15 
Capital 1550.00  1140.00 1140.00 1142.08 100.00 
Revenue 1130.26 1265.00 1295.28 1286.78 99.32 
Total  2680.26  2405.00 2435.28 2428.86 99.70 

 
52 
 
2015-16 
Capital 1200.00  1500.00 1500.00 1516.83 100.00 
Revenue 1314.00 1514.00 1547.61 1517.18 98.03 
Total 2514.00  3014.00 3047.61 3034.01 99.55 
 
2016-17 
Capital 1500.00  2500.00 2500.00 2468.97 98.75 
Revenue 1624.41 1737.76 1769.17 1773.25 100.00 
Total 3124.41  4237.76 4269.17 4242.22 99.37 
2017-18 
Capital 2200.00  2200.00 2200.00 2178.59 99.03 
Revenue 1829.79 2148.97 2148.97 2155.51 100.00 
Total 4029.79  4348.97 4348.97 4334.10 99.65 
 
2018-19 
Capital 2700.00  2250.00 2262.16 2260.48 99.95 
Revenue 2091.42 2391.42 2401.53 2451.14 100.00 
Total 4791.42 4641.42  4663.69 4711.62 100.00 
 
3. For the FY 2019-20, the final expenditure details as on 31 Mar 2020 is as below:- 
 (Rs. in crore) 
Year  Head  BE 
Allocation 
RE 
Allocation 
MA 
Allocation 
Actual 
Exp 
percentage 
achieved by 
ICG 
 
2019-20 
Capital 2500.00  2600.00 2600.00 2582.70 99.33 
Revenue 2385.27 2476.07 2520.07 2539.29 100.00 
Total  4885.27  5076.07 5120.07 5122.00 100.00 
 
4. As can be seen from the table above, the targeted expenditure at all stages has 
generally been met. However, there have been spills over of liabilities as under, during the FY 
2019-20: 
 (a) Revenue Head 
(i) POL   - Rs. 250 crore 
(ii) Minor Works - Rs. 160 crore 

 
53 
(b) Capital Head 
 
(i) Acquisition of Ships, Aircraft and Fleet - Rs. 161 Crore approx 
(ii) Major Works and Land Acquisition - Rs. 150 Crore approx 
 
The  budgetary  allocation  for  these  liabilities  has   been  planned  out  of  the 
allocation for the current FY 2020-21. 
 
Required and Existing Manpower 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 31) 
 The Committee note that at present, total manpower strength with Coast Guard is 14,313 
comprising of 1982 officers, 10997 Enrolled Personnel and 1334 Civilians. Admittedly, proactive 
steps such as re-employment of Naval Short Service commissioned officers at Comdt(JG) rank, 
deputation of officers from Indian Navy, induction of commercial pilot (CPL) holders as pilots 
under Short Service Appointment (SSA) scheme, introduction of Short Service Appointment 
(SSA) lady officer Entry Scheme, online application for recruitment for officers and enrolled 
personnel, audio visual & print advertisements for publicity to generate awareness amongst 
general masses, undertaking preliminary selection at 06 different locations in respect of officers 
to garner maximum candidates, recruitment of enrolled personnel from all over country by 
deputing selection committee at various places, special recruitment drive for induction of SC/ST 
candidates, lectures being conducted at various schools/ colleges to create awareness amongst 
youth for joining Coast Guard and for ease of processing online application forms, have been 
taken towards liquidation of manpower shortage against sanctioned strength. The committee 
opine that adequate manpower strength is essential for meeting challenges of maritime security 
and various contingencies in sea and coastal area of the country. Therefore, they recommend 
that concrete and result oriented efforts should be made by the Ministry of Defence in order to 
strictly adhere to the time line of the 2-3 years envisaged towards liquidation of shortages 
against sanctioned manpower in the Coast Guard. They would like to be apprised of the 
progress every six months the objective set is accomplished. 
 
Reply of the Government 
1. The details of Govt. manpower sanctioned and borne strength of Officers, Enrolled 
Personnel and Civilian personnel including vacancies as on 1st July, 2020 are as tabulated 
below: 
S.N Cadre Govt. 
Sanction 
Borne Vacancies Remarks 
(a) Officers 2,344 1,989 355 The vacancies exists in higher rank 
(Selection Grade, L-13A & above) 
which can be filled only through 
promotion from lower feeder/ 
deputation from Indian Navy. 

 
54 
(b) EPs 
(Enrolled 
Personnel) 
12,645 10,993 1,652 The vacancies exists in Group ‘B’(L-
6 & above) which can be filled only 
through promotion from lower 
feeder / deputation/pmt absorption 
from Indian Navy.  
(c) Civilians 1,970 1,347 623  
Total 16,959 14,329 2,630  
  
3.  The details of manpower sanctioned by the GoI/MoD during the last two periods of 6 
months are as follows:- 
 (a)  Govt Manpower sanctioned during the period 01 Apr 19 to 30 Sep 19:- 
S.No  Case No of Posts 
Off EP Civ Total  
(i) Creation of 105 posts for manning 03 Fast 
Patrol Vessels (FPVs)   
15 90 00 105 
(ii) Creation of 36 posts for Coast Guard Refit 
and Production Team(CGRPT) at Chennai 
and Paradip  
08 20 08 36 
Total 23 110 08 141 
 
 (b)  Government Manpower sanctioned during the period 01 Oct 19 to 31 Mar 20:-  
S.N Case No of Posts 
Off EP Civ Total  
 Nil Nil Nil Nil  
 
 4. Following proactive steps are continued to be taken towards liquidation of manpower 
shortage against sanctioned strength by ICG:  
(a)  Re-employment of Naval Short Service Commissioned officers at            
Commandant (JG) rank. 
(b) Seeking deputation of officers from Indian Navy. 
(c) Induction of commercial pilot license (CPL) holders as pilots under Short Service 
Appointment (SSA) scheme. 
(d) Introduction of Short Service Appointment (SSA). 
(e) Online applications for Recruitment of officers and enrolled personnel. 
(f) Audio visual & print advertisements for publicity to generate awareness amongst 
general masses. 
(g) Preliminary selection undertaken at 06 different locations in respect of officers to 
garner maximum candidates. 

 
55 
(h) Enrolled personnel are recruited from all over country by deputing selection 
committees at various places. 
(i) Special recruitment drive for induction of SC/ST candidates. 
(j) Lectures being conducted at various Schools/Colleges to create awareness 
amongst youth for joining Coast Guard. 
(k) Separate CG website created for ease of processing online application forms. 
 
Indian Coast Guard Academy 
Recommendation (Para No. 32) 
 The committee have been apprised that Indian Coast Guard (ICG) is envisaged to cater 
for professional training of personnel on subjects specific to Coast Guard’s non-military charter 
of duties. The proposed academy is planned to cater for training of      650 trainees, including 
the training needs of personnel from other maritime stake holders including Navy, Border 
Security Force (water wing), Marine police and friendly foreign countries as part of International 
Cooperation. Approval-in-Principle (AIP) for acquisition of 160 acres lands at New Mangalore 
for setting up of ICG Academy has been accorded by Ministry of Defence on 26th November, 
2019. Presently, Board of Officers has been convened for acquisition of land. Construction and 
commissioning of the academy is planned in 2022-25. In this regard, the committee recommend 
that the ministry should extend all budgetary and infrastructural support for completion of the 
academy within the envisaged timeframe. On their part, the Coast Guard should also mull a 
foolproof strategy to cooperate with the ministry so that the Academy is commissioned within 
the envisaged timelines. 
 
Reply of the Government 
Present status  
(a) MoD has accorded Approval-in-Principle (AIP) on 26th November, 2019 to process 
acquisition of 160 acres of land at Kenjaru Village, Mangaluru, Karnataka from Karnataka 
Industrial Area Development Board (KIADB) for setting up of ICG Academy and sanction 
letter has been issued on 09 April, 2020 for transfer of the said land at an amount of Rs. 
270,10,11,250/-, which has been released by ICG to PDDE, SC, Pune on 16th April, 
2020.  
(b) Board Proceedings for construction of security wall has been submitted to CE, CG Goa. 
The AEs have been submitted for an amount of Rs. 20.13 crore on 13th April, 2020.  
(c) Mangalore Electricity Supply Company Ltd (MESCOM) has been requested for cost 
estimates for provision of 33KV dedicated feeder line to be undertaken as deposit work 
by MESCOM. 
(d) Water supply department has been requested for cost estimates for provision of 3.5 MLD 
water to ICG academy through dedicated water supply pipeline to be undertaken as 
deposit.  

 
56 
Future Plan  
(a) Year-1:  
(i) Acquisition /Taking over /survey of land. 
  (ii) Construction of boundary wall. 
  (iii) Land development. 
  (iv) Clearance from various Govt/Pvt agencies. 
(b) Year-2:  
(i) Preparation of Zonal plan /Building Plan. 
  (ii) Tender action. 
  (iii) Commencement of Construction. 
  
(c)     Year 3rd to 5th - Construction and commissioning of Academy.   
 
Recommendation (Para No. 33) 
 The Committee learn that as on 31st January, 2020, Military Engineer Services (MES) 
has been able to spend 80.71 percent of the allocated Capital budget and 75.28 percent of the 
allocated revenue Budget for the Financial Year 2019-20. MES has projected an amount of Rs. 
23,938.91 crore for the Financial Year 2020-21. The Committee have further learnt that to 
mitigate effects of the reduced allocation, if any, at Budget Estimates (BE) stage, Annual Major 
Works Programme (AMWP) ceilings for both Army and Air Force have been reduced, probable 
dates of completion accorded for delayed projects have been extended and certain sanctioned 
works have been re-appropriated/ foreclosed/ cancelled. Further, 25 works of of Army worth Rs. 
1049.69 crore, 16 works of Air force worth Rs. 144.96 crore and 11 works of Navy worth Rs. 
56.03 crore were foreclosed/ cancelled (including under process for cancellation/ foreclosure) 
due to shortage of funds in last three financial years. The Committee understand that MES, 
comprising of proficient personnel who are deployed across the length and breadth of the 
county at remote locations in all types of terrain and inhospitable climatic conditions, plays an 
important role in empowering the combat effectiveness of the Armed Forces besides providing 
engineering support to various formations for Army, Air Force, Navy, Coast Guard, Ordnance 
Factories and Defence Research & Development Organisation (DRDO). Therefore, they 
recommend that sufficient funds should be allocated to MES at Revised Estimates or 
Supplementary Grants stage so that MES is able to effectively fulfil its responsibility for creating 
the strategic and the operational infrastructure for the Forces. 
Reply of the Government 
 The details contained in the report are factual. Sufficient funds have been allocated to 
MES in FY 2020-21 so that MES is able to effectively fulfil its responsibility for creating the 
strategic and operational infrastructure for the Armed Forces.  

 
57 
Recommendation (Para No. 34) 
 The Committee find that initiatives regarding MES such as revision in maintenance 
norms of buildings and roads, implementation of EPC methodology in MES, performance 
security in MES contracts, enhanced defect liability in MES contracts and Public Procurement 
(preference to Make in India) have been approved by the Ministry. Further, proposals regarding 
revision of Defence Works Procedure 2007, revision of scales of accommodation for Defence 
Services 2009, bulk MES establishment sanction, revision of plinth area conversion factor and 
electricity tariff for Armed Forces at par with civil domestic consumption are under process with 
the Ministry of Defence. The Committee recommend that initiative regarding MES which are 
approved by the Ministry be swiftly implemented and they be apprised accordingly. They also 
recommend that decision on proposals under consideration in the Ministry be taken at the 
earliest to reach finality in order to aid MES in timely achievement of its targets and clientele 
satisfaction. The Committee further recommend that MES should make maximum use of 
Government e-Market Place (GeM) portal for procurement and e-payments method should also 
be implemented to the fullest. 
 
Reply of the Government 
   
1. The Ministry of Defence is taking all measures to decide on various initiatives to improve 
its functioning and delivery. A number of deliberations have been conducted to fast track the 
proposals under consideration. 
2. The present status of various proposals are as under:- 
(a) Revision of Defence Works Procedure-2007.   The case file has been 
processed for obtaining the approval of the Competent Authority.  
 (b) Revision of Scales of Accommodation for Defence Services-2009.   Matter is 
under consideration in the Ministry. 
(c)  Bulk ‘M’ Establishment Sanction.  The case for issuing Bulk ‘M’ Establishment 
Sanction is under examination of the Ministry.  
(d)  Revision of Existing Plinth Area Conversion Factor (PACF).   The proposal is 
under examination in the Ministry.   
(e)   Special Electric Slab for Armed Forces.   The case for issuing Bulk “M’ 
Establishment Sanction is under examination in MoD.  
(f) Online Payments. Online payment through SBI-CMP (cash management 
product) is being implemented in MES.  
(g) Procurement through GeM.   Procurement of stores in MES is being carried out 
through GeM as per Government orders. GSL for procurement through GeM in lieu of 
DGS & D upto GE (Garrison Engineer) level has been issued on 16th  April, 2020.  
 
 

 
58 
Encroachment of Defence Lands 
 
Recommendations (Para Nos. 36 & 37) 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 36) 
 
The Committee have learnt that the total area of defence land under the management of 
Defence Estates Organisation (DEO) is 70,922 acres. As on 31.12.2019, about 4458 acres of 
Defence Land under the management of DEO is under encroachment. The Committee found 
during examination of Demands for Grants 2019-20,that about 4505 acres of Defence land 
under the management of DEO was under encroachment as on 30.06.2019. The Committee 
has been given to understand that the Ministry of Defence has already put in place a system 
whereby information of encroachment on defence land is received periodically and action taken 
thereon is monitored. The following institutional mechanisms are in place:- 
 
a) Each Service and Defence Establishment under whose management the defence land is 
placed, is responsible for prevention and removal of encroachments. 
 
b) An annual certificate is obtained from the Station Commander and the Defence Estates 
Officer under whose management the land is placed, as the case may be, under the 
provisions of Rule 14 of ACR Rules, 1944 or Rule 13 of Cantonment Land Administration 
Rules (CLAR), 1937 which provides information on physical verification of land and 
unauthorised constructions or encroachments thereon. This enables the concerned 
defence authorities to take stock of illegal or unauthorised occupation and monitor action 
taken by field officers. 
 
c) A quarterly report on prevention and removal of encroachments is obtained by HQ of 
each Service/Defence Establishment which is received by the Ministry of Defence and 
action taken is monitored. 
 
d) The officers at the field level under each Service or Defence Establishment have been 
notified as “’Estate Officer” under Rule -3 of the provisions of the Public Premises 
(Eviction of Unauthorised Occupants) Act, 1971, who are responsible for taking 
necessary action to deal with unauthorised occupation, unauthorised constructions and 
encroachments on Defence land placed within their jurisdiction. 
 
e) Demarcation survey of entire defence land outside Cantonments and inside 
Cantonments has already been undertaken in order to enable the concerned authorities 
to reconcile the recorded land data with the physical occupation of land and also be 
ascertain if there are any encroachments on defence land. The survey report is 
submitted to the Director General Defence Estates. 
 
f) Computerisation of defence land records and digitisation of important land files and 
documents have been done for efficient management of records and taking timely action 
against encroachments. 
 

 
59 
g) A Committee under the chairmanship of Additional Secretary, Ministry of Defence 
periodically reviews action taken on removal of encroachments and also suggest ways 
and means to make the system more efficient from time to time. 
 
Recommendations (Para No. 37) 
 
The Committee noted the steps mentioned above by the Ministry to remove 
encroachments on defence land. However, it is a matter of concern that despite these 
mechanisms in place, the area under encroachments has not decreased. Therefore, it is 
recommended that urgent and productive measures should be put in place for eviction of 
encroachers on the defence lands. The Committee, while examining this subject earlier also 
took note of the fact that one of the reasons why encroachments could not be cleared is the 
ongoing civil cases in various courts. The Committee fully understand such a scenario but 
would still urge the Ministry to find and devise a foolproof mechanism where at least the future 
encroachments could be checked forthwith. The Committee would like to know about the 
measures planned in this area in addition to the ones already brought out above. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 As on 31.12.2019, 4458 acres of Defence land under the management of Defence 
Estates Organisation was under encroachment. The state wise details of these encroachments 
are enclosed herewith as Annexure I. It may be seen that out of the said 4458 acres, 
approximately 787 acres of Defence land has been encroached upon by the State and Central 
Government departments and their entities. Lessees of ex-agriculture leases have encroached 
about 2060 acres of land. The balance 1611 acres is under encroachment by private persons. 
 
Various steps have been taken in accordance with the legal provisions for removal of 
encroachment. Use of proactive measures by leveraging advanced technologies related to 
Survey & Demarcation of defence land and Computerization & Digitisation of Defence land 
records have also been initiated. As a result of the efforts made by DGDE 165 acres of Defence 
land has been freed from encroachment during the last three years i.e., 2017, 2018 and 2019. 
The details may be seen at Annexure II. Legal action for eviction of encroachers has also been 
initiated by the Defence Estates Organisation. 6193 cases for eviction of encroachers are 
presently under process under the PPE Act 1971 before the Estates Officer. 858 cases 
pertaining to eviction of encroachers are pending in various courts of law.  
 
Instructions have been issued to all the Dtes, DE, by DGDE advising the field officer 
to be vigilant and take all necessary steps to prevent further encroachment (Annexure-III). 
Monitoring mechanism by way of quarterly reports on encroachment of Defence land has also 
been put in place. Steps taken like erection of boundary pillars after finalisation of Land Survey 
of Defence land have also been introduced. As a result of the effective implementation of these 
measures fresh incidents of encroachment of Defence land in the last three years i.e. 2017, 
2018 and 2019 have been minimal (Annexure IV). The encroachments detected in 2017, 2018 
and 2019 are 3.76 acres, 11.99 acres and 0.67 acres, respectively. 

 
60 
 


 
61 
 
 


 
62 
 
 


 
63 
 


 
64 
 
 
 


 
65 
Expert Committee on Working of Cantonment Boards 
Recommendations (Para Nos. 38 & 39) 
Recommendation (Para No. 38) 
The Committee take note of the fact that an Expert Committee under the Chairmanship 
of Shri Sumit Bose, IAS (Retd.) had been constituted to address various issues relating to the 
working of cantonments such as renewal/extension of expired/expiring leases, Building Bye 
Laws & Floor Space Index, transfer and mutation of Old Grant properties, freehold, service 
charges payable to Cantonments etc. The Terms of reference of the Committee are as below: 
 
i. To study the existing cantonment Act and to make specific recommendations for 
suitably amending the Act to impact modernization and democratization of the 
governance structure of Cantonment Boards. 
ii. To make specific recommendation in connection with building bye-laws in Cantonments 
to align them with the best practices and create and incentive structure particularly with 
respect to energy efficiency, green building, water conservation/rain water harvesting, 
fire safety standards, disaster resilience, sanitation including zero liquid discharge, etc. 
and initiation of on-line clearance of building norms. 
iii. To review the existing Floor Space Index 9FSI) across Cantonments, and make 
recommendations on future rationalization. 
iv. To make recommendations on the procedural modalities for transfer and mutation of 
property, including Old Grants Bungalows; freehold and leasing of property including its 
extension etc. 
v. To make recommendations in respect of municipal services being provided to the 
residents of the Cantonments, incorporating e-Governance practices and also providing 
‘Smart Solutions’ in respect of sewerage and drainage system, water supply, citizen 
safety, clean environment etc. 
vi. To make recommendations on levy of Service charges by Cantonment Boards from all 
entities. 
vii. To make recommendations after review of orders relating to cantonment administration, 
so as to weed out that are out of date. 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 39) 
The Committee have been apprised that the expert Committee has submitted its report 
to the Ministry of Defence on 13.02.2019. The Committee are hopeful that prompt 
implementation of such propitious recommendations of the Expert Committee would lead to 
desired modernization and democratization of the governance structure of the Cantonment 
Boards alongwith providing solutions to the various challenges faced by the civilian population 
residing in Cantonment areas. They Desire that latest status of implementation of the report of 
the Bose Committee may be furnished within in month of the presentation of this report. 

 
66 
 
Reply of the Government 
MoD had constituted an Expert Committee on Working of Cantonment Boards vide MoD 
ID No. 14(12)/2018-D(Q&C) dated 31.08.2018(Annexure V). The Expert Committee has 
submitted its report on 13.02.2019 and the same is under consideration. 
 
MoD has issued several guidelines in certain matters as per recommendations of the 
Committee which are given as under: 
 
(a) MoD vide its ID No. 2(2)/2018-D(Q&C) dated 05.11.2019 (Annexure VI) has decided 
that the Cantonment Boards shall allow/permit construction of a w.c/toilet in existing 
buildings in absence of any such provision within that tenement to an authorized 
resident, subject to condition that proper sewerage connection to the said building 
already exists in the Cantonment. The said guidelines have been forwarded to all 
Directorates to take necessary action in the matter. Till Jan, 2020, Cantonment Boards 
have already granted permissions for construction of toilets in respect of 24 application of 
authorized residents of such tenements. The process is ongoing. 
 
(b) MoD vide its ID No. 2(2)/2018-D(Q&C) dated 11.12.2019 (Annexure VII) has decided 
that the term ‘repairs’ appearing in the Land Policy of 1995 has not been defined, leading 
to ambiguity. The Committee, while opining that the matter needs to be clarified has 
suggested a list of activities which may constitute ‘repairs’ for which notice to 
Cantonment Board u/s 235 of the Cantonments Act, 2006 may not be required. 
Accordingly, MoD guidelines have been issued in furtherance to Section 235(2) of the 
Cantonments Act, 2006 to allow repairs to authorized buildings in Cantonment areas. 
The said guidelines have been forwarded to all Directorates/CBs to take necessary 
action in the matter. 
 
(c) MoD vide its ID No. 14(12)/2018-D(Q&C) dated 23.12.2019 (Annexure VIII) has advised 
the Cantonment Boards to constitute three more committees i.e. the Finance Committee, 
the Education Committee and the Health & Environment Committee, forward their 
amended business regulations to the Central Government for approval and thereafter its 
notification in the Gazette and to delegate the functions provided. The said guidelines 
have been forwarded to all Directorates to take necessary action in the matter. 
Cantonment Boards are in the process of preparing revised Business Regulations for the 
purpose. 
 
(d) The matter for amendments in Cantonments Act, 2006 is under consideration for 
consolidating and amending the law relating to cantonments with a view to imparting 
greater democratization, modernization and efficiency in the administration thereof, to 
achieve greater developmental objectives in alignment with municipalities, and for 
matters connected therewith and incidental thereto. Further, first proposal of the Draft 
Amendment in Cantonment Act, 2006 has been uploaded on website of MoD and DGDE 
as well as all Cantonment Boards for inviting suggestions/views from the general public 
likely to be affected thereby which could be incorporated to make Cantt Act more 
democratic & modern.  
 

 
67 


 
68 


 
69 


 
70 


 
71 


 
72 


 
73 
 
 
 


 
74 
Implementation of Central Government Schemes in Cantonment Boards  
Recommendations (Para Nos. 40 & 41) 
Recommendation (Para No. 40) 
The Committee have learnt that the Centrally Sponsored Schemes such as Smart Cities 
Mission, AMRUT, etc. are to be implemented by the State Government/UTs in their respective 
areas of jurisdiction. Barring isolated cases, these Schemes are not being implemented by the 
State Government/ District/ State Municipal authorities, in the Cantonment areas which are co-
located with the city and form part of the common environment. The main reason for non-
implementation is that the Cantonment Boards are perceived by the State Government as a 
separate entity from State urban local Bodies (ULBs). Since the entire Cantonments area in a 
city is considered to be directly under the administrative jurisdiction of the Central Government 
and not under the State Government, therefore, the Cantonment areas are left out by the State 
Government authorities at the time of assessment of projects by the State Mission Directorates, 
on the ground that the State Government is not liable to bear any expenditure in the 
implementation of Centrally sponsored Schemes in Cantonments areas. 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 41) 
The Committee have been apprised that the Ministry of  Defence has taken up the matter 
with the Chief Secretaries of all concerned State Government  vide its letter dated 05.11.2019 
to issue suitable instructions to institutionalize implementation of Centrally Sponsored Schemes 
in Cantonment area and the Directorates are further pursuing the matter with the State 
Government. The Committee understand that Cantonments Boards, Under the provisions of 
sub-section(2) of the section 10 of the Cantonments Act,2006, are deemed municipalities under 
clause (e) of Article 243P of the constitution, for the purposes of receiving grants and 
allocations and implementing Central Government schemes relating to development of 
infrastructure and social welfare. Therefore, the Committee recommend that the Ministry should 
leave no stone unturned in convincing the State Governments for implementation of Centrally 
sponsored schemes in Cantonments areas. Further, proposal to convert civil areas of 
Cantonments into municipalities may be examined seriously, without compromising with military 
interest, civil aspirations and State Government’s perspective. 
 
Reply of the Government 
The MoD/DGDE through correspondence, and the Cantonment authorities through 
liaison are constantly pursuing the matter with respective State Govt./District administration for 
effective implementation of the Centrally Sponsored Schemes at par with the Municipal areas. 
Further, 15th  Finance Commission in its report  for 2020-21  first time recommended that the 
States should also make allotment of grants on population basis for the Cantonment Boards 
within their territories. For urban local bodies other than Million-Plus cities, the grants should be 
distributed to each urban local body on the basis of accepted recommendations of the latest 
SFC suitably modified/ or on the basis of population and area in the ratio of 90:10. Cantonment 
Boards are in process of receiving 1st installments of Grants from respective State 
Governments. The inclusion of the Cantonment Boards as at par with ULBs of the State would 

 
75 
further facilitate the inclusion of Cantonment areas at par with ULBs/municipality in the state for 
implementation of schemes in these areas seamlessly. Further, as a step ahead in this 
direction, a workshop involving the officials from respective Ministries, CEOs, Presidents, Vice-
presidents of all Cantonment Boards was then scheduled on 17.04.2020, which was postponed 
due to COVID pandemic and this would be held as early as possible. 
 As regard proposal to convert civil areas of Cantonments into Municipalities, as 
suggested, any such proposal would be considered without compromising with Military 
interest/civil aspirations and State Govt. perspective.   
 
Leased properties in Cantonment areas  
 
Recommendations (Para Nos. 42 & 43) 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 42) 
 
The Committee found that Cantonments were set up primarily to quarter troops that 
necessitated provision of civic amenities such as houses, shops, schools, cinemas, clubs, 
banks etc.  Certain land was, therefore, allotted on lease for such purposes under the 
provisions of Cantonment Codes of 1899 and 1912 and Cantonment Land Administration Rules 
(CLAR) of 1925 and 1937.  Leases were granted for various tenures on payment of appropriate 
premium and annual rent.  Some of these were granted in perpetuity and fixed tenures while 
others were renewable.  Such sites are placed under the management of Cantonment Boards 
and Defence Estates officers.  There are total 6556 leases sites.    
 
Recommendation (Para No. 43) 
 
On the issue of commercial use of leased properties in Cantonment areas, the Director 
General, Defence Estates informed the Committee that renewal in such cases is being done 
subject to conditions.  The Committee, on the issue of feasibility of extension of lease period for 
residential purposes in Cantonment Areas, has been apprised that where the lease has expired, 
the interim policy of March 2017, which was extended up to December 2019, is in effect. The 
Committee recommend that with a view to provide solution to various constraints faced by 
civilian population residing in cantonment areas, a permanent lease policy should be 
introduced.  Timely implementation of the new lease policy also includes issues of mutation and 
as such the Committee feels that it should be finalized and notified at the earliest so as to 
streamline the working of DGDE and earn public trust and credence. 
  
 
Reply of the Government  
 
The policy on “Renewal/ extension of expired/ expiring leases is under consideration in 
the Ministry of Defence.      
 

 
76 
Interests of the Civil Population in Cantonment Areas 
Recommendations (Para Nos. 46 & 47) 
Recommendation (Para No. 46) 
During deliberations on Demands for Grants 2020-21, the Committee had raised the 
issue of problems being faced by the dwellers in Cantonment areas in matters related to 
improvement of building condition such as repair of houses etc. The Committee are pleased to 
note the submission of the Director General Defence Estates that all the minor work such as 
repair works, whitewashing, replacement of roof, etc. have been allowed now without any 
formal permission to be given by the Cantonment Board. 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 47) 
The Committee also raised the issue of construction of roads in Cantonment areas. In 
this regard, the Defence Secretary apprised the Committee that highest priority in such cases is 
accorded to the requirements of Armed Forces and security considerations. Wherever land is 
not available due to requirements of Armed Forces and security considerations, exchange of 
equal value land or equal value cost is considered. A geographic Information System (GIS) is 
being put in place to streamlime the whole process so that the information regarding available 
land is available to the state Government. The Committee appreciate various steps being taken 
in the direction of relaxing rigid norms regarding issues related to civilian population in the 
Cantonments areas and recommend that more such steps be contemplated/implemented to 
build mutual faith and affinity between the civil society and the Forces.    
 
Reply of the Government 
The Ministry of Defence vide letter No. 14(9)/2018-D(Q&C) dated 04.09.2018 has issued 
detailed procedure to be followed by Cantonment Boards for closure of roads in Cantonments 
and no public road in the Cantonment shall be closed without following the laid down procedure, 
as per Section 258 of the Cantonments Act, 2006. The Cantonment Boards have also advised 
the Local Military Authorities (LMA’s) accordingly for compliance.  
 
Ammunition Dumps 
Recommendation (Para No. 48) 
The Committee, during their deliberations in connection with examination of Demands for 
Grants 2019-20, expressed concern over the hazards posed by the ammunition dumps in 
vicinity or amidst the inhabited areas of the country. During discussion on Demands for Grants 
2020-21 too, the Committee raised the issue of limitations/restrictions faced by the civilians 
dwelling near Army depots. In his deposition before the Committee, the Chief of Defence Staff 
submitted that permission for residential purposes is given to civilians within 50 yards of Army 
accommodation. Around the ammunition depots, rule of no construction within 1000 meter, as 
recommended by the explosive experts, is enforced. The Committee note with glee that efforts 

 
77 
are on for underground vertical storage of the ammunitions in order to modernize the Depots 
and provide relaxation to the civilians residing around the depots. While adopting best 
advancements in the field and also with the intention to give respite to the surging civil 
population, the Committee strongly recommend that a final decision is arrived in this regard at 
the earliest. Such a solution should not only cover Jammu Cantonment but also the lands 
affected thereto. The Committee would like to be apprised of the results in this regard within 
three months of the presentation of this report. 
Reply of the Government 
a) The issue highlighted in Para 48 pertains to the efforts being undertaken for construction 
of underground (UG) storage of ammunition at a few locations in Northern and Eastern 
Commands in collaboration with NHPS, a Government of India enterprise. These projects are 
planned at forward areas where civil population around the ammunition storage area is limited. 
 
b) The types of ammunition storage areas with respect to civilian population around, can be 
classified as following types:- 
Type A Forward Gun areas, Ammunition bunkers where no civilian population exists. 
The ammunition dumps are smaller in dimension and hold very limited quantity of 
ammunition. Main criteria for such works is to reduce vulnerability to enemy fire, ensure 
safe storage and safety of troops. 
Type B Formation Ammunition Dumps and forward Ammunition Points located in near 
vicinity of Line of Control/International Boundary. The civil population around these 
ammunition dumps is very limited. Medium size storage location are required capable of 
reducing vulnerability due to enemy action as also to enhance safety of troops/civil 
population. 
Type C Ammunition Depots located in rear areas. These have civil localities in proximity 
to its periphery. Emphasis is required on large ammunition storage with a focus on 
reduction of Outside Quantity Distance (OQD) while enhancing safety of ammunition. 
 
c) The current project undertaken by Directorate General of Operation Logistic (DG OL) 
through NHPC are for Type A and B Ammunition Dumps. While the current initiative by 
Directorate General of Operation Logistics (DG OL) would be helpful for Type A and B 
Ammunition Storage Dumps, due consideration also needs to be given for ammunition being 
stored in type C locations. These are the areas where more than 80% of ammunition is stored. 
In view of the same, following is under consideration:- 
 
i. Construction of Semi UG/UG Storage accommodations in Type 'C’ to reduce 
Outside Quantity Distance (OQD). 
 
ii. Storage of UN Hazard Division 1.2 type of ammunition in Igloos (meant for 1.1 UN 
hazard), specially in the periphery of Depots to mitigate higher OQD requirements. 
 
  

 
78 
Recommendation (Para Nos. 49 & 50) 
Recommendation (Para No. 49) 
The Committee have been given to understand that there have been slippages on the part 
of DPSUs in adhering to the delivery timelines while supplying items to the Forces. As learnt 
through the written submission of the Ministry, the dependence of HAL products, being highly 
technology intensive on multiple stakeholders including foreign Original Equipment 
Manufacturers (OEMs) in most of the cases, at times has posed unforeseen challenges. The 
US sanctions during Light Combat Aircraft (LCA) Tejas development which in turn led to delay 
in certification of the aircraft, delay in receipt of License Technical Documents (LTD) from 
Licensor in case of Su-30MKI manufacturing etc, are few such instances. 
 
In case of Bharat Electronics Limited (BEL), the on-time delivery during last 5 years is 
around 80%, however, some of the large complex projects get delayed due to concurrent 
Engineering, accord of Bulk Production Clearance, change in user requirement, specifications 
to incorporate additional features, site/platform readiness etc. As regards Bharat Dynamics 
Limited (BDL), due to reasons beyond control, products like Konkurs-M Anti-Tank Guided 
Missile (ATGM), lnvar Anti-Tank Guided Missile (ATGM) were delivered beyond scheduled time 
due to technical snag encountered during proof firings. Akash Weapon Systems were delivered 
beyond scheduled time due to delay in receipt of input materials from vendors and delay in 
receipt of Tatra Vehicles from M/s BEML due to embargo. In Garden Reach Shipbuilders & 
Engineers Ltd. (GRSE), the delays in warship construction are primarily on account of 
finalization of fit and freezing of specifications by the customer, failure of Major Equipment 
manufacturers and inability to progress Integrated Construction In reference to Project P75 of 
Mazagon Dock Shipbuilders Limited (MDL), revision of delivery dates occurred due to delay in 
delivery of material, incomplete Technical Data Package Information System from collaborator, 
non-availability of concerned specialists as required from the collaborator / OEMs and delay in 
defect rectification and software issues. The Committee, during oral evidence of the 
representatives of the Ministry of Defence, were apprised that the DPSUs have first four 
contracts from Myanmar, and in two of them supplies have been made before time. 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 50) 
The Committee opine that majority of the reasons cited above such as change in user 
requirement, specifications to incorporate additional features, finalization of fit & freezing of 
specifications by the customer, incomplete Technical Data Package Information System, non-
availability of concerned specialists as required from the collaborator / OEMs etc. from 
collaborator may be resolved by through and timely interaction of the DPSUs with concerned 
collaborators / OEMs / vendors / clients / users. The Committee, therefore, recommend that the 
DPSUs should implement all suitable mechanisms to ensure timely supply of various defence 
products as delay due to any reason has consequences on operational readiness of the Forces. 
Here, it is in the fitness of things to recommend that highest level of due diligence should be 
taken by all Defence DPSUs in formulating a contract with the OEMs which should give an edge 
in the favour of DPSUs where in case of defaults, the financial interests of DPSUs are not put at 
stake. 

 
79 
Reply of the Government  
HAL: On-time project completion is given due importance at HAL and project execution is being 
reviewed at multiple levels, including at MoD, to ensure early identification of potential 
issues and timely risk mitigation. The project execution/strategies are being periodically 
reviewed internally at the highest level and are also being monitored by external 
committees involving customer/ MoD in various apex forums such as Steering 
Committee, Empowered Committee etc. Learnings are utilized to avoid pitfalls and 
remedial measures implemented.  
 
HAL has Contract Management and Legal Cell which vets all contract with OEMs.  For 
the platforms, the OEMs are being decided by the Customers. For supply of 
systems/units, due diligence is being carried out before signing of contract with OEMs. 
Also contract clauses like Warranty, Liquidated Damages (LD), Bank Guarantee (BG) 
etc. are added as part of every contract to avoid delays and also to safe guard HAL’s 
financial interest. Further, any issues with foreign OEMs are highlighted in regular 
meeting of HAL with OEMs management and the major issues are also highlighted and 
discussed in Steering Committee or Joint Working Group Meetings, at Ministry level. 
 
BEL: BEL is in complete agreement with the recommendations of the Committee as regards 
delivery of the products/services to the Defence Forces. Meeting the delivery 
requirements of our customers, primarily the Indian Armed Forces is of paramount 
importance to BEL. With the usage of state-of-the-art Project Management tools, all 
efforts are made to ensure timely delivery to customers as per contract. As part of our 
continuous improvement of on-time delivery, the root cause for delay in delivery of some 
of the projects is analyzed and necessary corrective/preventive measures are taken to 
minimize/zero down the same.  
As regards timely supplies of input material from OEMs/Vendors for the production of 
defence equipment, the delivery timelines vis-a-vis Customer Contractual Delivery Dates 
are made clear in the Purchase Order which are reiterated through continuous 
interactions and discussions. BEL's procurement process is governed by robust 
Purchase Procedure Manual which has been incorporated with requisite clauses with 
respect to delivery timelines. Regular monitoring of the supply status is carried out by the 
Project Management team to ensure timely receipt of the items from the OEMs/vendors. 
BEL also has shown zero tolerance towards negligence/dereliction of duties, if any, and 
appropriate actions are taken as per company norms. BEL's Purchase Order to suppliers 
is also incorporated with appropriate LD clause to protect the financial interests of the 
company, in case of any default/delays in the supplies as against the Purchase Order 
(P.O) terms. 
It is re-iterated that the On-time delivery during last 5 years is around 80%. It is inevitable 
that some of the large complex projects get delayed due to Concurrent Engineering, 
accord of Bulk Production Clearance, Change in user requirement, Specifications to 
incorporate additional features, Site/platform Readiness etc. All these measures and 
improvement processes are expected to further enhance the on-time delivery. 
 

 
80 
BEML: The delay in supply of Heavy-Duty Trucks was due to special situation of restriction 
arisen during 2012 which is a stray case.  However, the issues were resolved and 
supplies were completed.  Only in respect of supply of Armoured Recovery Vehicles, 
certain issues are being resolved and supplies will start in due course.  Systems are 
put in place to ensure proper due diligence before entering into any partnership. 
BDL: Reasons for delay in supply of Anti-Tank Guided Missiles (ATGMs): 
i. Konkurs-M: 
Indent was received on 31st March 2017 to supply 10,000 Nos., in two years, after a gap 
of one year i.e., previous indent was closed by March 2016. The total shop floor was idle 
due to non-availability of load. Suppliers also shifted to some other production line due to 
non-availability of orders from BDL. The delivery of Konkurs-M Missiles was delayed due 
to following reasons. 
a) Minimum 6 to 9 months’ time is required to procure the raw materials and further 2 to 
3 months required to convert into finished component. Procurement process in BDL 
starts after receipt of supply order (SO) from customer, which means that no delivery 
is possible in first year after receipt of SO. 
b) All the critical/specialized process were to be re-validated by the customer 
representative due to gap of production for more than one year. 
c) Explosive items supplied by Ordnance Factories, don’t have the capacity to produce 
yearly requirement of BDL. 
ii. Invar: 
a) Technical snags were encountered during proof firing of Invar Missiles. The problem 
was started in September, 2015. 
b) Missile being single shot device, identification of the root cause of the failure is very 
difficult and time consuming process in normal case, however it was very difficult in 
this typical case, where in acceptance testing of sub-systems/ missile is satisfactory 
but not in proof firing of missiles. BDL has involved DRDO, Armament Research and 
Development Establishment (ARDE), OEM and other experts in the analysis, hence 
lot of time & efforts were consumed. 
c) The root cause was eliminated step by step and finally BDL carried out successful 
proof firing in December 2018. Since then production is continued smoothly. 
 
In this type of contracts, BDL has to depend on the extent of ToT/infrastructure proposed 
by ToT partner. Special requirements/gaps can be understood by ToT receiver on 
encountering problems only. Corrections required, if any, can be incorporated in 
subsequent contracts. 
 
MDL: The issues of P75 project have been taken up to the highest levels of Govt to Govt 
meetings. Further, they have been additionally deliberated during visits of Senior 
dignitaries, both of the Customer and the OEMs / collaborators. Specially arranged visits 
by delegations led by the Controller of Warship Production and Acquisition (CWP&A) of 

 
81 
Indian Navy have been arranged to OEM premises to take up at their individual sites, the 
issues of design of systems, delay in supply of material and increase in number of 
defects encountered in the particular item /system. 
The issues have been resolved through these procedures. However, there is room for 
improvement to enable smooth progress of construction / delivery of balance 04 boats. 
 
GRSE: As per the terms of the shipbuilding contracts, all major equipment is to be procured 
from customer nominated OEMs/Vendors. The Technical specifications for procurement 
of these main equipment are required to be approved by the customer and customer’s 
representative is to be present as a part of TNCs with the OEMs/Vendors. Majority of 
the cases, delays are occurring due to approval of technical specifications and 
conclusion of Technical Negotiation Committees (TNCs), resulting in delay in order 
placement. This delay results in late availability of binding data required for detailed 
design and delayed equipment delivery resulting in project delay. Efforts have been 
made to address the issue by finalising the technical specifications & TNC through 
collegiate meeting attended by all stake holders.  
In order to ensure that all risk factors are addressed in the tender documents, suitable 
check lists are being used so that all necessary clauses to safeguard the company’s 
interests are incorporated in the contract for procurement. 
GSL: There have been no time slippages while delivery of products to the Forces in the past. 
GSL has delivered seven 105M Offshore Patrol Vessels (OPVs) to Indian Coast Guard, 
02 Offshore Patrol Vessel (OPV) to Sri Lanka Navy, 02 Fast Patrol Vessel & 11 Fast 
Interceptor Boats for Government of Mauritius, 01 Damage Control Simulator for 
Myanmar Navy, 01 Damage Control Simulator and Four 1000 T Fuel Barges for Indian 
Navy and 01 Nuclear Biological Chemical training Facility in last 6 years, all as per 
contractual schedule.  
1st vessel of second series of CGOPV (Yard No. 1233) was recently delivered by GSL 
within the delivery schedule after incorporating additional features or changes as per the 
Owner requirements. GSL has implemented a suitable mechanism which includes the 
following steps to ensure timely supply of various equipments/systems going in to 
construction of Vessels designed and constructed by GSL: 
(a) Departmental and Management Progress Review Meetings are being conducted on 
regular basis.        
(b) Cargo handling system is introduced for tackling delays on account of logistics for 
foreign shipments.   
(c) Close monitoring & follow up with the firms where the purchase orders placed for 
the first time by reviewing progress through Bar charts, co-ordination with class 
surveyor for timely approval of drawing and inspection of equipment at the vendor’s 
premises including physical monitoring at factory for monitoring the manufacturing 
activities, if required. 
(d) Hand holding of vendors in terms of technical support, knowledge sharing, class 
surveyor support.  

 
82 
(e) Safeguards and mitigation plans in Contracts for timely submission of binding 
drawings and execution of order. 
(f) Technical assistance provided to vendors wherever required. 
(g) Support & assistance to address Risk associated with supplier in difficult times. 
 
HSL:  There had been time slippages in the past while execution of some projects due to 
various reasons like delay due to lack of working capital, numerous design changes, re-
works, various modifications and delay in getting approval of drawings etc. However, it is 
pertinent to mention that HSL has completed all those legacy projects (13 Nos) pending 
since 2010 during the last four years on fast track basis. 
In the ship repair front, HSL has completed repairs of 13 vessels of different types for 
varied customers like Indian Navy, DCI, SCI, FSI, VPT etc. during the year 2019. The 
shipyard has achieved another milestone by completing the maiden refit of INS 
Astradharini, a torpedo launch and recovery vessel for Indian Navy, two weeks ahead of 
contractual refit schedule.   
The shipyard has also achieved a historical milestone in submarine repair capability by 
completing Normal Refit of INS Sindhuvir submarine on 31 Jan 2020 i.e. nine days 
ahead of the contractual delivery period of 09 Feb 2020. 
Further, the ongoing shipbuilding projects such as 2 No Diving support vessels, 4 nos 
50T BP Tugs for Indian Navy are being executed as per strict contractual time lines. New 
concept of ‘Throughput assignment’ has been introduced in the production processes for 
construction of 2 Nos. Diving Support Vessels (DSV) and 50 T Tugs projects in order to 
meet the contractual timelines. Production activities like plate cutting, block fabrication & 
erection /consolidation are being monitored through “Throughput Analysis”. Block 
fabrication is being done expeditiously for both these projects. The delivery timelines of 
ongoing shipbuilding and ship repair projects are effected due to COVID-19 lockdown 
and no LD to be levied on any projects till full impact of COVID-19 in industrial sector 
particularly in supply chain and international travel is established by independent 
agencies. 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 54) 
The Committee note that the value of exports from HAL in 2019-20 was 114.59 crore 
(upto 31.12.2019). The value of Defence exports in 2018-19 in BEL, BEML, BDL, GRSE, GSL 
and MIDHANI stands at Rs.78.73 crore, Rs. 19 crore, Rs. 66 crore, Rs. 4.55 crore, Rs.14.54 
crore and Rs. 20 crore (expected), respectively. The strategies adopted to enhance BEML’s   
export   business include widening BEML's distributor network in addition to direct sales, brand 
building and visibility through exhibitions and seminars, collaboration with other DPSUs / Indian 
companies, Joint Ventures in India or with local firms in abroad, utilizing Export-Import Bank 
opportunities   through   Indian   Lines   of   Credit   and   exploring   opportunities through 
Chambers of Commerce / Embassies / Defence Attaches. The steps taken by MIDHANI to 
improve exports are processing of National Aerospace and Defence Contractors Accreditation 
Program (NADCAP) certification to target global aerospace market, registration of MIDHANI as 

 
83 
a Vendor in EGYPT Defence Production Unit - Helwan Engineering Industries Company and 
approval of MIDHANI as a global supplier for Turbo Charger Application (one of the important 
components in automobile industry). The steps taken by the Ministry of Defence to promote 
defence exports include setting up of export promotion cell, expansion of role of Defence 
Attaches and creation of export action plans and strategies for all DPSUs and Ordnance 
Factories Board (OFB). The Committee perceive that healthy exports are crucial for accrual of 
economic and strategic benefits to a country. The Committee note the above steps being taken 
to promote exports and recommend that concerted and productive efforts of all the stakeholders 
i.e. the Ministry of Defence, DPSUs, Indian Ordnance Factories, robust industrial production 
base, strong ecosystem of Research & Development with collaboration of premier research 
institutions are required to make our nation a leading exporter of Defence products. For this 
purpose, realistic targets of exports for each DPSU may be fixed by the Ministry for better 
planning and execution. They also desire that details of the value of exports by each DPSU for 
2019-20 may be furnished to the Committee after the end of the financial year. 
 
Reply of the Government  
The export targets committed by DPSUs for 2020-21 are as under: 
S.No. Name of DPSUs Export Target (Rs. in crore) 
1. BEL 350  
2. HAL 200  
3. BDL 156  
4. BEML 125  
5. MIDHANI 20  
6. GRSE  84  
7. GSL 15.8  
8. MDL 100  
 
The value of exports achieved in 2019-20 by DPSUs/ OFB are as under: 
S.No. Name of DPSUs Export Target (Rs. in crore) 
1. BEL 356.74  
2. HAL 211.95  
3. BDL 174.69  
4. BEML 14.5  
5. MIDHANI 10.43  
6. GRSE 1.01  
7. GSL 0.87  
8. MDL 0.11  
 
  

 
84 
Reforms for indigenization and import substitution of products 
Recommendation (Para No. 55) 
The Committee have been apprised of the reforms undertaken by the Ministry of 
Defence for promoting indigenization in the DPSUs which inter alia include simplification of 
Make II procedure which involve prototype development of equipment/ system/ platform or their 
upgrades or their sub-systems/ subassembly/ assemblies/ components, primarily for import 
substitution/innovative solutions, for which no Government funding will be provided for prototype 
development purposes, approval of 2521 items to be taken up for indigenization under Make II 
framework, consideration of ‘suo-motu’ proposals of Capital Acquisition by the Services, setting 
up Indigenization Fund in DPSUs/OFB, insertion of 10 percent points in Memorandum of 
Understanding of Defence PSUs for indigenization and notification of a new policy for 
indigenization of components and spares used in Defence Platforms with the objective to create 
an industry eco-system to enable indigenization of imported components (including alloys and 
special materials) and sub-assemblies for Defence equipment and platforms manufactured in 
India in March 2019. Further, indigenization portal for DPSUs/OFB is being developed and 
study on savings in cost is being taken up by Institute for Defence Studies and Analysis (IDSA), 
Delhi to study savings in cost due to indigenization in the last 5 years in DPSUs/OFB. New 
Policy for indigenization was notified by the Department of Defence Production on 8 March, 
2019 with the objective to create an industry ecosystem. Some of the related issues touching 
the import substitution and ‘Make in India’ initiative have separately been discussed in the 7th 
Report of the Committee relating to Demands for Grants (2020-21). 
 
Reply of the Government 
1. Under Industry funded Make II procedure which involve prototype development of 
equipment/system/platform or their upgrades or their sub systems/ sub-assembly/ 
assemblies/ components including raw materials, primarily for import substitution/innovative 
solutions, 46 projects (including suo-moto proposals) from the Services (Army, Navy and 
Airforce) in total have been accorded ‘In-Principle Approval’ (AIP) by MoD. Out of which 
Project Sanction Order (PSO) has been issued for 9 projects and Request for Proposal 
(RFP) for procurement has been issued for one project. 
 
2. Apart from the above, 2602 items of OFB/DPSUs have been approved for indigenization 
under Make-II framework for OFB and DPSUs. Out of which Expression of Interest (EOI) 
has been issued for 2549 items and development order for 132 items. 
 
3. As regards indigenization policy, the indigenization portal for DPSUs/OFB is under 
preparation and 17920 items have been identified and uploaded on portal by DPSUs/OFB. 
Additionally, they are also updating list of items to be indigenized along with other relevant 
details, on Make in India website of Defence or their links to this website. 
 
4. The provision for setting up of indigenization fund in each DPSU/OFB for providing 
developmental support to MSMEs/Startups/ industry for import substitution has been 
included in Draft Defence Production and Export Promotion Policy (DPEPP)-2020, which is 
under formulation. 

 
85 
5. Institute for Defence Studies and Analysis (IDSA), Delhi has submitted interim report on 
saving in cost pertaining to HAL on 12 Feb, 2020. As per the study, the savings on account 
of indigenization during last 5 years (2014-15 to 2018-19) in respect of HAL works out to Rs. 
319 crore (approx). 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 56) 
The Committee understand that in HAL, the Greenfield facility planned for helicopters 
would cater to the manufacture of indigenously developed Light Utility Helicopter (LUH) 
program which will replace the ageing fleet of Cheetah/ Chetak helicopter produced under 
Transfer of Technology (ToT). Manufacture of state-of theart products like LCA, ALH, LCH, 
LUH, HTT-40 etc within the country helps avoid direct import to the extent of production by HAL 
thus furthering the import substitution efforts. Some of the major systems like Integrated Air 
Command & Control System (IACCS), Weapon Locating Radar (WLR), Cdr TI Sights, Tropo 
Upgrade, Integrated Communication System (ICS), Ground Based Mobile Elint System, Low 
Intensity Conflict Electronic Warfare System (LIC EWS), Electronic Voting Machines (EVM), 
Voter Verifiable Paper Audit Trail (VVPAT) etc., are indigenously designed & manufactured by 
BEL. Indigenization of products like Konkurs-M, Invar, Milan-2T has been achieved by BDL upto 
97%, 78.6% and 71% respectively. Post modernisation of infrastructure in 2013, GRSE can 
undertake construction of 20 Nos. of ships (08 Large ships and 12 small ships) concurrently. On 
completion of ongoing infrastructure augmentation Plan for Mine Counter Measure Vessel 
(MCMV), GSL will have the capability to build high technology GRP hull MCMVs indigenously 
with help of foreign technology provider. The Submarine Launch Facility will facilitate launching 
of Submarines directly independent of availability of deep dry dock and MDL shall not be 
dependent on Naval Dockyard or Dry Docks available with Mumbai Port Trust. 
Reply of the Government 
1.  The Light Utility Helicopter (LUH) designed and developed by HAL has attained IOC on 
7th Feb 2020.  This helicopter is planned to be manufactured in the Greenfield facility being set 
up at Tumakuru and an investment of Rs 476.37 crores is sanctioned by HAL Board. HAL has 
successfully flown the LUH from this facility on 29th December, 2018 and also met the timeline 
of 2018 given by the Hon’ble Prime Minister of India during foundation stone laying ceremony at 
Tumakuru on 3rd January, 2016.  However this facility can be made operational and gainfully 
utilised only if manufacturing orders is sufficient quantity is available with HAL. 
2. The state-of-the-art products like LCA, ALH, LCH, LUH, HTT-40 etc being the 
indigenously designed and developed platforms, if inducted in greater numbers would help 
avoid direct import to the extent of production by HAL, furthering the import substitution efforts.  
While LCA and ALH are in production, LCH and LUH have attained operational clearance and 
are awaiting order for production deliveries. For LCA and LCH, order for 83 nos and 15 nos 
respectively are under process, while ordering activities are progressing towards certification 
with the platform having demonstrated compliance to all PSQR requirements including stall and 
spin tests.  Another point worth mentioning is that, if the indigenous platforms are being 
inducted in greater numbers, it brings in economy of scale for Indian private defence 
manufacturers also, as currently over 30% of the HAL manhours are being sourced through 
outsource partners. As HAL is aiming at becoming principle integrator, private industries will 
have better scope to increase their participation in the defence manufacturing ecosystem in the 

 
86 
country, if orders for platform manufacturing in greater numbers are placed on HAL. This 
increased participation of the Indian private industry sector in defence production will in turn 
support ‘Make in India’ through the growth of the defence manufacturing ecosystem in the 
country. 
Recommendation (Para No. 57) 
 
The Committee have been given to understand that it is estimated that Defence PSUs will 
reduce the import bill more than Rs. 15,000 crore by 2022 through indigenization of products 
and processes. Taking into account the fact that India is the second largest importer for 
Defence items in the world, the Committee recommend that urgent and concerted efforts for 
using our indigenous technology, knowledge and skill should be made by the Ministry and the 
DPSUs to cater to maximum requirements of our Defence Forces. 
Reply of the Government  
Department of Defence Production has taken several initiatives to reduce the import of Defence 
items. Some of the initiatives are enumerated as under: 
 Indigenization: Policy for Indigenization was notified on by Department of Defence 
Production on 08 March, 2019, with the objective to create an industry ecosystem. It 
is estimated that Defence PSUs will reduce the import bill through indigenization of 
products and processes. 
 
 Development of Indigenization Portal: DPSUs/OFB are uploading the data on the 
link provided. The proposed Indigenization portal will be a centralized one in which 
DPSUs/OFB and other stakeholders will be showcasing their imported items to be 
indigenized. Vendor will become aware of the above items and they can in turn, show 
their interest in those items where they have capability to manufacture.  
 
 Study on savings in cost – IDSA, Delhi is studying savings in cost due to 
indigenization in the last 5 years in DPSUs/OFB. Final report submitted in Jan 2020. 
 
 Implementation of Make-II – The Make-II framework for implementation by 
DPSUs/OFB was notified on 11.02.2019. DPSUs/OFB have identified approx. 2500 
items under Make-II. These items are at various stages of development process.  
 
 Long Term Orders -“Framework for placing Long Term Orders by DPSUs” has been 
approved on 04 Nov 2019. Under this Framework, the procuring organization may 
aggregate demand of the item for a long period of upto 10 years, in cases where it 
finds challenges in indigenization. 
 
 Public Procurement Order: 127 items have been notified under this order, thereby 
giving preference to domestic manufacturers in procurement of these items. 
 
 
 IGA With Russia for Indigenous Manufacturing of Spares: An Inter-Governmental 
Agreement (IGA) on “Joint manufacturing of Spares, Components, Aggregates and 

 
87 
other materiel related to Russian/ Soviet origin Arms and Defence Equipment” was 
signed during the 20th India-Russia Bilateral Summit held at Vladivostok on 4th Sept. 
2019. The objective of the IGA is to enhance the After Sales Support of Russian 
origin equipment currently in service in Indian Armed Forces through partnership of 
Russian OEMs with the Indian industry under the framework of “Make in India” 
initiative.  First list of spares proposed to be manufactured in India has been received 
from IAF, Indian Army, Indian Navy, OFB and HAL. The list comprising of nearly 1100 
items has been shared with the Russian Side.  
 
 Inclusion of import reduction as parameter in MoUs of Defence PSUs. 
 
 Around 700 items, manufactured by DPSUs and OFB, under various categories have 
been identified for inclusion in the Negative list of import for Defence items. 
 
Further, Defence PSUs-wise reply is as under: 
HAL: HAL has adopted multifarious approach for reducing dependence on import of Defence 
equipment, which includes indigenous design and development, in-country manufacture 
under licence from OEMs, mid-life upgrade of existing platforms, MRO of available 
platforms and indigenization of imported systems and LRUs wherever feasible have 
been taken up by HAL ever since inception. 
HAL’s product profile includes Su-30 MKI, LCA Tejas, Dornier Do-228, Hawk, Upgraded 
Hawk-i, Basic Trainer Aircraft HTT-40, ALH Dhruv, Light Combat Helicopter (LCH) and 
Light Utility Helicopter (LUH). These aircraft/ helicopters are required by the Indian 
Armed Forces for modernisation and strengthening of their fleet.  
Further, in order to reduce the import bill through indigenization of products and 
processes, there is a need to ensure timely placement of orders and induction of 
indigenous platforms manufactured and developed by HAL, under “Make in India”.  
Indigenisation is an ongoing activity at the HAL for providing support to manufacturing as 
well as Maintenance, Repair and Overhaul (MRO) services for all projects throughout 
their service life. To ensure use of Make in India components, equipment and services 
for fostering self-reliance and to manage obsolescence for sustenance of fleets, HAL 
continuously undertakes indigenisation of various items of foreign origin fitted on HAL 
platforms to reduce dependence on imports. Every year HAL indigenizes sizeable no. of 
imported items with considerable Foreign Exchange (FE) savings through its extant 
procedure. During 2019-20, HAL has indigenized around 1500 items. 
In compliance of the framework promulgated by MoD, HAL has recently implemented the 
Make-II (Industry Funded) procedure with assured order quantity after successful 
development of items through private vendors. In this regard, HAL has identified more 
than 2000 items for indigenisation under Make-II and the list of items is hosted in HAL 
website along with the details of the concerned nodal officers of the respective HAL 
Divisions. The EOIs for these items will be issued in a phased manner over the next four 
years. 

 
88 
BEL: Import bill reduction can be achieved through self-reliance in terms of manufacturing as 
well as design & development within the country. Following steps are being taken in BEL 
to enhance indigenisation. BEL has identified 360 items for indigenisation under Make-II 
Manufacturing: BEL is investing in Industry 4.0 technologies in areas of Manufacturing, 
Supply Chain and other broader digital transformation initiatives with specific, focused 
technology that span the entire organisation. The upcoming manufacturing Plants of BEL 
i.e. ‘Defence Systems Integration Complex’ at Palasamudram, Advanced EO and IIR 
seeker manufacturing facility at Nimmaluru and Land based EW Systems at 
Ibrahimpatnam and future plants will leverage the specific technologies of Industry 4.0.  
It is planned to incorporate Industry 4.0 Standards in the new Unit being established, in 
discussion with the Industrial Consultant being selected. This will include surveillance and 
remote monitoring of critical processes, automation & control of production (particularly 
inspection & testing) processes where feasible, automatic collection & compilation of 
process data, Data analysis for continual process improvements, etc. This is expected to 
be operational by the year 2022-23. BEL can quickly diversify into new technology 
segments through necessary partnerships and scale up manufacturing. e.g., BEL has 
manufactured and supplied 8153 nos. ventilators to several State Government.  
R&D: With an aim to reduce the need for foreign ToT based products (which involve 
heavy imports), BEL will continue to take the following steps towards design & 
development of products indigenously: 
o R&D investment of 8%-10% of the turnover every year. Last 5 years data: 
2015-16 2016-17 2017-18 2018-19 2019-20 
9% 9% 10% 9% 8%Appx. (Prelim.) 
 
o Collaborations with National Labs (e.g., DRDO), academia and societies:  
Radars Naval 
systems 
Missile 
Systems Comm. EO & 
Lasers Encryption Futuristic 
technologies 
LRDE NSTL, 
NPOL 
RCI, 
DRDL 
DEAL, 
DRDL IRDE CAIR, SETS 
IITs (Kanpur, 
Kharagpur, Hyderabad, 
Roorkee, IIIT-Jabalpur, 
IISc 
 
o Development of 20 (or more) new products every year. Last 5 years data: 
2015-16 2016-17 2017-18 2018-19 2019-20 
15 20 23 21 22 
 
o Strengthening the two Central Research Labs (CRL), BEL Software Technology Centre 
(BSTC) and  Product Development & Innovation Centre (PD&IC) for development of cutting 
edge futuristic and critical (cost extensive) technology Modules through: 
 CRL, 
Bengaluru 
CRL, 
Ghaziabad BSTC PD&IC 
Current 
Manpower 260 187 249 269 

 
89 
 
o Empanelment of collaborative partners: 
 
Design 
Service 
Providers 
Production 
Service 
Providers 
R&D 
Consultants 
R&D Solution 
Providers 
Empanelment  
in 2019-20 165 38 35 30 
 
BEML: BEML has planned to set up ‘Make in India Parks’ by attracting potential partners with 
niche technology and consequently minimize import dependency while creating export 
opportunities. This will not only facilitate indigenization of complex aggregates but will 
also create employment opportunities.  
o Indigenisation of cabin of High Mobility Vehicles through ToT 
o Indigenous manufacture of Defence Spares through JV. 
o Indigenous manufacture of propulsions for Metro Cars / EMUs through JV. 
 
BEML is also working towards 'ZERO IMPORT' policy of the Government. BEML has 
published ‘Expression of Interest’ for indigenous development of 1269 imported items 
under Make-II procedure. Development POs have already been placed for 139 items. In 
line with MoD guidelines, Top-20 imported items have been identified for Indigenization 
out of which 7 items have been indigenized during 2019-20. To further enhance 
indigenisation, BEML has invited ‘Expression of Interest’ for manufacturing and 
technology partnerships with reputed global OEMs looking to establish and/ or expand 
their supply chains/ manufacturing base in India for the manufacture of various goods 
and/or service business in the areas of Defence & Aerospace, Rail & Metro, Mining & 
Construction, Engines and aggregates with the overarching objective of “Aatma Nirbhar 
Bharat”. 
In line with Vision 2022 document, BEML since 2018-19 has indigenized to the tune of 
Rs. 270 crore consisting of parts, aggregates & import substitution products such as 
design & development of high end dumpers & excavators. Plans are already put in place 
for achieving higher Indigenisation and saving of FE outgo. 
 
BDL: BDL has taken up 6% reduction in import of items during 2020-21 in MoU. MoU is yet to 
be finalised. BDL has identified 11 items for indigenisation under Make-II 
BDL has already indigenized products like Konkurs-M, Invar and Milan 2T ATGM and 
achieved 97%, 78.6% and 71% respectively. In addition, BDL has also achieved 86% 
and 91% on VARUNASTRA - Heavy Weigh Torpedo and TAL - Light Weight Torpedo 
respectively. 
MIDHANI: MIDHANI has developed several important materials which include special steels, 
super alloys and titanium alloys for strategic application like Defence, Space and 
Energy. The indigenous development of these materials has reduced the 

 
90 
dependency of India on import from other nations. Some of the major indigenous 
efforts are mentioned below. 
 
a) High-pressure compressor disc to HAL for Adour engine of Jaguar Aircraft  
 
b) Titanium sea water filters and high-pressure valves for nuclear submarine. 
 
c) Composite Armour for Mi 17 helicopter.  
 
d) Light weight body Armour product based on Bhabha Kavach 
 
e) High temperature super alloys Superni 617, Superni 740, Superfer 800L required 
for Advanced Ultra Supercritical Power Plants to be built in India.   
 
Dependency on import can be further mitigated if use of import substitute products 
manufactured by MIDHANI is made mandatory for defence products / equipments 
manufactured in India. DPSU may be given price preference in materials so that 
more thrust is given towards indigenisation of defence product / equipment. 
MIDHANI has identified 10 items for indigenisation under Make-II 
 
MDL: Indigenisation efforts by MDL are as under- 
a) MDL has set-up a dedicated Department of Indigenisation in Oct 2015 to boost and 
strengthen the indigenisation effort and to provide focused impetus to the Hon’ble 
Prime Minister’s vision of “Make-in-India”. 
b) MDL has identified 1 item for indigenisation under Make-II 
c) Since setting up of a dedicated Indigenisation Department, items as listed below have 
been indigenised till date. The expected cost savings in FE to the exchequer, for the 
ongoing projects would work out to Rs. 456 Crores if procured, from these vendors as 
listed below: - 
 
S  
No 
Item/ 
Equipment 
Earlier Source of 
Import 
Now Indigenised 
by 
Expected Cost 
Saving in FE          
(for 4-P15B & 
7-P17A Ships)                        
1. SICADS M/s Smith, Germany. M/S L&T, SEC 
Bengaluru & DRDE, 
Gwalior 
17  Crore 
2. Bridge Window 
Glass 
M/s Saint Gobain, 
Spain. 
M/S Jeet&Jeet Glass 
Jaipur 
22  Crore 
3. MCT Glands M/s Roxtec, Sweden M/S Wallmax, Noida, 
Delhi 
11  Crore 
4. Remote 
Controlled 
Valves 
 
Thompson Valves, 
UK. 
M/S DelValves, 
Satara, Pune 
15  Crore 

 
91 
5. Chladon Gas 
(for Magazine 
Fire Fighting 
System)  
M/s ROE, Russia M/s United 
Technologies, 
Gurugaon. 
M/s EKC, Mumbai. 
99 Crore 
 
6. Ref Plants for 
Submarines 
M/s SNORI, France M/s ACCEL, 
Ahmadabad 
1.5 Crore  
7. Battery 
monitoring 
System for 
Submarines 
M/s Naval Group, 
France 
M/s Precision Power 2.5 Crore 
8. Static 
Frequency 
Converter for 
Submarines 
M/s Naval Group, 
France 
M/s Precision Power 1.1 Crore 
9. Various HVAC 
items for Ships 
 
M/s Axima, France M/s SAF,  
M/s Del Valve, 
M/s Chamunda 
Valve 
14.9 Crore 
 Total Expected FE Savings 184  Crore 
 
 
d) Moreover, the various items/equipment planned to be indigenised/being indigenised 
are as follows:  
(a) Magazine Fire Fighting System along with CFEES, DRDO. 
(b) RSS Screens for Ships. 
(c) Life Raft for Submarines. 
(d) PolyChloroprene Rubber Band/ Continuity Straps for submarines. 
(e) Battery loading trolley for SSK Submarines. 
e) Although Indigenisation Dept.  is taking all out measure on selective basis to 
indigenisethe import equipments/ items/spares, reduction of import bill on substantial 
basis may be attained if technical specifications of requirements is determined at 
formulation stage by Customer, IN to promote indigeneous sourcing. Vendors dealing 
with MDL are being outreached to take advantage of Make in India policy towards 
promoting indigenisation either by developing their own innovative technological 
products or by executing TOT with foreign partners. 
 
GRSE: GRSE has identified items for development under indigenisation for next five years. 
GRSE has identified 1 item for indigenisation under Make-II. 
 
  

 
92 
The extract of Plan is appended below- 
Till 15 Aug 
2022 
1-Year 
2019-20 
2-Year 
2020-21 
3-Year 
2021-22 
4-Year 
2022-23 
5-Year 
2023-24 
8 Nos.  Helo 
connecting  
gear for 
Rail less 
Helo 
traversing 
system for 
Advanced 
Light 
Helicopter 
 
Pole Mast 
of 
composite 
material 
for Project 
– P28 
10T 
Telescopic 
Deck Crane 
 
Assault 
Bridge 
 
Double 
Lane 
Portable 
Steel 
Bridge 
Data Acquisition 
and Processing 
System(DAPS)  
 
 
HP Air Fittings 
& Reducing 
Station 
 
Magazine Fire 
Fighting System 
for SVL  
Window Wiper  
 
Telescopic Helo 
Hangar 
 
Magazine Fire 
Fighting System 
for ASW (SWC) 
 
 
GSL: As part of efforts towards indigenization in the defence production, GSL has indigenously 
developed several designs of cost effective Patrol Vessels and have delivered them to 
the Indian Navy and Indian Coast Guard. Indigenously developed designs of Patrol 
Vessels have saved the country considerable amount of foreign exchange by avoiding 
import of ships / designs and have given an impetus to the country’s efforts towards self-
reliance in ship design. A large number of materials / equipment for the ships built by 
GSL are sourced from indigenous vendors and all out efforts are being made to increase 
the same. GSL has identified 1 item for indigenisation under Make-II 
GSL has taken following measures to reduce import content for Shipbuilding projects: 
 
(i) GSL promulgated Make in India (Outsourcing, Long Term Procurement & Vendor 
Development and Indigenization) Policy in October, 2015 to enhance the local 
content/indigenization through increased vendor / manufacturing base in Defence 
Shipbuilding Sector. Assurance of Orders to vendors successfully developing import 
substitute. 
 
(ii) Purchase Preference Clause:GSL implemented Preference to Make in India 2017 
and accordingly arranged Purchase Preference to Local Indian Manufacturers over 
Foreign Manufacturers. GSL aligned with MoD notifications for the items reserved for 
indigenization for surface ships in line with preference to Make in India Policy. 
Further, GSL is in the process of implementing the revise PPP Order 2017 dated 
04.06.2020. 
 

 
93 
(iii) Make – II Procedure: GSL also introduced Make – II Procedure in May 2019 to 
encourage indigenous design, development and manufacture (IDDM) of defence 
equipment/ weapon systems as per MoD Office Order dated Feb 2019. 
 
(iv) Framework for Placing Long Term Orders for Indigenization: GSL adopted 
framework for Placing Long Term Orders for Indigenization in line with MoD letter 
dated 15.11.2019.  
 
(v) Proactive steps are being taken by the Company for involvement of local industries 
for having maximum indigenous content in projects to meet the objective of self 
reliance.  
 
(vi) Modernisation of Yard. On completion of Modernisation plan, GSL will have the 
capability to build high technology Glass-Fibre Reinforced Plastic (GRP) vessels 
indigenously with the help of foreign technology provider.  
 
(vii) Award of Project 1135.6. GSL has signed contract on 25 Jan 2019 for indigenous 
construction of 02 follow-on ships of Teg class (P 1135.6) for Indian Navy. Many 
major items have been identified for indigenisation in the project. It is likely to 
achieve 60-70% Indigenization content, which will be significant improvement 
against 02 ships being imported from Russia. With such large indigenous content, 
the dependency of Russian firms for spares and services support would reduce 
drastically. 
 
(viii) Mine Counter Measure Vessel (MCMV). GSL has been nominated for 
construction of MCMVs for the Indian Navy with hull made of composite material. 
Technology absorption in this process will provide self reliance in this rare 
technology and elevate GSL as one of the few shipyards in the world capable of 
making state-of-the-art MCMVs with composite material for requirements of 
defence forces. 
 
HSL: Indigenisation is being promoted by HSL by avoiding imported equipment and sourcing 
equipment / machineries from domestic vendors wherever feasible and permitted. 
Indigenous content as a percentage of VoP achieved during the last 5 years is tabulated 
below. 
Year VoP 
(Rs crore) 
Value of imported materials consumed 
during the year (Rs crore) 
Indigenous content 
as a % of VoP 
(1) (2) (3) (4) = [(2)-(3)/(2)]*100  
2014-15 294.16 99.52 66.17 
2015-16 593.29 159.63 73.09 
2016-17 629.05 65.18 89.64 
2017-18 644.78 72.84 88.70 
2018-19 594.91 92.04 84.53 
2019-20 
(Prov.) 563.33 110.00 80.47 

 
94 
The list of items being imported and 5 year Indigenisation Plan through import substitution / 
MAKE II (tabulated below) has been prepared. 
S No. Year Methodology Item / Equipment Amount  
(Rs crore) 
1 2019-20  Import 
Substitution 
Dynamic Positioning System 7.00 
2 2020-21  MAKE-II Pneumatic Quick Closing 
valves 0.20 
3 2021-22  MAKE-II Flight Deck safety net 
system 2.00 
4 2022-23  MAKE-II Air vent hoods of NW300 & 
above sizes 0.15 
5 2023-24  Import 
Substitution 
Fire class / Gas tight doors 1.00 
Further, the items at S.No. 2 & 3 above has been taken up with Indian Navy /Directorate of 
Indigenisation.  Draft technical specification for the two items have been prepared and 
being refined as user acceptance trials of the two items (procured from foreign OEMs) 
installed on a ship due for delivery in 2020 are in progress and is likely to be completed by 
mid-2020. The technical observations made by Indian Navy user acceptance team during 
the trials are being examined and incorporated into the technical requirements that would 
form part of the EoI. The EoI is expected to be issued in the month of Aug 2020 depending 
upon the inputs required from vendors which is delayed due to COVID issues. 
Further, following efforts have been made by HSL in order to harmonize Defence 
Procurements with the ‘Make in India’ initiative.  
(a) Provisions contained in ‘Public Procurement (Preference to Make in India), order 
2017’, issued by DPIIT, Ministry of Commerce and Industry, have been incorporated in 
Purchase Manual for implementation. 
(b) MAKE-II Procedure has been incorporated in the Purchase Manual in order to 
indigenize imported items through development of prototype. 
(c) Relaxation of norms (prior experience and prior turnover) for MSMEs and start-ups in 
all public procurements, subject to meeting quality and technical specifications. 
(d) Alignment to payment terms i.e; provision of advance payments to MSMEs. 
(e) Deemed registration of vendors (Vendors registered in other Defence PSUs are to be 
considered as deemed Registered). 
(f) Efforts are being made to identify Tier-I & Tier-II Vendors so as to facilitate 
development of import substitutes. 
(g) ‘Make in India’ Portal has been created in the HSL Website to attract vendors. The 
contact details of Nodal Officer have been provided in the portal. The list of items 

 
95 
which are hitherto being imported are displayed on the website with an intent to 
Indigenise. 
(h) With a view to familiarize the Vendor, a special link ‘Information to Vendors’ has also 
been incorporated in the HSL portal, which provides information like Guidelines for 
vendor registration, commercial questionnaire for indigenous and foreign suppliers, 
HSL Standard business  terms & conditions, List of items imported to be Indigenised, 
materials, equipment & works, HSL Manual on procurement of materials and services, 
MSMEs – List of items reserved for purchase from small scale industries, Vendor 
registration form – Supplier ,Vendor registration Form- Contractor etc. 
(i) A direct link to the ‘Make in India’ Page of GoI (http://www.makeinindia.com)   has also 
been provided in the portal. 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 58) 
The Committee, during their deliberation on DFG 2020-21, had raised the issue of 
avaiablity of level playing field at par with the DPSU, to other private indigenous players 
participating in defence production. The Secretary, Defence Production, appraised the 
Committee in this regard that no favourable treatment is meted out to the DPSUs and they enter 
the competitive bidding for orders. The Committee are please to note that Indian Ordnance 
factories and three DPSUs i.e HAL, BEL and BDL are amongst the world’s top 100 Defence 
Production industries. Therefore, they recommend that to promote feeling of competitiveness 
and efficient functioning amonst indigenous Defence Production Sector, the information 
regarding achievement of our Indian DPSUs and allied organizations should be popularised 
through media and bulletins. 
Reply of the Government  
The achievements of the DPSUs/OFB for 2019-20 have been furnished to Directorate of 
Public Relations, MoD for conveying the same to Ministry of Information and Broadcasting for 
publishing brouchures, booklets and other audio visual publicity material. Further, Annual 
Report of Ministry of Defence including achievements of Department of Defence Production is 
published every year. In addition, the achievements of DPSUs/OFB are widely published in 
International Defence Events like Defexpo and Aero India.  
Budgetary Allocations 
Recommendation (Para No 60) 
The Canteen Stores Department (CSD), a Government of India Undertaking under the 
Union Ministry of Defence, is committed to welfare of troops of the Army, Navy and Air Force 
and their families, through easy access to quality products of daily use at less than market 
prices. The committee note that against the projection of Rs.22,240.10 crore in BE 2020-21, it 
has been allocated Rs. 20,100.38 crore, leaving a gap of Rs. 2139.72 crore. They have also 
been apprised that 50 percent of the Trade Surplus generated by the Canteen Stores 
Department goes to Consolidated Fund of India. From the deliberation on the Demands for 
Grants 2020-21, the Committee find that the additional funds are required to support CSD in 
meeting the contractual obligation of current Financial Year, automation of CSD to ensure full 

 
96 
spectrum visibility in supply chain management and accounting/payments, modernization of 
Existing Warehouses for which Rs. 138 crore have been projected to the Ministry of Defence 
and making up of critical shortfall of manpower. The Committee, therefore, recommend that the 
Ministry may consider making CSD a subordinate organization under the Ministry of Defence 
with powers to raise funds if and when required. Further, as an interim measure, one time grant 
may be given to CSD to sustain its operations and subsequently it could become a self-
sustaining entity. The benefits like lower rate of GST should continue with the new entity also. 
Any surplus generated by the CSD could be distributed as per the current procedure in place. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 HO CSD had forwarded Budgetary Estimate (BE) of RS. 22240.10 crore for the FY 2020-
21. However, the actual funds allocation at BE stage is to the tune of Rs. 20100.38 Cr. 
Requirement of additional funds will be projected at RE stage in the Current Financial Year. 
Similarly, in the Capital Head (Land and Buildings), requirement of additional funds shall also be 
projected at RE stage of FY 2020-21. 
 With regard to recommendation to make CSD a subordinate organization under Ministry 
of Defence with powers to raise funds as and if required, shall be examined by this Ministry 
from feasibility angle, financial viability and self financing system for CSD, in consultation with 
all the stakeholders. However, as of now, CSD is an attached department under Ministry of 
Defence and the requirement of funds of CSD is being met out of Defence Services Estimates. 
Requirement of additional funds based on the pace of expenditure and requirements is being 
regularly projected to Ministry of Finance. 
Online presence of CSD 
Recommendation (Para No. 61) 
The Committee have leant that following efforts are being made by the Ministry for 
commencing online services of CSD: 
 Process underway with regard to automation of CSD; 
 Preparation of Request for Proposal and scope of work likely to be completed by 
mid-March 2020; 
 Development Phase (linking of Two major Unit Run Canteens with Depots at 
Mumbai and Delhi by end September, 2020; and  
 Feasibility of E-Commerce/Online Services will be looked into post automation. 
 The General Manager, CSD, in his oral deposition, apprised the Committee that the 
online shopping will be having a mix of both home delivery as well as delivery to the depots. 
There are a few areas where home delivery is not feasible such as Jammu and Kashmir, 3 
Corps, 4 Corps, 15 Corps and 16 Corps and there are certain restrictions in the Cantonment 
areas. He assured the Committee that 60 per cent clientele i.e. the veterans will be satisfied the 
moment online automation happens by September or October. 
 

 
97 
 While appreciating the efforts made so far, the committee still feel that the CSD should 
intensify its efforts to meet the timelines of commencing online automation by September or 
October of this year and ensure foolproof delivery mechanism to the Ex-Servicemen. 
Reply of the Government 
 As a concept, online sale and home delivery in this information age is most desirable and 
it would lead to immense satisfaction of the end users. The details of progress of automation 
are as under:- 
(a) Process Underway With Regard to Automation of CSD  Concerted efforts are 
on for timely completion of CSD automation and activities are being planned/ 
executed to achieve the same. 
(b) Automation of CSD has been planned with a view to extending online facility to the 
CSD beneficiaries across India. Accordingly, automation exercise is actively under 
way to:-  
(i) Facilitate online sale of ‘Against Firm Demand (AFD)’ items. 
(ii) Create an e-commerce platform to ensure that supplies reach the 
beneficiaries at their door step. 
(iii) Provide unhindered online access to CSD beneficiaries. 
 
(c) Automation exercise will also aim at bringing complete automation in other areas of 
logistic/administrative establishment pertaining to CSD Head Office as well to bring 
in more transparency and better inventory management, besides reducing process 
time in day to day functioning.  
 
(d) The progress of the project is being continuously reviewed vigorously at regular 
intervals at the highest level in MoD. 
 
Manpower strength  
Recommendation (Para No 62) 
During the discussion on DFG 2020-21, the issue of manpower shortage in CSD was 
brought up. The General Manager, CSD, in this regard, submitted that the Data Entry Operators 
have been hired through a proper outsourcing procedure, however, permanency in the arena of 
invoicing, accounting and Financial Department in the depots is desired. There is attrition of 
staff who have joined through the State Service Commission and recruitment of new staff takes 
its own time. The Ex-Army personnel are also employed through SSC. It was further submitted 
that more manpower will not be required once the automation of CSD starts. 
 The Committee opined that ad hoc mechanism of hiring the staff through outsourcing is 
not a long term solution for shortage of manpower in CSD. Therefore, they recommend that the 
Ministry should put in systemic efforts to recruit permanent staff for CSD to improve efficiency of 
the organization. The Committee also suggests that the surplus staff of other Departments 
which falls under the purview of the Ministry of Defence should also be suitably utilized in 
Canteen Stores Department.  

 
98 
Reply of the Government 
Manpower shortage remains an issue though all out efforts are being made to fill up the 
deficiencies in a gradual manner to prevent stagnation in the future. The recommendation of the 
Committee regarding readjustment of surplus manpower of other Departments of MoD is also 
being explored, particularly in Group ‘C’ vacancies. 
 
Qualitative Requirements for opening Unit Run Canteen in an area  
Recommendation (Para No 63) 
The Committee note that the Qualitative requirements for opening a new Unit Run 
Canteen (URC) in an area include minimum posted strength of 100 personnel of the 
combatants i.e. serving personnel whether Army, Navy, Air Force, Assam Rifles etc. or 5000 
Ex-Servicemen. However, being just a guideline, this criteria is not being strictly followed. 
Further, demands of the Forces and Ex-Servicemen are being met though mobile canteens or 
opening new canteens. The Committee, in this regard, would like to be apprised of the details of 
the proposals of opening new canteens received by the CSD in the last three years and action 
taken thereupon within one month of the presentation of this Report. They would also be 
intimated of the details of the mobile canteens and the areas and products serviced by them. 
Reply of the Government 
i) Qualitative requirements for opening Unit Run Canteen (URC). The criteria for opening a new 
Unit Run Canteen/Ex serviceman canteen has been laid down in AO 19/2003/QMG.  The 
following criteria needs to be met for opening of new Unit Run Canteen/Ex Serviceman 
Canteen:- 
(a) A Unit should have on its posted strength a minimum of 100 personnel. 
(b) For opening Ex Serviceman Canteen, there should be a dependency of at least 5000 
Ex Serviceman. 
ii) Procedure.  For opening a new URC/Ex Serviceman Canteen a unit forwards a statement of 
case duly recommended by Command HQs to Canteen Service Directorate. Based on 
recommendation of Command HQs to Canteen Service Directorate gives approval for opening 
of new URCs.  It is clarified that, no approval has been given by Canteen Service Directorate for 
opening URCs where the mandated strength has not been met.  The details of URCs 
sanctioned in last three years is at Annexure-IX.   
iii) Mobile Canteen.  Mobile Canteens are operated as welfare measure for Ex- Serviceman 
residing in far flung areas on requirement basis.  These are not independent entities but 
operated from the stores & manpower of existing URC.  Mobile Canteens are permitted under 
strict guidelines as per policy as laid down by Canteen Service Directorate letter No. 
95357/Q/DDGCS/Policy dated 28th Sept 2018 (copy attached at Appx-X).  Since, it is a welfare 
initiative based on the felt need of the ESM, they are under arrangements of the Local Military 
Authority.  Hence, no details are available. 

 
99 


 
100 


 
101 


 
102 
  


 
103 
Use of technology  
Recommendation (Para No. 64) 
The Committee, during the deliberations, were appreciative of increasing use of various 
modes of digital payments. However, the Committee recommend that extensive use of 
technology such as central warehousing system for Depots and Unit Run Canteens and 
promotion of digital transaction should be undertaken by the CSD to modernize its retailing 
arrangements. 
 The Committee are mindful of the fact that this is an evolving era where use of 
technology is at its peak. There is no field of supply chain management like the CSD where the 
use of technology is of lower importance. As such CSDs should also keep themselves abreast 
with the evolving international trends in such transactions and come out with a rendition to 
support their services to our highly esteemed Armed Forces. 
Reply of the Government 
While technology is already being used in the form of Integrated Canteen Stores 
Department System (ICSDS) for warehousing in depots and Canteen Inventory Management 
System (CIMS) in URCs, the present scope of automation includes integrating the supply chain 
operations and inventory management system of HO  and depots along with additional platform 
of E-commerce (Home Delivery) . It may be noted that digital transactions are already taking 
place both at URCs by use of credit/debit cards by beneficiaries, and through NEFT/RTGS at 
depots and HO. It is also hoped that the automation exercise when implemented, will bring in 
optimum use of technology in CSD setup. 
 All out efforts are being made to harness the technology to further streamline CSD 
operations to bring in greater transparency, efficient inventory management to ensure efficient 
CSD operations to meet the aspirations of 45 lakhs beneficiaries. 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 65) 
 The Committee learn that Department of Ex-servicemen Welfare (ESW) formulates 
various policies and programmes for the welfare and resettlement of ESM in the country. This 
Department has two Divisions viz, the resettlement Division and the Pension Division and has 3 
attached offices namely Secretariat of Kendriya Sainik Board (KSB), Directorate General of 
Resettlement (DGR) and Ex-Servicemen Contributory Health Scheme (ECHS) Organisation. 
Welfare of the Ex-Servicemen and their dependents is the joint responsibility of the Centre and 
the States/UTs. Like the Kendriya Sainik Board at the Centre, the Rajya / Zila Sainik Boards are 
responsible for policy formulation and implementation of resettlement and welfare schemes for 
Ex-Servicemen, widows and their dependents residing in their respective States/ UTs/ Districts. 
There are 33 Rajya Sainik Boards and 403 Zila Sainik Boards in the country to assist the 
Central Government in this regard. 
 
Reply of the Government 
The observations of the Committee are a matter of fact, hence no comments are offered. 
 

 
104 
Recommendation (Para No. 66) 
 During the course of examination of the Demands for grants 2020-21, the Secretary, 
Kendriya Sainik Board highlighted the need for allocation of additional funds to KSB. He also 
submitted that lack of funds would lead to difficulties in payments for the salary of the 
employees of the Rajya Sainik Boards, Sainik Rest Houses, etc. The additional funds are also 
required for Armed Forces Flag Day and various welfare schemes. The Committee, in this 
regard recommend that funds allocated to KSB should be accordingly increased at Revised 
Estimates stage in order to ensure that no financial liabilities are pending and various welfare 
activities of Ex-Servicemen, widows and their dependents are unhampered. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 DESW has requested to increase the budgetary allocation at RE stage for  FY 2020-21 
to Rs 214.21 Crore under DSE budget as  per the following details:- 
 Amount in Rs crore 
S No. Major Items/heads BE 2020-21 
Allotted 
RE 2020-21 
projected 
1 Nepal Bhartiya Gorkha Sainik Board 
(NBGSB) Estt charges 
1.19 3.14 
2 Kendriya SainikBoard (KSB) Estt 
charges 
0.32 0.40 
3 Central share  towards RSBs/ZSBs 0.00 185.00 
4 AFFDF yearly contribution 
(Sanctioned amount) 
25.75 25.75 
 Total (1 to 4) 27.26 214.21 
 
 Apart from this, efforts are also being made to seek one time contribution of Rs 310.00 
crore to Armed Forces Flag Day Fund (AFFDF) from Army Budget to clear the backlog cases of 
education, marriage grant and other welfare schemes. 
Recommendation (Para No. 67) 
 During the deposition before the Committee, the Secretary, KSB also submitted that the 
meeting of the Rajya Sainik Boards in some of the States in the South Zone has not been held 
in the last 10 years. In this regard, the Committee recommend that the Ministry should seriously 
review the reasons for regular meetings of the Kendriya and Rajya Sainik Boards not being held 
and device appropriate action plan in this regard and apprise the Committee accordingly. 
Reply of the Government 
 KSB has issued necessary directions to all State/UTs for holding annual meeting of 
Rajya Sainik Boards at State level in the years 2017, 2018 and 2019. This was also  discussed 
during  the recent meeting of  South Zone held in Karnataka on 22-23 Jan 2020 under the 
Chairpersonship of  Secretary (ESW). Secretary (ESW) gave directions  to States to ensure 
regular conduct of meetings of Rajya Sainik Board and State Management Committee. Specific 
instructions have been issued to Andhra Pradesh and Karnataka where meetings of RSBs have 

 
105 
not been held in the last 10 years. DESW is further reviewing the matter in consultation with 
RSBs and taking necessary measures for regular holding of meetings of RSBs. 
 
Recommendation (Para No.68) 
 The Committee note that various opportunities/schemes are available for the retired 
Officers and Personnel Below Officers Rank (PBOR) for their resettlement which include 
reservation in Central/State Government Ministries/Departments, Public Sector Banks/Financial 
Institutions and Central Public Sector Undertakings. Directorate General Resettlement (DGR) 
also sponsors Ex-Servicemen (Officers) to various Government organizations, Public Sector 
Undertakings, Corporate Houses, Private Sector, Central Para Military Forces etc. based on 
their requisition for re-employment of ESM. The DGR empanels/sponsors ESM run Private 
Security Agencies and State ESM Corporations for providing security guards to various CPSUs, 
Corporate Houses and Private Sector Undertakings etc. The other avenues for resettlement of 
ESM are ESM Coal Loading and Transportation Scheme, Management of Company Owned 
Company Operated Retail Outlets, Management of CNG Stations by ESM(O) in NCR/Pune, 
Allotment of Mother Dairy Milk Booths and Fruit & Vegetable (Safal) Shops in NCR, Coal Tipper 
Attachment Scheme, Tipper Attachment Scheme for Widows and Disabled 
Soldiers/Dependents, Issue of DGR Eligibility Certificate for Allotment of LPG/Retail Outlet 
(Petrol/Diesel) Distributorship advertised by Oil Marketing Companies against 8% Reservation 
Quota, Retail Outlet Dealership (Petrol/Diesel) and holding of Ex-Servicemen Seminar cum Job 
Fairs. 
Reply of the Government 
The observations of the Committee are a matter of fact, hence no comments are offered. 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 69) 
 The Committee further note that new proposals such as provision of technical service by 
ESM Manpower Agencies sponsored by DGR, Women Centric {ESM (W)} schemes/initiatives 
of Hospital Administration and Office-cum-House Keeping & Maintenance are being 
contemplated by the DGR for the resettlement of Ex-Servicemen. The Committee are of the 
considered view that while in service, various financial and medical benefits are provided by the 
personnel and after retirement too, the needs, re-settlement and welfare of the Ex-
Servicemen/women should be accorded the highest priority. Therefore, they recommend that 
new proposals for resettlement of ESM/ ESM(W) should be implemented at the earliest and the 
Committee be apprised accordingly.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 Currently all Directorate General Resettlement (DGR) schemes are open to all retired 
Officers/JCOs/ORs (both men and women officers) meeting the 'ESM status'. Recently DGR 
has operationalised a new resettlement scheme titled "Provision of Technical Services to the 
Govt Establishments". Under this scheme technical services by deploying ESM manpower in 
critical Government installations are being provided. Guidelines for the scheme have been 
issued on 06.02.2020. 

 
106 
Recommendation (Para No. 70) 
 During deliberations on DGF 2020-21, the Committee find that the States are following 
their own policy while paying ex-gratia amount to the dependents of martyrs. A representative of 
the Ministry submitted before the Committee that the Ministry has communicated several times 
to the States for enhancing this amount. The Committee opine that maximum financial support 
should be extended to the families of those who sacrifice their life for the country. Hence, they 
recommend that the Ministry should intensify its efforts for persuading the highest authorities in 
the State governments for bringing uniformity in payments of ex-gratia amount to the 
dependents of martyrs. 
Reply of the Government 
 Ex-gratia are paid by respective State/UT Govts from their own budget and as such 
decide the scale of payment as per their financial position. However, DESW has already been 
requesting the State Govts/UT Admin for enhancing the ex-gratia amount. 
 
Recommendation (Para No.71) 
 
The Committee recommend that the Ministry should look into the issue maintaining 
uniformity across the country while providing exemption on toll tax to the Gallantary Award 
winners. They also recommend that educational and awareness programmes for the serving 
and retired personnel of the Forces, regarding the benefits/facilities extended to them, should 
regularly be conducted by the Ministry to avoid their exploitation at the hands of unscrupulous 
persons. 
Reply of the Government 
 All the Gallantry Award winners are covered in the exempted category on all National 
highways managed by National Highway Authority of India (NHAI). The awardee of Pram Vir 
Chakra, Ashok Chakra, Maha Vir Chakra, Kirti Chakra, Vir Chakra and Shaurya Chakra, if such 
awardee produces his or her photo identity card duly authenticated by the appropriate or 
competent authority for such award  is exempted from paying the toll  tax. Exemption of toll tax 
for Ex-servicemen/ Gallantry Award winners on National Highway is based on the ESM Identity 
Card which is issued by respective Zila Sainik Board/ Rajya Sainik Board and the process is 
uniform and streamlined.  
 All welfare schemes/benefits/policy matters pertaining to serving and retired personnel 
and their dependents are displayed at the notice board/premises/offices of all Rajya Sainik 
Board/ Zila Sainik Boards to facilitate wide publicity and awareness amongst ex-servicemen 
community. Necessary instructions  are  also being  issued to all RSB/ZSBs by KSB Sectt from 
time to time in this regard. Since 2016, all welfare schemes have been made available online  
and wide publicity has been accorded for awareness of ESM community. 
Recommendation (Para No.72) 
 The Committee find that basic aim of constructing a Sainik Rest House is to provide 
suitable and cheap accommodation to the ESW during their short visit to the State 
Capital/District Headquarters for settlement of their pension cases and other matters like 
availing the facilities of CSD Canteens, hospitals etc. They desire that construction of the Sainik 

 
107 
houses which are already approved, should not suffer from due to allocation of funds issues 
and other minor formalities. Further, they recommend that tie-ups with private and public budget 
accommodations in a State may also be explored for comfort of ESM. The action taken on 
these recommendations of the Committee should be furnished within one month of the 
presentation of this report. 
Reply of the Government 
 With regard to the construction of Sainik Rest House (SRH) in States, it is stated that 
50% of construction cost is borne by KSB/MoD subject to the concerned State seeking prior 
approval of MoD through KSB before undertaking construction of Sainik Rest House (SRH) and 
further following the guidelines enumerated in the Standard Operating Procedure (SOP) 
promulgated by MoD on the subject.  At present no claim on account of payment of central 
share for construction of SRH as approved by MoD is pending. As far as the recommendations  
of the Committee regarding tie up with private & public budget accommodations in a State is 
concerned, the matter has been conveyed by KSB to all RSB’s for necessary action.  
Information in this regard would be submitted on receipt of feedback from RSBs. 
 
EX-SERVICEMEN CONTRIBUTORY HEALTH SCHEME (ECHS) 
Budgetary provisions and Medical bills pending with ECHS 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 73) 
 The Committee note that ECHS has been allocated RS 3,301.98 crore under Revenue 
(BE) Head, against the projection of Rs 6,892.00 crore in 2020-21. also the project amount for 
capital head under BE 2020-21 is RS 51 crore. The carried forward liability in 2019-20 was Rs. 
1,947.30 crore.  A representative of ECHS, while tendering his evidence before the Committee, 
submitted that in the last five years, on an average, carry forward liability every year is Rs 2,200 
crore. Admittedly, this is the reason for lapse in payment to the empanelled hospitals.  As this 
lapse in timely payment of medical bills of the empanelled hospitals may have detrimental 
effects on the healthcare services provided to the ECHS beneficiaries, the Committee strongly 
recommend that additional funds should be provided to ECHS to eliminate pendency of Medical 
Treatment related expenditure.  Further, the Ministry should also institute foolproof measures to 
scrutinize false medical bill claims and apprise the Committee accordingly. 
Reply of the Government 
 In Budget Estimates 2019-20 allocation for ECHS was Rs 3281.26 crore under Revenue 
Head. In Revised Estimates 2019-20, this amount was increased by Rs 1591.03 crore to Rs 
4872.29 crore. Further, in Modified Appropriation stage an amount of Rs. 5199.21 crore was 
allocated i.e.  an increase of Rs 1917.95 over BE 2019-20. Therefore, it may be seen that 
additional requirements of ECHS has been catered for to the extent possible. 
 In BE 2020-21, an amount of Rs 3301.98 crore has been allocated to ECHS under 
Revenue Head. Based on pace of expenditure, during the current financial year, additional 
funds will be sought from Ministry of Finance at Supplementary/Revised Estimates stage of 

 
108 
2020-21. It is further submitted that on the request of this Ministry, Ministry of Finance has 
exempted ECHS from the prescribed ceiling of 20% Cash Outgo in the first Quarter (Q1) of the 
current fiscal as per the revised Cash Management Guidelines. 
Further, following steps have been taken to scrutinize false medical claims:- 
(a) The bills are checked in detail by the Bill Processing Agency (BPA). 
(b) Further, bills are checked by verifiers at RC level/CO ECHS. 
(c) CDA conducts post audit of selected bills. 
(d) A Fraud preventive mechanism for ECHS is being worked out incorporating 
existing rules and best practices of other Government Schemes. 
 
Recommendation (Para No.74) 
After examining the data of authorized and actual manpower at ECHS Polyclinics 
submitted by the Ministry, the Committee are surprised to find that against the sanctioned 
strength of 61, there is no availability of radiologists in the ECHS polyclinics. A representative of 
the Ministry submitted before the Committee that there is a problem of hiring medical 
specialists, sometimes even hiring gynaecologists and radiologists, because of the pay issues. 
This is being addressed through offering hourly basis consultation to the doctors. The 
Committee, in this context, recommend that new technology of providing radiology services 
through telemedicine may be explored as an option at ECHS polyclinics at the earliest for 
compensating lack of radiologists. Nevertheless, all efforts be done to recruit radiologists as a 
long-term measure. 
Reply of the Government 
61 Radiologists are authorised to ECHS Type A & B Polyclinics across the country. 
However, it is observed from the past record that the posts have remained unfilled due to non 
availability of full time Radiologists for hiring on contractual basis. The same can be attributed to 
the current pay scale of Rs One lakh which does not attract Radiologists towards employment 
in ECHS Polyclinics as they get better remuneration in other private hospitals. Accordingly rules 
have been recently modified to provide for hiring of contractual employees on part time basis. 
All out efforts are being made to hire maximum Radiologists on part time basis. 
Guidelines on Telemedicine are for the patients who are consulting for the first time or 
follow up cases. Radio diagnosis is essentially based on imaging technology for which no clear 
guidelines are available. Secondly, unless the photo sent to the Radiologist on email/ whatsapp 
is of high resolution quality, there are chances of missing out conditions like hairline fractures 
etc. Hence, all efforts will be made to recruit Radiologist at Polyclinics. 
  

 
109 
Merger of Military hospitals with existing ECHS Polyclinics 
Recommendation (Para No. 75) 
The Committee learn that a proposal regarding utilization of spare capacities of the 
military hospitals is under consideration by the Ministry. They have been apprised that there are 
about 129 military policlinics, out of which, about 100 have been identified which are close to 
the military hospitals. The Committee are of the considered view that this step will invariably 
lead to better service delivery, gainful utilization of infrastructure, medicinal supplies, optimal 
use of doctors and administration of the military hospitals. Therefore, they recommend that 
identification and merger of such military hospitals is done at the earliest and the Committee be 
apprised accordingly. 
Reply of the Government 
 DGAFMS have constituted a Board of Officers (BOO) in December, 2019 for 
implementation of the recommendation of the Committee on “Merger of ECHS Polyclinics 
(ECHS PCs) with co-located Military Hospitals (MH). 
2. Parameters considered by the BOO for ascertaining the suitability of merger of ECHS 
PCs with their co-located MH were as follows:- 
(a) Distance between ECHS PCs and co-located MH. 
(b) Daily Average Sick Report (DASR) of ECHS PCs. 
(c) Daily Average Sick Report (DASR) of co-located MH. 
(d) Capability of co-located MH to handle enhanced workload post merger. 
(e) Minimum essential requirement of additional human resource for augmentation of 
capability of MH to cater for the enhanced workload.  
(f) Available manpower of the ECHS PC. 
 
The recommendations of the Board of Officers are under examination by DGAFMS and 
MD ECHS. 
 
Recommendation (Para No.76) 
The Committee understand that Fixed Medical Allowance (FMA) has been authorized to 
all ECHS beneficiaries who are residing in far flung areas where Polyclinics are not available. 
Further, a proposal for opening of 102 new Polyclinics is under consideration and proposal for 
procurement of ambulances and Mobile Medical Units is under process. taking into account the 
difficulties experienced by the veterans and their dependents dwelling in remote and difficult 
areas of the country in accessing and utilizing health care services, the Committee recommend 
that the proposals for opening up of new polyclinics, procurement of ambulances and Mobile 
medical Units mobile medical units should be accorded top most priority by the Ministry of 
Defence. The action taken by the Ministry on these proposals may be intimated to the 
Committee within three months of the presentation of this Report.  
 
 
 
 

 
110 
Reply of the Government 
 
(i) Fixed Medical Allowance (FMA) has already been authorised to all ECHS beneficiaries who 
are residing in far flung areas where Polyclinics are not available vide Govt letter No 
22(01)/2011/WE/D (Res-I) dt 01 Nov 2018.  
(ii) The proposal for opening of new polyclinics, downgradation of PCs, and upgradation of PCs 
is under consideration. Proposal to merge certain Polyclinics co-located with Service Hospitals 
is also under consideration.  
(iii) Proposal for purchase of ambulance and Mobile Medical Units is being expedited.  
 
DEFENCE PENSION 
Budgetary Provisions 
Recommendation (Para No. 77) 
The Committee observe that Defence Pensions, under the Ministry of Defence provides 
for Pensionary charges in respect of retired Defence personnel (including Defence civilian 
employees) of the three services viz. Army, Navy and Air Force and also employees of 
Ordnance Factories etc. It covers payment of Service pension, gratuity, family pension, 
disability pension, commuted value of pension, leave encashment etc. The Committee have 
been apprised that the amount allocated for BE 2020-21 in respect of Defence Pensions is Rs. 
1,33,825.00 crore, which is Rs. 16,014.56 crore more than the allocation of RE 2019-20. The 
requirement of Rs. 1,33,825.00 crore for BE 2020-21 has been worked out after taking into 
Dearness Relief announced by the Government, growth in pension, increase in amount of 
Gratuity, Family Pension, Leave Encashment and superannuation and retirement benefits as a 
result of increase in number of retirees. The Committee have already made their 
recommendation on this aspect of rising defence pension liabilities in the preceding 
Recommendation at Sl. No. 12. 
Reply to the Government 
The recommendations of the Committee with regards to the measures being taken to 
reduce the burden of pension have been noted. The points made by the Committee for taking 
into account the best interests of the retiring personnel and encouraging the youth to join forces 
is recognized. Recommendations made by the Committee will also be considered for improving 
prospects of Short Service Commissioned Officers, along side the other measures that are 
under consideration.    
Tax Exemption on disability pension 
Recommendation (Para No. 78) 
 During deliberations on DFG 2020-21, the issue of income tax exemption on disability 
Pension was discussed.  The Committee have been apprised that a clarification on this issue 
from the Central Board of Direct Taxes (CBDT) reads as under: 

 
111 
 “The Tax exemption will be available only to armed forces personnel who have been 
‘invalidated’ from service on account of bodily disability attributable to or aggravated by such 
service and not to personnel who have been retired on superannuation or otherwise.” 
 The Chief of Defence Staff, while depositing before the committee, stated that the 
disability pension includes battle casualty pension and those who have got disabled due to 
lifestyle diseases or other issues.  After the 6th pay Commission, the disability pension became 
a part pf the retiring salary i.e. the last salary drawn at the time of retirement.  Hence, there is a 
very wide variation of pension between the Officers and the Jawans.  Further, the person who 
suffers the disability is provided continuous medical support by the Services.  The Committee 
find that the latest development in this regard is that the Ministry of Defence has directed the 
Principal Controller of Defence Accounts (PCDA) to stop deducting income tax from those 
pensioners affected by disability.   They, therefore, recommend that the factual position in this 
regard may be intimated within one month of the presentation of this report and clear decision 
of the Government in this should be communicated to all personnel, serving and retired, to 
obviate any chances of misapprehensions and feeling of soreness amongst them, under 
intimation to the Committee.    
Reply of the Government 
The position is explained as under: 
(i) Central Board of Direct Taxes (CBDT) had issued a Circular No. 13/2019 on 
24.6.2019, according to which income tax exemption will be available to armed 
forces personnel who have been invalided from service on account of bodily disability 
attributable to or aggravated by such service and not to personnel who have been 
retired on superannuation or otherwise.  Later, CBDT informed that above said 
circular dated 24.6.2019 is only clarificatory in nature and all the circulars issued 
earlier are operative. 
 
(ii) Pradeep Mathur & Ors filed Writ Petition(Civil) No. 953/2019 before the Hon’ble 
Supreme Court seeking relief for exemption of income tax on disability pension on 
superannuation. Hon’ble Supreme Court vide order dated 30.08.2019 has directed 
the parties concerned to maintain status quo in the matter. 
 
(iii) Pursuant to the directions of Hon’ble Supreme Court, Ministry of Defence (Finance) 
directed the Joint CGDA(Pension) to advise Principal Controller of Defence Accounts 
(Pension), Allahabad to issue a Circular to the Pension Disbursing Agencies not to 
make recovery on Income Tax on disability pension as per CBDT Circular No. 13 
dated 24th June 2020 till a final decision is taken by the Hon’ble Supreme Court in the 
matter.  Accordingly, Principal Controller of Defence Accounts (Pension), Allahabad 
has issued a Circular No. 211 on 3.3.2020 to the Pension Disbursing Agencies for 
necessary action.  The said Circular dated 3.3.2020 is available on the PCDA(P) 
website.  Copy of this Circular is also enclosed herewith Appendix ‘C’. 
 
(iv) Presently, the matter is sub-judice in the Hon’ble Supreme Court. 
 
  

 
112 
Appendix ‘C’
 
 
 
 
  


 
113 
 
 


 
114 
 
 
 


 
115 
Recommendations (Para Nos. 79, 80 & 81) 
Recommendation (Para No. 79) 
 The Committee have learnt that Government of India had taken the decision to 
implement OROP in November 2015 and issued orders on 7.11.2015 for implementation of 
OROP for the Defence Forces Personnel.  Detailed instructions relating to implementation of 
OROP along with tables indicating revised pension for each rank and each category was issued 
on 3.2.2016.  The salient features of the OROP, as the Committee learn, are as under:- 
(i) Pension of the past pensioners would be re-fixed on the basis of pension of 
retirees of calendar year 2013 and the benefit will be effective with effect from 
01.07.2014. 
(ii) Pension will be re-fixed for all pensioners on the basis of the average of minimum 
and maximum pension of personnel retired in 2013 in the same rank and with the 
same length of service. 
(iii) Pension for those drawing above, the average shall be protected. 
(iv) Arrears will be paid in four equal half yearly instalments.  However, all the family 
pensioners including those in receipt of Special/Liberalized family pension and 
Gallantry Award Winners shall be paid arrears in one instalment. 
(v) The pension would be re-fixed every 5 years. 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 80) 
 
 The Committee further learn that a sum of Rs. 10,795.4 crore has been disbursed up to 
30.9.2017 (data compiled till 1.5.2018) for Defence Pensioners/Family pensioners on account of 
implementation of OROP.  The next revision of pension under OROP is due w.e.f. 01.07.2019.  
With the approval of the Raksha Mantri, orders have been issued on 14.6.2019 to constitute a 
Committee under the Chairmanship of Controller General of Defence Accounts (CGDA) to work 
out the modalities and methodology of implementation of next revision of pension under OROP. 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 81) 
 
 As regards the steps being taken to address the grievances and discontent of Ex-
Servicemen/family pensioners w.r.t. OROP, the Ministry of Defence submitted that there is a 
separate category for grievances regarding OROP Policy issues in the Centralized Public 
Grievance Redress and Monitoring System (CPGRAM), which are examined as per the extant 
policies and replies are sent to the petitioners in a time bound manner.  The Ministry of Defence 
has also informed the Committee that the Government had appointed One Member Judicial 
Committee (OMJC) headed by Justice L. Narasimha Reddy, Retired Chief Justice of Patna 
High Court to look into anomalies, if any, arising out of implementation of OROP and its Report 
has been submitted to the Government.  An Internal Committee has been constituted to 
examine the recommendations of OMJC with respect to feasibility, impact of recommendations 
on other existing provisions and financial aspects in implementation of the recommendations.  
In this regard, the Committee recommend that findings and recommendations of OMJC on the 
anomalies, if any, arising out of implementation of OROP should be expeditiously implemented 
and budget, modalities and method of implementation required for this purpose as well as next 

 
116 
revision of OROP should be worked out in advance to ensure timely disbursement of 
pension/arrears and eliminate any chances of grievances of the pensioners in this regard.   
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The present status of OROP & OMJC are as under:- 
 
 (i) The Government had appointed One Member Judicial Committee (OMJC) headed by 
Justice L. Narasimha Reddy, Retd. Chief Justice of Patna High Court to look into 
anomalies, if any, arising out of implementation of OROP. The Committee submitted its 
Report to the Government.  An Internal Committee has been constituted to examine the 
recommendations of OMJC with respect to the feasibility, impact of recommendations on 
other existing provisions and financial aspects in implementation of the 
recommendations. The report is under examination of the Government.  
 
(ii)  As per MoD Order dated 07.11.2015, the pension would be re-fixed every 5 years.  
Accordingly, next revision of pension was due w.e.f. 01.07.2019.  Necessary action for 
next revision of pension under OROP has been initiated and a Committee has been 
constituted on 14.6.2019 under the Chairmanship of Controller General of Defence 
Accounts (CGDA) to work out the modalities & methodology of implementation of next 
revision of pension under OROP. The Committee will submit the report to MOD with 
specific recommendations on modalities & methodology for next revision of pension 
under OROP. The Report of the Committee is awaited. 
 
Budgetary provisions and challenges 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 82) 
The Committee observe that against a projection of Rs.115 crore, the Sainik Schools 
were allocated Rs. 40.40 crore for 2019-20, a shortfall of Rs 74.60 Crore. The projection for the 
year 2020-21 is Rs 116 Crore. There is no separate budget for the Sainik Schools in Defence 
Budget and they get the money from the Army Budget itself. During the course of the 
examination of Demands for Grants 2020-21, the Committee were apprised that few major 
problems being faced by the Sainik Schools are shortage of funds, inadequate infrastructure, 
poor quality of staff and lack of manpower. The Secretary (Defence Planning) submitted before 
the Committee that a separate head ‘Grant-in-Aid’ earmarked for the Sainik Schools may be 
created to support them. The Committee are of the considered view that expenditure on Sainik 
Schools is an investment for nation building as the primary aim of the Sainik Schools is to 
prepare Cadets for entry into National Defence Academy and Naval Academy. Therefore, the 
Committee recommend that the requisite ‘Grant-in-Aid’ head for the Sainik Schools should be 
created at the earliest and they be apprised accordingly. Further, option of arranging Corporate 
Social Responsibility (CSR) funds may also be explored by the Ministry. 
Reply of the Government 
The Executive Committee in its meeting held on 17th March, 2020 has resolved that ` In 
view of the need of consistent and timely flow of shareable funds to the Sainik Schools, it is 
imperative that a separate budget code head/ sub head be created for the purpose and funds 
allocation henceforth be done under such created head/sub-head.’  Accordingly, proposal has 
been initiated for creation of separate budget head for Sainik Schools Society. 

 
117 
Admission of Girl Students in Sainik Schools 
Recommendation (Para No. 83) 
The Committee in their twentieth Report  (16th Lok Sabha) had recommended the 
Ministry of Defence to seriously look into the matter of admission of girl students in Sainik 
Schools and initiate the process of creating requisite infrastructure. It is heartening to learn that 
based on the success of the Pilot Project for admission of girl children in Sainik School, 
Chhingchhip in Mizoram for two years from the academic session 2018-19, the Government 
has decided to continue girls’ admission in Chhingchhip and also to implement the decision of 
admission of girls in other Sainik Schools. Besides, admission of girl child in 5 Sainik Schools 
viz Kalikiri (Andhra Pradesh), Kodagu (Karnataka), Ghorakhal (Uttarakhand), Chandrapur 
(Maharashtra) and Bijapur (Karnataka) has also been approved and admission process in 
under way for admission from academic session 2020-21. In remaining Sainik Schools of the 
country, admission of girls will be implemented from the academic session 2021-22. Opening 
that admission of girls in Sainik Schools will provide huge opportunities for the girls to join the 
Defence Forces in future, the Committee recommend that necessary budgetary support for 
creation of requisite infrastructure and staff for admission of girl students should be extended to 
the Sainik Schools. 
Reply of the Government 
Based on the success of the Pilot Project for admission of girl children in Sainik School, 
Chhingchhip in Mizoram for two years from the academic session 2018-2019, the Govt. has 
decided to continue girls admission in Chhingchhip and also to implement the decision of 
admission of girl children in other Sainik Schools. Admission of girl children in 05 Sainik Schools 
viz Kalikiri (Andhra Pradesh), Kodagu (Karnataka), Ghorakhal (Uttarakhand), Chandrapur 
(Maharastra) and Bijapur (Karnataka) has been approved and admission process is under way 
for admission from academic session 2020-21. In remaining Sainik Schools of the country 
admission of girl children will be implemented from the academic session 2021-22. 
 
2. The following steps are being taken by the Sainik Schools for smooth induction of the girl 
cadets in to class VI w.e.f 2021-22:- 
(a) A separate hostel with barbed wire fencing has already been provided in Sainik 
School , Chhingchhip for the girl cadets to ensure their safety. Similar facilities are 
also proposed to be provided in other Sainik Schools. 
(b) To ensure the security and well being of girl cadets in hostel, the following  personnel 
are to be placed on roll to look after the girl cadets exclusively as being followed in 
Sainik School, Chhingchhip:- 
i) One Matron-cum-Physical Trainer to facilitate the training/safety of girl cadets.. 
ii) One Nursing Sister for the medical requirements for the cadets. 
iii) Two female General Employees for housekeeping and maintenance of Girls 
Hostel. 

 
118 
(c) Separate washrooms to be provided to the girl cadets in the Hostel, Sports field, 
auditorium, mess and academic block for their convenience and ease. 
(d) CCTV cameras to be installed at appropriate locations for the safety of girl cadets. 
3. Similar training opportunities for the girl cadets as being permitted to the boy cadets are 
envisaged.  
4. For a provision of necessary budgetary support to all Sainik Schools, a proposal has 
already been initiated for creation of separate budget head for Sainik Schools Society. 
 
Intake of Sainik School Students into National Defence Academy (NDA) 
Recommendation (Para No. 84) 
 The Committee note that against the NDA course strength of 638, 148 Sainik School 
Students were selected in 2018-19. A representative of the Ministry informed the Committee 
that the success rate for cadets of Sainik Schools is almost 18 percent whereas it is 0.1 to 0.2 
per cent for the cadets coming from the civil schools. The Defence Secretary deposed that due 
to excellent quality of the education system in the Sainik Schools, many students take 
admission in these schools; however, they do not opt to go to NDA/Naval academy but other 
sectors. The Committee are pleased to note the pristine quality of education being provided in 
the Sainik Schools, yet, they opine that primary focus of the Sainik Schools should be to 
prepare the students for joining the Defence Forces. This main objective is what separates the 
Sainik Schools from the rest of the schools in the country. Therefore, they recommend that 
appropriate measures should be instituted by the Ministry of Defence to increase the number of 
cadets in NDA and Naval academy. 
Reply of the Government 
A committee set up by the Ministry of Defence to critically review the functioning of Sainik 
Schools and to suggest methods to improve their performance in the selection process for 
NDA/INA have recommended that each Sainik School be given specific annual targets to 
achieve with respect to CBSE and NDA/INA performance. In this regard, annual targets have 
been set for Sainik Schools from the academic year 2021-22. These targets are based on the 
average of cadets sent by the school to NDA/INA during last five years.  Other guidelines for 
improving performance in UPSC & SSB have also been issued to all Sainik Schools to increase 
the number of cadets getting selected in NDA and Naval academy from Sainik Schools.  
 
Expansion of Sainik Schools 
Recommendation (Para No. 85) 
The Committee have been apprised that presently, there are 33 Sainik Schools in the 
country and 15 new proposals for Sainik Schools are under consideration by the Ministry of 
Defence. They note that Sainik Schools are opened in a State only on receipt of a specific 
request from the State Government. The contribution of the State for a Sainik School include 
grant of land, building, maintenance and scholarships. As far as role of the Union Government 

 
119 
is concerned, it includes posting of suitable Service Officers for the posts of Principal, Vice 
Principal and Administrative Officer in the Sainik Schools, providing training grants to the 
schools regularly to upgrade their training infrastructure and skills, carrying out annual 
inspection of the schools to monitor the functioning of the schools and conducting training 
programmes  for teaching faculty, other staff and workshops for officers to enhance their 
professional competence. The Committee, in the context, recommend that the proposals for 
construction of the Sainik Schools received from the willing State Governments should be 
expedited and pace and quality of construction in the ongoing projects should continuously be 
monitored by the Ministry of Defence. Regular interactions with the State Governments and 
other stakeholders should be conducted to obviate impediments in timely completion of the 
construction and maintenance of the Sainik Schools. 
Reply of the Government 
Ministry has taken note of the observation of the Hon’ble Committee. Sainik Schools are 
established on receipt of a request from State Government agreeing to provide land along with 
funds for the creation and maintenance of basic infrastructure, purchase of equipment and other 
facilities besides scholarships for the cadets belonging to the State. On receipt of proposal from 
the State Govt., an inspection of the proposed site is carried out by the officials of Sainik 
Schools Society to ascertain its suitability. As and when such proposals are received in the 
Ministry from the States, it is considered within specified parameters.   
 
 
 
 
  

 
120 
CHAPTER II 
 
(B) OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE 
GOVERNMENT AND ARE COMMENTED UPON 
 
Projections made by the three Services 
Recommendation (Para Nos. 5-7) 
Recommendation (Para No. 5) 
The Committee, after careful examination of the Budgetary figures submitted by the 
Ministry, infer that the allocations to the Services are not commensurate with the projections at 
both Budget Estimates (BE) and Revised Estimates (RE) stage consequently. Moreover, the 
Committee note with glee that the Services have been more or less able to spend the amounts 
allocated at the stage of RE in the last fiscal year. For the previous financial year i.e. 2019-20, 
at the stage of RE, Army projected a requirement of Rs. 1,98,456.82crore for both Revenue and 
Capital expenditure, but was allocated Rs. 1,72,440.73 crore. In the case of Navy, the projected 
amount was  Rs. 68,860.27 crore for both Revenue and Capital in RE 2019-20, however, only  
Rs. 48,943.14 crore were provided. Similarly, while the Air Force projected a requirement of Rs. 
1,21,684.39 crore in RE 2019-20, only Rs. 74,898.88 crore was allocated. The Committee 
reiterate that they are pleased to note that for the past few years, the Forces have been able to 
completely utilize the budgetary allocation at RE stage.  
 
Recommendation (Para No. 6) 
Further, the Committee find that for the Budget Estimates 2020-21, the Army projected 
an amount of Rs. 1,65,228.28 crore under the Revenue Head, but has been allocated only Rs. 
1,45,785.88 crore. Under the Capital Head, the projected amount is  Rs. 50,373.60 crore but 
only Rs. 32,462.38 crore has been allocated, which amounts to 64 percent of the projected 
requirement. Again, for the current year 2020-21, while the Navy projected a requirement of Rs. 
32,237.96 crore, the allocated amount has been Rs. 22,934.75 crore under the Revenue Head. 
Under the Capital Head, while the Navy projected an amount of Rs. 45,268.31 crore, the 
allocated amount is only Rs. 26,688.28 crore, which amounts to approximately 59 percent of the 
projected requirement. While an amount of Rs. 43,904.17 crore has been projected as the 
requirement under the Revenue Head by Air Force, Rs. 29,962.66 crore has been provided. 
Under the Capital Head, while the Air Force projected a requirement of Rs. 66,207.29 crore, the 
allocation has been only Rs. 43,281.91 crore, which amounts to approximately 65 percent of the 
projected requirement.  
Recommendation (Para No. 7) 
The Ministry of Defence in their written submissions to the Committee stated that the 
requirements projected by Services are proposed to the Ministry of Finance for favourable 
consideration. While allocating funds, the Ministry of Finance analyses past absorption capacity 
of the Services and the pace of expenditure in the current Financial Year. In addition to this, 

 
121 
based on the overall ceilings conveyed by the Ministry of Finance, the Ministry of Defence 
distributes funds among the Services and Organizations under the Ministry, based on Inter-
Services priorities and allocations for critical projects.  Again, the Committee would like to 
highlight here, that taking into consideration this portentous achievement of the Forces where 
they have been able to completely utilize their funds for past few years as allocated to them at 
Revised Estimates stage, the Committee perceive that there is no reason that the projected 
amounts by the Services should not be allocated by the Ministry of Finance. Therefore, the 
Committee recommend that keeping in view not only their contribution in a war-like scenario but 
also their role of re-connoitering of national borders during peace time, the Ministry of Defence, 
armed with reasoning of healthy trend of expenditure of the allocated amount and critical 
requirements of operational preparedness of the Forces, should vigorously pursue for additional 
allocation of funds at Revised Estimates stage.  
 
Reply of the Government 
In BE 2019-20, an amount of Rs. 3,05,296.07 Crore was allocated to M/o Defence under 
Defence Services Estimates (DSE).  This Ministry had projected an additional requirement of 
Rs. 1,06,792.35 Crore under DSE in RE 2019-20.  Ministry of Finance allocated Rs. 
3,16,296.07 Crore (i.e. an increase of Rs.11,000 Crore over BE 2019-20 allocations)  to M/o 
Defence under DSE. It may be relevant to mention that earlier there was a trend of reduction in 
BE allocations at RE stage under DSE. This trend was reversed in 2017-18 and no cut was 
imposed in RE 2017-18 as well as in RE 2018-19. Additional allocation was provided in RE 
2019-20.  Further, it may also be relevant to mention that the Ministry has been able to spend 
the entire budget allocated at RE stage during the last 5 years. 
2. The recommendation of the Committee has been noted and projections / requirements of 
the Services will be forwarded to Ministry of Finance for favourable consideration at 
Supplementary/ RE stage.  
 
[For comments, please see Para No. 7 of Chapter I of the Report] 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 13) 
 
The Committee note that the proposals of creation of Defence Renewal Fund for capital 
acquisitions and border infrastructure, self-financing of Married Accommodation Project through 
National Buildings Construction Corporation Limited (NBCC) in next eight years and exchange 
of land with the State Governments/Central Ministries in lieu of land required by Defence are 
currently under consideration in the Ministry of Defence for mobilizing extra budgetary 
resources for Defence. Further, through the creation of post of the Chief of Defence Staff, 
prioritization of procurement to aid synchronized modernization of the Services will be taken up. 
Also, optimum use of manpower of the three Services, integration of training establishments of 
the Services to reduce cost involved in infrastructure and logistics will contribute to judicious 
utilization of Defence Budget. The Committee have been further apprised that Committees have 
been constituted for Defence Reforms to review existing delegation of financial powers to the 
Services and reforms in Defence Procurement Manual and Defence Procurement Procedure. In 

 
122 
addition to this, the Ministry of Defence has requested the Ministry of Finance for creation of 
Non-Lapsable Defence Modernization Fund in order to mobilize additional resources. The 
Committee are satisfied to learn that various measures/ steps/proposals being taken for reforms 
in our Defence sector and fervently urge that all the stakeholders i.e. the Ministry of Defence, 
the Services and allied Organizations go the extra mile to ensure optimum utilization of the 
Defence Budget. They also desire that updates on these steps/measures/proposals be apprised 
to the Committee within three months of the presentation of this Report. The reform measures 
and amendments etc. as highlighted to the Committee are linked to different sets of 
requirements within the Forces. The Committee, therefore, recommend that in heading-wise 
captions of the steps initiated, timelines for completion, the progress made till the finalization of 
the Action Taken Notes and the perceived difficulties be intimated to the Committee. In this 
information, the work done by the said Committees also be included. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Review of DPP-2016 is underway in order to further streamline the capital acquisition 
and make it user and business friendly.  For this purpose, a Main Review Committee was set up 
to review & revise the provisions in DPP-2016 to ensure seamless flow from asset acquisition to 
life cycle support.  Various Sub-Committees were setup under this Committee on different 
aspects of capital acquisition to be included in the revised DPP. 
[For comments, please see Para No. 10 of Chapter I of the Report] 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 20) 
 The Committee further note that out of the 273 roads of length 14577.33 Km, identified 
by the Army for construction/improvement, 24 roads of length 936.55 Km are in the state of 
Uttarakhand, 61 roads of length 2295.62 Km are in J&K, 44 roads of length 3185.95 Km are in 
Ladakh and 100 roads of length 5610.43 Km are in the North Eastern Region (excluding roads 
in Bhutan).  The Committee are satisfied to note that 75 percent of work has been completed by 
BRO with regard to construction of 61 Indo-China Border Roads (ICBRs) of length 3323.57 
kilometer. The Committee recommend that using state-of-the-art equipment and skilled 
manpower, BRO should make concerted efforts to strictly adhere to the timelines for 
construction of excellent quality roads. Necessary and timely budgetary support should also be 
extended to BRO by the Ministry of Defence and other Ministries involved. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 Earlier in 2006, the Government had identified 73 roads of length 3707.14 km as Indo 
China Border roads (ICBRs). Out of these BRO has been entrusted with the construction of 61 
roads of length 3323.57 km. Highest Priority is accorded by BRO to complete these roads as 
per the timelines fixed by the Army. The Agency wise physical progress of works (Cumulative 
progress) up to 31 March, 2020 is as under:- 
  

 
123 
 
Agency length (Km) Length (km) 
Connectivity 
achieved (Km) 
Surfacing  (Km) 
GS 1932.67 1907.46 1545.70 
CSG 1065.67 1036.76 788.90 
ITBP 325.87 299.19 203.30 
Total 3323.57 3243.41 2537.90 
 
Note: There is reduction in length of 33.25 km with respect to the approved length as per the 
ground condition. 
[For comments, please see Para No. 13 of Chapter I of the Report] 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 35) 
The Committee have been apprised that as against the projected amount of Rs 1, 
61,117.93 lakh under Revenue Head in Budget Estimates 2020-21 for Defence Estates 
Organisation (DEO), Rs 38, 742.00 lakh have been allocated, i.e a shortfall to Rs 1,22,375.93 
lakh. Under Capital Head, Rs 994 lakh have been allocated against the projected amount of Rs 
2,425.19 lakh, i.e a shortfall f Rs 1,431.19 lakh. The Committee note that processing proposals 
for acquisition of lands, resettlement and rehabilitation of displaced persons and for hiring and 
requisitioning of lands and buildings, besides management of Defence Estates (DGDE). As 
custodian of defence land records, Defence Estates Organisation is involved in updation and 
maintenance of records alongwith implementation of Cantonments Act 2006, Policies, Rules & 
Regulations and executive instructions. Therefore, they recommend that additional funds 
commensurate with pace of expenditure and prioritization of critical works should be allocated 
to the DEO at Revised Estimates stage. 
 
 While recommending for additional funds, the Committee would like to know what 
compromises are likely to be made in case the Supplementary funds do not reach to the level 
as sought in the initial projected figures. During deliberations of Cantonment Boards, the 
Committee took note of the fact that to accommodate the changing needs it would be in the 
fitness of things if the Ministry take a serious note and contemplate for amending Cantonment 
Board Act 2006 with a fresh perspective. In such proposed amendment, heed should be paid to 
increase the construction areas of the properties coming under the purview of the Cantonment 
Boards.    
 
Reply of the Government 
The recommendation of the Committee has been noted and additional funds, if any, as 
per requirement will be sought from Ministry of finance at Supplementary/ Revised Estimates 
stages of 2020-21. 
 It is intimated that as per the sanctioned budget 2020-21 PE of Cantonments by GOC-in-
C, an amount of Rs. 952 crore was recommended and requested as Grant-in-aid (General) for 
meeting budgetary deficit of Cantonments. Out of this, only an amount of Rs. 254 crore has 

 
124 
been allocated under 2020-21(BE). It is to intimate that in case the supplementary funds, do not 
reach to the level as sought in the initial projected figures, Cantonments would face acute 
financial crisis. Most of the 62 Cantonment Boards are dependent on Grant-in-Aid from Govt. All 
development and mandatory municipal responsibilities would get affected. Many Cantonment 
Boards would not be in position to pay salary/pension liabilities of their employees. The 
Cantonment boards are also undertaking various public infrastructure schemes such as 
Sewerage Treatment Plants, Water augmentation scheme, upgradation of Hospitals and 
Schools etc. Any decrease in allocation of funds would impact such ongoing and proposed 
projects adversely. 
2. As regards acquisition of land, the proposals are based on priority and operational 
requirements of the Services.  
3. It is intimated that amendment of Cantonment Act, 2006 with a fresh perspective is under 
consideration. However, it is pertinent to mention here that increasing the construction areas of 
the properties is the subject matter of building bye-laws of the respective Boards and would not 
be a part of the amendments proposed of the Cantonment Act.  
 
[For comments, please see Para No. 16 of Chapter I of the Report] 
 
Commercial use of non-sensitive Defence lands 
 
Recommendations (Para Nos. 44 & 45) 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 44) 
 
The Committee has been intimated that with regard to the option of commercialization of 
non-sensitive defence lands, such as leasing lands to commercial establishments etc. to 
increase the source of revenue, very limited vacant Class-C defence land is available for this 
purpose with Cantonment Boards. Also funds for establishing such capital assets are also not 
available.  Cantonment Boards could consider projects on B-4 vacant lands which could 
generate revenue for Cantonment Boards such as community halls, office complex etc.  This 
would also involve process of reclassification of B-4 lands to C for municipal purpose by the 
MoD.  The proposal, if considered feasible, could be considered for sanction under Creation of 
Capital Assets. The Ministry has advised the Cantonment Boards accordingly since this is 
almost identical demand from all the Cantonments.  
Recommendation (Para No. 45) 
 
The Committee opine that in addition to above mentioned proposals, the Ministry of 
Defence may also look into making the land available with Defence, Cantonment boards and 
Ordnance Factories to the State Governments for construction of helipads or parking space as 
it would lead to substantial revenue generation, which in turn can be used for provide better 
public infrastructure, health and educational facilities etc. in the Cantonment areas. The 
Committee recommend that feasibility of the said proposals may be examined at the earliest 
and they be apprised accordingly.  

 
125 
Reply of the Government  
 
 Government policy No.11015/02/2012/D(Lands) dated 02.02.2016, for transfer/ lease/ 
license of defence land to other Central Government Departments, State Governments and 
Organizations controlled by it as also local bodies, for execution of projects related to 
creation/up-gradation of Public infrastructure/ utilities, is already in place. The main features of 
the said policy are: 
i) Defence land is transferred to the Indenting Authority on the basis of exchange of ‘Equal 
Value Land’ (EVL) to be provided by Indenting Authority. However, where the Indenting 
Authority neither owns land nor has an arrangement with the State/ UT governments for 
providing land for the project and is therefore unable to provide EVL, Land transfer is 
made on payment of current market value of the land.  
(ii)  When land is neither required permanently nor its ownership rights are required to be 
transferred, in such cases land is transferred on lease hold basis, on payment of an 
annual rent and one time premium.  
(iii)   The policy also provides that when permission to carry out temporary works like laying 
of water pipelines and electricity cables on defence land is required, a license may be 
granted on payment of an annual license fee and a refundable security deposit. 
[For comments, please see Para No. 19 of Chapter I of the Report] 
 
Recommendations (Para Nos. 51-53) 
Recommendation Para No. 51 
After gleaning through the information supplied to the Committee, they note that out of 
the nine DPSUs, Hindustan Aeronautics Limited (HAL), Bharat Dynamics Limited (BDL), 
Garden Reach Shipbuilders and Engineers Limited (GRSE), Goa Shipyard Limited (GSL), 
Hindustan Shipyard Limited (HSL) and Mazagaon Dock Shipbuilders Limited (MDL) are facing 
order book challenges and decline in production in the current / coming years. Although HAL's 
production over last several years has been growing with highest turnover recorded in 2018-19, 
the major part of existing orders for supply of aircraft and helicopters will be liquidated shortly 
with the major manufacturing order of Su-30MKI being completed in 2019-20. There is no firm 
order currently available on the company beyond 2021-22. In case of BDL, most of the major 
products like Akash Weapon system will be executed by 2019-20, lnvar ATGM and Konkurs-M 
ATGM will be executed by 2020-21. There are no firm order executable beyond year 2020 - 21. 
ln case of Garden Reach Shipbuilders and Engineers Limited (GRSE), 3 projects of Indian Navy 
and Coast Guard will get completed in next 3 to 4 months leaving the shipyard with 3 No. of 
projects of Indian Navy for construction of 15 ships against capacity of 20 ships construction. 
Goa Shipyard Limited (GSL) is presently executing the 05 Coast Guard Offshore Patrol Vessel 
(CGOPV) project with balance executable order book of Rs. 800 crore which would get 
liquidated by 2020-21.  The balance order book value of HSL is Rs. 2772.28 crore as on 31 
December, 2019 and the balance orders are likely to be completed by end of March 2022. 
 

 
126 
Recommendation (Para No. 52) 
The Committee have also been apprised that for HAL, orders for supply of 83 Light 
Combat Aircraft (LCA) Mk1A and 15 Light Combat Helicopter (LCH) are expected for which 
quotations have already been submitted. An additional order for 12 Su-30MKI is also expected 
in the near future. The LCH platform has attained Initial Operational Clearance for both Air 
Force and Army variants and is fully ready for operational induction awaiting orders. Similarly, 
Light Utility Helicopter (LUH) has also completed all  major tests, including H-V envelope 
evaluation, towards Basic Operational Clearance of LUH. Document towards Initial Operational 
Clearance (IOC) were submitted to User and Regional Centre of Military Airworthiness (RCMA) 
during Dec 2019 and the IOC has been granted by Centre for Military Airworthiness & 
Certification (CEMILAC) to HAL on 7th February, 2020 during Defence Expo 2020 at Lucknow.  
HAL is also expecting additional orders for ongoing programs like Advanced Light Helicopter 
(ALH), LCA, Hawk, Do-228 & SU-30 MKI and fresh production orders for new platforms like Do-
228 Civil variant, LCH, HTT 40, LUH and Hawk-i. Goa Shipyard Limited (GSL) is making 
concerted efforts to secure short gestation projects in Domestic, Export and Ship Repair 
segments which will help in minimizing the potential impact due to lean executable orders to 
bridge the gap till the significant Value of Production contribution from Frigates and Mine 
Counter Measure Vessel Projects. The financial restructuring proposal of HSL with NIL cash 
outflow to the Government of India to enable shipyard to achieve positive net worth is under 
active consideration of the MoD, which will improve HSL's credit rating. Mazagon Dock 
Shipbuilders Limited (MDL) has an in-house capacity to undertake simultaneous construction of 
10 ships and 11 submarines at various build stages. Considering the status of ongoing projects, 
MDL can immediately undertake construction of 4 more warships and 7 more submarines.  
Recommendation (Para No. 53) 
Keeping in view the above facts, the Committee are of the considered view that the existing 
infrastructure at DPSUs and skilled manpower would face the challenge of idling due to want of 
confirmed orders. The continuity in production orders from the Forces is essential to sustain 
production growth of the DPSUs. Therefore, they recommend that the orders for DPSUs in 
pipeline need to be expedited for optimum use of their construction and ·building capacities and 
manpower. They also recommend that the Ministry and DPSUs should explore options of 
venturing into commercialization of various products other than arms and ammunition built by 
the DPSUs such as alloys by Mishra Dhatu Nigam Limited (MIDHANI) ·for revenue generation 
and for business expansion. 
Reply of the Government 
Defence PSUs are diversifying their product profile into other areas and has robust plans 
for technology, Research and Development, Infrastructure Development, export promotion and 
focus on indigenization, which will ensure the sustenance of DPSUs and improve their order 
book position in long term.  Further, DPSUs have also adopted several new technologies which 
include Artificial Intelligence (around 50 AI enabled products are under development by 
DPSUs); Cloud Based technology; Robotics; use of unmanned vehicles; composite R&D for 
design and developments of products; 3D printing; Integrated construction methodology for 
warship construction. DPSUs are also focusing on Modernization of Infrastructure and 

 
127 
technology. The Capital Expenditure plan for 2020-21 modernisation of Defence PSUs is 
around Rs. 2756 Cr.  
     The order book volume of Defence PSUs depends on the customers which is 
primarily the Armed Forces and export opportunities in the International market. Department of 
Defence Production is taking many steps to improve the order book position of DPSUs as 
detailed below: 
Buy (Indian- Indigenously Designed, Developed and Manufactured) : 
 
 In Defence Procurement Procedure 2016 under Capital Acquisition, preference is 
being given to Buy (Indian- Indigenously Designed, Developed and Manufactured). 
The order of preference/priority in decreasing order under this Procedure is 
categorized as follows:- 
(a) Buy (Indian - IDDM) 
(b) Buy (Indian) 
(c) Buy and Make (Indian) 
(d) Buy and Make 
(e) Buy (Global) 
 
To Boost-up the Export in Defence Production following steps/initiatives have been 
taken: 
 
 Open General Export Licence (OGEL) System for Promoting Defence Export: As 
part of creating greater ease of doing business for Defence exporters, DDP has 
notified two (02) OGEL for intra company transfer of technology and for export of 
parts and components. Under OGEL the Indian Defence Industries will be permitted 
to export specified items to specified destinations enumerated in the OGEL without 
approaching Department of Defence Production for export authorization requirements 
during the period of validity of the OGEL (i.e. 02 years). The companies will be 
required to have established Inter Compliance Programme (ICP) or Export 
Compliance Programme (ECP) before seeking OGEL.  
 Rationalizing the Standard Operating Procedure (SOP) for reducing the time taken 
and cut down red tapism.  
 Export Promotion Cell Set up. 
 Scheme for funding marketing activities by Defence Attaches for promoting exports. 
 Fully automated export portal and electronic sharing of export leads with relevant 
industry. 
 Dispensing with the requirement of End User Certificate by Government for exports of 
parts/ components.  
 Simplified procedure for tender, exhibitions, testing, etc. 
 SOP formulated to facilitate exports of ‘Munitions List’ under category 6 of Special 
Chemicals, Organism, Material, Equipment and Technologies (SCOMET) by DGFT. 
 Streamlining export using Line of Credit for items already sold to Indian military. 
 
As a result of these reforms, defence export permissions have increased from Rs. 
1940.64 crores in 2014-15 to Rs. 10,745 cr in 2018-19.  

 
128 
Indigenization:  
Policy for Indigenization was notified on by Department of Defence Production on 08 
March, 2019, with the objective to create an industry ecosystem. It is estimated that 
Defence PSUs will reduce the import bill through indigenization of products and 
processes. 
 
These Strategies are under implementation and some major achievements are as 
given below: - 
 
 Development of Indigenization Portal: DPSUs/OFB are uploading the data on the 
link provided. The proposed Indigenization portal will be a centralized one in which 
DPSUs/OFB and other stakeholders will be showcasing their imported items to be 
indigenized. Vendor will become aware of the above items and they can in turn, show 
their interest in those items where they have capability to manufacture.  
 
 Study on savings in cost – Institute for Defence Studies and Analysis (IDSA), Delhi 
is studying savings in cost due to indigenization in the last 5 years in DPSUs/OFB. 
Final report submitted in Jan 2020. 
 Implementation of Make-II – The Make-II framework (Industry funded prototype 
development) for implementation by DPSUs/OFB was notified on 
11.02.2019.DPSUs/OFB have identified approx. 2500 items under Make-II. These 
items are at various stages of development process. At Department level, 47 projects 
have accorded Approval – in- Principal (AIP).  
 Long Term Orders -“Framework for placing Long Term Orders by DPSUs” has been 
approved by Hon’ble Raksha Mantri on 04 Nov 2019. Under this Framework, the 
procuring organization may aggregate demand of the item for a long period of upto 10 
years, in cases where it finds challenges in indigenization. 
 
Other Initiatives 
 Testing and Certification - MoD/DDP has issued Government Orders for testing of 
items being indigenized/ priority in testing and certification on 28Aug 2019. It covers 
aspects like use of test facilities for R&D without asking for End User Certificate, 
fixation of insurance cost, transparency in declaration of test results and minimizing 
delays. 
 Third Party Testing- Third Party Inspection (TPI) is being implemented by DGQA and 
DGAQA both.   
 Testing Infrastructure for Industry- Defence Testing Infrastructure Scheme (DTIS) 
has been prepared. It proposes to setup 6 to 8 new green field Defence Testing 
Infrastructure with total grant-in-aid of Rs 400 Crs. 
 
  

 
129 
Further, the details of project that are under the pipeline of DPSUs are as below:  
 
S. 
No. 
Name of 
DPSU 
Major Order/Product details 
1 HAL Light Combat Aircraft (LCA), Light Combat Helicopter (LCH) and Basic 
Trainer HTT-40 etc. 
2 BEL Coast Surveillance System, Spares for long range surface to air missile 
(LRSAM) system, Delhi CC TV etc. 
3 BEML 8x8 HMVs for PINAKA, HMVs Coastal Surveillance System, HMVs 
ASCON, 8x8 HMVs- AKASH Army, 8x8 HMVs- AKASH Air Force etc.  
4 BDL Akash (IAF), Medium range surface to air Missiles (MRSAM) (IAF & 
Navy), Very short range Air Defence System, Milan 2T, Counter Measure 
Dispensing System(CDMS) etc. 
5 MIDHANI Special Steel, Super alloys, breech ring, titanium plates etc. 
6 GRSE Pollution Control Vessels, Air Cushion Vehicles for ICG & Indian Army, 
Next Generation Missile Vessel (NGMV), Multi-Purpose Vessels, Survey 
Training Vessel, Self-propelled fuel barge etc. 
7 GSL Pollution control vessels, fast patrol vessels, Advanced Infantry Floating 
Footbridge, Next Generation Missile Vessel, Multi-Purpose Vessel, 
Survey training vessel, Pax all-weather vessel, 12 ton patrol modified 
boats etc. 
8 HSL Fleet support Ships etc.  
 
Further, Defence PSUs wise reply is as under: 
HAL: HAL plays significant role in domestic Aerospace industry in terms of service provided to 
Indian Armed Forces and development of Indian aerospace manufacturing eco-system. 
There is a need to ensure maximum utilization of existing Defence & Aerospace facilities 
in the country, which is of national importance, by providing orders for aircraft / 
helicopters manufactured and developed by HAL under “Make in India”, which in turn will 
boost the manufacturing ecosystem in the country.  
Orders for following platforms are under process.  
a) LCA Mk 1A                                 - 83 Nos 
b) Light Combat Helicopter(LCH)   - 15 Nos 
c) HTT-40                                       - 70 + 38Nos  
d) Su-30 MKI                                  - 12 Nos (Additional) 
 
Further, as part of diversification strategy HAL is exploring following options for revenue 
generation and business expansion: 
  

 
130 
 
 Global supplier of Aero components 
 
HAL has been developing Business Association with various global Defence OEMs, by 
signing NDA/ MoU with following purposes:  
 To be Tier-1 supplier to Global OEMsfor supply of Aero structures, Avionics and 
Accessories. 
 To associate with global defence companies for catering to export market jointly. 
 To collaborate with OEMs for Civil Aircraft Development in India and also be Tier-1 
supplier of Civil Aircraft Components to global supply chain. 
 To collaborate with OEMs for Development in India and or manufacture/supply and 
maintenance of UAV/RUAV/UCAV for domestic and foreign markets 
 Civil Segment 
 
Civil Maintenance, Repair and Overhaul (MRO) 
  HAL has been providing MRO services for the military platforms for over 7 
decades. HAL has repair and overhaul facilities for airframe, engines as well as 
accessories at various locations across the country. With this, HAL is making all out 
efforts to explore the possibilities of being part of this expanded Civil MRO business 
avenue. 
  Also with recent restructuring of Tax structure and Govt. push with policy changes 
under “Atamnirbhar Bharat” “Convergence between defence sector and the civil MROs”, 
Civil MRO business is poised to expand quickly in the country. 
 
 Civil Aviation  
 
Dornier Do-228 Civil 
 
 HAL has been making its all-out marketing efforts to foray into domestic Civil 
aviation segment and position its Do-228 aircraft for Civil application/ Regional 
Connectivity. Export of Civil Do-228 - HAL has also initiated the process for EASA 
certification through DGCA. Leasing companies are to be encouraged to participate for 
sale of civil aircraft on lease as airline operators are not keen on outright purchase of 
aircraft.  
SARAS MK-II, 19 Seater Aircraft 
 
HAL has entered into MoU with CSIR-NAL for Design, Development and 
Certification of 19 seat Light Transport Aircraft – SARAS MKII and subsequent 
Production, Marketing and Lifecycle Maintenance of the aircraft intended to be sold to 
Indian Defence Services, non- Indian Defence Services and Export customers.  
 
The indigenously designed & developed SARAS MKII will meet the requirement of 
launch customer i.e IAF. The aircraft will also meet the ever-growing needs of Regional 
Connectivity Service (RCS) between tier-2 and tier-3 cities. 

 
131 
Civil Helicopters 
ALH Dhruv 
 ALH is 5.5 ton class certified helicopter for Military & Civil application. ALH Mark I is 
already certified by DGCA and ALH Mk III version is under certification by DGCA. 
 Export of ALH Civil - European Aviation Safety Agency (EASA) Certification is under 
process. 
Light Utility Helicopter (LUH) 
 LUH has received the Initial Operational Clearance (IOC) for Defence purpose. Civil 
certification by DGCA & EASA - Process has been initiated. 
BEL: Some of the major contracts could not be finalized during the last FY (2019-20). For many 
other major programs, the acquisition is in various stages of procurement (trials, Price 
Negotiation Committee (PNC), contract finalization etc). BEL depends on some of these 
orders for meeting the targets for current financial year and delay will also have a bearing 
on next few financial years. 
 BEL is capable of executing future projects in the field of Missile Systems, Radars, 
Electro-Optics, Ammunition Fuzes, Radio/Communication Equipment, 
Sonars/Underwater Systems, Gun Upgrades, C4I systems etc., for Tri services 
requirement to ensure utilization of the installed capacities, design and engineering 
competence of BEL. 
 
BEML: BEML has established dedicated infrastructure including test track facilities for 
manufacture of Main Battle Tanks, High Mobility Vehicles, Recovery vehicles, 
aggregates such as transmissions and engines.However, Equipment orders received in 
the last 5 years is only to the tune of Rs. 413 Cr. and Orders received in 2019-20 is Rs. 
45 Cr.  
While BEML has been supplying HMVs and Recovery Vehicles, orders are not placed 
for manufacture of Battle Tanks although BEML has manufactured & supplied two 
Arjun MBT Prototypes during 1990-95. BEML has also in-house designed, developed 
and supplied 2 nos. of Arjun Armored Repair & Recovery Vehicle (ARRV) to Combat 
Vehicles and Research Development Enterprises (CVRDE).  
Also, BEML’s dedicated Engine Division which manufactures Air-cooled BEML HMV 
Engines and engines for Engineer Plant Equipment, would soon be taking up 
development of 1500HP engines for Main Battle tanks.  
To effectively utilize the established national facilities and skilled manpower, following 
are under process: 
Contract Amendments: 
 204 Nos of ARV WZT-3 (Rs. 1400 Cr.) 
 Dispensation for ERV, Delivery Extension, etc. taken up with MoD: October 
2015 
 77 nos. Size 4 (BD50) Dozers to E-in-C (Rs. 47 Cr.) 
 

 
132 
Pending Orders of Rs. 1213 Cr.: 
 330 HMVs for PINAKA project (Rs. 715 Cr.) 
 1512 nos. of Track Width Mine Ploughs (Rs. 498 Cr.)  
 
Placement of Orders: 
 HMVs 8x8 (700 nos.) and 6x6 (1600 nos.), 59 nos. HRV and Trailers (50T & 
70T) through Revenue route.  
 Arjun MBT Mk-II 
 ARRV 
Also, Indian Army has published a Request for Information (RFI) on 13th May 2020, for 
undertaking the operations of 505 Army Base Workshop for (overhaul of High Mobility 
Vehicles and Armoured Recovery Vehicles) under the GOCO model by Indian private 
sector. BEML being an OEM for supply of High Mobility Vehicles & Recovery Vehicles 
for military applications and being in the process of disinvestment, to be made eligible 
to take part in the Request for Information (RFI). 
Further, it may be noted that, BEML is one of the oldest Rail coach manufacturing 
Company in the country and has installed capacity to 720 Rail Coaches per annum. 
Till 2013-14, Railway Board was utilizing the national facilities of BEML by placing 
orders for passenger coaches on BEML under its Annual Production programme at par 
with its other production units. However, after 2013-14 onwards, Railway Board has 
taken decision not to procure Rail coaches from BEML under its annual production 
programme, resulting in underutilization of BEML’s national facilities and skilled work 
force. Railways are being impressed upon to review its decision. 
 
BDL: Order Book Position: 
 
1. Executable Orders for 2020-21 & 2021-22 are less than the established production 
capacity of BDL. 
2. Milan production line is idle from 2 years. 
3. Akash Production capacity utilisation is 10% only from April 2020. 
 
Konkurs-M ATGM order will be completed by 2020-21. Invar ATGM will be 
completed by mid 2021—22 and thereafter, both production lines will be idle for want of 
workload. 
Following orders are in pipeline - 
1. Akash (IAF) 
2. Akash Primer (3&4 Regiment) 
3. Konkurs-M ATGM 
4. Milan 2T ATGM 
5. VSHORAD 
6. Refurbishment of Missiles 
7. Astra 
8. MR SAM 
9. Invar 
 

 
133 
MIDHANI: The orders from defence sector have been steadily reducing. In FY 18-19, 
contribution from defence sector has reduced to 10%. This is predominantly due to decline in 
orders. Value of defence orders booked during the period 2015-16 to 2018-19 is given below:                                                                            
   Defence % Contribution 
 
 
 
 
 
 
MDL:  MDL is readying itself for undertaking more work considering the fact that ongoing ship 
construction projects are expected to be completed in next 5 years. Anticipating 
completion of existing fabrication activities in next one year, MDL’s Fabrication 
Workshops would be ready with spare capacity for new projects. Thus, MDL can 
immediately undertake construction of 4 more warships. 
 
In the field of submarine construction, MDL can immediately undertake construction of 7 
more submarines considering the fact that remaining 04 submarines of P75 are under 
advanced stages of construction/trials and are expected to be delivered by 2022. Also, 
the Pressure Hull Facilities, Structural Fabrication & Outfitting capability, Pipe fabrication 
facilities required for initial phase of submarine construction can be immediately assigned 
to new projects.  
 
In view of above, MDL has undertaken following Strategies/measures to improve the 
order book position: 
 
i. MDL has initiated efforts for export, exploring diversification avenues, encouraging 
private sector participation, etc. MDL is gearing up for it by undertaking 
augmentation and modernization of construction facilities, acquisition of adjacent 
land, forming of JVs, transformation to latest technologies, etc. 
 
ii. Nhava Yard, close to the main facility, has been acquired by MDL with an intention 
for developing it into ‘Green Field’ Shipyard with requisite infrastructure/facilities for 
undertaking construction of Commercial vessels, Export orders and Repair/ Refit 
orders without disrupting production activities of IN orders in the main facility at 
Mumbai. 
 
iii. MDL is also in the process of acquisition of approx. 13 acres MbPT land adjacent to 
its existing facility. MbPT’s wet basin is intended to be converted into Dry-docks for 
New builds & Refit/ Repair projects. Existing slipways in the said land can be used 
for construction of small vessels for Indian Navy and Coast Guard. 
 
Details  2015-16 2016-17 2017-18 2018-19 
Defence Order Booked (In crore) 551 225.78 384.7 184.2 
Total Order Booked 909 320.27 635.7 1844.1 
Defence % Contribution 60.62% 70.50% 60.52% 9.99% 

 
134 
Apart from building frontline warships & conventional submarines, MDL is trying to 
penetrate other markets as well and some of their offerings are as follows- 
 
i.  Refit & Repair of Ships & Submarines 
ii. Construction of Commercial/Merchant ships & offshore platforms like Multi-
Support Vessels (MSVs), Offshore Supply Vessels (OSVs), Tugs, Dredgers, 
Ferries, Barges, Big Trawlers, Pontoons, Launches, Floating dry dock, Flat 
bottom river boats & fishing trawlers. 
iii. Auxiliary Naval Vessels like Offshore Patrol Vessels (OPVs), Security Vessels, 
Border Outposts, Cadet training ships, Missile Vessels, Vessels for Littoral 
combat & Fast attack crafts. 
iv. Artificial Intelligence enabled Remotely Operated Vehicle (ROV) 
vi. Tourist Submarines & Autonomous Underwater Vehicle. 
 
Shipbuilding infrastructure developed for construction of warships and submarines is 
specific to these products. The Slipways, dry-docks, wet basins cannot be utilised for 
anything else. 
 
Even the human skill sets are unique and specialized, developed through training 
programs designed for the respective job areas and experience gained over the years on 
the job. It is difficult to apply the same skills to altogether different product. 
 
However, MDL would be impressed upon to look into different areas for revenue 
generation. 
 
 
GRSE: GRSE has recently delivered the fourth and last ship of Anti-Submarine Warfare 
Corvette (ASWC) project. In view of the availability of proven hull form of ASWC and 
expertise gained from construction of 04 ships of this class, GRSE is ready for 
construction of Next Generation Corvettes (NGC) so that the project could be executed 
smoothly with minimal cost & time. 
GSL: On signing of the Contract for construction of 02 Frigates (Project P1135.6) for the Indian 
Navy on 25 Jan 2019, the order book position of GSL has fairly improved. Presently, 
Project P1135.6 is at design stage and expected to commence production as per the 
timelines. 
Early issue of RFP for Mine Counter Measure Vessel (MCMV) project, the major step 
towards contract conclusion, will lead to strengthening of the order book position. GSL 
has emerged L1 for 02 PCVs for the Indian Coast Guard and is expecting the contract 
signing of PCVs by Sep 2020. Contract conclusion for setting up of Damage Control 
Simulator at Port Blair (STE), OPS & training and CAMC for 10 yrs is at advance stage. 
 
On the export front, GSL is awaiting the finalisation of the supply of its in-house designed 
products on Line of Credit (LoC) to countries such as Nigeria (one each of LST and 

 
135 
Training Ship), Mauritius (one AOPV) and Seychelles (one AOPV). Finalisation of these 
domestic and export orders will enable GSL to improve its order book position. 
 
In order to minimise potential impact due to lean order book position and to bridge the 
gap till 02 Frigates and MCMV projects start in full swing, all out efforts are being made 
by GSL for securing orders by participating in acquisition programs of 
Domestic/Overseas customers, interacting and giving presentations to dignitaries and 
potential clients in various countries, contacting the Indian Embassies/High Commissions 
abroad to facilitate for GSL’s interaction with the appropriate authorities in the respective 
country for exporting products etc. GSL has been aggressively bidding for various 
tenders of IN and ICG and recently emerged as L1 for 02 PCVs for ICG and is expediting 
the contract signing of PCVs by Sep 2020 and commence production during FY 2020-21. 
Additionally, Marketing Representatives of GSL are appointed in various countries to 
identify potential markets outside India and to assist GSL in selling its products and 
services. In addition to its core activity of constructing ships, GSL has also undertaken 
the construction of Training Simulators and Repair & Refit of Defence and Commercial 
Ships on getting the orders through competitive bidding.  
 
GSL has been exploring various options of venturing into commercialisation of various 
products and following actions has been initiated by GSL in this regard: 
 
(a) Absorption of Construction Technology for Composite Material. Licensing 
Agreement for Transfer of Technology (LAToT) for Resin Film Infusion (RFI) and 
Process Monitoring of Vacuum Assisted Resin Transfer Moulding (VARTM) 
technology was exchanged between GSL and Research  & Development  
Establishment (Engineers), Pune  on 13.11.2019. 
 
(b) New Business lines like Inland River Navigation, FRP Boats for export and 
Composite Components /Structures.  
 
(c) Auxiliary Commercial Vessels. GSL has won orders through Competitive Bidding for 
Three 2000T LPG cylinder carrier to UTLA/SCI, 20 M Ferry boat to UPRN at Varanasi 
and 03 Tugs for Assam Government.  
 
(d) Thrust on Ship Repair and expansion at Karwar, Karnataka. 
 
(e) Supply of high value equipment for ships like Stern Gear, Fin stabilizer, Heli Grid 
and Sonar Domes. 
 
(f) Export Efforts. GSL is approaching potential clients in friendly countries for GSL 
designed ships for export market. GSL is putting concerted efforts for exporting 
various products (Ship, Simulators and GRP Boats) to friendly countries.  
 
HSL:  HSL is a green-field shipyard on the eastern coast, having capability to construct and 
repair all kinds of ships and submarines. However, the order book position of HSL is 
extremely low when compared with other DPSUs resulting in under-utilization of the 

 
136 
installed capacity of the shipyard. The balance shipbuilding order book position of HSL 
as on 31 Mar 2020 is Rs 2486.15 Cr and it comprises of the following projects:-  
S No. Project Balance as on 31 Mar 
2020 (Rs. crore) 
1 VC 11184 1.40 
2 2 Nos Diving Support Vessel for Indian 
Navy (VC 11190-91) 2332.44 
3 4 Nos 50T BP Tugs for Indian Navy (VC 
11192-95) 142.76 
4 3 Nos Flap Gates for ND (V) (VC 11196-
98) 9.55 
Total (Rs. crore) 2486.15 
The breakeven order book requirement for HSL is around Rs 5000 Cr. The balance 
orders are scheduled to be completed by end of Mar 2022 (as per contractual delivery 
dates). HSL, which has recently turned around and started making profits may find it 
difficult to sustain the growth outlook in the absence of immediate new orders.  
[For comments, please see Para No. 22 of Chapter I of the Report] 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 59) 
The Committee recommend that under CSR initiatives, funds should also be provided to the 
Sainik Schools by the DPSUs keeping the national interests as paramount. 
Reply of the Government  
HAL:   The matter regarding providing funds to the Sainik Schools by the DPSUs keeping the 
National Interest as paramount has been examined and following is submitted: 
(a) In terms of HAL’s CSR Policy, the Company has been giving preference to the 
local areas in the vicinity of its Divisions for undertaking Corporate Social 
Responsibility (CSR) Activities. The said policy is in line with Clause 5(1) of 
Section 135 of the Companies Act, 2013 read with the Companies (Corporate 
Social Responsibility) Rules, 2014. Accordingly, as a Policy, HAL has been 
undertaking CSR Projects / Programmes in the local areas, within the District or in 
the neighboring Districts of its operations, with a view to improve the quality of life 
of the Socially & Economically backward groups and marginalized & weaker 
sections of the Society.  
 
(b) It may also be noted that as per Schedule VII of the Companies Act 2013, (i) 
contribution to the Swachh Bharat Kosh set-up by the Central Government for the 
promotion of sanitation and making available safe drinking water; (ii) contribution 
to the Clean Ganga Fund set- up by the Central Government for rejuvenation of 
River Ganga; (iii) contribution to the Prime Minister’s National Relief Fund or Prime 
Minister’s Citizen Assistance and Relief in Emergency Situation Fund (PM CARES 
Fund) or any other Fund set up by the Central Government for socio-economic 

 
137 
development and relief and welfare of the Scheduled Castes, the Scheduled 
Tribes, other backward classes, minorities and women and (iv) contributions or 
Funds provided to Technology Incubators located within Academic Institutions 
which are approved by the Central Government are only considered as valid CSR 
Activities. Any other contribution is not considered as a valid CSR activity.  
 
Considering the positions indicated above, it may not be feasible to provide 
contributions directly to the Sainik Schools.  
BEL: BEL being a DPSU, has to comply with various Government guidelines directing CSR 
fund distribution, themes for CSR expenditure & areas of operation (Aspirational districts) 
and hence, its role has been limited to selection & implementation of CSR Projects in 
compliance with Govt. Legislations & Guidelines.  
Nevertheless, BEL has supported Sainik School, Satara, Maharashtra by creating an “e-
Learning & Knowledge Centre” at a cost of Rs.34.31 Lakhs. The Centre has been 
provided with Computers, associated peripherals like Printer, Modem, Router, Interactive 
boards with projection & audio system, furniture for 40 seating capacity etc.   
The facility was fully utilized by the School even during the lockdown period due to 
COVID-19 pandemic. Sainik School, Satara created history by holding parent-teacher 
meeting through video-conferencing and conducting online classes for its students during 
lockdown. 
BEML: BEML consistently spends more than 2% of average PAT of last 3 years exceeding the 
target as stipulated in guidelines. The expenditure is primarily on Healthcare, 
Education, Swachh Bharat Mission, etc.  
On education front, BEML runs one Junior College and one Nursery School at Kolar 
Gold Fields. Company also runs a school at Bangalore having classes from Pre-
Nursery to 12th level. These Institutions, although meant primarily for the children of the 
employees but also caters to a large extent to the local population. BEML also runs a 
Kendriya Vidyalaya at KGF, for the benefit of the employees’ children and also for the 
local population. The Company also provided School building, Furniture, Attender for 
Mid-day meal Programme and Security Personnel for the Government English Model 
Higher Primary School at KGF. 
BEML has rendered its support for establishing Akshaya Talent Hostel at Bangalore to 
the Akshaya Patra Foundation. The Talent Hostel will provide vital facilities home away 
from home to enable aspirations of meritorious students coming from families requiring 
economic support. 
 
BDL:    BDL has noted the recommendation. It is submitted that it has not received any 
proposal till date requesting funds to Sainik School. However, BDL has been supporting 
different Government Schools in states of Andhra Pradesh and Telangana by providing 
Dual desks, Digital Class Rooms etc. Supporting Sainik Schools may be considered 
while taking up the future projects. 
 

 
138 
MIDHANI: MIDHANI CSR budget for FY 2020-21 is Rs 3.92 Cr. (Prov.) This fund is allocated to 
ongoing projects such as annual maintenance of toilets in government schools, 
initiatives in aspirational district (Kothagudem). Expenditure towards these projects 
spill over to subsequent years. Hence, no fund is available to contribute towards 
Sainik Schools.  
 
MDL:  MDL has been carrying out different projects with regard to Sainik/ Military Schools 
under CSR its initiatives.  
In academic year 2018-19, MDL had commenced a flagship project in the education 
field titled “MDL Super 10”, wherein 10 tribal students from the identified schedule block 
of Shahpur (Thane district) are being selected every year for admission to Bhonsala 
Military School (BMS), Nagpur. The selected students, belonging to economically 
weaker section, are getting an opportunity to study at BMS, Nagpur from Std V to Std 
XII and the entire expenditure towards education of these students at this residential 
school is being borne by MDL for last two years. Till date, 20 children from the Shahpur 
block have been successfully studying at BMS, Nagpur and five more children will also 
be supported in the current academic year. MDL has spent Rs.13.07 lakhs and 
Rs.28.87 lakhs under this project in FY 2018-19 and FY 2019-20, respectively. In FY 
2020-21, an amount of Rs.40 lakhs are expected to be spent under this project. 
Further, in order to support the Aspirational District Transformation Programme (ADTP) 
of Govt. of India, MDL has planned to establish a military training facility at Eklavya 
Model Residential School (EMRS) at Nandurbar, Maharashtra. This facility would help 
tribal students of the district to avail military training while studying in the residential 
school and thereby would help them to be well prepared for jobs in Indian Army/ Navy/ 
Air Force etc. This project is having a budget of Rs.100 lakhs (approx.) and is expected 
to be executed in FY 2020-21. 
In addition to above, MDL is exploring the feasibility of financially supporting tribal 
students from two tribal taluks of the aspirational district of Nandurbar, who may be 
selected to study at the Sainik School. 
GRSE:  GRSE is situated in Metiabruz area of Kolkata which has a large population from the 
lower income bracket. The infrastructure in this locality for healthcare, skill development 
and education is extremely poor and as per Sec. 135 of Companies Act, priority is to be 
given for development of local areas. 
Moreover, during FY 2020-21, as per Notification of Ministry of Corporate Affairs vide 
General Circular No. 05/ 01/ 2019- CSR dated 23 Mar 2020, an amount of Rs. 100 lakh 
has been transferred to PM CARES Relief Fund from CSR Budget 2020-21, due to the 
pandemic outbreak of COVID-19. Further, DPE vide OM No. CSR No. 08/0002/2018-Dir 
(CSR) dated 01 Jun 2020 has notified that the Annual Themes for FY 2020-21 is 
‘Healthcare and Nutrition’ and at least 60% of CSR expenditure has to be incurred on 
these themes. Accordingly, CSR budget has been allocated catering 60% of fund for 
projects on Annual Themes. Further, as per MoD, 20% of CSR fund has been allocated 
on Skill Development projects, as being done for past few years. The balance 20% CSR 

 
139 
fund is being used for continuation of existing projects to improve the quality of life of 
marginalized section of local community. 
 
Under the aforesaid circumstances, it may not be possible to provide CSR funds to 
Sainik Schools at this juncture. 
 
GSL: GSL has a CSR Policy and CSR activities are taken up as per the provisions of 
Schedule VII of the Companies Act, 2013 and guidelines issued by Department of 
Public Enterprises (DPE) from time to time. 
 Any proposal/request from Sainik School will be analyzed on the basis of above 
applicable policy/guidelines/laws.  
 
HSL:    As recommended, necessary CSR initiatives will be undertaken in Sainik School during 
the current financial year 2020-21 based on the CSR budget for the FY 2020-21.   
[For comments, please see Para No. 25 of Chapter I of the Report] 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

 
140 
CHAPTER III 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT DESIRE TO 
PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE REPLIES RECEIVED FROM THE GOVERNMENT 
Recommendation (Para No. 17) 
 After examination of this data, the Committee found that allocation to BRO has always 
fallen short of the projected amount. To a specific query of the Committee as to how the 
Ministry has been able to maintain Border Roads in the wake of inadequacy of funds being 
faced from time to time, the Ministry through a written note replied that resurfacing works are 
prioritized by Directorate General Border Roads (DGBR) as per availability of funds to BRO. 
The Committee are of the considered view that due to inadequacy of funds, BRO may face 
difficulty in performing their significant role of developing and maintaining operational road 
infrastructure for Armed Forces in Border Areas, contributing to the socio-economic 
development of the Nation with specific reference to the Border States, developing and 
maintaining roads to keep open all Lines of Communication and contributing to the overall war 
effort. Therefore, the Committee recommend that considering prevalent security scenarios, 
additional funds be allocated to BRO at Revised Estimates stage. They further recommend that 
feasibility of levying toll tax on heavy commercial vehicles for using roads built/maintained by 
BRO may be explored for generating revenue for BRO. 
 
Reply of the Government 
The recommendation of the Committee has been noted and additional funds, if any, as 
per requirement will be sought from Ministry of Finance at Supplementary/ Revised Estimate 
stages 2020-21. 
 The observations of the Committee have been noted. Further, as regard to levying toll 
tax on heavy commercial vehicles for using roads built/maintained by BRO for generating 
revenue, it is mentioned that BRO is entrusted with construction and maintenance of roads in 
border areas where the maximum traffic comprises of Army convoy as compared to the low 
volume of civil traffic due to which it may not be viable to levy toll tax on such roads.  
  
 
 
 
 

 
141 
CHAPTER IV 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF 
GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE WHICH REQUIRE 
REITERATION AND TO BE COMMENTED UPON: 
 
-NIL- 

 
142 
CHAPTER V 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH GOVERNMENT HAVE 
FURNISHED INTERIM REPLIES/REPLIES AWAITED 
 
 
-NIL- 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi;                                 JUAL ORAM 
9 February, 2021                                                       Chairperson 
20 Magha, 1942 (Saka)                                      Standing Committee on Defence 
 

 
143 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE (2020-21)  
MINUTES OF THE THIRD SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
DEFENCE (2020-21) 
 
The Committee sat on Tuesday, the 9th February, 2021 from 1530 hrs. to 1600 hrs. in 
Committee Room No. 2, Block A, Extension to Parliament House Annexe (EPHA), New Delhi. 
 
PRESENT 
 
 
Shri Jual Oram  - Chairperson  
 
    MEMBERS 
 
Lok Sabha 
 
 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Smt. Kalpana Sharma - Additional Secretary  
2. Dr. Sanjeev Sharma - Director 
3. Shri Rahul Singh  - Deputy Secretary  
 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members of the Committee and informed 
them about the agenda for the Sitting. The Committee then took up for consideration the 
following draft Action Taken Reports:- 
2. Kunwar Danish Ali 
3. Shri Ajay Bhatt 
4. Shri Nitesh Ganga Deb 
5. Shri Annasaheb Shankar Jolle 
6. Choudhary Mehboob Ali Kaiser 
7. Smt. (Dr.) Rajashree Mallick 
8. Dr. T.R. Paarivendhar 
9. Shri Kapil Moreshwar Patil 
10 Shri Jugal Kishore Sharma 
11. Shri Prathap Simha 
12. Shri Brijendra Singh  
13. Shri Durga Das Uikey 
  
Rajya Sabha 
 
14. Dr. Ashok Bajpai 
15. Shri V. Lakshmikantha Rao 
16. Shri Sanjay Raut 
17. Shri Kamakhya Prasad Tasa 
18. Dr. Sudhanshu Trivedi 
19. Lt. Gen. Dr. D. P. Vats (Retd.) 

 
144 
i. Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations 
contained in the Twenty-third Report (16th Lok Sabha) of the Standing 
Committee on Defence on the subject 'Proxy and Postal Voting by Defence 
Services Personnel in General Elections an Evaluation'; 
ii. Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations 
contained in the Fiftieth Report (16th Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on 
Defence on the subject ‘Provision of all weather road connectivity under Border 
Roads Organisation (BRO) and other agencies up to International Borders as 
well as the strategic areas including approach roads-an appraisal’; 
iii. Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/ Recommendations 
contained in the First Report (17th Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants of the 
Ministry of Defence for the year 2019-20 on ‘General Defence Budget, Border 
Roads Organisation, Indian Coast Guard, Military Engineer Services, Directorate 
General Defence Estates, Defence Public Sector Undertakings, Canteen Stores 
Department, Welfare of Ex-Servicemen, Ex-Servicemen Contributory Health 
Scheme, Defence Pensions, Sainik Schools (Demand Nos. 18 and 21)’; 
iv. Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations 
contained in the Second Report (17th Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants of the 
Ministry of Defence for the year 2019-20 on ‘Army, Navy, Air Force and Joint 
Staff (Demand Nos. 19 and 20)'; 
v. Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations 
contained in the Fourth Report (17th Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants of the 
Ministry of Defence for the year 2019-20 on ‘Ordnance Factories, Defence 
Research and Development Organisation, Directorate General of Quality 
Assurance and National Cadet Corps (Demand No. 19 and 20)’; 
vi. Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations 
contained in the Fifth Report (17th Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants of the 
Ministry of Defence for the year 2020-21 on ‘General Defence Budget, Border 
Roads Organisation, Indian Coast Guard, Military Engineer Services, Directorate 
General Defence Estates, Defence Public Sector Undertakings, Canteen Stores 
Department, Welfare of Ex-Servicemen, Ex-Servicemen Contributory Health 
Scheme, Defence Pensions, Sainik Schools (Demand Nos. 18, 19, 20 and 21)’; 
vii. Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations 
contained in the Sixth Report (17th Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants of the 
Ministry of Defence for the year 2020-21 on ‘Army, Navy, Air Force and Joint 
Staff (Demand Nos. 19 and 20)’; and  
viii. Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations 
contained in the Eighth Report (17th Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants of the 
Ministry of Defence for the year 2020-21 on ‘Ordnance Factories, Defence 
Research and Development Organisation, Directorate General of Quality 
Assurance and National Cadet Corps (Demand Nos. 19 and 20)’. 
 
3. After some deliberations, the Committee adopted the above reports without any 
modifications. 
 

 
145 
4. The Committee, then, authorized the Chairperson to finalise the above draft Reports and 
present the same to the House on a date convenient to him. 
5. ******Does not pertain to the Reports****** 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
******** 
 

 
146 
APPENDIX II 
ANALYSIS OF THE ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE OBSERVATIONS / 
RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE FIFTH REPORT (SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA) ON DEMANDS 
FOR GRANTS OF THE MINISTRY OF DEFENCE FOR THE YEAR 2020-21 ON ‘GENERAL DEFENCE 
BUDGET, BORDER ROADS ORGANISATION, INDIAN COAST GUARD, MILITARY ENGINEER SERVICES, 
DIRECTORATE GENERAL DEFENCE ESTATES, DEFENCE PUBLIC SECTOR UNDERTAKINGS, CANTEEN 
STORES DEPARTMENT, WELFARE OF EX-SERVICEMEN, EX-SERVICEMEN CONTRIBUTORY HEALTH 
SCHEME, DEFENCE PENSIONS, SAINIK SCHOOLS (DEMAND NOS. 18, 19, 20  AND  21)' 
1.         Total number of recommendations                                                                                                            85 
 
2. Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the Government (please see Chapter II A): 
 
 Recommendation Nos. 1, 2, 3, 4, 8, 9,10,11, 12, 14, 15, 16, 18, 19, 21, 22, 23, 24, 25, 26, 27, 28, 29 , 30, 
31, 32, 33, 34, 36, 37, 38, 39, 40, 41, 42, 43, 46, 47, 48, 49, 50, 54, 55, 56, 57, 58, 60, 61, 62, 63, 64, 65, 
66, 67, 68, 69, 70, 71, 72, 73, 74, 75, 76, 77, 78, 79, 80, 81, 82, 83, 84 and 85 
                  Total :      72 
Percentage:   85%    
 
3. Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the Government and commented upon 
(please see Chapter II B): 
  
Recommendation Nos. 5, 6, 7, 13, 20, 35, 44, 45, 51, 52, 53 and 59           
                                                                                                                                                    Total :      12 
Percentage:     14% 
 
4. Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to pursue in view of the replies 
received from the Government (please see Chapter III): 
 Recommendation No. 17 
Total :        1 
Percentage: 1% 
 
5. Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of Government have not been accepted by the 
Committee, which require reiteration and commented upon (please see Chapter IV): 
-Nil- 
 
Total :       0 
Percentage:   0 % 
 
6. Observations/Recommendations in respect of which Government have furnished interim replies/replies 
awaited (please see Chapter V): 
 
 -Nil- 
 
Total :0 
   Percentage:   0% 
 
 